[]



THE DAY IT RAINED FOREVER


Ray Bradbury

[]


Copyright

_HarperVoyager_
An imprint of HarperCollins_Publishers_ Ltd.
77–85 Fulham Palace Road
Hammersmith, London, W6 8JB

www.harpervoyagerbooks.co.uk

First published in Great Britain by Rupert Hart-Davis 1959
Published in Penguin Books 1963

Copyright © Ray Bradbury 1959
Cover design by Mike Topping.
Cover layout design © HarperCollinsPublishers 2014
Cover photographs © Shutterstock.com

Ray Bradbury asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of
this work.

A catalogue copy of this book is available from the British Library.

This novel is entirely a work of fiction. The names, characters and
incidents portrayed in it are the work of the author’s imagination. Any
resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events or localities is
entirely coincidental.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.

HarperCollins_Publishers_ has made every reasonable effort to ensure
that any picture content and written content in this ebook has been
included or removed in accordance with the contractual and technological
constraints in operation at the time of publication.

Ebook Edition © JULY 2014 ISBN: 9780007539819

Version: 2014–07–18


Dedication

FOR

RUPERT HART-DAVIS

IN MEMORY OF

THE TERRIBLE SKIRMISH

THE TEMPORARY LOSS

BUT OUR INEVITABLE VICTORY

AT THE MIRABELLE


Table of Contents

Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Dedication

The Day it Rained Forever

In a Season of Calm Weather

The Dragon

The End of the Beginning

The Wonderful Ice-Cream Suit

Fever Dream

Referent

The Marriage Mender

The Town Where No One Got Off

Icarus Montgolfier Wright

Almost the End of the World

Dark They were and Golden-eyed

The Smile

Here there be Tygers

The Headpiece

Perchance to Dream

The Time of Going Away

The Gift

The Little Mice

The Sunset Harp

A Scent of Sarsaparilla

And the Rock Cried Out

The Strawberry Window

Keep Reading

About the Author

Also by the Author

About the Publisher


The Day it Rained Forever

THE hotel stood like a hollowed dry bone under the very centre of the
desert sky where the sun burned the roof all day. All night, the memory
of the sun stirred in every room like the ghost of an old forest fire.
Long after dusk, since light meant heat, the hotel lights stayed off.
The inhabitants of the hotel preferred to feel their way blind through
the halls in their never-ending search for cool air.

This one particular evening Mr Terle, the proprietor, and his only
boarders, Mr Smith and Mr Fremley, who looked and smelled like two
ancient rags of cured tobacco, stayed late on the long veranda. In their
creaking glockenspiel rockers, they gasped back and forth in the dark,
trying to rock up a wind.

‘Mr Terle …? Wouldn’t it be _really_ nice … some day … if you could
buy … air conditioning …?’

Mr Terle coasted a while, eyes shut.

‘Got no money for such things, Mr Smith.’

The two old boarders flushed; they hadn’t paid a bill now in twenty-one
years.

Much later, Mr Fremley sighed a grievous sigh. ‘Why, why don’t we all
just quit, pack up, get outa here, move to a decent city? Stop this
swelterin’ and fryin’ and sweatin’.’

‘Who’d buy a dead hotel in a ghost town?’ said Mr Terle, quietly. ‘No.
No, we’ll just set here and wait, wait for that great day, January
29th.’

Slowly, all three men stopped rocking.

January 29th.

The one day in all the year when it really let go and rained.

‘Won’t wait long.’ Mr Smith tilted his gold railroad watch like the warm
summer moon in his palm. ‘Two hours and nine minutes from now it’ll be
January 29th. But I don’t see nary a cloud in ten thousand miles.’

‘It’s rained every January 29th since I was born!’ Mr Terle stopped,
surprised at his own loud voice. ‘If it’s a day late this year, I won’t
pull God’s shirt-tail.’

Mr Fremley swallowed hard and looked from east to west across the desert
towards the hills. ‘I wonder … will there ever be a gold rush hereabouts
again?’

‘No gold,’ said Mr Smith. ‘And what’s more, I’ll make you a bet – no
rain. No rain tomorrow or the day after the day after tomorrow. No rain
all the rest of this year.’

The three old men sat staring at the big sun-yellowed moon that burned a
hole in the high stillness.

After a long while, painfully, they began to rock again.

The first hot morning breezes curled the calendar pages like a dried
snakeskin against the flaking hotel front.

The three men, thumbing their braces up over their hat-rack shoulders,
came barefoot downstairs to blink out at that idiot sky.

‘January 29th …’

‘Not a drop of mercy there.’

‘Day’s young.’

‘_I’m_ not.’ Mr Fremley turned and went away.

It took him five minutes to find his way up through the delirious
hallways to his hot, freshly baked bed.

At noon, Mr Terle peered in.

‘Mr Fremley …?’

‘Damn desert cactus, that’s us!’ gasped Mr Fremley, lying there, his
face looking as if at any moment it might fall away in a blazing dust on
the raw plank floor. ‘But even the best damn cactus got to have just a
sip of water before it goes back to another year of the same damn
furnace. I tell you I won’t move again, I’ll lie here an’ die if I don’t
hear more than birds pattin’ around up on that roof!’

‘Keep your prayers simple and your umbrella handy,’ said Mr Terle, and
tiptoed away.

At dusk, on the hollow roof a faint pattering sounded.

Mr Fremley’s voice sang out mournfully, from his bed.

‘Mr Terle, that ain’t rain! That’s you with the garden hose sprinklin’
well-water on the roof! Thanks for tryin’, but cut it out, now.’

The pattering sound stopped. There was a sigh from the yard below.

Coming around the side of the hotel a moment later, Air Terle saw the
calendar fly out and down in the dust.

‘Damn January 29th!’ cried a voice. ‘Twelve more months! Have to wait
twelve more months, now!’

Mr Smith was standing there in the doorway. He stepped inside and
brought out two dilapidated suitcases and thumped them on the porch.

‘Mr Smith!’ cried Mr Terle. ‘You can’t leave after thirty years!’

‘They say it rains twenty days a month in Ireland,’ said Mr Smith. ‘I’ll
get a job there and run around with my hat off and my mouth open.’

‘You can’t go!’ Mr Terle tried frantically to think of something; he
snapped his fingers. ‘You owe me nine thousand dollars rent!’

Mr Smith recoiled; his eyes got a look of tender and unexpected hurt in
them.

‘I’m sorry.’ Mr Terle looked away. ‘I didn’t mean that. Look now – you
just head for Seattle. Pours two inches a week there. Pay me when you
can, or never. But do me a favour: wait till midnight. It’s cooler then,
anyhow. Get you a good night’s walk towards the city.’

‘Nothin’ll happen between now and midnight.’

‘You got to have faith. When everything else is gone, you got to believe
a thing’ll happen. Just stand here, with me, you don’t have to sit, just
stand here and think of rain. That’s the last thing I’ll ever ask of
you.’

On the desert, sudden little whirlwinds of dust twisted up, sifted down.
Mr Smith’s eye scanned the sunset horizon.

‘What do I think? Rain, oh you rain, come along here? Stuff like that?’

‘Anything. Anything at all!’

Mr Smith stood for a long time between his two mangy suitcases and did
not move. Five, six minutes ticked by. There was no sound, save the two
men’s breathing in the dusk.

Then at last, very firmly, Mr Smith stooped to grasp the luggage
handles.

Just then, Mr Terle blinked. He leaned forward, cupping his hand to his
ear.

Mr Smith froze, his hands still on the luggage.

From away among the hills, a murmur, a soft and tremulous rumble.

‘Storm coming!’ hissed Mr Terle.

The sound grew louder; a kind of whitish cloud rose up from the hills.

Mr Smith stood tall on tiptoe.

Upstairs, Mr Fremley sat up like Lazarus.

Mr Terle’s eyes grew wider and yet wider to take hold of what was
coming. He held to the porch rail like the captain of a long-becalmed
vessel feeling the first stir of some tropic breeze that smelled of lime
and the ice-cool white meat of coconut. The smallest wind stroked over
his aching nostrils as over the flues of a white-hot chimney.

‘There!’ cried Mr Terle. ‘There!’

And over the last hill, shaking out feathers of fiery dust, came the
cloud, the thunder, the racketing storm.

Over the hill, the first car to pass in twenty days flung itself down
the valley with a shriek, a thud, and a wail.

Mr Terle did not dare to look at Mr Smith.

Mr Smith looked up, thinking of Mr Fremley in his room.

Mr Fremley, at the window, looked down and saw the car expire and die in
front of the hotel.

For the sound that the car made was curiously final. It had come a very
long way on blazing sulphur roads, across salt flats abandoned ten
million years ago by the shingling-off of waters. Now, with
wire-ravellings like cannibal hair sprung up from seams, with a great
eyelid of canvas top thrown back and melted to spearmint gum over rear
seat, the auto, a Kissel car, vintage 1924, gave a final shuddering as
if to expel its ghost upon the air.

The old woman in the front seat of the car waited patiently, looking in
at the three men and the hotel as if to say, Forgive me, my friend is
ill; I’ve known him a long while, and now I must see him through his
final hour. So she just sat in the car waiting for the faint convulsions
to cease and for the great relaxation of all the bones which signifies
that the final process is over. She must have sat a full half-minute
longer listening to her car, and there was something so peaceful about
her that Mr Terle and Mr Smith leaned slowly towards her. At last she
looked at them with a grave smile and raised her hand.

Mr Fremley was surprised to see his hand go out the window above, waving
back to her.

On the porch, Mr Smith murmured, ‘Strange. It’s not a storm. And I’m not
disappointed. How come?’

But Mr Terle was down the path and to the car.

‘We thought you were … that is …’ He trailed off. ‘Terle’s my name, Joe
Terle.’

She took his hand and looked at him with absolutely clear and unclouded
light-blue eyes like water that has melted from snow a thousand miles
off and come a long way, purified by wind and sun.

‘Miss Blanche Hillgood,’ she said, quietly. ‘Graduate of the Grinnell
College, unmarried teacher of music, thirty years high-school glee club
and student orchestra conductor, Green City, Iowa, twenty years private
teacher of piano, harp, and voice, one month retired and living on a
pension and now, taking my roots with me, on my way to California.’

‘Miss Hillgood, you don’t look to be going anywhere from here.’

‘I had a feeling about that.’ She watched the two men circle the car,
cautiously. She sat like a child on the lap of a rheumatic grandfather,
undecided. ‘Is there nothing we can do?’

‘Make a fence of the wheels, dinner-gong of the brake drums, the rest’ll
make a fine rock garden.’

Mr Fremley shouted from the sky. ‘Dead? I say, is the car dead? I can
_feel_ it from here! Well – it’s way past time for supper!’

Mr Terle put out his hand. ‘Miss Hillgood, that there is Joe Terle’s
Desert Hotel, open twenty-six hours a day. Gila monsters and road
runners please register before going upstairs. Get you a night’s sleep,
free, we’ll knock our Ford off its blocks and drive you to the city come
morning.’

She let herself be helped from the car. The machine groaned as if in
protest at her going. She shut the door carefully, with a soft click.

‘One friend gone, but the other still with me. Mr Terle, could you
please bring her in out of the weather?’

‘Her, ma’am?’

‘Forgive me, I never think of things but what they’re people. The car
was a man, I suppose, because it took me places. But a harp, now, don’t
you agree, is female?’

She nodded to the rear seat of the car. There, tilted against the sky
like an ancient scrolled leather ship-prow cleaving the wind, stood a
case which towered above any driver who might sit up in front and sail
the desert calms or the city traffics.

‘Mr Smith,’ said Mr Terle, ‘lend a hand.’

They untied the huge case and hoisted it gingerly out between them.

‘What you got there?’ cried Mr Fremley from above.

Mr Smith stumbled. Miss Hillgood gasped. The case shifted in the two
men’s arms.

From within the case came a faint musical humming.

Mr Fremley, above, heard. It was all the answer he needed. Mouth open,
he watched the lady and the two men and their boxed friend sway and
vanish in the cavernous porch below.

‘Watch out!’ said Mr Smith. ‘Some damn fool left his luggage here –’ He
stopped. ‘Some damn fool? _Me_!’

The two men looked at each other. They were not perspiring any more. A
wind had come up from somewhere, a gentle wind that fanned their shirt
collars and flapped the strewn calendar gently in the dust.

‘_My_ luggage …’ said Mr Smith.

Then they all went inside.

‘More wine, Miss Hillgood? Ain’t had wine on the table in years.’

‘Just a touch, if you please.’

They sat by the light of a single candle which made the room an oven and
struck fire from the good silverware and the un-cracked plates as they
talked and drank warm wine and ate.

‘Miss Hillgood, get on with your life.’

‘All my life,’ she said, ‘I’ve been so busy running from Beethoven to
Bach to Brahms, I never noticed I was twenty-nine. Next time I looked up
I was forty. Yesterday, seventy-one. Oh, there were men; but they’d
given up singing at ten and given up flying when they were twelve. I
always figured we were born to fly, one way or other, so I couldn’t
stand most men shuffling along with all the iron in the earth in their
blood. I never met a man who weighed less than nine hundred pounds. In
their black business suits, you could hear them roll by like funeral
wagons.’

‘So you flew away?’

‘Just in my mind, Mr Terle. It’s taken sixty years to make the final
break. All that time I grabbed on to piccolos and flutes and violins
because they make streams in the air, you know, like streams and rivers
on the ground. I rode every tributary and tried every fresh-water wind
from Handel on down to a whole slew of Strausses. It’s been the far way
around that’s brought me here.’

‘How’d you finally make up your mind to leave?’ asked Mr Smith.

‘I looked around last week and said, “Why, look, you’ve been flying
_alone_ ! No one in all Green City really cares _if_ you fly or how high
you go. It’s always, ‘Fine, Blanche,’ or ‘Thanks for the recital at the
PTA tea, Miss H.’ But no one really listening.” And when I talked a long
time ago about Chicago or New York, folks swatted me and laughed. “Why
be a little frog in a big pond when you can be the biggest frog in all
Green City!” So I stayed on, while the folks who gave me advice moved
away or died or both. The rest had wax in their ears. Just last week I
shook myself and said, “Hold on! Since when do _frogs_ have wings?”’

‘So now you’re headin’ west?’ said Mr Terle.

‘Maybe to play in pictures or in that orchestra under the stars. But
somewhere I just must play at last for someone who’ll hear and really
listen …’

They sat there in the warm dark. She was finished, she had said it all
now, foolish or not – and she moved back quietly in her chair.

Upstairs someone coughed.

Miss Hillgood heard, and rose.

It took Mr Fremley a moment to ungum his eyelids and make out the shape
of the woman bending down to place the tray by his rumpled bed.

‘What you all talking about down there just now?’

‘I’ll come back later and tell you word for word,’ said Miss Hillgood.
‘Eat now. The salad’s fine.’ She moved to leave the room.

He said, quickly, ‘You goin’ to stay?’

She stopped half out of the door and tried to trace the expression on
his sweating face in the dark. He, in turn, could not see her mouth or
eyes. She stood a moment longer, silently, then went on down the stairs.

‘She must not’ve heard me,’ said Mr Fremley.

But he knew she had heard.

Miss Hillgood crossed the downstairs lobby to fumble with the locks on
the upright leather case.

‘I must pay you for my supper.’

‘On the house,’ said Mr Terle.

‘I must pay,’ she said, and opened the case.

There was a sudden flash of gold.

The two men quickened in their chairs. They squinted at the little old
woman standing beside the tremendous heart-shaped object which towered
above her with its shining columbined pedestal atop which a calm Grecian
face with antelope eyes looked serenely at them even as Miss Hillgood
looked now.

The two men shot each other the quickest and most startled of glances,
as if each had guessed what might happen next. They hurried across the
lobby, breathing hard, to sit on the very edge of the hot velvet lounge,
wiping their faces with damp handkerchiefs.

Miss Hillgood drew a chair under her, rested the golden harp gently back
on her shoulder, and put her hands to the strings.

Mr Terle took a breath of fiery air and waited.

A desert wind came suddenly along the porch outside, tilting the chairs
so they rocked this way and that like boats on a pond at night.

Mr Fremley’s voice protested from above. ‘What’s goin’ on down there?’

And then Miss Hillgood moved her hands.

Starting at the arch near her shoulder, she played her fingers out along
the simple tapestry of wires towards the blind and beautiful stare of
the Greek goddess on her column, and then back. Then, for a moment, she
paused and let the sounds drift up through the baked lobby air and into
all the empty rooms.

If Mr Fremley shouted, above, no one heard. For Mr Terle and Mr Smith
were so busy jumping up to stand riven in the shadows, they heard
nothing save the storming of their own hearts and the shocked rush of
all the air in their lungs. Eyes wide, mouths dropped, in a kind of pure
insanity, they stared at the two women there, the blind Muse proud on
her golden pillar, and the seated one, gentle eyes closed, her small
hands stretched forth on the air.

Like a girl, they both thought wildly, like a little girl putting her
hands out of a window to feel what? Why, of course, of course!

To feel the rain.

The echo of the first shower vanished down remote causeways and
roof-drains, away.

Mr Fremley, above, rose from his bed as if pulled round by his ears.

Miss Hillgood played.

She played and it wasn’t a tune they knew at all, but it was a tune they
had heard a thousand times in their long lives, words or not, melody or
not. She played and each time her fingers moved, the rain fell pattering
through the dark hotel. The rain fell cool at the open windows and the
rain rinsed down the baked floorboards of the porch. The rain fell on
the rooftop and fell on hissing sand, it fell on rusted car and empty
stable and dead cactus in the yard. It washed the windows and laid the
dust and filled the rain-barrels and curtained the doors with beaded
threads that might part and whisper as you walked through. But more than
anything, the soft touch and coolness of it fell on Mr Smith and Mr
Terle. Its gentle weight and pressure moved them down and down until it
had seated them again. By its continuous budding and prickling on their
faces, it made them shut up their eyes and mouths and raise their hands
to shield it away. Seated there, they felt their heads tilt slowly back
to let the rain fall where it would.

The flash flood lasted a minute, then faded away as the fingers trailed
down the loom, let drop a few last bursts and squalls and then stopped.

The last chord hung in the air like a picture taken when lightning
strikes and freezes a billion drops of water on their downward flight.
Then the lightning went out. The last drops fell through darkness in
silence.

Miss Hillgood took her hands from the strings, her eyes still shut.

Mr Terle and Mr Smith opened their eyes to see those two miraculous
women, way over there across the lobby, somehow come through the storm
untouched and dry.

They trembled. They leaned forward as if they wished to speak. They
looked helpless, not knowing what to do.

And then a single sound from high above in the hotel corridors drew
their attention and told them what to do.

The sound came floating down feebly, fluttering like a tired bird
beating its ancient wings.

The two men looked up and listened.

It was the sound of Mr Fremley.

Mr Fremley, in his room, applauding.

It took five seconds for Mr Terle to figure out what it was. Then he
nudged Mr Smith and began, himself, to beat his palms together. The two
men struck their hands in mighty explosions. The echoes ricocheted
around about in the hotel caverns above and below, striking walls,
mirrors, windows, trying to fight free of the rooms.

Miss Hillgood opened her eyes now, as if this new storm had come on her
in the open, unprepared.

The men gave their own recital. They smashed their hands together so
fervently it seemed they had fistfuls of firecrackers to set off, one on
another. Mr Fremley shouted. Nobody heard. Hands winged out, banged shut
again and again until fingers puffed up and the old men’s breath came
short and they put their hands at last on their knees, a heart pounding
inside each one.

Then, very slowly, Mr Smith got up and still looking at the harp, went
outside and carried in the suitcases. He stood at the foot of the lobby
stairs looking for a long while at Miss Hillgood. He glanced down at her
single piece of luggage resting there by the first tread. He looked from
her suitcase to her and raised his eyebrows, questioningly.

Miss Hillgood looked at her harp, at her suitcase, at Mr Terle, and at
last back to Mr Smith.

She nodded once.

Mr Smith bent down and with his own luggage under one arm and her
suitcase in the other, he started the long slow climb up the stairs in
the gentle dark. As he moved, Miss Hillgood put the harp back on her
shoulder and either played in time to his moving or he moved in time to
her playing, neither of them knew which.

Half up the flight, Mr Smith met Mr Fremley who, in a faded robe, was
testing his slow way down.

Both stood there, looking deep into the lobby at the one man on the far
side in the shadows, and the two women farther over, no more than a
motion and a gleam. Both thought the same thoughts.

The sound of the harp playing, the sound of the cool water falling every
night and every night of their lives, after this. No spraying the roof
with the garden hose now, any more. Only sit on the porch or lie in your
night bed and hear the falling … the falling … the falling Mr Smith
moved on up the stair; Mr Fremley moved down.

The harp, the harp. Listen, listen!

The fifty years of drought were over.

The time of the long rains had come.


In a Season of Calm Weather

GEORGE and Alice Smith detrained at Biarritz one summer noon and in an
hour had run through their hotel on to the beach into the ocean and back
out to bake upon the sand.

To see George Smith sprawled burning there, you’d think him only a
tourist flown fresh as iced lettuce to Europe and soon to be transhipped
home. But here was a man who loved art more than life itself.

‘There …’ George Smith sighed. Another ounce of perspiration trickled
down his chest. Boil out the Ohio tap-water, he thought, then drink down
the best Bordeaux. Silt your blood with rich French sediment so you’ll
see with native eyes!

Why? Why eat, breathe, drink everything French? So that, given time, he
might really begin to understand the genius of one man.

His mouth moved, forming a name.

‘George?’ His wife loomed over him. ‘I know what you’ve been thinking. I
can read your lips.’

He lay perfectly still, waiting.

‘And?’

‘Picasso,’ she said.

He winced. Some day she would learn to pronounce that name.

‘Please,’ she said. ‘Relax. I know you heard the rumour this morning,
but you should see your eyes – your tic is back. All right, Picasso’s
here, down the coast a few miles away, visiting friends in some small
fishing town. But you must forget it or our vacation’s ruined.’

‘I wish I’d never heard the rumour,’ he said honestly.

‘If only,’ she said, ‘you liked other painters.’

Others? Yes, there were others. He could breakfast most congenially on
Caravaggio still-lifes of autumn pears and midnight plums. For lunch:
those fire-squirting, thick-wormed Van Gogh sunflowers, those blooms a
blind man might read with one rush of scorched fingers down fiery
canvas. But the great feast? The paintings he saved his palate for?
There, filling the horizon, like Neptune risen, crowned with limewood,
alabaster, coral, paintbrushes clenched like tridents in horn-nailed
fists, and with fishtail vast enough to fluke summer showers out over
all Gibraltar – who else but the creator of _Girl Before a Mirror_ and
_Guernica_?

‘Alice,’ he said, patiently, ‘how can I explain? Coming down on the
train I thought, Good Lord, it’s _all_ Picasso country!’

But was it really, he wondered. The sky, the land, the people, the
flushed-pink bricks here, scrolled electric-blue ironwork balconies
there, a mandolin ripe as a fruit in some man’s thousand fingerprinting
hands, billboard tatters blowing like confetti in night winds – how much
was Picasso, how much George Smith staring round the world with wild
Picasso eyes? He despaired of answering. That old man had distilled
turpentine and linseed oil so thoroughly through George Smith that they
shaped his being, all Blue Period at twilight, all Rose Period at dawn.

‘I keep thinking,’ he said aloud, ‘if we saved our money …’

‘We’ll never have five thousand dollars.’

‘I know,’ he said quietly. ‘But it’s nice thinking we might bring it off
some day. Wouldn’t it be great to just step up to him, say “Pablo,
here’s five thousand! Give us the sea, the sand, that sky, or any old
thing you want, we’ll be happy.…” ’

After a moment, his wife touched his arm.

‘I think you’d better go in the water now,’ she said.

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I’d better do just that.’

White fire showered up when he cut the water.

During the afternoon George Smith came out and went into the ocean with
the vast spilling motions of now warm, now cool people who at last, with
the sun’s decline, their bodies all lobster colours and colours of
broiled squab and guinea hen, trudged for their wedding-cake hotels.

The beach lay deserted for endless mile on mile save for two people. One
was George Smith, towel over shoulder, out for a last devotional.

Far along the shore another shorter, square-cut man walked alone in the
tranquil weather. He was deeper tanned, his close-shaven head dyed
almost mahogany by the sun, and his eyes were clear and bright as water
in his face.

So the shoreline stage was set, and in a few minutes the two men would
meet. And once again Fate fixed the scales for shocks and surprises,
arrivals and departures. And all the while these two solitary strollers
did not for a moment think on coincidence, that unswum stream which
lingers at man’s elbow with every crowd in every town. Nor did they
ponder the fact that if man dares dip into that stream he grabs a wonder
in each hand. Like most they shrugged at such folly, and stayed well up
the bank lest Fate should shove them in.

The stranger stood alone. Glancing about, he saw his alone-ness, saw the
waters of the lovely bay, saw the sun sliding down the late colours of
the day, and then half-turning spied a small wooden object on the sand.
It was no more than the slender stick from a lime ice-cream delicacy
long since melted away. Smiling he picked the stick up. With another
glance around to re-insure his solitude, the man stooped again and
holding the stick gently with light sweeps of his hand began to do the
one thing in all the world he knew best how to do.

He began to draw incredible figures along the sand. He sketched one
figure and then moved over and still looking down, completely focused on
his work now, drew a second and a third figure, and after that a fourth
and a fifth and a sixth.

George Smith, printing the shoreline with his feet, gazed here, gazed
there, and then saw the man ahead. George Smith, drawing nearer, saw
that the man, deeply tanned, was bending down. Nearer yet, and it was
obvious what the man was up to. George Smith chuckled. Of course, of
course … along on the beach this man – how old? Sixty-five? Seventy? –
was scribbling and doodling away. How the sand flew! How the wild
portraits flung themselves out there on the shore! How …

George Smith took one more step and stopped, very still.

The stranger was drawing and drawing and did not seem to sense that
anyone stood immediately behind him and the world of his drawings in the
sand. By now he was so deeply enchanted with his solitudinous creation
that depth-bombs set off in the bay might not have stopped his flying
hand nor turned him round.

George Smith looked down at the sand. And, after a long while, looking,
he began to tremble.

For there on the flat shore were pictures of Grecian lions and
Mediterranean goats and maidens with flesh of sand like powdered gold
and satyrs piping on hand-carved horns and children dancing, strewing
flowers along and along the beach with lambs gambolling after and
musicians skipping to their harps and lyres, and unicorns racing youths
towards distant meadows, woodlands, ruined temples and volcanoes. Along
the shore in a never-broken line, the hand, the wooden stylus of this
man bent down in fever and raining perspiration, scribbled, ribboned,
looped around over and up, across, in, out, stitched, whispered, stayed,
then hurried on as if this travelling bacchanal must flourish to its end
before the sun was put out by the sea. Twenty, thirty yards or more the
nymphs and dryads and summer founts sprang up in unravelled hieroglyphs.
And the sand, in the dying light, was the colour of molten copper on
which was now slashed a message that any man in any time might read and
savour down the years. Everything whirled and poised in its own wind and
gravity. Now wine was being crushed from under the grape-blooded feet of
dancing vintners’ daughters, now steaming seas gave birth to
coin-sheathed monsters while flowered kites strewed scent on blowing
clouds … now … now … now….

The artist stopped.

George Smith drew back and stood away.

The artist glanced up, surprised to find someone so near. Then he simply
stood there, looking from George Smith to his own creations flung like
idle footprints down the way. He smiled at last and shrugged as if to
say, Look what I’ve done; see what a child? You will forgive me, won’t
you? One day or another we are all fools … you, too, perhaps? So allow
an old fool this, eh? Good! Good!

But George Smith could only look at the little man with the sun-dark
skin and the clear sharp eyes, and say the man’s name once, in a
whisper, to himself.

They stood thus for perhaps another five seconds, George Smith staring
at the sand-frieze, and the artist watching George Smith with amused
curiosity. George Smith opened his mouth, closed it, put out his hand,
took it back. He stepped towards the picture, stepped away. Then he
moved along the line of figures, like a man viewing a precious series of
marbles cast up from some ancient ruin on the shore. His eyes did not
blink, his hand wanted to touch but did not dare to touch. He wanted to
run but did not run.

He looked suddenly at the hotel. Run, yes! Run! What? Grab a shovel,
dig, excavate, save a chunk of this all too crumbling sand? Find a
repair-man, race him back here with plaster-of-paris to cast a mould of
some small fragile part of these? No, no. Silly, silly. Or …? His eyes
flicked to his hotel window. The camera! Run, get it, get back, and
hurry along the shore, clicking, changing film, clicking unti l…

George Smith whirled to face the sun. It burned faintly on his face, his
eyes were two small fires from it. The sun was half underwater and, as
he watched, it sank the rest of the way in a matter of seconds.

The artist had drawn nearer and now was gazing into George Smith’s face
with great friendliness as if he were guessing every thought. Now he was
nodding his head in a little bow. Now the ice-cream stick had fallen
casually from his fingers. Now he was saying good night, good night. Now
he was gone, walking back down the beach towards the south.

George Smith stood looking after him. After a full minute, he did the
only thing he could possibly do. He started at the beginning of the
fantastic frieze of satyrs and fauns and wine-dipped maidens and
prancing unicorns and piping youths and he walked slowly along the
shore. He walked a long way, looking down at the free-running bacchanal.
And when he came to the end of the animals and men he turned round and
started back in the other direction, just staring down as if he had lost
something and did not quite know where to find it. He kept on doing this
until there was no more light in the sky, or on the sand, to see by.

He sat down at the supper table.

‘You’re late,’ said his wife. ‘I just had to come down alone. I’m
ravenous.’

‘That’s all right,’ he said.

‘Anything interesting happen on your walk?’ she asked.

‘No,’ he said.

‘You look funny; George, you didn’t swim out too far, did you, and
almost drown? I can tell by your face. You _did_ swim out too far,
didn’t you?’

‘Yes,’ he said.

‘Well,’ she said, watching him closely. ‘Don’t ever do that again. Now –
what’ll you have?’

He picked up the menu and started to read it and stopped suddenly.

‘What’s wrong?’ asked his wife.

He turned his head and shut his eyes for a moment.

‘Listen.’

She listened.

‘I don’t hear anything,’ she said.

‘Don’t you?’

‘No. What is it?’

‘Just the tide,’ he said, after a while, sitting there, his eyes still
shut. ‘Just the tide, coming in.’


The Dragon

THE night blew in the short grass on the moor; there was no other
motion. It had been years since a single bird had flown by in the great
blind shell of sky. Long ago a few small stones had simulated life when
they crumbled and fell into dust. Now only the night moved in the souls
of the two men bent by their lonely fire in the wilderness; darkness
pumped quietly in their veins and ticked silently in their temples and
their wrists.

Firelight fled up and down their wild faces and welled in their eyes in
orange tatters. They listened to each other’s faint, cool breathing and
the lizard blink of their eyelids. At last, one man poked the fire with
his sword.

‘Don’t, idiot; you’ll give us away!’

‘No matter,’ said the second man. ‘The dragon can smell us miles off,
anyway. God’s breath, it’s cold. I wish I was back at the castle.’

‘It’s death, not sleep, we’re after ’

‘Why? Why? The dragon never sets foot in the town!’

‘Quiet, fool! He eats men travelling alone from our town to the next!’

‘Let them be eaten and let us get home!’

‘Wait now; listen!’

The two men froze.

They waited a long time, but there was only the shake of their horses’
nervous skin like black velvet tambourines jingling the silver stirrup
buckles, softly, softly.

‘Ah.’ The second man sighed. ‘What a land of nightmares. Everything
happens here. Someone blows out the sun; it’s night. And then, and
_then_, oh, God, listen! This dragon, they say his eyes are fire. His
breath a white gas; you can see him burn across the dark lands. He runs
with sulphur and thunder and kindles the grass. Sheep panic and die
insane. Women deliver forth monsters. The dragon’s fury is such that
tower walls shake back to dust. His victims, at sunrise, are strewn
hither and thither on the hills. How many knights, I ask, have gone for
this monster and failed, even as we shall fail?’

‘Enough of that!’

‘More than enough! Out here in this desolation I cannot tell what year
this is!’

‘Nine hundred years since the Nativity.’

‘No, no,’ whispered the second man, eyes shut. ‘On this moor is no Time,
is only Forever. I feel if I ran back on the road the town would be
gone, the people yet unborn, things changed, the castles unquarried from
the rocks, the timbers still uncut from the forests; don’t ask how I
know, the moor knows, and tells me. And here we sit alone in the land of
the fire dragon, God save us!’

‘Be you afraid, then gird on your armour!’

‘What use? The dragon runs from nowhere; we cannot guess its home. It
vanishes in fog, we know not where it goes. Aye, on with our armour,
we’ll die well-dressed.’

Half into his silver corselet, the second man stopped again and turned
his head.

Across the dim country, full of night and nothingness from the heart of
the moor itself, the wind sprang full of dust from clocks that used dust
for telling time. There were black suns burning in the heart of this new
wind and a million burnt leaves shaken from some autumn tree beyond the
horizon. This wind melted landscapes, lengthened bones like white wax,
made the blood roil and thicken to a muddy deposit in the brain. The
wind was a thousand souls dying and all time confused and in transit. It
was a fog inside of a mist inside of a darkness, and this place was no
man’s place and there was no year or hour at all, but only these men in
a faceless emptiness of sudden frost, storm, and white thunder which
moved behind the great falling pane of green glass that was the
lightning. A squall of rain drenched the turf, all faded away until
there was unbreathing hush and the two men waiting alone with their
warmth in a cool season.

‘There,’ whispered the first man. ‘Oh, _there ._. .’

Miles off, rushing with a great chant and a roar – the dragon.

In silence, the men buckled on their armour and mounted their horses.
The midnight wilderness was split by a monstrous gushing as the dragon
roared nearer, nearer; its flashing yellow glare spurted above a hill
and then, fold on fold of dark body, distantly seen, therefore
indistinct, flowed over that hill and plunged vanishing into a valley.

‘Quick!’

They spurred their horses forward to a small hollow.

‘This is where it passes!’

They seized their lances with mailed fists, and blinded their horses by
flipping the visors down over their eyes.

‘Lord!’

‘Yes, let us use His name.’

On the instant, the dragon rounded a hill. Its monstrous amber eye fed
on them, fired their armour in red glints and glitters. With a terrible
wailing cry and a grinding rush it flung itself forward.

‘Mercy, God!’

The lance struck under the unlidded yellow eye, buckled, tossed the man
through the air. The dragon hit, spilled him over, down, ground him
under. Passing, the black brunt of its shoulder smashed the remaining
horse and rider a hundred feet against the side of a boulder, wailing,
wailing, the dragon shrieking, the fire all about, around, under it, a
pink, yellow, orange sun-fire with great soft plumes of blinding smoke.

‘Did you _see_ it?’ cried a voice. ‘Just like I told you!’

‘The same! The same! A knight in armour, by the Lord Harry! We _hit_
him!’

‘You goin’ to stop?’

‘Did once; found nothing. Don’t like to stop on this moor. I get the
willies. Got a _feel_, it has.’

‘But we hit _something_ !’

‘Gave him plenty of whistle; chap wouldn’t budge.’

A steaming blast cut the mist aside.

‘We’ll make Stokely on time. More coal, eh, Fred?’

Another whistle shook dew from the empty sky. The night train, in fire
and fury, shot through a gully, up a rise, and vanished over cold earth,
towards the north, leaving black smoke and steam to dissolve in the
numbed air minutes after it had passed and gone for ever.


The End of the Beginning

HE stopped the lawnmower in the middle of the yard because he felt that
the sun at just that moment had gone down and the stars come out. The
fresh-cut grass that had showered his face and body died softly away.
Yes, the stars were there, faint at first, but brightening in the clear
desert sky. He heard the porch screen-door tap shut and felt his wife
watching him as he watched the night.

‘Almost time,’ she said.

He nodded; he did not have to check his watch. In the passing moments he
felt very old, then very young, very cold, then very warm, now this, now
that. Suddenly, he was miles away. He was his own son talking steadily,
moving briskly to cover his pounding heart and the resurgent panics as
he felt himself slip into fresh uniform, check food supplies,
oxygen-flasks, pressure helmet, space-suiting and turn, as every man on
earth tonight turned, to gaze at the swiftly filling sky.

Then, quickly, he was back, once more, the father of the son, hands
gripped to the lawnmower handle. His wife called, ‘Come sit on the
porch.’

‘I’ve got to keep busy!’

She came down the steps and across the lawn. ‘Don’t worry about Robert;
he’ll be all right.’

‘But it’s all so new,’ he heard himself say. ‘It’s never been done
before. Think of it – a manned rocket going up tonight to build the
first space-station. Good Lord, it can’t be done, it doesn’t exist,
there’s no rocket, no proving-ground, no take-off time, no technicians.
For that matter, I don’t even have a son named Bob. The whole thing’s
too much for me!’

‘Then what are you doing out here, staring?’

He shook his head. ‘Well, late this morning, walking to the office, I
heard someone laugh out loud. It shocked me so I froze in the middle of
the street. It was _me_, laughing! Why? Because finally I really _knew_
what Bob was going to do tonight; at last I _believed_ it. Holy is a
word I never use, but that’s how I felt stranded in all that traffic.
Then, middle of the afternoon I caught myself humming. You know the
song. A wheel in a wheel. Way in the middle of the air. I laughed again.
The space-station, of course, I thought. The big wheel with hollow
spokes where Bob’ll live six or eight months, then get along to the
moon. Walking home, I remembered more of the song. Little wheel run by
faith, Big wheel run by the grace of God. I wanted to jump, yell, and
flame-out myself!’

His wife touched his arm. ‘If we stay out here, let’s at least be
comfortable.’

They placed two wicker rockers in the centre of the lawn and sat quietly
as the stars dissolved out of darkness in pale crushings of rock-salt
strewn from horizon to horizon.

‘Why,’ said his wife, at last, ‘it’s like waiting for the fireworks at
Sisley Field every year.’

‘Bigger crowd tonight….’

‘I keep thinking – a billion people watching the sky right now, their
mouths all open at the same time.’

They waited, feeling the earth move under their chairs.

‘What time is it now?’

‘Eleven minutes to eight.’

‘You’re always right; there must be a clock in your head.’

‘I can’t be wrong, tonight. I’ll be able to tell you one second before
they blast off. Look! The ten-minute warning!’

On the western sky they saw four crimson flares open out, float
shimmering down the wind, above the desert, then sink silently to the
extinguishing earth.

In the new darkness, the husband and wife did not rock in their chairs.

After a while, he said, ‘Eight minutes.’ A pause. ‘Seven minutes.’ What
seemed a much longer pause. ‘Six …’

His wife, her head back, studied the stars immediately above her and
murmured, ‘Why?’ She closed her eyes. ‘Why the rockets, why tonight? Why
all this? I’d like to know.’

He examined her face, pale in the vast powdering light of the Milky Way.
He felt the stirring of an answer, but let his wife continue.

‘I mean it’s not that old thing again, is it, when people asked why men
climbed Mount Everest and they said, “Because it’s there”? I never
understood. That was no answer to me.’

Five minutes, he thought. Time ticking … his wrist-watch … a wheel in a
wheel … little wheel run by … big wheel run by … way in the middle of …
four minutes! … the men snug in the rocket by now, the hive, the control
board lit like Christmas morning….

His lips moved.

‘All I know is it’s really the end of the beginning. The Stone Age,
Bronze Age, Iron Age; from now on we’ll lump all those together under
one big name for when we walked on Earth and heard the birds at morning
and cried with envy. Maybe we’ll call it the Earth Age, or maybe the Age
of Gravity. Millions of years we fought gravity. When we were amoebas
and fish we struggled to get out of the sea without gravity crushing us.
Once safe on the shore we fought to stand upright without gravity
breaking our new invention, the spine; tried to walk without stumbling,
run without falling. A billion years, Gravity kept us home, mocked us
with wind and clouds, cabbage-moths and locusts. That’s what’s so
god-awful big about tonight … it’s the end of old man Gravity and the
Age we’ll remember him by, for once and all. I don’t know where they’ll
divide the Ages, at the Persians who dreamt of flying-carpets, or the
Chinese who all unknowing celebrated birthdays and New Years with strung
ladyfingers and high skyrockets, or some minute, some incredible second
in the next hour. But we’re in at the end of a billion years’ trying,
the end of something long and to us humans, anyway, honourable.’

Three minutes … two minutes, fifty-nine seconds … two minutes
fifty-eight seconds.…

‘Yes …’ He could hardly hear his wife’s voice. ‘Yes … I believe that’s
true.’

Two minutes, he thought. _Ready? Ready? Ready_? The far radio voice
calling. _Ready! Ready! Ready_! The quick faint replies from the humming
rocket. _Check! Check! Check_!

Tonight, he thought, even if we fail with this first, we’ll send a
second and a third ship and move on out to all the planets and, later,
all the stars. We’ll just keep going until the big words like immortal
and for ever take on meaning. Big words, yes, that’s what we want.
Continuity. Since our tongues first moved in our mouths, we’ve asked,
What does it all mean? No other question made sense, with death
breathing down our necks. But just let us settle in on ten thousand
worlds spinning around ten thousand alien suns and the question will
fade away. Man will be endless and infinite, even as space is endless
and infinite. Man will go on, as space goes on, for ever. Individuals
will die, as always, but our history will reach as far as we’ll ever
need to see into the future, and with the knowledge of our survival for
all time to come, we’ll know security and thus the answer we’ve always
searched for. Gifted with life, the least we can do is preserve and pass
on the gift to infinity. That’s a goal worth shooting for.

The wicker chairs whispered ever so softly on the grass.

One minute.

‘One minute,’ he said, aloud.

‘Oh!’ His wife moved suddenly, to seize his hands. ‘I hope that Bob…

‘He’ll be all right!’

‘Oh, God, take care.…’

Thirty seconds.

‘Watch, now.’

Fifteen, ten, five …

‘Watch!’

Four, three, two, one.

‘There! There! Oh, there, there!’

They both cried out. They both stood. The chairs toppled back, fell flat
on the lawn. The man and his wife swayed, their hands struggled to find
each other, grip hold. They saw the brightening colour in the sky and,
ten seconds later, the great uprising comet burn the air, put out the
stars, and rush away in firelight to become another star in the
returning profusion of the Milky Way. The man and wife held each other
as if they had stumbled on the rim of an incredible cliff that faced an
abyss so deep and dark there seemed no end to it. Staring up, they heard
themselves sobbing and crying. Only after a long time were they able to
speak.

‘It got away, it did, _didn’t_ it?’

‘Yes …’

‘It’s all right, isn’t it?’

‘Yes … yes …’

‘It didn’t fall back…?’

‘No, no, it’s all right, Bob’s all right, it’s all right.’

They stood away from each other at last.

He touched his face with his hand and looked at his wet fingers. ‘I’ll
be damned,’ he said, ‘I’ll be damned.’

They waited another five and then ten minutes until the darkness in
their heads, the retina, ached with a million specks of fiery salt. Then
they had to close their eyes.

‘Well,’ she said, ‘now let’s go in.’

He could not move. Only his hand reached a long way out by itself to
find the lawnmower handle. He saw what his hand had done and said,
‘There’s just a little more to do.…’

‘But you can’t see.’

‘Well enough,’ he said.’ I must finish this. Then we’ll sit on the porch
awhile before we turn in.’

He helped her put the chairs on the porch and sat her down and then
walked back out to put his hands on the guidebar of the lawnmower. The
lawnmower. A wheel in a wheel. A simple machine which you held in your
hands, which you sent on ahead with a rush and a clatter, while you
walked behind with your quiet philosophy. Racket, followed by warm
silence. Whirling wheel, then soft footfall of thought.

I’m a billion years old, he told himself; I’m one minute old. I’m one
inch, not ten thousand _miles_, tall. I look down and can’t see my feet
they’re so far off and gone away below.

He moved the lawnmower. The grass, showering up, fell softly around him;
he relished and savoured it and felt that he was all mankind bathing at
last in the fresh waters of the fountain of youth.

Thus bathed, he remembered the song again, about the wheels and the
faith and the grace of God being way up there in the middle of the sky
where that single star, among a million motionless stars, dared to move
and keep on moving.

Then he finished cutting the grass.


The Wonderful Ice-Cream Suit

IT was summer twilight in the city and out front of the quiet-clicking
pool-hall three young Mexican-American men breathed the warm air and
looked around at the world. Sometimes they talked and sometimes they
said nothing at all, but watched the cars glide by like black panthers
on the hot asphalt or saw trolleys loom up like thunderstorms, scatter
lightning, and rumble away into silence.

‘Hey,’ sighed Martinez, at last. He was the youngest, the most sweetly
sad of the three. ‘It’s a swell night, huh? Swell.’

As he observed the world it moved very close and then drifted away and
then came close again. People, brushing by, were suddenly across the
street. Buildings five miles away suddenly leaned over him. But most of
the time everything, people, cars, and buildings, stayed way out on the
edge of the world and could not be touched. On this quiet warm summer
evening, Martinez’s face was cold.

‘Nights like this you wish … lots of things.’

‘Wishing,’ said the second man, Villanazul, a man who shouted books out
loud in his room, but spoke only in whispers on the street. ‘Wishing is
the useless pastime of the unemployed.’

‘Unemployed?’ cried Vamenos, the unshaven. ‘Listen to him! We got no
jobs, no money!’

‘So,’ said Martinez, ‘we got no friends.’

‘True.’ Villanazul gazed off towards the green plaza where the
palm-trees swayed in the soft night wind. ‘Do you know what I wish? I
wish to go into that plaza and speak among the businessmen who gather
there nights to talk big talk. But dressed as I am, poor as I am, who
would listen? So, Martinez, we have each other. The friendship of the
poor is real friendship. We –’

But now a handsome young Mexican with a fine thin moustache strolled by.
And on each of his careless arms hung a laughing woman.

‘_Madre mía_!’ Martinez slapped his own brow. ‘How does that one rate
_two_ friends?’

‘It’s his nice new white summer suit.’ Vamenos chewed a black thumbnail.
‘He looks sharp.’

Martinez leaned out to watch the three people moving away, and then the
tenement across the street, in one fourth-floor window of which, far
above, a beautiful girl leaned out, her dark hair faintly stirred by the
wind. She had been there for ever, which was to say, for six weeks. He
had nodded, he had raised a hand, he had smiled, he had blinked rapidly,
he had even bowed to her, on the street, in the hall when visiting
friends, in the park, downtown. Even now, he put his hand up from his
waist and moved his fingers. But all the lovely girl did was let the
summer wind stir her dark hair. He did not exist. He was nothing.

‘_Madre mía_!’ He looked away and down the street where the man walked
his two friends around a corner. ‘Oh, if I had just one suit, one! I
wouldn’t need money if I _looked_ okay.’

‘I hesitate to suggest,’ said Villanazul, ‘that you see Gomez. But he’s
been talking some crazy talk for a month now, about clothes. I keep on
saying I’ll be in on it to make him go away. That Gomez.’

‘Friend,’ said a quiet voice.

‘Gomez!’ Everyone turned to stare.

Smiling strangely, Gomez pulled forth an endless thin yellow ribbon
which fluttered and swirled on the summer air.

‘Gomez,’ said Martinez, ‘what you doing with that tape-measure?’

Gomez beamed. ‘Measuring people’s skeletons.’

‘Skeletons!’

‘Hold on.’ Gomez squinted at Martinez. ‘g_Caramba_! Where you _been_ all
my life! Let’s try _you_ !’

Martinez saw his arm seized and taped, his leg measured, his chest
encircled.

‘Hold still!’ cried Gomez. ‘Arm – perfect. Leg – chest –
_perfectamente_! Now, quick, the height! There! Yes! Five foot five!
You’re in! Shake!’ Pumping Martinez’s hand he stopped suddenly. ‘Wait.
You got … ten bucks?’

‘I have!’ Vamenos waved some grimy bills. ‘Gomez, measure me!’

‘All I got left in the world is nine dollars and ninety-two cents.’
Martinez searched his pockets. ‘That’s enough for a new suit? Why?’

‘Why? Because you got the right skeleton, that’s why!’

‘Señor Gomez, I don’t hardly know you –’

‘Know me? You’re going to live with me! Come on!’

Gomez vanished into the pool-room. Martinez, escorted by the polite
Villanazul, pushed by an eager Vamenos, found himself inside.

‘Dominguez!’ said Gomez.

Dominguez, at a wall-telephone, winked at them. A woman’s voice squeaked
on the receiver.

‘Manulo!’ said Gomez.

Manulo, a wine bottle tilted bubbling to his mouth, turned.

Gomez pointed at Martinez.

‘At last we found our fifth volunteer!’

Dominguez said, ‘I got a date, don’t bother me –’ and stopped. The
receiver slipped from his fingers. His little black telephone book full
of fine names and numbers went quickly back into his pocket. ‘Gomez, you
– ?’

‘Yes, yes! Your money, now! _Ándale_!’

The woman’s voice sizzled on the dangling phone.

Dominguez glanced at it, uneasily.

Manulo considered the empty wine bottle in his hand and the liquor-store
sign across the street.

Then, very reluctantly, both men laid ten dollars each on the green
velvet pool-table.

Villanazul, amazed, did likewise, as did Gomez, nudging Martinez.
Martinez counted out his wrinkled bills and change. Gomez flourished the
money like a royal flush.

‘Fifty bucks! The suit costs sixty! All we need is ten bucks!’

‘Wait,’ said Martinez. ‘Gomez, are we talking about _one_ suit? _Uno_?’

‘_Uno_!’ Gomez raised a finger. ‘One wonderful white ice-cream summer
suit! White, white as the August moon!’

‘But who will own this one suit?’

‘Me!’ said Manulo.

‘Me!’ said Dominguez.

‘Me!’ said Villanazul.

‘Me!’ cried Gomez. ‘_And_ you, Martinez. Men, let’s show him. Line up!’

Villanazul, Manulo, Dominguez, and Gomez rushed to plant their backs
against the pool-room wall.

‘Martinez, you too, the other end, line up! Now, Vamenos, lay that
billiard cue across our heads!’

‘Sure, Gomez, sure!’

Martinez, in line, felt the cue tap his head and leaned out to see what
was happening. ‘Ah!’ he gasped.

The cue lay flat on all their heads, with no rise or fall, as Vamenos
slid it, grinning, along.

‘We’re all the same height!’ said Martinez.

‘The same!’ Everyone laughed.

Gomez ran down the line rustling the yellow tape-measure here and there
on the men so they laughed even more wildly.

‘Sure!’ he said. ‘It took a month, four weeks, mind you, to find four
guys the same size and shape as me, a month of running around measuring.
Sometimes I found guys with five-foot-five skeletons, sure, but all the
meat on their bones was too much or not enough. Sometimes their bones
were too long in the legs or too short in the arms. Boy, all the bones!
I tell you! But now, five of us, same shoulders, chests, waists, arms,
and as for weight? Men!’

Manulo, Dominguez, Villanazul, Gomez, and at last, Martinez stepped on
to the scales which flipped ink-stamped cards at them as Vamenos, still
smiling, wildly fed pennies. Heart pounding, Martinez read the cards.

‘One hundred thirty-five pounds … one thirty-six … one thirty-three …
one thirty-four … one thirty-seven … a miracle!’

‘No,’ said Villanazul, simply, ‘Gomez.’

They all smiled upon that genius who now circled them with his arms.

‘Are we not fine?’ he wondered. ‘All the same size, all the same dream –
the suit. So each of us will look beautiful at least one night each
week, eh?’

‘I haven’t looked beautiful in years,’ said Martinez. ‘The girls run
away.’

‘They will run no more, they will freeze,’ said Gomez, ‘when they see
you in the cool white summer ice-cream suit.’

‘Gomez,’ said Villanazul, ‘just let me ask one thing.’

‘Of course, _compadre_.’

‘When we get this nice new white ice-cream summer suit, some night
you’re not going to put it on and walk down to the Greyhound bus in it
and go live in El Paso for a year in it, are you?’

‘Villanazul, Villanazul, how can you say that?’

‘My eye sees and my tongue moves,’ said Villanazul. ‘How about the
_Everybody Wins_! Punchboard Lotteries you ran and you kept running when
nobody won? How about the United Chili Con Carne and Frijole Company you
were going to organize and all that ever happened was the rent ran out
on a two-by-four office?’

‘The errors of a child now grown,’ said Gomez. ‘Enough! In this hot
weather, someone may buy the special suit that is made just for us that
stands waiting in the window of SHUMWAY’S SUNSHINE SUITS! We have fifty
dollars. Now we need just one more skeleton!’

Martinez saw the men peer around the pool-hall. He looked where they
looked. He felt his eyes hurry past Vamenos, then come reluctantly back
to examine his dirty shirt, his huge nicotined fingers.

‘Me!’ Vamenos burst out, at last. ‘My skeleton, measure it, it’s great!
Sure, my hands are big, and my arms, from digging ditches! But –’

Just then Martinez heard passing on the sidewalk outside, that same
terrible man with his two girls, all laughing and yelling together.

He saw anguish move like the shadow of a summer cloud on the faces of
the other men in this pool-room.

Slowly Vamenos stepped on to the scales and dropped his penny. Eyes
closed, he breathed a prayer.

‘_Madre mía_, please …’

The machinery whirred, the card fell out. Vamenos opened his eyes.

‘Look! One thirty-five pounds! Another miracle!’

The men stared at his right hand and the card, at his left hand and a
soiled ten-dollar bill.

Gomez swayed. Sweating, he licked his lips. Then, his hand shot out,
seized the money.

‘The clothing store! The suit! _Andale_!’

Yelling, everyone ran from the pool-room.

The woman’s voice was still squeaking on the abandoned telephone.
Martinez, left behind, reached out and hung the voice up. In the
silence, he shook his head. ‘_Santos_, what a dream! Six men,’ he said,
‘one suit. What will come of this? Madness? Debauchery? Murder? But I go
with God. Gomez, wait for me!’

Martinez was young. He ran fast.

Mr Shumway, of SHUMWAY’S SUNSHINE SUITS, paused while adjusting a
tie-rack, aware of some subtle atmospheric change outside his
establishment.

‘Leo,’ he whispered to his assistant. ‘Look …’

Outside, one man, Gomez, strolled by, looking in. Two men. Manulo and
Dominguez, hurried by, staring in. Three men, Villanazul, Martinez, and
Vamenos, jostling shoulders, did the same.

‘Leo,’ Mr Shumway swallowed. ‘Call the police!’

Suddenly, six men filled the doorway.

Martinez, crushed among them, his stomach slightly upset, his face
feeling feverish, smiled so wildly at Leo that Leo let go the telephone.

‘Hey,’ breathed Martinez, eyes wide. ‘There’s a great suit, over there!’

‘No.’ Manulo touched a lapel. ‘_This_ one!’

‘There is only one suit in all the world!’ said Gomez, coldly. ‘Mr
Shumway, the ice-cream white, size thirty-four, was in your window just
an hour ago! It’s gone! You didn’t –’

‘Sell it?’ Mr Shumway exhaled. ‘No, no. In the dressing-room. It’s still
on the dummy.’

Martinez did not know if he moved and moved the crowd or if the crowd
moved and moved him. Suddenly they were all in motion. Mr Shumway,
running, tried to keep ahead of them.

‘This way, gents. Now which of you …?’

‘All for one, one for all!’ Martinez heard himself say, and laughed
wildly. ‘We’ll all try it on!’

‘All?’ Mr Shumway clutched at the booth curtain as if his shop were a
steamship that had suddenly tilted in a great swell. He stared.

That’s it, thought Martinez, look at our smiles. Now, look at the
skeletons behind our smiles! Measure here, there, up, down, yes, do you
_see_?

Mr Shumway saw. He nodded. He shrugged.

‘All!’ He jerked the curtain. ‘There! Buy it, and I’ll throw in the
dummy, free!’

Martinez peered quietly into the booth, his motion drawing the others to
peer, too.

The suit was there.

And it was white.

Martinez could not breathe. He did not want to. He did not need to. He
was afraid his breath would melt the suit. It was enough, just looking.

But at last he took a great trembling breath and exhaled, whispering,
‘_Ay. Ay, caramba_!’

‘It puts out my eyes,’ murmured Gomez.

‘Mr Shumway.’ Martinez heard Leo hissing. ‘Ain’t it dangerous precedent,
to sell it? I mean, what if everybody bought _one_ suit for _six_
people?’

‘Leo,’ said Mr Shumway, ‘you ever hear one single fifty-nine-dollar suit
make so many people happy at the same time before?’

‘Angels’ wings,’ murmured Martinez. ‘The wings of white angels.’

Martinez felt Mr Shumway peering over his shoulder into the booth. The
pale glow filled his eyes.

‘You know something, Leo?’ he said, in awe. ‘That’s a _suit_ !’

Gomez, shouting, whistling, ran up to the third-floor landing and turned
to wave to the others who staggered, laughed, stopped, and had to sit
down on the steps below.

‘Tonight!’ cried Gomez. ‘Tonight you move in with me, eh? Save rent as
well as clothes, eh? Sure! Martinez, you got the suit?’

‘Have I?’ Martinez lifted the white gift-wrapped box high. ‘From us to
us! _Ay-hah_!’

‘Vamenos, you got the dummy?’

‘Here!’

Vamenos, chewing an old cigar, scattering sparks, slipped. The dummy,
falling, toppled, turned over twice, and banged down the stairs.

‘Vamenos! Dumb! Clumsy!’

They seized the dummy from him. Stricken, Vamenos looked about as if
he’d lost something.

Manulo snapped his fingers. ‘Hey, Vamenos, we got to celebrate ! Go
borrow some wine!’

Vamenos plunged downstairs in a whirl of sparks.

The others moved into the room with the suit, leaving Martinez in the
hall to study Gomez’s face.

‘Gomez, you look sick.’

‘I am,’ said Gomez. ‘For what have I done?’ He nodded to the shadows in
the room working about the dummy. ‘I pick Dominguez, a devil with the
women. All right. I pick Manulo, who drinks, yes, but who sings as sweet
as a girl, eh? Okay. Villanazul reads books. You, you wash behind your
ears. But then what do I do? Can I wait? No! I got to buy that suit! So
the last guy I pick is a clumsy slob who has the right to wear _my_ suit
–’ He stopped, confused. ‘Who gets to wear _our_ suit one night a week,
fall down in it, or not come in out of the rain in it! Why, why, why did
I _do it_ !’

‘Gomez,’ whispered Villanazul from the room. ‘The suit is ready. Come
see if it looks as good using _your_ light bulb.’

Gomez and Martinez entered.

And there on the dummy in the centre of the room was the phosphorescent,
the miraculously white-fired ghost with the incredible lapels, the
precise stitching, the neat button-holes. Standing with the white
illumination of the suit upon his cheeks, Martinez suddenly felt he was
in church. White! White! It was white as the whitest vanilla ice-cream,
as the bottled milk in tenement halls at dawn. White as a winter cloud
all alone in the moonlit sky late at night. Seeing it here in the warm
summer night room made their breath almost show on the air. Shutting his
eyes, he could see it printed on his lids. He knew what colour his
dreams would be this night.

‘White …’ murmured Villanazul. ‘White as the snow on that mountain near
our town in Mexico which is called the Sleeping Woman.’

‘Say that again,’ said Gomez.

Villanazul, proud yet humble, was glad to repeat his tribute.

‘… white as the snow on the mountain called –’

‘I’m back!’

Shocked, the men whirled to see Vamenos in the door, wine bottles in
each hand.

‘A party! Here! Now tell us, who wears the suit first tonight? Me?’

‘It’s too late!’ said Gomez.

‘Late! It’s only nine-fifteen!’

‘Late?’ said everyone, bristling. ‘Late?’

Gomez edged away from these men who glared from him to the suit to the
open window.

Outside and below it was, after all, thought Martinez, a fine Saturday
night in a summer month and through the calm warm darkness the women
drifted like flowers on a quiet stream. The men made a mournful sound.

‘Gomez, a suggestion.’ Villanazul licked his pencil and drew a chart on
a pad. ‘You wear the suit from nine-thirty to ten, Manulo till
ten-thirty, Dominguez till eleven, myself till eleven-thirty, Martinez
till midnight, and –’

‘Why me _last_?’ demanded Vamenos, scowling.

Martinez thought quickly and smiled. ‘After midnight is the _best_ time,
friend.’

‘Hey,’ said Vamenos, ‘that’s right. I never thought of that. Okay.’

Gomez sighed. ‘All right. A half-hour each. But from now on, remember,
we each wear the suit just one night a week. Sundays we draw straws for
who wears the suit the extra night.’

‘Me!’ laughed Vamenos. ‘I’m lucky!’

Gomez held on to Martinez tight.

‘Gomez,’ urged Martinez, ‘you first. Dress.’

Gomez could not tear his eyes from that disreputable Vamenos. At last,
impulsively, he yanked his shirt off over his head. ‘Ay-yeah!’ he
howled. ‘_Ay-yeee_!’

Whisper rustle … the clean shirt.

‘Ah…!’

How clean the new clothes feel, thought Martinez, holding the coat
ready. How clean they sound, how clean they smell!

Whisper … the pants … the tie, rustle … the braces. Whisper … now
Martinez let loose the coat which fell in place on flexing shoulders.

‘_Olé_!’

Gomez turned like a matador in his wondrous suit-of-lights.

‘_Olé_, Gomez, _olé_!’

Gomez bowed and went out the door.

Martinez fixed his eyes to his watch. At ten sharp he heard someone
wandering about in the hall as if they had forgotten where to go.
Martinez pulled the door open and looked out.

Gomez was there, heading for nowhere.

He looks sick, thought Martinez. No, stunned, shook up, surprised, many
things.

‘Gomez! This is the place!’

Gomez turned around and found his way through the door.

‘Oh, friends, friends,’ he said. ‘Friends, what an experience! This
suit! This suit!’

‘Tell us, Gomez!’ said Martinez.

‘I can’t, how can I say it!’ He gazed at the heavens, arms spread, palms
up.

‘_Tell_ us, Gomez!’

‘I have no words, no words. You must see, yourself! Yes, you must see –’
And here he lapsed into silence, shaking his head until at last he
remembered they all stood watching him. ‘Who’s next? Manulo?’

Manulo, stripped to his shorts, leapt forward.

‘Ready!’

All laughed, shouted, whistled.

Manulo ready, went out the door. He was gone twenty-nine minutes and
thirty seconds. He came back holding to doorknobs, touching the wall,
feeling his own elbows, putting the flat of his hand to his face.

‘Oh, let me tell you,’ he said. ‘_Compadres_, I went to the bar, eh, to
have a drink? But no, I did not go in the bar, do you hear? I did not
drink. For as I walked I began to laugh and sing. Why, why? I listened
to myself and asked this. Because. The suit made me feel better than
wine ever did. The suit made me drunk, drunk! So I went to the
_Guadalajara Refritería_ instead and played the guitar and sang four
songs, very high! The suit, ah, the suit!’

Dominguez, next to be dressed, moved out through the world, came back
from the world.

The black telephone book! thought Martinez. He had it in his hands when
he left! Now, he returns, hands empty! What? What?

‘On the street,’ said Dominguez, seeing it all again, eyes wide, ‘on the
street I walked, a woman cried, “Dominguez, is that _you?”_ Another
said, “Dominguez? No, Quetzalcoatl, the Great White God come from the
East,” do you hear? And suddenly I didn’t want to go with six women or
eight, no. One, I thought. One! And to this one, who knows _what_ I
would say? “Be mine!” or “Marry me!” _Caramba_! This suit is dangerous!
But I did not care! I live, I live! Gomez, did it happen this way with
you?’

Gomez, still dazed by the events of the evening, shook his head. ‘No, no
talk. It’s too much. Later. Villanazul…?’

Villanazul moved shyly forward.

Villanazul went shyly out.

Villanazul came shyly home.

‘Picture it, ’ he said, not looking at them, looking at the floor,
talking to the floor. ‘The Green Plaza, a group of elderly business men
gathered under the stars and they are talking, nodding, talking. Now one
of them whispers. All turn to stare. They move aside, they make a
channel through which a white hot light burns its way as through ice. At
the centre of the great light is this person. I take a deep breath. My
stomach is jelly. My voice is very small, but it grows louder. And what
do I say? I say, “Friends. Do you know Carlyle’s _Sartor Resartus_? In
that book we find _his_ Philosophy of Suits.…” ’

And at last it was time for Martinez to let the suit float him out to
haunt the darkness.

Four times he walked around the block. Four times he paused beneath the
tenement porches, looking up at the window where the light was lit. A
shadow moved, the beautiful girl was there, not there, away and gone,
and on the fifth time, there she was, on the porch above, driven out by
the summer heat, taking the cooler air. She glanced down. She made a
gesture.

At first he thought she was waving to him. He felt like a white
explosion that had riveted her attention. But she was not waving. Her
hand gestured and the next moment a pair of dark-framed glasses sat upon
her nose. She gazed at him.

Ah, ah, he thought, so that’s it. So! Even the blind may see this suit!
He smiled up at her. He did not have to wave. And at last, she smiled
back. She did not have to wave either. Then, because he did not know
what else to do, and he could not get rid of this smile that had
fastened itself to his cheeks, he hurried, almost ran, around the
corner, feeling her stare after him. When he looked back, she had taken
off her glasses and gazed now with the look of the nearsighted at what,
at most, must be a moving blob of light in the great darkness here.
Then, for good measure he went around the block again, through a city so
suddenly beautiful he wanted to yell, then laugh, then yell again.

Returning, he drifted, oblivious, eyes half-closed, and seeing him in
the door the others saw not Martinez but themselves come home. In that
moment, they sensed that something had happened to them all.

‘You’re late!’ cried Vamenos, but stopped. The spell could not be
broken.

‘Somebody tell me,’ said Martinez. ‘Who am I?’

He moved in a slow circle through the room.

Yes, he thought, yes, it’s the suit, yes, it had to do with the suit and
them all together in that store on this fine Saturday night and then
here, laughing and feeling more drunk without drinking, as Manulo said
himself, as the night ran and each slipped on the pants and held,
toppling, to the others and, balanced, let the feeling get bigger and
warmer and finer as each man departed and the next took his place in the
suit until now here stood Martinez all splendid and white as one who
gives orders and the world grows quiet and moves aside.

‘Martinez, we borrowed three mirrors while you were gone. Look!’

The mirrors, set up as in the store, angled to reflect three Martinezes
and the echoes and memories of those who had occupied this suit with him
and known the bright world inside this thread and cloth. Now, in the
shimmering mirror, Martinez saw the enormity of this thing they were
living together and his eyes grew wet. The others blinked. Martinez
touched the mirrors. They shifted. He saw a thousand, a million
white-armoured Martinezes march off into eternity, reflected, reflected,
for ever, indomitable, and unending.

He held the white coat out on the air. In a trance, the others did not
at first recognize the dirty hand that reached to take the coat. Then:

‘Vamenos!’

‘Pig!’

‘You didn’t wash!’ cried Gomez. ‘Or even shave, while you waited!
_Compadres_, the bath!’

‘The bath!’ said everyone.

‘No!’ Vamenos flailed. ‘The night air! I’m dead!’

They hustled him yelling out and down the hall.

Now here stood Vamenos, unbelievable in white suit, beard shaved, hair
combed, nails scrubbed.

His friends scowled darkly at him.

For it was not true, thought Martinez, that when Vamenos passed by,
avalanches itched on mountain-tops. If he walked under windows, people
spat, dumped garbage, or worse. Tonight now, this night, he would stroll
beneath ten thousand wide-opened windows, near balconies, past alleys.
Suddenly the world absolutely sizzled with flies. And here was Vamenos,
a fresh-frosted cake.

‘You sure look keen in that suit, Vamenos,’ said Manulo sadly.

‘Thanks.’ Vamenos twitched, trying to make his skeleton comfortable
where all their skeletons had so recently been. In a small voice,
Vamenos said, ‘Can I go now?’

‘Villanazul!’ said Gomez. ‘Copy down these rules.’

Villanazul licked his pencil.

‘First,’ said Gomez, ‘don’t fall down in that suit, Vamenos!’

‘I won’t.’

‘Don’t lean against buildings in that suit.’

‘No buildings.’

‘Don’t walk under trees with birds in them, in that suit. Don’t smoke.
Don’t drink –’

‘Please,’ said Vamenos, ‘can I _sit down_ in this suit?’

‘When in doubt, take the pants off, fold them over a chair.’

‘Wish me luck,’ said Vamenos.

‘Go with God, Vamenos.’

He went out. He shut the door.

There was a ripping sound.

"Vamenos!’ cried Martinez.

He whipped the door open.

Vamenos stood with two halves of a handkerchief torn in his hands,
laughing.

‘Rrrip! Look at your faces! Rrrip!’ He tore the cloth again. ‘Oh, oh,
your faces, your faces! Ha!’

Roaring, Vamenos slammed the door, leaving them stunned and alone.

Gomez put both hands on top of his head and turned away. ‘Stone me. Kill
me. I have sold our souls to a demon!’

Villanazul dug in his pockets, took out a silver coin and studied it for
a long while.

‘Here is my last fifty cents. Who else will help me buy back Vamenos’s
share of the suit?’

‘It’s no use.’ Manulo showed them ten cents. ‘We got only enough to buy
the lapels and the buttonholes.’

Gomez, at the open window, suddenly leaned out and yelled, ‘Vamenos!
No!’

Below on the street, Vamenos, shocked, blew out a match, and threw away
an old cigar butt he had found somewhere. He made a strange gesture to
all the men in the window above, then waved airily and sauntered on.

Somehow, the five men could not move away from the window. They were
crushed together there.

‘I bet he eats a hamburger in that suit,’ mused Villanazul. ‘I’m
thinking of the mustard.’

‘Don’t!’ cried Gomez. ‘No, no!’

Manulo was suddenly at the door.

‘I need a drink, bad.’

‘Manulo, there’s wine here, that bottle, on the floor –’

Manulo went out and shut the door.

A moment later, Villanazul stretched with great exaggeration and
strolled about the room.

‘I think I’ll walk down to the plaza, friends.’

He was not gone a minute when Dominguez, waving his black book at the
others, winked, and turned the doorknob.

‘Dominguez,’ said Gomez.

‘Yes?’

‘If you see Vamenos, by accident,’ said Gomez, ‘warn him away from
Mickey Murillo’s Red Rooster Café. They got fights not only _on_ TV but
_out front_ of the TV, too.’

‘He wouldn’t go into Murillo’s,’ said Dominguez. ‘That suit means too
much to Vamenos. He wouldn’t do anything to hurt it.’

‘He’d shoot his mother first,’ said Martinez.

‘Sure he would.’

Martinez and Gomez, alone, listened to Dominguez’s footsteps hurry away
down the stairs. They circled the undressed window dummy.

For a long while, biting his lips, Gomez stood at the window, looking
out. He touched his shirt pocket twice, pulled his hand away, and then
at last pulled something from the pocket. Without looking at it, he
handed it to Martinez.

‘Martinez, take this.’

‘What is it?’

Martinez looked at the piece of folded pink paper with print on it, with
names and numbers. His eyes widened.

‘A ticket on the bus to El Paso, three weeks from now!’

Gomez nodded. He couldn’t look at Martinez. He stared out into the
summer night.

‘Turn it in. Get the money,’ he said. ‘Buy us a nice white panama hat
and a pale blue tie to go with the white ice-cream suit, Martinez. Do
that.’

‘Gomez –’

‘Shut up. Boy, is it hot in here! I need air.’

‘Gomez. I am touched. Gomez –’

But the door stood open. Gomez was gone.

Mickey Murillo’s Red Rooster Café and Cocktail Lounge was squashed
between two big brick buildings and, being narrow, had to be deep.
Outside, serpents of red and sulphur-green neon fizzed and snapped.
Inside, dim shapes loomed and swam away to lose themselves in a swarming
night sea.

Martinez, on tiptoe, peeked through a flaked place on the red-painted
front window.

He felt a presence on his left, heard breathing on his right. He glanced
in both directions.

‘Manulo! Villanazul!’

‘I decided I wasn’t thirsty,’ said Manulo. ‘So I took a walk.’

‘I was just on my way to the plaza,’ said Villanazul, ‘and decided to go
the long way round.’

As if by agreement the three men shut up now and turned together to peer
on tiptoe through various flaked spots on the window.

A moment later, all three felt a new very warm presence behind them and
heard still faster breathing.

‘Is our white suit in there?’ asked Gomez’s voice.

‘Gomez!’ said everybody, surprised. ‘Hi!’

‘Yes!’ cried Dominguez, having just arrived to find his own peephole.
‘There’s the suit! And, praise God, Vamenos is still _in_ it!’

‘I can’t see!’ Gomez squinted, shielding his eyes. ‘What’s he _doing_?’

Martinez peered. Yes! There, way back in the shadows, was a big chunk of
snow, and the idiot smile of Vamenos winking above it, wreathed in
smoke.

‘He’s smoking!’ said Martinez.

‘He’s drinking!’ said Dominguez.

‘He’s eating a taco!’ reported Villanazul.

‘A _juicy_ taco,’ added Manulo.

‘No,’ said Gomez. ‘No, no, no …’

‘Ruby Escadrillo’s with him!’

‘Let me see that!’ Gomez pushed Martinez aside.

Yes, there was Ruby! Two hundred pounds of glittering sequins and tight
black satin on the hoof, her scarlet fingernails clutching Vamenos’s
shoulder. Her cow-like face, floured with powder, greasy with lipstick,
hung over him!

‘That hippo!’ said Dominguez. ‘She’s crushing the shoulder pads. Look,
she’s going to sit on his lap!’

‘No, no, not with all that powder and lipstick!’ said Gomez. ‘Manulo,
inside! Grab that drink! Villanazul, the cigar, the taco! Dominguez,
date Ruby Escadrillo, get her away. _Ándale_, men!’

The three vanished, leaving Gomez and Martinez to stare, gasping,
through the peephole.

‘Manulo, he’s got the drink, he’s _drinking_ it!’

‘_Olé_! There’s Villanazul, he’s got the cigar, he’s eating the taco!’

‘Hey, Dominguez, he’s got Ruby! What a _brave_ one!’

A shadow bulked through Murillo’s front door, travelling fast.

‘Gomez!’ Martinez clutched Gomez’s arm. ‘That was Ruby Escadrillo’s boy
friend, Bull La Jolla. If he finds her with Vamenos, the ice-cream suit
will be covered with blood, _covered_ with blood –’

‘Don’t make me nervous,’ said Gomez. ‘Quickly!’

Both ran. Inside, they reached Vamenos just as Bull La Jolla grabbed
about two feet of the lapels of that wonderful ice-cream suit.

‘Let go of Vamenos!’ said Martinez.

‘Let go that _suit_ !’ corrected Gomez.

Bull La Jolla, tap-dancing Vamenos, leered at these intruders.

Villanazul stepped up, shyly.

Villanazul smiled. ‘Don’t hit him. Hit me.’

Bull La Jolla hit Villanazul smack on the nose.

Villanazul, holding his nose, tears stinging his eyes, wandered off.

Gomez grabbed one of Bull La Jolla’s arms, Martinez the other.

‘Drop him, let go, _peón, coyote, vaca!_!’

Bull La Jolla twisted the ice-cream suit material until all six men
screamed in mortal agony. Grunting, sweating, Bull La Jolla dislodged as
many as climbed on. He was winding up to hit Vamenos when Villanazul
wandered back, eyes streaming.

‘Don’t hit him. Hit me!’

As Bull La Jolla hit Villanazul on the nose, a chair crashed on Bull’s
head.

‘_Olé_!’ said Gomez.

Bull La Jolla swayed, blinking, debating whether to fall. He began to
drag Vamenos with him.

‘Let go!’ cried Gomez. ‘Let go!’

One by one, with great care, Bull La Jolla’s banana-like fingers let
loose of the suit. A moment later he was ruins at their feet.

‘_Compadres_, this way!’

They ran Vamenos outside and set him down where he freed himself of
their hands with injured dignity.

‘Okay, okay. My time ain’t up. I still got two minutes and, let’s see –
ten seconds.’

‘What!’ said everybody.

‘Vamenos,’ said Gomez, ‘you let a Guadalajara cow climb on you, you pick
fights, you smoke, you drink, you eat tacos, and _now_ you have the
nerve to say your time ain’t up?’

‘I got two minutes and one second left!’

‘Hey, Vamenos, you sure look sharp!’ Distantly, a woman’s voice called
from across the street.

Vamenos smiled and buttoned his coat.

‘It’s Ramona Alvarez! Ramona, wait!’ Vamenos stepped off the curb.

‘Vamenos,’ pleaded Gomez. ‘What can you do in one minute and –’ he
checked his watch. ‘Forty seconds!’

‘Watch! Hey, Ramona!’

Vamenos loped.

‘Vamenos, look out!’

Vamenos, surprised, whirled, saw a car, heard the shriek of brakes.

‘No,’ said all five men on the sidewalk.

Martinez heard the impact and flinched. His head moved up. It looks like
white laundry, he thought, flying through the air. His head came down.

Now he heard himself and each of the men make a different sound. Some
swallowed too much air. Some let it out. Some choked. Some groaned. Some
cried aloud for justice. Some covered their faces. Martinez felt his own
fist pounding his heart in agony. He could not move his feet.

‘I don’t want to live,’ said Gomez quietly. ‘Kill me, someone.’

Then, shuffling, Martinez looked down and told his feet to walk,
stagger, follow one after the other. He collided with other men. Now
they were trying to run. They ran at last and somehow crossed a street
like a deep river through which they could only wade, to look down at
Vamenos.

‘Vamenos!’ said Martinez. ‘You’re alive!’

Strewn on his back, mouth open, eyes squeezed tight, tight, Vamenos
motioned his head back and forth, back and forth, moaning.

‘Tell me, tell me, oh tell me, tell me.’

‘Tell you what, Vamenos?’

Vamenos clenched his fists, ground his teeth.

‘The suit, what have I done to the suit, the suit, the suit!’

The men crouched lower.

‘Vamenos, it’s … why, it’s _okay_ !’

‘You lie!’ said Vamenos. ‘If s torn, it must be, it must be, it’s torn,
all round, _underneath_?’

‘No.’ Martinez knelt and touched here and there. ‘Vamenos, all around,
underneath even, it’s okay!’

Vamenos opened his eyes to let the tears run free at last. ‘A miracle,’
he sobbed. ‘Praise the saints!’ He quieted at last. ‘The car?’

‘Hit and run.’ Gomez suddenly remembered and glared at the empty street.
‘It’s good he didn’t stop. We’d have –’

Everyone listened.

Distantly, a siren wailed.

‘Someone phoned for an ambulance.’

‘Quick!’ said Vamenos, eyes rolling. ‘Set me up! Take off our coat!’

‘Vamenos –’

‘Shut up, idiots!’ cried Vamenos. ‘The coat, that’s it! Now, the pants,
the pants, quick, quick, _peónes_ ! Those doctors! You seen movies? They
rip the pants with razors to get them off! They don’t _care_ ! They’re
maniacs! Ah, God, quick, quick!’

The siren screamed.

The men, panicking, all handled Vamenos at once.

‘Right leg, _easy_, hurry, cows! Good! Left leg, now, left, you hear,
there, easy, _easy_ ! Ow, God! Quick! Martinez, your pants, take them
off!’

‘What?’ Martinez froze.

The siren shrieked.

‘Fool!’ wailed Vamenos. ‘All is lost! Your pants! Give me!’

Martinez jerked at his belt-buckle.

‘Close in, make a circle!’

Dark pants, light pants, flourished on the air.

‘Quick, here come the maniacs with the razors! Right leg on, left leg,
_there_!’

‘The zipper, cows, zip my zipper!’ babbled Vamenos.

The siren died.

‘_Madre mía_, yes, just in time! They arrive.’ Vamenos lay back down and
shut his eyes. ‘_Gracias_.’

Martinez turned, nonchalantly buckling on the white pants as the
internes brushed past.

‘Broken leg,’ said one interne as they moved Vamenos on to a stretcher.

‘_Compadres_,’ said Vamenos, ‘don’t be mad with me.’

Gomez snorted. ‘Who’s mad?’

In the ambulance, head tilted back, looking out at them upside down,
Vamenos faltered.

‘_Compadres_, when … when I come from the hospital … am I still in the
bunch? You won’t kick me out? Look, I’ll give up smoking, keep away from
Murillo’s, swear off women –’

‘Vamenos,’ said Martinez gently, ‘don’t promise nothing.’

Vamenos, upside-down, eyes brimming wet, saw Martinez there, all white
now against the stars.

‘Oh, Martinez, you sure look great in that suit. _Compadres_, don’t he
look _beautiful_?’

Villanazul climbed in beside Vamenos. The door slammed. The four
remaining men watched the ambulance drive away.

Then, surrounded by his friends, inside the white suit, Martinez was
carefully escorted back to the kerb.

In the tenement, Martinez got out the cleaning fluid and the others
stood around, telling him how to clean the suit and later, how not to
have the iron too hot and how to work the lapels and the crease and all.
When the suit was cleaned and pressed so it looked like a fresh gardenia
just opened, they fitted it to the dummy.

‘Two o’clock,’ murmured Villanazul. ‘I hope Vamenos sleeps well. When I
left him, he looked good.’

Manulo cleared his throat. ‘Nobody else is going out with that suit
tonight, huh?’

The others glared at him.

Manulo flushed. ‘I mean … it’s late. We’re tired. Maybe no one will use
the suit for forty-eight hours, huh? Give it a rest. Sure. Well. Where
do we sleep?’

The night being still hot and the room unbearable, they carried the suit
on its dummy out and down the hall. They brought with them also some
pillows and blankets. They climbed the stairs towards the roof of the
tenement. There, thought Martinez, is die cooler wind, and sleep.

On the way, they passed a dozen doors that stood open, people still
perspiring and awake, playing cards, drinking pop, fanning themselves
with movie magazines.

I wonder, thought Martinez. I wonder if – yes!

On the fourth floor, a certain door stood open.

The beautiful girl looked up as the five men passed. She wore glasses
and when she saw Martinez she snatched them off and hid them under a
book.

The others went on, not knowing they had lost Martinez who seemed stuck
fast in the open door.

For a long moment he could say nothing. Then he said:

‘José Martinez.’

And she said:

‘Celia Obregon.’

And then both said nothing.

He heard the men moving up on the tenement roof. He moved to follow.

She said, quickly, ‘I saw you tonight!’

He came back.

‘The suit,’ he said.

‘The suit,’ she said and paused. ‘But not the suit.’

‘Eh?’ he said.

She lifted the book to show the glasses lying in her lap. She touched
the glasses.

‘I do not see well. You would think I would wear my glasses, but no. I
walk around for years now, hiding them, seeing nothing. But tonight,
even without glasses, I see. A great whiteness passes below in the dark.
So white! And I put on my glasses quickly!’

‘The suit, as I said,’ said Martinez.

‘The suit for a little moment, yes, but there is another whiteness above
the suit.’

‘Another?’

‘Your teeth! Oh, such white teeth, and so many!’

Martinez put his hand over his mouth.

‘So happy, Mr Martinez,’ she said. ‘I have not often seen such a happy
face and such a smile.’

‘Ah,’ he said, not able to look at her, his face flushing now.

‘So you see,’ she said, quietly, ‘the suit caught my eye, yes, the
whiteness filled the night, below. But, the teeth were much whiter. Now,
I have forgotten the suit.’

Martinez flushed again. She too was overcome with what she had said. She
put her glasses on her nose, and then took them off, nervously, and hid
them again. She looked at her hands and at the door above his head.

‘May I –’ he said, at last.

‘May you –’

‘May I call for you,’ he asked, ‘when next the suit is mine to wear?’

‘Why must you wait for the suit?’ she said.

‘I thought –’

‘You do not need the suit,’ she said.

‘But –’

‘If it were just the suit,’ she said, ‘anyone would be fine in it. But
no, I watched. I saw many men in that suit, all different, this night.
So again I say, you do not need to wait for the suit.’

‘_Madre mía, madre mía_!’ he cried, happily. And then, quieter,

‘I will need the suit for a little while. A month, six months, a year. I
am uncertain. I am fearful of many things. I am young.’

‘That is as it should be,’ she said.

‘Good night, Miss –’

‘Celia Obregon.’

‘Celia Obregon,’ he said and was gone from the door.

The others were waiting, on the roof of the tenement. Coming up through
the trapdoor, Martinez saw they had placed the dummy and the suit in the
centre of the roof and put their blankets and pillows in a circle round
it. Now they were lying down. Now a cooler night was blowing here, up in
the sky.

Martinez stood alone by the suit, smoothing the lapels, talking half to
himself.

‘Aye, _caramba_, what a night! Seems ten years since seven o’clock, when
it all started and I had no friends. Two in the morning, I got all
_kinds_ of friends …’ He paused and thought, Celia Obregon, Celia
Obregon. ‘… all kinds of friends,’ he went on. ‘I got a room, I got
clothes. You tell me. You know what?’ He looked around at the men lying
on the rooftop, surrounding the dummy and himself. ‘It’s funny. When I
wear this suit, I know I will win at pool, like Gomez. A woman will look
at me like Dominguez. I will be able to sing like Manulo, sweetly. I
will talk fine politics like Villanazul. I’m strong as Vamenos. So? So,
tonight, I am more than Martinez. I am Gomez, Manulo, Dominguez,
Villanazul, Vamenos. I am everyone. Ay … ay …’ He stood a moment longer
by this suit which could save all the ways they sat or stood or walked.
This suit which could move fast and nervous like Gomez or slow and
thoughtfully like Villanazul or drift like Dominguez who never touched
ground, who always found a wind to take him somewhere. This suit which
belonged to them, but which also owned them all. This suit that was –
what? A parade.

‘Martinez,’ said Gomez. ‘You going to sleep?’

‘Sure. I’m just thinking.’

‘What?’

‘If we ever get rich,’ said Martinez, softly, ‘it’ll be kind of sad.
Then we’ll all have suits. And there won’t be no more nights like
tonight. It’ll break up the old gang. It’ll never be the same after
that.’

The men lay thinking of what had just been said.

Gomez nodded, gently.

‘Yeah … it’ll never be the same … after that.’

Martinez lay down on his blanket. In darkness, with the others, he faced
the middle of the roof and the dummy, which was the centre of their
lives.

And their eyes were bright, shining, and good to see in the dark as the
neon lights from nearby buildings flicked on, flicked off, flicked on,
flicked off, revealing and then vanishing, revealing and then vanishing,
their wonderful white vanilla ice-cream summer suit.


Fever Dream

THEY put him between fresh, clean, laundered sheets and there was always
a newly squeezed glass of thick orange juice on the table under the dim
pink lamp. All Charles had to do was call and Mom or Dad would stick
their heads into his room to see how sick he was. The acoustics of the
room were fine; you could hear the toilet gargling its porcelain throat
of mornings, you could hear rain tap the roof or sly mice run in the
secret walls, the canary singing in its cage downstairs. If you were
very alert, sickness wasn’t too bad.

He was fifteen, Charles was. It was mid September, with the land
beginning to burn with autumn. He lay in the bed for three days before
the terror overcame him.

His hand began to change. His right hand. He looked at it and it was hot
and sweating there on the counterpane, alone. It fluttered, it moved a
bit. Then it lay there, changing colour.

That afternoon the doctor came again and tapped his thin chest like a
little drum. ‘How are you?’ asked the doctor, smiling. ‘I know, don’t
tell me: “My _cold_ is fine, Doctor, but I feel lousy!” Ha!’ He laughed
at his own oft-repeated joke.

Charles lay there and for him that terrible and ancient jest was
becoming a reality. The joke fixed itself in his mind. His mind touched
and drew away from it in a pale terror. The doctor did not know how
cruel he was with his jokes! ‘Doctor,’ whispered Charles, lying flat and
colourless. ‘My _hand_, it doesn’t _belong_ to me any more. This morning
it _changed_ into something else. I want you to change it back, Doctor,
Doctor!’

The doctor showed his teeth and patted his hand. ‘It looks fine to me,
son. You just had a little fever dream.’

‘But it changed, Doctor, oh, Doctor,’ cried Charles, pitifully holding
up his pale wild hand. ‘It _did_ !’

The doctor winked. ‘I’ll give you a pink pill for that.’ He popped a
tablet on to Charles’s tongue. ‘Swallow!’

‘Will it make my hand change back and become _me_, again?’

‘Yes, yes.’

The house was silent when the doctor drove off down the road in his
carriage under the quiet, blue September sky. A clock ticked far below
in the kitchen world. Charles lay looking at his hand.

It did not change back. It was still – something else.

The wind blew outside. Leaves fell against the cool window.

At four o’clock his other hand changed. It seemed almost to become a
fever, a chemical, a virus. It pulsed and shifted, cell by cell. It beat
like a warm heart. The fingernails turned blue and then red. It took
about an hour for it to change and when it was finished, it looked just
like any ordinary hand. But it was not ordinary. It no longer was him
any more. He lay in a fascinated horror and then fell into an exhausted
sleep.

Mother brought the soup up at six. He wouldn’t touch it. ‘I haven’t any
hands,’ he said, eyes shut.

‘Your hands are perfectly good,’ said Mother.

‘No,’ he wailed. ‘My hands are gone. I feel like I have stumps. Oh,
Mama, Mama, hold me, hold me, I’m scared!’

She had to feed him herself.

‘Mama,’ he said, ‘get the doctor, please, again, I’m so sick.’

‘The doctor’ll be here tonight at eight,’ she said, and went out.

At seven, with night dark and close around the house, Charles was
sitting up in bed when he felt the thing happening to first one leg then
the other. ‘Mama! Come quick!’ he screamed.

But when Mama came the thing was no longer happening.

When she went downstairs, he simply lay without fighting as his legs
beat and beat, grew warm, red hot, and the room filled with the warmth
of his feverish change. The glow crept up from his toes to his ankles
and then to his knees.

‘May I come in?’ The doctor smiled in the doorway.

‘Doctor!’ cried Charles. ‘Hurry, take off my blankets!’

The doctor lifted the blankets tolerantly. ‘There you are. Whole and
healthy. Sweating, though. A little fever. I told you not to move
around, bad boy.’ He pinched the moist pink cheek. ‘Did the pills help?
Did your hand change back?’

‘No, no, now it’s my other hand and my legs!’

‘Well, well, I’ll have to give you three more pills, one for each limb,
eh, my little peach?’ laughed the doctor.

‘Will they help me? Please, please. What’ve I _got_?’

‘A mild case of scarlet fever, complicated by a slight cold.’

‘Is it a germ that lives and has more little germs in me?’

‘Yes.’

‘Are you _sure_ it’s scarlet fever? You haven’t taken any tests!’

‘I guess I know a certain fever when I see one,’ said the doctor,
checking the boy’s pulse with cool authority.

Charles lay there, not speaking until the doctor was crisply packing his
black kit. Then in the silent room, the boy’s voice made a small, weak
pattern, his eyes alight with remembrance. ‘I read a book once. About
petrified trees, wood turning to stone. About how trees fell and rotted
and minerals got in and built up and they look just like trees, but
they’re not, they’re stone.’ He stopped. In the quiet warm room his
breathing sounded.

‘Well?’ asked the doctor.

‘I’ve been thinking,’ said Charles, after a time. ‘Do germs ever get
big? I mean in biology class they told us about one-celled animals,
amoebas and things, and how, millions of years ago, they got together
until there was a bunch and they made the first body. And more and more
cells got together and got bigger and then finally maybe there was a
fish and finally here _we_ are, and all we are is a bunch of cells that
decided to get together, to help each other out. Isn’t that right?’
Charles wet his feverish lips.

‘What’s all this about?’ The doctor bent over him.

‘I’ve got to tell you this. Doctor, oh. I’ve got to!’ he cried. ‘What
would happen, oh just pretend, please pretend, that just like in the old
days, a lot of microbes got together and wanted to make a bunch, and
reproduced and made _more –_’

His white hands were on his chest now, crawling towards his throat.

‘And they decided to _take over_ a person!’ cried Charles.

‘Take over a person?’

‘Yes, _become_ a person. _Me_, my hands, my feet! What if a disease
somehow knew how to kill a person and yet live after him?’

He screamed.

The hands were on his neck.

The doctor moved forward, shouting.

At nine o’clock the doctor was escorted out to his carriage by the
mother and father, who handed him up his bag. They conversed in the cool
night wind for a few minutes. ‘Just be sure his hands are kept strapped
to his legs,’ said the doctor. ‘I don’t want him hurting himself!’

‘Will he be all right, Doctor?’ The mother held to his arm a moment.

He patted her shoulder. ‘Haven’t I been your family physician for thirty
years? It’s the fever, he imagines things.’

‘But those bruises on his throat, he almost choked himself.’

‘Just you keep him strapped; he’ll be all right in the morning.’

The horse and carriage moved off down the dark September road.

At three in the morning, Charles was still awake in his small back room.
The bed was damp under his head and his back. He was very warm. Now he
no longer had any arms or legs, and his body was beginning to change. He
did not move on the bed, but looked at the vast blank ceiling space with
insane concentration. For a while he had screamed and thrashed but now
he was weak and hoarse from it, and his mother had gotten up a number of
times to soothe his brow with a wet towel. Now he was silent, his hands
strapped to his legs.

He felt the walls of his body change, the organs shift, the lungs catch
fire like burning bellows of pink alcohol. The room was lighted up as
with the flickerings of a hearthplace.

Now he had no body. It was all gone. It was under him, but it was filled
with a vast pulse of some burning, lethargic drug. It was as if a
guillotine had neatly lopped off his head and his head lay shining on a
midnight pillow while the body, below, still alive, belonged to somebody
else. The disease had eaten his body and from the eating had reproduced
itself in feverish duplicate. There were the little hand-hairs and the
fingernails and the scars and the toenails and the tiny mole on his
right hip, all done again in perfect fashion.

I am dead, he thought. I’ve been killed, and yet I live. My body is
dead, it is all disease and nobody will know. I will walk around and it
will not be me, it will be something else. It will be something all bad,
all evil, so big and so evil it’s hard to understand or think about.
Something that will buy shoes and drink water and get married some day
maybe and do more evil in the world than has ever been done.

Now the warmth was stealing up his neck, into his cheeks, like a hot
wine. His lips burned, his eyelids, like leaves, caught fire. His
nostrils breathed out blue flame, faintly, faintly.

This will be all, he thought. It’ll take my head and my brain and fix
each eye and every tooth and all the marks in my brain, and every hair
and every wrinkle in my ears, and there’ll be nothing left of me.

He felt his brain fill with a boiling mercury. He felt his left eye
clench in upon itself and, like a snail, withdraw, shift. He was blind
in his left eye. It no longer belonged to him. It was enemy territory.
His tongue was gone, cut out. His left cheek was numbed, lost. His left
ear stopped hearing. It belonged to someone else now. This thing that
was being born, this mineral thing replacing the wooden log, this
disease replacing healthy animal cell.

He tried to scream and he was able to scream loud and high and sharply
in the room, just as his brain flooded down, his right eye and right ear
were cut out, he was blind and deaf, all fire and terror, all panic, all
death.

His scream stopped before his mother ran through the door to his side.

It was a good, clear morning, with a brisk wind that helped carry
doctor, horse and carriage along the road to halt before the house. In
the window above, the boy stood, fully dressed. He did not wave when the
doctor waved and called, ‘What’s this? Up? My God!’

The doctor almost ran upstairs. He came gasping into the bedroom.

‘What are you doing out of bed?’ he demanded of the boy. He tapped his
thin chest, took his pulse and temperature. ‘Absolutely amazing! Normal.
Normal, by God !’

‘I shall never be sick again in my life,’ declared the boy, quietly,
standing there, looking out of the wide window. ‘Never.’

‘I hope not. Why, you’re looking fine, Charles.’

‘Doctor?’

‘Yes, Charles?’

‘Can I go to school _now_?’ asked Charles.

‘Tomorrow will be time enough. You sound positively eager.’

‘I am. I like school. All the kids. I want to play with them and wrestle
with them, and spit on them and play with the girls’ pigtails and shake
the teacher’s hand, and rub my hands on all the cloaks in the cloakroom,
and I want to grow up and travel and shake hands with people all over
the world, and be married and have lots of children, and go to libraries
and handle books and – _all_ of that I want to!’ said the boy, looking
off into the September morning. ‘What’s the name you called me?’

‘What?’ The doctor puzzled. ‘I called you nothing but Charles.’

‘It’s better than no name at all, I guess,’ Charles shrugged.

‘I’m glad you want to go back to school,’ said the doctor.

‘I really anticipate it,’ smiled the boy. ‘Thank you for your help,
Doctor. Shake hands.’

‘Glad to.’

They shook hands gravely, and the clear wind blew through the open
window. They shook hands for almost a minute, the boy smiling up at the
old man and thanking him.

Then, laughing, the boy raced the doctor downstairs and out to his
carriage. His mother and father followed for the happy farewell.

‘Fit as a fiddle!’ said the doctor. ‘Incredible!’

‘And strong,’ said the father. ‘He got out of his straps himself during
the night. Didn’t you, Charles?’

‘Did I?’ said the boy.

‘You did! How?’

‘Oh,’ the boy said, ‘that was a long time ago.’

‘A long time ago!’

They all laughed, and while they were laughing, the quiet boy moved his
bare foot on the sidewalk and brushed against a number of red ants that
were scurrying about on the sidewalk. Secretly, his eyes shining, while
his parents chatted with the old man, he saw the ants hesitate, quiver,
and lie still on the cement. He knew they were cold now.

‘Good-bye!’

The doctor drove away, waving.

The boy walked ahead of his parents. As he walked he looked away towards
the town and began to hum ‘School Days’ under his breath.

‘It’s good to have him well again,’ said the father.

‘Listen to him. He’s so looking forward to school!’

The boy turned quietly. He gave each of his parents a crushing hug. He
kissed them both several times.

Then, without a word, he bounded up the steps into the house.

In the parlour, before the others entered, he quickly opened the
birdcage, thrust his hand in, and petted the yellow canary, _once_.

Then he shut the cage door, stood back, and waited.


Referent

ROBY MORRISON fidgeted. Walking in the tropical heat he heard the wet
thunder of waves on the shore. There was a green silence on Orthopaedic
Island.

It was the year 1997, but Roby did not care.

All around him was the garden where he prowled, all ten years of him.
This was Meditation Hour. Beyond the garden wall, to the north, were the
High I.Q. Cubicles where he and the other boys slept in special beds.
With morning they popped up like bottle-corks, dashed into showers,
gulped food, and were sucked down vacuum-tubes half across the island to
Semantics School. Then to Physiology. After Physiology he was blown back
underground and released through a seal in the great garden wall to
spend this silly hour of meditative frustration, as prescribed by the
island Psychologists.

Roby had his opinion of it. ‘Damned silly.’

Today, he was in furious rebellion. He glared at the sea, wishing he had
the sea’s freedom to come and go. His eyes were dark, his cheeks
flushed, his small hands twitched nervously.

Somewhere in the garden a chime vibrated softly. Fifteen more minutes of
meditation. Huh! And then to the Robot Commissionary to stuff his dead
hunger as taxidermists stuff birds.

And, after the scientifically pure lunch, through the tube again to
Sociology. Of course, late in the warm green afternoon, games would be
played in the Main Garden. Games some tremble-brained Psychologist had
evolved from a nightmare-haunted sleep. This was the future! You must
live, my lad, as the people of the past, of the year 1920, 1930, and
1942 predicted you would live! Everything fresh, brisk, sanitary, too,
too fresh! No nasty old parents about to give one complexes. Everything
controlled, dear boy!

Roby should have been in a perfect mood for something unique.

He wasn’t.

When the star fell from the sky a moment later he was only more
irritated.

The star was a spheroid. It crashed and rolled to a stop on the hot
green grass. A small door popped open in it.

Faintly, this incident recalled a dream to the child. A dream which with
superior stubbornness he had refused to record in his Freud Book this
morning. The dream-thought was in his mind at the exact instant that the
star-door popped wide and some ‘thing’ emerged.

Some ‘thing’.

Young eyes, seeing an object for the first time, have to make a familiar
thing of it. Roby didn’t know what this ‘thing’ was, stepping from the
sphere. So, scowling, Roby thought of what it _most resembled_.

Instantly the ‘something’ became a _certain_ thing.

Warm air ran cold. Light flickered, form changed, melted, shifted as the
thing evolved into certainty.

Startled, a tall, thin, pale man stood beside the metal star.

The man had pink, terrified eyes. He trembled.

‘Oh, I know _you_.’ Roby was disappointed. ‘You’re only the Sandman.’

‘Sand – man?’

The stranger quivered like heat rising from boiling metal. His shaking
hands went wildly up to touch his long coppery hair as if he’d never
seen or felt of it before. The Sandman gazed in horror at his own hands,
legs, feet, body, as if they were all new. ‘Sand-man?’ The word was
difficult. Talking was new to him, also. He seemed about to flee, but
something stopped him.

‘Yeah,’ said Roby. ‘I dream about you every night. Oh, I know what you
think. Semantically, our teachers say that ghosts, goblins and fairies,
and sandmen are labels, only names for which there aren’t any actual
referents, no actual objects or things. But to heck with that. We kids
know more than teachers about it. You being here proves the teachers
wrong. There are Sandmen after all, aren’t there?’

‘Don’t give me a label!’ cried the Sandman, suddenly. He seemed to
understand now. For some reason he was unutterably frightened. He kept
pinching, tugging, and feeling his own long new body as if it was a
thing of terror. ‘Don’t _name_ me, don’t label me!’

‘Huh?’

‘I’m a referent!’ screamed the Sandman. ‘I’m not a label! I’m just a
referent! Let me go!’

Roby’s little green cat-eyes slitted. ‘Say –’ He put his hands on his
hips. ‘Did Mr Grill send you? I bet he did! I bet this is another of
those psychological tests!’

Roby flushed with dark anger. Always and for ever they were at him. They
sorted his games, food, education, took away his friends and his mother,
his father, and now – played tricks on him!

‘I’m not from Mr Grill,’ pleaded the Sandman. ‘Listen, before anyone
else comes and sees me this way and makes it worse!’

Roby kicked violently. The Sandman danced back, gasping:

‘Listen. I’m not human! You are!’ he shouted. ‘Thought has moulded the
flesh of all you here on this world! You’re all dictated to by labels.
But I – I am a _pure_ referent!’

‘Liar!’ More kicking from Roby.

The Sandman gibbered with frustration. ‘The truth, child! Centuries of
thought have moulded your atoms to your present form; if you could
undermine and destroy that belief, the beliefs of your friends,
teachers, and parents, you could change form, be a pure referent, too!
Like Freedom, Liberty, Humanity, or Time, Space, and Justice!’

‘Grill sent you; he’s always pestering me!’

‘No, no! Atoms are malleable. You’ve accepted certain labels on Earth,
called Man, Woman, Child, Head, Hands, Fingers, Feet. You’ve changed
from anything into something.’

‘Leave me alone,’ protested Roby. ‘I’ve a test today, I have to think.’
He sat on a rock, hands over his ears.

The Sandman glanced fearfully about, as if expecting disaster. Standing
over Roby, he was beginning to tremble and cry. ‘Earth could have been a
thousand other ways. Thought, using labels, went round tidying up a
disordered cosmos. Now no one bothers trying to think things into other
different shapes!’

‘Go away,’ sniffed Roby.

‘I landed near you, not suspecting the danger. I was curious. Inside my
spheriod spaceship, thoughts cannot change my shape. I’ve travelled from
world to world, over the centuries, and never been trapped like _this_
!’ Tears sprang down his face. ‘And now, by the gods, you’ve labelled
me, caught me, imprisoned me with thought! This Sandman idea. Horrible!
I can’t fight it, I can’t change back! And if I can’t change back I’ll
never fit into my ship again, I’m much too large. I’ll be stranded on
Earth for ever. Release me!’

The Sandman screamed, wept, shouted. Roby’s mind wandered. He debated
quietly with himself. What did he want most of all? Escape from this
island. Silly. They always caught you. What then? Games, maybe. Like to
play regular games, minus psycho-supervision. Yeah, that’d be nice.
Kick-the-can, or spin-the-bottle, or even just a rubber ball to bounce
on the garden wall and catch, all to himself. Yeah. A red ball.

The Sandman cried, ‘Don’t –’

Silence.

A red rubber ball bounced on the ground.

Up and down bounced the red rubber ball.

‘Hey!’ It took Roby a moment to realize the ball was there. ‘Where’d
this come from?’ He hurled it against the wall, caught it. ‘Gee!’

He didn’t notice the absence of a certain stranger who had been shouting
at him a few moments before.

The Sandman was gone.

Way off in the hot distance of the garden a bonging noise sounded. A
cylinder was rushing up the tube to the wall’s circular door. The door
peeled open with a faint hiss. Footsteps rustled measuredly along the
path. Mr Grill stepped through a a lush frame of tiger-lilies.

‘Morning, Roby. Oh!’ Mr Grill stopped, his chubby pink face looked as if
it had been kicked. ‘What have you there, boy?’ he cried.

Roby bounced the object against the wall.

‘This? A rubber ball.’

‘Eh?’ Grill’s small blue eyes blinked, narrowing. Then he relaxed. ‘Why,
of course. For a moment I thought I saw – uh – er –’

Roby bounced the ball some more.

Grill cleared his throat. ‘Lunch time. Meditation Hour is over. And I’m
not certain that Minister Locke would enjoy your playing unorthodox
games.’

Roby swore under his breath.

‘Oh, well, then, go on. Play. I won’t tattle.’ Mr Grill was in a
generous mood.

‘Don’t feel like playing.’ Roby sulked, shoving his sandal-tip into the
dirt. Teachers spoiled everything. You couldn’t vomit without
permission.

Grill tried to interest the boy. ‘If you come to lunch now, I’ll let you
televise your mother in Chicago afterwards.’

‘Time limit, two minutes, ten seconds, no more, no less,’ was Roby’s
acid reply.

‘I gather you don’t approve of things, boy.’

‘I’ll run away some day, wait and see!’

‘Tut, lad. We’ll always bring you back, you know.’

‘I didn’t ask to be brought here in the first place.’ Roby bit his lip,
staring at his new red rubber ball. He thought he had seen it kind of,
sort of, well – _move_. Funny. He held the ball in his hand. The ball
shivered.

Grill patted his shoulder. ‘Your mother is neurotic. Bad environment.
You’re better off here on the island. You have a high I.Q. and it is an
honour for you to be here with the other little boy geniuses. You’re
unstable and unhappy and we’re trying to change that. Eventually you’ll
be the exact antithesis of your mother.’

‘I love Mother!’

‘You _like_ her,’ corrected Grill, quietly.

‘I like Mother,’ replied Roby, disquieted. The red ball twitched in his
hands, without his touching it. He looked at it with wonder.

‘You’ll only make it harder for yourself if you love her,’ said Grill.

‘You’re a goddam silly,’ said Roby.

Grill stiffened. ‘Don’t swear. Besides, you don’t really mean god and
you don’t mean damn. There’s very little of either in the world.
Semantics Book Seven, page 418. Labels and Referents.’

‘Now I remember!’ shouted Roby, looking around. ‘There was a Sandman
here just now and he said –’

‘Come along,’ said Mr Grill. ‘Lunch time.’

Commissary food emerged from robot-servers on extension springs. Roby
accepted the ovoid plate and milk-globe silently. Where he had hidden
it, the red rubber ball pulsed and beat like a heart under his belt. A
gong rang. He gulped food swiftly. The tumble for the tube began. They
were blown like feathers across the island to Sociology and then, later,
in the afternoon, back again for games. Hours passed.

Roby slipped away to the garden to be alone. Hatred for this insane,
never-stopping routine, for his teachers and his fellow-students flashed
through him in a scouring torrent. He sat alone and thought of his
mother, a great distance away. In great detail he recalled how she
looked and what she smelled like and how her voice was and how she
touched and held and kissed him. He put his head down into his hands and
began to fill the palms of his hands with small tears.

He dropped the red rubber ball.

He didn’t care. He only thought of his mother.

The jungle shivered. Something shifted, quickly.

A woman ran through the deep grass!

She ran away from Roby, slipped, cried out, and fell.

Something glittered in the sunlight. The woman was running towards that
silvery glittering thing. The spheroid. The silver star ship! And where
had _she_ come from? And why was she running towards the sphere? And why
had she fallen as he looked up? She didn’t seem to be able to get up.
Roby leaped from his rock, gave chase. He caught up with her and stood
over the woman.

‘Mother!’ he screamed.

Her face shivered and changed, like melting snow, then took on a hard
cast, became definite and handsome.

‘I’m not your mother,’ she said.

He didn’t hear. He only heard his own breath moving over his shaking
lips. He was so weak with shock he could hardly stand. He put out his
hands towards her.

‘Can’t you understand?’ Her face was cold. ‘I’m not your mother. Don’t
label me! Why must I have a name! Let me get back to my ship! I’ll kill
you if you don’t!’

Roby swayed. ‘Mother, don’t you know me? I’m Roby, your son!’ He wanted
only to cry against her, tell her of the long months of imprisonment.
‘Please, remember me!’

Sobbing, he moved forward and fell against her.

Her fingers tightened on his throat.

She strangled him.

He tried to scream. The scream was caught, pressed back into his
bursting lungs. He flailed his legs.

Deep in her cold, hard, angry face, Roby found the answer even as her
fingers tightened and things grew dark.

Deep in her face he saw a vestige of the Sandman.

The Sandman. The star falling on the summer sky. The silver sphere, the
ship towards which this ‘woman’ had been running. The disappearance of
the Sandman, the appearance of the red ball, the vanishing of the red
ball and now the appearance of his mother. It all fitted.

Matrixes. Moulds. Thought habits. Patterns. Matter. The history of man,
his body, all things in the universe.

She was killing him.

She would make him stop thinking, then she would be free.

Thoughts. Darkness. He could barely move, now. Weak, weak. He had
thought ‘it’ was his mother. It wasn’t. Nevertheless ‘it’ was killing
him. What if Roby thought something else? Try, anyway. Try it. He
kicked. In the wild darkness he thought hard, hard.

With a wail, his ‘mother’ withered before him.

He concentrated.

Her fingers dwindled from his throat. Her bright face crumbled. Her body
shrank to another size.

He was free. He rose up, gasping.

Through the jungle he saw the silver sphere lying in the sun. He
staggered towards it, then cried out with the sharp thrill of the plan
that formed in his mind.

He laughed triumphantly. He stared once more at ‘it’. What was left of
the woman form changed before his eyes, like melting wax. He reshaped it
into something new.

The garden wall trembled. A vacuum cylinder was hissing up through the
tube. Mr Grill was coming. Roby would have to hurry or his plan would be
ruined.

Roby ran to the spheroid, peered in. Simple controls. Just enough room
for his small body – if the plan worked. It had to to work. It would
work!

The garden trembled with the approaching thunder of the cylinder. Roby
laughed. To hell with Mr Grill. To hell with this island.

He thrust himself into the ship. There was much he could learn, it would
come in time. He was just on the skirt of knowledge now, but that little
knowledge had saved his life, and now it would do even more.

A voice cried out behind him. A familiar voice. So familiar that it made
Roby shudder. Roby heard small-boy feet crash the underbrush. Small feet
on a small body. A small voice pleading.

Roby grasped the ship controls. Escape. Complete and unsuspected.
Simple. Wonderful. Grill would never know.

The sphere door slammed. Motion.

The star, Roby inside, rose on the summer sky.

Mr Grill stepped out of the seal in the garden wall. He looked around
for Roby. Sunlight struck him warmly in the face as he hurried down the
path.

There! There was Roby. In the clearing ahead of him. Little Roby
Morrison staring at the sky, making fists, crying out to nobody. At
least Grill could see nobody about.

‘Hello, Roby,’ called Grill.

The boy jerked at the sound. He wavered – in colour, density, and
quality. Grill blinked, decided it was only the sun.

‘I’m not Roby!’ cried the child. ‘Roby escaped! He left me to take his
place, to fool you so you wouldn’t hunt for him! He fooled me, too!’
screamed the child, nastily, sobbing. ‘No, no, don’t _look_ at me! Don’t
think that I’m Roby, you’ll make it worse! You came expecting to find
him, and you found me and made me into Roby! You’re moulding me and I’ll
never, _never_ change, now! Oh, God!’

‘Come now, Roby –’

‘Roby’ll never come back. I’ll _always_ be him. I was a rubber ball, a
woman, a Sandman. But, believe me, I’m only malleable atoms, that’s all.
Let me go!’

Grill backed up slowly. His smile was sick.

‘I’m a referent. I’m _not_ a label!’ cried the child.

‘Yes, yes, I understand. Now, now, Roby, Roby, you just wait right
there, right there now, while I, while I, while I call the Psycho-Ward.’

Moments later, a corps of assistants ran through the garden.

‘Damn you all!’ screamed the child, kicking. ‘God damn you!’

‘Tut,’ declared Grill quietly, as they forced the child into the
vac-cylinder. ‘You’re using a label for which there is no referent!’

The cylinder sucked them away.

A star blinked on the summer sky and vanished.


The Marriage Mender

IN the sun, the headboard was like a fountain, tossing up plumes of
clear light. It was carved with lions and gargoyles and bearded goats.
It was an awe-inspiring object even at midnight, as Antonio sat on the
bed and unlaced his shoes, and put his large calloused hand out to touch
its shimmering harp. Then he rolled over into this fabulous machine for
dreaming, and he lay breathing heavily, his eyes beginning to close.

‘Every night,’ his wife’s voice said, ‘we sleep in the mouth of a
calliope.’

Her complaint shocked him. He lay a long while before daring to reach up
his hard-tipped fingers to stroke the cold metal of the intricate
headboard, the threads of this lyre that had sung many wild and
beautiful songs down the years.

‘This is no calliope,’ he said.

‘It cries like one,’ Maria said. ‘A billion people on this world tonight
have beds. Why, I ask the saints, not us?’

‘This,’ said Antonio gently, ‘is a bed.’ He plucked a little tune on the
imitation brass harp behind his head. To his ears it was Santa Lucia.

‘This bed has humps like a herd of camels was under it.’

‘Now, Mama,’ Antonio said. He called her Mama when she was mad, though
they had no children. ‘You were never this way,’ he went on, ‘until five
months ago when Mrs Brancozzi downstairs bought her new bed.’

Maria said wistfully, ‘Mrs Brancozzi’s bed. It’s like snow. It’s all
flat and white and smooth.’

‘I don’t want any damn snow, all flat and white and smooth! These
springs – feel them!’ he cried angrily. ‘They know me. They recognize
that this hour of night I lie _thus_, at two o’clock, _so_! Three
o’clock _this_ way, four o’clock _that_. We are like a tumbling act,
we’ve worked together for years, and know all the holds and falls.’

Maria sighed and said, ‘Sometimes, I dream we’re in the taffy machine at
Bartole’s candy store.’

‘This bed,’ he announced to the darkness, ‘served our family before
Garibaldi! From this wellspring alone came precincts of honest voters, a
squad of clean-saluting Army men, two confectioners, a barber, four
second-leads for _Il Trovatore_ and _Rigoletto_, and two geniuses so
complex they never _could_ decide what to do in their lifetime! Not to
forget enough beautiful women to provide ballrooms with their finest
decoration. A cornucopia of plenty, this bed! A veritable harvesting
machine!’

‘We have been married two years,’ she said, with dreadful control over
her voice. ‘Where are _our_ second-leads for _Rigoletto_, our geniuses,
our ballroom decorations?’

‘Patience, Mama.’

‘Don’t call me Mama! While this bed is busy favouring you all night,
never once has it done for me. Not even so much as a baby _girl_ !’

He sat up. ‘You’ve let these women in this tenement ruin you with their
dollar-down, dollar-a-week talk. Has Mrs Brancozzi children? Her and her
new bed that she’s had for five months?’

‘No! But _soon_ ! Mrs Brancozzi says … and her bed, so beautiful.’

He slammed himself down and yanked the covers over him. The bed screamed
like all the Furies rushing through the night sky, fading away towards
the dawn.

The moon changed the shape of the window pattern on the floor. Antonio
awoke. Maria was not beside him.

He got up and went to peer through the half-open door of the bathroom.
His wife stood at the mirror looking at her tired face.

‘I don’t feel well,’ she said.

‘We argued.’ He put out his hand to pat her. ‘I’m sorry. We’ll think it
over. About the bed, I mean. We’ll see how the money goes. And if you’re
not well tomorrow, see the doctor, eh? Now, come back to bed.’

At noon the next day, Antonio walked from the lumber-yard to a window
where stood fine new beds with their covers invitingly turned back.

‘I,’ he whispered to himself, ‘am a beast.’

He checked his watch. Maria, at this time, would be going to the
doctor’s. She had been like cold milk this morning; he had told her to
go. He walked on to the candy-store window and watched the taffy machine
folding and threading and pulling. Does taffy scream? he wondered.
Perhaps, but so high we cannot hear it. He laughed. Then, in the
stretched taffy, he saw Maria. Frowning, he turned and walked back to
the furniture store. No. Yes. No. Yes! He pressed his nose to the icy
window. Bed, he thought, you in there, new bed, do you _know_ me? Will
you be kind to my back, nights?

He took out his wallet, slowly, and peered at the money. He sighed,
gazed for a long time at that flat marble-top, that unfamiliar enemy,
that new bed. Then, shoulders sagging, he walked into the store, his
money held loosely in his hand.

‘Maria!’ He ran up the steps two at a time. It was nine o’clock at night
and he had managed to beg off in the middle of his overtime at the
lumber-yard to rush home. He rushed through the open doorway smiling.

The apartment was empty.

‘Ah,’ he said disappointedly. He laid the receipt for the new bed on top
of the bureau where Maria might see it when she entered. On those few
evenings when he worked late she visited with any one of several
neighbours downstairs.

I’ll go find her, he thought, and stopped. No. I want to tell her alone,
I’ll wait. He sat on the bed. ‘Old bed,’ he said, ‘goodbye to you. I am
very sorry.’ He patted the brass lions nervously. He paced the floor.
Come _on_, Maria. He imagined her smile.

He listened for her quick running on the stair, but he heard only a
slow, measured tread. He thought: That’s not my Maria, slow like that,
no.

The doorknob turned.

‘Maria!’

‘You’re early!’ She smiled happily at him. Did she guess? Was it written
on his face? ‘I’ve been downstairs,’ she cried, ‘telling everyone!’

‘Telling everyone?’

‘The doctor! I saw the doctor!’

‘The doctor?’ He looked bewildered. ‘And?’

‘And, Papa, _and_ –’

‘Do you mean – Papa?’

‘Papa, Papa, Papa, Papa!’

‘Oh,’ he said, gently, ‘you walked so carefully on the stairs.’

He took hold of her, but not too tight, and he kissed her cheeks, and he
shut his eyes and he yelled. Then he had to wake a few neighbours and
tell them, shake them, tell them again. There had to be a little wine
and a careful waltz around, an embracing, a trembling, a kissing of
brow, eyelids, nose, lips, temples, ears, hair, chin – and then it was
past midnight.

‘A miracle,’ he sighed.

They were alone in their room again, the air warm from the people who
had been there a minute before, laughing, talking. But now they were
alone again.

Turning out the light, he saw the receipt on the bureau. Stunned, he
tried to decide in what subtle and delicious way to break this
additional news to her.

Maria sat upon her side of the bed in the dark, hypnotized with wonder.
She moved her hands as if her body was a strange doll, taken apart, and
now to be put back together again, limb by limb, her motions as slow as
if she lived beneath a warm sea at midnight. Now, at last, careful not
to break herself, she lay back, upon the pillow.

‘Maria, I have something to tell you.’

‘Yes?’ she said faintly.

‘Now that you are as you are,’ he squeezed her hand, ‘you deserve the
comfort, the rest, the beauty of a new bed.’

She did not cry out happily or turn to him or seize him. Her silence was
a thinking silence.

He was forced to continue. ‘This bed is nothing but a pipe organ, a
calliope.’

‘It is a bed,’ she said.

‘A herd of camels sleep under it.’

‘No,’ she said quietly, ‘from it will come precincts of honest voters,
captains enough for _three_ armies, two ballerinas, a famous lawyer, a
very tall policeman, and seven basso profundos, altos, and sopranos.’

He squinted across the dimly lighted room at the receipt upon the
bureau. He touched the worn mattress under him. The springs moved softly
to recognize each limb, each tired muscle, each aching bone.

He sighed. ‘I never argue with you, little one.’

‘Mama,’ she said.

‘Mama,’ he said.

And then as he closed his eyes and drew the covers to his chest and lay
in the darkness by the great fountain, in the sight of a jury of fierce
metal lions and amber goats and smiling gargoyles, he listened. And he
heard it. It was very far away at first, very tentative, but it came
clearer as he listened.

Softly, her arm back over her head, Maria’s finger-tips began to tap a
little dance on the gleaming harp strings, on the shimmering brass pipes
of the ancient bed. The music was – yes, of course: Santa Lucia! His
lips moved to it in a warm whisper. Santa Lucia! Santa Lucia!

It was very beautiful.


The Town Where No One Got Off

CROSSING the continental United States by night, by day, on the train,
you flash past town after wilderness town where nobody ever gets off. Or
rather, no person who doesn’t _belong_, no person who hasn’t roots in
these country graveyards ever bothers to visit their lonely stations or
attend their lonely views.

I spoke of this to a fellow-passenger, another salesman like myself, on
the Chicago-Los Angeles train as we crossed Iowa.

‘True,’ he said. ‘People get off in Chicago, everyone gets off there.
People get off in New York, get off in Boston, get off in L.A. People
who don’t live there go there to see and come back to tell. But what
tourist ever just got off at Fox Hill, Nebraska, to _look_ at it? You?
Me? No! I don’t know anyone, got no business there, it’s no health
resort, so why bother?’

‘Wouldn’t it be a fascinating change,’ I said, ‘some year to plan a
really different vacation? Pick some village lost on the plains where
you don’t know a soul and go there for the hell of it?’

‘You’d be bored stiff.’

‘I’m not bored, thinking of it!’ I peered out of the window. ‘What’s the
next town coming up on this line?’

‘Rampart Junction.’

I smiled. ‘Sounds good. I might get off there.’

‘You’re a liar and a fool. What you want? Adventure? Romance? Go ahead,
jump off the train. Ten seconds later you’ll call yourself an idiot,
grab a taxi and race us to the next town.’

‘Maybe.’

I watched telephone poles flick by, flick by, flick by. Far ahead I
could see the first faint outlines of a town.

‘But I don’t think so,’ I heard myself say.

The salesman across from me looked faintly surprised.

For slowly, very slowly, I was rising to stand. I reached for my hat. I
saw my hand fumble for my one suitcase. I was surprised, myself.

‘Hold on!’ said the salesman. ‘What’re you doing?’

The train rounded a curve suddenly. I swayed. Far ahead, I saw one
church spire, a deep forest, a field of summer wheat.

‘It looks like I’m getting off the train,’ I said.

‘Sit down,’ he said.

‘No,’ I said. ‘There’s a something about that town up ahead. I’ve got to
go see. I’ve got the time. I don’t have to be in L.A., really, until
next Monday. If I don’t get off the train now, I’ll always wonder what I
missed, what I let slip by when I had the chance to see it.’

‘We were just talking. There’s nothing there.’

‘You’re wrong,’ I said. ‘There is.’

I put my hat on my head and lifted the suitcase in my hand.

‘By God,’ said the salesman, ‘I think you’re really going to do it.’

My heart beat quickly. My face was flushed.

The train whistled. The train rushed down the track. The town was near!

‘Wish me luck,’ I said.

‘Luck!’ he cried.

I ran for the porter, yelling.

There was an ancient flake-painted chair tilted back against the station
platform wall. In this chair, completely relaxed so he sank into his
clothes, was a man of some seventy years whose timbers looked as if he’d
been nailed there since the station was built. The sun had burned his
face dark and tracked his cheek with lizard folds and stitches that held
his eyes in a perpetual squint. His hair smoked ash-white in the summer
wind. His blue shirt, open at the neck to show white clocksprings, was
bleached like the staring late afternoon sky. His shoes were blistered
as if he had held them, uncaring, in the mouth of a stove, motionless,
for ever. His shadow under him was stencilled a permanent black.

As I stepped down, the old man’s eyes flicked every door on the train
and stopped, surprised, at me.

I thought he might wave.

But there was only a sudden colouring of his secret eyes; a chemical
change that was recognition. Yet he had not twitched so much as his
mouth, an eyelid, a finger. An invisible bulk had shifted inside him.

The moving train gave me an excuse to follow it with my eyes. There was
no one else on the platform. No autos waited by the cobwebbed, nail-shut
office. I alone had departed the iron thunder to set foot on the choppy
waves of platform timber.

The train whistled over the hill.

Fool! I thought. My fellow-passenger had been right. I would panic at
the boredom I already sensed in this place. All right, I thought, fool,
yes, but run, no!

I walked my suitcase down the platform, not looking at the old man. As I
passed, I heard his thin bulk shift again, this time so I could hear it.
His feet were coming down to touch and tap the mushy boards.

I kept walking.

‘Afternoon,’ a voice said, faintly.

I knew he did not look at me but only at that great cloudless spread of
shimmering sky.

‘Afternoon,’ I said.

I started up the dirt road towards the town. One hundred yards away, I
glanced back.

The old man, still seated there, stared at the sun, as if posing a
question.

I hurried on.

I moved through the dreaming late-afternoon town, utterly anonymous and
alone, a trout going upstream, not touching the banks of a clear-running
river of life that drifted all about me.

My suspicions were confirmed: it was a town where nothing happened,
where occurred only the following events:

At four o’clock sharp, the Honneger Hardware door slammed as a dog came
out to dust himself in the road. Four-thirty, a straw sucked emptily at
the bottom of a soda-glass, making a sound like a great cataract in the
drug-store silence. Five o’clock, boys and pebbles plunged in the town
river. Five-fifteen, ants paraded in the slanting light under some
elm-trees.

And yet – I turned in a slow circle – somewhere in this town there must
be something worth seeing. I knew it was there. I knew I had to keep
walking and looking. I knew I would find it.

I walked. I looked.

All through the afternoon there was only one constant and unchanging
factor: the old man in the bleached blue pants and shirt was never far
away. When I sat in the drug store he was out front spitting tobacco
that rolled itself into tumble-bugs in the dust. When I stood by the
river he was crouched downstream making a great thing of washing his
hands.

Along about seven-thirty in the evening, I was walking for the seventh
or eight time through the quiet streets when I heard footsteps beside
me.

I looked over and the old man was pacing me, looking straight ahead, a
piece of dried grass in his stained teeth.

‘It’s been a long time,’ he said, quietly.

We walked along in the twilight.

‘A long time,’ he said, ‘waitin’ on that station platform.’

‘You?’ I said.

‘Me.’ He nodded in the tree shadows.

‘Were you waiting for someone at the station?’

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘You.’

‘Me?’ The surprise must have shown in my voice. ‘But why …? You never
saw me before in your life.’

‘Did I say I did? I just said I was waitin’.’

We were on the edge of town now. He had turned and I had turned with him
along the darkening river-bank towards the trestle where the night
trains ran over going east, going west, but stopping rare few times.

‘You want to know anything about me?’ I asked, suddenly. ‘You the
sheriff?’

‘No, not the sheriff. And no, I don’t want to know nothin’ about you.’
He put his hands in his pockets. The sun was set now. The air was
suddenly cool. ‘I’m just surprised you’re here at last, is all.’

‘Surprised?’

‘Surprised,’ he said, ‘and … pleased.’

I stopped abruptly and looked straight at him.

‘How long have you been sitting on that station platform?’

‘Twenty years, give or take a few.’

I knew he was telling the truth; his voice was as easy and quiet as the
river.

‘Waiting for me?’ I said.

‘Or someone like you,’ he said.

We walked on in the growing dark.

‘How you like our town?’

‘Nice, quiet,’ I said.

‘Nice, quiet.’ He nodded. ‘Like the people?’

‘People look nice and quiet.’

‘They are,’ he said. ‘Nice, quiet.’

I was ready to turn back but the old man kept talking and in order to
listen and be polite I had to walk with him in the vaster darkness, the
tides of field and meadow beyond town.

‘Yes,’ said the old man, ‘the day I retired, twenty years ago, I sat
down on that station platform and there I been, sittin’ doin’ nothin’,
waitin’ for something to happen, I didn’t know what, I didn’t know. I
couldn’t say. But when it finally happened, I’d know it, I’d look at it
and say, Yes, sir, that’s what I was wait-in’ for. Train wreck? No. Old
woman friend come back to town after fifty years? No. No. It’s hard to
say. Someone. Something. And it seems to have something to do with you.
I wish I could tell –’

‘Why don’t you try?’ I said.

The stars were coming out. We walked on.

‘Well,’ he said, slowly, ‘you know much about your own in-sides?’

‘You mean my stomach or you mean psychologically?’

‘That’s the word. I mean your head, your brain, you know much about
_that_?’

The grass whispered under my feet. ‘A little.’

‘You hate many people in your time?’

‘Some.’

‘We all do. It’s normal enough to hate, ain’t it, and not only hate but,
while we don’t talk about it, don’t we sometimes want to hit people who
hurt us, even _kill_ them?’

‘Hardly a week passes we don’t get that feeling,’ I said, ‘and put it
away.’

‘We put away all our lives,’ he said. ‘The town says thus and so, mom
and dad say this and that, the law says such and such. So you put away
one killing and another and two more after that. By the time you’re my
age, you got lots of that kind of stuff between your ears. And unless
you went to war, nothin’ ever happened to get rid of it.’

‘Some men trap-shoot, or hunt ducks,’ I said. ‘Some men box or wrestle.’

‘And some don’t. I’m talkin’ about them that don’t. Me. All my life I’ve
been saltin’ down those bodies, puttin’ ’em away on ice in my head.
Sometimes you get mad at a town and the people in it for makin’ you put
things aside like that. You like the old cavemen who just gave a hell of
a yell and whanged someone on the head with a club.’

‘Which all leads up to …?’

‘Which all leads up to: everybody’d like to do one killin’ in his life,
to sort of work off that big load of stuff, all those killin’s in his
mind he never did have the guts to do. And once in a while a man has a
chance. Someone runs in front of his car and he forgets the brakes and
keeps goin’. Nobody can prove nothin’ with that sort of thing. The man
don’t even tell himself he did it. He just didn’t get his foot on the
brake in time. But you know and I know what really happened, don’t we?’

‘Yes,’ I said.

The town was far away now. We moved over a small stream on a wooden
bridge, just near the railway embankment.

‘Now,’ said the old man, looking at the water, ‘the only kind of killin’
worth doin’ is the one where nobody can guess who did it or why they did
it or who they did it to, right? Well, I got this idea maybe twenty
years ago. I don’t think about it every day or every week. Sometimes
months go by, but the idea’s this: only one train stops here each day,
sometimes not even that. Now, if you wanted to kill someone you’d have
to wait, wouldn’t you, for years and years, until a complete and actual
stranger came to your town, a stranger who got off the train for no
reason, a man nobody knows and who don’t know nobody in the town. Then,
and only then, I thought, sittin’ there on the station chair, you could
just go up and when nobody’s around, kill him and throw him in the
river. He’d be found miles downstream. Maybe he’d never be found. Nobody
would ever think to come to Rampart Junction to find him. He wasn’t
goin’ there. He was on his way some place else. There, that’s my whole
idea. And I’d know that man the minute he got off the train. Know him,
just as clear …’

I had stopped walking. It was dark. The moon would not be up for an
hour.

‘Would you?’ I said.

‘Yes,’ he said. I saw the motion of his head looking at the stars.
‘Well, I’ve talked enough.’ He sidled close and touched my elbow. His
hand was feverish, as if he had held it to a stove before touching me.
His other hand, his right hand, was hidden, tight and bunched, in his
pocket. ‘I’ve talked enough.’

Something screamed.

I jerked my head.

Above, a fast-flying night-express razored along the unseen tracks,
flourished light on hill, forest, farm, town dwellings, field, ditch,
meadow, ploughed earth, and water, then, raving high, cut off away,
shrieking, gone. The rails trembled for a little while after that. Then,
silence.

The old man and I stood looking at each other in the dark. His left hand
was still holding my elbow. His other hand was still hidden.

‘May I say something?’ I said, at last.

The old man nodded.

‘About myself,’ I said. I had to stop. I could hardly breathe. I forced
myself to go on. ‘It’s funny. I’ve often thought the same way as you.
Sure, just today, going cross-country, I thought, how perfect, how
perfect, how really perfect it could be. Business has been bad for me,
lately. Wife sick. Good friend died last week. War in the world. Full of
boils, myself. It would do me a world of good –’

‘What?’ the old man said, his hand on my arm.

‘To get off this train in a small town,’ I said, ‘where nobody knows me,
with this gun under my arm, and find someone and kill them and bury them
and go back down to the station and get on and go home and nobody the
wiser and nobody ever to know who did it, ever. Perfect, I thought, a
perfect crime. And I got off the train.’

We stood there in the dark for another minute, staring at each other.
Perhaps we were listening to each other’s hearts beating very fast, very
fast indeed.

The world turned under me. I clenched my fists. I wanted to fall. I
wanted to scream, like the train.

For suddenly I saw that all the things I had just said were not lies put
forth to save my life.

All the things I had just said to this man were true.

And now I knew why I had stepped from the train and walked up through
this town. I knew what I had been looking for.

I heard the old man breathing hard and fast. His hand was tight on my
arm as if he might fall. His teeth were clenched. He leaned towards me
as I leaned towards him. There was a terrible silent moment of immense
strain as before an explosion.

He forced himself to speak at last. It was the voice of a man crushed by
a monstrous burden.

‘How do I know you got a gun under your arm?’

‘You don’t know.’ My voice was blurred. ‘You can’t be sure.’

He waited. I thought he was going to faint.

‘That’s how it is?’ he said.

‘That’s how it is,’ I said.

He shut his eyes tight. He shut his mouth tight.

After another five seconds, very slowly, heavily, he managed to take his
hand away from my own immensely heavy arm. He looked down at his right
hand then, and took it, empty, out of his pocket.

Slowly, with great weight, we turned away from each other and started
walking blind, completely blind, in the dark.

The midnight PASSENGER TO BE PICKED UP flare sputtered on the tracks.
Only when the train was pulling out of the station did I lean from the
open Pullman door and look back.

The old man was seated there with his chair tilted against the station
wall, with his faded blue pants and shirt and his sunbaked face and his
sunbleached eyes. He did not glance at me as the train slid past. He was
gazing east along the empty rails where tomorrow or the next day or the
day after the day after that, a train, some train, any train, might fly
by here, might slow, might stop. His face was fixed, his eyes were
blindly frozen, towards the east. He looked a hundred years old.

The train wailed.

Suddenly old myself, I leaned out, squinting.

Now the darkness that had brought us together stood between. The old
man, the station, the town, the forest, were lost in the night.

For an hour I stood in the roaring blast staring back at all that
darkness.


Icarus Montgolfier Wright

HE lay on his bed and the wind blew through the window over his ears and
over his half-opened mouth so it whispered to him in his dream. It was
like the wind of time hollowing the Delphic caves to say what must be
said of yesterday, today, tomorrow. Sometimes one voice gave a shout far
off away, sometimes two, a dozen, an entire race of men cried out
through his mouth, but their words were always the same:

‘Look, look, we’ve done it!’

For suddenly he, they, one or many, were flung in the dream, and flew.
The air spread in a soft warm sea where he swam, disbelieving.

‘Look, look! It’s done!’

But he didn’t ask the world to watch, he was only shocking his senses
wide to see, taste, smell, touch the air, the wind, the rising moon. He
swam alone in the sky. The heavy earth was gone.

But wait, he thought, wait now!

Tonight – what night is this?

The night before, of course. The night before the first flight of a
rocket to the Moon. Beyond this room on the baked desert floor one
hundred yards away the rocket waits for me.

Well, does it now? Is there _really_ a rocket?

Hold on! he thought, and twisted, turned, sweating, eyes tight, to the
wall, the fierce whisper in his teeth. Be certain-sure ! You, now, who
_are_ you?

Me? he thought. _My_ name?

Jedediah Prentiss, born 1938, college graduate 1959, licensed rocket
pilot, 1965. Jedediah Prentiss … Jedediah Prentiss….

The wind whistled his name away! He grabbed for it, yelling.

Then, gone quiet, he waited for the wind to bring his name back. He
waited a long while, and there was only silence, and then after a
thousand heartbeats, he felt motion.

The sky opened out like a soft blue flower. The Aegean Sea stirred soft
white fans through a distant wine-coloured surf.

In the wash of the waves on the shore, he heard his name.

_Icarus_.

And again in a breathing whisper.

_Icarus_.

Someone shook his arm and it was his father saying his name and shaking
away the night. And he himself lay small, half-turned to the window and
the shore below and the deep sky, feeling the first wind of morning
ruffle the golden feathers bedded in amber wax lying by the side of his
cot. Golden wings stirred half-alive in his father’s arms, and the faint
down on his own shoulders quilled trembling as he looked at these wings
and beyond them to the cliff.

‘Father, how’s the wind?’

‘Enough for me, but never enough for you….’

‘Father, don’t worry. The wings seem clumsy, now, but my bones in the
feathers will make them strong, my blood in the wax will make it live!’

‘My blood, my bones, too, remember; each man lends his flesh to his
children, asking that they tend it well. Promise you’ll not go high,
Icarus. _The_ sun, or _my_ son, the heat of one, the fever of the other,
could melt these wings. Take care!’

And they carried the splendid golden wings into the morning and heard
them whisper in their arms, whisper his name or a name or some name that
blew, spun, and settled like a feather on the soft air.

_Montgolfier_.

His hands touched fiery rope, bright linen, stitched thread gone hot as
summer. His hands fed wool and straw to a breathing flame.

_Montgolfier_.

And his eye soared up along the swell and sway, the oceanic tug and
pull, the immensely wafted silver pear still filling with the shimmering
tidal airs channelled up from the blaze. Silent as a god tilted
slumbering above French countryside, this delicate linen envelope, this
swelling sac of oven-baked air would soon pluck itself free. Draughting
upward to blue worlds of silence, his mind and his brother’s mind would
sail with it, muted, serene among island clouds where uncivilized
lightnings slept. Into that uncharted gulf and abyss where no bird-song
or shout of man could follow, the balloon would hush itself. So cast
adrift, he, Montgolfier, and all men, might hear the unmeasured
breathing of God and the cathedral tread of eternity.

‘Ah …’ He moved, the crowd moved, shadowed by the warm balloon.
‘Everything’s ready, everything’s right….’

Right. His lips twitched in his dream. Right. Hiss, whisper, flutter,
rush. Right.

From his father’s hands a toy jumped to the ceiling, whirled in its own
wind, suspended, while he and his brother stared to see it flicker,
rustle, whistle, heard it murmuring their names.

_Wright_.

Whispering: wind, sky, cloud, space, wing, fly .,.

‘Wilbur, Orville? Look; how’s _that_?’

Ah. In his sleep, his mouth sighed.

The toy helicopter hummed, bumped the ceiling, murmured eagle, raven,
sparrow, robin, hawk; murmured eagle, raven, sparrow, robin, hawk.
Whispered eagle, whispered raven, and at last, fluttering to their hands
with a susurrance, a wash of blowing weather from summers yet to come,
with a last whir and exhalation, whispered hawk.

Dreaming, he smiled.

He saw the clouds rush down the Aegean sky.

He felt the balloon sway drunkenly, its great bulk ready for the clear
running wind.

He felt the sand hiss up the Atlantic shelves from the soft dunes that
might save him if he, a fledgling bird, should fall. The framework
struts hummed and chorded like a harp and himself caught up in its
music.

Beyond this room he felt the primed rocket glide on the desert field,
its fire-wings folded, its fire-breath kept, held ready to speak for
three billion men. In a moment he would wake and walk slowly out to that
rocket.

And stand on the rim of the cliff.

Stand cool in the shadow of the warm balloon.

Stand whipped by tidal sands drummed over Kitty Hawk.

And sheathe his boy’s wrists, arms, hands, fingers with golden wings in
golden wax.

And touch for a final time the captured breath of man, the warm gasp of
awe and wonder siphoned and sewn to lift their dreams.

And spark the gasoline engine.

And take his father’s hand and wish him well with his own wings, flexed
and ready, here on the precipice.

Then whirl and jump.

Then cut the cords to free the great balloon.

Then rev the motor, prop the plane on air.

And crack the switch, to fire the rocket fuse.

And together in a single leap, swim, rush, flail, jump, sail, and glide,
upturned to sun, moon, stars, they would go above Atlantic,
Mediterranean; over country, wilderness, city, town; in gaseous silence,
riffling feather, rattle-drum frame, in volcanic eruption, in timid,
sputtering roar; in start, jar, hesitation, then steady ascension,
beautifully held, wondrously transported, they would laugh and cry each
his own name to himself. Or shout the names of others unborn or others
long dead and blown away by the wine wind or the salt wind or the silent
hush of balloon wind or the wind of chemical fire. Each feeling the
bright feathers stir and bud deep-buried and thrusting to burst from
their riven shoulder-blades! Each leaving behind the echo of their
flying, a sound to encircle, recircle the earth in the winds and “speak
again in other years to the sons of the sons of their sons, asleep but
hearing the restless midnight sky.

Up, yet further up, higher, higher! A spring tide, a summer flood, an
unending river of wings!

A bell rang softly.

No, he whispered, I’ll wake in a moment. Wait …

The Aegean slid away below the window, gone; the Atlantic dunes, the
French countryside, dissolved down to New Mexico desert. In his room
near his cot stirred no plumes in golden wax. Outside, no wind-sculpted
pear, no trapdrum butterfly machine. Outside only a rocket, a
combustible dream, waiting for the friction of his hand to set it off.

In the last moment of sleep, someone asked his name.

Quietly, he gave the answer as he had heard it during the hours from
midnight on.

‘Icarus Montgolfier Wright.’

He repeated it slowly so the questioner might remember the order and
spelling down to the last incredible letter.

‘Icarus Montgolfier Wright.

‘Born: nine hundred years before Christ. Grammar school: Paris, 1783.
High school, college: Kitty Hawk, 1903. Graduation from Earth to Moon:
this day, God willing, 1 August 1970. Death and burial, with luck, on
Mars, summer 1999 in the Year of Our Lord.’

Then he let himself drift awake.

Moments later, crossing the desert tarmac, he heard someone shouting
again and again and again.

And if no one was there or if someone was there behind him, he could not
tell. And whether it was one voice or many, young or old, near or very
far away, rising or falling, whispering or shouting to him all three of
his brave new names, he could not tell, either. He did not turn to see.

For the wind was slowly rising and he let it take hold and blow him all
the rest of the way across the desert to the rocket which stood waiting
there.


Almost the End of the World

SIGHTING ROCK Junction, Arizona, at noon on 22 August 1961, Willy
Bersinger let his miner’s boot rest easy on the jalopy’s accelerator and
talked quietly to his partner, Samuel Fitts.

‘Yes, sir, Samuel, it’s great hitting town. After a couple of months out
at the Penny Dreadful Mine, a juke-box looks like a stained-glass window
to me. We need the town; without it, we might wake some morning and find
ourselves all jerked beef and petrified rock. And then, of course, the
town needs us, too.’

‘How’s that?’ asked Samuel Fitts.

‘Well, we bring things into the town that it hasn’t got – mountains,
creeks, desert night, stars, things like that….’

And it was true, thought Willy, driving along. Set a man way out in the
strange lands and he fills with wellsprings of silence. Silence of
sagebrush, or a mountain lion purring like a warm beehive at noon.
Silence of the river shallows deep in the canyons. All this a man takes
in. Opening his mouth, in town, he breathes it out.

‘Oh, how I love to climb in that old barber-shop chair,’ Willy admitted.
‘And see all those city men lined up under the naked-lady calendars
staring back at me, waiting while I chew over my philosophy of rocks and
mirages and the kind of Time that just sits out there in the hills
waiting for Man to go away. I exhale – and that wilderness settles in a
fine dust on the customers. Oh, it’s nice, me talking, soft and easy, up
and down, on and on….’

In his mind he saw the customers’ eyes strike fire. Some day they would
yell and rabbit for the hills, leaving families and time-clock
civilization behind.

‘It’s good to feel wanted,’ said Willy. ‘You and me, Samuel, are basic
necessities for those city-dwelling folks. Gangway, Rock Junction!’

And with a tremulous tin whistling they steamed across city limits into
awe and wonder.

They had driven perhaps a hundred feet through town when Willy kicked
the brakes. A great shower of rust flakes sifted from the jalopy
fenders. The car stood cowering in the road.

‘Something’s wrong,’ said Willy. He squinted his lynx eyes this way and
that. He snuffed his huge nose. ‘You feel it? You smell it?’

‘Sure,’ said Samuel, uneasily, ‘but, what …?’

Willy scowled. ‘You ever see a sky-blue cigar-store Indian?’

‘Never did.’

‘There’s one over there. Ever see a pink dog-kennel, an orange
out-house, a lilac-coloured bird-bath? There, there, and over there!’

Both men had risen slowly now to stand on the creaking floorboards.

‘Samuel,’ whispered Willy. ‘The whole damn shooting match, every
kindling pile, porch-rail, gewgaw gingerbread, fence, fireplug, garbage
truck, the _whole blasted town_, look at it! It was painted just an hour
ago!’

‘No!’ said Samuel Fitts.

But there stood the band pavilion, the Baptist church, the firehouse,
the Oddfellows’ orphanage, the railroad depot, the county jail, the cat
hospital and all the bungalows, cottages, greenhouses, gazebos,
shop-signs, mailboxes, telephone poles, and trash-bins, around and in
between, and they all blazed with corn yellow, crab-apple greens, circus
reds. From water-tank to tabernacle, each building looked as if God had
jig-sawed it, coloured it, and set it out to dry a moment ago.

Not only that, but where weeds had always been, now cabbages, green
onions, and lettuce crammed every yard, crowds of curious sunflowers
clocked the noon sky, and pansies lay under unnumbered trees cool as
summer puppies, their great damp eyes peering over rolled lawns
mint-green as Irish travel posters. To top it all, ten boys, faces
scrubbed, hair brilliantined, shirts, pants, and tennis shoes clean as
chunks of snow, raced by.

‘The town,’ said Willy, watching them run, ‘has gone mad. Mystery.
Mystery everywhere. Samuel, what kind of tyrant’s come to power? What
law was passed that keeps boys clean, drives people to paint every
toothpick, every geranium pot? Smell that smell? There’s fresh wallpaper
in all those houses! Doom in some horrible shape has tried and tested
these people. Human nature doesn’t just get this picky perfect
overnight. I’ll bet all the gold I panned last month those attics, those
cellars are cleaned out, all shipshape. I’ll bet you a real Thing fell
on this town.’

‘Why, I can almost hear the cherubim singing in the Garden,’ Samuel
protested. ‘How you figure Doom? Shake my hand, put ’er there. I’ll bet
and take your money!’

The jalopy swerved around a corner through a wind that smelled of
turpentine and whitewash. Samuel threw out a gum wrapper, snorting. He
was somewhat surprised at what happened next. An old man in new
overalls, with mirror-bright shoes, ran out in the street, grabbed the
crumpled gum wrapper and shook his fist after the departing jalopy.

‘Doom …’ Samuel Fitts looked back, his voice fading. ‘Well … the bet
_still_ stands.’

They opened the door upon a barber-shop teeming with customers whose
hair had already been cut and oiled, whose faces were shaved close and
pink, yet who sat waiting to vault back into the chairs where three
barbers flourished their shears and combs. A stock-market uproar filled
the room as customers and barbers all talked at once.

When Willy and Samuel entered, the uproar ceased instantly. It was as if
they had fired a shotgun blast through the door.

‘Sam … Willy …’

In the silence some of the sitting men stood up and some of the standing
men sat down, slowly, staring.

‘Samuel,’ said Willy out of the corner of his mouth, ‘I feel like the
Red Death standing here.’ Aloud he said, ‘Howdy! Here I am to finish my
lecture on the “Interesting Flora and Fauna of the Great American
Desert,” and –’

‘No!’

Antonelli, the head barber, rushed frantically at Willy, seized his arm,
clapped his hand over Willy’s mouth like a snuffer on a candle. ‘Willy,’
he whispered, looking apprehensively over his shoulder at his customers.
‘Promise me one thing: buy a needle and thread, sew up your lips.
Silence, man, if you value your life!’

Willy and Samuel felt themselves hurried forward. Two already neat
customers leapt out of the barber chairs without being asked. As they
stepped into the chairs, the two miners glimpsed their own images in the
flyspecked mirror.

‘Samuel, there we are! Look! Compare!’

‘Why,’ said Samuel, blinking, ‘we’re the only men in all Rock Junction
who really _need_ a shave and a haircut.’

‘Strangers!’ Antonelli laid them out in the chairs as if to anaesthetize
them quickly. ‘You don’t know what strangers you are!’

‘Why, we’ve only been gone a couple of months….’ A steaming towel
inundated Willy’s face; he subsided with muffled cries. In steaming
darkness he heard Antonelli’s low and urgent voice.

‘We’ll fix you to look like everyone else. Not that the way you look is
dangerous, no, but the kind of talk you miners talk might upset folks at
a time like this….’

‘Time like this, hell!’ Willy lifted the seething towel. One bleary eye
fixed Antonelli. ‘What’s wrong with Rock Junction?’

‘Not just Rock Junction.’ Antonelli gazed off at some incredible mirage
beyond the horizon. ‘Phoenix, Tucson, Denver. All the cities in America!
My wife and I are going as tourists to Chicago next week. Imagine
Chicago all painted and clean and new. The Pearl of the Orient they call
it! Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Buffalo, the same! All because … well … get
up now, walk over, and switch on that television set against the wall.’

Willy handed Antonelli the steaming towel, walked over, switched on the
television set, listened to it hum, fiddled with the dials, and waited.
White snow drifted down the screen.

‘Try the radio now,’ said Antonelli.

Willy felt everyone watch as he twisted the radio dial from station to
station.

‘Hell,’ he said at last, ‘both your television and radio are broken.’

‘No,’ said Antonelli, simply.

Willy lay back down in the chair and closed his eyes.

Antonelli leaned forward, breathing hard.

‘Listen,’ he said.

‘Imagine four weeks ago, a late Saturday morning, women and children
staring at clowns and magicians on TV. In beauty shops, women staring at
TV fashions. In the barber-shop and hardware stores, men staring at
baseball or trout fishing. Everybody everywhere in the civilized world
staring. No sound, no motion, except on the little black and white
screens.

‘And then, in the middle of all that staring …’

Antonelli paused to lift up one corner of the broiling cloth.

‘Sunspots on the sun,’ he said.

Willy stiffened.

‘Biggest damn sunspots in the history of mortal man,’ said Antonelli.
‘Whole damn world flooded with electricity. Wiped evry TV scren clear as
a whistle, leaving nothing, and, after that, more nothing.’

His voice was remote as the voice of a man describing an Arctic
landscape. He lathered Willy’s face not looking at what he was doing.
Willy peered across the barber-shop, at the soft snow falling down and
down that humming screen in an eternal winter. He could almost hear the
rabbit-thumping of all the hearts in the shop.

Antonelli continued his funeral oration.

‘It took us all that first day to realize what had happened. Two hours
after that first sunspot storm hit, every TV repairman in the United
States was on the road. Everyone figured it was just their own set. With
the radios conked out too it was only that night when newsboys, like in
the old days, ran headlines through the streets that we got the shock
about the sun-spots maybe going on – for the rest of our lives!’

The customers murmured.

Antonelli’s hand, holding the razor, shook. He had to wait.

‘All that blankness, that empty stuff falling down, falling down inside
our television sets, oh, I tell you, it gave everyone the willies. It
was like a good friend who talks to you in your front room and suddenly
shuts up and lies there, pale, and you know he’s dead and you begin to
turn cold yourself.

‘That first night, there was a run on the town’s movie houses. Films
weren’t much, but it was like the Oddfellows’ Ball downtown till
midnight. Drug-store fizzed up two hundred vanilla, three hundred
chocolate sodas that first night of the Calamity. But you can’t buy
movies and sodas every night. What then? Phone your in-laws for canasta
or parchesi?’

‘Might as well,’ observed Willy, ‘blow your brains out.’

‘Sure, but people had to get out of their haunted houses. Walking
through their parlours was like whistling past a graveyard. All that
silence –’

Willy sat up a little. ‘Speaking of silence –’

‘On the third night,’ said Antonelli, quickly, ‘we were all still in
shock. We were saved from outright lunacy by one woman. Somewhere in
this town this woman strolled out of the house, and came back a minute
later. In one hand she held a paintbrush. And in the other …’

‘A bucket of paint,’ said Willy.

Everyone smiled, seeing how well he understood.

‘If those psychologists ever strike off gold medals, they should pin one
on that woman and every woman like her in every little town who saved
our world from coming to an end. Those women who instinctively wandered
in at twilight, and brought us the miracle cure …’

Willy imagined it. There were the glaring fathers and the scowling sons
slumped by their dead TV sets waiting for the damn things to shout Ball
One, or Strike Two! And then they looked up from their wake and there in
the twilight saw the fair women of great purpose and dignity standing
and waiting with brushes and paint. And a glorious light kindled their
cheeks and eyes …’

‘Lord, it spread like wildfire!’ said Antonelli. ‘House to house, city
to city. Jigsaw-puzzle craze, 1932; yo-yo craze, 1928, were nothing
compared with the Everybody Do Everything Craze that blew this town to
smithereens and glued it back again. Men everywhere slapped paint on
anything that stood still ten seconds; men everywhere climbed steeples,
straddled fences, fell off roofs and ladders by the hundreds. Women
painted cupboards, closets; kids painted Tinkertoys, wagons, kites. If
they hadn’t kept busy, you could have built a wall around this town and
renamed it Babbling Brook. All towns, everywhere, the same, where people
had forgotten how to waggle their jaws, make their own talk. I tell you,
men were moving in mindless circles, dazed, until their wives shoved a
brush in their hand and pointed them towards the nearest unpainted
wall!’

‘Looks like you finished the job,’ said Willy.

‘Paint stores ran out of paint three times the first week.’ Antonelli
surveyed the town with pride. ‘The painting could only last so long, of
course, unless you start painting hedges and spraying grass blades one
by one. Now that the attics and cellars are cleaned out, too, our fire
is seeping off into, well – women canning fruit again, making tomato
pickles, raspberry, strawberry preserves. Basement shelves are loaded.
Big church doings, too. Organized bowling, night donkey baseball, box
socials, beer busts. Music shop sold five hundred ukeleles, two hundred
twelve steel guitars, four hundred sixty ocarins and kazoos in four
weeks. I’m studying trombone. Mac, there, the flute. Band concerts
Thursday and Sunday nights. Hand-crank ice-cream machines? Bert Tyson’s
sold two hundred last week alone. Twenty-eight days, Willy, Twenty-eight
Days That Shook the World!’

Willy Bersinger and Samuel Fitts sat there, trying to imagine and feel
the shock, the crushing blow.

‘Twenty-eight days, the barber-shop jammed with men, getting shaved
twice a day so they can sit and stare at customers like they might _say_
something,’ said Antonelli, shaving Willy now. ‘Once, remember, before
TV, barbers were supposed to be great talkers. Well, this month it took
us one whole week to warm up, get the rust out. Now we’re spouting
fourteen to the dozen. No quality, but our quantity is ferocious. When
you came in you heard the commotion. Oh, it’ll simmer down when we get
used to the great Oblivion ’

‘Is _that_ what everyone calls it?’

‘It sure looked that way to most of us, there for a while.’

Willy Bersinger laughed quietly and shook his head.

‘Now I know why you didn’t want me to start lecturing when I walked in
that door.’

Of course, thought Willy, why didn’t I see it right off? Four short
weeks ago the wilderness fell on this town and shook it good and scared
it plenty. Because of the sunspots, all the towns in all the western
world have had enough silence to last them ten years. And here I come by
with another dose of silence, my easy talk about deserts and nights with
no moon and only stars and just the little sound of the sand blowing
along the empty river bottoms. No telling what might have happened if
Antonelli hadn’t shut me up. I see me, tarred and feathered, leaving
town.

‘Antonelli,’ he said aloud. ‘Thanks.’

‘For nothing,’ said Antonelli. He picked up his comb and shears. ‘Now,
short on the sides, long in back?’

‘Long on the sides,’ said Willy Bersinger, closing his eyes again,
‘short in back.’

An hour later Willy and Samuel climbed back into their jalopy, which
someone, they never knew who, had washed and polished while they were in
the barber-shop.

‘Doom.’ Samuel handed over a small sack of gold-dust. ‘With a capital
D.’

‘Keep it.’ Willy sat, thoughtful, behind the wheel. ‘Let’s take this
money and hit out for Phoenix, Tucson, Kansas City, why not? Right now,
we’re a surplus commodity around here. We won’t be welcome again until
those little sets begin to herring-bone and dance and sing. Sure as
hell, if we stay, we’ll open our traps and the Gila monsters and chicken
hawks and the wilderness will slip out and make us trouble.’

Willy squinted at the highway straight ahead.

‘Pearl of the Orient, that’s what he said. Can you imagine that dirty
old town, Chicago, all painted up fresh and new as a babe in the morning
light? We just got to go see Chicago, by God!’

He started the car, let it idle, and looked at the town.

‘Man survives,’ he murmured. ‘Man endures. Too bad we missed the big
change. It must have been a fierce thing, a time of trials and testings.
Samuel, I don’t recall, do you? What have _we_ ever seen on TV?’

‘Saw a woman wrestle a bear two falls out of three, one night.’

‘Who won?’

‘Damned if I know. She –’

But then the jalopy moved and took Willy Bersinger and Samuel Fitts with
it, their hair cut, oiled, and neat on their sweet-smelling skulls,
their cheeks pink-shaven, their fingernails flashing the sun. They
sailed under clipped green, fresh-watered trees, through flowered lanes,
past daffodil, lilac, violet, rose, and peppermint-coloured houses on
the dustless road.

‘Pearl of the Orient, here we come!’

A perfumed dog, with permed hair, ran out, nipped their tyres, and
barked, until they were gone away and completely out of sight.


Dark They were and Golden-eyed

THE rocket’s metal cooled in the meadow winds. Its lid gave a bulging
_pop_. From its clock interior stepped a man, a woman, and three
children. The other passengers whispered away across the Martian meadow,
leaving the man alone among his family.

The man felt his hair flutter and the tissues of his body draw tight as
if he were standing at the centre of a vacuum. His wife, before him,
trembled. The children, small seeds, might at any instant be sown to all
the Martian climes.

The children looked up at him. His face was cold.

‘What’s wrong?’ asked his wife.

‘Let’s get back on the rocket.’

‘Go back to Earth?’

‘Yes! Listen!’

The wind blew, whining. At any moment the Martian air might draw his
soul from him, as marrow comes from a white bone.

He looked at Martian hills that time had worn with a crushing pressure
of years. He saw the old cities, lost and lying like children’s delicate
bones among the blowing lakes of grass.

‘Chin up, Harry,’ said his wife. ‘It’s too late. We’ve come at least
sixty-five million miles or more.’

The children with their yellow hair hollered at the deep dome of Martian
sky. There was no answer but the racing hiss of wind through the stiff
grass.

He picked up the luggage in his cold hands. ‘Here we go,’ he said – a
man standing on the edge of a sea, ready to wade in and be drowned.

They walked into town.

Their name was Bittering. Harry and his wife Cora; Tim, Laura, and
David. They built a small white cottage and ate good breakfasts there,
but the fear was never gone. It lay with Mr Bittering and Mrs Bittering,
a third unbidden partner at every midnight talk, at every dawn
awakening.

‘I feel like a salt crystal,’ he often said, ‘in a mountain stream,
being washed away. We don’t belong here. We’re Earth people. This is
Mars. It was meant for Martians. For heaven’s sake, Cora, let’s buy
tickets for home!’

But she only shook her head. ‘One day the atom bomb will fix Earth. Then
we’ll be safe here.’

‘Safe and insane!’

_Tick-tock, seven o’clock_ sang the voice clock; _time to get up_. And
they did.

Something made him check everything each morning – warm hearth, potted
blood-geraniums – precisely as if he expected something to be amiss. The
morning paper was toast-warm from the six a.m. Earth rocket. He broke
its seal and tilted it at his breakfast plate. He forced himself to be
convivial.

‘Colonial days all over again,’ he declared. ‘Why, in another year
there’ll be a million Earthmen on Mars. Big cities, everything ! They
said we’d fail. Said the Martians would resent our invasion. But did we
find any Martians? Not a living soul! Oh, we found their empty cities,
but no one in them. Right?’

A river of wind submerged the house. When the windows ceased rattling,
Mr Bittering swallowed and looked at the children.

‘I don’t know,’ said David. ‘Maybe there’re Martians around we don’t
see. Sometimes nights I think I hear ’em. I hear the wind. The sand hits
my window. I get scared. And I see those towns way up in the mountains
where the Martians lived a long time ago. And I think I see things
moving around those towns, Papa. And I wonder if those Martians _mind_
us living here. I wonder if they won’t do something to us for coming
here.’

‘Nonsense!’ Mr Bittering looked out of the windows. ‘We’re clean, decent
people.’ He looked at his children. ‘All dead cities have some kind of
ghosts in them. Memories, I mean.’ He stared at the hills. ‘You see a
staircase and you wonder what Martians looked like climbing it. You see
Martian paintings and you wonder what the painter was like. You make a
little ghost in your mind, a memory. It’s quite natural. Imagination.’
He stopped. ‘You haven’t been prowling up in those ruins, have you?’

‘No, Papa.’ David looked at his shoes.

‘See that you stay away from them. Pass the jam.’

‘Just the same,’ said little David, ‘I bet something happens.’

Something happened that afternoon.

Laura stumbled through the settlement, crying. She dashed blindly on to
the porch.

‘Mother, Father – the war, Earth!’ she sobbed. ‘A radio flash just came.
Atom bombs hit New York! All the space rockets blown up. No more rockets
to Mars, ever!’

‘Oh, Harry!’ The mother held on to her husband and daughter.

‘Are you sure, Laura?’ asked the father quietly.

Laura wept. ‘We’re stranded on Mars, for ever and ever!’

For a long time there was only the sound of the wind in the late
afternoon.

Alone, thought Bittering. Only a thousand of us here. No way back. No
way. No way. Sweat poured from his face and his hands and his body; he
was drenched in the hotness of his fear. He wanted to strike Laura, cry,
‘No, you’re lying! The rockets will come back!’ Instead, he stroked
Laura’s head against him and said, ‘The rockets will get through, some
day.’

‘In five years maybe. It takes that long to build one. Father, Father,
what will we do?’

‘Go about our business, of course. Raise crops and children. Wait. Keep
things going until the war ends and the rockets come again.’

The two boys stepped out on to the porch.

‘Children,’ he said, sitting there, looking beyond them, ‘I’ve something
to tell you.’

‘We know,’ they said.

Bittering wandered into the garden to stand alone in his fear. As long
as the rockets had spun a silver web across space, he had been able to
accept Mars. For he had always told himself: Tomorrow, if I want, I can
buy a ticket and go back to Earth.

But now: the web gone, the rockets lying in jigsaw heaps of molten
girder and unsnaked wire. Earth people left to the strangeness of Mars,
the cinnamon dusts and wine airs, to be baked like gingerbread shapes in
Martian summers, put into harvested storage by Martian winters. What
would happen to him, the others? This was the moment Mars had waited
for. Now it would eat them.

He got down on his knees in the flower bed, a spade in his nervous
hands. Work, he thought, work and forget.

He glanced up from the garden to the Martian mountains. He thought of
the proud old Martian names that had once been on those peaks. Earthmen,
dropping from the sky, had gazed upon hills, rivers, Martian seas left
nameless in spite of names. Once Martians had built cities, named
cities; climbed mountains, named mountains; sailed seas, named seas.
Mountains melted, seas drained, cities tumbled. In spite of this, the
Earth-men had felt a silent guilt at putting new names to these ancient
hills and valleys.

Nevertheless, man lives by symbol and label. The names were given.

Mr Bittering felt very alone in his garden under the Martian sun, bent
here, planting Earth flowers in a wild soil.

Think. Keep thinking. Different things. Keep your mind free of Earth,
the atom war, the lost rockets.

He perspired. He glanced about. No one watching. He removed his tie.
Pretty bold, he thought. First your coat off, now your tie. He hung it
neatly on a peach tree he had imported as a sapling from Massachusetts.

He returned to his philosophy of names and mountains. The Earthmen had
changed names. Now there were Hormel Valleys, Roosevelt Seas, Ford
Hills, Vanderbilt Plateaus, Rockefeller Rivers, on Mars. It wasn’t
right. The American settlers had shown wisdom, using old Indian prairie
names: Wisconsin, Minnesota, Idaho, Ohio, Utah, Milwaukee, Waukegan,
Osseo. The old names, the old meanings.

Staring at the mountains wildly he thought: Are you up there? All the
dead ones, you Martians? Well, here we are, alone, cut off! Come down,
move us out! We’re helpless!

The wind blew a shower of peach blossoms.

He put out his sun-browned hand, gave a small cry. He touched the
blossoms, picked them up. He turned them, he touched them again and
again. Then he shouted for his wife.

‘Cora!’

She appeared at a window. He ran to her.

‘Cora, these blossoms!’

She handled them.

‘Do you see? They’re different. They’ve changed! They’re not peach
blossoms any more!’

‘Look all right to me,’ she said.

‘They’re not. They’re _wrong_ ! I can’t tell how. An extra petal, a
leaf, something, the colour, the smell!’

The children ran out in time to see their father hurrying about the
garden, pulling up radishes, onions, and carrots from their beds.

‘Cora, come look!’

They handled the onions, the radishes, the carrots among them.

‘Do they look like carrots?’

‘Yes … No.’ She hesitated. ‘I don’t know.’

‘They’re changed.’

‘Perhaps.’

‘You know they have! Onions but not onions, carrots but not carrots.
Taste: the same but different. Smell: not like it used to be.’ He felt
his heart pounding, and he was afraid. He dug his fingers into the
earth. ‘Cora, what’s happening? What is it? We’ve got to get away from
this.’ He ran across the garden. Each tree felt his touch. ‘The roses.
The roses. They’re turning green!’

And they stood looking at the green roses.

And two days later, Tim came running. ‘Come see the cow. I was milking
her and I saw it. Come on!’

They stood in the shed and looked at their one cow.

It was growing a third horn.

And the lawn in front of their house very quietly and slowly was
colouring itself, like spring violets. Seed from Earth but growing up a
soft purple.

‘We must get away,’ said Bittering. ‘We’ll eat this stuff and then we’ll
change – who knows to what. I can’t let it happen. There’s only one
thing to do. Burn this food!’

‘It’s not poisoned.’

‘But it is. Subtly, very subtly. A little bit. A very little bit. We
mustn’t touch it.’

He looked with dismay at their house. ‘Even the house. The wind’s done
something to it. The air’s burned it. The fog at night. The boards, all
warped out of shape. It’s not an Earthman’s house any more.’

‘Oh, your imagination!’

He put on his coat and tie. ‘I’m going into town. We’ve got to do
something now. I’ll be back.’

‘Wait, Harry!’ his wife cried.

But he was gone.

In town, on the shadowy step of the grocery store, the men sat with
their hands on their knees, conversing with great leisure and ease.

Mr Bittering wanted to fire a pistol in the air.

What are you doing, you fools! he thought. Sitting here! You’ve heard
the news – we’re stranded on this planet. Well, move! Aren’t you
frightened? Aren’t you afraid? What are you going to do?

‘Hello, Harry,’ said everyone.

‘Look,’ he said to them. ‘You did hear the news, the other day, didn’t
you?’

They nodded and laughed. ‘Sure. Sure, Harry.’

‘What are you going to do about it?’

‘Do, Harry, do? What _can_ we do?’

‘Build a rocket, that’s what!’

‘A rocket, Harry? To go back to all that trouble? Oh, Harry!’

‘But you _must_ want to go back. Have you noticed the peach blossoms,
the onions, the grass?’

‘Why, yes, Harry, seems we did,’ said one of the men.

‘Doesn’t it scare you?’

‘Can’t recall that it did, much, Harry.’

‘Idiots!’

‘Now, Harry.’

Bittering wanted to cry. ‘You’ve got to work with me. If we stay here,
we’ll all change. The air. Don’t you smell it? Something in the air. A
Martian, virus, maybe; some seed, or a pollen. Listen to me!’

They stared at him.

‘Sam,’ he said to one of them.

‘Yes, Harry?’

‘Will you help me build a rocket?’

‘Harry, I got a whole load of metal and some blueprints. You want to
work in my metal shop, on a rocket, you’re welcome. I’ll sell you that
metal for five hundred dollars. You should be able to construct a right
pretty rocket if you work alone, in about thirty years.’

Everyone laughed.

‘Don’t laugh.’

Sam looked at him with quiet good humour.

‘Sam,’ Bittering said. ‘Your eyes –’

‘What about them, Harry?’

‘Didn’t they used to be grey?’

‘Well, now, I don’t remember.’

‘They were, weren’t they?’

‘Why do you ask, Harry?’

‘Because now they’re kind of yellow-coloured.’

‘Is that so, Harry?’ Sam said, casually.

‘And you’re taller and thinner –’

‘You might be right, Harry.’

‘Sam, you shouldn’t have yellow eyes.’

‘Harry, what colour eyes have _you_ got?’ Sam said.

‘My eyes? They’re blue, of course.’

‘Here you are, Harry.’ Sam handed him a pocket mirror. ‘Take a look at
yourself.’

Mr Bittering hesitated, and then raised the mirror to his face.

There were little, very dim flecks of new gold captured in the blue of
his eyes.

‘Now look what you’ve done,’ said Sam, a moment later. ‘You’ve broken my
mirror.’

Harry Bittering moved into the metal shop and began to build the rocket.
Men stood in the open door and talked and joked without raising their
voices. Once in a while they gave him a hand on lifting something. But
mostly they just idled and watched him with their yellowing eyes.

‘It’s supper-time, Harry,’ they said.

His wife appeared with his supper in a wicker basket.

‘I won’t touch it,’ he said. ‘I’ll eat only food from our deepfreeze.
Food that came from Earth. Nothing from our garden.’

His wife stood watching him. ‘You can’t build a rocket.’

‘I worked in a shop once, when I was twenty. I know metal. Once I get it
started, the others will help,’ he said, not looking at her, laying out
the blueprints.

‘Harry, Harry,’ she said, helplessly.

‘We’ve got to get away, Cora. We’ve _got_ to!’

The nights were full of wind that blew down the empty moonlit
sea-meadows past the little white chess cities lying for their
twelve-thousandth year in the shallows. In the Earthmen’s settlement,
the Bittering house shook with a feeling of change.

Lying abed, Mr Bittering felt his bones shifted, shaped, melted like
gold. His wife, lying beside him, was dark from many sunny afternoons.
Dark she was, and golden, burnt almost black by the sun, sleeping, and
the children metallic in their beds, and the wind roaring forlorn and
changing through the old peach trees, the violet grass, shaking out
green rose petals.

The fear would not be stopped. It had his throat and heart. It dripped
in a wetness of the arm and the temple and the trembling palm.

A green star rose in the east.

A strange word emerged from Mr Bittering’s lips.

‘Iorrt. Iorrt.’ He repeated it.

It was a Martian word. He knew no Martian.

In the middle of the night he arose and dialled a call through to
Simpson, the archaeologist.

‘Simpson, what does the word “Iorrt” mean?’

‘Why that’s the old Martian word for our planet Earth. Why?’

‘No special reason.’

The telephone slipped from his hand.

‘Hello, hello, hello, hello,’ it kept saying while he sat gazing out at
the green star. ‘Bittering? Harry, are you there?’

The days were full of metal sound. He laid the frame of the rocket with
the reluctant help of three indifferent men. He grew very tired in an
hour or so and had to sit down.

‘The altitude,’ laughed a man.

‘Are you _eating_, Harry?’ asked another.

‘I’m eating,’ he said, angrily.

‘From your deep-freeze?’

‘Yes!’

‘You’re getting thinner, Harry.’

‘I’m not!’

‘And taller.’

‘Liar!’

His wife took him aside a few days later. ‘Harry, I’ve used up all the
food in the deep-freeze. There’s nothing left. I’ll have to make
sandwiches using food grown on Mars.’

He sat down heavily.

‘You must eat,’ she said. ‘You’re weak.’

‘Yes,’ he said.

He took a sandwich, opened it, looked at it, and began to nibble at it.

‘And take the rest of the day off,’ she said. ‘It’s hot. The children
want to swim in the canals and hike. Please come along.’

‘I can’t waste time. This is a crisis!’

‘Just for an hour,’ she urged. ‘A swim’ll do you good.’

He rose, sweating. ‘All right, all right. Leave me alone. I’ll come.’

‘Good for you, Harry.’

The sun was hot, the day quiet. There was only an immense staring burn
upon the land. They moved along the canal, the father, the mother, the
racing children in their swimsuits. They stopped and ate meat
sandwiches. He saw their skin baking brown. And he saw the yellow eyes
of his wife and his children, their yes that were never yellow before. A
few tremblings shook him, but were carried off in waves of pleasant heat
as he lay in the sun. He was too tired to be afraid.

‘Cora, how long have your eyes been yellow?’

She was bewildered. ‘Always, I guess.’

‘They didn’t change from brown in the last three months?’

She bit her lips. ‘No. Why do you ask?’

‘Never mind.’

They sat there.

‘The children’s eyes,’ he said. ‘They’re yellow, too.’

‘Sometimes growing children’s eyes change colour.’

‘Maybe _we’re_ children, too. At least to Mars. That’s a thought.’ He
laughed. ‘Think I’ll swim.’

They leaped into the canal water, and he let himself sink down and down
to the bottom like a golden statue and lie there in green silence. All
was water, quiet and deep, all was peace. He felt the steady, slow
current drift him easily.

If I lie here long enough, he thought, the water will work and eat away
my flesh until the bones show like coral. Just my skeleton left. And
then the water can build on that skeleton – green things, deep-water
things, red things, yellow things. Change. Change. Slow, deep, silent
change. And isn’t that what it is up _there_?

He saw the sky submerged above him, the sun made Martian by atmosphere
and time and space.

Up there, a big river, he thought, a Martian river, all of us lying
deeep in it, in our pebble houses, in our sunken boulder houses, like
crayfish hidden, and the water washing away our old bodies and
lengthening the bones and –

He let himself drift up through the soft light.

Tim sat on the edge of the canal, regarding his father seriously.

‘Utha,’ he said.

‘What?’ asked his father.

The boy smiled. ‘You know. _Utha’_s the Martian word for “father”.’

‘Where did you learn it?’

‘I don’t know. Around. _Utha_!’

‘What do you want?’

The boy hesitated. ‘I – I want to change my name.’

‘Change it?’

‘Yes.’

His mother swam over. ‘What’s wrong with Tim for a name?’

Tim fidgeted. ‘The other day you called Tim, Tim, Tim. I didn’t even
hear. I said to myself, That’s not my name. I’ve a new name I want to
use.’

Mr Bittering held to the side of the canal, his body cold and his heart
pounding slowly. ‘What is this new name?’

‘Linnl. Isn’t that a good name? Can I use it? Can I, please?’

Mr Bittering put his hand to his head. He thought of the rocket, himself
working alone, himself alone even among his family, so alone.

He heard his wife say, ‘Why not?’

He heard himself say, ‘Yes, you can use it.’

‘Yaaa!’ screamed the boy. ‘I’m Linnl, Linnl!’

Racing down the meadowlands, he danced and shouted.

Mr Bittering looked at his wife. ‘Why did we do that?’

‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘It just seemed like a good idea.’

They walked into the hills. They strolled on old mosaic paths, beside
still-pumping fountains. The paths were covered with a thin film of cool
water all summer long. You kept your bare feet cool all the day,
splashing as in a creek, wading.

They came to a small deserted Martian villa with a good view of the
valley. It was on top of a hill. Blue-marble halls, large murals, a
swimming-pool. It was refreshing in this hot summertime. The Martians
hadn’t believed in large cities.

‘How nice,’ said Mrs Bittering, ‘if you could move up here to this villa
for the summer.’

‘Come on,’ he said. ‘We’re going back to town. There’s work to be done
on the rocket.’

But as he worked that night, the thought of the cool blue-marble villa
entered his mind. As the hours passed, the rocket seemed less important.

In the flow of days and weeks, the rocket receded and dwindled. The old
fever was gone. It frightened him to think he had let it slip this way.
But somehow the heat, the air, the working conditions –

He heard the men murmuring on the porch of his metal shop.

‘Everyone’s going. You heard?’

‘All right. That’s right.’

Bittering came out. ‘Going where?’ He saw a couple of trucks, loaded
with children and furniture, drive down the dusty street.

‘Up to the villa,’ said the man.

‘Yeah, Harry. I’m going. So is Sam. Aren’t you, Sam?’

‘That’s right, Harry. What about you?’

‘I’ve got work to do here.’

‘Work! You can finish that rocket in the autumn, when it’s cooler.’

He took a breath. ‘I got the frame all set up.’

‘In the autumn is better.’ Their voices were lazy in the heat.

‘Got to work,’ he said.

‘Autumn,’ they reasoned. And they sounded so sensible, so right.

‘Autumn would be best,’ he thought. ‘Plenty of time, then.’

No! cried part of himself, deep down, put away, locked tight,
suffocating. No! No!

‘In the autumn,’ he said.

‘Come on, Harry,’ they all said.

‘Yes,’ he said, feeling his flesh melt in the hot liquid air. ‘Yes, in
the autumn. I’ll begin work again then.’

‘I got a villa near the Tirra Canal,’ said someone.

‘You mean the Roosevelt Canal, don’t you?’

‘Tirra. The old Martian name.’

‘But on the map –’

‘Forget the map. It’s Tirra now. Now I found a place in the Pillan
mountains –’

‘You mean the Rockefeller range,’ said Bittering.

‘I mean the Pillan mountains,’ said Sam.

‘Yes,’ said Bittering, buried in the hot, swarming air. ‘The Pillan
mountains.’

Everyone worked at loading the truck in the hot, still afternoon of the
next day.

Laura, Tim, and David carried packages. Or, as they preferred to be
known, Ttil, Linnl, and Werr carried packages.

The furniture was abandoned in the little white cottage.

‘It looked just fine in Boston,’ said the mother. ‘And here in the
cottage. But up at the villa? No. We’ll get it when we come back in the
autumn.’

Bittering himself was quiet.

‘I’ve some ideas on furniture for the villa,’ he said, after a time.
‘Big, lazy furniture.’

‘What about your _Encyclopedia_? You’re taking it along, surely?’

Mr Bittering glanced away. ‘I’ll come and get it next week.’

They turned to their daughter. ‘What about your New York dresses?’

The bewildered girl stared. ‘Why, I don’t want them any more.’

They shut off the gas, the water, they locked the doors and walked away.
Father peered into the truck.

‘Gosh, we’re not taking much,’ he said. ‘Considering all we brought to
Mars, this is only a handful!’

He started the truck.

Looking at the small white cottage for a long moment, he was filled with
a desire to rush to it, touch it, say good-bye to it, for he felt as if
he were going away on a long journey, leaving something to which he
could never quite return, never understand again.

Just then Sam and his family drove by in another truck.

‘Hi, Bittering! Here we go!’

The truck swung down the ancient highway out of town. There were sixty
others travelling the same direction. The town filled with a silent,
heavy dust from their passage. The canal waters lay blue in the sun, and
a quiet wind moved in the strange trees.

‘Good-bye, town!’ said Mr Bittering.

‘Good-bye, good-bye,’ said the family, waving to it.

They did not look back again.

Summer burned the canals dry. Summer moved like flame upon the meadows.
In the empty Earth settlement, the painted houses flaked and peeled.
Rubber tyres upon which children had swung in back yards hung suspended
like stopped clock pendulums in the blazing air.

At the metal shop, the rocket frame began to rust.

In the quiet autumn, Mr Bittering stood, very dark now, very
golden-eyed, upon the slope above his villa, looking at the valley.

‘It’s time to go back,’ said Cora.

‘Yes, but we’re not going,’ he said, quietly. ‘There’s nothing there any
more.’

‘Your books,’ she said. ‘Your fine clothes.’

‘Your _Illes_ and your fine _ior uele rre_,’ she said.

‘The town’s empty. No one’s going back,’ he said. ‘There’s no reason to,
none at all.’

The daughter wove tapestries and the sons played songs on ancient flutes
and pipes, their laughter echoing in the marble villa.

Mr Bittering gazed at the Earth settlement far away in the low valley.
‘Such odd, such ridiculous houses the Earth people built.’

‘They didn’t know any better,’ his wife mused. ‘Such ugly people. I’m
glad they’ve gone.’

They both looked at each other, startled by all they had just finished
saying. They laughed.

‘Where did they go?’ he wondered. He glanced at his wife. She was golden
and slender as his daughter. She looked at him, and he seemed almost as
young as their eldest son.

‘I don’t know,’ she said.

‘We’ll go back to town maybe next year, or the year after, or the year
after that,’ he said, calmly. ‘Now – I’m warm. How about taking a swim?’

They turned their backs to the valley. Arm in arm they walked silently
down a path of clear running spring water.

Five years later, a rocket fell out of the sky. It lay steaming in the
valley. Men leaped out of it, shouting.

‘We won the war on Earth! We’re here to rescue you! Hey!’

But the American-built town of cottages, peach trees, and theatres was
silent. They found a half-finished rocket frame, rusting in an empty
shop.

The rocket men searched the hills. The captain established headquarters
in an abandoned bar. His lieutenant came back to report.

‘The town’s empty, but we found native life in the hills, sir. Dark
people. Yellow eyes. Martians. Very friendly. We talked a bit, not much.
They learn English fast. I’m sure our relations will be most friendly
with them, sir.’

‘Dark, eh?’ mused the captain. ‘How many?’

‘Six, eight hundred, I’d say, living in those marble ruins in the hills,
sir. Tall, healthy. Beautiful women.’

‘Did they tell you what became of the men and women who built this Earth
settlement, Lieutenant?’

‘They hadn’t the foggiest notion of what happened to this town or its
people.’

‘Strange. You think those Martians killed them?’

‘They look surprisingly peaceful. Chances are a plague did this town in,
sir.’

‘Perhaps. I suppose this is one of those mysteries we’ll never solve.
One of those mysteries you read about.’

The captain looked at the room, the dusty windows, the blue mountains
rising beyond, the canals moving in the light, and he heard the soft
wind in the air. He shivered. Then, recovering, he tapped a large fresh
map he had thumb-tacked to the top of an empty table.

‘Lots to be done, Lieutenant.’ His voice droned on and quietly on as the
sun sank behind the blue hills. ‘New settlements. Mining sites, minerals
to be looked for. Bacteriological specimens taken. The work, all the
work. And the old records were lost. We’ll have a job of remapping to
do, renaming the mountains and rivers and such. Calls for a little
imagination.

‘What do you think of naming those mountains the Lincoln Mountains, this
canal the Washington Canal, those hills – we can name those hills for
you, Lieutenant. Diplomacy. And you, for a favour, might name a town for
me. Polishing the apple. And why not make this the Einstein Valley, and
further over … are you _listening_, Lieutenant?’

The lieutenant snapped his gaze from the blue colour and the quiet mist
of the hills far beyond the town.

‘What? Oh, _yes_, sir!’


The Smile

IN the town square the queue had formed at five in the morning, while
cocks were crowing far out in the rimed country and there were no fires.
All about, among the ruined buildings, bits of mist had clung at first,
but now with the new light of seven o’clock it was beginning to
disperse. Down the road, in twos and threes, more people were gathering
in for the day of marketing, the day of festival.

The small boy stood immediately behind two men who had been talking
loudly in the clear air, and all of the sounds they made seemed twice as
loud because of the cold. The small boy stamped his feet and blew on his
red, chapped hands, and looked up at the soiled gunny-sack clothing of
the men, and down the long line of men and women ahead.

‘Here, boy, what’re you doing out so early?’ said the man behind him.

‘Got my place in line, I have,’ said the boy.

‘Whyn’t you run off, give your place to someone who appreciates?’

‘Leave the boy alone,’ said the man ahead, suddenly turning.

‘I was joking.’ The man behind put his hand on the boy’s head. The boy
shook it away coldly. ‘I just thought it strange, a boy out of bed so
early.’

‘This boy’s an appreciator of arts, I’ll have you know,’ said the boy’s
defender, a man named Grigsby. ‘What’s your name, lad?’

‘Tom.’

‘Tom here is going to spit clean and true, right, Tom?’

‘I sure am!’

Laughter passed down the line.

A man was selling cracked cups of hot coffee up ahead. Tom looked and
saw the little hot fire and the brew bubbling in a rusty pan. It wasn’t
really coffee. It was made from some berry that grew on the meadowlands
beyond town, and it sold a penny a cup to warm their stomachs; but not
many were buying, not many had the wealth.

Tom stared ahead to the place where the line ended, beyond a bombed-out
stone wall.

‘They say she _smiles_,’ said the boy.

‘Aye, she does,’ said Grigsby.

‘They say she’s made of oil and canvas.’

‘True. And that’s what makes me think she’s not the original one. The
original, now, I’ve heard, was painted on wood a long time ago.’

‘They say she’s four centuries old.’

‘Maybe more. No one knows what year this is, to be sure.’

‘It’s 2061!’

‘That’s what they say, boy, yes. Liars. Could be 3,000 or 5,000, for all
we know. Things were in a fearful mess there for a while. All we got now
is bits and pieces.’

They shuffled along the cold stones of the street.

‘How much longer before we see her?’ asked Tom, uneasily.

‘Just a few more minutes. They got her set up with four brass poles and
velvet rope, all fancy, to keep folks back. Now mind, no rocks, Tom;
they don’t allow rocks thrown at her.’

‘Yes, sir.’

The sun rose higher in the heavens, bringing heat which made the men
shed their grimy coats and greasy hats.

‘Why’re we all here in line?’ asked Tom, at last. ‘Why’re we all here to
spit?’

Grigsby did not glance down at him, but judged the sun. ‘Well, Tom,
there’s lots of reasons.’ He reached absently for a pocket that was long
gone, for a cigarette that wasn’t there. Tom had seen the gesture a
million times. ‘Tom, it has to do with hate. Hate for everything in the
Past. I ask you, Tom, how did we get in such a state, cities all junk,
roads like jigsaws from bombs, and half the cornfields glowing with
radio-activity at night? Ain’t that a lousy stew, I ask you?’

‘Yes, sir, I guess so.’

‘It’s this way, Tom. You hate whatever it was that got you all knocked
down and ruined. That’s human nature. Unthinking, maybe, but human
nature anyway.’

‘There’s hardly nobody or nothing we don’t hate,’ said Tom.

‘Right! The whole blooming caboodle of them people in the Past who run
the world. So here we are on a Thursday morning with our guts plastered
to our spines, cold, live in caves and such, don’t smoke, don’t drink,
don’t nothing except have our festivals, Tom, our festivals.’

And Tom thought of the festivals in the past few years. The year they
tore up all the books in the square and burned them and everyone was
drunk and laughing. And the festival of science a month ago when they
dragged in the last motor-car and picked lots and each lucky man who won
was allowed one smash of a sledge-hammer at the car.

‘Do I remember _that_, Tom? Do I _remember_? Why, I got to smash the
front window, the window, you hear? My God, it made a lovely sound!
_Crash_!’

Tom could hear the glass falling in glittering heaps.

‘And Bill Henderson, he got to bash the engine. Oh, he did a smart job
of it, with great efficiency. Wham!’

But the best of all, recalled Grigsby, there was the time they smashed a
factory that was still trying to turn out aeroplanes.

‘Lord, did we feel good blowing it up!’ said Grigsby. ‘And then we found
that newspaper plant and the munitions depot and exploded them together.
Do you understand, Tom?’

Tom puzzled over it. ‘I guess.’

It was high noon. Now the odours of the ruined city stank on the hot air
and things crawled among the tumbled buildings.

‘Won’t it ever come back, mister?’

‘What, civilization? Nobody wants it. Not me!’

‘I could stand a bit of it,’ said the man behind another man. ‘There
were a few spots of beauty in it.’

‘Don’t worry your heads,’ shouted Grigsby. ‘There’s no room for that,
either.’

‘Ah,’ said the man behind the man. ‘Someone’ll come along some day with
imagination and patch it up. Mark my words. Someone with a heart.’

‘No,’ said Grigsby.

‘I say yes. Someone with a soul for pretty things. Might give us back a
kind of _limited_ sort of civilization, the kind we could live in in
peace.’

‘First thing you know there’s war!’

‘But maybe next time it’d be different.’

At last they stood in the main square. A man on horseback was riding
from the distance into the town. He had a piece of paper in his hand. In
the centre of the square was the roped-off area. Tom, Grigsby, and the
others were collecting their spittle and moving forward – moving forward
prepared and ready, eyes wide. Tom felt his heart beating very strongly
and excitedly, and the earth was hot under his bare feet.

‘Here we go, Tom, let fly!’

Four policemen stood at the corners of the roped area, four men with
bits of yellow twine on their wrists to show their authority over other
men. They were there to prevent rocks being hurled.

‘This way,’ said Grigsby at the last moment, ‘everyone feels he’s had
his chance at her, you see, Tom? Go on, now!’

Tom stood before the painting and looked at it for a long time.

‘Tom, spit!’

His mouth was dry.

‘Get on, Tom! Move!’

‘But,’ said Tom, slowly, ‘she’s BEAUTIFUL!’

‘Here, I’ll spit for you!’ Grigsby spat and the missile flew in the
sunlight. The woman in the portrait smiled serenely, secretly, at Tom,
and he looked back at her, his heart beating, a kind of music in his
ears.

‘She’s beautiful,’ he said.

The line fell silent. One moment they were berating Tom for not moving
forward, now they were turning to the man on horseback.

‘What do they call it, sir?’ asked Tom, quietly.

‘The picture? _Mono. Lisa_, Tom, I think. Yes, the _Mona Lisa_.’

‘I have an announcement,’ said the man on horseback. ‘The authorities
have decreed that as of high noon today the portrait in the square is to
be given over into the hands of the populace there, so they may
participate in the destruction of –’

Tom hadn’t even time to scream before the crowd bore him, shouting and
pummelling about, stampeding towards the portrait. There was a sharp
ripping sound. The police ran to escape. The crowd was in full cry,
their hands like so many hungry birds pecking away at the portrait. Tom
felt himself thrust almost through the broken thing. Reaching out in
blind imitation of the others, he snatched a scrap of oily canvas,
yanked, felt the canvas give, then fell, was kicked, sent rolling to the
outer rim of the mob. Bloody, his clothing torn, he watched old women
chew pieces of canvas, men break the frame, kick the ragged cloth, and
rip it into confetti.

Only Tom stood apart, silent in the moving square. He looked down at his
hand. It clutched the piece of canvas close to his chest, hidden.

‘Hey there, Tom!’ cried Grigsby.

Without a word, sobbing, Tom ran. He ran out and down the bomb-pitted
road, into a field, across a shallow stream, not looking back, his hand
clenched tightly, tucked under his coat.

At sunset he reached the small village and passed on through. By nine
o’clock he came to the ruined farm dwelling. Around back, in the
half-silo, in the part that still remained upright, tented over, he
heard the sounds of sleeping, the family – his mother, father, and
brother. He slipped quickly, silently, through the small door and lay
down, panting.

‘Tom?’ called his mother in the dark.

‘Yes.’

‘Where’ve you been?’ snapped his father. ‘I’ll beat you in the morning.’

Someone kicked him. His brother, who had been left behind to work their
little patch of ground.

‘Go to sleep,’ cried his mother, faintly.

Another kick.

Tom lay getting his breath. All was quiet. His hand was pushed to his
chest, tight, tight. He lay for half an hour this way, eyes closed.

Then he felt something, and it was a cold white light. The moon rose
very high and the little square of light moved in the silo and crept
slowly over Tom’s body. Then, and only then, did his hand relax. Slowly,
carefully, listening to those who slept about him, Tom drew his hand
forth. He hesitated, sucked in his breath, and then, waiting, opened his
hand and uncrumpled the tiny fragment of painted canvas.

All the world was asleep in the moonlight.

And there on his hand was the Smile.

He looked at it in the white illumination from the midnight sky. And he
thought, over and over to himself, quietly, _the Smile, the lovely
Smile_.

An hour later he could still see it, even after he had folded it
carefully and hidden it. He shut his eyes and the Smile was there in the
darkness. And it was still there, warm and gentle, when he went to sleep
and the world was silent and the moon sailed up and then down the cold
sky towards morning.


Here there be Tygers

‘YOU have to beat a planet at its own game,’ said Chatterton. ‘Get in,
rip it up, poison its animals, dam its rivers, sow its fields,
depollinate its air, mine it, nail it down, hack away at it, and get the
hell out from under when you have what you want. Otherwise, a planet
will fix you good. You can’t trust planets. They’re bound to be
different, bound to be bad, bound to be out to get you, especially this
far off, a billion miles from nowhere, so you get them first. Tear their
skin off, I say. Drag out the minerals and run away before the damn
world explodes in your face. That’s the way to treat them.’

The rocket ship sank down towards planet 7 cf star system 84. They had
travelled millions upon millions of miles. Earth was far away, her
system and her sun forgotten, her system settled and investigated and
profited on, and other systems rummaged through and milked and tidied
up, and now the rockets of these tiny men from an impossibly remote
planet were probing out to far universes. In a few months, a few years,
they could travel anywhere, for the speed of their rocket was the speed
of a god, and now for the ten thousandth time one of the rockets of the
far-circling hunt was feathering down towards an alien world.

‘No,’ said Captain Forester. ‘I have too much respect for other worlds
to treat them the way you want to, Chatterton. It’s not my business to
rape or ruin, anyway, thank God. I’m glad I’m just a rocket man. You’re
the anthropologist-mineralogist. Go ahead, do your mining and ripping
and scraping. I’ll just watch. I’ll just go around looking at this new
world, whatever it is, however it seems. I like to look. All rocket men
are lookers or they wouldn’t be rocket men. You like to smell new airs,
if you’re a rocket man, and see new colours and new people if there are
new people to see, and new oceans and islands.’

‘Take your gun along,’ said Chatterton.

‘In my holster,’ said Forester.

They turned to the port together and saw the green world rising to meet
their ship. ‘I wonder what _it_ thinks of us?’ said Forester.

‘It won’t like me,’ said Chatterton. ‘By God, I’ll see to it it won’t
like me. And I don’t care, you know. I don’t give a damn. I’m out for
the money. Land us over there, will you, Captain; that looks like iron
country if I ever saw it.’

It was the freshest green colour they had seen since childhood.

Lakes lay like clear blue water droplets through the soft hills; there
were no loud highways, signboards, or cities. It’s a sea of green
golf-links, thought Forester, which goes on for ever. Putting greens,
driving greens, you could walk ten thousand miles in any direction and
never finish your game. A Sunday planet, a croquet-lawn world, where you
could lie on your back, clover in your lips, eyes half-shut, smiling at
the sky, smelling the grass, drowse through an eternal Sabbath, rousing
only on occasion to turn the Sunday paper or crack the red-striped
wooden ball through the hoop.

‘If ever a planet was a woman, this one is.’

‘Woman on the outside, man on the inside,’ said Chatterton. ‘All hard
underneath, all male iron, copper, uranium, black sod. Don’t let the
cosmetics fool you.’

He walked to the bin where the Earth Drill waited. Its great screw-snout
glittered bluely, ready to stab seventy feet deep and suck out corks of
earth, deeper still with extensions into the heart of the planet.
Chatterton winked at it. ‘We’ll fix your woman, Forester, but good.’

‘Yes, I know you will,’ said Forester, quietly.

The rocket landed.

‘It’s too green, too peaceful,’ said Chatterton. ‘I don’t like it.’ He
turned to the captain. ‘We’ll go out with our rifles.’

‘I give orders, if you don’t mind.’

‘Yes, and my company pays our way with millions of dollars of machinery
we must protect; quite an investment.’

The air on the new planet 7 in star system 84 was good. The port swung
wide. The men filed out into the greenhouse world.

The last man to emerge was Chatterton, gun in hand.

As Chatterton set foot to the green lawn, the earth trembled. The grass
shook. The distant forest rumbled. The sky seemed to blink and darken
imperceptibly. The men were watching Chatterton when it happened.

‘An earthquake, by God!’

Chatterton’s face paled. Everyone laughed.

‘It doesn’t like you, Chatterton!’

‘Nonsense!’

The trembling died away at last.

‘Well,’ said Captain Forester, ‘it didn’t quake for us, so it must be
that it doesn’t approve of your philosophy.’

‘Coincidence,’ Chatterton smiled. ‘Come on now on the double. I want the
Drill out here in a half-hour for a few samplings.’

‘Just a moment.’ Forester stopped laughing. ‘We’ve got to clear the area
first, be certain there’re no hostile people or animals. Besides, it
isn’t every year you hit a planet like this, very nice; can you blame us
if we want to have a look at it?’

‘All right.’ Chatterton joined them. ‘Let’s get it over with.’

They left a guard at the ship and they walked away over fields and
meadows, over small hills and into little valleys. Like a bunch of boys
out hiking on the finest day of the best summer in the most beautiful
year in history, walking in the croquet weather where if you listened
you could hear the whisper of the wooden ball across grass, the click
through the hoop, the gentle undulations of voices, a sudden high drift
of women’s laughter from some ivy-shaded porch, the tinkle of ice in the
summer tea-pitcher.

‘Hey,’ said Driscoll, one of the younger crewmen, sniffing the air. ‘I
brought a baseball and bat; we’ll have a game later. What a diamond!’

The men laughed quietly in the baseball season, in the good quiet wind
for tennis, in the weather for bicycling and picking wild grapes.

‘How’d you like the job of mowing all this?’ asked Driscoll.

The men stopped.

‘I _knew_ there was something wrong!’ cried Chatterton. ‘This grass;
it’s freshly cut!’

‘Probably a species of dichondra, always short.’

Chatterton spat on the green grass and rubbed it in with his boot. ‘I
don’t like it, I don’t like it. If anything happened to us, no one on
Earth would ever know. Silly policy: if a rocket fails to return, we
never send a second rocket to check the reason why.’

‘Natural enough,’ explained Forester. ‘We can’t waste time on a thousand
hostile worlds, fighting futile wars. Each rocket represents years,
money, lives. We can’t afford to waste _two_ rockets if one rocket
proves a planet hostile. We go on to peaceful planets. Like this one.’

‘I often wonder,’ said Driscoll, ‘what happened to all those lost
expeditions on worlds we’ll never try again.’

Chatterton eyed the distant forest. ‘They were shot, stabbed, broiled
for dinner. Even as we may be, any minute. It’s time we got back to
work, Captain!’

They stood at the top of a little rise.

‘Feel,’ said Driscoll, his hands and arms out loosely. ‘Remember how you
used to run when you were a kid, and how the wind felt? Like feathers on
your arms. You ran and thought any minute you’d fly, but you never quite
did.’

The men stood remembering. There was a smell of pollen and new rain
drying upon a million grass blades.

Driscoll gave a little run. ‘Feel it, by God, the wind! You know, we
never have _really_ flown by ourselves. We have to sit inside tons of
metal, away from flying, really. We’ve never flown like birds fly, to
themselves. Wouldn’t it be nice to put your arms out like this –’ He
extended his arms. ‘And run.’ He ran ahead of them, laughing at his
idiocy. ‘And fly!’ he cried.

He flew.

Time passed on the silent gold wrist-watches of the men standing below.
They stared up. And from the sky came a high sound of almost
unbelievable laughter.

‘Tell him to come down,’ whispered Chatterton. ‘He’ll be killed.’

Nobody heard. Their faces were raised away from Chatterton; they were
stunned and smiling.

At last Driscoll landed at their feet. ‘Did you see me? My God, I flew!’

They had seen.

‘Let me sit down, oh Lord, Lord.’ Driscoll slapped his knees, chuckling.
‘I’m a sparrow, I’m a hawk, God bless me. Go on, all of you, try it!’

‘It’s the wind. It picked me up and flew me!’ he said, a moment later,
gasping, shivering with delight.

‘Let’s get out of here.’ Chatterton started turning slowly in circles,
watching the blue sky. ‘It’s a trap, it wants us all to fly in the air.
Then it’ll drop us all at once and kill us. I’m going back to the ship.’

‘You’ll wait for my order on that,’ said Forester.

The men were frowning, standing in the warm-cool air, while the wind
sighed about them. There was a kite sound in the air, a sound of eternal
March.

‘I _asked_ the wind to fly me,’ said Driscoll. ‘And it _did_ !’

Forester waved the others aside. ‘I’ll chance it next. If I’m killed,
back to the ship, all of you.’

‘I’m sorry, I can’t allow this; you’re the captain,’ said Chatterton.
‘We can’t risk you.’ He took out his gun. ‘I should have some sort of
authority or force here. This game’s gone on too long; I’m ordering us
back to the ship!’

‘Holster your gun,’ said Forester quietly.

‘Stand still, you idiot!’ Chatterton blinked now at this man, now at
that. ‘Haven’t you _felt_ it? This world’s alive, it has a look to it,
it’s playing with us, biding its time.’

‘I’ll be the judge of that,’ said Forester. ‘You’re going back to the
ship, in a moment, under arrest, if you don’t put up that gun.’

‘If you fools won’t come with me, you can die out here. I’m going back,
get my samples, and get out.’

‘Chatterton!’

‘Don’t try to stop me!’

Chatterton started to run. Then, suddenly, he gave a cry.

Everyone shouted and looked up.

‘There he goes,’ said Driscoll.

Chatterton was up in the sky.

Night had come on like the closing of a great but gentle eye. Chatterton
sat stunned on the side of the hill. The other men sat around him,
exhausted and laughing. He would not look at them, he would not look at
the sky, he would only feel of the earth, and his arms and his legs and
his body, tightening in on himself.

‘God, wasn’t it perfect!’ said a man named Koestler.

They had all flown, like orioles and eagles and sparrows, and they were
all happy.

‘Come out of it, Chatterton, it was fun, wasn’t it?’ said Koestler.

‘It’s impossible.’ Chatterton shut his eyes, tight, tight. ‘It can’t do
it. There’s only one way for it to do it; it’s alive. The air’s alive.
Like a fist, it picked me up. Any minute now, it can kill us all. It’s
alive!’

‘All right,’ said Koestler, ‘say it’s alive. And a living thing must
have purposes. Suppose the purpose of this world is to make us happy.’

As if to add to this, Driscoll came flying up, canteens in each hand. ‘I
found a creek, tested and pure water, wait’ll you try it!’

Forester took a canteen, nudged Chatterton with it, offering a drink.
Chatterton shook his head and drew hastily away. He put his hands over
his face. ‘It’s the blood of this planet. Living blood. Drink that, put
that inside and you put this world inside you to peer out your eyes and
listen through your ears. No thanks!’

Forester shrugged and drank.

‘Wine!’ he said.

‘It can’t be!’

‘It _is_. Smell it, taste it! A rare white wine!’

‘French domestic’ Driscoll sipped his.

‘Poison,’ said Chatterton.

They passed the canteens round.

They idled on through the gentle afternoon, not wanting to do anything
to disturb the peace that lay all about them. They were like very young
men in the presence of great beauty, of a fine and famous woman, afraid
that by some word, some gesture, they might turn her face away, avert
her loveliness and her kindly attentions. They had felt the earthquake
that had greeted Chatterton, thought Forester, and they did not want
earthquake. Let them enjoy this Day After School Lets Out, this fishing
weather. Let them sit under the shade trees or walk on the tender hills,
but let them drill no drillings, test no testings, contaminate no
contaminations.

They found a small stream which poured into a boiling water pool. Fish,
swimming in the cold creek above, fell glittering into the hot spring
and floated, minutes later, cooked, to the surface.

Chatterton reluctantly joined the others, eating.

‘It’ll poison us all. There’s always a trick to things like this. I’m
sleeping in the rocket tonight. You can sleep out if you want. To quote
a map I saw in medieval history: “Here there be tygers.” Some time
tonight when you’re sleeping, the tigers and cannibals will show up.’

Forester shook his head. ‘I’ll go along with you, this planet is alive.
It’s a race unto itself. But it needs us to show off to, to appreciate
its beauty. What’s the use of a stage full of miracles if there’s no
audience?’

But Chatterton was busy. He was bent over, being sick.

‘I’m poisoned! Poisoned!’

They held his shoulders until the sickness passed. They gave him water.
The others were feeling fine.

‘Better eat nothing but ship’s food from now on,’ advised Forester.
‘It’d be safer.’

‘We’re starting work right now.’ Chatterton swayed, wiping his mouth.
‘We’ve wasted a whole day. I’ll work alone if I have to. I’ll show this
damned thing.’

He staggered away towards the rocket.

‘He doesn’t know when he’s well off,’ murmured Driscoll. ‘Can’t we stop
him, Captain?’

‘He practically owns the expedition. We don’t have to help him; there’s
a clause in our contract that guarantees refusal to work under dangerous
conditions. So … do unto this Picnic Ground as you would have it do unto
you. No initial-cutting on the trees. Replace the turf on the greens.
Clean up your banana-peels after you.’

Now, below, in the ship there was an immense humming. From the storage
port rolled the great shining Drill. Chatterton followed it, called
directions to its robot radio. ‘This way, here!’

‘The fool.’

‘Now!’ cried Chatterton.

The Drill plunged its long screw-bore into the green grass.

Chatterton waved up at the other men. ‘I’ll show it!’

The sky trembled.

The Drill stood in the centre of a little sea of grass. For a moment it
plunged away, bringing up moist corks of sod which it spat
unceremoniously into a shaking analysis bin.

Now the Drill gave a wrenched, metallic squeal like a monster
interrupted at its feed. From the soil beneath it, slow, bluish liquids
bubbled up.

Chatterton shouted, ‘Get back, you fool!’

The Drill lumbered in a prehistoric dance. It shrieked like a mighty
train turning on a sharp curve, throwing out red sparks. It was sinking.
The black slime gave under it in a dark pool.

With a coughing sigh, a series of pants and churnings, the Drill sank
into a black scum like an elephant shot and dying, trumpeting, like a
mammoth at the end of an Age, vanishing limb by ponderous limb into the
pit.

‘My God,’ said Forester under his breath, fascinated with the scene.
‘You know what that is, Driscoll? It’s tar. The damn fool machine hit a
tar-pit!’

‘Listen, listen!’ cried Chatterton at the Drill, running about on the
edge of the oily lake. ‘_This_ way, over here!’

But like the old tyrants of the earth, the dinosaurs with their tubed
and screaming necks, the Drill was plunging and thrashing in the one
lake from where there was no returning to bask on the firm and
understandable shore.

Chatterton turned to the other men far away. ‘_Do_ something, someone!’

The Drill was gone.

The tar-pit bubbled and gloated, sucking the hidden monster bones. The
surface of the pool was silent. A huge bubble, the last, rose, expelled
a scent of ancient petroleum, and fell apart.

The men came down and stood on the edge of the little black sea.

Chatterton stopped yelling.

After a long minute of staring into the silent tar-pool, Chatterton
turned and looked at the hills, blindly, at the green rolling lawns. The
distant trees were growing fruit now and dropping it, softly, to the
ground.

‘I’ll show it,’ he said quietly.

‘Take it easy, Chatterton.’

‘I’ll fix it,’ he said.

‘Sit down, have a drink.’

‘I’ll fix it good, I’ll show it it can’t do this to me.’

Chatterton started off back to the ship.

‘Wait a minute, now,’ said Forester.

Chatterton ran. ‘I know what to do, I know how to fix it!’

‘Stop him!’ said Forester. He ran, then remembered he could fly. ‘The
A-Bomb’s on the ship, if he should get to that….’

The other men had thought of that and were in the air. A small grove of
trees stood between the rocket and Chatterton as he ran on the ground,
forgetting that he could fly, or afraid to fly, or not allowed to fly,
yelling. The crew headed for the rocket to wait for him, the Captain
with them. They arrived, formed a line, and shut the rocket port. The
last they saw of Chatterton he was plunging through the edge of the tiny
forest.

The crew stood waiting.

‘That fool, that crazy guy.’

Chatterton did not come out on the other side of the small woodland.

‘He’s turned back, waiting for us to relax our guard.’

‘Go bring him in,’ said Forester.

Two men flew off.

Now, softly, a great and gentle rain fell upon the green world.

‘The final touch,’ said Driscoll. ‘We’d never have to build houses here.
Notice it’s not raining _on_ us. It’s raining all around, ahead, behind
us. What a world!’

They stood dry in the middle of the blue, cool rain. The sun was
setting. The moon, a large one the colour of ice, rose over the
freshened hills.

‘There’s only one more thing this world needs.’

‘Yes,’ said everyone, thoughtfully, slowly.

‘We’ll have to go looking,’ said Driscoll. ‘It’s logical. The wind flies
us, the trees and streams feed us, everything is alive. Perhaps if we
asked for companionship …’

‘I’ve thought a long time, today and other days,’ said Koestler. ‘We’re
all bachelors, been travelling for years, and tired of it. Wouldn’t it
be nice to settle down somewhere. Here, maybe. On Earth you work like
hell just to save enough to buy a house, pay taxes; the cities stink.
Here, you won’t even need a house, with this weather. If it gets
monotonous you can ask for rain, clouds, snow, changes. You don’t have
to work here for anything.’

‘It’d be boring. We’d go crazy.’

‘No,’ Koestler said, smiling. ‘If life got too soft, all we’d have to do
is repeat a few times what Chatterton said: _“Here there be tygers.”_
Listen!’

Far away, wasn’t there the faintest roar of a giant cat, hidden in the
twilight forest?

The men shivered.

‘A versatile world,’ said Koestler dryly. ‘A woman who’ll do anything to
please her guests, as long as we’re kind to her. Chatterton wasn’t
kind.’

‘Chatterton. What about him?’

As if to answer this, someone cried from a distance. The two men who had
flown off to find Chatterton were waving at the edge of the woods.

Forester, Driscoll, and Koestler flew down alone.

‘What’s up?’

The men pointed into the forest. ‘Thought you’d want to see this,
Captain. It’s damned eerie.’ One of the men indicated a pathway. ‘Look
here, sir.’

The marks of great claws stood on the path, fresh and clear.

‘And over here.’

A few drops of blood.

A heavy smell of some feline animal hung in the air.

‘Chatterton?’

‘I don’t think we’ll ever find him, Captain.’

Faintly, faintly, moving away, now gone in the breathing silence of
twilight, came the roar of a tiger.

The men lay on the resilient grass by the rocket and the night was warm.
‘Reminds me of nights when I was a kid,’ said Driscoll. ‘My brother and
I waited for the hottest night in July and then we slept on the Court
House lawn, counting the stars, talking; it was a great night, the best
night of the year, and now, when I think back on it, the best night of
my life.’ Then he added, ‘Not counting tonight, of course.’

‘I keep thinking about Chatterton,’ said Koestler.

‘Don’t,’ said Forester. ‘We’ll sleep a few hours and take off. We can’t
chance staying here another day. I don’t mean the danger that got
Chatterton. No. I mean, if we stayed on we’d get to liking this world
too much. We’d never want to leave.’

A soft wind blew over them.

‘I don’t want to leave now.’ Driscoll put his hands behind his head,
lying quietly. ‘And it doesn’t want us to leave.’

‘If we go back to Earth and tell everyone what a lovely planet it is,
what then, Captain? They’ll come smashing in here and ruin it.’

‘No,’ said Forester, idly. ‘First, this planet wouldn’t put up with a
full-scale invasion. I don’t know what it’d do, but it could probably
think of some interesting things. Secondly, I like this planet too much;
I respect it. We’ll go back to Earth and lie about it. Say it’s hostile.
Which it would be to the average man, like Chatterton, jumping in here
to hurt it. I guess we won’t be lying after all.’

‘Funny thing,’ said Koestler. ‘I’m not afraid. Chatterton vanishes, is
killed most horribly, perhaps, yet we lie here, no one runs, no one
trembles. It’s idiotic. Yet it’s right. We trust it, and it trusts us.’

‘Did you notice, after you drank just so much of the wine-water, you
didn’t want more? A world of moderation.’

They lay listening to something like the great heart of this earth
beating slowly and warmly under their bodies.

Forester thought, I’m thirsty.

A drop of rain splashed on his lips.

He laughed quietly.

I’m lonely, he thought.

Distantly, he heard soft high voices.

He turned his eyes in upon a vision. There was a group of hills from
which flowed a clear river, and in the shallows of that river, sending
up spray, their faces shimmering, were the beautiful women. They played
like children on the shore. And it came to Forester to know about them
and their life. They were nomads, roaming the face of this world as was
their desire. There were no highways or cities, there were only hills
and plains and winds to carry them like white feathers where they
wished. As Forester shaped the question, some invisible answerer
whispered the answers. There were no men. These women, alone, produced
their race. The men had vanished fifty thousand years ago. And where
were these women now? A mile down from the green forest, a mile over on
the wine-stream by the six white stones, and a third mile to the large
river. There, in the shallows, were the women who would make fine wives,
and raise beautiful children.

Forester opened his eyes. The other men were sitting up.

‘I had a dream.’

They had all dreamed.

‘A mile down from the green forest …’

"… a mile over on the wine-stream …’

‘… by the six white stones …’ said Koestler.

‘… and a third mile to the large river,’ said Driscoll, sitting there.

Nobody spoke again for a moment. They looked at the silver rocket
standing there in the starlight.

‘Do we walk or fly, Captain?’

Forester said nothing.

Driscoll said, ‘Captain, let’s stay. Let’s never go back to Earth.
They’ll never come and investigate to see what happened to us, they’ll
think we were destroyed here. What do you say?’

Forester’s face was perspiring. His tongue moved again and again on his
lips. His hands twitched over his knees. The crew sat waiting.

‘It’d be nice,’ said the captain.

‘Sure.’

‘But …’ Forester sighed. ‘We’ve got our job to do. People invested in
our ship. We owe it to them to go back.’

Forester got up. The men still sat on the ground, not listening to him.

‘It’s such a goddamn nice night,’ said Koestler.

They stared at the soft hills and the trees and the river running off to
other horizons.

‘Let’s get aboard ship,’ said Forester, with difficulty.

‘Captain …’

‘Get aboard,’ he said.

The rocket rose into the sky. Looking back, Forester saw every valley
and every tiny lake.

‘We should’ve stayed,’ said Koestler.

‘Yes, I know.’

‘It’s not too late to turn back.’

‘I’m afraid it is.’ Forester made an adjustment on the port telescope.
‘Look now.’

Koestler looked.

The face of the world was changed. Tigers, dinosaurs, mammoths appeared.
Volcanoes erupted, cyclones and hurricanes tore over the hills in a
welter and fury of weather.

‘Yes, she was a woman all right,’ said Forester. ‘Waiting for visitors
for millions of years, preparing herself, making herself beautiful. She
put on her best face for us. When Chatterton treated her badly, she
warned him a few times, and then, when he tried to ruin her beauty, she
eliminated him. She wanted to be loved, like every woman, for herself,
not for her wealth. So now, after she had offered us everything, we turn
our backs. She’s the woman scorned. She let us go, yes, but we can never
come back. She’ll be waiting for us with _those …_’ He nodded to the
tigers and the cyclones and the boiling seas.

‘Captain,’ said Koestler.

‘Yes.’

‘It’s a little late to tell you this. But just before we took off, I was
in charge of the air-lock. I let Driscoll slip away from the ship. He
wanted to go. I couldn’t refuse him. I’m responsible. He’s back there
now on mat planet.’

They both turned to the viewing port.

After a long while, Forester said, ‘I’m glad. I’m glad one of us had
enough sense to stay.’

‘But he’s dead by now!’

‘No, that display down there is for us, perhaps a visual hallucination.
Underneath all the tigers and lions and hurricanes, Driscoll is quite
safe and alive, because he’s her only audience now. Oh, she’ll spoil him
rotten. He’ll lead a wonderful life, he will, while we’re slugging it
out up and down the system looking for but never finding a planet quite
like this again. No, we won’t try to go back and rescue Driscoll. I
don’t think "she" would let us anyway. Full speed ahead, Koestler, make
it full speed.’

The rocket leaped forward into greater acceleration.

And just before the planet dwindled away in brightness and mist,
Forester imagined he could see Driscoll very clearly, walking away down
from the green forest, whistling quietly, all of the fresh planet around
him, a wine-creek flowing for him, baked fish lolling in the hot
springs, fruit ripening in the midnight trees, and distant forests and
lakes waiting for him to happen by. Driscoll walked away across the
endless green lawns, near the six white stones, beyond the forest to the
edge of the large bright river.


The Headpiece

THE parcel arrived in the late afternoon mail. Mr Andrew Lemon knew what
was inside by shaking it. It whispered in there like a large hairy
tarantula.

It took him some time to get up his courage, tremble the wrappings open,
and remove the lid from the white cardboard box.

There the bristly thing lay on its snowy tissue bed, as impersonal as
the black horsechair clock-springs stuffed in an old sofa. Andrew Lemon
chuckled.

‘Indians come and gone, left this piece of a massacre behind as a sign,
a warning. Well. _There_!’

And he fitted the new patent-leather black shining toupee to his naked
scalp. He tugged at it like someone touching his cap to passers-by.

The toupee fitted perfectly, covering the neat coin-round hole which
marred the top of his brow. Andrew Lemon gazed at the strange man in the
mirror and yelled with delight.

‘Hey there, who’re you? Face’s familiar, but, by gosh now, pass you on
the street without looking twice! Why? Because, _it’s_ gone! Darn hole’s
covered, nobody’d guess it was ever there. Happy New Year, man, that’s
what it is, Happy New Year!’

He walked around and around his little apartment, smiling, needing to do
something, but not yet ready to open the door and surprise the world. He
walked by the mirror, glancing sidewise at someone going past there, and
each time laughed and shook his head. Then he sat down in the rocker and
rocked, grinning, and tried to look at a couple of copies of _Wild West
Weekly_ and then _Thrilling Movie Magazine_. But he couldn’t keep his
right hand from crawling up along his face, tremulously, to feel at the
rim of that crisp new sedge above his ears.

‘Let me buy you a drink, young fellow!’

He opened the fly-specked medicine cabinet and took three gulps from a
bottle. Eyes watering, he was on the verge of cutting himself a chew of
tobacco when he stopped, listening.

Outside, in the dark hallway, there was a sound like a field-mouse
moving softly, daintily on the threadbare carpeting.

‘Miss Fremwell!’ he said to the mirror.

Suddenly the toupee was off his head and into the box as if, frightened,
it had scuttled back there of itself. He clapped the lid down, sweating
cold, afraid of even the sound that woman made moving by like a summer
breeze.

He tiptoed to the door that was nailed shut in one wall and bent his raw
and now furiously blushing head. He heard Miss Fremwell unlock her door
and shut it and move delicately about her room with little tinkles of
chinaware and chimes of cutlery, turning in a merry-go-round to make her
dinner. He backed away from that door that was bolted, locked, latched,
and driven shut with its four-inch hard-steel nails. He thought of the
nights he had flinched in bed, thinking he heard her quietly pulling out
the nails, pulling out the nails, touching at the bolts and slithering
the latch…. And how it always took him an hour to turn away towards
sleep after that.

Now she would rustle about her room for an hour or so. It would grow
dark. The stars would be out and shining when he tapped on her door and
asked if she’d sit on the porch or walk in the park. Then the only way
she could possibly know of this third blind and staring eye in his head
would be to run her hand in a Braille-like motion there. But her small
white fingers had never moved within a thousand miles of that scar which
was no more to her than, well, one of those pockmarks off on the full
moon tonight. His toe brushed a copy of _Wonder Science Tales_. He
snorted. Perhaps if she thought at all of his damaged head – she wrote
songs and poems, didn’t she, once in a while? – she figured that a long
time back a meteor had run and hit him and vanished up there where there
were no shrubs or trees, where it was just white, above his eyes. He
snorted again and shook his head. Perhaps, perhaps. But however she
thought, he would see her only when the sun had set.

He waited another hour, from time to time spitting out the window into
the warm summer night.

‘Eight-thirty. Here goes.’

He opened the hall door and stood for a moment looking back at that nice
new toupee hidden in its box. No, he still could not bring himself to
wear it.

He stepped along the hall to Miss Naomi Fremwell’s door, a door so
thinly made it seemed to beat with the sound of her small heart there
behind it.

‘Miss Fremwell,’ he whispered.

He wanted to cup her like a small white bird in his great bowled hands,
speak soft to her quietness. But then, in wiping the sudden perspiration
from his brow, he found again the pit and only at the last quick moment
saved himself from falling over, in, and screaming, down! He clapped his
hand to that place to cover that emptiness. After he had held his hand
tight tight to the hole for a long moment he was then afraid to pull his
hand away. It had changed. Instead of being afraid he might fall in
there, he was afraid something terrible, something secret, something
private, might gush out and drown him.

He brushed his free hand across her door, disturbing little more than
dust.

‘Miss Fremwell?’

He looked to see if there were too many lamps lit under her doorsill,
the light of which might strike out at him when she swung the door wide.
The very thrust of lamplight alone might knock his hand away, and reveal
that sunken wound. Then mightn’t she peer through it like a keyhole,
into his life?

The light was dim under the doorsill.

He made a fist of one hand and brought it down gently, three times, on
Miss Fremwell’s door.

The door opened and moved slowly back.

Later, on the front porch, feverishly adjusting and re-adjusting his
senseless legs, perspiring, he tried to work around to asking her to
marry him. When the moon rose high, the hole in his brow looked like a
leaf-shadow fallen there. If he kept one profile to her, the crater did
not show, it was hidden away over on the other side of his world. It
seemed that when he did this, though, he only had half as many words and
felt only half a man.

‘Miss Fremwell,’ he managed to say, at last.

‘Yes?’ She looked at him as if she didn’t quite see him.

‘Miss Naomi, I don’t suppose you ever really noticed me, lately.’

She waited. He went on.

‘I’ve been noticing you. Fact is, well, I might as well put it right out
on the line and get it over with. We been sitting out here on the porch
for quite a few months. I mean we’ve known each other a long time. Sure,
you’re good fifteen years younger than me, but would there be anything
wrong with our getting engaged, do you think?’

‘Thank you very much, Mr Lemon,’ she said quickly. She was very polite.
‘But –’

‘Oh, I know,’ he said, edging forward with the words. ‘I know! It’s my
head, it’s always this darn thing up here on my head!’

She looked at his turned-away profile in the uncertain light.

‘Why, no, Mr Lemon, I don’t think I would say that, I don’t think that’s
it at all. I have wondered a bit about it, certainly, but I don’t think
it’s an interference in any way. A friend of mine, a very dear friend,
married a man once, I recall, who had a wooden leg. She told me she
didn’t even know he had it, after a while.’

‘It’s always this darn hole,’ cried Mr Lemon bitterly. He took out his
plug of tobacco, looked at it as if he might bite it, decided not to and
put it away. He formed a couple of fists and stared at them bleakly as
if they were big rocks. ‘Well, I’ll tell you all about it, Miss Naomi.
I’ll tell you how it happened.’

‘You don’t have to if you don’t want.’

‘I was married once. Miss Naomi. Yes, I was, darn it. And one day my
wife she just took hold of a hammer and hit me right on the head!’

Miss Fremwell gasped. It was as if she had been struck herself.

Mr Lemon brought one clenching fist down through the warm air.

‘Yes, ma’am, she hit me straight-on with that hammer, she did. I tell
you, the world blew up on me. Everything fell down on me. It was like
the house coming down in one heap. That one little hammer buried me,
_buried_ me! The pain? I can’t tell you!’

Miss Fremwell turned in on herself. She shut her eyes and thought,
biting her lips. Then she said, ‘Oh, poor Mr Lemon.’

‘She did it so calm,’ said Mr Lemon, puzzled. ‘She just stood over me
where I lay on the couch and it was a Tuesday afternoon about two
o’clock and she said, “Andrew, wake up!” and I opened my eyes and looked
at her is all and then she hit me with that hammer. Oh, Lord.’

‘But why?’ asked Miss Fremwell.

‘For no reason, no reason at all. Oh, what an ornery woman.’

‘But why should she do a thing like that?’ said Miss Fremwell.

‘I told you: for no reason.’

‘She was crazy?’

‘Must have been. Oh, yes, she _must_ of been.’

‘Did you prosecute her?’

‘Well, no, I didn’t. After all, she didn’t know what she was doing.’

‘Did it knock you out?’

Mr Lemon paused and there it was again, so clear, so tall, in his mind,
the old thought of it. Seeing it there, he put it in words.

‘No, I remember just standing up, I stood up and I said to her, "What’d
you do?" and I stumbled towards her. There was a mirror. I saw the hole
in my head, deep, and blood coming out. It made an Indian of me. She
just stood there, my wife did. And at last she screamed three kinds of
horror and dropped that hammer on the floor and ran out the door.’

‘Did you faint then?’

‘No. I didn’t faint. I got out on the street some way and I mumbled to
somebody I needed a doctor. I got on a bus, mind you, a bus! And paid my
fare! And said to leave me by some doctor’s house downtown. Everybody
screamed, I tell you. I got sort of weak then, and next thing I knew the
doctor was working on my head, had it cleaned out like a new thimble,
like a bunghole in a barrel….’

He reached up and touched that spot now, fingers hovering over it as a
delicate tongue hovers over the vacated area where once grew a fine
tooth.

‘A neat job. The doctor kept staring at me, too, as if he expected me to
fall down dead any minute.’

‘How long did you stay in the hospital?’

‘Two days. Then I was up and around, feeling no better, no worse. By
that time my wife had picked up and skedaddled.’

‘Oh, my goodness, my goodness,’ said Miss Fremwell, recovering her
breath. ‘My heart’s going like an eggbeater. I can hear and feel and see
it all, Mr Lemon. Why, why, oh, _why_ did she do it?’

‘I already told you, for no reason I could see. She was just took with a
notion, I guess.’

‘But there must have been an argument – ?’

Blood drummed in Mr Lemon’s cheeks. He felt that place up there on his
head glow like a fiery crater. ‘There wasn’t no argument. I was just
sitting, peaceful as you please. I like to sit, my shoes off, my shirt
unbuttoned, afternoons.’

‘Did you – did you know any other women?’

‘No, never, none!’

‘You didn’t – drink?’

‘Just a nip once in a while, you know how it is.’

‘Did you gamble?’

‘No, no, no!’

‘But a hole punched in your head like that, Mr Lemon, my land, my land!
All over nothing?’

‘You women are all alike. You see something and right off you expect the
worst. I tell you there was no reason. She just fancied hammers.’

‘What did she say before she hit you?’

‘Just "Wake up, Andrew".’

‘No, before that.’

‘Nothing. Not for half an hour or an hour, anyway. Oh, she said
something about wanting to go shopping for something or other, but I
said it was too hot. I’d better lie down, I didn’t feel so good. She
didn’t appreciate how I felt. She must have got mad and thought about it
for an hour and grabbed that hammer and come in and gone kermash. I
think the weather got her, too.’

Miss Fremwell sat back thoughtfully in the lattice shadow, her brows
moving slowly up and then slowly down.

‘How long were you married to her?’

‘A year. I remember we got married in July and in July it was I got
sick.’

‘Sick?’

‘I wasn’t a well man. I worked in a garage. Then I got these backaches
so I couldn’t work and had to lie down afternoons. Ellie, she worked in
the First National Bank.’

‘I see,’ said Miss FremwelL

‘What?’

‘Nothing,’ she said.

‘I’m an easy man to get on with. I don’t talk too much. I’m easy-going
and relaxed. I don’t waste money. I’m economical. Even Ellie had to
admit that. I don’t argue. Why, sometimes Ellie would jaw at me and jaw
at me, like bouncing a ball hard on a house, but me not bouncing back. I
just sat. I took it easy. What’s the use of always stirring around and
talking, right?’

Miss Fremwell looked over at Mr Lemon’s brow in the moonlight. Her lips
moved but he could not hear what she said.

Suddenly, she straightened up and took a deep breath and blinked around
surprised to see the world out beyond the porch lattice. The sounds of
traffic came in to the porch now, as if they had been tuned up, they had
been so quiet for a time. Miss Fremwell took a deep breath and let it
out.

‘As you yourself say, Mr Lemon, nobody ever got anywhere arguing.’

‘Right!’ he said. ‘I’m easy-going, I tell you –’

But Miss Fremwell’s eyes were lidded now and her mouth was strange. He
sensed this and tapered off.

A night wind blew fluttering her light summer dress and the sleeves of
his shirt.

‘It’s late,’ said Miss Fremwell.

‘Only nine o’clock!’

‘I have to get up early tomorrow.’

‘But you haven’t answered my question yet. Miss Fremwell.’

‘Question?’ She blinked. ‘Oh, the question. Yes.’ She rose from the
wicker seat. She hunted around in the dark for the screen doorknob. ‘Oh
now, Mr Lemon, let me think it over.’

‘That’s fair enough,’ he said. ‘No use arguing, is there?’

The screen door closed. He heard her find her way down the dark warm
hall. He breathed shallowly, feeling of the third eye in his head, the
eye that saw nothing.

He felt a vague unhappiness shift around inside his chest like an
illness brought on by too much talking. And then he thought of the fresh
white gift-box waiting with its lid on in his room. He quickened.
Opening the screen door he walked down the silent hall and went into his
room. Inside, he slipped and almost fell on a slick copy of _True
Romance Tales_. He switched on the light, excitedly, smiling, fumbled
the box open and lifted the toupee from the tissues. He stood before the
bright mirror and followed directions with the spirit gum and tapes, and
tucked it here and stuck it there and shifted it again and combed it
neat. Then he opened the door and walked along the hall to knock for
Miss Fremwell.

‘Miss Naomi?’ he called, smiling.

The light under her door clicked out at the sound of his voice.

He stared at the dark keyhole with disbelief.

‘Oh, Miss Naomi?’ he said again, quickly.

Nothing happened in the room. It was dark. After a moment he tried the
knob, experimentally. The knob rattled. He heard Miss Fremwell sigh. He
heard her say something. Again, the words were lost. Her small feet
tapped to the door. The light came on.

‘Yes?’ she said, behind the panel.

‘Look, Miss Naomi,’ he entreated. ‘Open the door. Look.’

The bolt of the door snapped back. She jerked the door open about an
inch. One of her eyes looked at him sharply.

‘Look,’ he announced proudly, adjusting the toupee so it very definitely
covered the sunken crater. He imagined he saw himself in her bureau
mirror and was pleased. ‘Look here, Miss Fremwell!’

She opened the door a bit wider and looked. Then she slammed the door
and locked it. From behind the thin panelling, her voice was toneless.

‘I can still see the hole, Mr Lemon,’ she said.


Perchance to Dream

YOU don’t want death and you don’t expect death. Something goes wrong,
your rocket tilts in space, a planetoid jumps up, blackness, movement,
hands over the eyes, a violent pulling back of available powers in the
forejets, the crash.

The darkness. In the darkness, the senseless pain. In the pain, the
nightmare.

He was not unconscious.

_Your name_? asked hidden voices. Sale, he replied in whirling nausea.
_Leonard Sale. Occupation_? cried the voices. _Space man_! he cried,
alone in the night. _Welcome_, said the voices. _Welcome, welcome_. They
faded.

He stood up in the wreckage of his ship. It lay like a folded, tattered
garment around him.

The sun rose and it was morning.

Sale prised himself out of the small airlock and stood breathing
heavily. Luck. Sheer luck. His suit was intact; his oxygen breathable. A
few minutes’ checking showed him he had two months’ supply of oxygen and
food. Fine! And this – he prowled through the wreckage. Miracle of
miracles! The radio was intact.

He shuttered out the message on the sending key. CRASHED ON PLANETOID
787. SALE. HELP. SALE. HELP.

Minutes passed; the reply came: HELLO, SALE, THIS IS ADDAMS IN MARSPORT.
SENDING RESCUE SHIP LOGARITHM. WILL ARRIVE PLANETOID 787 SIX DAYS. HANG
ON.

Sale did a little dance.

It was simple as that. One crashed. One had food. One radioed for help.
Help came. _Voilà_! he shouted.

The sun rose and was warm. He felt no sense of mortality. Six days would
be no time at all. He would eat, he would read, he would sleep. He
glanced at his surroundings. No dangerous animals; a tolerable oxygen
supply. What more could one ask? Beans and bacon, was the answer. He
touched the machinery in his helmet that popped food into his mouth.

After breakfast he smoked a cigarette slowly, deeply, blowing out
through the special helmet tube. He nodded contentedly. What a life! Not
a scratch on him. Luck, sheer luck!

His head nodded. Sleep, he thought.

Good idea. Forty winks. Plenty of time to sleep, take it easy. Six whole
long, luxurious days of idling and philosophizing. Sleep.

He stretched himself out, tucked his arm under his head, and shut his
eyes.

Insanity came in to take him. The voices whispered.

_Sleep, yes, sleep_, said the voices. _Ah, sleep, sleep_.

He opened his eyes. The voices stopped. Everything was normal. He
shrugged. He shut his eyes casually, fitfully. He settled his long body.

Eeeeeeeeeeee, sang the voices far away.

Ahhhhhhhhh, sang the voices.

_Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep_, sang the voices.

_Die, die, die, die, die_, sang the voices.

Oooooooooooo, cried the voices.

Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm, a bee ran through his brain.

He sat up. He shook his head. He blinked at the crashed ship. Hard
metal. He felt the solid rock under his fingers. He saw the real sun
warming the blue sky.

Let’s try sleeping on our back, he thought. He adjusted himself, lying
back down. His watch ticked on his wrist. The blood burned in his veins.

_Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep_, sang the voices.

Ohhhhhhhhhhhhh, sang the voices.

Ahhhhhhhhhhhhh, sang the voices.

_Die, die, die, die, die. Sleep, sleep, die, sleep, die, sleep, die!
Oohhh. Ahhhh. Eeeeeeeeeeeeeee_!

Blood tapped in his ears. The sound of the wind rising.

_Mine, mine_, said a voice. _Mine, mine, he’s mine; he’s mine_!

_No mine, mine_, said another voice. _No, mine, mine, he’s mine_!

_No, ours, ours_, sang ten voices. _Ours, ours, he’s ours_!

His fingers twitched. His jaws spasmed. His eyelids jerked.

_At last, at last_, sang a high voice. _Now, now. The long time, the
waiting. Over, over_, sang the high voice. _Over, over at last_!

It was like being undersea. Green songs, green visions, green time.
Bubbled voices drowning in deep liquors of sea tide. Faraway choruses
chanting senseless rhymes. Leonard Sale stirred in agony.

_Mine, mine_, cried a loud voice. _Mine, mine_! shrieked another. _Ours,
ours_, shrieked the chorus.

The din of metal, the crash of sword, the conflict, the battle, the
fight, the war. All of it exploding, his mind fiercely torn apart.

Eeeeeeeeee!

He leaped up, screaming. The landscape melted and flowed.

A voice said, ‘I am Tylle of Rathalar. Proud Tylle, Tylle of the Blood
Mound and the Death Drum. Tylle of Rathalar, Killer of Men!’

Another spoke, ‘I am Iorr of Wendillo, Wise Iorr, Destroyer of
Infidels!’

The chorus chanted. ‘And we the warriors, we the steel, we the warriors,
we the red blood rushing, the red blood falling, the red blood steaming
in the sun –’

Leonard Sale staggered under the burden. ‘Go away!’ he cried. ‘Leave me,
in God’s name, leave me!’

Eeeeeee, shrieked the high sound of steel hot on steel.

Silence.

He stood with the sweat boiling out of him. He was trembling so
violently he could not stand. Insane, he thought. Absolutely insane.
Raving insane. Insane!

He jerked the food kit open, did something to a chemical packet. Hot
coffee was ready in an instant. He mouthed it through the helmet tube
greedily. He shivered. He sucked in raw gulps of breath.

Let’s be logical, he thought, sitting down heavily. The coffee seared
his tongue. No record of insanity in the family for two hundred years.
All healthy, well-balanced. No reason for insanity now. Shock? Silly. No
shock. I’m to be rescued in six days. No shock to that. No danger. Just
an ordinary planetoid. Ordinary, ordinary, ordinary place. No reason for
insanity. I’m sane.

_Oh_? cried a small metal voice within. An echo. Fading.

‘Yes!’ he cried, beating his fists together. ‘Sane!’

_Hahhahhahhahhahhahhahhah_. Somewhere a vanishing laughter.

He whirled about. ‘Shut up, you!’ he cried.

We didn’t say anything, said the mountains. We didn’t say anything, said
the sky. We didn’t say anything, said the wreckage.

‘All right then,’ he said, swaying. ‘See that you don’t.’

Everything was normal.

The pebbles were getting hot. The sky was big and dark. He looked at his
fingers and saw the way the sun burned on every black hair. He looked at
his boots and the dust on them. Suddenly he felt very happy because he
made a decision. I won’t go to sleep, he thought. I’m having nightmares,
so why sleep? There’s your solution.

He made a routine. From nine o’clock in the morning, which was this
minute, until twelve, he would walk around and see the planetoid. He
would write on a pad with a yellow pencil everything he saw. Then he
would sit down and open a can of oily sardines, and some canned fresh
bread with good butter on it, and pass it in through the helmet
airlocks. From twelve-thirty until four he would read nine chapters of
_War and Peace_. He took the book from the wreckage, and laid it where
he might find it later. There was a book of T. S. Eliot’s poetry, too.
That might be nice.

Supper would come at five-thirty and then from six until ten he would
listen to the radio from Earth. There would be a couple of bad comedians
telling jokes and a bad singer singing some songs, and the latest news
flashes, signing off at midnight with the U.N. anthem.

After that?

He felt sick.

I’ll play solitaire until dawn, he thought. I’ll sit up and drink hot
black coffee and play solitaire, no cheating, until sunrise.

Ho, ho, he thought.

‘What did you say?’ he asked himself, aloud.

‘I said "Ha ha",’ he replied. ‘_Some_ time, you’ll have to sleep.’

‘I’m wide awake,’ he said.

‘Liar!’ he retorted, enjoying the conversation.

‘I feel fine,’ he said.

‘Hypocrite,’ he replied.

‘I’m not afraid of the night or sleep or anything,’ he said.

‘_Very_ funny,’ he said.

He felt bad. He wanted to sleep. And the fact that he was afraid of
sleep made him want to lie down all the more and shut his eyes and curl
up. ‘Comfy-cosy?’ asked his ironic censor.

‘I’ll just walk and look at the rocks and the geological formations and
think how good it is to be alive,’ he said.

‘Ye gods!’ cried his censor. ‘William Saroyan!’

You’ll go on, he thought, maybe one day, maybe one night, but what about
the next night and the next and the _next_? Can you stay awake _all_
that time, for six nights? Until the rescue ship comes? Are you _that_
good, _that_ strong?

The answer was no.

What are you afraid of ? I don’t know. Those voices. Those sounds. But
they can’t hurt you – can they?

They _might_. You’ve got to face them some time. Must I? Brace up to it,
old man. Chin up, and all that rot.

He sat down on the hard ground. He felt very much like crying. He felt
as if life was over and he was entering new and unknown territory. It
was such a deceiving day, with the sun warm; physically, he felt able
and well, one might fish on such a day as this, or pick flowers or kiss
a woman or anything. But in the midst of a lovely day, what did one get?

Death.

Well, hardly _that_.

Death, he insisted.

He lay down and closed his eyes. He was tired of messing around.

All right, he thought, if you _are_ death, come get me. I want to know
what all this nonsense is about.

Death came.

Eeeeeeeeeeeee, said a voice.

Yes, I know, said Leonard Sale, lying there. But what else?

Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh, said a voice.

I know that, also, said Leonard Sale, irritably. He turned cold. His
mouth hung open wildly.

‘I am Tylle of Rathalar, Killer of Men!’

‘I am Iorr of Wendillo, Destroyer of Infidels!’

What is this place? asked Leonard Sale, struggling against horror.

‘Once a mighty planet!’ said Tylle of Rathalar. ‘Once a place of
battles!’ said Iorr of Wendillo.

‘Now dead,’ said Tylle.

‘Now silent,’ said Iorr.

‘Until _you_ came,’ said Tylle.

‘To give us life again,’ said Iorr.

You’re dead, insisted Leonard Sale, flesh writhing. You’re nothing but
empty wind.

‘We live, through you.’

‘And fight, through _you_ !’

So that’s it, thought Leonard Sale. I’m to be a battleground, am I? Are
you friends?

‘Enemies!’ cried Iorr.

‘Foul enemies!’ cried Tylle.

Leonard smiled a rictal smile. He felt ghastly. How long have you
waited? he demanded.

‘How long is _time_?’ Ten thousand years? ‘Perhaps.’ Ten million years ?
‘Perhaps.’

What are you? Thoughts, spirits, ghosts? ‘All of those, and more.’
Intelligence? ‘Precisely.’ How did you survive?

Eeeeeeeeeeeeeee, sang the chorus, far away.

Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh, sang another army, waiting to fight.

‘Once upon a time, this was fertile land, a rich planet. And there were
two nations, strong nations, led by two strong men. I, Iorr. And he,
that one who calls himself Tylle. And the planet declined and gave way
to nothingness. The peoples and the armies languished in the midst of a
great war which had lasted five thousand years. We lived long lives and
loved long loves, drank much, slept much, fought much. And when the
planet died, our bodies withered, and, only in time, and with much
science, did we survive.’

Survive, wondered Leonard Sale. But there is nothing of you!

‘Our _minds_, fool, our _minds_ ! What is a body without a mind?’

What is a mind without a _body_, laughed Leonard Sale. I’ve got you
there. Admit it, I’ve _got_ you!

‘True,’ said the cruel voice. ‘One is useless, lacking the other. But
survival is survival even when unconscious. The minds of our nations,
through science, through wonder, survived.’

But without senses, lacking eyes, ears, lacking touch, smell, and the
rest? ‘Lacking all those, yes. We were vapours, merely. For a long time.
Until today.’

And now I am here, thought Leonard Sale. ‘You are here,’ said the voice.
‘To give substance to our souls. To give us our needed body.’

I’m only one, thought Sale. ‘Nevertheless, you are of use.’

I’m an individual, thought Sale. I resent your intrusion.

‘He resents our intrusion! Did you heard him, Iorr? He resents!’

‘As if he had a right to resent!’

Be careful, warned Sale. I’ll blink my eyes and you’ll be gone,
phantoms! I’ll wake up and rub you out!

‘But you’ll have to sleep again, _some_ time!’ cried Iorr. ‘And when you
do, we’ll be here, waiting, waiting, waiting. For you.’

What do you want? ‘Solidity. Mass. Sensation again!’ You can’t _both_
have it. ‘We’ll fight that out between us.’

A hot clamp twisted his skull. It was as if a spike had been thrust and
beaten down between the bivalvular halves of his brain.

Now he was terribly clear. Horribly, magnificently clear. He was their
universe. The world of his thoughts, his brain, his skull, divided into
two camps, that of Iorr, that of Tylle. They were _using_ him!

Pennants flung up on a pink mind sky! Brass shields caught the sun. Grey
animals shifted and came rushing in bristling tides of sword and plume
and trumpet.

Eeeeeeeeeeeee! The rushing.

Ahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh! The roaring.

Nowwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww! The whirling.

Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm –

Ten thousand men hurled across the small hidden stage. Ten thousand men
floated on the shellacked inner ball of his eye. Ten thousand javelins
hissed between the small bone hulls of his head. Ten thousand jewelled
guns exploded. Ten thousand voices chanted in his ears. Now his body was
riven and extended, shaken and rolled, he was screaming, writhing, the
plates of his skull threatened to burst asunder. The gabbling, the
shrilling, as across bone plains of mind and continent of inner marrow,
through gullies of vein, down hills of artery, over rivers of
melancholy, came armies and armies, one army, two armies, swords flashed
in the sun, bearing down upon each other, fifty thousand minds
snatching, scrabbling, cutting at him, demanding, using. In a moment,
the hard collision, one army on another, the rush, the blood, the sound,
the fury, the death, the insanity!

Like cymbals, the armies struck!

He leaped up, raving. He ran across the desert. He ran and ran and did
not stop running.

He sat down and cried. He sobbed until his lungs ached. He cried very
hard and long. Tears ran down his cheeks. ‘God, God, help me, oh God,
help me!’ he said.

All was normal again.

It was four o’clock in the afternoon. The rocks were baked by the sun.
He managed, after a time, to cook himself a few hot biscuits, which he
ate with strawberry jam.

‘At least I know what I’m up against,’ he told himself. ‘Oh, Lord, what
a world! What an innocent-looking world, and what a monster it really
is. It’s good no one ever explored it before. Or _did_ they?’ He shook
his aching head. Pity them, whoever crashed here before, if any ever
did. Warm sun, hard rocks, not a sign of hostility.

Until you shut your eyes and relaxed your mind.

And the night and the voices and the insanity and the death padded in on
soft feet.

‘I’m all right now, though,’ he said, proudly. ‘Look at that.’ He
displayed his hand. By a supreme effort of will, it was no longer
shaking. ‘I’ll show you who in hell’s ruler here,’ he announced to the
innocent sky. ‘_I_ am!’ He tapped his chest.

To think that _thought_ could live that long! A million years, perhaps,
all these throughts of death and disorder and conquest, lingering in the
innocent but poisonous air of the planet, waiting for a real man to give
them a channel through which they might issue again in all their
senseless virulence.

Now that he was feeling better, it was all silly. All I have to do, he
thought, is stay awake six nights. They won’t bother me that way. When
I’m awake, I’m dominant. I’m stronger than those crazy monarchs and
their silly tribes of sword-flingers and shield-bearers and
horn-blowers. I’ll stay awake.

But _can_ you? he wondered. Six whole nights? Awake?

There’s coffee and medicine and books and cards.

But I’m tired _now_, so tired, he thought. Can I hold out?

Well, if not – there’s always the gun.

Where will these silly monarchs be if you put a bullet through their
stage? All the world’s a stage. No. _You_, Leonard Sale, are the small
stage. And they the players. And what if you put a bullet through the
wings, tearing down scenes, destroying curtains, ruining lines! Destroy
the stage, the players, all if they aren’t careful!

First of all, he must radio through to Marsport, again. If there was any
way they could rush the rescue ship sooner, then maybe he could hang on.
Anyway, he must warn them what sort of planet this was, this so
innocent-seeming spot of nightmare and fever vision –

He tapped on the radio key for a minute. His mouth tightened. The radio
was dead.

It had sent through the proper rescue message, received a reply, and
then extinguished itself.

The proper touch of irony, he thought. There was only one thing to do.
Draw a plan.

This he did. He got a yellow pencil and delineated his six-day plan of
escape.

Tonight, he wrote, read six more chapters of _War and Peace_. At four in
the morning have hot black coffee. At four-fifteen take cards from pack
and play ten games of solitaire. This should take until six-thirty when
– more coffee. At seven o’clock, listen to early morning programmes from
Earth, if the receiving equipment on the radio works at all. Does it?

He tried the radio receiver. It was dead.

Well, he wrote, from seven o’clock until eight, sing all the songs you
remember, make your own entertainment. From eight until nine think about
Helen King. Remember Helen. On second thought, think about Helen right
now.

He marked that out with his pencil.

The rest of the days were set down in minute detail.

He checked the medical kit. There were several packets of tablets that
would keep you awake. One tablet an hour every hour for six days. He
felt quite confident.

‘Here’s mud in your evil eye, Iorr, Tylle!’

He swallowed one of the stay-awake tablets with a scalding mouth of
black coffee.

Well, with one thing and another it was Tolstoy or Balzac, gin-rummy,
coffee, tablets, walking, more Tolstoy, more Balzac, more gin-rummy,
more solitaire. The first day passed, as did the second and the third.

On the fourth day he lay quietly in the shade of a rock, counting to a
thousand by fives, then by tens, to keep his mind occupied and awake.
His eyes were so tired he had to bathe them frequently in cool water. He
couldn’t read, he was bothered with splitting headaches. He was so
exhausted he couldn’t move. He was numb with medicine. He resembled a
waxen dummy stuffed with things to preserve him in a state of horrified
wakefulness. His eyes were glass, his tongue a rusted pike, his fingers
felt as if they were gloved in needles and fur.

He followed the hand of his watch. One second less to wait, he thought.
Two seconds, three seconds, four, five, ten, thirty seconds. A whole
minute. Now an hour less time to wait. Oh, ship, hurry on thy appointed
round!

He began to laugh softly.

What would happen if he just gave up, drifted off into sleep?

Sleep, ah, sleep; perchance to dream. All the world a stage … What if he
gave up the unequal struggle, lapsed down?

Eeeeeeeeeeee, the high, shrill warning sound of battle metal.

He shivered. His tongue moved in his dry, burry mouth.

Iorr and Tylle would battle out their ancient battle.

Leonard Sale would become quite insane.

And whichever won the battle would take this ruin of an insane man, the
shaking, laughing wild body, and wander it across the face of this world
for ten, twenty years, occupying it, striding in it, pompous, holding
court, making grand gestures, ordering heads severed, calling on inward,
unseen dancing girls. Leonard Sale, what remained of him, would be led
off to some hidden cave, there to be infested with wars and worms of
wars for twenty insane years, occupied and prostituted by old and
outlandish thoughts.

When the rescue ship arrived it would find nothing. Sale would be hidden
somewhere by a triumphant army in his head. Hidden in some cleft of
rock, placed there like a nest for Iorr to lie upon in evil occupation.

The thought of it almost broke him in half.

Twenty years of insanity. Twenty years of torture, doing what you don’t
want to do. Twenty years of wars raging and being split apart, twenty
years of nausea and trembling.

His head sank down between his knees. His eyes snapped and cracked and
made soft noises. His eardrum popped tiredly.

_Sleep, sleep_, sang soft sea voices.

I’ll – I’ll make a proposition with you, listen, thought Leonard Sale.
You, Iorr, you, too, Tylle! Iorr, you can occupy me on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays. Tylle, you can take me over on Sundays,
Tuesdays, and Saturday. Thursday is maid’s night out. Okay?

Eeeeeeeeeee, sang the sea tides, seething in his brain.

Ohhhhhhhhhhhhhhh, sang the distant voices softly, soft.

What’ll you say, is it a _bargain_, Iorr, Tylle?

_No_, said a voice.

_No_, said another.

Greedy, both of you, greedy! complained Sale. A pox on both your houses!

He slept.

He _was_ Iorr, jewelled rings on his hands. He arose beside his rocket
and held out his fingers, commanding blind armies. He was Iorr, ancient
ruler of jewelled warriors.

He _was_ Tylle, lover of women, killer of dogs!

With some hidden bit of awareness, his hand crept to the holster at his
hip. The sleeping hand withdrew the gun there. The hand lifted, the gun
pointed.

The armies of Tylle and Iorr gave battle.

The gun exploded.

The bullet tore across Sale’s forehead, awakening him.

He stayed awake for another six hours, getting over his latest seige. He
knew it to be hopeless now. He washed and bandaged the wound he had
given himself. He wished he had aimed straighter and it was all over. He
watched the sky. Two more days. Two more. Come on, ship, come on. He was
heavy with sleeplessness.

No use. At the end of six hours he was raving badly. He took the gun up
and put it down and took it up again, put it against his head, tightened
his hand on the trigger, changed his mind, looked at the sky again.

Night settled. He tried to read, threw the book away. He tore it up and
burned it, just to have something to do.

So tired. In another hour, he decided. If nothing happens, I’ll _kill_
myself. This is for certain now. I’ll _do_ it, this time.

He got the gun ready and laid it on the ground next to himself.

He was very calm now, though tired. It would be over and done. He would
be dead.

He watched the minute hand of his watch. One minute, five minutes,
twenty-five minutes.

The flame appeared on the sky.

It was so unbelievable he started to cry.

‘A rocket,’ he said, standing up. ‘A rocket!’ he cried, rubbing his
eyes. He ran forward.

The flame brightened, grew, came down.

He waved frantically, running forward, leaving his gun, his supplies,
everything behind. ‘You _see_ that, Iorr, Tylle! You savages, you
monsters, I beat you! I _won_ ! They’re coming to rescue me now! I’ve
won, damn you!’

He laughed harshly at the rocks and the sky and the backs of his hands.

The rocket landed. Leonard Sale stood swaying, waiting for the door to
lid open.

‘Good-bye, Iorr, good-bye, Tylle!’ he shouted in triumph, grinning, eyes
hot.

Eeeeeee, sang a diminishing roar in time.

Ahhhhhhhh, voices faded.

The rocket flipped wide its airlock. Two men jumped out.

‘Sale?’ they called. ‘We’re Ship ACDN13. Intercepted your SOS and
decided to pick you up ourselves. The Marsport ship won’t get through
until day after tomorrow. We want a spot of rest ourselves. Thought it’d
be good to spend the night here, pick you up, and go on.’

‘No,’ said Sale, face melting with terror. ‘No spend night –’

He couldn’t talk. He fell to the ground.

‘Quick!’ said a voice, in the bleary vortex over him. ‘Give him a shot
of food liquid, another of sedative. He needs sustenance and rest.’

‘No rest!’ screamed Sale.

‘Delirious,’ said one man, softly.

‘No sleep!’ screamed Sale.

‘There, there,’ said the man gently. A needle poked into Sale’s arm.

Sale thrashed. ‘No sleep, go!’ he mouthed horribly. ‘Oh, go!’

‘Delirious,’ said one man. ‘Shock.’

‘No sedatives!’ screamed Sale.

The sedative flowed into him.

Eeeeeeeee, sang the ancient winds.

Ahhhhhhhhhh, sang the ancient seas.

‘No sedative, no sleep, please, don’t, don’t, don’t!’ screamed Sale,
trying to get up. ‘You – don’t understand!’

‘Take it easy, old man, you’re safe among us now, nothing to worry
about,’ said the rescuer above him.

Leonard Sale slept. The two men stood over him.

As they watched, Sale’s features changed violently. He groaned and cried
and snarled in his sleep. His face was riven with emotion. It was the
face of a saint, a sinner, a fiend, a monster, a darkness, a light, one,
many, an army, a vacuum, all all!

He writhed in his sleep.

Eeeeeeeee! the sound burst from his mouth. Ahhhhhhhhhh! he screamed.

‘What’s wrong with him?’ asked one of the two rescuers.

‘I don’t know. More sedatives?’

‘More sedatives. Nerves. He needs more sleep.’

They stuck the needle in his arm. Sale writhed and spat and moaned.

Then, suddenly, he was dead.

He lay there, the two men over him. ‘What a shame,’ said one of them.
‘Can you figure that?’

‘Shock. Poor guy. What a pity.’ They covered his face. ‘Did you ever see
a face like that?’

‘Loneliness. Shock.’

‘Yes. Lord, what an expression! I hope never to see a face like _that_
again.’

‘What a shame, waiting for us, and we arrive, and he dies anyway.’

They glanced around. ‘What shall we do? Shall we spend the night?’

‘Yes. It’s good to be out of the ship.’

‘We’ll bury him first, of course.’

‘Naturally.’

‘And spend the night in the open, with good air, right? Good to be in
the open again. After two weeks in that damned ship.’

‘Right. I’ll find a spot for him. You start supper, eh?’

‘Done.’

‘Should be good sleeping tonight.’

‘Fine, fine.’

They made a grave and said a word over it. They drank their evening
coffee silently. They looked at the lovely sky and the bright and
beautiful stars.

‘What a night,’ they said, lying down.

‘Pleasant dreams,’ said one, rolling over.

And the other replied, ‘Pleasant dreams.’

They slept.


The Time of Going Away

THE thought was three days and three nights growing. During the days he
carried it like a ripening peach in his head. During the nights he let
it take flesh and sustenance, hung out on the silent air, coloured by
country moon and country stars. He walked around and around the thought
in the silence before dawn. On the fourth morning he reached up an
invisible hand, picked it, and swallowed it whole.

He arose as swiftly as possible and burned all his old letters, packed a
few clothes in a very small case, and put on his midnight suit and a tie
the shiny colour of ravens’ feathers, as if he were in mourning. He
sensed his wife in the door behind him watching his little play with the
eyes of a critic who may leap onstage any moment and stop the show. When
he brushed past her, he murmured, ‘Excuse me.’

‘Excuse me!’ she cried. ‘Is that all you say? Creeping around here,
planning a trip!’

‘I didn’t plan it; it happened,’ he said. ‘Three days ago I got this
premonition. I knew I was going to die.’

‘Stop that kind of talk,’ she said. ‘It makes me nervous.’

The horizon was mirrored softly in his eyes. ‘I hear my blood running
slow. Listening to my bones is like standing in an attic hearing the
beams shift and the dust settle.’

‘You’re only seventy-five,’ said his wife. ‘You stand on your own two
legs, see, hear, eat, and sleep good, don’t you? What’s all this talk?’

‘It’s the natural tongue of existence speaking to me,’ said the old man.
‘Civilization’s got us too far away from our natural selves. Now you
take the pagan islanders –’

‘I won’t!’

‘Everyone knows the pagan islanders get a feel for when it’s time to
die. They walk around shaking hands with friends and give away all their
earthly goods –’

‘Don’t their wives have a say?’

‘They give some of their earthly goods to their wives.’

‘I should think so!’

‘And some to their friends –’

‘I’ll argue that!’

‘And some to their friends. Then they paddle their canoes off into the
sunset and never return.’

His wife looked high up along him as if he were timber ripe for cutting.
‘Desertion!’ she said.

‘No, no, Mildred; death, pure and simple. The Time of Going Away, they
call it.’

‘Did anyone ever charter a canoe and follow to see what those fools were
up to?’

‘Of course not,’ said the old man, mildly irritated. ‘That would spoil
everything.’

‘You mean they had other wives and pretty friends off on another
island?’

‘No, no, it’s just a man needs aloneness, serenity, when his juices turn
cold.’

‘If you could prove those fools really died, I’d shut up.’ His wife
squinted one eye. ‘Anyone ever _find_ their bones on those far islands?’

‘The fact is that they just sail into the sunset like animals who sense
the Great Time at hand. Beyond that, I don’t wish to know.’

‘Well, _I_ know,’ said the old woman. ‘You been reading more articles in
the _National Geographic_ about the Elephant Bone-yard.’

‘Graveyard, not Boneyard!’ he shouted.

‘Graveyard, Boneyard. I thought I burned those magazines; you got some
hid?’

‘Look here, Mildred,’ he said severely, seizing the suitcase again. ‘My
mind points north; nothing you say can head me south. I’m tuned to the
infinite secret wellspring of the primitive soul.’

‘You’re tuned to whatever you read last in that bog-trotters’ gazette!’
She pointed a finger at him. ‘You think I got no memory?’

His shoulders fell. ‘Let’s not go through the list again, please.’

‘What about the Hairy Mammoth episode?’ she asked. ‘When they found that
frozen elephant in the Russian tundra thirty years back? You and Sam
Hertz, that old fool, with your fine idea of running off to Siberia to
corner the world market in canned edible hairy mammoth? You think I
don’t still hear you saying, “Imagine the prices members of the National
Geographic Society will pay to have the tender meat of the Siberian
hairy mammoth, ten thousand years old, ten thousand years extinct, right
in their homes!” You think; my scars have healed from that?’

‘I see them clearly,’ he said.

‘You think I’ve forgotten the time you went out to find the Lost Tribe
of the Osseos, or whatever, in Wisconsin some place where you could
dogtrot to town Saturday nights and tank up, and fell in that quarry and
broke your leg and laid there three nights?’

‘Your recall,’ he said, ‘is total.’

‘Then what’s this about pagan natives and the Time of Going Away? I’ll
tell you what it is – it’s the Time of Staying at Home! It’s the time
when fruit don’t fall off the trees into your hand, you got to walk to
the store for it. And why do we _walk_ to the store for it? Someone in
this house, I’ll name no names, took the car apart like a clock some
years back and left it strewn all down the yard. I’ve raised auto parts
in my garden ten years come Thursday. Ten more years and all that’s left
of our car is little heaps of rust. Look out that window! It’s
leaf-raking-and-burning time. It’s
chopping-trees-and-sawing-wood-for-the-fire time. It’s
clean-out-stoves-and-hang-storm-doors-and-windows time. It’s
shingle-the-roof time, _that’s_ what it is, and if you think you’re out
to escape it, think again!’

He placed his hand to his chest. ‘It pains me you have so little trust
in my natural sensitivity to oncoming Doom.’

‘It pains _me_ that _National Geographies_ fall in the hands of crazy
old men. I see you read those pages then fall into those dreams I always
have to sweep up after. Those _Geographic_ and _Popular Mechanics_
publishers should be forced to see all the half-finished rowboats,
helicopters, and one-man batwing gliders in our attic, garage, and
cellar. Not only _see_, but cart them home!’

‘Chatter on,’ he said. ‘I stand before you, a white stone sinking in the
tides of Oblivion. For God’s sake, woman, can’t I drag myself off to die
in peace?’

‘Plenty of time for Oblivion when I find you stone cold across the
kindling pile.’

‘Jesting Pilate!’ he said. ‘Is recognition of one’s own mortality
nothing but vanity?’

‘You’re chewing it like a plug of tobacco.’

‘Enough!’ he said. ‘My earthly goods are stacked on the back porch. Give
them to the Salvation Army.’

‘The _Geographies_ too?’

‘Yes, damn it, the _Geographies_ ! Now stand aside!’

‘If you’re going to die, you won’t need that suitcase full of clothing,’
she said.

‘Hands off, woman! It may take some few hours. Am I to be stripped of my
last creature comforts? This should be a tender scene of parting.
Instead – bitter recriminations, sarcasm, doubt strewn to every wind.’

‘All right,’ she said.’ Go spend a cold night in the woods.’

‘I’m not necessarily going to the woods.’

‘Where else is there for a man in Illinois to go to die?’

‘Well,’ he said, and paused. ‘Well, there’s always the open highway.’

‘And be run down, of course; I’d forgotten that.’

‘No, no!’ He squeezed his eyes shut, then opened them again. ‘The empty
side-roads leading nowhere, everywhere, through night forests,
wilderness, to distant lakes ’

‘Now, you’re not going to go rent a canoe, are you, and paddle off?
Remember the time you tipped over and almost drowned at Fireman’s Pier?’

‘Who said anything about canoes?’

‘You did! Pagan islanders, you said, paddling off into the great
unknown.’

‘That’s the South Seas! Here a man has to strike off on foot to find his
natural source, seek his natural end. I might walk north along the Lake
Michigan shore, the dunes, the wind, the big breakers there.’

‘Willie, Willie,’ she said softly, shaking her head. ‘Oh, Willie,
Willie, what will I do with you?’

He lowered his voice. ‘Just let me have my head,’ he said.

‘Yes,’ she said, quietly. ‘Yes.’ And tears came to her eyes.

‘Now, now,’ he said.

‘Oh, Willie …’ She looked a long while at him. ‘Do you really think with
all your heart you’re not going to live?’

He saw himself reflected, small but perfect, in her eye, and looked away
uneasily. ‘I thought all night about the universal tide that brings man
in and takes him out. Now it’s morning and good-bye.’

‘Good-bye?’ She looked as if she’d never heard the word before.

His voice was unsteady. ‘Of course, if you absolutely insist I stay,
Mildred –’

‘No!’ She braced herself and blew her nose. ‘You feel what you feel; I
can’t fight that!’

‘You _sure_?’ he said.

‘You’re the one that’s sure, Willie,’ she said. ‘Get on along now. Take
your heavy coat; the nights are cold.’

‘But –’ he said.

She ran and brought his coat and kissed his cheek and drew back quickly
before he could enclose her in his bear hug. He stood there working his
mouth, gazing at the big armchair by the fire. She threw open the front
door. ‘You got food?’

‘I won’t need …’ He paused. ‘I got a boiled-ham sandwich and some
pickles in my case. Just one, That’s all I figured I’d…’

And then he was out the door and down the steps and along the path
towards the woods. He turned and was going to say something but thought
better of it, waved, and went on.

‘Now, Will,’ she called. ‘Don’t overdo. Don’t make too much distance the
first hour! You get tired, sit down! You get hungry, eat! And …’

But here she had to stop and turn away and get out her handkerchief.

A moment later, she looked up the path and it looked as though nobody
had passed there in the last ten thousand years. It was so empty she had
to go in and shut the door.

Night-time, nine o’clock, nine-fifteen, stars out, moon round, house
lights strawberry-coloured through the curtains, the chimney blowing
long comet tails of fireworks, sighing warm. Down the chimney, sounds of
pots and pans and cutlery, fire on the hearth, like a great orange cat.
In the kitchen, the big iron cook-stove full of jumping flames, pans
boiling, bubbling, frying, vapours, and steams in the air. From time to
time the old woman turned and her eyes listened and her mouth listened,
wide, to the world outside this house, this fire, and this food.

Nine-thirty and, from a great distance away from the house, a solid
whacking, chunking sound.

The old woman straightened up and laid down a spoon.

Outside, the dull solid blows came again and again in the moonlight. The
sound went on for three or four minutes, during which she hardly moved
except to tighten her mouth or her fists with each solid chunking blow.
When the sounds stopped, she threw herself at the stove, the table,
stirring, pouring, lifting, carrying, setting down.

She finished just as new sounds came from the dark land outside the
windows. Footsteps came slowly up the path, heavy shoes weighed the
front porch.

She went to the door and waited for a knock.

None came.

She waited a full minute.

Outside on the porch a great bulk stirred and shifted from side to side
uneasily.

Finally she sighed and called sharply at the door. ‘Will, is that you
breathing out there?’

No answer. Only a kind of sheepish silence behind the door.

She snatched the door wide.

The old man stood there, an incredible stack of cordwood in his arms.
His voice came from behind the stack.

‘Saw smoke in the chimney; figured you might need wood,’ he said.

She stood aside. He came in and placed the wood carefully by the hearth,
not looking at her.

She looked out on the porch and picked up the suitcase and brought it in
and shut the door.

She saw him sitting at the dinner table.

She stirred the soup on the stove to a great boiling whirl.

‘Roast beef in the oven?’ he asked quietly.

She opened the oven door. The steam breathed across the room to wrap him
up. He closed his eyes, seated there, bathed.

‘What’s that other smell, the burning?’ he asked a moment later.

She waited, back turned, and finally said, ‘_National Geographies_.’

He nodded slowly, saying nothing.

Then the food was on the table, warm and tremorous, and there was a
moment of silence after she sat down and looked at him. She shook her
head. She looked at him. Then she shook her head again silently.

‘Do you want to ask the blessing?’ she said.

‘_You_,’ he said.

They sat there in the warm room by the bright fire and bowed their heads
and closed their eyes. She smiled and began.

‘Thank you, Lord …’


The Gift

TOMORROW would be Christmas and even while the three of them rode to the
rocket port, the mother and father were worried. It was the boy’s first
flight into space, his very first time in a rocket, and they wanted
everything to be perfect. So when, at the customs table, they were
forced to leave behind his gift which exceeded the weight limit by no
more than a few ounces and the little tree with the lovely white
candles, they felt themselves deprived of the season and their love.

The boy was waiting for them in the Terminal room. Walking towards him,
after their unsuccessful clash with the Interplanetary officials, the
mother and father whispered to each other.

‘What shall we do?’

‘Nothing, nothing. What _can_ we do?’

‘Silly rules!’

‘And he so wanted the tree!’

The siren gave a great howl and people pressed forward into the Mars
Rocket. The mother and father walked at the very last, their small pale
son between them, silent.

‘I’ll think of something,’ said the father.

‘What …?’ asked the boy.

And the rocket took off and they were flung headlong into dark space.

The rocket moved and left fire behind and left Earth behind on which the
date was 24 December 2052, heading out into a place where there was no
time at all, no month, no year, no hour. They slept away the rest of the
first ‘day’. Near midnight, by their Earth-time New York watches, the
boy awoke and said, ‘I want to go look out the porthole.’

There was only one port, a ‘window’ of immensely thick glass, of some
size, up on the next deck.

‘Not quite yet,’ said the father. ‘I’ll take you up later.’

‘I want to see where we are and where we’re going.’

‘I want you to wait, for a reason,’ said the father.

He had been lying awake, turning this way and that, thinking of the
abandoned gift, the problem of the season, the lost tree and the white
candles. And at last, sitting up, no more than five minutes ago, he
believed he had found a plan. He need only carry it out and this journey
would be fine and joyous indeed.

‘Son,’ he said, ‘in exactly one half-hour it will be Christmas.’

‘Oh,’ said the mother, dismayed that he had mentioned it. Somehow she
had rather hoped the boy would forget.

The boy’s face grew feverish and his lips trembled. ‘I know, I know.
Will I get a present, will I? Will I have a tree? You promised –’

‘Yes, yes, all that, and more,’ said the father.

The mother started. ‘But –’

‘I mean it,’ said the father. ‘I really mean it. All and more, much
more. Excuse me, now. I’ll be back.”

He left them for about twenty minutes. When he came back he was smiling.
‘Almost time.’

‘Can I hold your watch?’ asked the boy, and the watch was handed over
and he held it ticking in his fingers as the rest of the hour drifted by
in fire and silence and unfelt motion.

‘It’s Christmas _now_ ! Christmas! Where’s my present?’

‘Here we go,’ said the father, and took his boy by the shoulder and led
him from the room, down the hall, up a ramp-way, his wife following.

‘I don’t understand,’ she kept saying.

‘You will. Here we are,’ said the father.

They had stopped at the closed door of a large cabin. The father tapped
three times and then twice, in a code. The door opened and the light in
the cabin went out and there was a whisper of voices.

‘Go on in, son,’ said the father.

‘It’s dark.’

‘I’ll hold your hand. Come on, mama.’

They stepped into the room and the door shut, and the room was very dark
indeed. And before them loomed a great glass eye, the porthole, a window
four feet high and six feet wide, from which they could look out into
space.

The boy gasped.

Behind him, the father and the mother gasped with him, and then in the
dark room some people began to sing.

‘Merry Christmas, son,’ said the father.

And the voices in the room sang the old, the familiar carols, and the
boy moved forward slowly until his face was pressed against the cool
glass of the port. And he stood there for a long long time, just looking
and looking out into space and the deep night at the burning and the
burning of ten billion billion white and lovely candles….


The Little Mice

‘THEY’RE very odd,’ I said. ‘The little Mexican couple.’

‘How do you mean?’ asked my wife.

"Never a sound,’ I said. ‘Listen.’

Ours was a house deep back in among tenements, to which another
half-house had been added. When my wife and I purchased the house, we
rented the additional quarter which lay walled up against one side of
our parlour. Now, listening at this particular wall, we heard our hearts
beat.

‘I know they’re home,’ I whispered. ‘But in the three years they’ve
lived here I’ve never heard a dropped pan, a spoken word, or the sound
of a light switch. Good God, what are they _doing_ in there?’

‘I’d never thought,’ said my wife. ‘It _is_ peculiar.’

‘Only one light on, that same dim little blue 25-watt bulb they burn in
the parlour. If you walk by and peer in their front door, there _he_ is,
sitting in his armchair, not saying a word, his hands in his lap. There
_she_ is, sitting in the other armchair, looking at him, saying nothing.
They don’t move.’

‘At first glance I always think they’re not home,’ said my wife. ‘Their
parlour’s so dark. But if you stare long enough, your eyes get used to
it and you can make them out, sitting there.’

‘Some day,’ I said, ‘I’m going to run in, turn on their lights, and
yell! My God, if _I_ can’t stand their silence, how can they? They can
talk, can’t they?’

‘When he pays the rent each month, he says hello.’

‘What else?’

‘Good-bye.’

I shook my head. ‘When we meet in the alley he smiles and runs.’

My wife and I sat down for an evening of reading, the radio, and talk.
‘Do they have a radio?’

‘No radio, television, telephone. Not a book, magazine, or paper in
their house.’

‘Ridiculous!’

‘Don’t get so excited.’

‘I know, but you can’t sit in a dark room two or three years and not
speak, not listen to a radio, not read or even eat, can you? I’ve never
smelled a steak, or an egg frying. Damn it, I don’t believe I’ve ever
heard them go to bed!’

‘They’re doing it to mystify us, dear.’

‘They’re succeeding!’

I went for a walk around the block. It was a nice summer evening.
Returning I glanced idly in their front door. The dark silence was
there, and the heavy shapes, sitting, and the little blue light burning.
I stood a long time, finishing my cigarette. It was only in turning to
go that I saw him in the doorway, looking out with his bland, plump
face. He didn’t move. He just stood there, watching me.

‘Evening,’ I said.

Silence. After a moment, he turned, moving away into the dark room.

In the morning, the little Mexican left the house at seven o’clock
alone, hurrying down the alley, observing the same silence he kept in
his rooms. She followed at eight o’clock, walking carefully, all lumpy
under her dark coat, a black hat balanced on her frizzy, beauty parlour
hair. They had gone to work this way, remote and silent, for years.

‘Where do they work?’ I asked, at breakfast.

‘He’s a blast furnaceman at U.S. Steel here. She sews in a dress loft
somewhere.’

‘That’s hard work.’

I typed a few pages of my novel, read, idled, typed some more. At five
in the afternoon I saw the little Mexican woman come home, unlock her
door, hurry inside, hook the screen, and lock the door tight.

He arrived at six sharp, in a rush. Once on their back porch, however,
he became infinitely patient. Quietly, raking his hand over the screen,
lightly, like a fat mouse scrabbling, he waited. At last she let him in.
I did not see their mouths move.

Not a sound during supper time. No frying. No rattle of dishes. Nothing.

I saw the small blue lamp go on.

‘That’s how he is,’ said my wife, ‘when he pays the rent. Raps so
quietly I don’t hear. I just happen to glance out of the window and
there he is. God knows how long he’s waited, standing, sort of
“nibbling” at the door.’

Two nights later, on a beautiful July evening the little Mexican man
came out on the back porch and looked at me, working in the garden and
said, ‘You’re crazy!’ He turned to my wife. ‘You’re crazy, too!’ He
waved his plump hand, quietly. ‘I don’t like you. Too much _noise_. I
don’t like you. You’re crazy.’

He went back into his little house.

August, September, October, November. The ‘mice’, as we now referred to
them, lay quietly in their dark nest. Once, my wife gave him some old
magazines with his rent receipt. He accepted these politely, with a
smile and a bow, but no word. An hour later she saw him put the
magazines in the yard incinerator and strike a match.

The next day he paid the rent three months in advance, no doubt figuring
that he would only have to see us up close once every twelve weeks. When
I saw him on the street, he crossed quickly to the other side to greet
an imaginary friend. She, similarly, ran by me, smiling wildly,
bewildered, nodding. I never got nearer than twenty yards to her. If
there was plumbing to be fixed in their house, they went silently forth
on their own, not telling us, and brought back a plumber who worked, it
seemed, with a flashlight.

‘God damnedest thing,’ he told me when I saw him in the alley. ‘Damn
fool place there hasn’t got any light bulbs in the sockets. When I asked
where they all were, damn it, they just _smiled_ at me!’

I lay at night thinking about the little mice. Where were they from?
Mexico, yes. What part? A farm, a small village, somewhere by a river?
Certainly no city or town. But a place where there were stars and the
normal lights and darknesses, the goings and comings of the moon and the
sun they had known the better part of their lives. Yet here they were,
far far away from home, in an impossible city, he sweating out the hell
of blast furnaces all day, she bent to jittering needles in a sewing
loft. They came home then to this block, through a loud city, avoided
clanging street-cars and saloons that screamed like red parrots along
their way. Through a million shriekings they ran back to their parlour,
their blue light, their comfortable chairs, and their silence. I often
thought of this. Late at night I felt if I put out my hand, in the dark
of my own bedroom, I might feel adobe, and hear a cricket, and a river
running by under the moon, and someone singing, softly, to a faint
guitar.

Late one December evening the next door tenement burned. Flames roared
at the sky, bricks fell in avalanches, and sparks littered the roof
where the quiet mice lived.

I pounded their door.

‘Fire!’ I cried. ‘Fire!’

They sat motionless, in their blue-lighted room.

I pounded violently. ‘You _hear_? Fire!’

The fire engines arrived. They gushed water into the tenement. More
bricks fell. Four of them smashed holes in the little house. I climbed
to the roof, extinguished the small fires there and scrambled down, my
face dirty and my hands cut. The door to the little house opened. The
quiet little Mexican and his wife stood in the doorway, solid and
unmoved.

‘Let me in!’ I cried. ‘There’s a hole in your roof; some sparks may have
fallen in your bedroom!’

I pulled the door wide, pushed past them.

‘No!’ the little man grunted.

‘Ah!’ the little woman ran in a circle like a broken toy.

I was inside with a flashlight. The little man seized my arm.

I smelled his breath.

And then my flashlight shot through the rooms of their house. Light
sparkled on a hundred wine bottles standing in the hall, two hundred
bottles shelved in the kitchen, six dozen along the parlour wall-boards,
more of the same on bedroom bureaus and in closets. I do not know if I
was more impressed with the hole in the bedroom ceiling or the endless
glitter of so many bottles. I lost count. It was like an invasion of
gigantic shining beetles, struck dead, deposited, and left by some
ancient disease.

In the bedroom, I felt the little man and woman behind me in the
doorway. I heard their loud breathing and I could feel their eyes. I
raised the beam of my flashlight away from the glittering bottles, I
focused it, carefully, and for the rest of my visit, on the hole in the
yellow ceiling.

The little woman began to cry. She cried softly. Nobody moved.

The next morning they left.

Before we even knew they were going, they were half down the alley at
six a.m. carrying their luggage, which was light enough to be entirely
empty. I tried to stop them. I talked to them. They were old friends, I
said. Nothing had changed, I said. They had nothing to do with the fire,
I said, or the roof. They were innocent bystanders, I _insisted_ ! I
would fix the roof myself, no charge, no charge to them! But they did
not look at me. They looked at the house and at the open end of the
alley, ahead of them, while I talked. Then, when I stopped they nodded
to the alley as if agreeing that it was time to go, and walked off, and
then began to run, it seemed, away from me, towards the street where
there were street-cars and buses and automobiles and many loud avenues
stretching in a maze. They hurried proudly, though, heads up, not
looking back.

It was only by accident I ever met them again. At Christmastime, one
evening, I saw the little man running quietly along the twilight street
ahead of me. On a personal whim, I followed. When he turned, I turned.
At last, five blocks away from our old neighbourhood, he scratched
quietly at the door of a little white house. I saw the door open, shut,
and lock him in. As night settled over the tenement city, a small light
burned like blue mist in the tiny living-room as I passed. I thought I
saw, but probably imagined, two silhouettes there, he on his side of the
room in his own particular chair, and she on her side of the room,
sitting, sitting in the dark, and one or two bottles beginning to
collect on the floor behind the chairs, and not a sound, not a sound
between them. Only the silence.

I did not go up and knock. I strolled by. I walked on along the avenue,
listening to the parrot Cafés scream. I bought a newspaper, a magazine,
and a quarter-edition book. Then I went home to where all the lights
were lit and there was warm food upon the table.


The Sunset Harp

TOM, knee-deep in the waves, a piece of driftwood in his hand, listened.

The house, up towards the Coast Highway in the late afternoon, was
silent. The sounds of closets being rummaged, suitcase locks snapping,
vases being smashed, and of a final door crashing shut, all had faded
away.

Chico, standing on the pale sand, flourished his wire-strainer to shake
out a harvest of lost coins. After a moment, without glancing at Tom, he
said, ‘Let her go.’

So it was every year. For a week or a month, their house would have
music swelling from the windows, there would be new geraniums potted on
the porch-rail, new paint on the doors and steps. The clothes on the
wire-line changed from harlequin pants to sheath-dresses to handmade
Mexican frocks like white waves breaking behind the house. Inside, the
paintings on the walls shifted from imitation Matisse to pseudo-Italian
Renaissance. Sometimes, looking up, he would see a woman drying her hair
like a bright yellow flag on the wind. Sometimes the flag was black or
red. Sometimes the woman was tall, sometimes short, against the sky. But
there was never more than one woman at a time. And, at last, a day like
today came.…

Tom placed his driftwood on the growing pile near where Chico sifted the
billion footprints left by people long vanished from their holidays.

‘Chico. What are we doing here?’

‘Living the life of Reilly, boy!’

‘I don’t feel like Reilly, Chico.’

‘Work at it, boy!’

Tom saw the house a month from now, the flower-pots blowing dust, the
walls hung with empty squares, only sand carpeting the floors. The rooms
would echo like shells in the wind. And all night every night bedded in
separate rooms he and Chico would hear a tide falling away and away down
a long shore, leaving no trace.

Tom nodded, imperceptibly. Once a year he himself brought a nice girl
here, knowing she was right at last and that in no time they would be
married. But his women always stole silently away before dawn, feeling
they had been mistaken for someone else, not being able to play the
part. Chico’s friends left like vacuum-cleaners, with a terrific drag,
roar, rush, leaving no lint unturned, no clam unprized of its pearl,
taking their purses with them like toy-dogs which Chico had petted as he
opened their jaws to count their teeth.

‘That’s four women so far this year.’

‘Okay, referee.’ Chico grinned. ‘Show me the way to the showers.’

‘Chico –’ Tom bit his lower lip, then went on. ‘I been thinking. Why
don’t we split up?’

Chico just looked at him.

‘I mean,’ said Tom, quickly, ‘maybe we’d have better luck, alone.’

‘Well, I’ll be goddamned,’ said Chico, slowly, gripping the strainer in
his big fists before him. ‘Look here, boy, don’t you know the facts? You
and me, we’ll be here come the year 2,000. A couple of crazy dumb old
gooney-birds drying their bones in the sun. Nothing’s ever going to
happen to us now, Tom, it’s too late. Get that through your head and
shut up.’

Tom swallowed and looked steadily at the other man. ‘I’m thinking of
leaving – next week.’

‘Shut up, shut up, and get to work!’

Chico gave the sand an angry showering rake that tilled him forty-three
cents in dimes, pennies, and nickels. He stared blindly at the coins
shimmering down the wires like a pinball game all afire.

Tom did not move, holding his breath.

They both seemed to be waiting for something.

The something happened.

‘Hey … hey … hey …’

From a long way off down the coast a voice called.

The two men turned slowly.

‘Hey … hey … oh, hey …!’

A boy was running, yelling, waving, along the shore two hundred yards
away. There was something in his voice that made Tom feel suddenly cold.
He held on to his own arms, waiting.

‘Hey!’

The boy pulled up, gasping, pointing back along the shore.

‘A woman, a funny woman, by the North Rock!’

‘A woman!’ The words exploded from Chico’s mouth and he began to laugh.
‘Oh, no, no!’

‘What you mean, a “funny” woman?’ asked Tom.

‘I don’t know,’ cried the boy, his eyes wide. ‘You got to come see!
Awful funny!’

‘You mean “drowned”?’

‘Maybe! She came out of the water, she’s lying on the shore, you got to
see, yourself … funny …’ The boy’s voice died. He gazed off north again.
‘She’s got a fish’s tail.’

Chico laughed. ‘Not before supper, please.’

‘Please!’ cried the boy, dancing now. ‘No lie! Oh, hurry!’

He ran off, sensed he was not followed, and looked back in dismay.

Tom felt his lips move. ‘Boy wouldn’t run this far for a joke, would he,
Chico?’

‘People have run farther for less.’

Tom started walking. ‘All right, son.’

‘Thanks, mister, oh thanks!’

The boy ran. Twenty yards up the coast, Tom looked back. Behind him,
Chico squinted, shrugged, dusted his hands wearily, and followed.

They moved north along the twilight beach, their skin weathered in tiny
lizard folds about their burnt pale-water eyes, looking younger for
their hair cut close to the skull so you could not see the grey. There
was a fair wind and the ocean rose and fell with prolonged concussions.

‘What,’ said Tom, ‘what if we get to North Rock and it’s true? The ocean
_has_ washed some _thing_ up?’

But before Chico could answer Tom was gone, his mind racing down coasts
Uttered with horseshoe crabs, sand-dollars, starfish, kelp, and stone.
From all the times he’d talked on what lives in the sea, the names
returned with the breathing fall of waves. Argonauts, they whispered,
codlings, pollacks, hound-fish, tautog, tench, sea-elephant, they
whispered, gillings, flounders, and beluga, the white whale and grampus,
the sea-dog … always you thought how these must look from their
deep-sounding names. Perhaps you would never in your life see them rise
from the salt meadows beyond the safe limits of the shore, but they were
there, and their names, with a thousand others, made pictures. And you
looked and wished you were a frigate-bird that might fly nine thousand
miles around to return some year with the full size of the ocean in your
head.

‘Oh, quick!’ The boy had run back to peer in Tom’s face. ‘It might be
gone!’

‘Keep your shirt on, boy,’ said Chico.

They came around the North Rock. A second boy stood there, looking down.

Perhaps from the corner of his eye, Tom saw something on the sand that
made him hesitate to look straight at it, but fix instead on the face of
the boy standing there. The boy was pale and he seemed not to breathe.
On occasion he remembered to take a breath, his eyes focused, but the
more they saw there on the sand the more they took time off from
focusing and turned blank and looked stunned. When the ocean came in
over his tennis shoes, he did not move or notice.

Tom glanced away from the boy to the sand.

And Tom’s face, in the next moment, became the face of the boy. His
hands assumed the same curl at his sides and his mouth moved to open and
stay half-open and his eyes, which were light in colour, seemed to
bleach still more with so much looking.

The setting sun was ten minutes above the sea.

‘A big wave came in and went out,’ said the first boy, ‘and here she
was.’

They looked at the woman lying there.

Her hair was very long and it lay on the beach like the threads of an
immense harp. The water stroked along the threads and floated them up
and let them down, each time in a different fan and silhouette. The hair
must have been five or six feet long and now it was strewn on the hard
wet sand and it was the colour of limes.

Her face …

The men bent half down in wonder.

Her face was white sand sculpture, with a few water drops shimmering on
it like summer rain upon a cream-coloured rose. Her face was that moon
which when seen by day is pale and unbelievable in the blue sky. It was
milk-marble veined with faint violet in the temples. The eyelids, closed
down upon the eyes, were powdered with a faint water-colour, as if the
eyes beneath gazed through the fragile tissue of the lids and saw them
standing there above her looking down and looking down. The mouth was a
pale flushed sea-rose, full and closed upon itself. And her neck was
slender and white and her breasts were small and white, now covered,
uncovered, covered, uncovered in the flow of water, the ebb of water,
the flow, the ebb, the flow. And the breasts were flushed at their tips,
and her body was startlingly white, almost an illumination, a
white-green lightning against the sand. And as the water shifted her,
her skin glinted like the surface of a pearl.

The lower half of her body changed itself from white to very pale blue,
from very pale blue to pale green, from pale green to emerald green, to
moss and lime green, to scintillas and sequins all dark green, all
flowing away in a fount, a curve, a rush of light and dark, to end in a
lacy fan, a spread of foam and jewel on the sand. The two halves of this
creature were so joined as to reveal no point of fusion where pearl
woman, woman of a whiteness made of cream-water and clear sky merged
with that half which belonged to the amphibious slide and rush of
current that came up on the shore and shelved down the shore, tugging
its half towards its proper home. The woman was the sea, the sea was
woman. There was no flaw, or seam, no wrinkle or stitch; the illusion,
if illusion it was, held perfectly together and the blood from one moved
into and through and mingled with what must have been the ice-waters of
the other.

‘I wanted to run get help.’ The first boy seemed not to want to raise
his voice. ‘But Skip said she was dead and there’s no help for that. Is
she?’

‘She was never alive,’ said Chico. ‘Sure,’ he went on, feeling their
eyes on him suddenly. ‘It’s something left over from a movie-studio.
Liquid rubber skinned over a steel frame. A prop, a dummy.’

‘Oh, no, it’s real!’

‘We’ll find a label somewhere,’ said Chico. ‘Here.’

‘Don’t!’ cried the first boy.

‘Hell.’ Chico touched the body to turn it, and stopped. He knelt there,
his face changing.

‘What’s the matter?’ asked Tom.

Chico took his hand away and looked at it. ‘I was wrong.’ His voice
faded.

Tom took the woman’s wrist. ‘There’s a pulse.’

‘You’re feeling your own heartbeat.’

‘I just don’t know … maybe … maybe …’

The woman was there and her upper body was all moon pearl and tidal
cream and her lower body all slithering ancient green-black coins that
slid upon themselves in the shift of wind and water.

‘There’s a trick somewhere!’ cried Chico, suddenly.

‘No. No!’ Just as suddenly Tom burst in laughter. ‘No trick! My God, my
God, I feel great! I haven’t felt so great since I was a kid!’

They walked slowly around her. A wave touched her white hand so the
fingers faintly softly waved. The gesture was that of someone asking for
another and another wave to come in and lift the fingers and then the
wrist and then the arm and then the head and finally the body and take
all of them together back down out to sea.

Tom.’ Chico’s mouth opened and closed. ‘Why don’t you go get our truck?’

Tom didn’t move.

‘You hear me?’ said Chico.

‘Yes, but –’

‘But what? We could sell this somewhere, I don’t know – the university,
that aquarium at Seal Beach or … well, hell, why couldn’t we just set up
a place? Look.’ He shook Tom’s arm. ‘Drive to the pier. Buy us three
hundred pounds of chipped ice. When you take anything out of the water
you _need_ ice, don’t you?’

‘I never thought.’

‘Think about it! Get moving!’

‘I don’t know, Chico.’

‘What do you mean? She’s real, isn’t she?’ He turned to the boys. ‘_You_
say she’s real, don’t you? Well, then, what are we waiting for?’

‘Chico,’ said Tom. ‘You better go get the ice yourself.’

‘Someone’s got to stay and make sure she don’t go back out with the
tide!’

‘Chico,’ said Tom. ‘I don’t know how to explain. I don’t want to get
that ice for you.’

‘I’ll go myself, then. Look, boys, build the sand up here to keep the
waves back. I’ll give you five bucks apiece. Hop to it!’

The sides of the boys’ faces were bronze-pink from the sun which was
touching the horizon now. Their eyes were a bronze colour looking at
Chico.

‘My God!’ said Chico. ‘This is better than finding ambergris!’ He ran to
the top of the nearest dune, called, ‘Get to work!’ and was gone.

Now Tom and the two boys were left with the lonely woman by the North
Rock and the sun was one-fourth of the way below the western horizon.
The sand and the woman were pink-gold.

‘Just a little line,’ whispered the second boy. He drew his fingernail
along under his own chin, gently. He nodded to the woman. Tom bent again
to see the faint line under either side of her firm white chin, the
small, almost invisible line where the gills were or had been and were
now almost sealed shut, invisible.

He looked at the face and the great strands of hair spread out in a lyre
on the shore.

‘She’s beautiful,’ he said.

The boys nodded without knowing it.

Behind them, a gull leaped up quickly from the dunes. The boys gasped
and turned to stare.

Tom felt himself trembling. He saw the boys were trembling too. A car
horn hooted. Their eyes blinked, suddenly afraid. They looked up towards
the highway.

A wave poured about the body, framing it in a clear white pool of water.

Tom nodded the boys to one side.

The wave moved the body an inch in and two inches out towards the sea.

The next wave came and moved the body two inches in and six inches out
towards the sea.

‘But –’ said the first boy.

Tom shook his head.

The third wave lifted the body two feet down towards the sea. The wave
after that drifted the body another foot down the shingles and the next
three moved it six feet down.

The first boy cried out and ran after it.

Tom reached him and held his arm. The boy looked helpless and afraid and
sad.

For a moment there were no more waves. Tom looked at the woman,
thinking, she’s true, she’s real, she’s mine … but … she’s dead. Or will
be if she stays here.

‘We can’t let her go,’ said the first boy. ‘We can’t, we just can’t!’

The other boy stepped between the woman and the sea. ‘What would we do
with her?’ he wanted to know, looking at Tom, ‘if we kept her?’

The first boy tried to think. ‘We could – we could – ‘He stopped and
shook his head. ‘Oh, my Gosh.’

The second boy stepped out of the way and left a path from the woman to
the sea.

The next wave was a big one. It came in and went out and the sand was
empty. The whiteness was gone and the black diamonds and the great
threads of the harp.

They stood by the edge of the sea, looking out, the man and the two
boys, until they heard the truck driving up on the dunes behind them.

The last of the sun was gone.

They heard footsteps running down the dunes and someone yelling.

They drove back down the darkening beach in the light truck with the
big-treaded tyres, in silence. The two boys sat in the rear on the bags
of chipped ice. After a long while, Chico began to swear steadily, half
to himself, spitting out of the window.

‘Three hundred pounds of ice. Three hundred _pounds_ of ice! What do I
do with it now? And I’m soaked to the skin, soaked! You didn’t even move
when I jumped in and swam out to look around! Idiot, idiot! You haven’t
changed! Like every other time, like always, you do nothing, nothing,
just stand there, stand there, do nothing, nothing, just stare!’

‘And what did you do, I ask, what?’ said Tom, in a tired voice, looking
ahead. ‘The same as you always did, just the same, no different, no
different at all. You should’ve seen yourself.’

They dropped the boys off at their beach-house. The youngest spoke in a
voice you could hardly hear against the wind. ‘Gosh, nobody’ll ever
believe …’

The two men drove down the coast and parked.

Chico sat for two or three minutes waiting for his fist to relax on his
lap, and then he snorted.

‘Hell. I guess things turn out for the best.’ He took a deep breath. ‘It
just came to me. Funny. Twenty, thirty years from now, middle of the
night, our phone’ll ring. It’ll be one of those two boys, grown-up,
calling long-distance from a bar somewhere. Middle of the night, them
calling to ask one question. It’s _true_, isn’t it? they’ll say. It
_did_ happen, didn’t it? Back in 1958, it really happened to _us_? And
we’ll sit there on the edge of the bed, middle of the night, saying,
Sure, boy, sure, it really happened to us in 1958. And they’ll say,
Thanks, and we’ll say, Don’t mention it, any old time. And we’ll all say
good night. And maybe they won’t call again for a couple of years.’

The two men sat on their front-porch steps in the dark.

‘Tom?’

‘What?’

Chico waited a moment.

‘Tom, next week – you’re not moving out.’

Tom thought about it, a cigarette dead in his fingers. And he knew he
would never go away now. For tomorrow and the day after and the day
after the day after that, he knew he would walk down and go swimming
there in all the green lace and the white fires and the dark caverns in
the hollows under the waves. Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow.

‘That’s right, Chico. I’m staying here.’

Now the silver looking-glasses advanced in a crumpling line all along
the coast from a thousand miles north to a thousand miles south. The
mirrors did not reflect so much as one building or one tree or one
highway or one car or even one man himself. The mirrors reflected only
the quiet moon and then shattered into a billion bits of glass that
spread out in a glaze on the shore. Then the sea was dark awhile,
preparing another line of mirrors to rear up and surprise the two men
who sat there for a long time, never once blinking their eyes, waiting.


A Scent of Sarsaparilla

MR WILLIAM FINCH stood quietly in the dark and blowing attic all morning
and afternoon for three days. For three days in late November, he stood
alone, feeling the soft white flakes of Time falling out of the infinite
cold steel sky, silently, softly, feathering the roof and powdering the
eaves. He stood, eyes shut. The attic, wallowed in seas of wind in the
long sunless days, creaked every bone and shook down ancient dusts from
its beams and warped timbers and lathings. It was a mass of sighs and
torments that ached all about him where he stood sniffing its elegant
dry perfumes and feeling of its ancient heritages. Ah. Ah.

Listening, downstairs, his wife Cora could not hear him walk or shift or
twitch. She imagined she could only hear him breathe, slowly out and in,
like a dusty bellows, alone up there in the attic, high in the windy
house.

‘Ridiculous,’ she muttered.

When he hurried down for lunch the third afternoon, he smiled at the
bleak walls, the chipped plates, the scratched silverware, and even at
his wife!

‘What’s all the excitement?’ she demanded.

‘Good spirits is all. Wonderful spirits!’ he laughed. He seemed almost
hysterical with joy. He was seething in a great warm ferment which,
obviously, he had trouble concealing. His wife frowned.

‘What’s that _smell_?’

‘Smell, smell, smell?’ He jerked his greying head back and forth.

‘Sarsaparilla.’ She sniffed suspiciously. ‘That’s what it is!’

‘Oh, it couldn’t be!’ His hysterical happiness stopped as quickly as if
she’d switched him off. He seemed stunned, ill at ease, and suddenly
very careful.

‘Where did you go this morning?’ she asked.

‘You _know_ I was cleaning the attic.’

‘Mooning over a lot of trash. I didn’t hear a sound. Thought maybe you
weren’t in the attic at all. What’s that?’ She pointed.

‘Well, now how did _those_ get there?’ he asked the world.

He peered down at the pair of black spring-metal bicycle clips that
bound his thin pants to his bony ankles.

‘Found them in the attic,’ he answered himself. ‘Remember when we got
out on the gravel road in the early morning on our tandem bike, Cora,
forty years ago, everything fresh and new?’

‘If you don’t finish that attic today, I’ll come up and toss everything
out myself.’

‘Oh, no,’ he cried. ‘I have everything the way I want it!’

She looked at him coldly.

‘Cora,’ he said, eating his lunch, relaxing, beginning to enthuse again,
‘you know what attics are? They’re Time Machines, in which old,
dim-witted men like me can travel back forty years to a time when it was
summer all year round and children raided ice-wagons. Remember how it
tasted? You held the ice in your handkerchief. It was like sucking the
flavour of linen and snow at the same time.’

Cora fidgeted.

It’s not impossible, he thought, half closing his eyes, trying to see it
and build it. Consider an attic. Its very atmosphere is Time. It deals
in other years, the cocoons and chrysalises of another age. All the
bureau drawers are little coffins where a thousand yesterdays lie in
state. Oh, the attic’s a dark, friendly place, full of Time, and if you
stand in the very centre of it, straight and tall, squinting your eyes,
and thinking and thinking, and smelling the Past, and putting out your
hands to feel of Long Ago, why, it…

He stopped, realizing he had spoken some of this aloud. Cora was eating
rapidly.

‘Well, wouldn’t it be interesting,’ he asked the parting in her hair,
‘if Time Travel _could_ occur? And what more logical, proper place for
it to happen than in an attic like _ours_, eh?’

‘It’s not always summer back in the old days,’ she said. ‘It’s just your
crazy memory. You remember all the good things and forget the bad. It
wasn’t always summer.’

‘Figuratively speaking, Cora, it was.’

‘Wasn’t’

‘What I mean is this,’ he said, whispering excitedly, bending forward to
see the image he was tracing on the blank dining-room wall. ‘If you rode
your unicycle carefully between the years, balancing, hands out,
careful, careful, if you rode from year to year, spent a week in 1909, a
day in 1900, a month or a fortnight somewhere else, 1905, 1898, you
could stay with summer the rest of your life.’

‘Unicycle?’

‘You know, one of those tall chromium one-wheeled bikes, single-seater,
the performers ride in vaudeville shows, juggling. Balance, true
balance, it takes, not to fall off, to keep the bright objects flying in
the air, beautiful, up and up, a light, a flash, a sparkle, a bomb of
brilliant colours, red, yellow, blue, green, white, gold; all the Junes
and Julys and Augusts that ever were, in the air, about you, at once,
hardly touching your hands, flying, suspended, and you, smiling, among
them. Balance, Cora, _balance_.’

‘Blah,’ she said, ‘blah, blah.’ And added, ‘blah!’

He climbed the long cold stairs to the attic, shivering.

There were nights in winter when he woke with porcelain in his bones,
with cool chimes blowing in his ears, with frost piercing his nerves in
a raw illumination like white cold fireworks exploding and showering
down in flaming snows upon a silent land deep in his subconscious. He
was cold, cold, cold, and it would take a score of endless summers, with
their green torches and bronze suns to thaw him free of his wintry
sheath. He was a great tasteless chunk of brittle ice, a snowman put to
bed each night, full of confetti dreams, tumbles of crystal and flurry.
And there lay winter outside for ever, a great leaden winepress smashing
down its colourless lid of sky, squashing them all like so many grapes,
mashing colour and sense and being from everyone, save the children who
fled on skis and toboggans down mirrored hills which reflected the
crushing iron shield that hung lower above town each day and every
eternal night.

Mr Finch lifted the attic trapdoor. But here, _here_. A dust of summer
sprang up about him. The attic dust simmered with heat left over from
other seasons. Quietly, he shut the trapdoor down.

He began to smile.

The attic was quiet as a thundercloud before a storm. On occasion, Cora
Finch heard her husband murmuring, murmuring, high up there.

At five in the afternoon, singing _My Isle of Golden Dreams_, Mr Finch
flipped a crisp new straw hat in the kitchen door. ‘Boo!’

‘Did you sleep all afternoon?’ snapped his wife. ‘I called up at you
four times and no answer.’

‘Sleep?’ He considered this and laughed, then put his hand quickly over
his mouth. ‘Well, I guess I did.’

Suddenly she saw him. ‘My God!’ she cried, ‘where’d you get that coat?’

He wore a red candy-striped coat, a high white, choking collar, and
ice-cream pants. You could smell the straw hat like a handful of fresh
hay fanned in the air.

‘Found ’em in an old trunk.’

She sniffed. ‘Don’t smell of mothballs. Look brand-new.’

‘Oh, no!’ he said hastily. He looked stiff and uncomfortable as she eyed
his costume.

‘This isn’t a summer stock company,’ she said.

‘Can’t a fellow have a little fun?’

‘That’s all you’ve ever had,’ she slammed the oven door. ‘While I’ve
stayed home and knitted, Lord knows, you’ve been down at the store
helping ladies’ elbows in and out doors.’

He refused to be bothered. ‘Cora.’ He looked deep into the crackling
straw hat. ‘Wouldn’t it be nice to take a Sunday walk the way we used to
do, with your silk parasol and your long dress whishing along, and sit
on those wire-legged chairs at the soda parlour and smell the drug store
the way they used to smell? Why don’t drug stores smell that way any
more? And order two sarsaparillas for us, Cora, and then ride out in our
1910 Ford to Hannahan’s Pier for a box-supper and listen to the brass
band. How about it?’

‘Supper’s ready. Take that dreadful uniform off.’

‘If you could make a wish and take a ride on those oak-laned country
roads like they had before cars started rushing, would you _do_ it?’ he
insisted, watching her.

‘Those old roads were dirty. We came home looking like Africans.
Anyway,’ she picked up a sugar-jar and shook it, ‘this morning I had
forty dollars here. Now it’s gone! Don’t tell me you ordered those
clothes from a costume house. They’re brand-new, they didn’t come from
any trunk!’

‘I’m –’ he said.

She raved for half an hour, but he could not bring himself to say
anything. The November wind shook the house and as she talked, the snows
of winter began to fall again in the cold steel sky.

‘Answer me!’ she cried. ‘Are you crazy, spending our money that way, on
clothes you can’t wear?’

‘The attic,’ he started to say.

She walked off and sat in the living-room.

The snow was falling fast now and it was a cold dark November evening.
She heard him climb up the step ladder, slowly, into the attic, into
that dusty place of other years, into that black place of costumes and
props and Time, into a world separate from this world below.

He closed the trap door down. The flashlight, snapped on, was company
enough. Yes, here was all of Time compressed in a Japanese paper flower.
At the touch of memory, everything would unfold into the clear water of
the mind, in beautiful blooms, in spring breezes, larger than life. Each
of the bureau drawers, slid forth, might contain aunts and cousins and
grand-mamas, ermined in dust. Yes, Time was here. You could feel it
breathing, an atmospheric instead of a mechanical clock.

Now the house below was as remote as another day in the past. He
half-shut his eyes and looked and looked on every side of the waiting
attic.

Here, in prismed chandelier, were rainbows and mornings and noons as
bright as new rivers flowing endlessly back through time. His flashlight
caught and flickered them alive, the rainbows leapt up to curve the
shadows back with colours, with colours like plums and raspberries and
concord grapes, with colours like cut lemons and the sky where the
clouds drew off after storming and the blue was there. And the dust of
the attic was incense burning and all of time burning, and all you need
do was peer into the flames. It was indeed a great machine of Time, this
attic, he knew, he felt, he was sure, and if you touched prisms here,
doorknobs there, plucked tassels, chimed crystals, swirled dust, punched
trunk-hasps, and gusted the vox-humana of the old hearth-bellows until
it puffed the soot of a thousand ancient fires into your eyes, if,
indeed, you played this instrument, this warm machine of parts, if you
fondled all of its bits and pieces, its levers and changers and movers,
then, then, _then_ !

He thrust out his hands to orchestrate, to conduct, to flourish. There
was music in his head, in his mouth shut tight, and he played the great
machine, the thunderously silent organ, bass, tenor, soprano, low, high,
and at last, at last, a chord that shuddered him so that he had to shut
his eyes.

About nine o’clock that night she heard him calling, ‘Cora!’ She went
upstairs. His head peered down at her from above, smiling at her. He
waved his hat. ‘Good-bye, Cora.’

‘What do you mean?’ she cried.

‘I’ve thought it over for three days and I’m saying good-bye.’

‘Come down out of there, you fool!’

‘I drew five hundred dollars from the bank yesterday. I’ve been thinking
about this. And then when _it_ happened, well … Cora …’ He shoved his
eager hand down. ‘For the last time, will you come along with me?’

‘In the attic? Hand down that step-ladder, William Finch. I’ll climb up
there and run you out of that filthy place!’

‘I’m going to Hannahan’s Pier for a bowl of Clam Chowder,’ he said. ‘And
I’m requesting the brass band to play _Moonlight Bay_. Oh, come on,
Cora….’ He motioned his extended hand.

She simply stared at his gentle, questioning face.

‘Good-bye,’ he said.

He waved gently, gently. Then his face was gone, the straw hat was gone.

‘William!’ she screamed.

The attic was dark and silent.

Shrieking, she ran and got a chair and used it to groan her way up into
the musty darkness. She flourished a flashlight. ‘William! William!’

The dark spaces were empty. A winter wind shook the house.

Then she saw the far west attic window, ajar.

She fumbled over to it. She hesitated, held her breath. Then, slowly,
she opened it. The ladder was placed outside the window, leading down on
to a porch roof.

She pulled back from the window.

Outside the opened frame the apple trees were lush green, it was
twilight of a summer day in July. Faintly, she heard explosions,
firecrackers going off. She heard laughter and distant voices. Rockets
burst in the warm air, softly, red, white, and blue, fading.

She slammed the window and stood reeling. ‘William!’

Wintry November light glowed up through the trap in the attic floor
behind her. Bent to it, she saw the snow whispering against the cold
clear panes down in that November world where she would spend the next
thirty years.

She did not go near the window again. She sat alone in the black attic,
smelling the one smell that did not seem to fade. It lingered like a
gentle sigh of satisfaction, on the air. She took a deep, long breath.

The old, the familiar, the unforgettable scent of drug-store
sarsaparilla.


And the Rock Cried Out

THE raw carcasses, hung in the sunlight, rushed at them, vibrated with
heat and red colour in the green jungle air, and were gone. The stench
of rotting flesh gushed through the car windows, and Leonora Webb
quickly pressed the button that whispered her door window up.

‘Good Lord,’ she said, ‘those open-air butcher’s shops.’

The smell was still in the car, a smell of war and horror.

‘Did you see the flies?’ she asked.

‘When you buy any kind of meat in those markets,’ John Webb said, ‘you
slap the beef with your hand. The flies lift from the meat so you can
get a look at it.’

He turned the car around a lush bend in the green rain-jungle road.

‘Do you think they’ll let us into Juatala when we get there?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘Watch out!’

He saw the bright things in the road too late, tried to swerve, but hit
them. There was a terrible sighing from the right front tyre, the car
heaved about and sank to a stop. He opened his side of the car and
stepped out. The jungle was hot and silent and the highway empty, very
empty and quiet at noon.

He walked to the front of the car and bent, all the while checking his
revolver in its underarm holster.

Leonora’s window gleamed down. ‘Is the tyre hurt much?’

‘Ruined, utterly ruined!’ He picked up the bright thing that had stabbed
and slashed the tyre.

‘Pieces of a broken machete,’ he said, ‘placed in adobe holders pointing
towards our car wheels. We’re lucky it didn’t get all our tyres.’

‘But _why_?’

‘You know as well as I.’ He nodded to the newspaper beside her, at the
date, the headlines:

4 OCTOBER 1963: UNITED STATES, EUROPE SILENT!

_The radios of the U.S.A. and Europe are dead. There is a great silence.
The War has spent itself_.

It is believed that most of the population of the United States is dead.
It is believed that most of Europe, Russia, and Siberia are equally
decimated. The day of the white people of the earth is over and
finished.

‘It all came so fast,’ said Webb. ‘One week we’re on another tour, a
grand vacation from home. The next week – this.’

They both looked away from the black headlines to the jungle.

The jungle looked back at them with a vastness, a breathing
moss-and-leaf silence, with a billion diamond and emerald insect eyes.

‘Be careful, Jack.’

He pressed two buttons. An automatic lift under the front wheels hissed
and hung the car in the air. He jammed a key nervously into the right
wheel plate. The tyre, frame and all, with a sucking pop, bounced from
the wheel. It was a matter of seconds to lock the spare in place and
roll the shattered tyre back to the luggage compartment. He had his gun
out while he did all this.

‘Don’t stand in the open, please, Jack.’

‘So it’s starting already.’ He felt his hair burning hot on his skull.
‘News travels fast.’

‘For God’s sake,’ said Leonora. ‘They can _hear_ you!’

He stared at the jungle.

‘I know you’re in there!’

‘Jack!’

He aimed at the silent jungle. ‘I see you!’ He fired four, five times,
quickly, wildly.

The jungle ate the bullets with hardly a quiver, a brief slit sound like
torn silk where the bullets bored and vanished into a million acres of
green leaves, trees, silence, and moist earth. The brief echo of the
shots died. Only the car muttered its exhaust behind Webb. He walked
around the car, got in, and shut the door and locked it.

He reloaded the gun, sitting in die front seat. Then they drove away
from the place.

They drove steadily.

‘Did you see anyone?’

‘No. You?’

She shook her head.

‘You’re going too fast.’

He slowed only in time. As they rounded a curve another clump of the
bright flashing objects filled the right side of the road. He swerved to
the left and passed.

‘Sons-of-bitches!’

‘They’re not sons-of-bitches, they’re just people who never had a car
like this or anything at all.’

Something ticked across the window pane.

There was a streak of colourless liquid on the glass.

Leonora glanced up. ‘Is it going to rain?’

‘No, an insect hit the pane.’

Another tick.

‘Are you sure that was an insect?’

Tick, tick, tick.

‘Shut the window!’ he said, speeding up.

Something fell in her lap.

She looked down at it. He reached over to touch the thing.

‘Quick!’

She pressed the button. The window snapped up.

Then she examined her lap again.

The tiny blowgun dart glistened there.

‘Don’t get any of the liquid on you,’ he said. ‘Wrap it in your
handkerchief – we’ll throw it away later.’

He had the car up to sixty miles an hour.

‘If we hit another road block, we’re done.’

‘This is a local thing,’ he said. ‘We’ll drive out of it.’

The panes were ticking all the time. A shower of things blew at the
window and fell away in their speed.

‘Why,’ said Leonora Webb, ‘they don’t even _know_ us!’

‘I only wish they did.’ He gripped the wheel. ‘It’s hard to kill people
you know. But not hard to kill strangers.’

‘I don’t want to die,’ she said simply, sitting there.

He put his hand inside his coat. ‘If anything happens to me, my gun is
here. Use it, for God’s sake, and don’t waste time.’

She moved over close to him and they drove seventy-five miles an hour
down a straight stretch in the jungle road, saying nothing.

With the windows up the heat was oven-thick in the car.

‘It’s so silly,’ she said, at last. ‘Putting the knives in the road.
Trying to hit us with the blowguns. How could they know that the next
car along would be driven by white people?’

‘Don’t ask them to be that logical,’ he said. ‘A car is a car. It’s big,
it’s rich. The money in one car would last them a lifetime. And anyway,
if you road-block a car, chances are you’ll get either an American
tourist or a rich Spaniard, comparatively speaking, whose ancestors
should have behaved better. And if you happen to road-block another
Indian, hell, all you do is go out and help him change tyres’

‘What time is it?’ she asked.

For the thousandth time he glanced at his empty wrist. Without
expression or surprise, he fished in his coat pocket for the glistening
gold watch with the silent sweep hand. A year ago he had seen a native
stare at this watch and stare at it and stare at it with almost a
hunger. Then the native had examined him, not scowling, not hating, not
sad or happy; nothing except puzzled.

He had taken the watch off that day and never worn it since.

‘Noon,’ he said.

Noon.

The border lay ahead. They saw it and both cried out at once. They
pulled up, smiling, not knowing they smiled….

John Webb leaned out of the window, started gesturing to the guard at
the border station, caught himself, and got out of his car. He walked
ahead to the station where three young men, very short, in lumpy
uniforms, stood talking. They did not look up at Webb, who stopped
before them. They continued conversing in Spanish, ignoring him.

‘I beg your pardon,’ said John Webb at last. ‘Can we pass over the
border into Juatala?’

One of the men turned for a moment. ‘Sorry, _señor_.’

The three men talked again.

‘You don’t understand,’ said Webb, touching the first man’s elbow.
‘We’ve _got_ to get through.’

The man shook his head. ‘Passports are no longer good. Why should you
want to leave our country, anyway?’

‘It was announced on the radio. All Americans to leave the country,
immediately.’

‘Ah, _sí sí_,’ all three soldiers nodded and leered at each other with
shining eyes.

‘Or be fined or imprisoned, or both,’ said Webb.

‘We could let you over the border, but Juatala would give you
twenty-four hours to leave also. If you don’t believe me, listen!’ The
guard turned and called across the border, ‘Aye, there! Aye!’

In the hot sun, forty yards distant, a pacing man turned, his rifle in
his arms.

‘Aye there, Paco, you want these two people?’

‘_No, gracias_ – _gracias, no_,’ replied the man, smiling.

‘You see?’ said the guard, turning to John Webb.

All of the soldiers laughed together.

‘I have money,’ said Webb.

The men stopped laughing.

The first guard stepped up to John Webb and his face was now not relaxed
or easy; it was like brown stone.

"Yes,’ he said. ‘They always have money. I know. They come here and they
think money will do everything. But what is money? It is only a promise,
_señor_. This I know from books. And when somebody no longer likes your
promise, what then?’

‘I will give you anything you ask.’

‘Will you?’ The guard turned to his friends. ‘He will give me _anything_
I ask.’ To Webb: ‘It was a joke. _We_ were always a joke to you, weren’t
we?’

‘No.’

‘_Mañana_, you laughed at us; _mañana_, you laughed at our siestas and
our _mañanas_, didn’t you?’

‘Not me. Someone else.’

‘Yes, you.’

‘I’ve never been to this particular station before.’

‘I know you, anyway. Run here, do this, do that. Oh, here’s a peso, buy
yourself a house. Run over there, do this, do that.’

‘It wasn’t me.’

‘He looked like you, anyway.’

They stood in the sun with their shadows dark under them, and the
perspiration colouring their armpits. The soldier moved closer to John
Webb. ‘I don’t have to do anything for you any more.’

‘You never had to before. I never asked it.’

‘You’re trembling, _señor_.’

‘I’m all right. It’s the sun.’

‘How much money have you got?’ asked the guard.

‘A thousand pesos to let us through, and a thousand for the other man
over there.’

The guard turned again. ‘Will a thousand pesos be enough?’

‘No,’ said the other guard. ‘Tell him to report us!’

‘Yes,’ said the guard, back to Webb again. ‘Report me. Get me fired. I
was fired once, years ago, by you.’

‘It was someone else.’

‘Take my name. It is Carlos Rodriguez Ysotl. Go on now.’

‘I see.’

‘No, you don’t see,’ said Carlos Rodriguez Ysotl. ‘Now give me two
thousand pesos.’

John Webb took out his wallet and handed over the money. Carlos
Rodriguez Ysotl licked his thumb and counted the money slowly under the
blue glazed sky of his country as noon deepened and sweat arose from
hidden sources and people breathed and panted above their shadows.

‘Two thousand pesos.’ He folded it and put it in his pocket quietly.
‘Now turn your car around and head for another border.’

‘Hold on now, damn it!’

The guard looked at him. ‘Turn your car.’

They stood a long time that way, with the sun blazing on the rifle in
the guard’s hands, not speaking. And then John Webb turned and walked
slowly, one hand to his face, back to the car and slid into the front
seat.

‘What’re we going to do?’ said Leonora.

‘Rot. Or try to reach Porto Bello.’

‘But we need gas and our spare fixed. And going back over those
highways … This time they might drop logs, and –’

‘I know, I know.’ He rubbed his eyes and sat for a moment with his head
in his hands. ‘We’re alone, my God, we’re alone. Remember how safe we
used to feel? How safe? We registered in all the big towns with the
American Consuls. Remember how the joke went? “Everywhere you go you can
hear the rustle of the eagle’s wings!” Or was it the sound of paper
money? I forget. Jesus, Jesus, the world got empty awfully quick. Who do
I call on now?’

She waited a moment and then said, ‘I guess just me. That’s not much.’

He put his arm around her. ‘You’ve been swell. No hysterics, nothing.’

‘Tonight maybe I’ll be screaming, when we’re in bed, if we ever find a
bed again. It’s been a million miles since breakfast.’

He kissed her, twice, on her dry mouth. Then he sat slowly back. ‘First
thing is to try to find gas. If we can get that, we’re ready to head for
Porto Bello.’

The three soldiers were talking and joking as they drove away.

After they had been driving a minute, he began to laugh quietly.

‘What were you thinking?’ asked his wife.

‘I remember an old spiritual. It goes like this:

‘I went to the Rock to hide my face
And the Rock cried out, “No Hiding Place,

There’s no Hiding Place down here.”’

‘I remember that,’ she said.

‘It’s an appropriate song right now,’ he said. ‘I’d sing the whole thing
for you if I could remember it all. And if I felt like singing.’

He put his foot harder to the accelerator.

They stopped at a gas station and after a minute, when the attendant did
not appear, John Webb honked the horn. Then, appalled, he snapped his
hand away from the horn-ring, looking at it as if it were the hand of a
leper.

‘I shouldn’t have done that.’

The attendant appeared in the shadowy doorway of the gas station. Two
other men appeared behind him.

The three men came out and walked around the car, looking at it,
touching it, feeling it.

Their faces were like burnt copper in the daylight. They touched the
resilient tyres, they sniffed the rich new smell of the metal and
upholstery.

‘_Señor_,’ said the gas attendant at last.

‘We’d like to buy some gas, please.’

‘We are all out of gas, _señor_.’

‘But your tank reads full. I see the gas in the glass container up
there.’

‘We are all out of gas,’ said the man.

‘I’ll give you ten pesos a gallon!’

‘_Gracias, no_.’

‘We haven’t enough gas to get anywhere from here.’ Webb checked the
gauge. ‘Not even a quarter gallon left. We’d better leave the car here
and go into town and see what we can do there.’

‘I’ll watch the car for you, _señor_,’ said the station attendant. ‘If
you leave the keys.’

‘We can’t do that!’ said Leonora. ‘Can we?’

‘I don’t see what choice we have. We can stall it on the road and leave
it to anyone who comes along, or leave it with this man.’

‘That’s better,’ said the man.

They climbed out of the car and stood looking at it.

‘It was a beautiful car,’ said John Webb.

‘Very beautiful,’ said the man, his hand out for the keys. ‘I will take
good care of it, _señor_.’

‘But, Jack –’

She opened the back door and started to take out the luggage. Over her
shoulder, he saw the bright travel stickers, the storm of colour that
had descended upon and covered the worn leather now after years of
travel, after years of the best hotels in two dozen countries.

She tugged at the valises, perspiring, and he stopped her hands and they
stood gasping there for a moment, in the open door of the car, looking
at these fine rich suitcases, inside which were the beautiful tweeds and
woollens and silks of their lives and living, the forty-dollar-an-ounce
perfumes and the cool dark furs and the silvery golf shafts. Twenty
years were packed into each of the cases; twenty years and four dozen
parts they had played in Rio, in Paris, in Rome, and Shanghai, but the
part they played most frequently and best of all was the rich and
buoyant, amazingly happy Webbs, the smiling people, the ones who could
make that rarely balanced Martini known as the Sahara.

‘We can’t carry it all into town,’ he said. ‘We’ll come back for it
later.’

‘But …’

He silenced her by turning her away and starting her off down the road.

‘But we can’t leave it there, we can’t leave all our luggage and we
can’t leave our car! Oh look here now, I’ll roll up the windows and lock
myself in the car, while you go for the gas, why not?’ she said.

He stopped and glanced back at the three men standing by the car which
blazed in the yellow sun. Their eyes were shining and looking at the
woman.

‘There’s your answer,’ he said. ‘Come on.’

‘But you just _don’t_ walk off and leave a four-thousand-dollar
automobile!’ she cried.

He moved her along, holding her elbow firmly and with quiet decision. ‘A
car is to travel in. When it’s not travelling, it’s useless. Right now,
we’ve got to travel; that’s everything. The car isn’t worth a dime
without gas in it. A pair of good strong legs is worth a hundred cars,
if you use the legs. We’ve just begun to toss things overboard. We’ll
keep dropping ballast until there’s nothing left to heave but our
hides.’

He let her go. She was walking steadily now, and she fell into step with
him. ‘It’s so strange. So strange. I haven’t walked like this in years.’
She watched the motion of her feet beneath her, she watched the road
pass by, she watched the jungle moving to either side, she watched her
husband striding quickly along, until she seemed hypnotized by the
steady rhythm. ‘But I guess you can learn anything over again,’ she
said, at last.

The sun moved in the sky and they moved for a long while on the hot
road. When he was quite ready, the husband began to think aloud. ‘You
know, in a way, I think it’s good to be down to essentials. Now instead
of worrying over a dozen damned things, it’s just two items – you and
me.’

‘Watch it, here comes a car – we’d better …’

They half turned, yelled, and jumped. They fell away from the highway
and lay watching the automobile hurtle past at seventy miles an hour.
Voices sang, men laughed, men shouted, waving. The car sped away into
the dust and vanished around a curve, blaring its double horns again and
again.

He helped her up and they stood in the quiet road.

‘Did you see it?’

They watched the dust settle slowly.

‘I hope they remember to change the oil and check the battery, at least.
I hope they think to put water in the radiator,’ she said, and paused.
‘They were singing, weren’t they?’

He nodded. They stood blinking at the great dust cloud filtering down
like yellow pollen upon their heads and arms. He saw a few bright
splashes flick from her eyelids when she blinked.

‘Don’t,’ he said. ‘After all, it was only a machine.’

‘I loved it.’

‘We’re always loving everything too much.’

Walking, they passed a shattered wine bottle which steamed freshly as
they stepped over it.

They were not far from the town walking single file, the wife ahead, the
husband following, looking at their feet as they walked, when a sound of
tin and steam and bubbling water made them turn and look at the road
behind them. An old man in a 1929 Ford drove along the road at a
moderate speed. The car’s fenders were gone, and the sun had flaked and
burnt the paint badly, but he rode in the seat with a great deal of
quiet dignity, his face a thoughtful darkness under a dirty Panama hat,
and when he saw the two people he drew the car up, steaming, the engine
joggling under the hood and opened the squealing door as he said, ‘This
is no day for walking.’

‘Thank you,’ they said.

‘It is nothing.’ The old man wore an ancient yellowed white summer suit,
with a rather greasy tie knotted loosely at his wrinkled throat. He
helped the lady into the rear seat with a gracious bow of his head. ‘Let
us men sit up front,’ he suggested, and the husband sat up front and the
car moved off in trembling vapours.

‘Well. My name is García.’

There were introductions and noddings.

‘Your car broke down? You are on your way for help?’ said Señor García.

‘Yes.’

‘Then let me drive you and a mechanic back out,’ offered the old man.

They thanked him and kindly turned the offer aside and he made it once
again, but upon finding that his interest and concern caused them
embarrassment, he very politely turned to another subject.

He touched a small stack of folded newspapers on his lap.

‘Do you read the papers? Of course, you do. But do you read them as I
read them? I rather doubt that you have come upon my system. No, it was
not exactly myself that came upon it; the system was forced upon me. But
now I know what a clever thing it has turned out to be. I always get the
newspapers a week late. All of us, those who are interested, get the
papers a week late, from the Capital. And this circumstance makes for a
man being a clear-thinking man. You are very careful with your thinking
when you pick up a week-old paper.’

The husband and wife asked him to continue.

‘Well,’ said the old man, ‘I remember once, when I lived in the Capital
for a month and bought the paper fresh each day, I went wild with love,
anger, irritation, frustration; all of the passions boiled in me. I was
young. I exploded at everything I saw. But then I saw what I was doing,
I was believing what I read. Have you noticed? You believe a paper
printed on the very day you buy it? This has happened but only an hour
ago, you think! It must be true.’ He shook his head. ‘So I learned to
stand back away and let the paper age and mellow. Back here, in Colonia,
I saw the headlines diminish to nothing. The week-old paper – why you
can spit on it if you wish. It is like a woman you once loved, but you
now see, a few days later, she is not quite what you thought. She has
rather a plain face. She is no deeper than a cup of water.’

He steered the car gently, his hands upon the wheel as upon the heads of
his good children, with care and affection. ‘So here I am, returning to
my home to read my weekly papers, to peek sideways at them, to toy with
them.’ He spread one on his knee, glancing down to it on occasion as he
drove. ‘How white this paper is, like the mind of a child that is an
idiot, poor thing, all blank. You can put anything into an empty place
like that. Here, do you see? This paper speaks and says that the
light-skinned people of the world are dead. Now that is a very silly
thing to say. At this very moment, there are probably millions upon
millions of white men and women eating their noon meals or their
suppers. The earth trembles, a town collapses, people run from the town,
screaming, _All is lost_!’ In the next village, the population wonders
what all of the shouting is about, since _they_ have had a most splendid
night’s repose. Ah, ah, what a sly world it is. People do not see how
sly it is. It is either night or day to them. Rumour flies. This very
afternoon all of the little villages upon this highway, behind us and
ahead of us, are in carnival. The white man is dead, the rumours say,
and yet here I come into the town with two very lively ones. I hope you
don’t mind my speaking this way? If I do not talk to you I would then be
talking to this engine up in the front, which makes a great noise
speaking back.’

They were at the edge of town.

‘Please,’ said John Webb, ‘it wouldn’t be wise for you to be seen with
us today. We’ll get out here.’

The old man stopped his car reluctantly and said, ‘You are most kind and
thoughtful of me.’ He turned to look at the lovely wife.

‘When I was a young man I was very full of wildness and ideas. I read
all of the books from France by a man named Jules Verne. I see you know
his name. But at night I many times thought I must be an inventor. That
is all gone by; I never did what I thought I might do. But I remember
clearly that one of the machines I wished to put together was a machine
that would help every man, for an hour, to be like any other man. The
machine was full of colours and smells and it had film in it, like a
theatre, and the machine was like a coffin. You lay in it. And you
touched a button. And for an hour you could be one of those Eskimos in
the cold wind up there, or you could be an Arab gentleman on a horse.
Everything a New York man felt, you could feel. Everything a man from
Sweden smelled, you could smell. Everything a man from China tasted,
your tongue knew. The machine was like another man-do you see what I was
after? And by touching many of the buttons, each time you got into my
machine, you could be a white man or a yellow man or a Negrito. You
could be a child or a woman, even, if you wished to be very funny.’

The husband and wife climbed from the car.

‘Did you ever try to invent that machine?’

‘It was so very long ago. I had forgotten until today. And today I was
thinking, we could make use of it, we are in need of it. What a shame I
never tried to put it all together. Some day some other man will do it.’

‘Some day,’ said John Webb.

‘It has been a pleasure talking with you,’ said the old man. ‘God go
with you.’

‘_Adiós_, señor García,’ they said.

The car drove slowly away, steaming. They stood watching it go, for a
full minute. Then, without speaking, the husband reached over and took
his wife’s hand.

They entered the small town of Colonia on foot. They walked past the
little shops, the butcher shop, the photographer’s. People stopped and
looked at them as they went by and did not stop looking at them as long
as they were in sight. Every few seconds, as he walked, Webb put up his
hand to touch the holster hidden under his coat, secretly, tentatively,
like someone feeling for a tiny boil that is growing and growing every
hour and every hour …

The patio of the Hotel Esposa was cool as a grotto under a blue
waterfall. In it birds sang, caged, and footsteps echoed like small
rifle shots, clear and smooth.

‘Remember? We stopped here years ago,’ said Webb, helping his wife up
the steps. They stood in the cool grotto, glad of the blue shade.

‘señor Esposa,’ said John Webb, when a fat man came forward from the
desk, squinting at them. ‘Do you remember me – John Webb? Five years ago
– we played cards one night.’

‘Of course, of course.’ señor Esposa bowed to the wife and shook hands
briefly. There was an uncomfortable silence.

Webb cleared his throat. ‘We’ve had a bit of trouble, señor. Could we
have a room for tonight only?’

‘Your money is always good here.’

‘You mean you’ll actually give us a room? We’ll be glad to pay in
advance. Lord, we need the rest. But, more than that, we need gas.’

Leonora picked at her husband’s arm. ‘Remember? We haven’t a car any
more.’

‘Oh. Yes.’ He fell silent for a moment and then sighed. ‘Well. Never
mind the gas. Is there a bus out of here for the Capital soon?’

‘All will be attended to, in time,’ said the Manager nervously. ‘This
way.’

As they were climbing the stairs they heard a noise. Looking out they
saw their car riding around and around the plaza, eight times, loaded
with men who were shouting and singing and hanging on to the front
fenders, laughing. Children and dogs ran after the car.

‘I would like to own a car like that,’ said Señor Esposa.

He poured a little cool wine for the three of them, standing in the room
on the third floor of the Esposa Hotel.

‘To “change”,’ said Señor Esposa.

‘I’ll drink to that.’

They drank. señor Esposa licked his lips and wiped them on his coat
sleeve. ‘We are always surprised and saddened to see the world change.
It is insane, they have run out on us, you say. It is unbelievable. And
now, well – You are safe for the night. Shower and have a good supper. I
won’t be able to keep you more than one night, to repay you for your
kindness to me five years ago.’

‘And tomorrow?’

‘Tomorrow? Do not take any bus to the Capital, please. There are riots
in the streets there. A few people from the North have been killed. It
is nothing. It will pass in a few days. But you must be careful until
those few days pass and the blood cools. There are many wicked people
taking advantage of this day, _señor_. For forty-eight hours anyway,
under the guise of a great resurgence of nationalism, these people will
try to gain power. Selfishness and patriotism, _señor_; today I cannot
tell one from the other. So – you must hide. That is a problem. The town
will know you are here in another few hours. This might be dangerous to
my hotel. I cannot say.’

‘We understand. It’s good of you to help this much.’

‘If you need any thing, call me.’ Señor Esposa drank the rest of die
wine in his glass. ‘Finish the bottle,’ he said.

The fireworks began at nine that evening. First one skyrocket then
another soared into the dark sky and burst out upon the winds, building
architectures of flame. Each skyrocket, at the top of its ride, cracked
open and let out a formation of streamers in red and white flame that
made something like the dome of a beautiful cathedral.

Leonora and John Webb stood by the open window in their unlit room,
watching and listening. As the hour latened, more people streamed into
town from every road and path and began to roam, arm in arm, around the
plaza, singing, barking like dogs, crowing like roosters, and then
falling down on the tile sidewalks, sitting there, laughing, their heads
thrown back, while the skyrockets burst explosive colours on the tilted
faces. A brass band began to thump and wheeze.

‘So here we are,’ said John Webb, ‘after a few hundred years of living
high. So this is what’s left of our white supremacy – you and I in a
dark room in a hotel three hundred miles inside a celebrating country.’

‘You’ve got to see their side of it.’

‘Oh, I’ve seen it ever since I was that high. In a way, I’m glad they’re
happy. God knows they’ve waited long enough to be. But I wonder how long
that happiness will last. Now that the scapegoat is gone, who will they
blame for oppression, who will be handy and as obvious and as guilty as
you and I and the man who lived in this room before us?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘We were so convenient. The man who rented this room last month, he was
convenient, he stood out. He made loud jokes about the natives’ siestas.
He refused to learn even a smattering of Spanish. Let them learn
English, by God, and speak like men, he said. And he drank too much and
whored too much with this country’s women.’ He broke off and moved back
from the window. He stared at the room.

The furniture, he thought. Where _he_ put his dirty shoes upon the sofa,
where _he_ burnt holes in the carpet with cigarettes; the wet spot on
the wall near the bed, God knows what or how he did _that_. The chairs
scarred and kicked. It wasn’t _his_ hotel or his room; it was borrowed,
it meant nothing. So this son-of-a-bitch went around the country for the
past one hundred years, a travelling commercial, a Chamber of Commerce,
and now here we are, enough like him to be his brother and sister, and
there they are down there on the night of the Butler’s Ball. They don’t
know, or if they know they won’t think of it, that tomorrow they’ll be
just as poor, just as oppressed as ever, that the whole machine will
have shifted only into another gear.

Now the band had stopped playing below; a man had leaped up, shouting,
on the bandstand. There was a flash of machetes in the air and the brown
gleam of half-naked bodies.

The man on the bandstand faced the hotel and looked up at the dark room
where John and Leonora Webb now stood back out of the intermittent
flares.

The man shouted.

‘What does he say?’ asked Leonora.

John Webb translated: ‘“It is now a free world,” he says.’

The man yelled.

John Webb translated again. ‘He says, “We are _free_!”’

The man lifted himself on his toes and made a motion of breaking
manacles. ‘He says, “No one owns us, no one in all the world.”’

The crowd roared and the band began to play, and while it was playing,
the man on the bandstand stood glaring up at the room window, with all
of the hatred of the universe in his eyes.

During the night there were fights and pummellings and voices lifted,
arguments and shots fired. John Webb lay awake and heard the voice of
Señor Esposa below, reasoning, talking quietly, firmly. And then the
fading away of the tumult, the last rockets in the sky, the last
breakings of bottles on the cobbles.

At five in the morning the air was warming into a new day. There was the
softest of taps on the bedroom door.

‘It is me, it is Esposa,’ said a voice.

John Webb hesitated, half-dressed, numb on his feet from lack of sleep,
then opened the door.

‘What a night, what a night!’ said Señor Esposa, coming in, shaking his
head, laughing gently. ‘Did you hear that noise? Yes? They tried to come
up here to your room. I prevented this.’

‘Thank you,’ said Leonora, still in bed, turned to the wall.

‘They were all old friends. I made an agreement with them, anyway. They
were drunk enough and happy enough so they agreed to wait. I am to make
a proposition to you two.’ Suddenly he seemed embarrassed. He moved to
the window. ‘Everyone is sleeping late. A few are up. A few men. See
them there on the far side of the plaza?’

John Webb looked out at the plaza. He saw the brown men talking quietly
there about the weather, the world, the sun, this town, and perhaps the
wine.

‘_Señor_, have you ever been hungry in your life?’

‘For a day, once.’

‘Only for a day. Have you always had a house to live in and a car to
drive?’

‘Until yesterday.’

‘Were you ever without a job?’

‘Never.’

‘Did all of your brothers and sisters live to be twenty-one years old?’

‘All of them.’

‘Even I,’ said señor Esposa, ‘even I hate you a little bit now. For I
have been without a home. I have been hungry. I have three brothers and
one sister buried in that graveyard on the hill beyond the town, all
dead of tuberculosis before they were nine years old.’

señor Esposa glanced at the men in the plaza. ‘Now, I am no longer
hungry or poor, I have a car, I am alive. But I am one in a thousand.
What can _you_ say to them out there today?’

‘I’ll try to think of something.’

‘Long ago I stopped trying. _señor_, we have always been a minority, we
white people. I am Spanish, but I was born here. They tolerate me.’

‘We have never let ourselves think about our being a minority/ said
Webb, ‘and now it’s hard to get used to the fact.’

‘You have behaved beautifully.’

‘Is that a virtue?’

‘In the bull-ring, yes, in war, yes, in anything like this, most
assuredly yes. You do not complain, you do not make excuses. You do not
run and make a spectacle of yourself. I think you are both very brave.’

The hotel manager sat down, slowly, helplessly.

‘I’ve come to offer you the chance to settle down,’ he said.

‘We wanted to move on, if possible.’

The Manager shrugged. ‘Your car is stolen, I can do nothing to get it
back. You cannot leave town. Remain then and accept my offer of a
position in my hotel.’

‘You don’t think there is any way for us to travel?’

‘It might be twenty days, _señor_, or twenty years. You cannot exist
without money, food, lodging. Consider my hotel and the work I can give
you.’

The Manager arose and walked unhappily to the door and stood by the
chair, touching Webb’s coat which was draped over it.

‘What’s the job?’ asked Webb.

‘In the kitchen,’ said the Manager, and looked away.

John Webb sat on the bed and said nothing. His wife did not move.

Señor Esposa said. ‘It is the best I can do. What more can you ask of
me? Last night, those others down in the plaza wanted both of you. Did
you see the machetes? I bargained with them. You were lucky. I told them
you would be employed in my hotel for the next twenty years, that you
were my employees and deserve my protection!’

‘You said _that_ !’

‘_Señor, señor_, be thankful! Consider! Where will you go? The jungle?
You will be dead in two hours from the snakes. Then can you walk five
hundred miles to a capital which will not welcome you? No – you must
face the reality.’ señor Esposa opened the door. ‘I offer you an honest
job and you will be paid the standard wages of two pesos a day, plus
meals. Would you rather be with me, or out in the plaza at noon with our
friends? Consider.’

The door was shut. señor Esposa was gone.

Webb stood looking at the door for a long while.

Then he walked to the chair and fumbled with the holster under the
draped white shirt. The holster was empty. He held it in his hands and
blinked at its emptiness and looked again at the door through which
Señor Esposa had just passed. He went over and sat down on the bed
beside his wife. He stretched out beside her and took her in his arms
and kissed her, and they lay there, watching the room get brighter with
the new day.

At eleven o’clock in the morning, with the great doors on the windows of
their room flung back, they began to dress. There were soap, towels,
shaving equipment, even perfume in the bathroom, provided by Mr Esposa.

John Webb shaved and dressed carefully.

At eleven-thirty he turned on the small radio near their bed. You could
usually get New York or Cleveland, or Houston on such a radio. But the
air was silent. John Webb turned the radio off.

‘There’s nothing to go back to – nothing to go back for-nothing.’

His wife sat on a chair near the door, looking at the wall.

‘We could stay here and work,’ he said.

She stirred at last. ‘No. We couldn’t do that, not really. Could we?’

‘No, I guess not.’

‘There’s no way we could do that. We’re being consistent, anyway;
spoiled, but consistent.’

He thought a moment. ‘We could make for the jungle.’

‘I don’t think we can move from the hotel without being seen. We don’t
want to try to escape and be caught. It would be far worse that way.’

He nodded.

They both sat a moment.

‘It might not be too bad, working here,’ he said.

‘What would we be living for? Everyone’s dead – your father, mine, your
mother, mine, your brothers, mine, all our friends, everything gone,
everything we understood.’

He nodded.

‘Or if we took the job, one day soon one of the men would touch me and
you’d go after him, you know you would. Or someone would do something to
you, and _I’d_ do something.’

He nodded again.

They sat for fifteen minutes, talking quietly. Then, at last, he picked
up the telephone and ticked the cradle with his finger.

‘_Bueno_,’ said a voice on the other end.

‘señor Esposa?’

‘_Si_.’

‘Señor Esposa,’ he paused and licked his lips, ‘tell your friends we
will be leaving the hotel at noon.’

The phone did not immediately reply. Then with a sigh, señor Esposa
said, ‘As you wish. You are sure – ?’

The phone was silent for a full minute. Then it was picked up again and
the Manager said quietly, ‘My friends say they will be waiting for you
on the far side of the plaza.’

‘We will meet them there,’ said John Webb.

‘And _señor –_’

‘Yes.’

‘Do not hate me, do not hate us.’

‘I don’t hate anybody.’

‘It is a bad world, _señor_. None of us know how we got here or what we
are doing. These men don’t know what they are mad at, except they are
mad. Forgive them and do not hate them.’

‘I don’t hate them or you.’

‘Thank you, thank you.’ Perhaps the man on the far end of the telephone
wire was crying. There was no way to tell. There were great lapses in
his talking, in his breathing. After a while he said, ‘We don’t know why
we do anything. Men hit each other for no reason except they are
unhappy. Remember that. I am your friend. I would help you if I could.
But I cannot. It would be me against the town. Good-bye, _señor_.’ He
hung up.

John Webb sat in the chair with his hands on the silent phone. It was a
moment before he glanced up. It was a moment before his eyes focused on
an object immediately before him. When he saw it clearly, he still did
not move, but sat regarding it, until a look of immensely tired irony
appeared on his mouth. ‘Look here,’ he said at last.

Leonora followed his motion, his pointing.

They both sat looking at his cigarette which, neglected on the rim of
the table while he telephoned, had burnt down so that now it had charred
a black hole in the clean surface of the wood.

It was noon, with the sun directly over them, pinning their shadows
under them as they started down the steps of the Hotel Esposa. Behind
them, the birds fluted in their bamboo cages, and water ran in a little
fountain bath. They were as neat as they could get, their faces and
hands washed, their nails clean, their shoes polished.

Across the plaza two hundred yards away stood a small group of men, in
the shade of a store front overhang. Some of the men were natives from
the jungle area, with machetes gleaming at their sides. They were all
facing the plaza.

John Webb looked at them for a long while. That isn’t everyone, he
thought, that isn’t the whole country. That’s only the surface. That’s
only the thin skin over the flesh. It’s not the body at all. Just the
shell of an egg. Remember the crowds back home, the mobs, the riots?
Always the same, there or here. A few mad faces up front, and the quiet
ones far back, not taking part, letting things go, not wanting to be in
it. The majority not moving. And so the few, the handful, take over and
move for them.

His eyes did not blink. If we could break through that shell, God knows
it’s thin! he thought, if we could talk our way through that mob and get
to the quiet people beyond…. Can I do it? Can I say the right things?
Can I keep my voice down?

He fumbled in his pockets and brought out a rumpled cigarette package
and some matches.

I can try, he thought. How would the old man in the Ford have done it?
I’ll try to do it his way. When we get across the plaza, I’ll start
talking, I’ll whisper if necessary. And if we move slowly through the
mob, we might just possibly find our way to the other people and we’ll
be on high ground and we’ll be safe.

Leonora moved beside him. She was so fresh, so well groomed in spite of
everything, so new in all this oldness, so startling, that his mind
flinched and jerked. He found himself staring at her as if she’d
betrayed him by her salt-whiteness, her wonderfully brushed hair and her
cleanly manicured nails and her bright-red mouth.

Standing on the bottom step, Webb lit a cigarette, took two or three
long drags on it, tossed it down, stepped on it, kicked the flattened
butt into the street, and said, ‘Here we go.’

They stepped down and started around the far side of the plaza, past the
few shops that were still open. They walked quietly.

‘Perhaps they’ll be decent to us.’

‘We can hope so.’

They passed a photographic shop.

‘It’s another day. Anything can happen. I believe that. No – I don’t
really believe it. I’m only talking. I’ve got to talk or I wouldn’t be
able to walk,’ she said.

They passed a candy shop.

‘Keep talking, then.’

‘I’m afraid,’ she said. ‘This can’t be happening to us! Are we the last
ones in the world?’

‘Maybe next to the last.’

They approached an open-air _carnecería_.

God! he thought. How the horizons narrowed, how they came in. A year ago
there weren’t four directions, there were a million for us. Yesterday
they got down to four; we could go to Juatala, Porto Bello, San Juan
Clementas, or Brioconbria. We were satisfied to have our car. Then when
we couldn’t get gas, we were satisfied to have our clothes, then when
they took our clothes, we were satisfied to have a place to sleep. Each
pleasure they took away left us with one other creature comfort to hold
on to. Did you see how we let go of one thing and clutched another so
quickly? I guess that’s human. So they took away everything. There’s
nothing left. Except us. It all boils down to just you and me walking
along here, and thinking too goddamn much for my own good. And what
counts in the end is whether they can take you away from me or me away
from you, Lee, and I don’t think they can do that. They’ve got
everything else and I don’t blame them. But they can’t really do
anything else to us now. When you strip all the clothes away and the
doodads, you have two human beings who were either happy or unhappy
together, and we have no complaints.

‘Walk slowly,’ said John Webb.

‘I am.’

‘Not too slowly, to look reluctant. Not too fast, to look as if you want
to get it over with. Don’t give them the satisfaction, Lee, don’t give
them a damn bit.’

‘I won’t.’

They walked. ‘Don’t even touch me,’ he said, quietly. ‘Don’t even hold
my hand.’

‘Oh, please!’

‘No, not even that.’

He moved away a few inches and kept walking steadily. His eyes were
straight ahead and their pace was regular.

‘I’m beginning to cry, Jack.’

‘Goddamn it!’ he said, measuredly, between his teeth, not looking aside.
‘Stop it! Do you want me to run? Is that what you want – do you want me
to take you and run into the jungle, and let them hunt us, is that what
you want, goddamn it, do you want me to fall down in the street here and
grovel and scream; shut up, let’s do this right, don’t give them
_any_thing!’

They walked on.

‘All right,’ she said, hands tight, her head coming up. ‘I’m not crying
now. I won’t cry.’

‘Good, damn it, that’s good.’

And still, strangely, they were not past the _carnecería_. The vision of
red horror was on their left as they paced steadily forward on the hot
tile sidewalk. The things that hung from hooks looked like brutalities
and sins, like bad consciences, evil dreams, like gored flags and
slaughtered promises. The redness, oh, the hanging, evil-smelling
wetness and redness, the hooked and hung-high carcasses, unfamiliar,
unfamiliar.

As he passed the shop, something made John Webb strike out a hand. He
slapped it smartly against a strung-up side of beef. A mantle of blue
buzzing flies lifted angrily and swirled in a bright cone over the meat.

Leonora said, looking ahead, walking, ‘They’re all strangers! I don’t
know any of them. I wish I knew even _one_ of them. I wish even _one_ of
them knew me!’

They walked on past the _carnecería_. The side of beef, red and
irritable-looking, swung in the hot sunlight after they passed.

The flies came down in a feeding cloak to cover the meat, once it had
stopped swinging.


The Strawberry Window

IN his dream he was shutting the front door with its strawberry windows
and lemon windows and windows like white clouds and windows like clear
water in a country stream. Two dozen panes squared round the one big
pane, coloured of fruit wines and gelatins and cool water-ices. He
remembered his father holding him up as a child. ‘Look!’ And through the
green glass the world was emerald, moss, and summer mint. ‘Look!’ The
lilac pane made Concord grapes of all the passers by. And at last the
strawberry glass perpetually bathed the town in roseate warmth, carpeted
the world in pink sunrise, and made the cut lawn seem imported from some
Persian rug bazaar. The strawberry window, best of all, cured people of
their paleness, warmed the cold rain, and set the blowing, shifting
February snows afire.

‘Ah!’

He awoke.

He heard his boys talking before he was fully out of his dream and he
lay in the dark now, listening to the sad sound their talk made, like
the wind blowing the white sea-bottoms in the blue bills; and then he
remembered.

We’re on Mars, he thought.

‘What?’ His wife cried out in her sleep.

He hadn’t realized he had spoken; he lay as still as he possibly could.
But now, with a strange kind of numb reality he saw his wife rise to
haunt the room, her pale face staring through the small, high windows of
their quonset hut at the clear but unfamiliar stars.

‘Carrie,’ he whispered.

She did not hear.

‘Carrie,’ he whispered. ‘There’s something I want to tell you. For a
month now I’ve been wanting to say … tomorrow … tomorrow morning,
there’s going to be …’

But his wife sat all to herself in the blue starlight and would not look
at him.

He closed his eyes tight.

If only the sun stayed up, he thought, if only there was no night. For
during the day, he nailed the settlement town together, the boys were in
school, and Carrie had cleaning, gardening, cooking to do. But when the
sun was gone and their hands were empty of flowers or hammers and nails
and arithmetics, their memories, like night birds, came home in the
dark. You heard them rustle the black roof like the first rain of a new
season of endless rains. You woke to the cool pattering, which was not
rain, but only the slow dipping down, the flicking, brushing, touching,
the whispered flight and glide of remembering towards dawn.

His wife moved, a slight turn of her head.

‘Will,’ she said at last, ‘I want to go home.’

‘Carrie!’

‘This isn’t home,’ she said.

He saw that her eyes were wet and brimming. ‘Carrie, hold on awhile.’

‘I’ve got no fingernails from holding on now!’

As if she still moved in her sleep, she opened her bureau drawers and
took out layers of handkerchiefs, shirts, underclothing and put it all
on top of the bureau, not seeing it, letting her fingers touch and bring
it out and put it down. The routine was long familiar now. She would
talk and put things out and stand quietly awhile, and then later put all
the things away and come, dry-faced, back to bed and dreams. He was
afraid that some night she would empty every drawer, and reach for the
few ancient suitcases against the wall.

‘Will …’ Her voice was not bitter, but soft, featureless, and as
uncoloured as the moonlight that showed what she was doing. ‘So many
nights for six months I’ve talked this way; I’m ashamed. You work hard
building houses in town. A man who works so hard shouldn’t have to
listen to a wife gone sad on him. But there’s nothing to do but talk it
out. It’s the little things I miss most of all. I don’t know – silly
things. Our front porch swing. The wicker rocking-chair, summer nights.
Looking at the people walk or ride by those evenings, back in Ohio. Our
black upright piano, out of tune. My Swedish cut glass. Our parlour
furniture – oh, it was like a herd of elephants, I know, and all of it
old. And the Chinese hanging crystals that hit when the wind blew. And
talking to neighbours there on the front porch, July nights. All those
crazy, silly things … they’re not important. But it seems those are
things that come to mind around three in the morning. I’m sorry.’

‘Don’t be,’ he said. ‘Mars is a far place. It smells funny, looks funny,
and feels funny. I think to myself nights, too. We came from a nice
town.’

‘It was green,’ she said. ‘In the spring and summer. And yellow and red
in the fall. And ours was a nice house; my, it was old, eighty-ninety
years or so. Used to hear the house talking at night, whispering away.
All the dry wood, the banisters, the front porch, the sills. Wherever
you touched, it talked to you. Every room a different way. And when you
had the whole house talking, it was a family around you in the dark,
putting you to sleep. No other house, the kind they build nowadays, can
be the same. A lot of people have got to go through and live in a house
to make it mellow down all over. This place here, now, this hut, it
doesn’t know I’m in it, doesn’t care if I live or die. It makes a noise
like tin, and tin’s cold. It’s got no pores for the years to sink in.
It’s got no cellar for you to put things away for next year and the year
after that. It’s got no attic where you keep things from last year and
all the other years before you were born; and without an attic, you’ve
got no past. If we only had a little bit up here that was familiar,
Will, then we could make room for all that’s strange. But when
everything, _every single thing_ is strange, then it takes forever to
make things familiar.’

He nodded in the dark. ‘There’s nothing: you say that I haven’t
thought.’

She was looking at the moonlight where it lay upon the suitcases against
the wall. He saw her move her hand down towards them.

‘Carrie!’

‘What?’

He swung his legs out of bed. ‘Carrie, I’ve done a crazy dam-fool thing.
All these months I heard you dreaming away, scared, and the boys at
night and the wind, and Mars out there, the sea-bottoms and all, and …’
He stopped and swallowed. ‘You got to understand what I did and why I
did it. All the money we had in the bank a month ago, all the money we
saved for ten years, I spent.’

‘Will!’

‘I threw it away, Carrie, I swear, I threw it away on nothing. It was
going to be a surprise. But now, tonight, there you are, and there are
those damned suitcases on the floor and …’

‘Will,’ she said, turning around. ‘You mean we’ve gone through all
_this_, on Mars, putting away extra money every week, only to have you
burn it up in a few hours?’

‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘I’m a crazy fool. Look, it’s not long till
morning. We’ll get up early. I’ll take you down to see what I’ve done. I
don’t want to tell you, I want you to see. And if it’s no go, then,
well, there’s always those suitcases and the rocket to Earth four times
a week.’

She did not move. ‘Will, Will,’ she murmured.

‘Don’t say any more,’ he said.

‘Will, Will …’ She shook her head slowly, unbelievingly. He turned away
and lay back down on his own side of the bed, and she sat on the other
side, and for a moment did not lie down, but only sat looking at the
bureau where her handkerchiefs and jewellery and clothing lay ready in
neat stacks where she had left them. Outside a wind the colour of
moonlight stirred up the sleeping dust and powdered the air.

At last she lay back, but said nothing more and was a cold weight in the
bed, staring down the long tunnel of night towards the faintest sign of
morning.

They got up in the very first light and moved in the small quonset hut
without a sound. It was a pantomime prolonged almost to the time when
someone might scream at the silence, as the mother and father and the
boys washed and dressed and ate a quiet breakfast of toast and
fruit-juice and coffee, with no one looking directly at anyone and
everyone watching someone in the reflective surfaces of toaster,
glassware, or cutlery, where all their faces were melted out of shape
and made terribly alien in the early hour. Then, at last, they opened
the quonset door and let in the air that blew across the cold blue-white
Martian seas, where only the sand tides dissolved and shifted and made
ghost patterns, and they stepped out under a raw and staring cold sky
and began their walk towards a town, which seemed no more than a
motion-picture set far on ahead of them on a vast, empty stage.

‘What part of town are we going to?’ asked Carrie.

‘The rocket depot,’ he said. ‘But before we get there, I’ve a lot to
say.’

The boys slowed down and moved behind their parents, listening. The
father gazed ahead, and not once in all the time he was talking did he
look at his wife or sons to see how they were taking all that he said.

‘I believe in Mars,’ he began, quietly. I guess I believe some day it’ll
belong to us. We’ll nail it down. We’ll settle in. We won’t turn tail
and run. It came to me one day a year ago, right after we first arrived.
Why did we come? I asked myself. Because, I said, because. It’s the same
thing with the salmon every year. The salmon don’t know why they go
where they go, but they go, anyway. Up rivers they don’t remember, up
streams, jumping waterfalls, but finally making it to where they
propagate and die, and the whole thing starts again. Call it racial
memory, instinct, call it nothing, but there it is. And here we are.’

They walked in the silent morning with the great sky watching them and
the strange blue and steam-white sands sifting about their feet on the
new highway.

‘So here we are. And from Mars where? Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and on
out? Right. _And on out_. Why? Some day the sun will blow up like a
leaky furnace. Boom – there goes Earth. But maybe Mars won’t be hurt; or
if Mars is hurt maybe Pluto won’t be, or if Pluto’s hurt, then where’ll
_we_ be, our sons’ sons, that is?’

He gazed steadily up into that flawless shell of plum-coloured sky.

‘Why, we’ll be on some world with a number maybe; planet 6 of star
system 97, planet 2 of system 99! So damn far off from here you need a
nightmare to take it in! We’ll be gone, do you see, gone off away and
safe! And I thought to myself, ah, ah. So that’s the reason we came to
Mars, so _that’s_ the reason men shoot off their rockets.’

‘Will –’

‘Let me finish. Not to make money, no. Not to see the sights, no. Those
are the lies men tell, _the_ fancy reasons they give themselves. Get
rich, get famous, they say. Have fun, jump around, they say. But all the
while, inside, something else is ticking along the way it ticks in
salmon or whales, the way it ticks, by God, in the smallest microbe you
want to name. And that little clock that ticks in everything living, you
know what it says? It says get away, spread out, move along, keep
swimming. Run to so many worlds and build so many towns that _nothing_
can ever kill man. You _see_, Carrie? It’s not just us come to Mars,
it’s the race, the whole darn human race, depending on how _we_ make out
in our lifetime. This thing is so big I want to laugh, I’m so scared
stiff of it.’

He felt the boys walking steadily behind him and he felt Carrie beside
him and he wanted to see her face and how she was taking all this, but
he didn’t look there, either.

‘All this is no different than me and Dad walking the fields when I was
a boy, casting seed by hand when our seeder broke down and we’d no money
to fix it. It had to be done somehow, for the later crops. My God,
Carrie, my God, you _remember_ those Sunday-supplement articles, THE
EARTH WILL FREEZE IN A MILLION YEARS! I bawled once, as a boy, reading
articles like that. My mother asked why. I’m bawling for all those poor
people up ahead, I said. Don’t worry about them, mother said. But,
Carrie, that’s my whole point; we _are_ worrying about them. Or we
wouldn’t be here. It matters if Man with a capital M keeps going.
There’s nothing better than Man with a capital M in my books. I’m
prejudiced, of course, because I’m one of the breed. But if there’s any
way to get hold of that immortality men are always talking about, this
is the way – spread out – seed the universe. Then you got a harvest
against crop failures anywhere down the line. No matter if Earth has
famines or the rust comes in. You got the new wheat lifting on Pluto or
where-in-hell-ever man gets to in the next thousand years. I’m crazy
with the idea, Carrie, crazy. When I finally hit on it I got so excited
I wanted to grab people, you, the boys, and tell them. But hell, I knew
that wasn’t necessary. I knew a day or night would come when you’d hear
that ticking in yourselves, too, and then you’d see, and no one’d have
to say anything again about all this. It’s big talk, Carrie, I know, and
big thoughts for a man short of five feet five, but by all that’s holy,
it’s true.’

They moved through the deserted streets of the town and listened to the
echoes of their walking feet.

‘And this morning?’ said Carrie.

‘I’m coming to this morning,’ he said. ‘Part of _me_ wants to go home,
too. But the other part says if we go, everything’s lost. So I thought,
what bothers us most? Some of the things we once had. Some of the boys’
things, your things, mine. And I thought, if it takes an old thing to
get a new thing started, by God, I’ll use the old thing. I remember from
history books that a thousand years ago they put charcoals in a
hollowed-out cow-horn, blew on them during the day, so they carried
their fire on marches from place to place, to start a fire every night
from the sparks left over from morning. Always a new fire, but always
something of the old in it. So I weighed and balanced it off. Is the Old
worth all our money? I asked. No! It’s only the things we _did_ with the
Old that have any worth. Well, then, is the New worth _all_ our money? I
asked. Do you feel like investing in the day after the middle of next
week? Yes! I said. If I can fight this thing that makes us want to go
back to Earth, I’d dip my money in kerosene and strike a match!’

Carrie and the two boys did not move. They stood on the street, looking
at him as if he were a storm that had passed over and around, almost
blowing them from the ground, a storm that was now dying away.

‘The freight rocket came in this morning,’ he said, quietly. ‘Our
delivery’s on it. Let’s go and pick it up.’

They walked slowly up the three steps into the rocket depot and across
the echoing floor towards the freight room that was just sliding back
its doors, opening for the day.

‘Tell us again about the salmon,’ said one of the boys.

In the middle of the warm morning they drove out of town in a rented
truck filled with great crates and boxes and parcels and packages, long
ones, tall ones, short ones, flat ones, all numbered and neatly
addressed to one William Prentiss, New Toledo, Mars.

‘Will,’ said Carrie, over and over again. ‘Will.’

They stopped the truck by the quonset hut and the boys jumped down and
helped their mother out. For a moment Will sat behind the wheel, and
then slowly got out himself, to walk around and look into the back of
the truck at the crates.

And by noon all but one of the boxes were opened and their contents
placed on the sea-bottom where the family stood among them.

‘Carrie …’

And he led her up the old porch steps that now stood uncrated on the
edge of town.

‘Listen to ’em, Carrie.’

The steps squeaked and whispered underfoot.

‘What do they say, tell me what they say?’

She stood on the ancient wooden steps, holding to herself, and could not
tell him.

He waved his hand. ‘Front porch here, living-room there, dining-room,
kitchen, three bedrooms. Part we’ll build new, part we’ll bring. Of
course all we got here now is the front porch, some parlour furniture
and the old bed.’

‘All that money, Will!’

He turned, smiling. ‘You’re not mad, now, look at me! You’re not mad.
We’ll bring it all up, next month, next year. The cut-glass vases, that
Armenian carpet your mother gave us in 1961! Just _let_ the sun
explode!’

They looked at the other crates, numbered and lettered: Front-porch
swing, front-porch wicker rocker, hanging Chinese crystals …

‘I’ll blow them myself to make them ring.’

They set the front door on the top of the stairs, with its little panes
of coloured glass, and Carrie looked through the strawberry window.

‘What do you see?’

But he knew what she saw, for he gazed through the coloured glass, too.
And there was Mars, with its cold sky warmed and its dead seas fired
with colour, with its hills like mounds of strawberry ice, and its sand
like burning charcoals sifted by wind. The strawberry window, the
strawberry window, breathed soft rose colours on the land and filled the
mind and the eye with the light of a never-ending dawn. Bent there,
looking through, he heard himself say:

‘The town’ll be out this way in a year. This’ll be a shade street,
you’ll have your porch, and you’ll have friends. You won’t need all this
much, then. But starting right here, with this little bit that’s
familiar, watch it spread, watch Mars change so you’ll know it as if
you’d known it all your life.’

He ran down the steps to the last and as-yet unopened canvas-covered
crate. With his pocket knife he cut a hole in the canvas. ‘Guess!’ he
said.

‘My kitchen stove? My furnace?’

‘Not in a million years.’ He smiled very gently. ‘Sing me a song,’ he
said.

‘Will, you’re clean off your head.’

‘Sing me a song worth all the money we had in the bank and now don’t
have, but who gives a blast in hell,’ he said.

‘I don’t know anything but "Genevieve, Sweet Genevieve"!’

‘Sing that,’ he said.

But she could not open her mouth and start the song. He saw her lips
move and try, but there was no sound.

He ripped the canvas wider and shoved his hand into the crate and
touched around for a quiet moment, and started to sing the words himself
until he moved his hand a last time and then a single clear piano chord
sprang out on the morning air.

‘There,’ he said. ‘Let’s take it right on to the end. Everyone! Here’s
the harmony.’


If you enjoyed _The Day it Rained Forever_, check out these other great Ray Bradbury titles.

[]

Buy the ebook here

[]

Buy the ebook here

[]

Buy the ebook here

[]

Buy the ebook here

[]

Buy the ebook here

[]

Buy the ebook here


About the Author

Ray Bradbury (August 22, 1920–June 5, 2012) published some 500 short
stories, novels, plays and poems since his first story appeared in Weird
Tales when he was twenty years old. Among his many famous works are
_Fahrenheit 451_, _The Illustrated Man_, and _The Martian Chronicles_.


Also by the Author

FAHRENHEIT 451

THE MARTIAN CHRONICLES

THE ILLUSTRATED MAN

DEATH IS A LONELY BUSINESS

QUICKER THAN THE EYE

I SING THE BODY ELECTRIC

GOLDEN APPLES OF THE SUN

THE OCTOBER COUNTRY

FROM THE DUST RETURNED

DRIVING BLIND

GREEN SHADOWS, WHITE WHALES

THE GRAVEYARD FOR LUNATICS

LET’S ALL KILL CONSTANCE

THE TOYNBEE CONVECTOR

LONG AFTER MIDNIGHT

THE MACHINERIES OF JOY

SUMMER MORNING, SUMMER NIGHT

S IS FOR SPACE

R IS FOR ROCKET

DARK CARNIVAL

THE HALLOWEEN TREE

THE HAUNTED COMPUTER AND THE ANDROID POPE

WHEN ELEPHANTS LAST IN THE DOORYARD BLOOMED

WHERE ROBOT MICE AND ROBOT MEN RUN ROUND IN ROBOT TOWNS

SWITCH ON THE NIGHT

[]


About the Publisher

AUSTRALIA

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au

CANADA

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East – 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

NEW ZEALAND

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

UNITED KINGDOM

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77–85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

UNITED STATES

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com
