THE

ANTHEM SPRINTERS

_And Other Antics_ by

Ray Bradbury

THE DIAL PRESS NEW YORK 1963

APOLLO EDITIONS

425   PARK   AVENUE   SOUTH,   N. Y.   16, N. Y.

[]

COPYRIGHT © 1963 BY RAY BRADBURY

_All Rights Reserved_

_
_

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 62-17689

Any resemblance between the characters herein and actual persons living
or dead is purely coincidental.

NOTICE! No amateur or professional reading of this work may be given
without permission in writing from the author's agent, Harold Matson
Company, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20.

DESIGNED BY ALAN M. HEICKLEN

MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY THE COLONIAL PRESS INC.,
CLINTON, MASS.

Jacket Design by Joan Berg

To John Huston, _who sent me after the White Whale;_

_
_

To Nick,

_the_ _cab-driver of Kilcock, who helped me in my Search;_

_
_

To Len and Beth Probst, _who found me when I was lost;_

and to Maggie, _who brought me safely home._

CONTENTS

 

The Great Collision of Monday Last

The First Night of Lent

_A\ Clear\ View\ of\ an\ Irish\ Mist_

_The\ Anthem\ Sprinters_

The\ Queen's\ Own\ Evaders,

 



THE GREAT COLLISION OF MONDAY LAST


CHARACTERS

 

THE   OLD   MAN   (MIKE)

THE   YOUNG   MAN   (MC GUIRE)

HEEBER  FINN

KELLY

FEENEY

QUINLAN

KILPATRICK

THE  DOCTOR

PAT  NOLAN

MR.   PEEVEY

FLYNN

DONOVAN

CASEY

_The curtain rises upon darkness. Later on, we will make out certain
details, but now, in the dark, we hear someone whistling and singing,
off away somewhere, an Irish ditty of some vintage or other; "Sweet
Molly Malone" will do as well as any. The voice fades, then comes back,
dies off into a kind of pumping gasp, and at last we see why, as onto
the stage, wobbling badly, exhausted, pedals an old man on a bike. He
more falls than gets off the damned thing in midstage and lets the beast
lie there at his feet as he takes off his cap and wipes his brow,
shaking his head._

The Old Man Old Man, you're not what you once was!

_He puts away his handkerchief, puts on his cap, bends to heft the bike,
is still too winded and lets it fall._

Ah, lie there, brute that you are!

_He takes out a bottle and eyes it sadly. There is but one last fiery
gulp in it. He downs it philosophically and holds it up to let the last
tiny drop fall off on his tongue. As he is doing so, we hear a car
approach, stage left. Its lights flash out in a beam to spot_ the old
man, _who fends off the light with his free hand._

Enough of that, now!

_The lights go off, the motor cuts, a door opens and slams,_ the young
man _enters, stage left._

The Young Man Is anything wrong?

The Old Man _(blinking, peering)_ You made a bund man of me is all.
Who's there? _(Squints)_

the young man, _uncertain, takes half a step._

The Young Man Oh, you don't know me—

The Old Man That's certain! _(Squints)_ Is that an American voice I
hear?

The Young Man I just got ofi the boat—

The Old Man He just got off the boat! He did indeed! Come closer!

the young man _approaches._

There! Me eyes are better. An American face to go with the American
voice.

The Young Man May I be of assistance . . . ?

the old man _holds the bottle up so it can drain its emptiness on the
air._

The Old Man

Well, there's assistance _and_ assistance. It came over me as I pumped
up the hill, one or the other of us, me or this damned vehicle _(He
kicks the bike gently),_ is seventy years old.

The Young Man Congratulations.

The Old Man For what? Breathing? That's a habit, not a virtue.

The Young Man Let me give you a lift.

The Old Man

No, a moment's rest, thanks, and me and the beast will be on our way. We
don't know where we're going, Sally and me—that's the damn bike's
name—ye see, but we pick a road each day and give it a try.

the young man, _who has been watchful and warming to this, now says,
with real affection:_

The Young Man Does your mother know you're out?

The Old Man _(surprised)_

Strange you say that! She does! Ninety-five she is, back there in the
cot! Mother, I said, I'll be gone the day; leave the whisky alone!

_He laughs to himself, quietly._ I never married, you know.

The Young Man I'm sorry.

The Old Man

First you congratulate me for being old and now you're sorry I've no
wife. It's sure you don't know Ireland. Being old and having no wives is
one of our principal industries! You see, a man can't marry without
property. You bide your time till your mother and father are called
Beyond. Then when their property's yours, you look for a wife. It's a
waiting game. I'll marry yet.

The Young Man At _seventy?_

The Old Man _(ruffling)_

I'd get twenty good years out of marriage with a fine woman, even this
late, do you doubt it!

The Young Man _(impressed)_ I do not!

the old man _relaxes._

The Old Man Now, what are you up to, in Ireland?

The Young Man I'm looking for the Irish.

The Old Man _(surprised, pleased, then mystified)_ Ah, that's difficult.
They come, they throw shadows, they go. You got one standing before you,
now!

The Young Man _(smiling)_ I know!

The Old Man You be a writer, of course.

The Young Man How did you guess!

The Old Man _(gestures)_

The country's overrun! There's writers turning over rocks in Cork and
writers fishing in dinghies off Dun Laoghaire and writers trudging
through bogs at Kilashandra. The day will come, mark me, when they will
be five writers for every human being in the world!

The Young Man

Well, writer I am, and Irish I'm after. What shapes the Irish to their
dooms, and runs them on their way?

the old man _eyes_ the young man _with not exactly suspicion, but . . ._

The Old Man

You're in the country two hours and already you sound like an actor in
the midst of the Abbey Theatre stage!

The Young Man

Do I? Well, my family's all from Ireland, fifty years ago. So I came to
see their town, their land—their—

The Old Man _(wincing)_ Enough! I got the sense of your jabber! Come
here!

the young man _steps closer,_ the old man _takes his shoulder._

All right now, you say you want to bag the Irish in his lair? find him
out? write him down? I'll take you to that place where you can spy on
him unbeknownst! And where you'll see an event that's Irish as Irish can
be—unseen before by outlander's eyes, or if seen not believed, or if
believed not understood!

The Young Man _(eagerly)_ An Event? a fair? a circus?

The Old Mais

A _sort_ of circus, you might say ... an unusual circumstance, the
meeting of Fates is better! Hurry on, man, or we'll miss it!

the OLD man _starts to trot, with his bicycle._

The Young Man My car—

The Old Man Leave it there. It's not far.

TO MUSIC: the young man _follows_ the old man _off into the_ _wings,
right. They reappear almost immediately, left,_ the old man _on the bike
this time, pumping unsteadily along._

The Old Man _(pointing)_ Do you see those men there, walking on the
road?

The Young Man _(running behind)_ Yes!

The Old Man

That's _not quite_ the Irish!

 

TO MUSIC: _They vanish offstage right and reappear, left,_ the young man
_still jogging after the old one on the bike._

_(Pointing)_ Do you see all them young fellows on their bikes pumping
uphill?

The Young Man _(breathless)_ Yes!

The Old Man That's _almost_ the Irish.

TO MUSIC: _They vanish stage right, then reappear, left,_ the old man
_seated on the crossbars of the bike,_ the young man _pumping._

_(Pointing)_ Do you see that sign, now?

The Young Man _(gasping)_ Yes!

The Old Man Hold everything! _Stop!_

_The bike wobbles and collapses. Both leap off barely in time._ the old
man _points dramatically._

_That's_ the Irish!

_A door has slid out of the wings, right. A sign has come down out of
the flies,_ the young man _reads it aloud._

The Young Man Heeber Finn's. _(His face takes fire)_ Why . . . _it's a
pub!_

The Old Man _(all innocence)_

By God, now, I think you're right! _(He runs to the pub door)_ Come meet
my family!

The Young Man Family? You said you weren't married!

The Old Man

I'm not! But a man, seventy or no, has got to have a family. Right?
Well!

the old man _rams the double wicket doors, plunges through. At this
instant the scrim goes from front to back lighting. Instantaneously we
see the inside of Heeber Finn's pub, the men at the bar, and Finn
himself working the spigots. Once the lighting is established, the scrim
can go up out of the way. At the sound of the doors flung back, the men
at the bar jerk._

It's _me,_ boys!

heeber finn, _behind the bar, sighs._

Finn Mike! Ya gave us a start!

Another Man We thought it was—a _crisis!_

the old man _is pleased with the savor of that word._

The Old Man Well, maybe it is! This is my friend!

_He points to_ the young man. _Now_ _he points to the others._

_. ._ . and these, you might say, are what I use for a family . . .

the young man _is touched by this fancy, and nods to all. The men murmur
in friendly fashion, nodding._

Finn

Has your friend a crisis, then, Mike?

the old man _sobers dramatically._

The Old Man He's come to see the Irish, clear!

finn _pours from a bottle._

Finn See it or drink it?

The Young Man A—bit of both.

Finn Well spoke. To your health.

_He shoves the glass across the counter, winking,_ the old man _leans,
peering, toward the door._

The Old Man

Fine! it's dark early. Ah, that lovely mist! Now, peel an eye, Young
Man. There's great events preparing themselves out in that fog, of all
kinds and sorts even / can't tell you; right, boys?

_The men assent,_ the young man _drinks, gasps._

The Young Man _{peering)_ What should I look for?

The Old Man

Let nothing pass unquestioned! _(Turns)_ Give 'em another, Finn, to
focus his eyes.

finn _pours,_ the young man _wisely lets it lie._ the old man _trots to
the door, half opening same to let in a wisp of fog, which he fingers._

Will you look? Why, you could wear the dainty stuff about your neck! A
fine night. _Anything_ could happen! and always _does!_

_He inhales the fog, the lovely dark, smiles at the aroma, lets the
doors shimmy shut, and comes back to the bar to sip his drink._

Mind, now, maybe you'll have to wait for some other night—

Finn _(incensed)_

Can you name one night in history wasn't a night of earth-shaking
consequence at Heeber Finn's?

The Old Man _(scratches head)_ I can't.

Finn You can't. _(Turns)_ Son, do you play darts?

The Young Man Yes.

Finn Good! Do you lie?

The Young Man Lie?

Finn Can you tell untruths, man? Big ones, small, all sizes?

The Young Man _(dubiously)_ I'll try.

Finn _(pleased)
_ I'm sure you will! We 

_Suddenly_ the old man _quickens, catching hold of elbows to_ _right and
left._

The Old Man Hist!

_All down the bar, everyone freezes._

_(Whispering)_ That was _it!_

_Every_ _head, on a single string, turns toward the door._

The Young Man What . . . ?

The Old Man Ssst! _Listen . . ._

_All lean. All hear_—something, _far away._ _(Eyes shut)_ That's it ...
yes . . . yes . . .

_Everyone stares. Footsteps batter the outside step drunkenly. The
double wing doors flap wide as a bloody man in his thirties staggers in,
capless, holding his bloody head with a bloody hand. He stops, blinking
numbly at the crowd._

the young man _stares, amazed._

_AII down the bar, the men lean toward the intruder._

_The intruder sways, trying to find words, eyes glazed._

the old man _moves forward, frantically curious, gesturing his hand as
if bidding the man to speak up, speak up!_

_The bloody intruder finally gasps for breath._

The Intruder Collision! Collision on the road!

_Then, chopped at the knees, he falls down. The men glance at each
other._

All Collision!

heeber finn _vaults the bar. His landing breaks the spell._

Finn

Kelly, Feeney, quick!

_All run toward the "body."_ heeber finn _is first, with_ the old

MAN.

The Old Man Easy does it!

Finn

Quinlan, out to the road! Mind the victim! Kilpatrick, run for the Doc!

A Voice Wait!

ALL _look Up._

the doc _steps out from the far end of the bar, from a little dark cubby
where he has been standing alone with his philosophies._

finn _is surprised._

Finn Doc, you're so quiet I forgot you was there! Out you go!

the doctor _plunges out the front door with half a dozen men. The fog
streams in past them._

the young man _looks down at the "victim" on the floor. The "victim's"
lips twitch._

The Victim _(gasping, whispering)_ Collision . . .

Finn Softly, boys.

_They lift "the victim" and carry him over to lay him on the bar._ the
young man _comes up to stare at the man lying there, and at his image in
the mirror behind the bar . . . two dread calamities for the price of
one._

The Young Man _(puzzled)_ But ... I didn't hear any cars on the road.

the old man _is proud to reply:_

The Old Man That you didn't!

_He beckons. With a high sense of melodrama,_ THE OLD man _escorts him
to the swinging doors, opens one for him._

_A scrim has come down as they move toward the door._

_As they emerge into the "outside," the "world," the lights go off
behind the scrim and come on in front of it. This particular_ _scrim is
a mist, a fog, a gray background across which they may wander, looking
out over the apron at the night, the weather, and the men foraging
beyond. There are wisps of fog or mist moving in from either side, from
the wings, and from below in the pit._

the old man _stands next to the young one, on the steps of the pub,
sniffing the weather appreciatively._

You'd almost think that Ireland was gone. Oh, but it's there, all right.

the young man _stares into the fog, continuing his thought._

The Young Man . . . nor did I hear a collision.

The Old Man _{shouting beyond)_

Try the crossroad, boys! That's where it most often does! _{Quieter, he
turns to_ the young man) Ah, we don't be great ones for commotion, nor
great crashing sounds. But collision you'll see if you step on out
there. _{Points stage left)_

the young man _moves stage left, probing into the fog, groping._

Walk now, don't run! It's the Devil's own night. You might head-on into
Feeney, too drunk to find any road, no matter what's on it. You got a
match?

The Young Man A match?

The Old Man Blind you'll be, but try it!

the young man _strikes a match, holds it out in front of him._

That's pitiful poor, but on you go, and me behind you. Careful now,
_walk!_

_Both move in a great circle about the stage._ Hist, now!

_They listen to a rally of voices approaching._ Here they come!

A Voice _(hidden in jog)_ Easy now. Don't jiggle him!

Another Voice Ah, the shameful blight!

_Suddenly from the fog, stage left, a steaming lump of men appear
bearing atop themselves a crumpled object._

the young man _stares up, holding the match. We glimpse a bloodstained
and livid face high up there._

_Someone brushes the lit match, which snuffs out._

_The catafalque rushes on._

A Voice Where's Heeber Finn's?

Another Voice Bear left, left, I say!

_The crowd vanishes,_ the young man _peers after. He hears a chilling
insect rattle approach in the fog. He strikes another match._

The Young Man Who's there?

A Voice         ;

It's us!   !

Another Voice With the vehicles!

the young man _blinks at the old, who nods sagely._

A Voice You might say we got—the collision!

_Two men trot out of the fog, bringing with them under their arms two
ancient black bicycles, minus head and taillights._

the young MAN _stares at them. The two men with the bikes_ _smile, proud
of their task, give the bikes a heft, tip their caps, and trot off away
again, vanishing in mist, toward Finn's, just as the last match dies
forever,_ the young man, _stunned with the simple facts, hangs his mouth
open, turning to_ the old MAN.

The Young Man What?

The Old Man _(winks)_ What? What, indeed! Ah, the delightful mysteries!

_And he runs off into fog._ the young man, _musing, follows._

The Young Man Men . . . _bicycles . . ._ collision? Old Man, wait for
_me!_

the young man _runs, finds the front door to Finn's, and plunges in. The
lights come on inside Finn's, the fog-scrim vanishes._

_Inside Finn's,_ the old man _turns to welcome the arrival of_ the young
man.

The Old Man

Ah, there you are! _(lowers voice to a whisper)_ We got the "bodies" on
the bar.

the young man _peers over the crowd at the two "bodies" laid out in pale
ruin on the long bar,_ the doc _moving fretfully between the two,
shouldering the crowd aside._ the old man _whispers:_

One's Pat Nolan. Not under employment at the moment. the old man _peers
and nods at the next._

The other's Mr. Peevey from Meynooth. In candy and cigarettes, mostly.

the old man _raises his voice._

Are they long for this world, now, Doc?

the doc _mutters, swabbing a marbled face._

The Doc Ah, be still, won't ya! Here, let's put one victim on the floor.

the doc _moves,_ finn _stops him._

Finn

The floor's a tomb. He'll catch his death down there. Best leave him up
where the warm air gathers from our talk.

the doc _shrugs and continues working,_ the young man _whispers in_ the
old man's _hairy ear._

The Young Man But I've never heard of an accident like this in all my
life!

The Old Man _(fascinated with_ the doc) That you didn't!

The Young Man Are you sure there were absolutely no cars?

The Old Man None.

The Young Man Only these two men on their bikes?

The Old Man _(turning)_ Only! _Only!_

The Young Man _(embarrassed)_ I mean—

The Old Man Great gods, man, what do you _know_ of buy-cycles?

The Young Man Just—

The Old Man Just nothing! Clear the way!

the old man _fists a path to the two bikes leaned to the wall._ Flynn!
Donovan! Lend a hand! Casey, the other bike!

_He kicks the hackstand of the bike down. He swings astride a bike. The
men grab front and back to steady it._ CASEY _does like__wise with the
second bike._

Where am I now?

The Young Man In Heeber Finn's—

The Old Man

_No!_ I'm on the Meynooth Road . . . idling home lazy as you please . .
.

_He pumps. The back wheel, being free, hums quietly at a nice easy
pace,_ casey _pumps, too._

_(Listens)_ I hear a church bell. I know I'm late for meals. So what do
I do?

The Young Man _(trying)_ Go faster?

The Old Man

Now you're with it, lad! Faster I go! Where before I was toddling along
easy at twenty or twenty-five, now here I work up a drizzling sweat at—

Flynn

Forty an hour!

The Old Man Forty-five! Fifty!

_He pumps furiously, bent down in concentrated passion._

Now with a long downhill glide I hit sixty! So here I come, with no
front or taillights.

The Young Man Isn't there a law against that?

The Old Man To hell with government interference! So here I come!

Casey And here / come! the other way!

_Both pump furiously, heads down._

The Old Man

The two of us, no lights, heads down, flying home from one town to the
next, thrashing like Sin himself's at our behinds! Both going opposite
ways—

Casey But both on the _same side_ of the road!

The Old Man

Always ride the wrong side of the road, lad, it's safer, they say! But
look on those boys, fair destroyed by all that official palaver. Why?
One remembered it, the other didn't! Better if the officials kept their
mouths shut! For there the two boys lie, dying!

the young man _stares. The wheels hum, whining!_

The Young Man Dying?

Casey _(pumping)_

Well, think on it, man! What stands between two able-bodied hell-bent
fellas jumping along the path from Kilcock to Mey-nooth?

The Old Man _(pumping)_

Fog! Fog is all. Only fog to keep their skulls from bashing together. So
look now! Here we come, _bang!_ _The old man jerks his bike up in the
air with a grand whining, humming flourish, as does_ casey.

There we go, nine feet up in the air, heads together like dear chums
met, flailing the mist, our bikes clenched like two tomcats. Then we all
fall down and just lay there, feeling around for the Dark Angel.

_They let the bikes jail and stand over them, looking down at the
imaginary wreckage._

the young man _looks from them to the bar._

The Young Man Surely these men won't—

Casey

Oh, _won't_ they? Why, last year alone in all the Free State, no night
passed some soul did not meet in fatal collision with another.

The Young Man _(aghast)_

You mean to say over three hundred Irish bicyclists die every year,
hitting each other?

the old man _bows his head as at the grave of a friend._

The Old Man God's truth and a pity!

heeber FINN _eyes the "bodies."_

Finn I never ride my bike nights. I _walk._

The Young Man Why . . . let's get them to a hospital, then, quick!

the old man _is mildly irritated at this interruption of their
round-robin discussion._

The Old Man One thing at a time, please. You was saying, Finn . . . ?

Finn

I walk!

Casey But even walking, the damn bikes run you down!

The Old Man True!

Casey

Awheel, or afoot, some idiot's always pantin' up doom the other way,
they'd sooner split you down the seam than wave hello!

The Young Man _(touching_ the old man's _elbow)_ The victims here—

The Old Man

One moment, lad. _(Shakes head)_ Ah, the brave men I've seen ruined or
half-ruined or worse, and headaches their lifetimes after.

_He looks at the bicycles on the floor between them, and trembles, his
eyelids shut._

You might almost think, mightn't you, that human beings was not made to
handle such delicate instruments of power.

The Young Man _(still dazed)_ Three hundred dead each year . . .

Casey

And that don't count the "walkin' wounded" by the thousands every
fortnight who, cursing, throw their bikes in the bog forever and take
government pensions to salve their all-but-murdered bodies.

The Young Man _(nervously)_ I hate to bring it up but should we stand
here just _talking?_

The Old Man _(wounded, as are the others) Just_ talking! We're debating
the problems and making the decisions! Look there, do ya see?

_They look._

the doc, _quite obviously enjoying his moment of power in center stage
of the crowd, walks back and forth between the two creatures on the bar.
The crowd looks after him from right to left. He is building his moment
of suspense. He squints one eye, closes both, rubs his chin, scratches
his ear._

The Men _(restlessly)_ Ah ...

the doc _realizing he has gone almost too jar, feeling his audience
begin to drift away, now snatches their attention back by straightening
up and exhaling briskly._

The Doc

Well, now!

_The men quicken._

the old man _whispers to_ the YOUNG man, _grabbing his arm._

The Old Man He's ready for his pronouncement!

the doc, _veteran of much medical play-acting, rocks on his feet, and
points at the first "body."_

The Doc This chap here—

_The crowd leans toward the chap._

Bruises, lacerations, and agonizin' backaches for two weeks run-nin'.

_Everyone nods at the shame of it._ the doc _now turns to the other and
makes his face grim. The men lean that way._

As for this one—

_He pauses._

_(In a dramatic whisper)_ Concussion.

All Concussion!

_The quiet wind of their voices rises and falls in the silence._

The Doc

He'll survive if we run him quick now to Meynooth Clinic. Now then—whose
car will volunteer?

_The crowd looks at itself, then turns as a staring body toward_ the
young man. _He feels the gentle shift as he is drawn from outside the
ritual to its deep and innermost core. He looks about, thinking perhaps
there may be another volunteer. Then he walks to the door, half opens
it, and looks out._

The Young Man _{counting)_

_. . ._ twelve . . . fourteen . . . sixteen bicycles . . . and, two
hundred yards down the road . . . one automobile . . . _mine._

The Old Man Praise God, that's fortunate!

the young man _turns sheepishly. The crowd leans toward him._ the young
man _nods, once,_ the doc _quickens with gratitude._

The Doc

A volunteer!! Quick, lads, now, hustle this victim—gently—to our good
friend's vehicle. Take his keys. Drive the car up outside!

the young man _holds out the keys as someone runs by, seizing them. The
men reach out to lift the body and freeze when_ the young man _clears
his throat. All look to him._ the young man _circles them with his hand,
tips his cupped hand to his mouth, and nods at_ finn. _The men gasp._

Casey He's right, of course! It's a cold night. One for the road!

heeber finn _Unes_ _up the shot glasses lip to Up and sprinkles them all
quickly with the passing bottle. Hands seize the glasses. One of the
victims is taken off the bar and set in a chair, where, reviving, his
face like a white cheese, he feels a glass put in his trembly hand._

The Old Man Here, lad, now ... tell us ...

Casey What happened, eh . . . ?eh?

_The drinks are gulped. The second victim is hefted. The men head for
the door,_ the young man, _amazed, watches them go, his drink in his
hand._

The Old Man Finish your drink, Mr. . . . ?

The Young Man _{faintly)_ McGuire.

The Old Man By the saints, he _is_ Irish!

the young man _looks_—_at the recovering victim, at the bar, the_
_mirrors, the two bikes against the wall, the fog seeping in through the
door, then, at last, at_ the old man, _and the depths of the drink in
his hand._

The Young Man _{thoughtfully)_ No ... I don't think I am.

_He swigs his drink and heads for the door with_ the old man
_dogtrotting after. At the door he stops, for a voice is speaking behind
him. He does not turn, but listens. Behind, over his shoulder, the
recovered "victim" is sipping his drink and talking to two men bent
earnestly to listen._

The Victim _{hoarsely, dramatically)_ Well . . . I'm on me way home,
blithe as you please, see, and—

the young man _steps through the doors quickly. The pub lights go out.
Outside, the fog-scrim appears, mist drifts in from either side. We hear
voices off and away, and the approach of_ the young man's _car, driven
by someone. The car stops, just out of sight._

A Voice There we are!

Another Voice Now, easy, inside with the poor victim!

the young man _muses, with_ the old man _beside him, in the night._

The Young Man

Old Man, do you ever have auto wrecks, collisions between people in
_cars?_

The Old Man _{insulted)_

Not in our town!! If you like _that_ sort of thing, now _(Nods
scorn-__jully_ _east),_ Dublin's the very place for it!

the young man _looks east, nods, moves toward his car offstage._

Look now, McGuire, a last bit of advice. You've driven little in
Ireland, right?

THE YOUNG MAN _nods._

Listen. Driving to Meynooth, fog and all, go fast! Raise a din!

The Young Man In this fog? Why?

The Old Man

Why, he asks! To scare the bicyclists off the path, _and_ the cows! Both
sides! If you drive slow, you'll creep up on and do away with dozens
before they know what took them off. Also—when another car
approaches—douse your lights, pass each other, lights out, in safety.
Them devil's own lights have put out more eyes and demolished more
innocents than all of seeing's worth. Is it clear, now?

THE YOUNG MAN _nods._

You got a cap? I see ya haven't. So—

the old man _produces a tweed cap from his coat pocket._

The Old Man Put this on! Bicycling, driving, or especially, walking,
_always_ wear a cap. It'll save you the frightful migraines should you
meet Kelly or Moran or some other hurtling full tilt the other way, full
of fiery moss and hard-skulled from birth! So you see, there's rules for
pedestrians, too, in our country, and _wear a cap,_ is Number One!

the young man _pulls the cap down and looks to_ the old man _for his
approval, which he gets._

The Old Man Well now, get along, lad.

The Young Man Aren't you riding with me?

The Old Man Ah, no, I got the beast here, I must check on the mother.

_He picks up his bike and slings a slatty leg over it and pulls his cap
down._

The Old Man

Well, sir, did you find what you came for? did you see the Irish, clear?

The Young Man

I saw but didn't see . . . lost one thing and found another . . . now,
_that's_ gone, too. Tell me, how did you guess all this would happen
tonight, here? How did you know?

The Old Man

I didn't! Some other night it would be some other thing! Like I said,
anything could happen, and always does! That's Ireland for you. And it's
waiting out there for you now, in the fog. Go find it!

the young man _runs off, stage right._

The Young Man I will!

_We hear the motor revved, offstage._

The Old Man _(shouting off)_ Remember what I said! Douse your lights!

_The lights go off, stage right._

The Old Man _(shouting)_ Go fast!

_Offstage, we hear the furious gunning of the motor._

The Old Man Keep your cap on! Tight! (_Yanks his own cap, hard)_

The Young Man _(offstage)_ See you again!

The Old Man God willing!

_We hear the car roar off and away. The sound fades._

_When it is gone,_ the old man _is alone on his bike. He prepares_

_himself__, clears his throat, and sings going off, stage right._

The Old Man "She wheeled her wheelbarrow . . ."

_At which moment, a shadowy bicyclist_ (finn) _comes through the other
way. They almost collide._

The Old Man Damn! Watch where you're going!

Finn Hell! Look what you're doing!

The Old Man Heeber Finn, it's you!

Finn Old man, it's you!

The Old Man God Bless!

Finn

God Bless! _(Takes up the song, sailing away)_ "She wheeled her
wheelbarrow. . ."

The Old Man _(sings)_ ". . . through streets wide and narrow . . ."

_They vanish, pumping, but to reappear, wave, pass, and go off in
darkness, alternating lines of song, vanishing at last as the mist and
dark take over:_

Heeber Finn ". . . singing cockles . . ."

The Old Man ". . . and mussels . . ."

Heeber Finn ". . . alive! . . ."

The Old Man ". . . alive! . . ."

Both Together ". . . Ohhhh! . . ."

_By this time the curtain has hushed down on the mist and the play is
at. . ._

THE   END



THE FIRST NIGHT OF LENT


CHARACTERS

THE  YOUNG  MAN   (DOUGLAS)

MIKE   (THE   OLD  MAN)

HEEBER   FINN

TIMULTY

NOLAN O'CONNELL

PURDY

KELLEEN

SEAN   (TELEPHONE   OPERATOR)

_Curtain up on darkness._

the young man _strolls along in the dark to a single spotlight where he
stands debating with himself, hands in pockets, head down._

_Off somewhere, a harp begins to play a few bars of "Mollie Malone" or
some such ditty._

the young man _raises his hands._

The Young Man

Please. No harp. That will only muddy the waters and stop us from
thinking clear about Ireland.

_The harp rushes to the end of the next few bars, as if to get it all
in, then ceases,_ the young man _nods, not surprised at this maneuver,
and continues, looking out at the audience._

Does anyone understand the Irish?

No.

Will anyone _ever_ understand them in all of time?

No.

Can there be some system or method to size and sort them, tincture their
ganglions so we can slide them under a microscope and see what makes
them dance? _{Shakes his head)_

No history can date them, no psychiatrist's couch lure them, no song
explain them. And yet, as others tried, now so must I.

Did I ever know one solitary Irish fellow well?

I did. His name? Mike.

mike _sticks his head out of the wings, left._

Mike Ya called, sir?

The Young Man In a moment, Mike—

Mike Take all the time in the world!

_mike's head vanishes._

The Young Man I knew Mike for two hundred consecutive nights—

Mike's Voice _(offstage)_ Two-hundred-o/jc/

The Young Man

—two-hundred-one consecutive nights of one fall, winter, and early
spring when I went to Ireland to write a film. I lived in Dublin, and
every day when I finished ten new fresh pages of script, I would hire a
taxi out to Kilcock, show my director my work, and at midnight go back
to Dublin. How? By hiring the only taxi for miles around. So, every
night I'd call the village exchange.

_He picks up a telephone. And perhaps to one side, now, spotlighted, we
can see_ sean, the telephone operator, _bent over the village
switchboard._

Sean Are ya there?

The Young Man Hello, would you—

Sean Ah, it's _you,_ Mr. Douglas.

The Young Man Who's this?

Sean Why, Sean, of course!

The Young Man Sean?

Sean

The wife's got the uneasies. I took over the village ex-change for
tonight.

The Young Man Good . . .

Sean A fine night.

The Young Man It is.

Sean It must be up to at least fifty degrees on the damn thermometer.

The Young Man All of that.

Sean Warm for this time of year.

The Young Man I always said, Dublin is the Riviera of Ireland.

Sean

Did ya, now? I must remember to tell the wife. I suppose Heeber Finn's
is where you're calling?

The Young Man If you don't mind, Sean.

Sean Mind! I'll put ya through like a bolt of lightning!

_There is a hissing crackle. From the phone now pours a veritable
millrace of voices, laughter, tinkling bottles, toasts, brags, and
general multitude of hilarity. In the background, through a scrim, we
see Finn's, and the crowd there at the bar,_ the young man _listens,
fascinated._

_(At last)_ I have reason to believe you are through to Heeber Finn's,
sir.

The Young Man _(listening)_ I don't doubt it, Sean.

_We see_ finn, _behind the bar, maneuvering drinks and the phone._

Finn's Voice _(shouting)_ Heeber Finn here! Who's on the other end!

Sean

Heeber, it's _himself_ from the big house!

the young man _starts to speak but is cut across._

Finn Mr. Douglas, is it?

Sean The same!

Finn

Always glad to hear from Mr. Douglas.

the young man _starts to speak, but_—

Sean Did you know he was a writer?

Finn _(awed)_ I _did_ not!

the YOUNG MAN _opens his mouth, nodding._

Sean He is! Writes them science and fiction stories!

Finn _(dismayed)_ How's that?

Sean

You know; them shiny magazines with the green monsters chasing raw naked
women over the Martian Hills on the covers!

Finn _(pleased)_ So _that's_ what he's up to!

the young man _opens his mouth, but_—

Sean He is also writing the fillum with the title _Moby Dick._

Finn _Is he?_

the young man _nods, defeated._ _He does not try to open his mouth any
more._

Sean _You_ know the story, about the Whale!

Finn

And Jonah hi his belly!

the young man No-Sean _No,_ man. Ahab!

Finn

What?

the young man _(getting it in fast)_ Ahab!

Finn

Who else is on the line, Sean?

Sean Himself!

Finn Ahab?

Sean Mr. Douglas, ya dimwit!

Hello, Mr. Douglas

The Young Man  Now who’s this Ahab?

 

Sean Ahab is the captain that hunts the White Whale, man!

Finn

A fine story. Are ya there, Mr. Douglas? I said . . .

THE  YOUNG  MAN

Mr. Finn. Could you find Mike, the taxi driver, for me?

Finn

He's good as found.

_There is a long silence. We watch and hear the mob at Finn's and_ finn
_himself catting off and away:_ "Mike, Mike!"

Sean It's a fine night, Mr. Douglas.

The Young Man _(by rote)_ A bit warm for this time of year.

Sean _(admiring the other's sense)
_ Just what / was thinking !

_We see a man jog through the crowd, rear, and grab the phone._

Another Voice _(breaking in)_ Hello, Mr. Douglas?

The Young Man Mike?

Another Voice No. He'll be here when he finishes his game of darts!

_We see_ mike, _rear, playing the game out._

The Young Man Never mind, just tell Mike—

_We see_ mike _forging toward the phone._

Another Voice Hold on, here comes the triumphant victor now!

The Young Man There's no—

Mike's Voice Mr. Douglas, congratulate me!

The Young Man Mike, is that you?

Mike's Voice Who else? And I won!

The Young Man Mike, can you drive me to Dublin, now?

Mike I'm halfway to the door!

_There is a thud as, presumably, the phone is dropped at the other end.
The crowd noises swell,_ the young man _holds the receiver off and looks
at it with bemusement, then addresses the audience again._

The Young Man

Halfway to the door. It is but thirty feet, I'd wager, from the bar of
Heeber Finn's to the far side of the pub where the door, neglected,
abhorrent, waits. Yet that thirty feet is best negotiated carefully, and
may take all of one minute per foot. In other words, it may take Mike
half an hour to go from the phone to the outside world and five minutes
to drive the half-mile up the road to where I am waiting for him. Listen
to them.

_He holds out the phone, taking his hand off the earpiece so the noise
swells._

Mike's on his way. He's halfway to the door, plus one foot.

_And this is true. During all the above, in dim pantomime behind the
rear scrim, we see_ mike _turning in slow circles, moving his head here,
there, touching this person, touching that, trying to finish a stout
thrust in his hand, answering a jest with another, laughing at one man,
scowling at a second, blinking at a third. The pantomime continues
during the following speech._

Do you see how patient I am? Do I yell or threaten? I do not. I learned,
early on, that Mike's "headin' for the door" was no nerve-shattering
process for him. He must not affront the dignity of the men he moves
among. He must admire, on his way out, the fine filigree of any argument
being woven with great and breathless beauty at his elbow or behind his
back. It is, for him, a gradual disengagement, a leaning of his bulk so
his gravity is diplomatically shifted toward that far empty side of the
public room where the door, shunned by all, stands neglected. On his
way, a dozen conversational warps and woofs must be ticked, tied, and
labeled so next morn, with hoarse cries of recognition, patterns may be
seized, the shuttle thrown with no pause or hesitation.

the young man _produces a long instructor's pointer or baton._

To give you an idea of Mike's debilitating journey across the pub, here,
for instance—

_He points to one of the men who, approached by_ mike _now, breaks into
a kind of jig or reel._

That's old Timulty, who will dance for any reason or no reason at all.

mike _is appreciative of the jig and perhaps joins in a once-around._

the young man _points to a second man ahead._

Here's Pat Nolan. A fierce outcaster of politics. A banger, a smasher
and a shouter, to the wonderment of all.

_Now that_ timulty _has been gotten by,_ mike _is confronted by_ nolan,
_who has two other men by their ties or lapels_—_that is,_ _when he is
not banging his own knee or smashing his fist into one palm. Now, as_
mike _happens along,_ nolan _sees him and, in pantomime, grabs out for
him and starts bellowing on some vasty argument or other,_ mike _is
totally impressed, and nods, nods, nods._

the YOUNG man _points farther on_—_one, two, three._

While up ahead waits O'Connell with his jokes.

_We see_ o'connell _laughing at his own stories, holding to someone's
shoulder._

Purdy with his harmonica.

purdy _is guzzling his harmonica as we see him swaying there._

And Kelleen with a brand-spanking-new poem he is just finishing ...

_We see_ kelleen, _using someone's back for a desk, scribbling furiously
on a crumpled paper._

There! Mike's almost to the door. He's got the doorknob in his hand!

_Which is true._ _We see it!_ Now, he—

_At this instant, far across the pub, on the other side, a man waves and
shouts in pantomime,_ mike _turns, lets go the door, waves, and, to fast
harp music, jogs back through the crowd to where it all started!_ the
young man, _dismayed, readjusts his face to the situation._

_(Philosophically) Well . . ._ that's how it goes.

_He ambles back to the telephone, picks it up, listens._ So I do not
yell, threaten, or rouse my blood.

_He holds the phone out toward the audience so it can hear the tumult
and the shouting inside the earpiece._

Who would hear me?

_He hangs up. Silence. The pub lights go out. The pub vanishes._

While I'm waiting at the old house way out in the Irish wild, I take a
little drink _(Drinks),_ get into my coat and cap _(Does so),_ and go
out _(Goes)_ into the night to look at the clear stars. Until at last,
down through the night forest the nineteen-thirty-one Chevrolet comes
thrashing, peat-turf-colored on top like Mike himself, and inside the
old car—

_Through the darkness from stage left comes_ mike, _gliding on a car
seat with an apparatus to hold the steering wheel. The car, no more than
seat, steering wheel, doors, circles the stage. From it comes the
gasping, choking sound of a very old vehicle indeed,_ mike _and his
framework auto stop dead-center stage. The engine, with a hiccup,
strangles and dies._

Mike?

Mike _(waving easily)_ None other!

the young man _opens the car door._ Ain't it a fine warm evenin'?

The Young Man _(hesitates; rubs jaw)_ Mike . . . ? Have you ever visited
Sicily or Spain? The south of France?

Mike No, sir.

The Young Man Paris, the north of France, even?

Mike

I guess you'd say the furthest south I've ever been is the Tip-perary
shoreline, sir.

The Young Man I see.

_He gets in. He looks at_ mike, _breathes the air, exhales, slams the
door._

Well . . . it's a fine _warm_ evening, Mike.

Mike You hit it right on the head, sir!

_We hear the motor roar, shadows and stars move on the scrim behind
them, the men's bodies bounce a little._

The Young Man Mike, how've you been since?

Mike _(wheeling the car slow and easy)_

Ah, I got me health. Ain't that all-and-everything, with Lent comin' on
tomorra?

The Young Man _(muses)_ Lent. What will you give up for Lent, Mike?

Mike

I been turnin' it over. _(Sucks the cigarette which hangs from his_ _lip
until his face glows cherry-red)_ And why not these terrible things ya
see in me mouth?

The Young Man Cigarettes?

Mike

Dear as gold fillings and a dread congester of the lungs they be! Put it
all down, add 'em up, and ya got a sick loss by the year's turnin', ya
know. So ya'll not find these filthy creatures in me face again the
whole time of Lent—and, who knows, after!

The Young Man Bravo!

Mike _(suspicious at this outburst; glancing over)_ I see you don't
smoke yourself.

The Young Man Forgive me.

Mike

For what! Bravo, says I to meself if I can wrestle the Devil's habit two
falls out of three!

The Young Man Good luck, Mike.

Mike And do you know something? I'll need it!

_We hear the motor roar. The stars over_ _Ireland_ _swirl this way and
that behind the car moving in darkness. At this point,_ the young man
_quietly rises up and steps down from the car and addresses the
audience._

The Young Man

Well, now! We're on our way! But I want to make a few points . . .

_He reaches out and with one hand swings the car about so it points its
hood and bumpers stage left. The car purrs happily on,_ mike _at the
wheel, smoking and humming to himself._

Look upon Mike. The most careful driver in all God's world, including
any sane, small, quiet, butter-and-milk producing country you'd want to
name. Mike, all innocence—a saint!— when compared to those drivers who
switch on paranoia each time they fuse themselves to their bucket seats
in Los Angeles, Mexico City, or Paris!

_We hear various cars roar by, see flashes of light, hear honking of
horns,_ mike _philosophically watches the imaginary cars pass, waving
them on with calm good nature._

Compare him to those blind men who, forsaking tin cups and white canes,
but still wearing their Hollywood dark glasses, laugh insanely down the
Via Veneto in Rome, shaking brake-drum linings like carnival serpentine
out their race-car doors!

_During the above we hear the approach of a carnival of cars,
sput-sputs, hornets, wasps, swarms of big and little blasters and
blowers, and mixed with it hilarious voices, shouting, many horns:
picnic day at_ _Indianapolis_ _Speedway__._

mike _smiles at it all, blinking gently, driving along between the bogs.
The voices, horns, motors avalanche away into silence._

THE YOUNG man _circles the car, turning it till_ mike _faces_ _another
way, before he continues the lecture._

But Mike, now . . . See his easy hands loving the wheel in a slow
clocklike turning . . .

_The car makes a vast, lovely swirl around a bend in the road_— _we can
guess as much by the magical rotation of_ mike's _arms._

Listen to his mist-breathing voice all night-quiet as he charms the road
. . .

Mike _(singing)_ "As I was walking Through Dublin City . . . Around the
hour of twelve at night . . ."

The Young Man

... his foot a tenderly benevolent pat on the whispering accelerator . .
.

Mike _(singing softly)_ "I saw a maid, So fair was she . . ."

The Young Man . . . never a mile under thirty, never two miles over . .
.

Mike _(singing)_ ". . . combing her hair by candlelight."

the young man _steps back into the car and settles_ _himself, looking
kindly on this older man._

The Young Man

Mike, Mike, and his steady boat gentling a mild sweet lake where all
Time slumbers. Look: compare. And bind such a man to you with summer
grasses, gift him with silver, shake his hand warmly at each journey's
end.

Mike _{reaching for the hand brake)_ Here we are! The Royal Hibernian
Hotel!

The Young Man What a fine lilting name!

Mike _(thinks on it)_ The Royal Hibernian Hotel! Sure, it falls right
off the tongue!

THE YOUNG MAN _climbs OUt._

The Young Man It does. See you tomorrow, Mike!

_The car drives off into darkness._

Mike God willing!!

_The car is gone,_ the young man _turns and walks in a grand circle,
vanishing for a moment behind a curtain but reappearing on the instant,
checking his watch._

The Young Man

Now. Let twenty-three hours of sleep, breakfast, lunch, supper, late
nightcap pass, and here I come again, another midnight . . .

_He suits word to action, going in and coming out the door far stage
right._

Out the door of that Georgian mansion, to tread down the steps to feel
Braillewise in fog for the car which I know bulks there.

_The stage has darkened during part of this speech, and in the dark,
unseen by the audience, the car has returned,_ mike _in it, to center
stage. We hear the car faintly now. The lights are beginning to come up
as_ the young man _gropes forward._

Mike Ah, there you are, sir!

The Young Man Mike. _(To the audience)_ I climb in. I give the door its
slam.

_He slams the door._ And _then . . ._

_The car gives a great spasming jerk,_ the young man _grabs his hat,
grabs the dashboard, grabs_ mike's _knee._

Mike!

_With a thunderous roar, the car is off, vibrating. The sound is
furious. The black background behind the car rushes and flurries with
lights and shadows; the car spins and turns._

Mike!

Mike _(smiles benevolently)_ Yes, sir.

The Young Man Mike!

Mike Yes, _sir!_

The Young Man _(staring)_ Sixty miles an hour, Mike.

Mike Seventy!

The Young Man Now it's seventy-five!

Mike Is it!

The Young Man  Eighty

Mike (looks)  So it is.

The Young Man  Eighty-five! Can that be right?

Mike  It is, it is.

 

_The car turns in a great thunder of shadowy light, in huge river-ings
of hill and meadow thrown on the backdrop._

the young man _leaps out and watches the car with_ mike _bent over the
wheel gripping it hard, his smile a leer._

It is, it was, indeed! There went Mike and me with him! Ninety full
miles an hour! From the blazing mouth of the cannon we bounced, skidded,
cast ourselves in full stoning ricochet down the paths, over the bogs,
through the trees! I felt all Ireland's grass put down its ears when we,
with a yell, jumped over a rise!

Mike Ninety-five! Do you see that! Ninety-five!

_The car whirls, rushes._

The Young Man Mike, I thought—Mike!

mike _puffs his cigarette feverishly. Pink light comes and goes on his
creased face._

Mike was changed as if the Adversary himself had squeezed and molded and
fired him with a dark hand. There he was, whirling the wheel roundabout,
over-around, here we frenzied under trestles, there knocked crossroad
signs spinning like weathercocks! I studied Mike's fine face. A fine
face no longer!

_He moves close. The motor sounds die away so we can hear better, study
better. The car still rocks and turns slightly this way and that while_
the young man _philosophizes, standing beside it, perhaps pointing in
at_ mike's _face with a flashlight._

The wisdom drained from it. The eyes, neither gentle nor philosophical.
The mouth neither tolerant nor at peace. It was a face-washed raw, a
scalded peeled potato.

_Thunder up for a moment._ _Flashing lights,_ mike _leans avidly
forward. The thunder fades,_ the young man _is back in the car now._

Mike _(loud, raucous)_ Well, how you been since, sir!

The Young Man Mike, your voice! It's changed!

Mike Changed?!

The Young Man _(to the audience)_

A clarion, a trumpet, all iron and brassy tin! Gone the warm fire. Gone
the gentle grass. _(To_ mike _now)_ Mike, has a dire thing come into
your life, a sickness, a sorrow, a sore affliction?

Mike _(amazed, loud)_ Now why would you think that?

The Young Man _(touches the car)_ And, Mike, is this the same car you
drove last night?

Mike None other!

The Young Man _(to the audience)_

But it was changed, too. This car, this crusty old beggar that had been
content to stroll along, careful of its breath and bones, now thundered
toward Hell as if to warm itself at some special blaze there.

the young man _scans_ mike _now, carefully._ Hold on, I got it! Mike!
It's the first night of Lent!

Mike It is, sir.

The Young Man

Well, then, remembering your Lenten promise, why's that cigarette in
your mouth?

mike _casts his eyes down on the smoke jiggling on his lip and shrugs._

Mike Ah—I give up the _ither__._

_There is a long moment during which_ the young man _stares._

The Young Man The other?

Mike _(nodding wisely)_ The ither.

THE young MAN _pulls as far back in his seat as possible to look at_
mike. _Suddenly he reaches forward and twists the key in the ignition.
With a great squealing,_ mike _brings the car to a halt, surprised but
not angry._

Why, will you tell me, did you do that? _In silence, the two sit there._

The Young Man Mike, for two hundred nights we have ridden together.

Mike True.

The Young Man

And each night as I came from my employer's house I drank, at the door,
a fiery douse of Scotch or bourbon "against the chill."

Mike A reasonable precaution.

The Young Man

Then I walked out to this cab where sat a man, yourself, who, during all
the long winter evening's wait for me to phone for your services, had
_lived_ in Heeber Finn's pub.

Mike You might say, it's me office!

The Young Man _(slaps his own brow)_ Fool!

Mike Who is?

The Young Man lam!

Mike And why?

The Young Man

Because, Mike, because there in Heeber Finn's while you waited, you took
onto yourself—a mellowness. And that mellowness distilled itself down in
a slow rain that damped your smoldering nerves. It colored your cheeks,
warmed your eyes soft, lowered your voice to a husking mist, and spread
in your chest to slow your heart to a gentle jog-trot.

Mike Ah, I wish the Guinness family could hear you!

The Young Man

It loosened your hands on the wheel and sat you with grace and ease as
you gentled us through fogs and mists that kept us and Dublin apart. And
all the while, Mike, the liquor / drank stopped me from ever detecting
the scent of any spirits on _your_ breath.

Mike What are you leading up to, sir?

The Young Man

This, Mike! Tonight, the first night of Lent, for the first time in all
the nights I've driven with you, you are sober!

_He lets this sink in._ mike _lets it sink in, too, aghast._

Mike By God now, that's true.

The Young Man

And all those other two hundred nights you weren't driving slow and
careful and easy just for my safety—

Mike
 Well     

The Young Man

—but because of the gentle warm spirits sloping now on this side, now on
that side of you, as we took the long scything curves.

Mike _(as if revealing something)_ If you _must_ know, yes; I _was_
drunk all of them nights.

_They both sit and look at each other for a long moment._

The Young Man And now you've given up liquor for Lent?

Mike _(nods righteously)_ You've noticed the improvement?

_There is a moment of critical silence._

The Young Man Drive on, Mike.

mike _starts the car with a roar. They thunder on, rocking silently,_
the young man _studying the older._

Mike And here we are! Dublin's Fair City!

_He stops the car._ the young man _gets thoughtfully out. He looks
around at the imaginary city. He speaks to the audience._

The Young Man

Dublin's fair city. Oh, who _really_ knows the Irish, say I, and which
half of them is which? Mike? _{Turns to look at the man)_ Which Mike is
the real Mike? Which is the Mike that _everyone_ knows? _(Gasps, shakes
his head as at a foul vision)_ I will not think on it. There is only one
Mike for me. That one that Ireland shaped herself with her weathers and
waters, her seedings and harvestings, her brans and mashes, her brews,
bottlings, and swiggings. If you ask what makes the Irish what they are,
I'd point on down the road _(Points)_ and tell where you turn to find
Heeber Finn's. _(Turns)_ Mike?

Mike Sir?

The Young Man Wait here a second!

the young man _runs offstage. He comes running back out a moment later,
something hidden under his coat._

Will you do me a favor, Mike?

Mike Name it!

the young man _winces at the loudness of that voice._

The Young Man Here.

Mike What's that, sir?

mike _blinks at the bottle_ the young man _has brought from hiding._

The Young Man A bottle of whisky.

Mike I rarely see a whole bottle of it. That's why I didn't recognize—

The Young Man

Mike, this is the first night of Lent, right? Now ... on the second
night of Lent—

Mike Tomorrow night?

The Young Man

On the second night of Lent, when you come to pick me up, in Kilcock,
will you _drink_ this, Mike?

Mike Do you know what you're doing?

The Young Man Tempting you, Mike.

Mike _{sore torn between)_ You are indeed.

The Young Man Take it, Mike.

Mike Ah, God, it's Lent.

The Young Man Only the first night.

Mike You said that before, but with repetition it makes sense.

The Young Man Give something _else_ up!

Mike

Ah, Jesus, in all of Ireland, there's not so much joy, beauty, and
riotous pleasure about you can count them on more than five fingers!
Gimme the damn thing!

The Young Man Good old Mike!

Mike _(eyeing the bottle)_ Do I drink it _all?_

The Young Man Or as much as will turn Mr. Hyde into Dr. Jekyll!

Mike How's that?

The Young Man _(rephrasing it)_

Enough so Mike will come for me tomorrow night, instead of you.

Mike Mike instead of _me?_ _I'm_ Mike. Michael Finneran Seamus Kelly!

The Young Man _A re_ you?

_He peers in at the fellow,_ mike _gets his meaning, uncorks the bottle,
takes a long swig._

Mike Ah!

_He takes another swig as_ the young man _beams,_ mike _leans out, his
voice immediately softer, mellower._

Is that better?

The Young Man Mike, Mike you're back!

Mike _{nods slowly)_ I was long away.

The Young Man You were!

_They clench hands in a great shake, steadfast, true._

Mike Here now, take these precious bits of pure gold!

_He shoves over his cigarette pack._

The Young Man _(taking them)_ Thanks, Mike.

Mike _(gently)_ Ah, shut up.

The Young Man See you tomorrow?

Mike If we're both alive.

The Young Man Do you doubt we will be?

Mike _(with a last swig)_ Strange—I'm thinking now—I'll live forever.

_He drives off, waving beautifully,_ the young man _watches the car go.
He lights one of_ mike's¹ _cigarettes, studies it, studies the smoke on
the air._

The Young Man

The Irish? The Irish. Here they come out of the mist. There they vanish
into the rain.

_He calls into the growing darkness._

Michael Finneran Seamus Kelly! _Who_ and _what_ are _you?_

_He listens._

No answer. And _(Checks watch)_—already, look! It's the _second_ day of
Lent! So—what am / giving up?

_He looks at the cigarette pack, rips it open._ What indeed?!

_He tears the cigarettes apart, sprinkles the tobacco about, beaming. A
harp plays in the darkness offstage,_ the young man, _hearing it, laughs
and shrugs._

All right, all right! Let the harp play all it wants! I'm done,
finished, through!

_He moves briskly for the exit stage right as the harp lilts up playing
a zestful reel. Just before exiting,_ the young man _turns about once,
and maybe clicks his heels. When he is gone, from the darkness_ mike
_reappears on his throne, in his car, swinging back out in one long
wonderful slow curve,_ mike's _smile is mellow. The motor is quiet. The
harp plays gently now, as_ mike _vanishes back into the Irish dark, and
on away toward . . ._

THE   END



_A\ CLEAR\ VIEW\ OF\ AN\ IRISH\ MIST_


CHARACTERS

 

HEEBER  FINN

KATHLEEN   (HIS  WIFE)

OLD  MAN

CASEY TIMULTY

NOLAN

FATHER LEARY

HOOLIHAN   (THE   SALESMAN)

NOONAN

O'HARA

KELLY

_At the rise of curtain we see the bar of Heeber Finn's pub somewhere
deep in_ _Ireland__'s jogs and rains, deserted in the early-morning
hour. For a change, a rosy glare comes through the stained-glass windows
to either side of the bar; the day has begun with rare weather._

heeber FINN _enters, breathing the good air, scratching him__self,
yawning, fully dressed for a day of business. He looks about at the
silent room._

Finn

Ah, there you are, waiting for it all to begin. What will happen today?
Only God knows in the morning. By ten tonight /'// know. Some day I
should set it down.

_He moves about, arranging the chairs._

His Wife _(entering)_ Set what down?

Finn

All that happens, Katy, in a single day with the doors open and the
world flocking in.

His Wife Would you rather write it or live it?

Finn Since you put it that way—living's best.

His Wife

Live and _work._ I wish you'd do more of that. There's much needs
mending here. That chair leans favoring the left, the table leans
favoring the right. . . .

Finn _(polishing)_

Playing with these spigots is my work!

His Wife

And you play them fine, like the organist at the Variety Cinema in Cork,
but—

Finn _But,_ Woman! It's opening time!

His Wife _(checking)_ Ten seconds after.

Finn _(hustling)_ Wait till I get set up! Peep through the door! What do
you see?

_She peeps._

His Wife

A band of hoodlums, as is usual, elbowing each other and smacking their
lips.

Finn Well, what are you waiting for?

His Wife _(peeking through a chink)_ It does me good to make them stay
out in the cold a BIT overtime.

Finn You've a hard heart!

His Wife I thought you only worried about my soft behind.

_She fiddles with the latch. There is a groan of relief from outside._

Ah, listen to them craitures stir, will ya? Like so many cows in need of
milking!

_She fiddles the latch again, smiling. Another groan from outside._
They're fairly seething!

Finn Inhuman woman, let be!

_She unlocks, unbolts, and lets the_ _Red Sea_ _in._

His Wife One at a time! No hurry!

The Old Man _(entering indignant)_ One at a time? No hurry? What does
she mean?

Casey Out of the way, Woman!

Timulty Lift me to the bar, I'm too weak to make it alone!

Nolan I'm famished!

Finn Come get it, Men!

The Old Man Finn, why the delay? You opened twenty seconds late!

His Wife _(snorting)_ Twenty seconds! The shame of it!

_She exits._

The Old Man Has she got the humors?

Finn

When _hasn't_ she?

Nolan Women!

The Old Man

I'm glad you said that. Why is it, when a ship goes down, it's always
women and children first to the lifeboats? Shouldn't it be the other way
round?

Casey

Oh, my wife wouldn't mind going down with the ship. The question is:
Would the ship mind going down with _her?_

The Old Man

I think we have found a proper subject to converse on for the day.

_All drink, assenting._

Casey Break out the cards, we'll have a game!

_All move away into the next room, dragging chairs, flourishing a deck
of cards, carrying their drinks, laughing and warmly joyous. After the
brief riot, there is a little storm of silence in the pub._ the wife
_appears with a basket, on her way out to shop. She peers into the next
room, sniffs._

His Wife Well, the avalanche is fair started down the mountain!

finn _eyes her but she will not be eyed and goes off, away. Another
silent moment,_ finn _polishes glassware. Then: The doors open. It is_
father leary, _from the church across_ _the way._

Finn Father Leary, come in! We don't see you often!

Father I'm glad to hear that. I was beginning to worry.

Finn Will it be the Same?

Father

First you say you don't see me often, then you ask if it'll be the Same!

Finn No offense, Father. What'U it be?

Father The Usual.

Finn _(pouring)_

Begging your pardon, Father, but what's the difference between the
_Same_ and the _Usual?_

Father _(drinking)_

_Same_ is too blunt, cold, hard a word. _Usual_ is—well—more savory, at
ease, you can roll it about on your tongue. _(He savors_ _the word)_
Us—u-al. Do you see?

Finn

As far as I need to, Father. And how's business? I mean—the Church, are
people finding their way there through all the fog lately?

Father If they don't, I'll build hellfires to give them light.

Finn

Oh, you can do that, all right. You know, Father, I was thinking just
the other day, you and me—is much alike. No offense.

Father _(pausing in midsip)_ It's too early to tell. Go on.

Finn

I mean, the things you hear in the confessional and the things I hear
behind the bar. There is a rough equivalation, now.

Father Very rough.

Finn (sotto voce) And neither of us can _breathe a word._

Father Come now, Finn, you'll be putting on lace next.

Finn

Father, no word that's spoken goes back across this bar. I'm proud of my
own peculiar vow of silence. If the church ain't open, Heeber Finn's is.

Father _(controlling himself beautifully)_ You must be absolutely
groaning with truckloads of sin.

Finn I got me share.

Father

You don't imply now, do you, that you're in competition with the Church?
Eh?

Finn

Heaven forbid! And forgive my pride, but maybe I've eased your burden a
bit, Father.

Father

Do you mean by that that some sins get waylaid here that I never hear
about?

Finn

I only imply, Father, that I oil their tonsils so they can tell it
better by the time they get over to you, thus cutting down the fearsome
time you spend cooped up in the box—

Father Why, you're almost an annex to the Church, it seems!

Finn Now look what I've done—made you mad.

Father

I'm not mad, Finn, just surprised, and mad at myself ... for I thought I
was over being surprised at the duplicity of man. You did come on me
sudden, though, and I'd best leave.

_He reaches in his pocket._

Finn _(hastily)_ Put it in the poorbox, Father.

Father I will!

Finn

Come again for the—er—Usual, Father!

_Half out the door,_ father leary _turns, frowning._

Father Not the _Usual,_ man! _(A beat)_—The _Same!_

_The wickets slam. He's gone._

finn _busies himself, stacking glasses and wiping the bar. As he does
so, from a distance a high clear tenor voice is heard, approaching.
There is also the sound of footsteps coming near. The song being sung is
as follows:_

The Salesman's Voice _(Off)_ "All through life Mid storm and strife . .
. With maid or wife, It's the thinkin' Not the drinkin' Makes it go."

_The voice stops. The wickets open. A_ salesman _stands looking in and
about the pub._

finn _has frozen at the words of the song. He does not turn now as the
stranger advances easily toward the bar._

The Salesman

Though I must admit, there be occasions when the very wheels of
Juggernaut are kept turning with drink. A Guinness, please.

_This friendly sally does not unfreeze_ finn _at all; he draws the drink
without looking up._

the salesman _looks at_ finn _and senses diplomacy is needed._ I see
that your spine is all one piece because of my song.

Finn _{turning at last)_ The song was a touch subversive of my business.

The Salesman _(sings)_ "It's the thinkin' _And_ the drinkin' Makes it
go." Is that better?

Finn _(putting the drink on the bar)_ Why didn't you sing it that way to
start?

The Salesman I'm a proud man.

Finn _(letting the drink go)_

Pride's no sin, if it has to do with your business. What line are you
in?

The Salesman I guess you'd call me a Salesman of Philosophy.

Finn Now, how do you sell _that?_

The Salesman Here!

_He swings a small case onto the bar._

Do you know the saying "Infinite riches in a little room"?

Finn I know it now.

The Salesman Well, in this h'ttle case is the "furniture" I'm selling.

Finn For a doll house, then?

The Salesman No, to decorate the palace of man's mind!

_He opens up the case and puts forth a single item on the counter._

Finn _{confounded)_ That's _it?_

The Salesman _{proudly)_ That's it! Fine hand-painted bone porcelain.

Finn

Don't look like much to me. _{Moving around front)_ Furniture, you say.

_He stops. He approaches the little object slowly, peering at it. It is
about eight inches long and three inches high. There is a single word on
it, a word in white letters on a black background._

_{Spelling out loud) T ... H ... it says . . . I and N and K. THINK/_ Is
that all?

The Salesman I'm inclined to say it's everything!

Finn _{half-suspicious)_ What does it _mean?_

The Salesman Just what it says, friend. Think. _Think. THINK!_

the salesman's _voice grows in timbre and volume each time he says the
word. Then he subsides and sips his Guinness._

Finn _{uneasily)_

Ye-ess, I see what you're getting at. But what do you do with a bit of
furniture like that? To what purpose is it?

The Salesman To what purpose? God save me!

_Before_ finn _can stop him, he is around the bar and placing the little
sign on top of a Guinness barrel._

There! Now, pretend you're your own best customer, and I'm yourself, the
bartender. You got your drink in your hand.

_He nudges the drink._ Finn _takes and holds the glass._ You sip your
drink. finn _sips._

You raise your eyes      

FINN _raises his eyes._ And what do you see?

Finn "Think"?

The Salesman Right! You drink some more.

finn _drinks._

You stare at that little sign . . . and . . . first thing you know . . .
you're . . .

Finn Thinking!

The Salesman Ah, now you got the sun up. You're standing in the light!

Finn _(sips, stares; sips, stares)_ Ah ... ah ... yes ... I see.

The Salesman I _know_ you _do!_

finn _looks at the man with fresh admiration._

Finn You be a kind of intellectual, then?

The Salesman I—er—_knocked_ at the door of Trinity College!

Finn

What stopped your plunging through?

the salesman _refills both glasses, playing bartender with a fine air._

The Salesman

Well, I shaped it up in my mind. Hoolihan, I said to myself, why put off
helping others half your life? Why not start this day? How? I said.
Well, I said, what's mainly wrong with the world? What? I said. No one
stops to think any more, I said. And for lack of stopping to think, what
happens?

Finn _(leaning toward him)_ A great lot, one supposes.

The Salesman

Wars, famines, depressions, murderous impulses, bad livers, short
breaths, unwanted children, and marriages best kept running on whisky
for fear of seeing the true aspect!

Finn _(enchanted)_ Say that again.

The Salesman If you don't mind, I'll let the echoes die.

Finn

Right! That's a beautiful thing there, the little bit of porcelain and
that single word. Already I feel a popping in my ears, like I'm on a
mountain! It's amazing how full of thoughts I suddenly am.

The Salesman

Think what it'll do for your customers, then, and the brand of talk
they'll spray at one another! In one hour, in this room, the humidity
will rise ten points!

Finn All I do is leave it set right there, eh?

The Salesman Right there. Nothing to wind, nothing to grease or oil,
nothing to get out of whack. A simple machine it is, and'll make men's
minds _"GO"!_

Finn I'll take one! Wait! You _are_ selling them, aren't you?

The Salesman Not exactly. You can rent this for just ten shillings a
month!

Finn That's dear!

The Salesman

If it raises your business twenty shillings a month, you're still ten
ahead!

Finn _{amazed)_ Will it _do_ that?

The Salesman

Who can deny thinking men blow off steam, and what makes steam? Water!
And what is beer and ale and stout but mostly water?

Finn You've gone below the surface, I see.

The Salesman

Study pays. Try it. If it don't work out after four weeks, I'll buy the
damn thing off you at half-price or—er—thereabouts; you'll be little out
of pocket!

FINN _is still grudging._

Hold on, let me sweeten the deal.

_He pulls forth three more objects and sets them up on the bar._

Rent one, you get them all!

finn _stares._

Finn _(reading) STOP! CONSIDER! THINK! DO!_

The Salesman Ain't that a fine quartet?

Finn Explain them to me!

The Salesman

Well, before you can _THINK,_ you got to _CONSIDER_ what you want to
think about, right?

Finn _(nods)_ The fog parts.

The Salesman

_After_ you consider what to think and think it, thinking's no good, is
it, if you don't _DO?_

Finn

By God, you're right. You might as well arrange a flower bouquet and
throw it in the River Liffey as think and not _do._ But you've not
explained the first—

The Salesman

The first is _most_ important! You must _STOP_ whatever else you're
doing, scratching your ear and notching your belt or whatever, mustn't
you, in order to _CONSIDER THINKING_ and _DOING?_

Finn

That's it, bull's-eye on! I'll take the lot!

finn _gestures frantically, for he is still "customer" outside the bar,
while behind the bar is_ the salesman.

Ring up _No Sale_ and take out ten shillings before I regain my sanity!

the salesman _is to the register like a shot. Bang! A bell rings, the
red_ NO SALE _sign jumps up._

The Salesman How about another?

Finn Don't mind if I do!

the salesman _pours for both. They hoist them._

The Salesman To the Brave New World of this afternoon!

Finn So soon?

The Salesman

You'll note the difference within hours. To thought-provocation, to the
pub called _Heeber_ _Finn's,_ to the Oracle at Delphi in a way, to this
cavern of philosophers—

Finn Tavern of philosophers—that has a ring to it.

The Salesman Cavern.

Finn _(nettled)_

_Cavern's_ what I said! A cavern brimming over with philosophers, eh?

The Wife _(walking through)_ Philosophers? Is that the same as hoboes?

_She is gone._

The Salesman Who was that?

Finn _(eyes shut)_ 1 dread to tell you.

The Salesman _(nods understanding^) (Recovers briskly)_ To Finn's then,
where people stop! consider! think! and _do!_

Finn I'll drink to _those_ damn things, any day.

_They drink._

The Salesman _(walking)_ Well, I'll be off!

Finn _(worried)_ You won't sell any more of these in the village, now?

The Salesman

Nor in the next. I like to drop one stone in the pond and watch the
lovely ripples—_spread! (He illustrates)_

Finn _(awed)_ Your father was a poet.

The Salesman _(eyebrows up)_ Uncanny! You guessed it! Good day!

Finn

And a fine one to _you,_ Hoolihan! hoolihan _exits._

The Salesman _(singing)_ "In life, in strife, With maid, or wife It's
the _thinking,_ Not the drinking, Makes it . . . _Go!"_

_He is gone._

_Now_ finn, _alone, exhales with pleasure. He mops off each of the
little ceramic signs, exhales on them, shines them again_— _then, like a
painter, looks about at the empty bar, looking left,_ _left center,
center, right center, right._

Finn _(to himself)_ Now where is best for each . . . ? Well . . .

_He snatches one and places it jar over at stage right. The sign reads_
STOP!

When they come in the door they should see this right off!

What's next? Well, when their little eyes move on over along, the next
thing they should see is _CONSIDER,_ right? Right!

_He places_ CONSIDER _right center._ New let's think where to put
_THINK._

_He picks_ THINK _up, deliberates, puts it back down on top the_
_Guinness tap-barrel._

Right where he had it is best! And last of all, _DO_ should go over by
the door on the other side, so people, on the way out, will _do_ things.
Right? I think it is!

_He locates_ DO _where he has said he'd put it and stands back_ _again
to survey his tasks finished._

_At which point his_ wife _happens through. He flinches as if he had
expected her to throw scalding water on him and makes elaborately casual
attempts to look calm, collected, and not guilty of putting out hard
money for strange devices._

_He saunters toward the bar, turning in a circle past his_ wife, _who
also turns in a circle, suspicious of the smell of him._

The Wife Well?

_He reaches the bar, polishes the first sign,_ STOP!

Finn

Well, indeed!

_He moves over to polish the second,_ CONSIDER. _She turns_ _away and
huffs out. He flings down the rag._

Damn, she didn't see! Or did she see and disapprove? All right, steady,
Finn, a calm mind in a calm body, eh? _(Pours)_ Here's calmness.
_(Drinks)_ Ah.

_At which point the doors fling wide, and a man enters, somewhat in his
cups. He freezes and stares._

finn _looks at the man, follows his gaze to see what he is looking at
and finds it is the sign:_ STOP!

_The man sways there a moment, blinking, debating, then wheels about._

I-

_The man charges back out, gone._

Now, what the—? Well, where was I? Oiling the stormy seas. Another drop
of oil, eh?

_He gives himself a drop. He rearranges one of the signs, smiles at it,
pats it._

_The same half-drunk man enters again, is again transfixed at what he
sees, wheels, and goes out._

I'll be ... Now that's most peculiar. That _was_ Tom Noonan, wasn't it?
_(Shrugs)_ Ah, he'll be back.

_We can see_ noonan, _outside, warming up for another try. He steels
himself, takes a deep breath, and bursts through the doors again. He is
half across the barroom floor, at full steam, when his eyes fix to the
dire sign and he cries in loud dismay, almost a wail:_

Noonan _Stop!_

_and_ _circles around to flail out and is gone again, this time for
good._

Finn _(going after him)_

Tom Noonan, oh, _Tom! (stops, bewildered)_ Gone. Did he say "Stop"? Yes.
Must have misunderstood. That one sign wasn't meant for _him._

_He goes over and peers at the sign._ _(Muses)_ Stop . . .

_He is wracked with indecision. He picks up the sign, puts it down,
picks it up again._

Well, it might be best, for the first few hours, anyway, to turn this
one around so no one can see it, right off. Later, I'll turn it back.
It's not really the most important sign, anyway, is it? No!

_He turns the sign around so we can't read it._

There! Now we still have _(Points) CONSIDER! THINK! DO! (Rubs hands)_
All right, world, I'm ready for you! I'd best tell the boys to come in
and—

father leary _enters, or rather, almost backs in through the door._

_There_ you are, Father Leary!

Father _(bemused)_

Am I? So I am. On my way to Mrs. Kelly's I just saw Tom Noonan on the
street.

Finn _(suddenly uneasy)_ Noonan? Tom?

Father

Run up to me and insisted right there on the curb I take his confession!

Finn _(attempting cheer) Did_ he? That's nice.

Father

Nice, but not like Tom. He wouldn't take no. Held onto my elbow, he did.
So I shut my eyes and pretended not to know and heard him out!

Finn Fast thinking, Father!

Father The Archbishop would jump straight up if he heard.

Finn

I won't tell him.

Father _(looking sharp)_ Do you _know_ him?

Finn _(pulling his horns in)_ Now that you mention it, no . . .

Father _(baffled)_

It was over in a trice and Noonan gone. Said he'd stop this and stop
that and stop two of those and three of the next-worst. I can't tell you
_what_ he said he'd stop, of course, but stop it was, all up and down
the line.

finn _has backed over to the counter to hide the sign with his back. He
is edgy._

Finn Think of _that._

Father I _am_ thinking of it, Finn.

finn _has the "machine," the sign, in his hands behind his back now._

What's that behind your back, Finn?

Finn

Why, Father, it's—

_Crash! The damn thing has fallen to the floor,_ finn _turns to look at
the shards. He bends to pick them up._

Why, it's kind of a—jigsaw puzzle, Father.

Father I like puzzles.

Finn Ah, you couldn't work this one—

Father Let me try.

finn _reluctantly puts the pieces on the bar._ That don't look so
difficult, now, Finn.

Ftnn _(to himself)_ More's the pity.

Father Eh?

Finn Will you have a drink while you work it, Father?

Father _(working)_

This piece would seem to go here . . . Eh? Yes, Finn, bless you, man . .
. and this piece here. . . .

FINN _pours._ FATHER LEARY _tinkers._

... as I was saying. Noonan now . . . right on the street! Nothing wrong
really, I suppose, confessing him in the open, God's everywhere . . .
but still ... it shook me ... why should old _Tom?_ Stop _this_ I will!
he said, and stop _that!_ and stop the others! _(He tinkers with the
bits)_ Put this piece over here . . . and move this about . . . There
... it seems to be a word, Finn.

Finn _(mock surprise)_ Fancy that.

leary _shoves some more bits about._

Father _S_ would seem to be the first letter of the puzzle.

Finn Are you sure?

Father 5 ... _T_—that's a _T,_ ain't it? _(He moves a last shard in
place)_

_0          ._ . . _P._

Finn _(brightly)_ "Stop!"

Father _(disquieted)_

I can read, Finn.

Finn

I've always spoke well of your education, sir.

Father _(musing)_

"Stop," Finn. _Stop._ Have you heard that word before in the last three
minutes?

Finn You may have used it, sir.

Father Tom Noonan, didn't _he_ use it, too?

Finn

We mustn't talk of it, Father. The vows of the confessional—

Father _Finn!_

Finn _(quietly)_ Yes, sir?

Father Was Tom Noonan in here lately?

Finn

Of recent date, Father?

Father Date, hell, man. The last hour?

Finn

Well, in and out, Father.

Father Which is it, in _or_ out?

Finn It became a trifle circuitous, Father, to coin a word.

Father _Circuitous?_ Do you infer he weaved in circles, then?

Finn

I only infer, Father, he made one arc coming and another going. Six arcs
in all, Father.

Father Broken down, you say he arrived three times—

Finn

And left just as many—

Father In how long a time?

Finn

It was remarkable for its shortness, Father. He came and went, arrived
and departed, came through the entrance and looked for the exit.

Father _(toying with the reconstructed sign)_ How do you account for his
behavior, Finn?

Finn His wife had been nagging him, sir.

Father And?

Finn

And he had been drinking hard at it, down the road, I suppose, at
Rooney's pub.

Father Goon.

Finn

And they heaved him out, no doubt, and he came up this way seeking more
of the Same or the Usual, begging your pardon, Father. And when he came
in the door, I can only figure he saw this sign, sir.

Father

This _sign_ made him go out and in three times, and then run to me to
confess in broad daylight?

Finn

Yes, sir. I figure for thirty years now, Noonan's wife has yelled at
him, STOP this, STOP that! STOP the next best and the least-worst and
the half-between. "STOP!" she yells. But mostly _STOP DRINKING!_ It adds
up, down the years. Well, today, Noonan hears "STOP!" from Rooney's bar,
too, STOP! no more ale, whisky, or whatever, STOP! and threw him out! So
he comes up here, shell-shocked, it's reached the point, after thirty
years of his wife screaming and Rooney yelling. And he comes in the door
and what does he see?

Father _S-T-O-P._

Finn

Right, Father. And that made a little drive-shaft go loose in Noonan and
he headed straight off for you, sir.

Father You sound rather proud of the whole thing, Finn.

Finn

Shouldn't I be, Father? A thirty-year sinner reformed? A lost soul
changed—?

Father _(impatiently)_ Ah, let be! _(muses)_ Finn?

Finn Sir?

Father

I don't know how to explain it, but I have this unearthly sensation,
lately, each time I drop by that some day I'll come in and find you
selling Bibles and holding services.

Finn

Perish the thought, Father. I just redecorated the place a bit.

_He waves his hand at the other signs._

Father _(staring)_

God help us, don't tell me there's more? _(Squints)_ Does that say
_CONSIDER,_ Finn?

Finn It does.

Father And that _THINK,_ and that one _DO?_

Finn

What eyes, for a man your age!

Father Is fifty _old,_ Finn?

Finn

It's neither in nor out of the casket. You'll be around a while, Father.

Father

I will, Finn, I will. And now suppose you tell me what these signs mean?

Finn _(trying to recall the spiel)_

Well, _CONSIDER_ means . . . walk around, turn about . . . run your
hand, run your eyes over a thing . . .

Father What thing, Finn?

Finn

/Anything, sir.

Father

Did it ever strike you, Finn, that maybe there are some things should
not be considered at all?

Finn Like what, sir?

Father Well, fornication, for one, if you force me to it!

Finn That's a brave start, sir.

Father

Poverty's another. It must be borne, not considered. If you have no coal
and no way to get coal and _never will have any coal,_ as often happens
at the church, believe me, I do not _consider_ coal! Women, Mr. Finn,
can have no part in my life, so I do not _consider_ women. Travel, I
will never travel, so I do not _consider_ palm trees and sandy beaches
and twanging guitars. And since I do not consider the above subjects as
fit, to begin with, that takes us on to your next sign, Finn: _THINK._
Since I will not _consider_ certain subjects to start with, that means
they never become objects of my thought. I do not _THINK_ about them.

Finn

That's what the salesman said, you got to consider first, pick a
subject, before you can _THINK_ about it.

Father

He was right. And thus, through disconsideration and unthought-fulness,
Finn, I am never tempted to climb the ladder of a stocking—

Finn Father, you shock me!

Father

Sorry! Ladder of a _silk_ stocking! Nor do I perspire for strawberry
shortcakes, breathe hard for swimming in warm equatorial waters, or ask
for more than this rough stuff on my back. If you consider too much, you
think too much, and if you think too much you wind up _DOING,_ Finn.
Doing. Doing!

Finn

You're right, Father, that's how women, and other things, get done.

Father Finn!

Finn Sorry. It was off my tongue before I knew.

Father

It was! Now! (_The gimlet eye)_ The salesman that sold you these, was he
from the _north_ of Ireland?

Finn I think not.

Father Were these articles _made_ in Orange territory?

Finn

Why don't we look, sir?

_He hastens the three objects over and puts them down before_

FATHER LEARY, _who peers._

What do you see, Father?

Father Hold on, I left my glasses at the rectory.

Finn Borrow mine, Father—here!

_He holds them out._ father leary _hesitates._

Don't be afraid, Father. You won't see the world much different through
these than through your own.

Father I wouldn't be so sure, Finn! Do you see near or far?

Finn

A bit of both, Father. But it's best I leave the damn things off.
Without my glasses, the world looks fine, sinners look less like
Africans and more like angels, the shadows they cast are short and
sweet, and the sun stays up till midnight.

Father

God help us, that kind of vision would turn a trough full of pigs into
the Last Supper. Put your glasses on, man, and keep them on!

Finn

It's best to be a little blind in this sharp world, Father.

Father Shut up, and give me the loan.

leary _gets the spectacles at last, puts them on, peers at the
"machines."_

Finn Well, _were_ they made in the north of Ireland?

Father No, the western part of the U.S.A.

Finn That's good, Father.

Father Is _California_ good, Finn?

Finn The north or the south of California, sir?

Father _(squints)_ A town with the name of—Alhambra!

Finn _(truly enlightened)_ _Alhambra__!_ Ain't that Spanish? And aren't
the Spanish Catholic?

Father They're a _variety_ of Catholic, you might say.

Finn Might? I always thought Catholic was Catholic!

Father

Finn, you talk like a blatherin' infant! There's types and sizes.
There's Eye-talian Catholic, which is pretty good.

Finn It is indeed!

Father There's Spanish Catholic, which is fair.

Finn Only fair?

Father

And there's French Catholics, which is hardly Catholic at all. It is
rock-bottom Catholic, the fringe elements of the Church. Now if you want
your _real_ Catholic, it's here in Ireland he lives. Not that we don't
sin; we do. Not that we're perfect; we're not. But there be varieties
and varieties of Catholic, never forget, and the sad reflection of my
life is there was never a Pope named Patrick!

Finn _(philosophically)_ Ah, well, we had a Saint!

Father I'm grateful, don't misunderstand.

Finn _(peering)_ Alhambra, California, sounds Catholic enough to me.

Father

Do you have the facts and figures on church attendance in Alhambra,
California, close at hand, Finn?

Finn I do not, Father.

Father Then button your lip and fill my glass.

Finn What'll it be, Father, the Same or the Usual?

father leary _glares,_ finn _subsides,_ father leary _peers._

Father

It says The Monongaheela Gimcrack Novelty Company Inc. Monongaheela?
That's pagan Indian, ain't it?

Finn I wouldn't be surprised, Father.

Father Are you _ever_ surprised, Finn?

Finn

Like you, very rarely any more, Father.

Father

I wish you'd stop teaming us up, Finn. _(Reads)_ "A Little of Something
for Everybody" is the motto of this manufactory in Alhambra, California.

Finn _(savoring it)
_ "A Little of Something for Everybody"

Father

Now, if that doesn't sound like the title for a Protestant sermon, I
never heard one—

Finn Oh, now, Father—

Father

Mind you, I don't say this manufactory put these signs out to make
trouble in the world. No, far from it. In all innocence, I think they
thought they was putting out lovely little mottoes such as _GOD_ _BLESS
OUR HOME,_ which they were not. I forgive them their blind fumbling,
Finn. But think of the misery they have probably spread in the world
wherever these signs be!

Finn

I'm thinking on it. And I'm filled with remorse. You see, that salesman,
he talked as good as you, Father. Yes, he did, he had a fine tongue, and
first thing I knew I had the fevers.

Father You know what you have to do now, Finn?

Finn

What, sir?

father leary _nods at the three items on the bar, holds out his hand._

_(Groans)_ Oh, no.

Father Oh, yes, Finn.

Finn But I've only had them an hour, it's not been a true test, sir!

Father

Which is more important, the philosophy of this small town deep in green
Ireland, or tuppence-hapenny?

Finn I wish it _was_ tuppence-hapenny, sir. Father, look—

_He hands over the shards and one sign._

Take _STOP_ and _CONSIDER_ with you. Leave _THINK_ and _DO_ with me.

Father Finn—

Finn

At the first sign of outbreak, unease, riot, or so much as a headache on
the part of a villager, Father, you'll see these flying through the air
onto the stones!

Father Finn—

Finn

Twenty-four hours, then, just let me keep them _that_ long. The world
was made in six days, Father, but Heeber Finn sure won't undo it in one,
will he?

father leary _sighs, shaking his head, beaten._

Father Twenty-four hours, then. I don't want to be hard.

Finn _(smiling)_ And you're not! You're a man of reason. Here's to you,
Father!

FINN _drinks._

father leary _picks up the broken bits and the one sign, studies them,
peers at the others, starts to say something, shakes his head, moves
toward the door. At the door he pauses, his back to the bartender._

Father Finn?

Finn Yes, sir?

Father

If you should need me ... don't waste time thinking on it. Give a yell.

Finn A helluva yell, Father.

Father Come early, stay late, Finn.

_And the priest is gone._

finn _exhales and strides about the bar._ _He wipes his brow._

Finn

Whew, Finn, whew! I'm shaved to the bone. 'Twill take a year for my
beard to grow back! Well, what's the total? Two left out of four, but
surely the most important of the whole kit. Where was I? Men! _Boys!_

_He turns to shout through the door into the back room._

Is the game done? If not, bring it out here! A free round on the house!

Voices Free round! Outa the way, Men. Here we come, Finn!

_The men surge out along the bar, gabbling, laughing._

The Old Man

It's all in balances and weights, you get a man _so (Illustrates)_, and
thus, and he's in the ditch before he knows the fight is over!

Casey

Women are cats, I said, born and bred in Africa, and shipped north to
torment men in youth, middle age, and their dotage!

O'Hara

Meanness it is, keeps women alive long after a man, in his natural
Christian goodness, has laid down with coins on his eyes—

Finn _(pouring)_ Drink up!

_The men drink. Each talks almost to himself. Each says, and all only
half listen, their faces rosy fire._

Kelly

—worked in the pusstoffice selling stamps of all denominations . . .
have you ever looked at stamps, man, close? A regular gallery of art in
_one hour's_ arrivals of mail from far countries . . .

_The men, drinking, look around, notice the sign,_ THINK, _as the_ _talk
continues, pay no attention, and go on with their blarney._

The Old Man —in the semicircular canals I heard once on the Radio
Aerrean is this liquid which dances about ... if you can tilt a man so
his semicircular canals are off center, he'll get seasick, and—

Kelly

They had a fine stamp once from Portugal, and a girl on it naked as the
palm of my hand and twice as Umber . . .

_The talk begins to die away during all the above and on through the
next speeches. One by one, the men drop out of conversation._

The Old Man

Then I said to him, about fighting ... I don't remember what I said . .
. hold on ...

Casey

My wife has six fingers on each hand and all claws. She

Well, that about describes . . . my . . . wife . . .

Timulty _{trailing off)_

Well, the bog business ain't what it was. I've said my say, I guess . .
.

Kelly _(fading away)_ Then there was a stamp from ... oh ... but why
bother . . .

O'Hara _(after a pause)_ Women are mean. Put that in your pipe and smoke
it.

The Old Man Well, now . . .

Timulty Yes, sir ...

Kelly Drink . . .

_They are all suddenly uneasy and shy._

Casey Six fingers and claws . . .

_They all look at their glasses._

Finn Drink up, boys!

the old man _clears his throat,_ o'hara _blows his nose. They all watch
him do this, for lack of anything else to do._

TlMULTY

Old Man, tell us that joke about Nolan on the bridge.

The Old Man I can't remember.

o'hara _clears his throat. The men shuffle their feet. The men peer
around at each other._

O'HARA

How about some more cards?

The Old Man We was _all_ losing.

TlMULTY

That's hard to do, but we did it. _A nother silence._

Kelly Well?

Casey Well, indeed.

_They move about uneasily. They peer at each other, glance at the sign,
but say nothing._

The Old Man (in _a spooky voice)_ Hold on.

_They all turn to look at him._

Listen.

_They listen._

What do you hear?

Casey

Nothing.

The Old Man

That's it. Do you realize that this very moment and hour is the first
time in thirty years there has been silence in Heeber Finn's pub?

Finn Aw, now—

Casey _(gasps)_ He's right!

Kelly By God, he _is!_

_Everyone is spooked now. The men look around._

The Old Man

A lull is a strange thing to an Irishman.

Kelly _(awed_—sotto voce) You can feel the damn thing, like a calm at
sea.

_They all jeel it, together,_ finn _is upset, but does not speak._

The Old Man _(whispering)_ Strange . . .

Casey _Say_ something, Kelly.

Kelly _(blinks)_ What, for instance?

O'Hara _(whispering)_ Ah, for God's sake, man, "what for instance,"
_what?_ he says!

Kelly _You_ say something, Timulty.

_He checks his watch._

Timulty I got to get home.

The Old Man _{astounded)_ Home!

_Timulty_ _walks, dazed, to the door._

Timulty I think so, anyway . . .

_He wanders out. All look stunned at the doors as they swing shut._

Finn _(falsely hearty)_ Here's another belt for everyone.

_No answer. No enthusiasm._

Kelly

See you later . . .

Finn Later?

_And_ kelly _is gone, too._

O'Hara I think I'll play solitaire . . .

_He lays out the cards._

Ah, damn! I can see I've lost before I begin ... So long, boys . . .

_He leaves the cards and goes._

Casey

For all I said of the little woman, she's mine and not well . . . I'd
best go see how she does . . .

_The rest follow, wordless, leaving only_ the old man _and_ finn _at the
bar._ finn _comes out from behind the bar in shock, almost staggering
with the blow of this great unnamed event._

Finn What happened?

The Old Man _{puffs his pipe thoughtfully)_ A strange thing, for sure.

Finn

Everybody was so happy, everybody talking, everybody bustling about like
always and then, as if the Red Death Hisself had walked in all bones at
the strike of twelve . . . hush ... I never heard the likes in my life!
Old Man . . .

The Old Man Hush up a bit, yourself.

the old man _walks about the pub, sniffing, probing, squinting._

_He glances now and then at the signs behind the bar and at last stops,
looking at one of the signs,_ the old man _goes behind the bar and
reaches up to handle the one sign._

Finn Don't!

The Old Man Why not?

Finn I hate to see something shallow touching something deep, is all!

The Old Man

Don't be so sure about your shallows and deeps, Heeber Finn! Have you
stopped to think—_this_ may be the cause?

Finn The cause?

The Old Man

Of the lull, man! Of the damn peace and quiet which suddenly befell this
place? Of the becalming of this ship of yours!

Finn

_"Think"_ did that? _THINK?_

The Old Man

Think, Think, Think! Didn't you see their faces? I saw mine in the
mirror, I watched it fall! I was talking along, fourteen to the dozen,
when my eye spied that sign and my tongue went slower and I looked again
and my lips tightened up on me and I read the _THINK!_ again and the mud
settled on the bottom of my brain! First thing I knew, I was "mum's the
word," and so were the rest! I could see it come over them, they broke
out in pale sweats! They been talking all their lives, man, and what did
you do to them now?

Finn I didn't do anything!

The Old Man

Yes, you did; you asked them to think, think, think, what they was
saying! That's more than enough to break a man's leg, his arm, his neck
and then his back. Crippled them, you did. Called attention to their
tongues and mouths. First time they had ever noticed they _had_ tongues!
First time they noticed they was actors, and they got stage fright!
_Think_ did it, man, think and nothing _but_ think!

Finn _(lets out a loud cry of anguish)_ Ahhhh . . .

The Old Man

Well may you groan. It's a sad day. Driving off old friends and pals.
Scaring the wits out of them by showing them the marionette strings in
their fingers and lips! How _could_ you be so cruel, Finn?

the old man _goes to the door._

_{Shaken)_ I _ask_ myself . . . _how? How?_

_He exits,_ finn is _alone. He groans again and bites his knuckles,_
_pacing the room._

Finn

Finn, you idiot, Finn, you blathering fool! Thirty years you work to
build a clientele and in one short day lop the heads and shoot the
works. Lost! Finished! Done! Finn, what do you do now? Ahhh. . . .

_He groans. His_ wife _comes in from the street, looks at him,_ _looks
around, moves across the pub, stops, glances over at the_ _last sign,
walks closer, peers._

His Wife I can hardly believe my eyes.

Finn _(destroyed)_ Ah, Woman, leave me alone.

His Wife _(peers)_

Does it say what I _think_ it says, does it _mean_ what it says?
_(Spells) D-O. . . . DO?_

Finn Leave off!

His Wife _(turning)_

Why, Finn, it shows you're taking an interest. _DO!_ That does mean
_ACT,_ and _ACT_ means work, _W-O-R-K . . ._ does it not?

Finn _(punished but repentent)_ It does. _(Shakes head once)_

His Wife Then you'll fix the roof today?

Finn _(bleakly)_ I'll get the tools now!

His Wife And mend the front step?

Finn _(sinking fast)_ It's good as mended!

His Wife And put a new pane of glass in our bedroom window?

Finn _(half under)_ New glass, yes!

His Wife And lay new cobblestone on the path behind?

Finn _(sunk)_

Cobblestones, glass, roof, steps, anything, everything, drive me, sweat
me, kill me with work. I deserve it. I've sinned, I want to do penance!
Make a list, Woman. Shall I paint the chairs, wax the bar? Sew buttons
on my own shirts! I will, I will, I will!

His Wife _(suddenly afraid)_ Ah, God, it's all some joke!

Finn I mean it! I'll chop turf!

His Wife You're not ill?

Finn That all depends how you make illness out to be!

_She brings him the tool kit from behind the bar._

His Wife

Start with the steps, that's a love. Ah, Finn, you _are_ a sweet man,
when you want to be.

Finn _(forlorn, unmoving)_ Sweet I am and glad you think so.

_She kisses him lightly on the cheek and passes toward the back of the
house._

The Wife _(melodically)_ Wait for the roof till tomorrow, if you want!

_She exits._

Finn _(going mad)_

Roof . . . tomorrow . . . want! Ah, ha, Finn, ah ha! Ah, ha! There you
go!

_He throws the hammer through the door._

And there and there!

_He throws all the tools, one by one, then the box._

Ah, Finn, there, ah ha, Finn! Look! See how it goes!

_He whirls about._

What else? What, nothing? Nothing to throw, save me. And I'm too weak to
fling myself out on the stones. Ah, Finn, Finn!

_He almost weeps or maybe does, it is hard to tell with the groaning.
Then he sees the remaining signs. He runs and grabs them._

All right for you, _THINK,_ all right for you, _DO__!_ Here's the end,
the smashing end of you! You'll make fine music on the cobbles! One,
two—

_He is about to throw them when the double doors open and_ the salesman
peers in.

The Salesman Ah, there, Mr. Finn, sir.

Finn Fiend of hell, get out of the way!

The Salesman Mr. Finn . . . you sound upset, sir.

finn _hefts the clay mottoes but does not throw them._

Finn

Upset! Since you left this noon, it has been one plague of locusts on
another!

The Salesman The philosophical mottoes, they didn't work?

Finn

Work! They lost me the use of friends, the respect of neighbors, the
talk and the money of ancient customers, put my wife on my shoulders
along with God, the Church, and Father Leary! Hooli-han, you and your
"machines" have bent and broke me. Ah! Ah! Ah!

Finn's _hands sink to his sides. The remaining signs fall to the floor
without breaking._ Finn's _cries have become louder and louder; he
grieves at his own wake. As he shouts his last "Ah,"_ the salesman
_picks up the two signs, uncertainly, whereupon the double doors flap
wide and there, with imaginary sword unsheathed, stands_ father leary.

Father Heeber Finn, did you call!

Finn _{surprised)_ Did I? Why . . . so I _did!_

father leary _looks around, sees and stares at_ the salesman.

Father Is this the one, Finn?

The Salesman _(miffed)_ Is this the one _what?_

Finn That's him, Father.

The Salesman _(faintly alarmed)_ That's _who?_

Father _(rubbing his hands together)_

All _right,_ then. All _right._

The Salesman _Is_ it? _What_ is?

Father _(at the door)_ Men! Inside!

_There is no instantaneous response, so_ father leary _lifts his voice
and strikes out a pointing hand._

Timulty! Here! Nolan, not another step! Old Man, on the double! _He
holds the door wide,_ the old man _peers in._

The Old Man _(squinting right and left)_ Are they gone?

Father Are what gone?

The Old Man _(suspicious)_ The signs, Father.

Father Ah, come on, get in!

the old man _sidles in._ nolan _is behind him._ All right, Nolan, don't
clog the door.

_All the men shadow-sidle in, shy and uneasy, mouthing their caps with
their hands._ _With his army assembled,_ father leary _turns to the
astounded and now increasingly nervous_ salesman.

The Salesman What's going on?

Father

Well may you ask! I call your attention first to the fact that the man's
wearing a suit and hat the color of burning ashes and black soot.

_The men all gasp and nod in agreement._

The Salesman _{controlling himself)_

Or, to put it another way, the suit was dyed this color in the factory
and the rest is dirt from the roads of Eire!

father leary _is now slowly circling the man._

Father His eyes are green—

The Salesman From my father!

Father His ears pointed—

The Salesman From my mother!

The Old Man
 What's eatin' the priest? I           

nolan _gives_ the old man _a fierce elbow in the ribs which shuts him._
father leary _plants himself before_ the salesman.

Father Do you mind doing one thing, man?

The Salesman What?

Father Would you take off your hat?

The Salesman I _will_ not!

Father He won't take off his hat.

Finn I heard him!

The Salesman The place is a tomb, I'd catch me death!

Father _(hitching up his trousers under his skirt)_ All right, then! Let
us see your feet!

The Salesman They're right down below for you to see!

Father Will you take off your shoes?

Finn That's a _fine_ idea, Father, his shoes!

The Salesman

Ah, you're both daft! If I won't take off me hat I'm sure not to remove
me shoes!

Father He _refuses_ to take off his shoes!

The Salesman What for, why?

Father You know as well as I, man!

Finn Slow down, Father, you've left us behind—

Father

Why, Finn, don't you see, beneath them leather clogs, he's got no toes!

THE MEN _gasp._

It's all fused into one! the MEN _lean and stare._

Finn

You mean—it's hooves he's got, instead of feet?

The Old Man Hooves?

Father I didn't say that.

The Salesman

No—but you infer it! I will not be cudgeled into displaying my fearful
corns and bunions, for that's _all_ that lies hidden there!

Father So _you_ say! Finn!

Finn

Yes, Father?

Father Hang this bit of paper on the wall!

Finn

What is it, Father?

Father Me own sign!

The Salesman Your sign? Now, that ain't right, Father. Unfair
competition!

Father .   Look at him quail!

The Salesman This ain't quailing. I'm mad!

The Old Man What's it say, Finn?

Finn _(peers at the paper) Sic tran—sight_—_glore__—rye—ah_—_moon—day_—

Father _(correcting him) Sic transit gloria mundi!_

_All look at_ THE SALESMAN.

The Old Man Look, he's gone pale!

The Salesman

I ain't gone anywheres near pale! If anything, the blood pounds in me
head!

The Old Man What's it mean?

Father It means we're not long for this world! Post it, Finn.

finn _hustles to nail it on the wall._

Finn _(squinting)_ You got a teeny fine hand, Father. You can't see it
six inches off!

The Old Man _Sick transits,_ what, what?

Father _Gloria mundi!_

The Old Man And what does it mean again, Nolan?

Father

Everything passes away! _(To_ the salesman) Including you, sir! Get out,
begone! I banish you from Heeber Finn's. I banish you from the streets
of our town and the town itself!

The Salesman _(backing off)_

You do indeed. It's a bunch of holy nitwits from an asylum, the town is,
I'll not be back!

Father That you won't.

father leary _advances upon the man, who backs to the door._

Get on! Go sell your pagan bits in Kennywell, St. Bridget's and
Meynooth!

The Salesman And thanks, I will!

the salesman _backs out. The double gates slam-wriggle._

Father Watch out! Don't trip over your tail!

The Old Man _(spying out the window)_ There he goes! He _does_ walk
funny!

nolan _is at the wall, squinting at the paper._

Nolan _(muttering) Sic transit_—

_All the men look proudly at_ father leary, _who turns to look at them._

finn puts a glass on the bar and fills it. He nods, father leary _walks
to the bar and looks at the drink._

Finn Thank you, Father.

father leary _picks up the drink, eyes it against the light._

Father It's the least I could do, for an annex of the church!

_He circles his drink to take in the whole of the pub. He downs the
drink._

Well, now!

_He walks back to the door._

The Old Man

Father! Was it wise to tell him to go sell his heathen signs to other
towns?

Father

Ah, that's not my problem. That's the problem of the good fathers in
Kennywell, St. Bridget's, and Meynooth. It's good in a way that the
Devil passes by and gives us a whack and a shake and wakes us up. If I
had my mind, the Fiend would make a grand tour of Ireland twice a year!

The Old Man And maybe he does, Father!

Father _(muses)_ Yes. Maybe he does.

Finn Is he gone, now, Father?

FATHER LEARY _peers OUt._

Father

The road is empty. Our trial is over. All right, then! Tonight, from
seven till nine, the church is open, the booth waiting, and me inside
the booth!

Nolan We'll be there, Father!

_They hold out their drinks and drink to him._

Father _(surprised and pleased)_ By God, I think you will!

_He exits_

_There is a moment of silence._

Timulty _(sighs)_ Well, this is a day will go down in Kilcock's history.

Casey It was a near thing. I almost went home to the wife . . .

TlMULTY

I almost put in for a job at the pusstoffice.

The Old Man When the Father saved us all.

Timulty _(musing)_

It will be known as the day the Fiend was thrown out from Heeber Finn's.

The Old Man _(nose to the wall, squinting) Sic transit gloria mundi._

Nolan And what's it _mean?_

The Old Man _(flaring)_ It's Latin, dimwit! That's what it means!

finn _has walked slow to the door to look out at the church._

Finn A strange man.

Nolan The salesman?

Finn _(shakes head)_

Father Leary. Why, I ask myself, why did he tell the salesman to sell
the pagan signs in Kennywell, Meynooth, and St. Bridget's? Why? _Why?_

_He turns to look at the others, and at the bar. Slowly, his eyes widen,
his eyebrows go up, his mouth makes a smile. Suddenly he gives a great
laugh._

Ah-hah! Wife!

his wife _appears, arms over her bosom, glaring._

Bring more chairs! A dozen!

The Wife A dozen?

Finn Make it two dozen, three, five! And tables!

His Wife Tables?

Finn By sundown tonight refugees will be _pouring_ in here from—

The Old Man _(catching on)_ Kennywell?

Nolan _(enlightened)_ Meynooth?

Casey _And_ St. Bridget's!

Finn

There's no telling where from, how many, how long! It'll be a grand week
end! Woman—Kathleen, sweetheart, have a drink.

_She hesitates, softens, takes the drink. He gives her a buss and a
pinch,_ finn _raises his glass._

Here's to not _stopping,_ but going on as always and ever, with no
_consideration_ for one dainty moment about _thinking_ and no _doing_
save as how we always done. Casey, Nolan, Timulty, lend a hand!

Nolan It's lent!

_The men rush in and out bringing tables and chairs,_ finn, _in the
flurry, pours a line of little glasses full. On their way in and out the
men grab and swallow, hurry on._

Finn _(sings)_ "In life, in strife, With maid, with wife! It's the
drinkin' . . . !"

The Old Man _(speaks, running) "Not the thinkin'f"_

All _(sing)_ "Makes it go!"

_The Curtain falls on the beehive._ And . . .

THE   END



_THE\ ANTHEM\ SPRINTERS_


CHARACTERS

 

THE YOUNG MAN (DOUGLAS)

HEEBER FINN

THE OLD MAN

TIMULTY

DOONE

o'gavin

FOGARTY

NOLAN

KELLY

casey, peevey, _and other assorted spectators, door-watchers,
time-keepers and jormer champions of the Sprint._

_At the rise of curtain we find ourselves not so much in a real pub as
in a sort of a sketch of a pub. A plank laid across two high saw-horses
will do for a bar. Men are lined up, or rather clustered, at it, having
a fine pantomime argument about something, shaking each other's
shoulders, waving their hands, pulling their hats off and on their
heads, yanking at one another's lapels, pounding their fists on the bar,
and shouting silently, almost nose-to-nose. As the lights come up, so
does the sound of the men, as if theatrically we were tuning in on the
wildlife here. Four or five of the men are having the greatest to-do
there at the rail. Two other men, down front, are Indian-wrestling each
other. Two more are playing darts, hurling the feathered things through
space at a target suspended far to one side. To the left a man in a
bowler hat sits on a piano stool playing a tune on empty space. Though
the piano is not there, we can hear it fine. It is a jolly tune. So
jolly that one of the men in the argument breaks off, unable to resist,
and jogs about a bit. Still another fellow somewhere in all the melee is
munching on a harmonica, his eyes soulfully shut and the banshee mourn
of the little machine in his mouth rising and falling in the smoke and
din. An ardent fan of his stands near, aching with the melody, mouth
open, watching the great musician tongue and wheeze along the
contraption. In all, there are a dozen or so people littered about the
scene. More can be added. Or if need be, some might be taken away and
never missed._

_Anyway, here we are in Heeber Finn's and_ FINN _himself be__hind the
bar, singing any tune that strikes his fancy as he wipes glasses and
foams up drinks, adding his own musical bit to the general commotion._

_It is a scene rather like the tumult on a pinball device when the
jackpot is struck, all the lights flash, miniature guns explode,
fantastic totals jump about on the Scoreboard, and all the balls at once
seem to rush wild down the ways._

_Into this grand scene now walks our writer-hero, or for a time anyway,
villain,_ the young man. _He is not a nasty snob, he is just unfamiliar
with things and, like it or not, he looks just a bit like a Tourist._

_With his entrance, some of the activity, or at least the sound of it,
fades down._

the young man _stands dead-center of the action and looks about,
tolerantly amused. We hear a few of the cries more clearly now from some
of the men arguing at the bar._

The Men _{general hubbub)_ Doone! O'Gavin!

Devil take O'Gavin!

Then Devil Take Doone! He's no Sport at all! Now—
 O'Gavin

_At which point_ the young man _gathers his observations and makes his
fatal comment._

The Young Man Well! It sure looks like a wild night, here!

_It is as if the great blade of the Guillotine had fallen. Silence chops
across all._ the young man _is instantly sorry. Almost in midflight, the
feathered dart is shot down. The piano stops. The harmonica dies in
midwheeze. The dancer seems suddenly crippled. Nobody has turned yet to
look at_ the young man. _Perhaps they are only waiting for this
outlander to pack his chagrin and go away. They will give him enough
time. Count to ten._ the young man _looks around, looks at the door,
debates heading for it, but stops._

_For one man,_ timulty, _has broken from the mob at the bar and now
slowly stalks out, not looking at_ douglas, _only turning to survey him
steadily after he has come full in front of him, his glass of stout in
his hand._

_He drinks from the glass, eyeing_ douglas. douglas _fidgets. At last,_
timulty _speaks._

TlMULTY

Was that said in scorn or admiration?

The Young Man
 I really can't say

TlMULTY

There's a confusion in your mind then?

The Young Man _(eagerly grasping this)_ Yes, that's it!

TlMULTY _turns to glance all about._

TlMULTY

He's confused, boys!

_There is a general murmur neither for nor against, in answer to this,_
timulty _turns_ _back._

Are you new to Ireland, to Dublin, and to Heeber Finn's pub?

The Young Man Er—all _three_ of those, yes!

Timulty _(to his friends)_ He's new to all three, boys!

_There is a little more affirmative rumble now, exclamations of "Oh" and
"Ah well, then" and "So that's how it is" mix with the rest,_ timulty
_views_ douglas _again._

So it's an orientation program you're in search of?

The Young Man That's _it!_

timulty _eyes him a moment longer, then waves once, idly, to his
friends._

Timulty All right, boys!

_The tumult and the shouting that had died, without the captains and the
kings departing, now instantaneously renews itself. Darts fly. The piano
sounds. The harmonica wails. The men jump hip deep into their
argumentation._

douglas _views this, impressed, as if suddenly given to see the vast
workings of Big Ben's machinery going full blast._

Timulty's my name.

The Young Man Douglas.

Timulty Is it a wild night you're looking for?

The Young Man Well, I—

Timulty You think, don't you, there _are no_ Wild Nights in Ireland?

The Young Man
 I didn't say that 

Timulty

You think it. It shows in your eyes. Well, what would you say if I told
you you was at the eye of the hurricane! You're in the damn earthquake,
half-buried to your chin and don't know it!

The Young Man Ami?

Timulty

You are! Here at Finn's pub is the Central Betting Agency for the
greatest Sporting Event of Local Consequence!

The Young Man Is it?

Timulty 'Tis! Listen! Do you hear?

The _Men_ _(yelling again)_ Two bob says you're wrong! Three bob nails
you to the wall!

Timulty _(calling over)_ Men, what do you think of Doone?

Fogarty His reflex is uncanny!

The Old Man Doone hell! My money is on O'Gavin! What a Great Heart!

The Young Man A Sporting Event, you say?

Timulty Come along! Boys, this is Mr. Douglas, from the States.

_General greetings._

Timulty Mr. Douglas is in—

The Young Man Pictures. I write screenplays for the cinema.

All Fillums!

The Young Man _(modestly)_ Films.

Timulty No! It's too much!

The Old Man Are you staggered, Timulty?

Timulty I am!

Fogarty Coincidence!

Nolan Beyond belief!

The Young Man _(blinks)_ What is?

The Old Man

Your occupation and our Sporting Event! They're in the same bed!

FOGARTY

They're twins!

Timulty

By God now, you'll not only bet, we'll let you judge! Are you much for
sports? Do you know, for instance, such things as the cross-country,
four-forty, and like man-on-foot excursions?

The Young Man I've attended two Olympic Games.

The Old Man _(awed)_ Not just fillums, but the World Competition!

Timulty

Well, now, isn't it time you knew of the special all-Irish decathlon
event which has to do with picture theatres?

The Young Man

The Old Man Shall we show him, boys?

All

Sure! Fine! On the way! Stand aside!

Finn Out it is! This way! Doone, come on!

_And before_ Douglas _can protest,_ bang! _they are out the door,_ _the
pub has vanished, and they run circling through a sort of_ _mist,_
doone, _who, it turns out, is the man who has been playing the invisible
piano, turns last of all and, dancing around on his toes, pumping his
legs like a trackman to prime himself, exits last of all, and soon
catches, paces, and fronts the mob._

Finn Doone! Doone! There you are!

Doone Does an Event loom?

The Old Man It does!

Doone _(dancing ahead)_ I'm fit!

The Old Man You are!

Timulty There! We've arrived!

_They pull up._ the young man _gazes around, still not certain what to
look for._

The Old Man Will you read _that?_

_A marquee with blinking lights has come on above them._

The Young Man The . . . Great . . . Fine . . . Arts . . . Cinema.

Timulty Don't forget "Elite." It's there. But it's burnt out.

timulty _throws his cap up to hit the marquee. The missing word lights
feebly and flickeringly._

The Young Man The GreatE/J Fine Arts Elite Cinema Theatre.

FOGARTY

We have a name for everything, do we not?

Timulty If the Arts _need_ being Greater or Finer, this is where you
come.

Nolan Ah, look at the lights move, will ya?

Timulty Like the fireflies on the meadows with the sun just set.

The Old Man _{nudges the writer)_ Did you _hear_ him?

The Young Man Eh?

The Old Man

Well, I mean to say, are you a writer or not? I mean, don't writers make
notes of lovely things like that to put in their next book?

The Young Man Er ... yes ...

the young man _takes out a pad and pencil sheepishly. Everyone leans
over his shoulder to see the words go down._

Timulty _{quoting himself)_ "Like the fireflies . . ."

Nolan ". . . on the bogs . . ."

Timulty

"Meadows," ya dimwit! "On the meadows . . ." That's it. "With the sun .
. ."

The Young Man _{writing)_ ". . . just set."

TlMULTY

There! _(Sighs)_ I'm immortal.

The Old Man Enough! We are at the place of the grand sport!

The Young Man _(dubious)_ The Greater Fine Arts Elite Cinema Theatre?

Fogarty

Why not? Look, there's three churches in Ireland. There's them whose
faith is the pubs, them whose faith is the cinemas, and then there's the
Catholics.

The Old Man There's _always_ a place to go.

The Young Man

Yes, but what sport can you put in a theatre? Ping pong, basketball
onstage?

TlMULTY

Doone, step forward!

doone, _who has been darting about on tiptoe, snorting, snuffing, dances
in._

Doone Doone, that's me! The Best Anthem Sprinter in Ireland!

The Young Man _What_ sprinter?

Doone _(spells with difficulty)_ A-n-t-h-e-m. Anthem. Sprinter. The
fastest. _(Bobs)_

Finn Since you've been in Dublin, have you attended the cinema?

The Young Man
 Just once, but in London last month, I saw eight films      

TlMULTY

You're fanatic, then, as are we all, through need, on this godforsaken
desert!

The Old Man

In London, if you'll excuse the curse, when the fillum stopped each
night, did you observe anything tending towards the peculiar?

The Young Man _(muses)_ Hold on! You can't mean "God Save The Queen,"
can you?

TlMULTY Can we, boys?

All

We can!

The Old Man

In London, it's "God Save The Queen," here it's the National Anthem,
it's all the same!

TlMULTY

Any night, every night, for tens of dreadful years, at the end of each
damn fillum all over Ireland, in every cinema, as if you'd never heard
the baleful tune before, the orchestra strikes up for Ireland!

The Old Man _(nudges the writer)_ And what happens _then?_

The Young Man _(muses)_

Why ... if you're any man at all, you try to get out of the theatre in
those few precious moments between the end of the film and the start of
the Anthem.

TlMULTY He's nailed it!

Nolan Buy the Yank a drink!

Finn _(passing bottle)_ On the house!

The Young Man _(drinks, wipes mouth)_ After all, I was in London a
month. "God Save The Queen" had begun to pall. It's surely the same
after all these years for you and your National Anthem. _(Hastily)_ No
disrespect meant.

Finn And none taken!

Timulty

Or _given_ by any of us patriotic I.R.A. veterans, survivors of the
Troubles, lovers of country. Still, breathing the same air ten thousand
times makes the senses reel. So, as you've noted, in that God-sent
three- or four-second interval, any audience in its right mind beats it
the hell out. And the best of the crowd is—

The Young Man Doone. Your Anthem Sprinter.

The Old Man Smile at the man.

_Everyone smiles at the American, who smiles easily back._

Now! Stand near! At this moment, not one hundred feet through that door
and down the slight declivity toward the silver screen, seated on the
aisle of the fourth row center is O'Gavin . . .

The Young Man . . . your _other_ Anthem Sprinter.

Nolan _(tipping his cap)_ The man's eerie.

Timulty _(impressed)_ O'Gavin's there, all right. He's not seen the
filhim before—

The Young Man _(looks up)_ What, Clark Gable in _It Happened One Night?_

Nolan

Ah, that was last month. They've not got around to taking down the
names.

Timulty

This fillum tonight is a Deanna Durbin brought back by the asking, and
the time is now . . .

Finn _holds up his watch. All lean toward it._

Finn Ten-thirty o'clock.

Timulty

In five minutes the cinema will be letting the customers out in a herd .
. .

The Old Man

And if we should send Doone here in for a test of speed and agility . .
.

Doone _(dancing about)_ It's stripped to the buff I am!

The Old Man . . . O'Gavin would be ready to take the challenge!

The Young Man O'Gavin didn't go to the show just for an Anthem Sprint,
did he?

The Old Man

Good grief, no. He went for the Deanna Durbin songs and all, him playing
the banjo and knowing music as he does. But, as I say, if he should
casually note the entrance of Doone here, who would make himself
conspicuous by his late arrival, O'Gavin would know what was up. They
would salute each other and both sit listening to the dear music until
_Finis_ hove in sight.

Doone _(doing knee-bends)_ Sure, let me at him, let me _at_ him!

Douglas Do—do you have Teams?

TlMULTY

Teams! There's the Galway Runners!

FOGARTY

The Connemara Treadwells!

The Old Man The Donnegal Lightfoots!

TlMULTY

And the fastest team of all is made up of Irishmen living in London.

The Old Man _(reverently)_ "The Queen's Own Evaders"!

Fogarty Fast, do you see, to flee from "God Save The Queen"?

_All laugh, assent, pummel, gather about,_ finn _searches the writer's
face._

Finn

I see the details of the sport have bewildered you. Let me nail down the
rules. Fogarty?!

Fogarty Here!

Finn Door-listener supreme! Nolan! Kelly!

Nolan and Kelly Here!

Finn

Aisle-superintendent judges! Myself—_(Shows watch)_—Timekeeper. General
spectators: Casey, Peevey, and Dillon. You've met Doone. O'Gavin's in
the depths, there! So much for the participants. Now, the sports arena.
_(Moves, pointing)_ Much depends on the character of the theatre.

The Young Man The character?

The Old Man _(hustling along)_

Here's the exits, ya see? And inside—_(Opens a door, points)_ —the lobby
. . .

Finn _(cuts in)_

Now, there be some liberal free-thinking theatres with grand aisles,
grand lobbies, grand exits, and even grander, more spacious latrines . .
.

Nolan _(cutting in)_

Some with so much porcelain, the echoes alone put you in shock . . .

Timulty _(cutting in)_

And then again there's the parsimonious mousetrap cinemas with aisles
that squeeze the breath from you, seats that knock your knees, and doors
best sidled out of on your way to the men's lounge in the sweet-shop
across the alley.

The Old Man

Each theatre is carefully assessed before, during, and after a Sprint. A
runner is judged by whether he had to fight through men and women en
masse, mostly men, women with shopping bags which is terrible, or worst
still, children at the flypaper matinees.

Nolan _(illustrating)_

The temptation with children of course is lay into them as you'd harvest
hay, tossing them in windrows to left and right.

The Old Man

So we've stopped that. Now it's nights only here at the ideal cinema of
them all.

The Young Man Ideal? Why?

Kelly _(displays tape measure)_ Its aisles, do you see, are neither too
wide nor too narrow.

_He and_ the old man _pace off by the exit door._ _They illustrate with
the tape._

Its exits are well placed.

The Old Man _(tests door)_ The door hinges oiled.

_They open the door and point in._ the young man _peers._

Timulty

Its crowds, do you see? are a proper mixture of sporting bloods and
folks who mind enough to leap aside should a Sprinter, squandering his
energy, come dashing up the way.

The Young Man _(suddenly thoughtful)_ Do you . . . handicap your
runners?

Finn We do!

The Old Man

Some nights, we put a summer coat on one, a winter coat on another of
the racers.

Timulty Or seat one chap in the fifth row, while the other takes the
third.

Finn

And if a man turns terrible feverish swift, we add the sweetest known
burden of all—

The Young Man Drink?

All Ah ... ah ... ah ...

_All laugh, mumble, move in to clap and pat the dear, knowledgeable
boy._

The Old Man

What else! Nolan! Run this in! Make O'Gavin take two swigs, big ones!
_(Aside)_ He's a _two-handicap_ man.

nolan _runs through the door._

Nolan Two it is!

TlMULTY

While Doone here has already made his weight at Heeber Finn's.

Doone _(drinking from the bottle)_ Even all!

Kelly

Go on, Doone. Let our money be a light burden on you. Let's see you
burst out that exit, five minutes from now, victorious and first.

Finn Doone! Inside!

doone _shakes hands all around. He waves to everyone as if going on a
long voyage, opens the door. Sweet music flushes out about him_—_he
basks in it a moment, then plunges through into dark__ness, gone. At
which point_ nolan _bursts back out._

Nolan _(waves flask)_ O'Gavin's handicapped!

The Old Man

Fine! Kelly, now, go check the contestants, be sure they sit opposite
each other in the fourth row, caps on, coats half buttoned, scarves
properly furled.

Kelly _(running)_ It's already done!

kelly _vanishes back through in a surge of music of great romance._

Finn _(checking his watch)_ In two more minutes—

The Young Man _(innocently) Post_ Time?

Timulty _(with admiring affection)_ You're a dear lad.

Kelly _(bursting through door)_ All set! They're ready!

Fogarty _(listening at the door)_

'Tis almost over, you can tell, toward the end of any fillum, the music
has a way of getting out of hand!

_He opens the door wide and nods in. Sure enough, the music is in full
heat now, surging all over the place. All listen and nod, eyes closed._

Timulty

Full orchestra and chorus behind the singing maid. I must come tomorrow
for the entirety.

Finn _(entranced)_ What's the tune?

The Old Man Ah, off with the tune! Lay the bets!

Finn _(recovering)_ Right! Who's for Doone, who O'Gavin?

All _(hustling about, waving money and paper)_ Doone! A shilling for
O'Gavin. Doone! Two says it's Doone! Four on O'Gavin!

The Young Man _(holding out money)_ O'Gavin.

Finn _(shocked)_ Without having _seen_ him?

The Young Man _(whispers)_ A dark horse.

TlMULTY

A brave choice. Kelly, Nolan, inside as aisle judges. Watch sharp
there's no jumping the _Finis._

_In go_ kelly _and_ nolan, _happy as boys._

Finn Make an aisle now. Yank, you over here with me!

_All rush to form a double line, one on either side of the exit._

TlMULTY

Fogarty, lay your ear to the door!

Fogarty _(does so)_ The damn music is extra loud!

The Old Man (sotto voce _to_ the young man) It will be over soon.
Whoever's to die is dying this moment!

Fogarty Louder still! There!

_He holds one door half wide. The last single chord of music blasts
out._

Finn The grand ta-ta! By God!

The Young Man _(a quiet exclamation)_ They're _off!_

Finn Stand aside! Clear the door!

Fogarty _(listens)_ Here they come!

Finn Listen to their feet!

The Old Man Like thunder it is!

_We hear the feet rushing._

Finn Come on, O'Gavin!

Timulty Doone! Doone!

All Doone! O'Gavin! Doone! O'Gavin!

_The doors burst wide,_ doone, _breathless, plunges out alone._

The winner!

Doone _(surprised)_ By God, so I _am!_

Finn

'Tenshun! The National Anthem!

_He holds the door wide. The men whip off their caps. The Anthem speeds
swiftly to its end._

The Young Man _(puzzled)_ That was quick. Did they leave something out?

Finn What _didn't_ they!!

The Old Man

Over the years, by some miracle or other, the Anthem has got shorter and
shorter.

Doone Where's my competition?

_All suddenly realize_ doone _stands alone, blinking back into the
cinema dark, from which_ nolan _and_ kelly _emerge, bewildered._

The Old Man Jesus, you're right! Where's O'Gavin!

Nolan The idiot didn't run out the wrong exit, did he?

Doone _(calling into the dark)_ O'Gavin!?

Kelly Could he've sprinted into the Men's?

Finn Now what would he do there?

The Old Man _(snorts)_ There's a son of ignorant Ireland for you!
_O'Gavin__!_

Fogarty

Good grief, maybe coming up the aisle he had a heart attack and is lying
there in the dark gasping his—

All

That's _it!_

_The men riot through the door,_ the young man _last._

Nolan Maybe he broke his leg.

Kelly Did you bring the gun?

The Old Man Ah, off with the gun! O'Gavin? Dear lad? How _is_ it?

_They mob around down, perhaps to the first row of the theatre, where
they all peer at one man seated alone._

Nolan O'Gavin!

Finn

You haven't _moved!_

The Old Man

Why are you _sittiri_ there?

Finn What's that on his cheek?

Fogarty _{bends close, peers)_ A teardrop! A tear!

O'Gavin _{moans)_ Ah, God!

Finn O'Gavin, are ya sick?

_They all bend close._

O'Gavin

Ah, God . . .

_He rises slowly and turns, brushing a tear from his eye. He shakes his
head beatifically, eyes shut._

She has the voice of an angel.

The Young Man Angel?

O'Gavin _{nods back at the stage)_ That one up there, on the silver
screen.

_They all turn to stare at a silver screen that has come down behind
them, where Finn's pub once was._

The Young Man Deanna Durbin, does he mean?

O'Gavin _{blowing his nose)_ The dear dead voice of my grandmother—

TlMULTY

Your grandma's behind!

The Young Man _(peering at the screen)_ Her singing? Just _that_ made
him forget to ran?

O'Gavin

Just! _Just!_ It would be sacrilege to bound from a cinema after a
recital such as that just heard! Might as well throw bombs at a wedding
or—

TlMULTY

You could've at least _warned_ us it was No Contest.

O'Gavin

How? It crept over me in a divine sickness. That last bit she sang. "The
Lovely Isle of Innisfree," was it not, Doone?

Fogarty What _else_ did she sing?

The Old Man _(exasperated)_

What _else?_ He's just lost some of you a day's wages and you ask what
else she sang!

O'Gavin

Sure, it's money that runs the world. But it is music which holds down
the friction.

Phil (c _voice from the back of the theatre)_ Hey! What's going on down
there!

Timulty _(aside to the Yank)_ It's the cinema projectionist—!

The Old Man Hello, Phil, darling! It's only the Team!

Finn

We've a bit of a problem here, Phil, in ethics, not to say esthetics.

The Old Man _(smiling his grandest)_ Yes, now, we wonder—could you run
the Anthem over?

Phil's Voice Run it _over?!_

_There is a rumble of protests from the winners, approval from the
losers._

O'Gavin A _lovely_ idea!

Timulty It _is_ not! Doone won fair and square!

The Old Man An Act of God incapacitated O'Gavin!

Kelly

A tenth-run flicker from the year nineteen hundred and thirty-seven
caught him by the short hairs, you mean!

Fogarty
 We've never run a sprint over before        

O'Gavin _(sweetly)_

Phil, dear boy, is the _last_ reel of the Deanna Durbin fillum still
there?

Phil's Voice It ain't in the Ladies'.

O'Gavin

What a wit the boy has. Now, Phil, do you think you could just thread
the singing girl back through the infernal machine there and give us the
_Finis_ again?

Phil

Is _that_ what you _all_ want?

_There is a hard moment of indecision._

Fogarty _(tempted)_

Including, of course, all of the song "The Lovely Isle of Innis-free"?

Phil The whole damn island, sure!

_Everybody beams. This has hit them where they live._

The Old Man Done! Places, everyone!

doone _and_ o'gavin _race to sit down._

The Young Man

Hold on! There's no audience. Without them, there're no obstacles, no
real contest.

Finn _(scowls, thinks)_ Why, let's _all_ of us be the audience!

All _(flinging themselves into seats)_ Grand! Fine! Wonderful!

the young man _is left alone, looking at his friends._

The Young Man I beg pardon.

The Old Man _(seated)_ Yes, lad?

The Young Man There's no one outside by the exit, to judge who wins.

_Everyone is shocked to hear this. They look around._

Timulty Then, Yank, would you mind doing us the service?

the young man _nods, backs off, then turns and runs back out to the exit
door, onstage._

Phil's Voice Are ya clods down there ready?

The Old Man _(turning)_ If Deanna Durbin and the Anthem is!

Phil's Voice Here goes!

_The lights go out. The music surges. A voice sings. By the exit door,_
the young man _tenses, waiting, checking his watch. He holds the door
half open, listening._

The Young Man

Forty seconds . . . thirty . . . ten seconds . . . there's the Finale .
. . ! They're—_Off__!_

_He flings himself back as if afraid a flood of men will mob out over
him. We hear the grand Ta-Ta of cymbals, drums, brass. Then_—_silence._

the young man _opens the door wide and peers into the dark, then
stiffens to attention as_

_The National Anthem plays. Even shorter this time, at double-quick
speed._

_When it is over,_ the young man _steps in and peers down at the long
row where the "audience" and the two competitors are seated. They all
stand and look back and up at the projection room._

_Tears are streaming from their eyes. They are dabbing their cheeks._

The Old Man _(calls)_ Phil, darling . . . ?

Finn . . . once more?

_They all sit down. Only_ timulty _remains standing, eyes wet. He
gestures._

TLMULTY

And this time . . . _without_ the Anthem? _Blackout._

_Music._ _A swift Irish reel, with blended overtones of the lilting
"Innisfree," old Deanna Durbin songs, and at the very last, the Anthem,
in its most truncated form._

_The_ real _audience can, if it wishes, run for the exits, now, for_
_our Play has come to_

THE   END



THE\ QUEEN'S\ OWN\ EVADERS,


 

an Afterword _by Kay Bradbury_

I had never wanted to go to Ireland in my life.

Yet here was John Huston on the telephone asking me to his hotel for a
drink. Later that afternoon, drinks in hand, Huston eyed me carefully
and said, "How would you like to live in Ireland and write _Moby Dick_
for the screen?"

And suddenly we were off after the White Whale; myself, the wife, and
two daughters.

It took me seven months to track, catch, and throw the Whale flukes out.

From October to April I lived in a country where I did not want to be.

I thought that I saw nothing, heard nothing, felt nothing of Ireland.
The Church was deplorable. The weather was dreadful. The poverty was
inadmissible. I would have none of it. Besides, there was this Big Fish
. . .

I did not count on my subconscious tripping me up. In the middle of all
the threadbare dampness, while trying to beach Leviathan with my
typewriter, my antennae were noticing the people. Not that my wide-awake
self, conscious and afoot, did not notice them, like and admire and have
some for friends, and see them often, no. But the overall thing,
pervasive, was the poorness and the rain and feeling sorry for myself in
a sorry land.

With the Beast rendered down into oil and delivered to the cameras, I
fled Ireland, positive I had learned naught save how to dread storms,
fogs, and the penny-beggar streets of Dublin and Kilcock.

But the subliminal eye is shrewd. While I lamented my hard work and my
inability, every other day, to feel as much like Herman Melville as I
wished, my interior self kept alert, snuffed deep, listened long,
watched close, and filed Ireland and its people for other times when I
might relax and let them teem forth to my own surprise.

I came home via Sicily and Italy where I had baked myself free of the
Irish winter, assuring one and all, "I'll write nothing ever about the
Connemora Lightfoots and the Donnybrook Gazelles."

I should have remembered my experience with Mexico, many years before,
where I had encountered not rain and poverty, but sun and poverty, and
come away panicked by a weather of mortality and the terrible sweet
smell when the Mexicans exhaled death. I had at last written some fine
nightmares out of that.

Even so, I insisted, Eire was dead, the wake over, her people would
never haunt me.

Several years passed.

Then one rainy afternoon Mike (whose real name is Nick), the
taxi-driver, came to sit just out of sight in my mind. He nudged me
gently and dared to remind me of our journeys together across the bogs,
along the Liffey, and him talking and wheeling his old iron car slow
through the mist night after night, driving me home to the Royal
Hibernian Hotel, the one man I knew best in all the wild green country,
from dozens of scores of Dark Journeys.

"Tell the truth about me," Mike said. "Just put it down the way it was."

And suddenly I had a short story and a play. And the story is true and
the play is true. It happened like that. It could have happened no other
way.

Well, the story we understand, but why, after all these years, did I
turn to the stage?

It was not a turn, but a return.

I acted on the amateur stage, and radio, as a boy. I wrote plays as a
young man. These plays, unproduced, were so bad that I promised myself
never to write again for the stage until late in life, after I'd learned
to write all the other ways first and best. Simultaneously, I gave up
acting because I dreaded the competitive politics actors must play in
order to work. Besides: the short story, the novel, called. I answered.
I plunged into writing. Years passed. I went to hundreds of plays. I
loved them. I read hundreds of plays. I loved them. But still I held off
from ever writing Act I, Scene I, again. Then came _Moby Dick,_ a while
to brood over it, and suddenly here was Mike, my taxi-driver, rummaging
my soul, lifting up titbits of adventure from a few years before near
the Hill of Tara or inland at the autumn changing of leaves in
Killeshandra. My old love of the theater with a final shove pushed me
over.

One other thing jolted me back toward the stage. In the last five years
I have borrowed or bought a good many European and American Idea Plays
to read; I have watched the Absurd and the More-Than-Absurd Theatre. In
the aggregate I could not help but judge the plays as frail exercises,
more often than not half-witted, but above all lacking in the prime
requisites of imagination and ability.

It is only fair, given this flat opinion, I should now put my own head
on the chopping-block. You may, if you wish, be my executioners.

This is not so unusual. Literary history is filled with writers who,
rightly or wrongly, felt they could tidy up, improve upon, or
revolutionize a given field. So, many of us plunge forward where angels
leave no dustprint.

Having dared once, exuberant, I dared again. When Mike vaulted from my
machine, others unbidden followed.

And the more that swarmed, the more jostled to fill the spaces.

I suddenly saw that I knew more of the minglings and commotions of the
Irish than I could disentangle in a month or a year of writing and
unraveling them forth. Inadvertently, I found myself blessing the secret
mind, and winnowing a vast interior post-office, calling nights, towns,
weathers, beasts, bicycles, churches, cinemas, and ritual marches and
flights by name.

Mike had started me at an amble; I broke into a trot which was before
long a Full Sprint pacing my dear friends, the Queen's Own Evaders.

The stories, the plays, were born in a yelping litter. I had but to get
out of their way.

Now done, and busy with other plays about science-fiction machineries
which will spin their cogs in yet another book—do I have an
after-the-fact theory to fit play-writing?

Yes.

For only after, can one nail down, examine, explain.

To try to know beforehand is to freeze and kill.

Self-consciousness is the enemy of all art, be it acting, writing,
painting, or living itself, which is the greatest art of all.

Here's how my theory goes. We writers are up to the following:

We build tensions toward laughter, then give permission, and laughter
comes.

We build tensions toward sorrow, and at last say cry, and hope to see
our audience in tears.

We build tensions toward violence, light the fuse, and run.

We build the strange tensions of love, where so many of the other
tensions mix to be modified and transcended, and allow that fruition in
the mind of the audience.

We build tensions, especially today, toward sickness and then, if we are
good enough, talented enough, observant enough, allow our audiences to
be sick.

Each tension seeks its own proper end, release, and relaxation.

No tension, it follows, aesthetically as well as practically, must be
built which remains unreleased. Without this, any art ends incomplete,
halfway to its goal. And in real life, as we know, the failure to relax
a particular tension can lead to madness.

There are seeming exceptions to this, in which novels or plays end at
the height of tension, but the release is implied. The audience is asked
to go forth into the world and explode an idea. The final action is
passed on from creator to reader-viewer whose job it is to finish off
the laughter, the tears, the violence, the sexuality, or the sickness.

Not to know this is not to know the essence of creativity, which, at
heart, is the essence of man's being.

If I were to advise new writers, if I were to advise the new writer in
myself, going into the theatre of the Absurd, the almost-Absurd, the
theatre of Ideas, the any-kind-of-theatre-at-all, I would advise like
this:

Tell me no pointless jokes.

I will laugh at your refusal to allow me laughter.

Build me no tension toward tears and refuse me my lamentations.

I will go find me better wailing walls.

Do not clench my fists for me and hide the target.

I might strike you, instead.

Above all, sicken me not unless you show me the way to the ship's rail.

For, please understand, if you poison me, I must be sick. It seems to me
that many people writing the sick film, the sick novel, the sick play,
have forgotten that poison can destroy minds even as it can destroy
flesh. Most poison bottles have emetic recipes stamped on the labels.
Through neglect, ignorance, or inability, the new intellectual Borgias
cram hairballs down our throats and refuse us the convulsion that could
make us well. They have forgotten, if they ever knew, the ancient
knowledge that only by being truly sick can one regain health. Even
beasts know when it is good and proper to throw up. Teach me how to be
sick then, in the right time and place, so that I may again walk in the
fields and with the wise and smiling dogs know enough to chew sweet
grass.

The art aesthetic is all encompassing, there is room in it for every
horror, every delight, if the tensions representing these are carried to
their furthest perimeters and released in action. I ask for no happy
endings. I ask only for proper endings based on proper assessments of
energy contained and given detonation.

Given all this, what are we to make of a book mainly composed of Irish
comedies?

Well, the means whereby men "make do" with the world, which is more
often than not by their wit and humor, is the good stuff of serious
thought. We think long and much on the universe and the ways of God and
man toward man, and then cry into our inkwells to service tragedies, or
throw our heads way back and give one hell of a yell of laughter.

This time out, given poverty, given bicycle collisions in fogs that
might turn deadly serious, given rank prejudice and raw bias, given
suicidal cold and insufficient means against such cold, given Ireland
that is, and all its priest-ridden and sleet-worn souls, I have chosen
to lift my head from my hands, I have chosen not to weep but to laugh
with them as they themselves must laugh, in order to survive, in the
pubs, and on the roads of a lost and much-overpraised bog.

To take the plays more or less in the order of their veracity to life
and my experience in Ireland, THE FIRST NIGHT OF LENT, as I have already
noted, is a true portrayal of my adventures with Mike, the lone
taxi-driver of Kilcock.

THE GREAT COLLISION OF MONDAY LAST is based a bit more roughly on Truth,
with a sidewise look at fancy and a backward glance at the lie which,
once gone over, cannot be treaded again, for now it is booby-trapped.
The fact is, collisions occur _all_ the time in Ireland between
hell-bent sinner bicyclists, with dread results. From the echoes of
multiple collisions I harkened for further reverberations which became
the play.

A CLEAR VIEW OF AN IRISH MIST can best be approached thiswise:

If Tintoretto, Michelangelo, Titian and others invented the wide-screen
frozen cinema of the Renaissance, it was the Irish first came full-blown
with the Hi-Fi and the Long-Play Stereo.

Just open the doors of any pub, stand out of the blast, and you'll know
what I mean.

I woke one night in Dublin, half-panicked by something, shook my wife
and cried, I think, "The Troubles! They're on again!" or perhaps
"There's a riot downstairs!"

"No such thing," my wife murmured, rolling over. "There was a dance up
the street. It's just letting out." Or perhaps she protested, falling
into a snooze, "They've just shut the pubs . . ."

No matter. A great river of Irish swept by below, all "tweeter," all
"woofer," and playing on forever.

The flood took the better part of an hour to die away and empty into the
Liffey; for little side-flurries swept into storefronts or whirlpooled
at streetcorners with fearful arguments and ardent proclamations. Poets
were striking blows for freedom, actors were pounding Yeats into the
earth just to yank him out again. If women or girls were present they
were stormed to silence by the concussions.

In sum, if Guinness is the national stout, conversation is the royal
republican wine, liberally manufactured and sold everywhere men so much
as bump elbows in passing.

Irishmen inhale but never exhale: they _talk._

And they surely regret the lost time it takes to draw breath, for during
that split second some idiot with full lungs might dart in to seize the
arguments and not give them back save by main force.

Given this overall and inescapable truth, I have fancied forth A CLEAR
VIEW OF AN IRISH MIST to show what might happen to the National LP and
the dear Hi-Fi should an irrational beast dare them to THINK.

Which leaves us at last with the Anthem Sprinters themselves.

Squashed betwixt wet sky and damp earth, sex has little place to lie
down in anywhere from Dublin to Galway. Women, strange creatures that
they be, hesitate but a moment when offered a choice between a sodden
tromp for love in the flooded fields or the dry cinema where one can
squeeze out one's passions as well as can be under the circumstances by
knocking knees, clubbing feet and squirming elbows. If the girl did not
make this choice, the Church would make it for her. The growing and
tumescent lad then has but two ports to put in at, the pub and the
cinema. Both places overflow in all towns any night.

But the Church and State, synonymous, lurk everywhere.

The pubs close too early for Reason to have been completely defeated.

The American "fillums," which make clerical collars to jump up and down
in apprehension, are censored.

And, Worst, at the end of each show, the damn Anthem is played.

It was while in Dublin, nightly attending old Wally Beery movies to get
in out of the cold, I first noticed that my wife and I, like the rest,
were on our feet and half up the aisle before FINIS hit the screen.

This observation put me within a hair of forming teams and scoring
champs for their ability to make the MEN'S split seconds ahead of the
infernal national ditty.

These plays have taught me much, but mostly about myself. I hope never,
as a result, to doubt my subconscious again. I hope always to stay
alert, to educate myself. But lacking this, in future I will turn back
to my secret mind to see what it has observed at a time when I thought I
was sitting this one out.

These then are a blind man's plays, suddenly seen. I am grateful that
part of me paid attention and saved coins when I could have sworn I was
poverty-stricken.

In addition, one can only hope that these plays have been taken in small
doses, one at a time. One-act plays, short stories, shots of the best
Irish whiskey, all should be savored separate and apart. Too, if one
should sit down to read all these plays in one night, one would discover
certain encounters or facts in one play not connecting up with
encounters or facts in another. This results from all the plays being
written separately, with no thought being given to plays future or plays
past. The result is a series of one-acts meant to be done separately and
read in the same fashion. Though, of course, with a few deletions and
additions, the entirety could be staged of an evening. I have chosen,
however, to let the plays stand as they are, separate and apart, for
they are more enjoyable as creative units, and I insist you must look on
them as such; that is my prerogative.

Call all of what you have read in this book mere frivolous calligraphy
if you wish. But here, I believe, we find ways of making do with squalls
of weather, melancholy drizzles of church rhetoric, the improbability if
not the impossibility of sex, the inevitability of death, and the boring
ritual of the same old pomp-and-drum corp washing, hanging out, and
taking in the same tired old national linen.

The church has put her on her knees, the weather drowned, and politics
all but buried her, but Ireland, dear God, with vim and gusto, still
sprints for that far EXIT.

And, do you know? I think she'll make it.

_Ray Bradbury_ July 31st, 1962

The Anthem Sprinters

_and_ _Other Antics_ by Ray Bradbury

While engaged in writing a screenplay in Ireland, Ray Bradbury fell in,
around and under the quick sprinting spirit and feet of Erin's men, and
learned all there is to know of Anthem Sprinting —the curious Irish race
which the reader learns about in the title play.

The Anthem Sprinters _and Other Antics_ includes the hilarious
adventures and misadventures of an innocent American in the grasp of the
imaginative rural Irish. In these four plays, Mr. Bradbury discloses the
effect of Deanna Durbin on an important local contest and the comic
results of an attempt to introduce modern commercial slogans into a
tradition-bound community. Not only that, but he tells the fearful
consequences of great Bicycle Collisions on the boggy roads of
back-country Eire, as well as advising all who may wish to know what it
is best to give up for Lent. These and other antics are the charming,
always amusing, displays of wit and wisdom in these first plays by the
well-known American writer.


