About the Book

1916: THE WESTERN FRONT. Private Percy Blakeney wakes up. He is lying on
fresh spring grass. He can hear birdsong, and the wind in the leaves in
the trees. Where have the mud, blood and blasted landscape of No Man’s
Land gone?

2015: MADISON, WISCONSIN. Cop Monica Jansson is exploring the burned-out
home of a reclusive – some said mad, others dangerous – scientist when
she finds a curious gadget: a box containing some wiring, a three-way
switch and a…potato. It is the prototype of an invention that will
change the way Mankind views its world for ever.

_And that’s an understatement if ever there was one…_

_The Long Earth_ is the first novel in an exciting new collaboration
between the creator of Discworld Terry Pratchett and the acclaimed SF
writer Stephen Baxter.

Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Dedication

Diagram

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Acknowledgements

About the Authors

Also by Terry Pratchett and Stephen Baxter

Copyright

[images]

_For Lyn and Rhianna, as always_

T.P.

_For Sandra_

S.B.

[images]
The plan for Willis Linsay’s original ‘Stepper’ as anonymously posted
online.

(please note: the publisher accepts no responsibility for the
inappropriate use of this diagram or the technology it represents.)

1

IN A FOREST Glade:

Private Percy woke up to birdsong. It was a long time since he had heard
birdsong, the guns saw to that. For a while he was content to lie there
in the blissful quiet.

Although he was slightly worried, in a concussed kind of way, why he was
lying in damp though fragrant grass and not on his bedroll. Ah yes,
fragrant grass, there hadn’t been much fragrance where he’d just been!
Cordite, hot oil, burned flesh and the stink of unwashed men, that was
what he was used to.

He wondered if he was dead. After all, it had been a fearsome
bombardment.

Well, if he was dead then this would do for a heaven, after the hell of
noise and screams and mud. And if it wasn’t heaven, then his sergeant
would be giving him a kicking, pulling him up, looking him over and
sending him down to the mess for a cup of tea and a wad. But there was
no sergeant, and no noise except the birdsong in the trees.

And, as dawn light seeped into the sky, he wondered, ‘_What_ trees?’

When had he last seen a tree that was even vaguely in the shape of a
tree, let alone a tree with all its leaves, a tree not smashed to
splinters by the shelling? And yet here were trees, lots of trees, a
forest of trees.

Private Percy was a practical and methodical young man, and therefore
decided, in this dream, not to worry about trees, trees had never tried
to kill him. He lay back, and must’ve dozed off for a while. Because
when he opened his eyes again it was full daylight, and he was thirsty.

Daylight, but where? Well, France. It had to be France. Percy couldn’t
have been blown very far by the shell that had knocked him out; this
must still be France, but here he was in woods where woods shouldn’t be.
And without the traditional sounds of France, such as the thunder of the
guns and the screams of the men.

It was all a conundrum. And Percy was dying for a drink of water.

So he packed up his troubles in what remained of his old kit bag, in
this ethereal bird-haunted silence, and reflected that there was some
truth in the song: what _was_ the use of worrying? It _was_ really not
worthwhile, not when you have just seen men evaporate like the dew of
the morning.

But as he stood up he felt that familiar ache in his left leg, deep in
the bone, the relic of a wound that hadn’t been enough to send him home
but had got him a cushier posting with the camouflage boys, and a
battered paint box in his kit bag. No dream this if his leg still hurt!
But he wasn’t where he had been, that was for sure.

And as he picked his way between the trees in the direction that
appeared to have fewer trees in it than any other, a shimmering steely
thought filled his mind: Why did we sing? Were we mad? What the hell did
we think we were doing? Arms and legs all over the place, men just
turning into a mist of flesh and bone! And we sang!

What bloody, bloody fools we were!

Half an hour later Private Percy walked down a slope, to a stream in a
shallow valley. The water was somewhat brackish, but right now he would
have been ready to drink out of a horse trough, right alongside the
horse.

He followed the stream until it joined a river, not a very wide river as
yet, but Private Percy was a country boy and knew there would be
crayfish under the river bank. And in half an hour said crayfish were
cooking merrily, and never had he seen such big ones! And so many! And
so juicy! He ate until it hurt, twirling his catch on a green stick over
his hastily built fire and tearing them apart with his hands. He thought
now: Perhaps I really am dead and have gone to heaven. And that is good
enough for me, because, O Lord, I believe I have seen enough of hell.

That night he lay in a glade by the river, with his kit bag for a
pillow. And as the stars came out in the sky, more brilliant than he had
ever seen, Percy began to sing ‘Pack Up Your Troubles In Your Old Kit
Bag’. He fell silent before finishing the song, and slept the sleep of
the just.

When the sunshine touched his face again, Percy woke, refreshed, sat up
– and froze, motionless as a statue, before the calm gazes that
inspected him. There were a dozen of the fellows in a row, watching him.

Who were they? What were they? They looked a bit like bears, but not
with bear faces, or a bit like monkeys, only fatter. And they were just
watching him placidly. Surely they couldn’t be French?

He tried French anyway. ‘Parley buffon say?’

They stared at him blankly.

In the silence, and feeling that something more was expected of him,
Percy cleared his throat and plunged into ‘Pack Up Your Troubles’.

The fellows listened with rapt attention until he had finished. Then
they looked at one another. Eventually, as if some agreement had been
reached, one of them stepped forward and sang the song back at Percy,
pitch perfect.

Private Percy listened with blank astonishment.

And, a century later:

The prairie was flat, green, rich, with scattered stands of oaks. The
sky above was blue as generally advertised. On the horizon there was
movement, like the shadow of a cloud: a vast herd of animals on the
move.

There was a kind of sigh, a breathing-out. An observer standing close
enough might have felt a whisper of breeze on the skin.

And a woman was lying on the grass.

Her name was Maria Valienté. She wore her favourite pink angora sweater.
She was only fifteen, but she was pregnant, and the baby was coming. The
pain of the contractions pulsed through her skinny body. A moment ago
she hadn’t known if she was more afraid of the birth, or the anger of
Sister Stephanie who had taken away her monkey bracelet, all that Maria
had from her mother, saying it was a sinful token.

And now, this. Open sky where there should have been a nicotine-stained
plaster ceiling. Grass and trees, where there should have been worn
carpet. Everything was wrong. Where _was_ here? Was this even Madison?
How could she _be_ here?

But that didn’t matter. The pain washed through her again, and she felt
the baby coming. There was nobody to help, not even Sister Stephanie.
She closed her eyes, and screamed, and pushed.

The baby spilled on to the grass. Maria knew enough to wait for the
afterbirth. When it was done there was a warm mess between her legs, and
a baby, covered in sticky, bloody stuff. It, he, opened his mouth, and
let out a thin wail.

There was a sound like thunder, from far away. A roar like you’d hear in
a zoo. Like a lion.

_A lion?_ Maria screamed again, this time in fear—

The scream was cut off, as if by a switch. Maria was gone. The baby was
alone.

Alone, except for the universe. Which poured in, and spoke to him with
an infinity of voices. And behind it all, a vast Silence.

His crying settled to a gurgle. The Silence was comforting.

There was a kind of sigh, a breathing-out. Maria was back in the green,
under the blue sky. She sat up, and looked around in panic. Her face was
grey; she was losing a lot of blood. But her baby was here.

She scooped up the baby and the afterbirth – she hadn’t even tied off
the cord – wrapped him up in her angora sweater, and cradled him in her
arms. His little face was oddly calm. She thought she’d lost him.
‘Joshua,’ she said. ‘Your name is Joshua Valienté.’

A soft pop, and they were gone.

On the plain, nothing remained but a drying mess of blood and bodily
fluids, and the grass, and the sky. Soon, though, the scent of blood
would attract attention.

And, long ago, on a world as close as a shadow:

A very different version of North America cradled a huge, landlocked,
saline sea. This sea teemed with microbial life. All this life served a
single tremendous organism.

And on this world, under a cloudy sky, the entirety of the turbid sea
crackled with a single thought.

I …

This thought was followed by another.

To what purpose?

2

THE BENCH, BESIDE a modern-looking drinks machine, was exceedingly
comfortable. Joshua Valienté was not used to softness these days. Not
used to the fluffy feeling of being inside a building, where the
furnishings and the carpets impose a kind of quiet on the world. Beside
the luxurious bench was a pile of glossy magazines, but Joshua was not
particularly good at shiny paper either. Books? Books were fine. Joshua
liked books, particularly paperback books: light and easy to carry, and
if you didn’t want to read them again, well, there was always a use for
reasonably thin soft paper.

Normally, when there was nothing to do, he listened to the Silence.

The Silence was very faint here. Almost drowned out by the sounds of the
mundane world. Did people in this polished building understand how noisy
it was? The roar of air conditioners and computer fans, the susurration
of many voices heard but not decipherable, the muffled sound of
telephones followed by the sounds of people explaining that they were
not in fact there but would like you to leave your name after the beep,
this being subsequently followed by the beep. This was the office of the
transEarth Institute, an arm of the Black Corporation. The faceless
office, all plasterboard and chrome, was dominated by a huge logo, a
chesspiece knight. This wasn’t Joshua’s world. None of it was _his_
world. In fact, when you got right down to it, he didn’t have a world;
he had _all_ of them.

All of the Long Earth.

Earths, untold Earths. More Earths than could be counted, some said. And
all you had to do was walk sideways into them, one after the next, an
unending chain.

This was a source of immense irritation for experts such as Professor
Wotan Ulm of Oxford University. ‘All these parallel Earths,’ he told the
BBC, ‘are identical on all but the detailed level. Oh, save that they
are empty. Well, actually they are full, mainly of forests and swamps.
Big, dark, silent forests, deep, clinging, lethal swamps. But empty of
people. The Earth is crowded, but the Long Earth is empty. This is tough
luck on Adolf Hitler, who hasn’t been allowed to win his war anywhere!

‘It is hard for scientists even to talk about the Long Earth without
babbling about m-brane manifolds and quantum multiverses. Look: perhaps
the universe bifurcates every time a leaf falls, a billion new branches
every instant. That’s what quantum physics seems to tell us. Oh, it is
not a question of a billion realities to be experienced; the quantum
states superpose, like harmonics on a single violin string. But perhaps
there are times – when a volcano stirs, a comet kisses, a true love is
betrayed – when you _can_ get a separate experiential reality, a braid
of quantum threads. And perhaps these braids are then drawn together
through some higher dimension by similarity, and a chain of worlds
self-organizes. Or something! Maybe it is all a dream, a collective
imagining of mankind.

‘The truth is that we are as baffled by the phenomenon as Dante would
have been if he’d suddenly been given a glimpse of Hubble’s expanding
universe. Even the language we use to describe it is probably no more
correct than the pack-of-cards analogy that most people feel at home
with: the Long Earth as a large pack of three-dimensional sheets,
stacked up in a higher-dimensional space, each card an Earth entire unto
itself.

‘And, most significantly, to most people, the Long Earth is open. Almost
anybody can travel up and down the pack, drilling, as it were, through
the cards themselves. People are expanding into all that room. Of course
they are! This is a primal instinct. We plains apes still fear the
leopard in the dark; if we spread out he cannot take all of us.

‘It is all profoundly annoying. None of it fits! And why has this
tremendous pack of cards been dealt to mankind just _now_, when we have
never been more in need of _room_? But then science is nothing but a
series of questions that lead to more questions, which is just as well,
or it wouldn’t be much of a career path, would it? Well – whatever the
answers to such questions, believe you me, everything is changing for
mankind … Is that enough, Jocasta? Some idiot clicked a pen while I was
doing the bit about Dante.’

Of course, Joshua understood, transEarth existed to profit from all
these changes. Which, presumably, was why Joshua had been brought here,
more or less against his will, from a world a long way away.

At last the door opened. A young woman came in, nursing a laptop as thin
as a sheet of gold leaf. Joshua kept such a machine in the Home, a
fatter, antiquated model, mostly to look up wild-food recipes. ‘Mr
Valienté? It’s so kind of you to come. My name is Selena Jones. Welcome
to the transEarth Institute.’

She was certainly attractive, he thought. Joshua liked women; he
remembered his few, brief relationships with pleasure. But he hadn’t
spent much _time_ with women, and was awkward with them. ‘Welcome? You
didn’t give me a choice. You found my mailbox. That means you’re
government.’

‘As a matter of fact, you’re wrong. We sometimes work for the
government, but we’re certainly not the government.’

‘Legal?’

She smiled deprecatingly. ‘Lobsang found your mailbox code.’

‘And who is Lobsang?’

‘Me,’ said the drinks machine.

‘You’re a drinks machine,’ said Joshua.

‘You are wrong in your surmise, although I could produce the drink of
your choice within seconds.’

‘But you’ve got Coca-Cola written on you!’

‘Do forgive me my sense of humour. Incidentally, if you had hazarded a
dollar in the hope of soda-based refreshment I would definitely have
returned it. Or provided the soda.’

Joshua struggled to make sense of this encounter. ‘Lobsang _who_?’

‘I have no surname. In old Tibet, only aristocrats and Living Buddhas
had surnames, Joshua. I have no such pretensions.’

‘Are you a computer?’

‘Why do you ask?’

‘Because I’m damn sure there isn’t a human being in there, and besides,
you talk funny.’

‘Mr Valienté, I am more articulate and better spoken than anybody you
know, and indeed _I_ am not inside the drinks machine. Well, not wholly,
that is.’

‘Stop teasing the man, Lobsang,’ said Selena, turning to Joshua. ‘Mr
Valienté, I know you were … _elsewhere_, when the world first heard
about Lobsang. He is unique. He is a computer, physically, but he used
to be – how can I put this? – a Tibetan motorcycle repairman.’

‘So how did he get from Tibet to the inside of a drinks machine?’

‘That _is_ a long story, Mr Valienté …’

If Joshua hadn’t been away so long he’d have known all about Lobsang. He
was the first machine to successfully convince a court that he was a
human being.

‘Of course,’ Selena said, ‘other sixth-generation machines had tried it
before. Provided they stay in the next room and talk to you via a
speaker they can sound at least as human as some of the lunkheads you
see around, but that proves nothing in the eyes of the law. But Lobsang
doesn’t claim to be a thinking machine. He didn’t claim rights on that
basis. He said he was a dead Tibetan.

‘Well, Joshua, he had them by the shorts. Reincarnation is still a
cornerstone of world faith; and Lobsang simply said that he had
reincarnated as a computer program. As was deposited in evidence in
court – I’ll show you the transcripts if you like – the relevant
software initiated at precisely the microsecond a Lhasan motorcycle
repairman with a frankly unpronounceable name died. To a discarnate
soul, twenty thousand teraflops-worth of technological wizardry on a gel
substrate apparently looks identical to a few pounds of soggy brain
tissue. A number of expert witnesses testified to the astonishing
accuracy of Lobsang’s flashes of recall of his previous life. And I
myself witnessed a small, wiry old man with a face like a dried peach, a
distant cousin of the repairman, conversing with Lobsang happily for
several hours, reminiscing about the good old days in Lhasa. A charming
afternoon!’

‘Why?’ Joshua asked. ‘What could he gain out of it?’

‘I’m right here,’ said Lobsang. ‘_He_’s not made of wood, you know.’

‘Sorry.’

‘What did I gain? Civil rights. Security. The right to own property.’

‘And switching you off would be murder?’

‘It would. Also physically impossible, incidentally, but let’s not go
into that.’

‘So the court’s agreed you’re human?’

‘There’s never actually been a legal definition of human, you know.’

‘And now you work for transEarth.’

‘I part-own it. Douglas Black, the founder, had no hesitation in
offering me a partnership. Not only for my notoriety, though he’s drawn
to that sort of thing. For my transhuman intellect.’

‘Really.’

Selena said, ‘Let’s get back to business. You took a lot of finding, Mr
Valienté.’

Joshua looked at her and made a mental note to make it a lot _more_
finding next time.

‘Your visits to Earth are infrequent these days.’

‘I’m _always_ on Earth.’

‘You know what I mean. This one,’ said Selena. ‘Datum Earth, or even one
of the Low Earths.’

‘I’m not for hire,’ Joshua said quickly, trying to keep a trace of
anxiety out of his voice. ‘I like to work alone.’

‘Well, that’s rather an understatement, isn’t it?’

Joshua preferred life in his stockades, on Earths far from the Datum,
too far away for most to travel. Even then he was wary of company. They
said that Daniel Boone would pull up sticks and move on if he could as
much as see the smoke from another man’s fire. Compared with Joshua,
Boone was pathologically gregarious.

‘But that’s what makes you useful. We know you don’t need people.’
Selena held up a hand. ‘Oh, you’re not antisocial. But consider this.
Before the Long Earth, no one in the whole history of mankind had ever
been alone; I mean really _alone_. The hardiest sailor has always known
that there’s someone out there somewhere. Even the old moonwalker
astronauts could _see_ the Earth. Everyone knew that other people were
just a matter of distance away.’

‘Yeah, but with the Steppers they’re only a knight’s-move away.’

‘Our instincts don’t understand that, though. Do you know how many
people pioneer solo?’

‘No.’

‘None. Well, hardly any. To be alone on an entire planet, possibly the
only mind in a universe? Ninety-nine out of a hundred people can’t take
it.’

But Joshua never was alone, he thought. Not with the Silence always
there, behind the sky.

‘As Selena said, that’s what makes you useful,’ Lobsang said. ‘That and
certain other qualities we can discuss later. Oh, and the fact that we
have leverage over you.’

Light dawned, for Joshua. ‘You want me to make some kind of journey.
Into the Long Earth.’

‘That’s what you’re uniquely good at,’ Selena said sweetly. ‘We want you
to go into the High Meggers, Joshua.’

_The High Meggers_: the term used by some of the pioneers for the
worlds, most of them still little more than legend, more than a million
steps from Earth.

‘Why?’

‘For the most innocent of all reasons,’ said Lobsang. ‘To see what’s out
there.’

Selena smiled. ‘Information on the Long Earth is the stock in trade of
transEarth, Mr Valienté.’

Lobsang was more expansive. ‘Consider, Joshua. Until fifteen years ago
mankind had one world and dreamed of a few more, the worlds of the solar
system, all barren and horribly expensive to get to. Now we have the key
to more worlds than we can count! And we have barely explored even the
nearest of them. Now’s our chance to do just that.’

‘_Our_ chance?’ Joshua said. ‘I’m taking you with me? Is that the gig? A
computer is paying me to chauffeur it?’

‘Yes, that’s the size of it,’ Selena said.

Joshua frowned. ‘And the reason I’ll do this – you said something about
leverage?’

Selena said smoothly, ‘We’ll come to that. We’ve studied you, Joshua. In
fact the earliest trace you leave in the files is a report by Madison PD
Officer Monica Jansson, filed just after Step Day itself. About the
mysterious boy who _came back_, bringing the other children with him.
Quite the little pied piper, weren’t you? Once upon a time you would
have been called a celebrity.’

‘And,’ Lobsang put in, ‘once upon another time you’d have been called a
witch.’

Joshua sighed. Was he ever going to live that day down? He had never
wanted to be a hero; he didn’t like people looking at him in that funny
way. Or, indeed, in any way. ‘It was a mess, that’s all,’ he said. ‘How
did you find out?’

‘The police reports, like Jansson’s,’ said the drinks machine. ‘The
thing about the police is that they keep everything on file. And I just
love files. Files tell me things. They tell me who your mother was, for
instance, Joshua. Maria was her name, was it not?’

‘My mother’s none of your business.’

‘Joshua, everybody is my business, and everybody is on file. And the
files have told me all about you. That you may be very special. That you
were there on Step Day.’

‘_Everybody_ was there on Step Day.’

‘Yes, but _you_ felt at home, didn’t you, Joshua? You felt as if you’d
_come_ home. For once in your life you knew you were in the right place
…’

3

STEP DAY. FIFTEEN years ago. Joshua had been just thirteen.

Later, everybody remembered where they were on Step Day. Mostly they
were in the shit.

At the time, nobody knew who had uploaded the circuit diagram for the
Stepper on to the web. But as evening swept like a scythe around the
world, kids everywhere started putting Steppers together, dozens in the
neighbourhood of the Home in Madison alone. There had been a real run on
Radio Shack. The electronics seemed laughably simple. The potato you
were supposed to install at the heart of it seemed laughable too, but it
was important, because it was your power supply. And then there was the
switch. The switch was vital. Some kids thought you didn’t need a
switch. Just twist wires together. And they were the ones who ended up
screaming.

Joshua had put his first Stepper together _carefully_. He always did
things meticulously. He was the kind of boy who always, but always,
paints before assembly, and then assembles the pieces in the right
order, with every single component laid out with care before commencing.
Joshua always _commenced_ things. It sounded more deliberate than
starting. In the Home, when he worked on one of the old and worn and
incomplete jigsaw puzzles, he would always sort out the pieces first,
separating sky and sea and edge, before putting even two pieces
together. Sometimes afterwards, if the puzzle was incomplete, he would
go into his little workshop and very carefully shape the missing pieces
out of hoarded scrap wood and then paint them to fit. If you didn’t
know, you wouldn’t believe that the puzzle had ever had holes. And
sometimes he would cook, under the supervision of Sister Serendipity. He
would collect all the ingredients, prepare them all in advance
meticulously, and then work through the recipe. He even cleaned up as he
went. He liked cooking, and liked the approval it won him in the Home.

That was Joshua. That was how he did things. And that was why he wasn’t
the first kid to step out of the world, because he’d not only varnished
his Stepper box, he’d waited for the varnish to dry. And that was why he
was certainly the first kid to get back without wetting his pants, or
worse.

Step Day. Kids were disappearing. Parents scoured the neighbourhoods.
One minute the kids were there, playing with this latest crazy toy, and
the next moment they weren’t. When frantic parent meets frantic parent,
frantic becomes terrified. The police were called, but to do what?
Arrest who? To look where?

And Joshua himself stepped, for the first time.

A heartbeat earlier, he had been in his workshop, in the Home. Now he
stood in a wood, heavy, thick, the moonlight hardly managing to reach
the ground. He could hear other kids everywhere, throwing up, crying for
their parents, a few screaming as if they were hurt. He wondered why all
the distress. _He_ wasn’t throwing up. It was creepy, yes. But it was a
warm night. He could hear the whine of mosquitoes. The only question
was, a warm night _where_?

All the crying distracted him. There was one kid close at hand, calling
for her mother. It sounded like Sarah, another resident of the Home. He
called out her name.

She stopped crying, and he heard her voice, quite close: ‘Joshua?’

He thought it over. It was late evening. Sarah would have been in the
girls’ dormitory, which was about twenty yards away from his workshop.
He had not _moved_, but he was clearly in a different place. This wasn’t
Madison. Madison had noises, cars, airplanes, lights, while now he was
standing in a forest, like something out of a book, with not a trace of
a streetlight anywhere he looked. But Sarah was here too, wherever this
was. The thought constructed itself a piece at a time, like an
incomplete jigsaw. Think, don’t panic. In relation to where you are, or
were, she will be where she is, or was. You just have to go down the
passage to her room. Even though, here and now, there is no passage, no
room. Problem solved.

Except that to get to her would mean walking through the tree right in
front of him. An extremely big tree.

He worked his way around the tree, pushing through the tangled
undergrowth, the briars, the fallen branches of this very wild wood.
‘Keep talking,’ he said. ‘Don’t move. I’m coming.’

‘Joshua?’

‘Look, I’ll tell you what. Sing. Keep singing. That way I’ll be able to
find you in the dark.’ Joshua switched on his flashlight. It was a tiny
one that fitted into a pocket. He always carried a flashlight at night.
Of course he did. He was Joshua.

She didn’t sing. She started to pray. ‘Our Father, who art in heaven …’

He wished people would do what he told them, just sometimes.

From around the forest, from the dark, other voices joined in. ‘Hallowed
be thy name …’

He clapped his hands and yelled, ‘Everybody shut up! I’ll get you out of
here. Trust me.’ He didn’t know why they should trust him, but the tone
of authority worked, and the other voices died away. He took a breath
and called, ‘Sarah. You first. OK? Everybody else, go towards the
prayer. Don’t say anything. Just head towards the prayer.’

Sarah began again: ‘Our Father, who art in heaven …’

As he worked his way forward, hands outstretched, pushing through briars
and climbing over roots, testing every step, he heard the sounds of
people moving all around him, more voices calling. Some were complaining
about being lost. Others were complaining about a lack of cellphone
signal. Sometimes he glimpsed their phones, little screens glowing like
fireflies. And then there was the desolate weeping, even moans of pain.

The prayer ended with an amen, which was echoed around the forest, and
Sarah said, ‘Joshua? I’ve finished.’

And I thought she was clever, thought Joshua. ‘Then start again.’

It took him minutes to get to her, even though she was only half the
length of the Home away. But he could see this forest clump was actually
quite small. Beyond, in the moonlight, he saw what looked like prairie
flowers, like in the Arboretum. No sign of the Home, though, or Allied
Drive.

At last Sarah stumbled towards him and clamped herself on him. ‘Where
are we?’

‘Somewhere else, I guess. You know. Like Narnia.’

The moonlight showed him the tears pouring down her face and the snot
under her nose, and he could smell the vomit on her nightdress. ‘I never
stepped into no wardrobe.’

He burst out laughing. She stared at him. But because he was laughing,
she laughed. And the laughter started to fill this little clearing, for
other kids were drifting this way, towards the flashlight glow, and for
a moment that held back the terror. It was one thing to be lost and
alone, quite another to be lost in a crowd, and laughing.

Somebody else grabbed his arm. ‘Josh?’

‘Freddie?’

‘It was terrible. I was in the dark and I _fell down_, down to the
ground.’

Freddie had a tummy bug, Josh remembered. He’d been in the sanatorium,
on the Home’s first floor. He must have just fallen, through the
vanished building. ‘Are you hurt?’

‘No … Josh? How do we get home?’

Joshua took Sarah’s hand. ‘Sarah, you made a Stepper?’

‘Yes.’

He glanced at the mess of components in her hand. It wasn’t even in a
box, not even a shoebox or something, let alone a box that had been
carefully made for the purpose, like his. ‘What did you use for a
switch?’

‘What switch? I just twisted the wires together.’

‘Look. It definitely said to put in a centre-off switch.’ He very
carefully took her Stepper in his hands. You always had to be very
careful around Sarah. She wasn’t a Problem, but problems had happened to
her.

At least there were three wires. He traced back the circuitry by touch.
He’d spent hours staring at the circuit diagram; he knew it by heart. He
separated the wires and put the ragged tangle back in her hands.
‘Listen. When I say go, press that wire and that one together. If you
find yourself back in your room, drop the whole thing on the floor and
go to bed. OK?’

Sniffing, she asked, ‘What if it doesn’t work?’

‘Well, you’ll still be here, and so will I. And that won’t be so bad,
will it? Are you ready? Come on. Let’s do a countdown from ten. Nine,
eight …’

On zero she disappeared, and there was a pop, like a soap bubble
bursting.

The other kids stared at where she’d been, and then at Joshua. Some were
strangers: as much as he could see any faces at all, there were plenty
he couldn’t recognize. He’d no idea how far they’d walked in the dark.

Right now he was king of the world. These helpless kids would do
anything he told them. It wasn’t a feeling he liked. It was a chore.

He turned to Freddie. ‘OK, Freddie. You next. You know Sarah. Tell her
not to worry. Tell her a lot of kids are coming home via her bedroom.
Tell her Joshua says it’s the only way to get them home, and please
don’t get angry. Now show me your Stepper.’

One by one, pop after pop, the lost boys and girls disappeared.

When the last of those near by had gone, there were still voices further
away in the forest, maybe beyond. There was nothing Joshua could do for
them. He wasn’t even sure he’d done the right thing now. He stood alone
in the stillness, and listened. Aside from the distant voices there was
no sound but the skinny drone of mosquitoes. People told you that
mosquitoes could kill a horse, in time.

He held his own carefully constructed Stepper, and moved the switch.

He was instantly back in the Home, by Sarah’s bed, in her tiny cluttered
room, just in time to see the back of the last girl he’d led home, still
quite hysterical, disappearing into the hallway. And he heard the shrill
sound of the Sisters’ voices calling his name.

He hastily moved the switch again, to stand alone in the solitude of the
forest. _His_ forest.

There were more voices now, closer by. Sobbing. Screaming. One kid
saying very politely, ‘Excuse me. Can anybody help me?’ And then a
retch. Vomiting.

More new arrivals. He thought, why are they all sick? That was the smell
of Step Day, when he remembered it later. Everyone had thrown up. He
hadn’t.

He set off into the dark, looking for the latest calling kid.

And after that kid there was another. And another, who had broken her
arm, it looked like, falling from some upper storey. And then another.
There was always another kid.

The first hint of dawn filled the forest clump with birdsong and light.
Was it dawn back home too?

There were absolutely no sounds of humanity now, except for the sobbing
of the latest lost boy, who had speared his leg on a jagged length of
wood. There was no way the kid would be able to operate his own Stepper,
which was a shame, because in the sallow light Joshua admired the
craftsmanship. The kid had evidently spent some time in Radio Shack. A
sensible kid, but not sensible enough to bring a flashlight, or mosquito
repellent.

Carefully, Joshua bent, picked up the kid in his arms, and stood
straight. The boy moaned. One-handed, Joshua groped for the switch on
his own Stepper, glad once more he’d followed the instructions exactly.

This time, when they stepped over, there were lights glaring in his
face, and within seconds a City of Madison police car screeched to a
halt before him. He stood stock still.

Two cops got out of the car. One, a younger man in a fluorescent jacket,
gently took the injured boy from Joshua, and laid him on the grass. The
other officer stood before him. A woman, smiling, hands open. This made
him nervous. It was the way a Sister smiled at a Problem. Arms
outstretched in welcome could quickly become arms that grabbed. Behind
the officers, there were lights everywhere, like a movie set.

‘Hello, Joshua,’ the woman officer said. ‘My name is Monica Jansson.’

4

FOR MPD OFFICER Jansson it had all started even earlier, the day before:
the third time in the last few months she’d come out to the burned-out
Linsay house, just off Mifflin Street.

She wasn’t sure why she had come back here. There hadn’t been a call-out
this time. Yet here she was poking once more through the heaps of ash
and charcoal that used to be furniture. Crouching over the smashed
remains of an elderly flatscreen TV. Stepping gingerly over a carpet
scorched and soaked and stained with foam, marked by the heavy
footprints of firemen and cops. Leafing again through the charred relics
of what must once have been an extensive set of notes, handwritten
mathematical equations, an indecipherable scrawl.

She thought of her partner, Clancy, drinking the day’s fifth Starbucks
out in the cruiser, thinking she was an idiot. What could be left to
find, after the detectives had crawled over everything and forensics had
done their stuff? Even the daughter, that oddball college student Sally,
had taken it all in without surprise or concern, calmly nodding when
told that her father was wanted for questioning over suspected arson,
incitement to terrorism, and animal cruelty, not necessarily in that
order. Just nodding, as if all that was an everyday occurrence in the
Linsay household.

Nobody else cared. Soon the place would be released as a crime scene,
and the landlord could start the clean-up and the arguments with his
insurance company. It wasn’t as if anybody had got hurt, not even Willis
Linsay himself, for there was no sign he’d died in the pretty feeble
fire. It was all just a puzzle that would likely never be resolved, the
kind experienced cops came across all the time, said Clancy, and you had
to know when to let it go. Maybe at twenty-nine Jansson was still too
green.

Or maybe it was because of what she’d seen when they’d responded to that
first call a few months back. Because the first call had come from a
neighbour who had reported seeing a man carrying a goat into this
single-storey house, here in the middle of Madison.

A _goat_? Cue predictable banter between Clancy and the dispatcher.
Maybe goats gave this guy the horn – et cetera, et cetera, ha ha. But
the same neighbour, an excitable woman, said she’d also seen the man on
other occasions push calves in through his front door, and even a foal.
Not to mention a cage of chickens. Yet there was no report of noise, no
barnyard stinks. No evidence of live animals in there. What was the guy
doing, screwing them or cooking them?

Willis Linsay turned out to have been living alone since the death of
his wife in a road accident some years before. There was one daughter,
called Sally, eighteen years old, a student at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, living with an aunt. Linsay had been some kind of
scientist, and had even once held a theoretical physics post at
Princeton. Now he earned his money as a peripatetic tutor at UW, and
with the rest of his time – well, nobody quite knew what he did with the
rest of his time. Though Jansson had found traces in the records that
he’d done some work for Douglas Black, the industrialist, under another
name. That was no great surprise. These days almost everybody ended up
working for Black one way or another.

Whatever Linsay was up to, he wasn’t keeping goats in his living room.
Maybe it had been malicious all along, some busybody neighbour trying to
make trouble for the oddball guy next door. You got that sometimes.

But the next call had been different.

Somebody posted online a plan for a gadget he or she called a ‘Stepper’.
You could customize the design, but it would be a portable gadget with a
big three-position switch on top, and with various electronic components
within, and with a power lead plugged into … a potato?

The authorities noted this, and became alarmed. It _looked_ like the
kind of thing a suicide bomber would strap to his chest, before taking a
stroll down State Street. It also looked like the kind of thing that
would appeal to every kid in the world who could knock one up from spare
parts in his or her bedroom. Everybody thought the word ‘potato’ must be
a cover word for something else, like a slab of Semtex.

But by the time a car had been dispatched to the Linsay place, due to
rendezvous with Homeland officers at the scene, a third call had come
in, entirely separate: the house was on fire. Jansson had been part of
the response to that. And Willis Linsay was nowhere to be found.

It was arson. Forensics had found the oily rag, the cheap cigarette
lighter, the heap of papers and smashed-up furniture that had started
it. The purpose of the fire seemed to have been to destroy Linsay’s
heaps of notes and other materials. The perp could have been Linsay, or
else somebody out to get him.

Jansson had the feeling it had been Linsay himself. She’d never met the
man, never so much as seen a photograph. But her tangential contact with
him had left impressions in her mind. He was clearly ferociously
intelligent. You didn’t get to do physics at Princeton otherwise. But
there was something missing. His home had been a disorderly jumble. The
neither-one-thing-nor-the-other fire attempt fitted too.

But what she didn’t understand was what it was all _for_. What had he
been up to?

Now Jansson found Linsay’s own Stepper, the prototype, presumably. It
was in the living room, sitting on the mantelpiece above a fire that
hadn’t been lit in decades. Maybe he’d purposefully left it behind to be
found. The forensics guys had seen it and abandoned it, heavily dusted
for prints. It would probably be taken into store once the crime scene
was broken down.

Jansson bent to inspect it. It was just a clear plastic box, a cube,
about four inches on a side. Forensics thought the box might once have
contained antique three-and-a-half-inch floppy discs. Linsay was
evidently the kind of man who kept junk like that. Through the clear
walls you could see electrical components, capacitors and resistors and
relays and coils, connected with twisted and soldered copper wire. There
was a big three-way switch on the lid, the positions labelled by hand
with a black marker pen:

WEST – OFF – EAST

Right now the switch was set to OFF.

The rest of the box’s volume was occupied by … a potato. Just a potato,
no Semtex or acid vial or nails or any other element of the modern
terror arsenal. One of the forensics boys had suggested it might be used
as a power source, like the classic potato-run clock. Mostly people
thought it was just a symptom of lunacy, or maybe some bizarre practical
joke. Whatever it was, this was what kids all around the planet were
racing to assemble right now.

The Stepper had been found holding down a bit of paper on which had been
scrawled, in the same marker pen, the same hand, TRY ME. Very Alice in
Wonderland. Linsay’s parting shot. It occurred to Jansson that none of
her colleagues had actually followed the instruction on the paper scrap:
TRY ME.

She took the box, held it; it weighed nothing. She opened the lid.
Another scrap of paper, headed FINISH ME, had simple instructions, what
looked like a draft of the circuit diagram that had finished up on the
net. You were supposed to use no iron parts, she read; that was
underlined. She had to finish winding a couple of coils of copper wire,
and then set contacts to tune the coils, somehow.

She got to work. Winding the coils was an oddly pleasant activity,
though she couldn’t have explained why. Just her and the bits of kit,
like a kid assembling a crystal radio. Finding the tuning was easy too;
she kind of felt it when she got the sliding contact set right – though
again she couldn’t have explained this, and didn’t look forward to
trying to write this up in her report.

When she was done she closed the lid and took hold of the switch, tossed
a coin in her head, and turned the switch WEST.

The house vanished in a rush of fresh air.

Prairie flowers, all around, waist deep, like a nature reserve.

And it was like she had been punched in the stomach. She doubled over,
grunting, dropping the box. Earth under her feet, her polished shoes on
grass. The air in her nostrils fresh, sharp, the stink of ash and foam
gone.

Had some perp jumped her? She grabbed for her gun. It was in its
holster, but it felt odd; the Glock’s polymer frame and magazine body
looked OK, but the thing _rattled_.

Cautiously she straightened up. Her stomach was still bad, but she felt
nauseous rather than bruised. She glanced around. There was nobody here,
threatening or otherwise.

Nor were there four walls around her, no house just off Mifflin Street.
Just prairie flowers, and a stand of hundred-foot-tall trees, and a blue
sky clear of contrails and smog. It was like the Arboretum, the
Herculean prairie reconstruction inside Madison’s city limits. An
Arboretum that had swallowed the city itself. Suddenly here she was, in
the middle of all this.

She opined, ‘Oh’. This response seemed inadequate in itself. After some
consideration, she added, ‘My.’ And she concluded, although in the
process she was denying a lifelong belief system of agnosticism shading
to outright atheism, ‘God.’

She put away her gun and tried to think like a cop. To _see_ like a cop.
She noticed litter on the ground at her feet, beside the Stepper she’d
dropped. Cigarette butts. What looked like a cowpat. So was this where
Willis Linsay had gone? If so, there was no sign of him, or of his
animals …

The very air was different. Rich. Heady. She felt like she was getting
high on it. It was all magnificent. It was impossible. Where _was_ she?
She laughed out loud, for the sheer wonder of it all.

Then she realized that every kid in Madison was soon going to have one
of these boxes. Every kid everywhere else, come to that. And they were
all going to start turning the switches. All around the world.

And _then_ it occurred to her that getting home might be a good plan.

She grabbed the Stepper box from the ground, where she’d dropped it. It
still had fingerprint dust on it. The switch had snapped back to OFF.
With trepidation, she grabbed the switch, closed her eyes, counted down
from three, and turned it EAST.

And she was back in the Linsay house, with what looked like metallic
components of her gun on the ruined carpet at her feet. There was her
badge, and name tag, even her tie clip, lying on the carpet. More bits
of metal she hadn’t noticed she was missing.

Clancy was waiting out in the car. She started figuring how she was
going to explain all this to him.

When she got back to base, station manager Dodd’s tracking board showed
missing person calls coming in, one or two per neighbourhood. Slowly the
whole board was lighting up.

Then the alerts came in from across the country.

‘And all around the world,’ Dodd said, wondering, after he’d flicked on
CNN. ‘A missing persons plague. Even China. Look at that.’

Then the night got more complicated, for all of them. There was a rash
of burglaries, even one from a strongroom in the Capitol building. The
MPD had trouble just fielding the call-outs. That was before the
directives started coming in from Homeland Security and the FBI.

Jansson managed to collar the sergeant in charge. ‘What’s going on,
sarge?’

Harris turned to her, his face grey. ‘You’re asking me? I don’t know.
Terrorists? Homeland are jumping up and down about that possibility.
Space aliens? That’s what some guy in a tinfoil hat out in the lobby
insists is causing it all.’

‘So what should I do, sarge?’

‘Do the job in front of you.’ And he hurried on.

She thought that over. If she were a citizen out there, what would she
most care about? The missing kids, that’s what. She left the station and
got to work.

And she found the kids, and spoke to them, some of them in the hospital,
and every other kid talked about one particular kid who was calm, a
hero, leading them to safety, like Moses – only he was called Joshua,
not Moses.

Joshua backed away from the cop.

‘You are Joshua, aren’t you? I can tell. You’re the one kid that isn’t
dribbling vomit.’

He said nothing.

‘They tell me Joshua saved them. They tell me he picked them up and
carried them back home. You’re a regular catcher in the rye. You ever
read that book? You should. Although maybe it’s banned in the Home. Yes,
I know about the Home. But how did you do it, Joshua?’

‘I didn’t do anything wrong. I’m not a Problem,’ he said, backing
further away.

‘I know you’re not a Problem. But you did something different. I just
want to know what you did. Tell me, Joshua.’

Joshua hated it when people kept repeating his name. It was what they
did to calm you down when they thought you were a Problem. ‘I followed
the instructions. That’s all. People don’t understand. You just follow
the instructions.’

‘I want to understand,’ she said. ‘Just tell me. You don’t have to be
afraid of me.’

‘Look,’ said Joshua, ‘even if you make a simple wooden box you have to
varnish it, otherwise it gets damp and everything swells and that can
pull things apart. Whatever you do you have to do it right. You have to
follow the instructions. That’s what they’re there for.’ He was saying
too much, too fast. He shut up. Shutting up nearly always worked. Anyway
what could he say?

Joshua baffled Jansson. Everybody had been panicking in the dark,
evidently, the kids screaming and throwing up and tripping over and
crapping their pants and being eaten by mosquitoes and walking into
trees. But not Joshua. Joshua was calm. She looked at him now. He was
slim, tall for his age, his face pale but his hair Mediterranean black.
He was a calm enigma.

Out loud she said, ‘You know, Joshua, I would have said that, given the
stories they’re telling, some of these kids must have been playing with
drugs. Except that they were all covered in leaves and scratches. As if
they really had been taking a walk in a forest right here in the middle
of the city.’

She took another slight step forward, and he took another slight step
back.

She stopped moving and lowered her hands. ‘Look, Joshua, I know you’re
telling the truth. _Because I’ve been there myself_. No more games. Talk
to me. The box you’re holding looks pretty neat compared with the
others. Can I have a look? I mean just put it down and step back, I’m
not trying to trick you. I’m just trying to work out why kids all over
town are getting stuck in some mysterious forest, frightened they’re
going to be eaten by orcs!’

Oddly enough that impressed Joshua. He did put the box down, and did
step back. ‘I’d like that back, I haven’t got enough money to go to
Radio Shack again.’ He hesitated for a moment. ‘You really think orcs?’

‘No. I don’t think orcs. But I don’t know what to think. Look, Joshua,
you put your box down for me, so I’m putting my card down here where you
can pick it up, OK? My personal number. I have a feeling we should stay
in touch, you and I.’ She took a couple of steps back, holding the box.
‘Good workmanship!’

But now another car was coming up, lights blazing. Officer Jansson
looked round. ‘Just other policemen checking up,’ she said, ‘don’t
worry—’

There was a faint _pop_.

She looked at the box in her hand, and at the empty pavement. ‘Joshua?’

Joshua realized immediately that he’d left his box behind.

He’d stepped without the box! And, worse, that cop had _seen_ him step
without the box. Now he was in trouble.

So he got away. He just kept stepping, away from where he’d been,
whatever _away_ meant. He didn’t stop, or slow down. He just kept going,
one step after the next, each step like a soft jolt in his gut. One
world after another, as if it was a series of rooms. One step after the
next away from Officer Jansson. Deeper into this corridor of forest.

As he pressed on there was no more city, no buildings, no lights, no
people. Just this forest, but a forest that changed with every step.
Trees came out of nowhere with one step and disappeared with the next,
like bits of scenery in the plays the kids had to put on in the Home,
yet all the trees seemed real, all hard and solid and deep-rooted in the
earth. Sometimes it was warmer, sometimes a little colder. But there was
always the forest, around him. And it was always dawn. Some things
didn’t change, then: the ground, solid under his feet, the dawn sky.
That pleased him, to detect order in this new world.

The instructions on the internet had said nothing about stepping without
a box, but he was doing it anyhow. The thought gave him a lurching
sensation, as if he were standing over a drop. But it was a thrill too,
a rule-breaking thrill. Like the time he and Billy Chambers had borrowed
a bottle of Bud from the builders who had come to fix the busted window,
and had drunk it in a corner of the boiler room, and then smashed the
bottle and put it in the recycling bin. He grinned at the memory.

He just kept going, moving aside for the trees when he needed to. But
the trees changed, gradually. Now he was surrounded by rougher bark, low
branches with narrow prickly leaves. A forest of pine trees. Colder,
too. But it was still a forest, and still he pushed on.

And he came to a Wall. A place where he couldn’t step on, no matter how
he walked sideways. He even took a few paces back and kind of ran at it,
trying to force his way onward. It didn’t hurt, it was like running into
a huge upraised palm. But he couldn’t go forward.

If he couldn’t push through this thick forest maybe he could climb above
it. He found a tall tree, the tallest around. He pulled himself up to
the lowest branches, and scrambled up higher. Pine needles prickled his
hands. Every six feet or so he would try stepping sideways, just to see
if he could, but the Wall was still there.

And then it worked, suddenly.

He fell forward on to a flat floor, like uneven, smoothed-over concrete,
hard and dry and grey. There was no tree, no forest. Just the air, the
sky, and this floor. And it was _cold_, cold through the thin fabric of
his jeans over his knees, cold under his bare hands. Ice!

He stood up. His breath steamed around his face. The cold was like
daggers probing through his clothes to his flesh. The whole world was
covered in ice. He was in a kind of broad gully, carved in the ice,
which rose up in hard grey mounds around him. Old ice, dirty ice. The
sky was clear, the empty blue-grey of an early dawn. Nothing moved, not
a bird, not a plane, and on the ground he didn’t see a building, or a
single living thing, not so much as a blade of grass.

He grinned.

Then he stepped back to the pine forest, disappearing with a soap-bubble
pop.

5

LOBSANG SAID, ‘JANSSON, that police officer, kept an eye on you. You
know that, don’t you, Joshua?’

Joshua was jolted back to the present. ‘You know, you’re smart for a
vending machine.’

‘You would be amazed. Selena, please take Joshua downstairs, will you?’

The woman looked startled. ‘But Lobsang, we haven’t put Joshua through
the security screening yet.’

There was a clank from the drinks machine and a can of Dr Pepper thumped
into the hopper. ‘What’s the worst that could happen? I would like our
new friend to meet me properly. By the way, Joshua, the can is for you.
On the house.’

Joshua stood. ‘No thanks, I lost my taste for soda years ago.’ And if I
hadn’t, he thought to himself, I would have done just now, having seen
you excrete it.

As they headed towards the stairs Selena said, ‘Good of you to shave, by
the way. Seriously, chins are going out of style in these pioneering
times. People are so faddy.’ She smiled. ‘I think we were expecting some
kind of mountain man.’

‘I used to be like that, I guess.’

This bland deflection evidently annoyed her; she seemed to want more
from him.

They reached a landing that consisted of nothing but unmarked metal
doors. One of these slid open as she approached, and slid noiselessly
shut seconds after he had followed her through and on to another
stairway, heading down.

‘Joshua, I have to tell you,’ she said with a kind of brittle humour, ‘I
would like to _push_ you down these stairs! And you know why? Because
you just walk in and suddenly you have a security rating of zero, a
great big oh, which means technically you can be told everything that’s
going on here. I on the other hand have a security clearance of five.
You outrank me and I have been working for transEarth and its affiliates
since the start! Who exactly are you, who can just walk in and be told
every secret?’

‘Well, sorry about that. I am just Joshua, I guess. Anyway, what do you
mean “since the start”? I was the start! That’s why I’m here, isn’t it?’

‘Yes. Of course. But I suppose every person’s first step is the start,
for them …’

6

JIM RUSSO HAD taken his own first step out into what the excited online
chatterers were soon calling the Long Earth for ambition. And because,
at thirty-eight years old, after a lifetime of bad breaks and betrayals,
he figured he was ahead of the pack.

Very soon after Step Day he’d come up with his plan, and worked out what
he had to do. He headed straight for this corner of California. He
brought maps and photographs and such, to locate the exact spot where
Marshall had made his find, all those years ago. He was well aware that
GPS didn’t work in the stepwise worlds, so everything had to be on
paper. But of course you didn’t need a map to find Sutter’s Mill, here
on the bank of the South Fork American River, not in Datum Earth anyhow.
It was in a State Historic Park. The place was a California Historical
Landmark. They’d built a monument to show the site of the original mill,
and you could see where James Marshall had first seen gold flakes
glittering in the mill’s tailrace. You could stand there, right on the
very spot. Jim Russo did so now, the cogs whirring in his head.

And then he stepped, into West 1, and the reconstruction was gone. The
landscape was just as wild as Marshall and Sutter and his buddies had
found it when they came to build their sawmill. Or maybe wilder, because
there hadn’t even been Indians here before the stepping started. Of
course there were other people here today, tourists from Datum Earth
looking around the site. There were even a couple of little information
plaques. Sutter West and East I had already been co-opted into the
landmark, as an adjunct to what they had in Datum Earth. Jim smiled at
the goggle-eyed foolishness of the few tourists here, their lack of
imagination.

As soon as he felt able, when the nausea faded after ten or fifteen
minutes, he stepped on further. And again. And again.

He paused in West 5, which he figured was far enough away. Nobody
around. He laughed out loud, and whooped. No reply. There was an echo,
and a bird called somewhere. He was alone.

He didn’t wait for the nausea to pass. He crouched down by the stream,
and dug out his sieve from his pack, breathing deep to settle his
stomach. Right here, on January 24, 1848, James Marshall had noticed odd
rock formations in the water. Within a day Marshall had been washing
gold flakes out of the stream, and the California Gold Rush was on. Jim
had dreams of finding the _exact same first flake_ as Marshall had
found, which was held by the Smithsonian Institution. What a stunt that
would be! But there was no mill here, of course, and so no tailrace, and
the river bed hadn’t been disturbed as it had been in Marshall’s day
back in Datum Earth, and it seemed unlikely he’d find the identical
flake. Well, he’d settle for getting rich.

This was his grand plan. He knew exactly where the Sutter’s Mill gold
was, for it had all been discovered and extracted by the miners who had
followed Marshall. He had maps of the seams that still lay undisturbed,
right here! For in this world, there had been no Sutter, no Marshall, no
mill – and no Gold Rush. All that wealth, or a copy of it, still slept
in the ground. Just waiting for Jim to take it for himself.

And there was laughter, from right behind him.

He whirled around, tried to stand, and stumbled and splashed back into
the stream, getting his feet wet.

A man faced him, wearing rough denim clothes and a broad-brimmed hat. He
carried a heavy orange backpack, and some kind of pick. He was laughing
at Jim, showing white teeth in a grimy face. Others popped into
existence around him: men and women, similarly dressed, grubby and
tired-looking. They grinned when they saw Jim, despite the stepping
nausea.

‘Not another one?’ said one woman.

She looked attractive under the dirt. An attractive woman, mocking him.
Jim looked away, his face hot.

‘Looks like it,’ said the first man. ‘What’s the deal, buddy? You here
to make your fortune with the Sutter gold?’

‘What’s it to you?’

The man shook his head. ‘What is it with people like you? You kind of
think one move ahead, but not the next, or the next.’ He sounded like a
college boy to Jim, smug, sneering. ‘You figured out there’s unmined
gold on this spot. Sure there is, you’re right. But what about the same
site on West 6 and 7 and 8, and as far out as you can go? What about all
the other guys just like you, out there panning the streams on all those
stepwise worlds? You didn’t think of that, did you?’ He dug a nugget of
gold the size of a pigeon’s egg from his pocket. ‘My friend, everybody
else has had the same idea!’

The woman said, ‘Oh, don’t be too hard on him, Mac. He’ll make some
money, if he moves fast. Gold hasn’t been totally devalued yet; there
hasn’t been much brought back. And he can always sell it as a commodity.
It’s just, well, gold isn’t worth its weight in gold any more!’

More laughter.

Mac nodded. ‘Another example of the surprisingly low economic value of
all these stepwise worlds. A real paradox.’

That college-boy smugness maddened Jim. ‘If it’s worth nothing, smart
ass, what are you guys doing here?’

‘Oh, we’ve been mining too,’ Mac said. ‘We’ve been retracing the steps
of Marshall and the rest, just like you. We went further out. We even
built a copy of the mill, and a forge to make iron tools, so we could
find the gold and extract it the way the pioneers did. It’s history, a
reconstruction. It’ll be on Discovery next year; check it out. But we
were _not_ there for the gold itself. Here.’ And he threw the egg of
gold at Jim. It landed at his feet, and lay in the damp gravel.

‘You assholes.’

Mac’s smile faded, as if in disappointment at his manners. ‘I don’t
think our new friend is a very good sport, gents and ladies. Oh, well—’

Jim lumbered at the group, swinging his fists. They kept laughing at him
as they disappeared, one by one. He didn’t land a single punch.

7

FOR SALLY LINSAY, her departure from Datum Earth, a year after Step Day,
hadn’t been her first step at all. She left the world because her father
had gone before her. And before him, most of her family. She was
nineteen years old.

She had taken her time about it. Time to get her kit together, to
resolve her affairs. After all, she wasn’t planning to come back.

Then, early one morning, she slipped on her sleeveless fisherman’s
jacket with all the pockets, and picked up her pack, and left her room
in her aunt’s home for the last time. Aunt Tiffany was away, and that
suited Sally; she didn’t like goodbyes. She worked her way over to Park
Street and strolled through the campus. Nobody around, not even a
cleaner; UW was asleep. At that, the early morning was quieter than it
used to be, she was sure. Maybe more people had stepped away than she’d
thought. At the lake shore she cut past the library, headed west along
the Lakeshore Path, and kept walking towards Picnic Point. There were a
couple of sailboats out on Lake Mendota, and a hardy windsurfer in a
lurid orange wetsuit, and a couple of boats of the UW Rowing Club, their
coaches’ bullhorn barks carrying across the water. The horizon was
bounded by green.

To some all this was idyllic, the leafy university by the lake. Not to
her. Sally liked nature, the real thing. To her the Long Earth wasn’t
some new-fangled novelty, a theme park that had opened up on Step Day.
She had _grown up_ out there. Now, looking at the rowboats and the
surfer, all she could see was disturbance, idiots scaring away the
birds. Just as was starting to happen in the other worlds as more idiots
stumbled stepwise, slack-jawed. Even this limpid lakewater was just
dilute waste to her. At least she had picked a fine day to say goodbye
to this place, this city by the lake, where she hadn’t always been
entirely unhappy, and the air was fresh. But where she was going it
would be fresher.

She found a quiet spot, and walked off the path into the shade of the
trees. She checked over her kit, one last time. She carried weapons, up
to and including a lightweight crossbow. Her Stepper was in a plastic
box of the kind her father had used. As well as the basic apparatus
itself it was crowded with spares, fine optician’s tools, a length of
solder, printouts of the circuit diagrams. There was the potato, of
course, in the middle of the tangle of beat-up electronics. What a smart
idea that was, a battery you could eat, if lunch became the priority. It
was a professional traveller’s piece of kit. She was nostalgic enough to
have plastered the box with a UW sticker.

But the box was a cover. Sally didn’t need a Stepper to step.

She knew the Long Earth, and how to travel across it. Now she was going
out there to find her father. And, something that had puzzled her
endlessly since she was a little girl playing outside her father’s shed
in a stepwise Wyoming, to figure out what it was all _for_.

She’d never been indecisive. She made a random choice of direction,
grinned, and stepped. Around her, the lake, the clumps of trees
persisted. But the footpath, the rowboats, the idiot on the windsurfer
had gone.

8

PEOPLE HAD GONE off every which way in those early days, with a purpose
or just for the hell of it. But nobody had gone further than Joshua.

In those first months, still aged only thirteen, fourteen, he’d built
himself refuges in the higher Earths. Stockades, he called them. And the
best of them _were_ stockades, like Robinson Crusoe’s. People had the
wrong idea about Robinson Crusoe. The popular image was of a determined,
cheerful man heavily into goatskin underwear. But at the Home had been
an old, battered copy of the book itself, and Joshua, being Joshua, had
read it from cover to cover. Robinson Crusoe had been on his island for
over twenty-six years, and had spent most of the time building
stockades. Joshua approved of this; the man obviously had his head
screwed on right.

It had been harder when he’d first started. In Madison, Wisconsin, what
you found on the other side of the reality walls, to East and West, was
mostly prairie. Joshua knew now that the first time he’d stepped through
he’d been lucky it hadn’t been winter, which could have plunged him
unprepared into temperatures of forty below. And that he hadn’t landed
in some marsh, in some place that on Datum Earth had been drained by
people and turned into farmland long before he’d been born.

The first time he’d gone out alone into the wild worlds and tried to
spend a night had been kind of rough. Blackberries had been the only
food he’d recognized, but he got water from rainfall in cup plants. He’d
taken a blanket, and it had been too warm for that, but he’d needed it
as a mosquito net. He’d slept up a tree for security. It was only later
that he’d learned that cougars could climb trees …

After that he’d taken over a few books from the Home and the city
library to help him recognize stuff, and he asked Sister Serendipity,
who knew about cookery through the ages, and he’d begun to see you’d
have to be pretty stupid to starve out there. There were berries,
mushrooms, acorns, walnuts, and cat-tails, big green reeds with roots
rich in carbs. There were plants to use if you were ill – even wild
quinine. The lakes were rich in fish, and traps were easy to make. He’d
tried his hand at hunting, once or twice. Rabbits were OK, but the
bigger game, the white-tailed deer and elk and moose, would have to wait
until he was older. Even turkeys took some running down. But why bother,
when there were passenger pigeons that were so dumb that they’d sit and
wait for you to walk up to them and knock them over? The animals, even
the fish, seemed so innocent. Trusting. Joshua had developed a habit of
thanking his catch for its gift of its life, only to learn later that
that was how Indian hunters treated their prey.

You had to prepare. You took over matches or a Fresnel lens for fire;
he’d taught himself how to make a fire bow in an emergency, but the
effort sucked for everyday use. He’d got mosquito repellent free from
Clean Sweep, a government exchange for household chemicals on Badger
Road. And household bleach, for purifying the water.

Of course you didn’t want to become prey of anything yourself – but prey
of what? There were animals that could take you down, certainly. Lynxes,
dog-sized cats that stared at you and ran off in search of easier
targets. Cougars, animals the size of German shepherds with faces that
were the essence of cat. Once he saw a cougar bring down a deer, jumping
on its back and biting into the carotid. Further out he’d glimpsed
wolves, and more exotic animals – a thing like a huge beaver, and a
sloth, heavy and stupid, that made him laugh. All these animals, he
supposed, had existed in Datum Madison before humans came along, and now
were mostly extinct. None of these creatures of the stepwise worlds had
ever seen a human before, and even ferocious hunters tended to be wary
of the unknown. Mosquitoes were more trouble than wolves, in fact.

In those early days Joshua had never stayed long, only a few nights at a
time. Sometimes he perversely wished his stepping ability would switch
off, so he’d be stuck out there, and see how he survived. When he came
home Sister Agnes would ask him, ‘Don’t you find it lonely and
frightening out there?’ But it hadn’t been lonely enough. And what was
there to be frightened of? You might as well have said somebody who had
stuck their toe into the water on a Pacific beach should be frightened
of all that ocean.

Besides, pretty soon, in the Low Earths you couldn’t move for trippers,
coming to see what it was all about. Steely-eyed folk, some of them,
with serious shorts and determined knees, striding across this new
territory, or at least getting tangled in the underbrush. Folk with
questions like, ‘Whose land is this? Are we still in Wisconsin? Is this
even the United States?’

Worst of all were the ones fleeing from the wrath of God, or maybe
looking for it. There was an awful lot of that. Was the Long Earth a
sign of the End of Days? Of the destruction of the old world, and a new
world made ready for the chosen people? Too many people wanted to be
among the chosen, and too many people thought that God would provide, in
these paradisiacal worlds. God provided in abundance, it was true, vast
amounts of food that you could see running around. But God also helped
those who helped themselves, and presumably expected the chosen to bring
warm clothing, water purification tablets, basic medication, a weapon
such as the bronze knives that were selling so well these days, possibly
a tent – in short, to bring some common sense to the party. And if you
didn’t, and if you were lucky, it would only be the mosquitoes that got
you. _Only_. In Joshua’s opinion, if you wanted to extend the biblical
metaphor, then this apocalypse had four horsemen of its own, their names
being Greed, Failing to Follow the Rules, Confusion and Miscellaneous
Abrasions. Joshua had got sick of having to save the Saved.

He was soon sick of them all, actually. How did these people have the
right to trample all over _his_ secret places?

Worse yet, they got in the way of the Silence. He was already calling it
that. They drowned out the calmness. Drowned out that distant, deep
presence behind the clutter of the worlds, a presence he seemed to have
been aware of all his life, and had recognized as soon as he was far
enough away from the Datum to be able to hear it. He started resenting
every tanned hiker, every nosy kid, and the racket they made.

Yet he felt compelled to help all these people he despised, and he got
confused about that. He also got confused about having to spend so much
time alone, and the fact that he _liked_ it. Which was why he broached
the subject with Sister Agnes.

Sister Agnes was definitely religious, in a weird kind of way. At the
Home, Sister Agnes had two pictures on the walls of her cramped room:
one of them was of the Sacred Heart, the other was of Meat Loaf. And she
played old Jim Steinman records far too loudly for the other Sisters.
Joshua didn’t know much about bikes, but Sister Agnes’s Harley looked so
old that St Paul had probably once ridden in the sidecar. Sometimes
extremely hairy bikers made interstate pilgrimages to her garage at the
Home on Allied Drive. She gave them coffee, and made sure they kept
their hands _off_ the paintwork.

All the kids liked her, and she liked them, but especially Joshua, and
especially after he had done a dream of a paint job on her Harley,
including the slogan ‘Bat Into Heaven’ painstakingly delineated on the
gas tank in a wonderful italic script that he had found in a book from
the library. After that, in her eyes, Joshua could do no wrong, and she
allowed him to use her tools any time he liked.

If there was anyone he could trust, it was Sister Agnes. And with her,
if he’d been away too long, his usual taciturn reserve sometimes turned
into a flood of words, like a dam breaking, and everything that needed
saying got said, all in a rush.

So he’d told her about what it was like to have to keep on saving the
lost and the silly and the unpleasant, and the way they stared, and the
way they said, ‘You are him, aren’t you? The kid who can step without
having to spend fifteen minutes feeling like dog shit.’ He never knew
_how_ they knew, but the news got out somehow, for all Officer Jansson’s
assurances. And that made him different, and being different made him a
Problem. Which was a bad thing, and you couldn’t forget that, even here
in Sister Agnes’s study. Because just above those two pictures of the
Sacred Heart and Meat Loaf, there was a little statue of a man who’d
been nailed to a cross because He’d been a Problem.

She had said that it seemed to her that he might be trapped in a
vocation, not unlike her own. She knew how difficult it was to make
people understand what they didn’t want to understand, for instance when
she insisted that ‘For Crying Out Loud’ was one of the holiest songs
that had ever been recorded. She told him to follow his heart, and also
to come and go whenever he liked, because the Home _was_ his home.

And she said that he could trust Officer Jansson, a good policewoman and
a good Steinman fan (inserting ‘Steinman fan’ into the conversation at
the point where another nun might have used the word ‘Catholic’), who
had been to see Sister Agnes, and had asked if she could meet Joshua,
and ask for his help.

9

MEANWHILE, SIX MONTHS after Step Day, Monica Jansson’s own career path
had taken a decisive knight’s-move sideways.

She had stood outside the Madison PD South District building, braced,
slid the switch on her Stepper, and received the usual punch in the gut,
as the station vanished to be replaced by tall trees, green shade. In a
clearing cut into this scrap of primeval forest was a small wooden shack
with the MPD crest on the door, and a low bench outside, and a Stars and
Stripes hanging from a stripped sapling. Jansson sat on the bench,
folded over, nursing the nausea. The bench was put here precisely to
allow you to recover from the stepping before you had to face your
fellow officers.

Since Step Day, things had moved on quickly. The techs had come up with
a police-issue Stepper, robust components in a sleek black plastic case,
resistant even to a close-range gunshot. Of course, as with all Steppers
– just as she’d found at the start with Linsay’s prototype – to make it
work for you, you had to finish the assembly of the working components
yourself. It was a nice piece of kit, although you had to ignore the
jokes about the potatoes needed to run it. ‘Do you want fries with that,
Officer?’ Ha ha.

But nobody had been able to do anything about the nausea that
incapacitated most people for ten or fifteen minutes after a step. There
was a drug that was supposed to help, but Jansson always tried to avoid
becoming dependent on drugs, and besides it turned your piss blue.

When the dizziness and nausea started to subside, she stood up. The day,
in Madison West 1 anyhow, was still and cold, sunless but rainless. This
stepwise world was still much as it had been the first time she’d
stepped here, from out of the ruin of Willis Linsay’s house: the rustle
of leaves, the clean air, the birdsong. But it was changing, bit by bit,
as clearings were nibbled into the forest and the prairie flowers were
cut back: householders ‘extending’ their properties, entrepreneurs
trying to figure out how to exploit a world of high-quality lumber and
exotic wildlife, official presences like the MPD establishing a foothold
in world-next-door annexes to their principal buildings. Already, it was
said, there was smoky smog on very still days. Jansson wondered how long
it would be before she would see airplane contrails in that empty sky.

She wondered where Joshua Valienté was, right now. Joshua, her own
guilty secret.

She was almost late for her appointment with Clichy.

Inside the shack, the smell of long-brewed coffee was strong.

There were two officers here, Lieutenant Clichy behind his desk staring
into a laptop – customized and non-ferrous – and a junior patrol officer
called Mike Christopher who was painstakingly handwriting some kind of
report in a big ledger of lined yellow paper. Still largely without
electronic support, all over the country cops were having to learn to
write legibly again, or as legibly as they ever had.

Clichy waved at her, without taking his eyes from the laptop. ‘Coffee,
seat.’

She fetched a mug of coffee so thick she thought it would dissolve the
bronze spoon she used to stir it, and sat on a rough-hewn handmade chair
across the desk. Jack Clichy was a squat, stout man with a face like a
piece of worn-out luggage. She had to smile at him. ‘You look right at
home, Lieutenant.’

He eyed her. ‘Don’t shit me, Jansson. What am I, Davy Crockett? Listen,
I grew up in Brooklyn. To me, downtown Madison is the wild west. _This_
is a freaking theme park.’

‘Why do you want to see me, sir?’

‘Strategy, Jansson. We’re being asked to contribute to a statewide
report on how we’re intending to deal with this contingency of the extra
Earths. Our plans in the short, medium and long term. A version will go
up to federal level too. And the chief is bearing down on me because, as
he points out, we don’t _have_ any plans, either short, medium or long
term. So far we’ve just been reacting to events.’

‘And that’s why I’m here?’

‘Let me find the files …’ He tapped at the keyboard.

Christopher’s radio crackled, and he murmured in response. Cellphones
wouldn’t work over here, of course. Conventional radio transmitters and
receivers were OK so long as they were customized to exclude iron
components, so they could be carried over intact. There was talk of
laying down some kind of network of old-fashioned phone lines, copper
wire.

‘Here we go.’ Clichy swivelled the laptop so that Jansson could see the
screen. ‘I got case logs here, snippets of video. I’m trying to make
sense of it all. Your name kept on coming up, Jansson, which is why I
called you in.’

She saw links to her reports on the fire at the Linsay residence, the
first-night panic over the missing teenagers.

‘So we had a tough first few days. Those missing kids, and the ones that
came back with broken bones from falling through high-rise buildings, or
with chunks bitten out of them by some critter or other. Prison escapes.
A wave of absenteeism, from the schools, businesses, the public
services. The economy took an immediate hit, nationwide, even globally.
Did you know that? I’m told it was like an extra Thanksgiving break,
before the assholes drifted back to work, or most of them …’

Jansson nodded. Most of those first-day Steppers had come quickly back.
Some had not. The poor tended to be more likely to stay away; rich
people had more to give up back in Datum. So, out of cities like Mumbai
and Lagos, even a few American cities, flocks of street kids had
stepped, bewildered, unequipped, into wild worlds, but worlds that
didn’t already belong to somebody else, so why shouldn’t they belong to
you? The American Red Cross and other agencies had sent care teams after
them, to sort out the _Lord of the Flies_ chaos that followed.

That was the main thing about the Long Earth, in Jansson’s mind. Joshua
Valienté’s behaviour had shown it right from the beginning. It offered
_room_. It offered you a place to escape – a place to run, endlessly as
far as anybody knew. All over the world there was a trickle of people
just walking away, with no plan, no preparation, just walking off into
the green. And back home there were already reports of problems with the
desolate, resentful minority who found they couldn’t step at all, no
matter how fancy their Steppers.

Lieutenant Clichy’s priority, of course, was the way the new worlds were
being used against Datum Earth.

‘Look at the log,’ he said. ‘After a few days people start to figure out
this shit, and we get more calculated crimes. Elaborate burglaries. A
rash of suicide bombers in the big cities. And the Brewer assassination,
or the attempt. Which is where your name started to get flagged up,
Officer Jansson.’

Jansson remembered. Mel Brewer was the estranged wife of a drug baron,
who had cut a deal with the DA to testify against her husband, and was
headed for witness protection. She barely escaped the first attempt on
her life by a stepping assassin. It had been Jansson who had come up
with the idea of stashing her in a cellar. On the stepwise worlds, West
1 and East 1, the space the cellar occupied was solid ground, so you
couldn’t step straight in. You’d either have to dig a parallel hole, or
else come in at ground level and fight your way down. Either way, the
element of surprise was lost. By the following morning the belowground
facilities in all the police stations, even in the Capitol building,
were being fitted out as refuges.

‘You weren’t the only one to figure that out, Jansson. But you were
_among_ the first, even nationally. I hear the President herself sleeps
in some bunker under the White House now.’

‘Glad to hear it, sir.’

‘Yeah, yeah. Then it started getting more exotic.’

‘Odd to hear you using that term without the word “dancer” attached to
it, sir.’

‘Don’t push it, Jansson.’ He showed her reports of various religious
nuts. Apocalypse-minded types had gone flooding into the ‘new Edens’,
believing their sudden ‘appearance’ was a sign of the End of Days. One
Christian sect believed Christ must have survived the crucifixion and
stepped out of the tomb by the time His disciples came looking for His
body – and, it wasn’t much of a leap to conclude, He was probably still
out there in the Long Earth somewhere. All this presented public order
challenges for the police.

Clichy pushed away the laptop and massaged the top of his fleshy nose.
‘Who am I, Stephen Hawking? My brain is boiling. Whereas you, on the
other hand, Officer Jansson, have taken to all this like a pig to shit.’

‘I wouldn’t say that, sir—’

‘Just tell it to me the way you understand it. The most basic problem –
I mean for Madison’s finest – is that we can’t carry through our pieces
intact. Right?’

‘Not even a Glock, no, because of the steel parts. No metallic iron can
be carried over, sir. Or steel. You can take through whatever you can
carry, save for that. I mean, there’s iron ore in the other worlds, and
you can dig it up and process it and manufacture iron over _there_, but
you can’t carry that stepwise either.’

‘So you need to build a forge on every world you settle.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘I’ll tell you what puzzles even a doofus like me, Jansson. I thought we
all got iron in our blood, or something. How come that doesn’t get left
behind?’

‘In your blood, the iron’s chemically bound up in organic molecules.
Inside your haemoglobin, one molecule at a time. Iron molecules can go
over if they are in chemical compounds like that, just not in the form
of metal. Why, rust can be carried over, because that’s a compound of
iron with water and oxygen. You can’t take your piece over, sir, except
for all the rust on the shaft.’

He eyed her. ‘That isn’t some kind of lewd remark, is it, Jansson?’

‘Wouldn’t dream of it, sir.’

‘Anybody know why things are this way?’

‘No, sir.’ She had been following the discussions, as best she could.
Some physicists had pointed out that iron nuclei were the most stable in
nature; iron was the end result of the complicated fusion processes that
went on at the heart of the sun. Maybe its reluctance to travel between
the worlds was something to do with that. Maybe stepping between the
worlds was something like quantum tunnelling, a low-probability passage
between energy states. As iron had the most stable atomic nucleus, maybe
it lacked the energy to escape from its energy well on Datum Earth … Or
maybe it was magnetism. Or something. Nobody _knew_.

Clichy, a practical man, just nodded. ‘At least we know the rules. Kind
of a gut-wrench for most Americans to have gun control suddenly imposed
on ’em, however. What else? There are no people in these other worlds,
right? I mean, except for the ones who leaked over from ours.’

‘That’s right, sir. Well, as far as anybody knows. There has been no
systematic exploration even of the nearby worlds, not yet. You can’t
know what’s hiding over the next ridge. But they have sent up a few spy
balloons and such, aerial cameras. No sign of people, anywhere we can
see.’

‘OK. So there’s a whole chain of these worlds, right? In two directions,
East and West.’

‘Yes, sir. You just step from one into another, like passing down a
corridor. You can go one way or another, East or West – though those are
just arbitrary labels. They don’t correspond to real directions, in our
world.’

‘No short cuts? I can’t just beam over to world two million?’

‘Not that anybody knows, sir.’

‘How many of these worlds? One, two, many? A million, a billion?’

‘Nobody knows that either, sir. We don’t even know how far out people
have walked. It’s all –’ She waved a hand. ‘– loose around the edges.
Uncontrolled.’

‘And every one of these worlds is a whole separate Earth, right?’

‘As far as we know.’

‘But the sun. Mars and Venus. The fucking moon. Are they the same as
ours? I mean—’

‘Every Earth comes with its own universe, sir. And the stars are the
same. The date is the same, in all the worlds. Even the time of day. The
astronomers have established that with star charts; they could tell if
there were a slippage of a century, or whatever.’

‘Star charts. Centuries. Jeez. You know, this afternoon I have to attend
a conference chaired by the Governor about jurisdiction. If you commit a
crime in Madison West fucking 14, do I even have the authority to arrest
you?’

Jansson nodded. Not long after Step Day had come to pass, while some
people had just drifted away into the wild, others had started staking
claims. You settled down, hammered in your markers, and prepared to
plant your crops and raise your kids, in what looked like virgin
country. But who, in reality, owned what? You could stake your claim,
but would the government endorse it? Were the parallel Americas even
United States territory? Well, now the administration had decided to
take a position on that.

Clichy said, ‘Word is the President is going to declare that all the
stepwise Americas _are_ US sovereign territory, over which US laws
apply. The stepwise territories are “under the aegis of the federal
government”, is the language. That will simplify things, I guess. If you
can call having a beat suddenly become infinite “simple”. We’re all
overstretched, all the agencies. You have the military being brought
home from the war zones, Homeland dreaming up endless new ways the
terrorists can get through, and meanwhile the corporations are quietly
heading on out to see what there is to grab … Ah, shit. My momma told me
I should have stayed in Brooklyn.

‘OK, listen, Officer Jansson.’ He leaned forward now, hands folded,
intent. ‘I’ll tell you why I brought you in. Whatever the legal
viewpoint, we’re still charged with keeping the peace in Madison. And,
how lucky for us, Madison is a kind of magnet for the nutjobs over
this.’

‘I know, sir …’

Madison had been the source of the Stepper technology in the first
place, so it was a natural hub for that reason. And Jansson, studying
reports about people coming here to begin long stepwise journeys, was
also beginning to wonder if there was something else about the area that
attracted them. Some way stepping was _easier_ here. Maybe the Long
Earth was about stability. Maybe the oldest, most stable parts of the
continents were the easiest places to step – just as iron had the most
stable nucleus. And Madison, sitting at the heart of North America, was
one of the most stable places on the planet, geologically. If she saw
Joshua again, she meant to ask him.

Clichy said, ‘So we got a special challenge. Which is why I need you,
Jansson.’

‘I’m no kind of an expert, sir.’

‘But you keep functioning, right through all the _Twilight Zone_ shit.
Even on that first night, you kept your head clear and your mind focused
on the policing priorities, while some of your esteemed colleagues were
busy pissing their pants or puking up their pretzels. I want you to be
point man on this. You understand? I want you to take a lead, both on
the individual incidents, and the patterns behind them. For sure those
rascals out there are going to keep figuring out more ways to use this
shit against us. I want you to be my Mulder, Officer Jansson.’

She smiled. ‘Scully would be more appropriate.’

‘Whatever. Look, I’m not promising you anything in return. It’s an
unconventional assignment. Your contribution will be hard to reflect in
your record. I’ll do my best, however. You might end up spending a lot
of time away from home. A lot of time alone, even. Your personal life—’

She shrugged. ‘I’ve a cat. She looks after herself.’

He tapped a key, and she knew he must be studying her personnel file.
‘Twenty-eight years old.’

‘Twenty-nine, sir.’

‘Born in Minnesota. Parents still there. No siblings, no kids. A failed
gay marriage?’

‘I’m mostly celibate these days, sir.’

‘Jansson, I sincerely do not want to know. OK, go back to Datum Earth,
rework your assignments with your sergeant, figure out what you need to
set up in this station and the one in East 1 – hell, just go look busy
for the mayor, Officer.’

‘Yes, sir.’

All in all Jansson had been pleased with the meeting, looking back on
it, and her new assignment. It told her that guys like Clichy, and those
in power above him, were handling this extraordinary phenomenon, the
sudden opening up of the Long Earth, about as well as they could be
expected to. Which wasn’t true, she had learned from the news and other
sources, in every country in the world.

10

‘SURELY, PRIME MINISTER, we could just ban stepping? It is a manifest
security risk!’

‘Geoffrey, we might as well outlaw breathing. Even my own mother has
stepped!’

‘But the population is fleeing. The inner cities are ghost towns. The
economy is collapsing. We must do _something_ …’

Hermione made a tactful minute of the exchange.

Hermione Dawes was extremely good at taking minutes. She prided herself
on the skill; it was an art to sift what people meant from what they
said, and she had been practising this art quite sat-is factorily for
almost thirty years, for political masters of all hues. She had never
married, and appeared to be quite comfortable with that fact, laughingly
telling her fellow secretaries that her gold ring, which she wore all
the time, was intended as a chastity belt. She was trustworthy, and
trusted, and the only tiny flaw that her bosses had detected was that
she owned every single track that Bob Dylan had ever cut.

Nobody she worked with knew her, she felt. Not even the gentlemen who,
periodically, when she was known to be working, broke into her flat and
searched it, always very carefully, no doubt sharing a little smile as
they carefully replaced the tiny sliver of wood she pushed between the
front door and its frame every day. Very similar to her own little smile
when she noted that their big flat feet had once again crushed the scrap
of meringue that she always dropped on the carpet just inside the living
room door, a scrap they never ever noticed.

Since she never took off her gold ring, no one but she and God knew that
inscribed, quite expensively, around the inner surface of the ring was a
line from a Dylan song called ‘It’s Alright Ma (I’m Only Bleeding)’. She
wondered, these days, if any of the busy little bodies she worked with,
including most of the ministers, would even recognize where the quote
came from.

And now, a few years after Step Day, as the latest panicky discussion
went on in the Cabinet Office, she wondered if she was too old to get a
job with the masters, as opposed to the fools.

‘Then they should be licensed. Stepper boxes. The Long Earth is a sink
as far as the blessed economy is concerned, but penalizing the use of
the boxes you need to access it would yield some tax revenue, at least!’

‘Oh, don’t be absurd, man.’ The Prime Minister sat back in his chair.
‘Come on. We can’t just ban a thing because we can’t control it.’

The minister responsible for health and safety looked startled. ‘I don’t
see why not. It’s never stopped us before.’

The Prime Minister tapped his pen on the table. ‘The inner cities are
emptying. The economy’s imploding. Of course there is a bright side.
Immigration is no longer a problem …’ He laughed, but he seemed to
crumple, and when he spoke again he sounded, to Hermione, almost in
despair. ‘God help us, gentlemen, the science chaps tell me that there
might be more iterations of the planet Earth out there than there are
people. What policy options can we possibly conceive in the face of
_that_?’

Enough was enough: quite suddenly, that was how Hermione felt about all
this.

As the picky, preposterous, pointless conversation continued, with a
faint smile on her lips Hermione wrote a couple of lines of her
immaculate Pitman shorthand, laid her pad on the desk in front of her,
and after a nod of permission from the Prime Minister she stood and left
the room. Probably nobody else even noticed she was gone. She walked out
into Downing Street, and stepped into the London next door, which
swarmed with security guards, but she was such a familiar sight after
all these years that they accepted her identity card and let her pass.

And then she stepped again. And again, and again …

Much later, when she was missed, one of the other secretaries was called
in to translate the little note that she had written, the delicate
strokes and swirling curves.

‘It looks like a poem to me, sir. Or a song lyric. Something about
people criticizing what they can’t understand.’ She looked up at the
Prime Minister. ‘Mean anything to you, sir? Sir? Are you all right,
sir?’

‘Have you got a husband, miss—sorry, I don’t know your name?’

‘It’s Caroline, sir. I’ve got a boyfriend, a steady boy, good with his
hands. I can get you a doctor if you want.’

‘No, no. It’s just we’re all so bloody inadequate, Caroline. What a
farce it is, this business of government. To imagine we were ever in
control of our destinies. If I were you, Caroline, I would marry your
steady boy right now, if you think he’s any good, and _go_, go to
another world. Anywhere but here.’ He slumped in the chair and shut his
eyes. ‘And God help England, and God help us all.’

She wasn’t sure if he was asleep or awake. At length she slipped out,
taking Hermione’s abandoned pad with her.

11

WITHIN A WEEK of her meeting with Clichy, Jansson’s colleagues had
started calling her ‘Spooky’ Jansson.

And within a month, she had made an appointment at the Home, as Joshua
called it. It was an orphanage, a run-down converted section-8 apartment
complex on Allied Drive, in an area that was about as rough as it got in
Madison. But you could see the place was well kept. And there she
quietly met, once more, fourteen-year-old Joshua Valienté. She had sworn
that if Joshua dealt through her she would guarantee that nobody would
treat him as a Problem, but as somebody who might be able to help out,
maybe, you know? Like Batman?

That was how, for several years after Step Day, Joshua’s young life had
been shaped.

‘That must seem a long time ago to you now,’ Selena said smoothly,
leading Joshua deeper into the transEarth complex.

He didn’t reply.

‘So you became a hero. Did you wear a cape?’ asked Selena.

Joshua didn’t like sarcasm. ‘I had an oilskin for rainy days.’

‘Actually, that was a joke.’

‘I know.’

Yet another forbidding door opened in front of them, another corridor
was revealed.

‘Makes Fort Knox look like a colander, this place, doesn’t it?’ Selena
said nervously.

‘Fort Knox _is_ a colander nowadays,’ said Joshua. ‘It’s just lucky that
people can’t carry out bars of gold by hand.’

She sniffed. ‘I was merely making a comparison, Joshua.’

‘Yes. I know.’

She halted. The way he’d paused in the middle of that reply was
annoying, and even more annoying when what she’d really been trying to
express was that, even now, all this business of stepwise worlds could
be so frightening. Not to Joshua, it seemed. She forced a brief smile.
‘This is where I leave you, at least for now. _I_ am not allowed to get
too close to Lobsang. Very few people are. I know Lobsang wants to
discuss your difficulties with the congressional review that’s been
looking into the outcome of your earlier jaunt into the remote stepwise
worlds.’

She was fishing, of course. Joshua suspected that this was, in fact, the
leverage Lobsang hoped to use to recruit him.

He said nothing, and she couldn’t gauge his reaction.

She guided him gently into the room beyond. ‘Nice to have met you face
to face, Joshua.’

He said, ‘May I wish you the security rating you desire, Selena.’

She stared at the closing door. She was sure that impassive face had
broken into a smile.

The room within this fortress-like inner sanctum was decorated like the
study of an Edwardian gentleman, even down to the log fire blazing in
the fireplace. The fire was a fake, however, and not entirely
convincing, at least to Joshua, who lit a genuine log fire every night
out in the wild. The leather on the chair standing invitingly beside the
fire, however, was real.

‘Good afternoon, Joshua,’ said a voice from the air. ‘I regret that you
cannot see me, but in point of fact there is very little of me here to
see. And what there is, I feel sure, would be quite dull to observe.’

Joshua settled down in the chair. For a time there was silence, almost
companionable. Beside him, the fire crackled artificially. You could
tell, if you listened, because of certain sequences of crackle, that the
soundtrack was repeated every forty-one seconds.

The voice of Lobsang said soothingly, ‘I ought to have paid more
attention to that. Yes – I mean the fire. Oh, don’t worry, Joshua, I’m
no mind-reader, not yet; you were glancing at the fire every few seconds
and you have a tendency to move your lips soundlessly when you are
counting. Interestingly enough, nobody else has noticed that little
flaw, with the fire.

‘But of course, Joshua, you _do_ notice. You watch, and listen, and
analyse, and inside that roomy cranium of yours you play yourself little
videos of all the possible outcomes of the current situation that you
can envisage. It was once said of an English politician that if you
kicked him in the butt not a muscle would move on his face until he had
decided what to do about it. It’s one of the qualities that makes you so
useful, that watchfulness.

‘And you are not apprehensive, are you? I can detect no fear in you,
none whatsoever. I believe this is because you are the only person who
has been in this fortress of a room who knows that he could get out at
any moment. Why? Because you can step without a Stepper box – oh, yes, I
know about that. And without getting nauseous afterwards, too.’

Joshua did not rise to that. ‘Selena said you had something to tell me,
about the congressional review?’

‘Yes, the expedition. You got into trouble with that one, didn’t you,
Joshua?’

‘Look – there are only two of us in here, aren’t there? So, if you give
it some thought, there is no reason whatsoever why you should repeatedly
_tell me what my name is_. I know why you’re doing it. Dominance.’ This
was a lifelong bugbear for Joshua. ‘I may not be too clever, Lobsang,
but you don’t have to be clever to work out what the rules are!’

For a while there was nothing but the repeated crackling of the false
fire. Later, Joshua came to understand that if there was a pause in a
conversation with Lobsang, it was for effect; at the clock speeds he
worked at, Lobsang could answer any question a fraction of a second
after you asked it, yet after the equivalent of a lifetime of
contemplation.

‘You know, we are like-minded, you and I, my friend,’ said Lobsang.

‘Let’s stick to “acquaintance” for now.’

Lobsang laughed. ‘Of course. I stand corrected. Or rather, float in a
disembodied way corrected. But I would like to become your friend.
Because, in the abstract, in any given situation, I believe that both of
us are interested in finding out, above all, _what the rules are_.

‘And I believe that you are a remarkably valuable individual. You are
smart enough, Joshua – you couldn’t have survived so much time out alone
in the Long Earth otherwise. Oh, there are certainly others smarter than
you, they are stacked high in the universities achieving little or
nothing. But smart has to have a depth as well as a length. Some smart
brushes over a problem. And some smart grinds exceeding slow, like the
mills of God, and it grinds fine, and when it comes up with an answer,
it has been tested. That’s how it is with you, Joshua.’ Lobsang laughed
again. ‘And by the way my laughter is not a recording. Each laugh is a
unique product of the moment, demonstrably different from any other
laugh I have ever emitted. That was a laugh just for you. I was human,
you know. I still am.

‘Joshua, let’s get to know one another. I want to help you. And of
course I want you to help me. I cannot think of a better person to go
with me on the expedition I am planning, which will involve some very
far stepping indeed. I think it might rather appeal to you. You like to
be far from the maddening crowd, Joshua, don’t you?’

‘Thomas Hardy’s title was about the madding crowd.’

‘Oh, of course it was. But it’s a good idea for me to make the odd
little slip – not to appear all-knowing, every now and again.’

Joshua was growing impatient with this clumsy seduction. ‘Lobsang, how
are _you_ going to help _me_?’

‘I know that what happened to the congressional expedition was not your
fault. I can prove it.’

Now they were getting down to brass tacks, Joshua thought. ‘The
assholes,’ he said.

‘Oh yes, assholes,’ said Lobsang, ‘and thusly you described them to the
preliminary board of inquiry. An unknown species of primate resembling a
particularly unpleasant carnivorous baboon. But I suspect the Linnaean
Society will not approve your appellation. Assholes!’

‘I didn’t kill those men. Sure, I can get along without people. But I
had no _reason_ to kill anybody. Did you read the report? Those ass—’

‘Can we stick to baboons, please, Joshua? It looks better on the
transcript.’

It had been a paid jaunt for Joshua, a gig arranged by his old friend
Officer Jansson. ‘You’ve grown up while I’ve grown old, Joshua,’ she’d
said. ‘And now I’ve got you some government work. You’ll be a kind of
bodyguard and guide …’

It was an official journey to the far West worlds with a party of
scientists, lawyers and a Congressman, accompanied by a platoon of
soldiers. It had ended in slaughter.

The scientists had been gathering data. The lawyers had been taking
photographs of the Congressman setting foot on one world after another,
making a kind of visual claim to the stepwise Americas, in order to
establish symbolically the aegis of the Datum federal government. The
soldiers complained about the food and the state of their feet. Joshua
had been happy enough to help the party, for his fee, but sensible
enough to make sure his ability to step without a box and without
after-effects was concealed. So he carried a potion consisting of sour
milk and diced vegetables that would pass muster as vomit, the product
of stepping nausea. After all, who was going to look too closely?

It all worked fine. They had all bitched, squabbled and complained their
way through two thousand Earths, and after every step Joshua faked
nausea with splashes of ersatz vomit. And then the murderous attack had
come.

They were apes, something like baboons, but smarter, more vicious.
‘Superboons’, some of the scientists had called them. ‘Assholes’, Joshua
had decided, watching their pink butts go bobbing into the distance
after he’d driven them off.

Or anyhow, that was his story of what had become of the party. The
trouble was there had been no witnesses to back him up, and it had all
happened too far out for an expedition to be sent to investigate, so
far.

‘The damn things could plan an attack! They never bothered _me_ after I
killed two of them, but the troops were overwhelmed, and the science
guys never knew how to defend themselves worth a damn.’

‘And you left the bodies for the baboons?’

‘You know, it’s hard to dig a grave with a wooden shovel in one hand
while holding a plastic gun in the other. I burned the camp and got the
hell out of there.’

‘I thought the board of inquiry’s tentative verdict was rather unfair on
you. It left doubt. Now I want you to know that I can prove that what
you said was true. I can _prove_ that there is an outcrop of black rock
about a kilometre from the campsite by the waterhole, just as you said,
behind which still lies the remains of the corpse of the alpha animal,
which you shot. Incidentally the rock was low-grade coal.’

‘How can you know all this?’

‘I retraced your steps. The records you returned were quite accurate. I
went back, Joshua.’

‘_You_ went _back_? When?’

‘Yesterday.’

‘You got back yesterday?’

Lobsang said patiently, ‘I went and returned yesterday.’

‘You couldn’t have done! It’s impossible to step that fast.’

‘So you say, Joshua. You’ll find out in due course. You did make an
attempt to cover the corpses with stones, and you left grave markers,
just as you mentioned at the inquiry. I brought back photographic
records. Proof of what you said, you see?

‘In fact I reconstructed the whole thing. I used pheromone trails,
checked angles of fire, the lie of the bodies. I found every bullet.
And, of course, I took DNA samples. I even brought back the alpha’s
skull – and the bullet that killed it. It all fits with your testimony.
None of the soldiers put up an effective defence when your
asshole-baboons attacked, did they? The superboons are maniacs by the
standards of the animal world. Appallingly aggressive. But I don’t think
they would have attacked if one of the grunts hadn’t got nervy and fired
first.’

Joshua squirmed with embarrassment. ‘If you checked all this out, you
know I crapped my pants in the course of the engagement.’

‘Should I think less of you for that? Throughout the animal kingdom, it
has always made good sense to jettison the cargo in a threatening
situation. All battlefields attest to that, as does every soaring
songbird. But then _you came back_, and stabbed one of the superboons in
the brain, and drove off the rest, stopping only when you’d shot the
leader dead. You came back, and that excuses a lot.’

Joshua thought for a moment. ‘OK. That’s leverage, all right. You can
clear me. But why do you want to recruit me in the first place?’

‘Well, we discussed that. It’s the same reason Jansson suggested you for
Congressman Popper’s party in the first place. You have Daniel Boone
syndrome, Joshua. Very rare. You don’t need people. You quite like
people, at least some people, but the absence of people does not worry
you. That’s going to be very useful where we’re going. I don’t expect to
meet too many other human beings once the expedition is under way. Your
assistance would be of great help to me because of that quality: you are
able to focus, you’re not distracted by the extraordinary isolation of
the Long Earth. And, as Officer Jansson saw from the beginning, your
unique stepping talent, your ability to step unaided and, more
important, to recover quickly from each step, will be useful if trouble
strikes – as it surely will.

‘The rewards to you, should you agree to accompany me, will be
excessively generous, and tailored to your particular preferences. Among
them will be an authoritative account of the massacre of the
congressional investigators, totally exonerating you, which will be
received by the authorities on the day we depart.’

‘Am I worth that much?’

Lobsang laughed again. ‘Joshua, what is worth? What is value now, when
gold is valued simply for its lustre, because every man can have a gold
mine for himself? Property? The physics of the Long Earth means that
every one of us can have a world entirely to himself, if he so wishes.
This is the new age, Joshua, and there will be new values, new ideas of
worth, including love, cooperation, truth – and above all, yes indeed,
above all, the friendship of Lobsang. You should listen to me, Joshua
Valienté. I intend to travel to the ends of the Earth – no, to the ends
of the Long Earth. And I want you with me. Will you come?’

Joshua sat there, staring at nothing. ‘Do you know, the crackling of
your fire now sounds absolutely random?’

‘Yes. Easy enough to fix. I thought it might put you a little more at
your ease.’

‘So if I come with you, you’ll get that congressional review off my
back?’

‘Yes, certainly, I promise.’

‘And if I don’t choose to go with you, what then?’

‘I’ll deal with the review nonetheless. You did everything you could
have done, I believe, and the loss of those people was definitely not
your fault. Evidence of this will be presented to the panel.’

Joshua stood up. ‘Right answer.’

That night Joshua sat in front of a screen in the Home and read up about
Lobsang.

Apparently, so it was believed, Lobsang resided in extremely
high-density, fast-access computer storage at MIT, and therefore not in
the premises of transEarth at all. When Joshua read that, he felt a warm
certainty that whatever was in a super-cooled box in MIT, it wasn’t
Lobsang, not the _whole_ of Lobsang. If Lobsang were smart, and he was
most surely smart, he would have got himself distributed _everywhere_. A
hedge against an off switch. And he’d be in a position where nobody
could command him, not even his super-powerful partner Douglas Black.
_There_ was somebody who knew the rules, Joshua thought.

Joshua switched off the screen. Another rule: Sister Agnes held it as a
matter of faith that all left-on computer screens exploded sooner or
later. He sat back in the silence, and thought.

Was Lobsang human, or an AI aping humanity? A smiley, he thought: one
curve and two dots, and you see a human face. What was the minimum you
needed to _see_ a human being? What has to be said, what has to be
laughed? After all, people are made of nothing but clay – well,
metaphorically, although Joshua was not too good at metaphors, seeing
them as a kind of trick. And you had to admit that Lobsang was pretty
good at knowing what Joshua was thinking, just as a perceptive human
would be. Maybe the only significant difference between a really smart
simulation and a human being was the noise they made when you punched
them.

But … the ends of the Long Earth?

Was there an end? People were saying there must be a whole circle of
Earths, because the Stepper box took you either East or West, and
everybody believed that East must meet West! But nobody _knew_. Nobody
knew what all the other Earths were doing out there in the first place.
Perhaps it was time somebody tried to find out.

Joshua looked down at the latest Stepper box he had just finished, using
a double-pole, double-throw switch he had bought over the internet.
Sitting on the desk beside him it was red and silver and looked very
professional, unlike his first box, which had utilized a switch taken
off Sister Regina’s elderly stairlift. He had carried a Stepper ever
since it had dawned on him that since he did not know how he stepped,
the sensible thing would be to carry a Stepper box _anyway_; a talent
that had come suddenly and inexplicably might just as easily disappear
the same way. And besides, a box was cover. He didn’t want to stand out
from the stepping crowd.

Turning the box over in his hands, Joshua wondered if Lobsang realized
what was the most interesting thing about Stepper-box construction. He’d
noticed it on Step Day, and it was obvious when you thought about it; it
was a strange little detail nobody seemed to think was important. Joshua
always thought that details were important. Officer Jansson noticed
details like this. It had to do with following the instructions. A
Stepper would only work for you if you built it yourself, or at least
finished its assembly.

He drummed his fingers on the box. He could go with Lobsang, or not.
Joshua was twenty-eight years old; he didn’t have to ask anybody’s
permission. But he did have the damn congressional review hanging over
him.

And he always liked the idea of being out of reach.

Despite Jansson’s promises all those years ago, the bad guys had got to
him once or twice. There had been that trouble not long after Step Day,
when men with badges had pushed their way into the Home and tried to
send him to sleep so they could take him away, and Sister Agnes had laid
one of them out with a tyre iron, and pretty soon the cops were called,
and that meant Officer Jansson showed up, and then the mayor had got
involved, and it turned out that one of the kids who were helped by
Joshua on Step Day had been his son, and that had been that, the three
black anonymous cars had hightailed it out of town … That was when the
rule was laid down that if anyone wanted to talk to Joshua then they had
to talk to Officer Jansson first. Joshua was not the problem, the mayor
had said. The problem was crime and escapes from jails and no security
left in the world. Joshua, the city council was told, was perhaps a
little strange, but also marvellously gifted and, as was testified by
Officer Jansson, had already been of great help to the Madison police
department. That was the official position.

But that wasn’t always much comfort to Joshua himself, who hated being
_looked at_. Who hated the fact that a growing number of people _knew he
was different_, whether they thought he was a Problem or not.

In recent years Joshua had stepped alone, going further and further into
the Long Earth, far beyond the Robinson Crusoe stockades he’d built as a
teenager, out to worlds so remote he didn’t have to worry about the
crazies, even the crazies with badges and warrants. And when they did
come he just stepped away again; by the time they had finished throwing
up Joshua could be a hundred worlds away. Though sometimes he stepped
back to tie their bootlaces together while they barfed. You had to have
something to entertain yourself. Longer and longer jaunts, further and
further away. He called these his sabbaticals. A way of getting away
from the crowds – and from the odd pressure in his head when he was back
on Datum Earth, or even the Low Earths nowadays. A pressure that got in
the way of listening to the Silence.

So he was strange. But the Sisters said that the whole world was getting
stranger. Sister Georgina had told him as much, in her polite English
accent. ‘Joshua, you may be just a little ahead of the rest of the human
race. I imagine the first _Homo sapiens_ felt the way you do when you
look at the rest of us with our Stepper boxes and our vomiting. Like _H.
sap_. wondering why the other chaps take such a long time to string two
syllables together.’ But Joshua wasn’t sure if he liked the idea of
being different, even if it was different in a superior sort of way.

Still, he liked Sister Georgina almost as much as Sister Agnes. Sister
Georgina read Keats and Wordsworth and Ralph Waldo Emerson to him.
Sister Georgina had studied at Cambridge or, as she put it,
‘Not-the-one-in-Massachusetts-Cambridge-Universitythe-real-one-you-know-in-England.’
Sometimes it occurred to Joshua that the nuns who ran the Home were not
like the ones that he saw on television. When he asked Sister Georgina
about that she laughed and said, ‘Maybe it’s because we are just like
you, Joshua. We’re here because we didn’t quite fit anywhere else.’ He
was going to miss them all, he realized, when he went travelling with
Lobsang.

Somehow the decision had made itself.

12

A WEEK AFTER his interview at transEarth Sister Agnes took Joshua to
Dane County Regional Airport on the back of her Harley, a rare honour.
He would always remember her saying as they arrived that God must have
wanted him to catch that plane, because every stop light they
encountered turned to green just before she needed to slow. (In so far
as Sister Agnes ever did slow.) Joshua, however, suspected that the
subroutines of Lobsang were responsible for this, rather than the hand
of God.

Joshua had walked on countless Earths, but he had never actually flown
before. Sister Agnes knew the routine, and she marched him to the
check-in desk. Once the clerk had entered his booking reference he went
very quiet, and picked up the phone, and Joshua began to realize what it
meant to have a friend in Lobsang, as he was whisked away from the lines
of passengers and led along corridors with the politeness you might
observe when dealing with a politician belonging to a country that had
nuclear weapons and a carefree approach to their deployment.

He was brought to a room with a bar the length of the burger counter in
Disney World. Impressive though this was, Joshua didn’t often drink, and
would actually have preferred a burger. When he mentioned this jokily to
the young man who was nervously dancing attendance on him, he received,
after only minutes, a perfect burger so stuffed with trimmings that the
patty could have fallen out and not been missed. Joshua was still
digesting this when the young man reappeared and led him to the plane.

His seat was right behind the flight deck, and discreetly hidden from
the other travellers by a velvet curtain. No one had asked to see his
passport, which he didn’t have in any case. No one bothered to check
whether he was carrying explosives in his shoes. And nobody, once he was
on the flight, spoke to him. He watched a news summary in peace.

At Chicago O’Hare he was taken to another plane some way from the main
terminal, a surprisingly small craft. Within, what wasn’t
leather-upholstered was carpeted, and what wasn’t leather-upholstered or
carpeted seemed to consist of the dazzling teeth of a young woman who,
as he sat down, provided him with a Coke and a telephone. He tucked his
small personal pack under the seat before him, where he could see it.
Then he turned on the phone.

Lobsang called immediately. ‘Good to have you on board, Joshua! How are
you enjoying the journey so far? The plane is all yours today. You will
find a master bedroom behind you which I’m told is exceedingly
comfortable, and don’t hesitate to take advantage of the shower room.’

‘It’s going to be a long journey, is it?’

‘I’ll be meeting you in Siberia, Joshua. A Black Corporation skunk
works. You know what that means?’

‘A facility that’s off the radar.’ Where, he wondered, they were
building _what_?

‘Right. Oh, didn’t I mention Siberia?’

There was a sound of engines starting.

‘You’ve a human pilot, incidentally. People seem to like a warm
uniformed body at the controls. But don’t be alarmed. In a real sense
_I_ am the controls.’

Joshua sat back in the luxurious seat and put his thoughts in order. It
occurred to him that Lobsang was full of himself, as the Sisters would
have said. But maybe he had a lot of himself to be full of. Here was
Joshua cocooned _in_ Lobsang, in a sense. Joshua wasn’t big on
computers, and the marvellously interconnected electronic civilization
of which they were part. Out in the stepwise worlds you never got a
cellphone signal, after all, so the only thing that counted was _you_,
and what you knew, and what you could do. With his prized knife of
hardened glass he could keep himself alive, no matter what was thrown at
him. He kind of liked that. Maybe there was going to be some tension
with Lobsang over that – or with however much of Lobsang was ported
along for the ride.

The plane took off, making about as much noise as would Sister Agnes’s
sewing machine in an adjacent room. During the flight Joshua watched the
first episode of _Star Wars_, sipping gin and tonic, wallowing in
boyhood nostalgia. Then he took a shower – he didn’t need one but just
for the hell of it – and tried the enormous bed, whereupon the young
lady followed him in and asked him a couple of times if there was
anything else he wanted, and seemed disappointed when he only asked for
a glass of warm milk.

Some time later he awoke to find the attendant trying to strap him in.
He pushed her away; he hated being restrained. She remonstrated with the
sugar-coated steeliness bequeathed by her training, until a phone
chimed. Then: ‘I do apologize, sir. It would appear that the safety
rules have been temporarily suspended.’

He had expected Siberia to be flat, windy, cold. But this was summer,
and the plane descended towards a landscape where gentle hills were
coated with dark shoots of grass, and wildflowers and butterflies were
splashes of colour, red, yellow and blue. Siberia was unexpectedly
beautiful.

The jet did not so much touch down as kiss the tarmac.

The phone rang. ‘Welcome to No Such Place, Joshua. I do hope you’ll fly
with No Such Airlines in the future. You will find thermal underwear and
appropriate outdoor clothing in the wardrobe just inside the door.’

Joshua refused, with a red face, the attendant’s suggestion that she
should help him on with the thermal underwear. However, he did accept
the offer of her assistance with the bulky outer clothing, which he
thought made him look like the Pillsbury Doughboy, but was surprisingly
light.

He climbed down from the plane to join a group of men dressed as he was.
Joshua immediately began to sweat in the mild air. One man grinned,
called ‘West!’ to Joshua in a distinctly Bostonian accent, pressed a
switch on the box strapped to his belt, and vanished. A moment later his
companions began to follow.

Joshua stepped West, and arrived in an almost identical landscape – save
that he emerged into a blizzard and realized why he needed the winter
gear. There was a small shack near by, with the Bostonian beckoning to
him from a half-open door. It looked like a halfway house, a travellers’
rest stop of the kind becoming common in the stepwise worlds. But it was
utilitarian, just a place out of the wind where a man could upchuck in
something like comfort before stepping on.

The Bostonian, looking queasy, shut the door behind Joshua. ‘You really
are him, aren’t you? Feeling fine, are you? I don’t suffer from it too
bad myself, but …’ He waved a hand.

Joshua looked towards the back of the shack where two men were lying
face down over the edge of narrow beds, each with a bucket under his
face; the smell told it all.

‘Look, if you really feel OK, go on ahead. You’re the VIP here. You
don’t have to wait for us. You need to take three more steps West. There
are rest stations in each one – but I guess you won’t need them … Are
you for real? I mean, how do you do it?’

Joshua shrugged again. ‘Don’t know. Kind of a knack, I guess.’

The Bostonian opened the door. ‘Hey, before you go, we like to say here:
you’re stepping, wait for it, on the steppe!’ When Joshua tried but
failed to summon up a laugh the Bostonian said apologetically, ‘You can
imagine we don’t get too many visitors here. Best of luck, fella.’

The three further steps brought him out into rain. There was another
shack near by, and another pair of workers, one of them a woman, who
shook him by the hand. ‘Good to see you, sir.’ Her accent was richly
Russian. ‘Do you like our weather? Siberia’s two degrees warmer in this
world, and nobody knows why. I must wait a while for the rest of the
gang, but you can just follow the yellow brick road.’ She pointed to a
line of orange markers on sticks. ‘It’s a short walk to the construction
site.’

‘Construction? Construction of what?’

‘Believe me, you won’t miss it.’

He didn’t, because he couldn’t. Acres of pine woodland had been cleared,
and hovering over a circle of denuded land was what looked at first
glance like a floating building. Floating, yes; through the rain he made
out tethering wires. It was vast, an aerial whale. The partially
inflated body was a bag of some toughened fibre plastered with
transEarth logos, over a gondola like an Art Deco fantasy, several decks
deep, all polished wood and portholes and plate glass.

An airship!

As he stared, yet another worker hurried towards him flourishing a
phone. ‘You are Joshua?’ This man’s accent was European, Belgian
perhaps. ‘Pleased to meet you, very pleased! Follow me. Can I help you
with your bag?’

Joshua pulled his pack away so quickly that it would have burned the
man’s hand.

The worker stepped back. ‘Sorry, sorry. By all means keep your bag;
security is not an issue, not for you. Come with me.’

Joshua followed him across the soaking ground and under the formless
envelope. The gondola, fashioned like a wooden ship’s hull, appeared to
be anchored to a metal gantry, presumably constructed of locally
manufactured steel, at the bottom of which was a skeleton elevator cage.
Cautiously, his guide climbed into the open cage and, when Joshua had
joined him, pressed a button.

It was a short ride up to the underside of the gondola, and through a
hatch and out of the rain. Joshua found himself in a small compartment,
suffused by a rich smell of polished wood. There were windows, or
possibly portholes, but right now they showed nothing but the weather.

‘Wish I was leaving with you, young man,’ said the worker cheerfully.
‘Going wherever this thing is going – none of _us_ need to know, of
course. If you get a chance, look around the engineering. Non-ferrous,
of course, aluminium airframe … Well. We’re all proud of her. Bon
voyage, enjoy the journey!’ He stepped back into the elevator, and as it
descended out of sight a plate slid across to seal the polished floor.

The voice of Lobsang sounded in the air. ‘Once again, welcome aboard,
Joshua. Such dreadful weather, isn’t it? Never mind, I will soon have us
above it or, should I say, away from it.’

There was a jolt and the floor rocked. ‘We’ve detached from the gantry.
Are we airborne already?’

‘Well, you wouldn’t have been brought here if we weren’t ready to go.
Below us they will be breaking camp already, and then this site will
suffer a minor version of the Tunguska event.’

‘Security, I take it.’

‘Of course. As for the workers, they are a mixed lot: Russians,
Americans, Europeans, Chinese. None of them the kind of people who like
to talk to the authorities. Clever folk who have worked for many
masters, so very useful, and so commendably forgetful.’

‘Who supplied the plane?’

‘Ah. Did you enjoy your ride in the Lear? It is the property of a
holding company who rent it out occasionally to a certain rock star, who
tonight is fretting that the jet is unavailable because of an overhaul.
But she will soon be distracted by learning that her latest album is two
places higher in the charts than it was last night. The reach of Lobsang
is great. Now that we are under way …’

An inner door opened smoothly, revealing a corridor of panelled wood and
subtle lamps, leading to a blue door at the end.

‘Welcome to the _Mark Twain_. Please make yourself at home. You will
find on this corridor six staterooms, all identical; choose whichever
one you like. You can shed your cold-weather gear. Notice also the blue
door. That leads to a laboratory, workshop and fabrication plant, among
other things. You will find a similar door on each deck. I would prefer
if you do not go beyond unless invited. Any questions?’

Joshua changed in the room he’d chosen at random, and then explored the
_Mark Twain_.

The tremendous envelope, rippling under partial pressurization, was
evidently coated on the outside with solar-cell film for power, and
there were propulsion units, big fragile-looking fans that could swivel
and tilt. The gondola was as luxurious within as it had looked from the
outside. There were several decks, with staterooms, a wheelhouse, an
observation deck, and a saloon deck with a galley as well equipped as
the kitchen of a high-class restaurant, and a spacious hall that could
serve as a restaurant for fifty – or, incredibly, as a _cinema_. And on
every deck there was that blue door, closed and locked.

As he thought it over, Joshua began to see the point of stepping in an
airship – as long as you could get the thing to step in the first place,
and how you’d do that he didn’t yet understand. One problem with
stepping rapidly was obstacles. He’d discovered on his very first night
of exploration of the Long Earth that some obstacles simply couldn’t be
walked around, such as the ice cap, sometimes miles high, that typically
blanketed much of North America during an Ice Age. The airship was an
attempt to get around that: it would ride above such inconveniences as
glaciers or floods, and a much smoother journey ought to be possible.

He asked the air, ‘But did it have to be quite so grand, Lobsang?’

‘Why not be grand? We can’t hide, after all. I want my exploratory
vessel to be like the Chinese treasure ships which struck awe into the
natives of India and Arabia in the fifteenth century.’

‘You’ll strike awe, all right. And no iron in this thing, I take it?’

‘I’m afraid not. The impermeability of the reality barrier to iron
remains a mystery even to Black Corporation scientists. I get plenty of
theorizing, but few practical results.’

‘You know, when you talked about the journey, I thought I’d be carrying
_you_, somehow.’

‘Oh, no. _I_ am wired into the airship’s systems. The whole ship will be
my body, in a sense. Joshua, _I_ will be carrying _you_.’

‘Only sentient creatures can step—’

‘Yes. And I, like you, am sentient!’

And Joshua understood. The airship _was_ Lobsang, or at least his body;
when Lobsang stepped, the airship carcass came with him, just as Joshua
‘carried’ over his body, his clothes, whenever he stepped. And that was
how an airship could step.

Lobsang was smug and boastful. ‘Of course this would not work were I
_not_ sentient. This is further proof of my claims of personhood, isn’t
it? I’ve already trialled the technology – well, you know that, I traced
your earlier expedition as I told you. All rather thrilling, isn’t it?’

Joshua reached the base of the gondola and entered the observation deck
he’d spotted before, a blister of reinforced glass giving spectacular
views of this Low Earth’s Siberia. The construction site sprawled below,
with ancillary workings cut into the forest, supply dumps, dormitories,
an airstrip.

Joshua, thinking it over, began to realize just what an achievement
Lobsang had pulled off here – _if_ the airship stepped as advertised.
Nobody before had found a way to make a _vehicle_ capable of stepping
between the worlds the way a human could, and that was throttling the
expansion of any kind of trade across the Long Earth. In parts of the
Near East, and even in Texas, they had human chains carrying over oil by
the bucket-load. If Lobsang really had cracked this, essentially by
becoming the vessel himself – well, he was like a modern rail pioneer;
he was going to change the world, all the worlds. No wonder security was
so tight. _If_ it worked. This was all experimental, evidently. And
Joshua would be swimming across Long Earth in the belly of a silvery
whale. ‘You seriously expect me to risk my life in this thing?’

‘More than that. If “this thing” fails I expect you to bring me home.’

‘You’re insane.’

‘Quite possibly. But we have a contract.’

A blue door slid open, and, to Joshua’s blank astonishment, Lobsang
showed himself in person – or rather, in ambulatory unit. ‘Welcome
again! I thought I would dress for the occasion of our maiden voyage.’
The automaton was male, slim and athletic, with movie star looks and a
wig of thick black hair, and it wore a black lounge suit. It looked like
a waxwork of James Bond, and when it moved, and worse when it smiled, it
did nothing to dispel the artifice.

Joshua stared, struggling not to laugh.

‘Joshua?’

‘Sorry! Pleased to meet you in person …’

The deck vibrated as engines bit. Joshua felt oddly thrilled at the
prospect of the voyage in a small-boy kind of way. ‘What do you think
we’re going to find out there, Lobsang? I guess anything is possible if
you go far enough. What about dragons?’

‘I would suggest we might expect to find anything that _could_ possibly
exist in the conditions found on this planet, within the constraints of
the laws of physics, and bearing in mind that the planet has not always
been so peaceful as it is now. All creatures on Earth have been hammered
on the anvil of its gravity, for example, which influences size and
morphology. So I am sceptical about finding armoured reptiles who can
fly and spout flames.’

‘Sounds a little drab.’

‘However, I would not be human if I did not acknowledge one important
factor, which is that I might be totally wrong. And _that_ would be very
exciting.’

‘Well, we’ll find out – if this thing actually steps.’

Lobsang’s synthetic face folded into a smile. ‘Actually we’ve been
stepping for the last minute or so.’

Joshua turned to a window and saw that it was true. The construction
site had cleared away; they must have passed out of the sheaf of known
worlds in the first few steps – although that word ‘known’ was something
of a joke. Even the stepwise worlds right next to the Datum had barely
been explored; humans were colonizing the Long Earth in thin lines
stretched across the worlds. Anything could be living out back in the
woods … And he, evidently, was going deeper into those woods than
anybody before him.

‘How fast will this thing go?’

‘You’ll be pleasantly surprised, Joshua.’

‘You’re going to change the world with this technology, Lobsang.’

‘Oh, I know that. Up to now the Long Earth has been opened up on foot.
It’s been medieval. No, worse than that, we haven’t even been able to
use horses. Stone Age! But of course, even on foot humans have been
moving out since Step Day. Dreaming of a new frontier, of the riches of
the new worlds …’

13

MONICA JANSSON HAD always understood very well that it was the promise
of the riches of the new worlds that drew the likes of Jim Russo out
into the Long Earth to try their luck, over and over, with the law
seeming at times no more than a minor obstacle in the face of their
ambition.

On her first visit to Portage East 3, ten years after Step Day, it had
taken Jansson a minute or two, even after she’d gotten over the step
sickness, to figure out what was familiar about the place. This new
Portage had big steam-driven sawmills with chimney stacks belching
smoke, and foundries with a burned-metal smell. She heard the cries of
the workers, the steam hooters, the steady clank of the smiths’ hammers.
It was like something out of a certain kind of fantasy novel that she’d
read as a kid. Oh, in no novel she’d ever read would there have been
teams of labourers hauling twelve-yard lengths of timber up on to their
shoulders, and then vanishing. But she could testify that on this
particular world, the modestly named Long Earth Trading Company was
turning a corner of a stepwise Wisconsin into a steampunk theme park.

And here came the man who was driving it all.

‘Sergeant Jansson? Thank you for stepping over to see my little
enterprise.’

Jim Russo was shorter than she was. He wore a crumpled grey suit, and
had well-tended hair of a suspiciously vivid brown hue, and a broad grin
between cheeks that might or might not have had a little help to stay
perky. She knew Russo was forty-five years old, had been declared
bankrupt three times before but had always bounced back, and had now
mortgaged his own home for seed-corn money for this new inter-world
enterprise.

‘No need to thank me, sir,’ she said. ‘You know we have a duty to
investigate complaints.’

‘Ah, yes, more anonymous whining from the hired hands. Well, it’s par
for the course.’ He led her over the muddy ground, evidently hoping to
impress her with the scale of his operation here. ‘Although I think I
would have expected a visit from the Portage PD. That’s the local
department.’

‘Your registered office is in Madison.’ And besides, ‘Spooky’ Jansson
was often called into the more high-profile cases involving Long Earth
issues around wider Wisconsin.

They paused to watch another team of handlers pick a tremendously
long-looking log off a heap; a foreman called out a countdown – ‘three,
two, one’ – and away they stepped, with a soft implosion.

‘You can see this is a busy place, Sergeant Jansson,’ Russo said. ‘We
started with nothing, of course. Nothing more than we could carry over,
and no iron tools. In the early days the foundries were a high priority,
after the sawmills. Now we have a flow of high-quality iron and steel,
and soon we’ll be building steam-driven harvesters and collectors, and
then you’ll see us rip through these forests like a hot knife through
butter. And all this timber is stepped back to the Datum, to waiting
fleets of flatbed trucks.’ He brought her to an open-front log cabin
that served as a kind of showroom. ‘We’re expanding into a lot of areas
other than just raw materials. Look at this.’ It was a kind of shotgun
that gleamed like brass. ‘No iron parts at all, meant for the new
pioneer market.

‘I know the opening up of the Long Earth has knocked us into an economic
dip, but that’s short term. The loss of a percentage of the low-grade
workforce, a glut of some precious metals – that will pass. Back on
Datum Earth the US went from colonial days to the moon in a few
centuries. There’s no reason we can’t do the same again, on any number
of other Earths. Personally I’m very excited. It’s a new age, Sergeant
Jansson, and with products and commodities like these I mean to be in on
the ground floor …’

As did hundreds, thousands of other needy entrepreneur types, Jansson
knew. And most of them were younger than Russo, smarter, not yet weighed
down by previous failures, in Russo’s case beginning with a comically
naive attempt to go mine a stepwise copy of Sutter’s Mill for gold,
almost a cliché of a misunderstanding of the economic realities of the
new age.

‘It’s a problem, isn’t it, Mr Russo, to balance the profit you make
against the pressure on your labour force?’

He smiled easily, prepared for the question. ‘I’m not building pyramids
here, Sergeant Jansson. I’m not whipping slaves.’

But neither was he running a philanthropic foundation, Jansson knew. The
workers, mostly young and ill-educated, often had no real idea of what
was going on out in the Long Earth before they came out here to work in
places like this. As soon as they realized that they could be using
their strength to build something for themselves, they tended to start
agitating to join one of the new Companies and go trekking off into the
deep crosswise to colonize – or else, as it dawned on them that there
was an infinity of worlds out there none of which were owned by people
like Jim Russo, they simply walked away, into the endless spaces. Some
people just seemed to keep walking and walking, living off the land as
best they could. Long Earth Syndrome, they called it. And that was where
the complaints about Russo were coming from. He was said to be tying his
workers up with punitive contracts to keep them from straying, and then
going after them with hired muscle if they reneged.

She had the sudden instinct that this man was going to fail, as he had
before. And when it all started going belly-up he was going to be
cutting even more corners.

‘Mr Russo, we need to get down to the specifics of the complaints
against you. Is there somewhere we can talk privately?’

‘Of course …’

All over the nearby Earths, Jansson knew, on worlds becoming sweatshops
overnight, people were dreaming of escape, of freedom. As she waited for
a coffee Jansson spotted a flyer in Russo’s own in-tray, just a page
crudely printed on pulpy paper, about the formation of yet another new
Company to go trek up West. Dreams of the new frontier, even here in
this minor businessman’s office. Sometimes Jansson, nearing forty now,
wondered if she should up sticks and go out herself, and leave the Datum
and the increasingly murky Low Earths behind.

14

DREAMS OF THE Long Earth. Dreams of the frontier. Yes, ten years after
Step Day, Jack Green had understood that. Because they had been his
wife’s dreams, and Jack had feared they were tearing his family apart.

_January 1. Madison West 5. We came to stay at a lodge here for New Year
after Cristmas Christmas at home but we will have to go bak back to the
Datum for school. My name is Helen Green. I am elven eleven years old.
My mother (Dr Tilda Lang Green) says I should keep a jurnal jorunal
journal in this bok book which was a Christmas presnt present from Aunt
Meryl because there mite might be no electrics electronics this thing
have no spellchecker it drive me CRAYZEE!!! …_

Jack Green carefully turned the pages of his daughter’s journal. It was
like a fat paperback book, though with the pulpy graininess of much of
the paper produced here in West 5. He was alone in Helen’s room, on a
bright Sunday afternoon. Helen was out playing softball in ParkZone
Four. Katie was out too, he wasn’t sure where. And Tilda was downstairs
talking with a group of the friends and colleagues she had managed to
snag into the idea of forming a Company to go West.

‘… Empires rise and they fall. Look at Turkey. That was a great empire
once and you wouldn’t believe it now …’

‘… If you’re middle class you look to the left and see the activists
undermining American values, and to the right and you see how free trade
has exported our jobs …’

‘… We believed in America. Now we seem to be mired in mediocrity, while
the Chinese steam ahead …’

Tilda’s voice: ‘The notion of Manifest Destiny is historically suspect,
of course. But you can’t deny the importance of the frontier experience
to the making of the American consciousness. Well, now the frontier is
opening up again, for our generation and maybe for uncountable
generations to follow …’

The group conversation broke up into a general susurrus of noise, and
Jack smelled a rich aroma. Time for coffee and cookies.

He returned to the diary. At last he came to an entry that mentioned his
son. He read on, skimming over the spelling errors and crossings-out.

_March 23. We have moved to our new house in Madison West 5. It will be
fun here in the summer. Dad and Mom take it in turns to go back, they
have to work on the Datum for the money. And we had to leave Rod again
with Auntie Meryl because he is a fobic_ [she meant phobic, a
non-stepper – Jack tripped over that spelling] _and can’t step it’s sad
I cried this time after we stepped away but Rod didn’t cry unless he did
after we had gone. I will write to him in the summer and will go back
and see him IT IS SAD because it is fun here in the summer and Rod can’t
come …_

‘Tut tut.’ His wife’s voice. ‘That’s private.’

He turned, guilty. ‘I know, I know. But we’re going through such
changes. I feel the need to know what’s going on in their heads. I think
that trumps the privacy thing, just for now.’

She shrugged. ‘That’s your judgement.’ She had brought him a coffee, a
brimming mug. She turned and stood by the big picture window, the best
in the house, the least flawed pane they could find of the locally
manufactured sheet glass. They looked out over Madison West 5, across
which the afternoon shadows were just beginning to stretch. She wore her
slightly greying strawberry blonde hair cut short, and the graceful
curve of her neck was silhouetted against the window. ‘Still a lovely
day,’ she said.

‘Lovely place, too …’

‘Yes. Nearly perfect.’

_Nearly perfect_. Under that phrase lurked a real bear trap.

Madison West 5 sprawled comfortably over essentially the same landscape
dominated by its elder brother back on the Datum. But this was a place
of grace and light and open spaces, with only a fraction of true
Madison’s population. That wasn’t to deny that many of the buildings
were massive. The architectural styles that had developed on the Low
Easts and Wests were characterized by weight. Raw materials were dirt
cheap on the virgin worlds, which meant that buildings and furnishings
could often be variations on the theme of slab. Thus the town hall with
its cathedral-thick walls, and roof beams laser-cut from whole trees.
But there were a lot of electronics and other kinds of smartness around,
lightweight and easily imported from the Datum. So you saw little
pioneer log cabins with solar paint on the roofs.

But you could never forget you weren’t on Earth, not on the Datum. At
the perimeter of the city there was a wide system of fences and ditches,
designed to keep out some of the more exotic wildlife. The migration of
a herd of Columbian mammoths had once caused a rushed suburban
evacuation.

In the first years after Step Day, a lot of couples like Jack and Tilda
Green, with careers and kids and savings in the bank, had started
looking at the new stepwise worlds with a view to buying a little extra
property, a place for their kids to go play. They rapidly found that
Madison West 1 was too much of a slave to the Datum, a jumble of hasty
extensions to homes and office developments. At first the Greens had
rented a small cabin on West 2. But the place soon came to feel like a
theme park. Over-organized, too close to home. And the land already
belonged to somebody else.

But then they’d discovered the project to develop Madison West 5,
starting from a clean slate, high-tech, eco-friendly from the start,
intended to be more than just another city. They’d both been enthused,
and had invested a chunk of their savings to get in on the ground floor.
Jack and Tilda had contributed a lot to the finalizing of the design, he
as a software engineer working on details of the city’s smarts, she as a
lecturer in cultural history devising novel forms of local government
and community forums. It was only unfortunate that they couldn’t make
enough of a living here, and they both had to cut back to the Datum to
their regular jobs.

‘This is our city. But it’s only “nearly perfect”?’ he said.

‘Uh huh. We’re living in a dream, but it’s somebody else’s dream. I want
my _own_ dream.’

‘But our son the phobic—’

‘Don’t use that word.’

‘Well, it’s what people say, Tilda. _He_ won’t be able to share that
dream.’

She sipped her coffee. ‘We have to think about what’s best for all of
us. For Katie and Helen too, as well as Rod – we can’t be tied down by
that. It’s a unique moment, Jack. Just now, under the aegis rules and
the new Homestead Acts, the government are practically giving away the
land in the stepwise Americas. That’s a window that’s not going to stay
open for ever.’

Jack grunted. ‘It’s all ideology.’ _The New Frontier_: that was the
slogan, borrowed from an old John F. Kennedy election pitch. The federal
government was encouraging emigration to the new worlds by Americans,
and indeed by others, the sole understanding being that under the
American aegis you would obey American laws, and pay American taxes: you
would _be_ an American. ‘The federal government just wants to make sure
all those stepwise versions of the US are colonized by us before
somebody else moves in.’

‘There’s nothing wrong with that. The same sort of impulse drove the
expansion west in the nineteenth century. Of course it’s intellectually
interesting that most Americans choose to go _West_, even though that’s
just an arbitrary label with no reference to geographical west.
Similarly I heard that most Chinese emigrants are heading _East_ …’

‘Christ, the journey itself takes months. All for a chance to dump the
kids in an uncivilized wilderness. And what use is a software engineer
going to be out there? Or a lecturer in cultural history, come to that.’

She smiled fondly. It was infuriating; he could see she wasn’t taking
him remotely seriously. ‘Whatever we need to know, we’ll learn.’ She put
down her coffee and slipped her arms around him. ‘I think we need to do
this, Jack. It’s our chance. Our generation. Our kids’ chance.’

Our kids, he thought. All save poor Rod. Here was his wife, one of the
most intelligent people he’d ever met, her head full of idealism about
the future of America and mankind, and yet contemplating abandoning her
own son. He rested his cheek on her greying hair, and wondered if he
would ever understand her.

15

DREAMS OF THE Long Earth, all across the old world. Some dreams were
new, and at the same time very, very old …

The mates sat near the car, deep in the bush, drinking beer and
pondering the changing world, and the stepping boxes they had all made
that were resting on the red sand. Overhead, the central Australian sky
was so full of stars that some had to wait their turn to twinkle.

After a while one of them said gloomily, ‘Something clawed Jimbo’s guts
out, left him looking like a dugout canoe. You know that, don’t you? It
ain’t no joke! A cop went in there too! _He_ came out with his face
off!’

Billy, who tended not to speak until he had thought for a while, like
maybe a week, said, ‘It’s dreamtime stuff, mate, like it was before the
ancestors came here. Don’t you remember what that scientist bloke told
us, one time? They dug up the bones of big, big animals all over the
bloody place, as big as you like! Big, slow food, but with big, big
teeth. All these new worlds under the same sky! And no people to be seen
in any of them, right? Like this world before it was buggered up! Just
think what we could do if we got out there!’

Somebody opposite the fire said, ‘Yeah, mate, we could bugger it up all
over again. And I like my head with a face on it!’

There was laughter. But Albert said, ‘Know what happened? Our ancestors
bloody well killed them all, ate them up. They wiped out everything
except what we got now. But we don’t have to do that, right? They say
the world out there is just like here, except no men, no women, no
policemen, no cities, no guns, just the land over and over again. The
waterhole here is the waterhole there, all ready and waiting for us!’

‘No, it isn’t. The waterhole’s half a mile over _there_.’

‘Near enough, you know what I mean. Why don’t we give it a go, boys?’

‘Yeah, but this is _our_ country. This one right here.’

Albert leaned forward, eyes sparkling. ‘Yes, but you know what? _So are
those others! All of them!_ I heard the scientist guys talking. Every
rock, every stone, all there. It’s true!’

In the morning, the little group, slightly hungover, tossed coins to
select the one who would give it a go.

Billy came back half an hour later, retching horribly, arriving out of
nowhere. They picked him up and gave him water, and waited. He opened
his eyes and said, ‘It’s true, but it’s bloody raining over there,
mates!’

They looked at one another.

Somebody said, ‘Yeah, but what about all those creatures I’ve heard
about, back in the old time? Roos with teeth! Bloody big ones! Big
creatures with claws!’

There was silence. Then Albert said, ‘Well, ain’t we as good as our
ancestors? They saw off these buggers. Why can’t we?’

There was a shuffling of feet.

Finally Albert said, ‘Look, tomorrow, _I’m_ going over for good. Who’s
with me? It’s all there, mates. It’s all been left there waiting for us,
since the beginning …’

By the end of the next day the songlines had begun to expand, as the
never-never began to become the ever-ever. Although sometimes the blokes
came back for a beer.

Later, there were towns, unfamiliar towns admittedly, and new ways of
living, a mix of past and present, as old ways were seamlessly woven
into new ones. The eating was good, too.

And later still, surveys showed that in the great post-Step Day
migration a greater proportion of Australian Aborigines left Datum Earth
for good than any other ethnic group on the planet.

16

_Excerpts from the Journal of Helen Green, resceptfully respectfully
spellchecked by Dad, aka Mr J. Green_:

_Here is the story
of how the Green family
walked across the Long Earth
to our new home_.

_February 11, 2026. We rode on a helicopter, yay! We are going to start
out from Richmond West 10, that’s Richmond Virgina Virginia, because you
have to trek from south of all the ice in the Ice Age worlds, and we
went back to the Datum and we rode to Richmond on a helicopter!! But we
had to say goodbye to Rod at Chicago airport and that was sad sad …_

JACK GREEN HAD always had to do plenty of travelling in the course of
his work in software, and in recent years travel had become a lot more
interesting. Everybody made their long geographical trips on the Datum,
with its elaborate transport networks. A Stepper would take you a
thousand worlds stepwise but it wouldn’t give you a foot of lateral
movement. So transport had become one of the few boom elements in the
Datum’s slumping post-step economy. The Datum, in fact, was starting to
look like the crossroads of the Long Earth.

And you never knew who you might meet at the next rail station. Pioneer
types, come back to buy a new set of bronze tools and to have their
teeth fixed. High-tech hippies, trading goat cheese for mastitis cream.
Once, a woman dressed like Pocahontas blissfully clutching a white
wedding dress in a cellophane cover, and there was a whole short story
just in her smile. People with new ways of living all jumbled up
together in the Datum, at least for the duration of their journeys.

So for this last trip down to Richmond, Jack and Tilda had decided to
treat the girls to a helicopter hop. In the future they would be riding
in ox-drawn carts and dug-out canoes; why not let them enjoy a little
high technology while they could?

Besides, it had distracted them from the distressing scene at the
helipad where they had to say goodbye to Rod. Meryl, Tilda’s sister, was
willing to take the boy, but she didn’t bother to hide her disapproval
of how the family was being split up. And Rod, only thirteen years old,
was blank. Jack suspected they had all been relieved when the chopper
had finally lifted; he saw that small face upturned, the short-cut
strawberry blond hair so like his mother’s, and they were on their way,
the girls shrieking with delight.

Richmond West 10 was making a living as the mustering point for treks
heading for stepwise editions of the eastern United States, including
Tilda’s Company. Jack had had no idea what to expect.

He found himself standing in a bare earth street, in a grid pattern of
houses built of heavy logs, clapboard, even lumps of sod. Hand-painted
signs told him that the buildings on the main street included churches,
banks, inns, hotels, stores offering food, clothing, and other
essentials for the treks that began here. The Stars and Stripes
fluttered from poles and rooftops, with a few Confederacy flags in
amongst them. The place bustled with people, some of them clean-looking
newcomers wearing bright artificial fabrics like the Greens, but most in
worn-looking ‘frontier’ gear – much-patched jackets and trousers, even
coats and cloaks of hand-cut leather. It all aped former times when
Datum Richmond itself had been a trading post for furs, hides and
tobacco, on the edge of an empty continent.

It was like a movie set for some old-fashioned western. Jack felt
utterly out of place. He rubbed his stomach, willing away the stepping
nausea.

The Prairie Marble Inn turned out to be named after what it was mostly
built from – ‘prairie marble’, sod piled up around a wooden frame. It
was gloomy, dank, but a big place, and heavily occupied. The woman
behind the counter said the rest of their party was gathering in the
‘ballroom’, which was a barn with rough-hewn wooden furniture set out on
a rag carpet. It was pretty full, with maybe a hundred people, mostly
adults, a few children and infants. One man was speaking, a boisterous
fellow with a spectacular mane of grey-blond hair. He was delivering
some kind of lecture about the need for rotas. A few of the others
turned to the newcomers, warily, some half-smiling.

Tilda smiled back. ‘Most of these are people I dealt with online when we
set all this up. Never met them in person before …’

These, Jack reflected, might be the people he would be spending the rest
of his life with. Total strangers. Jack had left it all to Tilda, but he
understood that it took some skill to assemble a viable Company for a
trek. You had your professional captains to lead you, along with scouts,
guides, porters; they were relatively easy to find and hire. But the
core of the party were the people who would be settling together a
hundred thousand worlds away. You needed complementary skill types:
tailors, carpenters, coopers, smiths, wheelwrights, millwrights,
weavers, furniture makers. Doctors, of course – a dentist if you could
find one. Tilda, after being rejected by the first Companies she had
approached, had retrained herself, packaging herself as a teacher and
historian. Jack had gone for basic farming skills – he felt he was
physically fit enough for that – and for backup medical competences.

It struck Jack, on this first glance at his new companions, that they
were mostly like _him_ and Tilda. A mix of ethnicities, but they all
looked prosperous enough, earnest, a little anxious – middle-class types
setting off into the unknown. That was the classic profile of the Long
Earth pioneer, just as, according to Tilda, it had been in the Old West.
The very rich wouldn’t travel, for they were too comfortable back on the
Datum to give it all up. And nor would the very poor, at least not in an
organized party like this, for they didn’t have the means to pay for the
trek itself. No, it was the middle classes who were heading off into the
far West, especially those distressed in difficult economic times.

The blowhard on his feet was called Reese Henry, Jack gathered, some
kind of salesman, a survivalist in his spare time. He had moved on from
latrine rotas. ‘Once again young Americans are going out into the wild,
to places where the streetlights do not shine, where there isn’t a cop
at the other end of a cellphone connection. Urbanized, online,
civilized, pampered and preened – and now pitched back into nature in
the raw.’ He grinned. ‘Ladies and gentlemen, welcome back to reality.’

17

RICHMOND WEST 10’S only bookseller exulted with every sale he made to
the would-be pioneers who passed through here. Books, printed on paper,
every one of them! Dead tree technology! Information that, if carefully
stored, would last for millennia! And no batteries required. It ought to
be on an ad hoarding, he thought.

If Humphrey Llewellyn III could have his way, every book ever written
would be treasured, at least one copy bound in sheepskin and illuminated
by monks (or specifically by naked nuns, his predilection being somewhat
biased in that direction). So now, he hoped, here was a chance to bring
mankind back into the book-loving fold. He gloated. There was still no
electronics in the pioneer worlds, was there? Where was your internet?
Hah! Where was Google? Where was your mother’s old Kindle? Your iPad 25?
Where was Wickedpedia? (Very primly, he always called it that, just to
show his disdain; very few people noticed.) All gone, unbelievers! All
those fancy toy-gadgets stuffed in drawers, screens blank as the eyes of
corpses, left behind.

Books – oh yes, real books – were flying off his shelves. Out in the
Long Earth humanity was starting again in the Stone Age. It needed to
know the old ways. It needed to know what to eat and what not to eat. It
needed to know how to build an outdoor privy, and how to manure fields
with human and animal waste in safe proportions. It needed to know about
wells. About shoemaking! Yes, it had to know how to find iron ore, but
also how to work graphite, and how to make ink. And so Humphrey’s
presses ran hot, with geological maps and surveys and commonplace books
and almanacs, reclaiming the knowledge that had been all but lost to the
printed page.

He stroked a polished-leather volume. Oh, sooner or later all that
knowledge once more would be precariously imprisoned by electricity. But
for now the books had been patient long enough, and their time had come
again.

In another part of Richmond West 10, meanwhile, there was a kind of
labour market, where Companies tried to find recruits to fill the
remaining gaps. Franklin Tallyman carefully pushed his way through the
crowd, holding his sign above his head. It was a hot day and he wished
he had drunk more water.

He was approached by a small party led by a middle-aged man. ‘You are Mr
Tallyman, the blacksmith? We saw your résumé at the Prairie Marble Inn.’

He nodded. ‘Yes, sir, that’s me.’

‘We’re looking to complete our Company.’ The man stuck out a hand. ‘The
name’s Green, Jack Green. This gentleman is Mr Batson, our Captain.
Tallyman, isn’t that a Caribbean name?’

‘No, sir, it’s a Caribbean job description, as far as I know. I could be
wrong. I’ve never been there; I was born in Birmingham. In England, not
in Alabama. The original and best.’ He got back blank looks. ‘So you
have looked at my résumé?’

An anxious-looking woman asked, ‘You really can do all you say? Make
bronze? Does anyone do that these days?’

‘Yes, ma’am. Back on West 1 I spent four years as apprentice to smiths
who knew their stuff. As for iron, starting from scratch, all I need is
the ore. I can make my own forge, I can make my own furnace, I can draw
wires. By the way I’m a fair electrician; give me a waterwheel and I can
fit up your colony with electricity. Oh, and weapons: I can knock up a
decent musket – it couldn’t compete with a modern design, but good
enough for hunting.

‘The engagement I’m looking for is three years.’ He was warming to his
pitch now. ‘Under the aegis regulations I will have American citizenship
by the end of the third year. You, ladies and gentlemen, will be way
ahead of the curve.’ He held out his notebook, opened at a page. ‘And
_this_ is what you will pay me, please.’

There was a gasp from the would-be citizens of the New Frontier.
Eventually Green said, ‘Is this negotiable?’

‘Only upwards, I’m afraid. You can make a deposit in Pioneer Support.
Oh, if you want me to train up an apprentice then that will be extra, on
account of they would be more of a hindrance than a help.’

He smiled before their doubtful faces. It wasn’t the moment for a hard
sell, he decided. They looked a decent bunch, just folk keen to step
Westward with a group of like-minded individuals, looking for a place to
spread out, a place where you could trust your neighbours, in a world
where the air was clean and you could start over in search of a better
future. It was the dream, it had _always_ been the dream. Even their
kids looked bright as buttons.

‘Look, Mr Green, I’ve done my homework too. I’ve seen your Company’s
prospectus and I can see that a lot of thought has gone into your
venture. You’ve got your medic, your carpenter, you’ve got a chemist. I
like your style. Yours won’t be the only offer I could get today, but
you guys appear to be a solid bunch with your heads screwed on right.
I’m with you if you want me. Do we have a deal?’

They had a deal.

That night Franklin packed his bags and his non-ferrous toolbox for the
journey. Now all he had to do was to make sure he kept his secret for
the duration of the trek, and _that_ meant making sure he didn’t try to
step without a potato in his Stepper.

He had heard about natural steppers on the net. Then, back in West 1,
just for the hell of it, one night he’d tried to step with the potato
out of the box, a box without power. He was amazed when it worked. Oddly
enough, he still needed the box, to throw the switch. He needed to hear
the click to be able to step, it seemed; how weird was that?

Yes, he’d heard rumours about people like him. And other rumours, about
beatings of such people. Like you were a freak, or unnatural. So he’d
keep himself to himself on the trek, and replace the potato, and fake
the nausea, and all the rest. It wasn’t so hard when you got the habit.

Although you did start to wonder how many of those around you were
similarly faking too.

He slept well that night, dreaming of hot forges and distant hills.

18

_DAY THREE (SINCE Richmond West 10)_.

Three days already! But Captain Batson says it is going to take us a
hundred days to cross the Ice Belt. And _then_ we’ll take months more to
cross the Mine Belt, whatever _that_ is. We have to get to where we’re
going before winter comes. And winter comes the same on all the worlds.

We’re doing about a step a minute, for about six hours of every day. We
take pills to stop from being sick all the time, but it’s still an
effort. They try to lead us to places where the ground level doesn’t
change much from world to world. It’s a jolt if you drop down, and you
can’t step at all if your ankles would be five inches underground. But
it’s quite a sight to see two hundred people with all their packs and
stuff twinkling out of sight, and then twinkling back in the next world,
over and over.

I miss being online.

I miss my phone!!!

I miss school. Or some of the people in it, anyway. Not some others.

I MISS ROD. Even though he could be a weirdo.

I miss being a cheerleader.

Dad says I should say some of what I like too. Otherwise this journal
won’t be a fun read for his grandchildren. Grandchildren!? He should be
so lucky.

_Day Five_.

I like camping!

We used to do some of that in West 5, and we did it in pioneer studies,
but it’s a lot more fun out here.

After a couple of days we palled up with a family called the Doaks. They
have four kids, two boys and two girls, and we arranged it so I’m in
with the two girls, they are called Betty and Marge, and it’s like a
sleepover every night!

I can build a fire! I have a lens to start the flames, and I know about
tinder and kindling and what wood burns best. I can find stuff to eat,
weeds, roots, mushrooms. I know about hazelnuts and fruit and stuff too
but it’s not the season. I can make a fishing line out of old thread or
even nettle stalks. I know where to look for the fish. Cool.

Today Mr Henry showed us how to make a trout trap in the river. You make
a sort of walled pool, and they swim in, and get stuck. Mr Henry grins
when he clubs the fish. I felt like crying. Mr Henry says The Youngsters
Have To Learn.

Marge Doak used to be a cheerleader! We practise routines.

_Day Eight_.

Yesterday we hit an ice sheaf.

We’re following a trail. There are markers and everything, and little
cairns, and posts that tell you what number world you’re on like highway
signs, and sometimes caches of stuff. Even little boxes you can put post
in to be carried East or West, depending who passes.

So we came to a sign that said ICE NEXT. We passed through a few Ice Age
worlds in the first day or two, but just one at a time, and you could
just rush quickly through them. Now we were coming to a band of them. We
all had to stop, and the porters came and handed out the Arctic coats
and trousers and ski masks and stuff. The next morning Captain Batson
had us all tie up in groups of eight or ten with ropes, and made sure
the babies were snug in their little papooses, with no fingers or toes
sticking out.

We stepped, and it was dazzling, no clouds in a bright blue sky, and not
much ice, but the ground was frozen hard as rock under my feet. And then
the cold got to me, like little needles working into my cheeks.

And we stepped on, again and again. More winter worlds. Sometimes you’d
come out into a white-out, or a blizzard. And other times you would come
out and it would be a bit warmer, and then the ground was boggy so we
left tracks if we walked, and there were these strange dwarf trees, all
bent over. And midges! I saw a huge deer, with antlers like a chandelier
(spelled out by Dad). Ben Doak says he saw a woolly mammoth, but nobody
believes anything he says.

This is why we had to come so far south, to Richmond, to walk West.
Because Datum Earth is in the middle of the Ice Belt, a bunch of worlds
where they have Ice Ages, so you have to go south of the ice to where
it’s possible to step. But even away from the ice caps the whole world
is affected by the cold.

Some people turned back after the first night in the cold. Said they
hadn’t been told about _that_, although they clearly had been, and
should have listened.

_Day Twenty-Five_.

At night you have to cram into these little tents. It’s a bit close.
These are strangers after all. Marge Doak is OK, but Betty has this way
of picking her teeth. And she snores.

Mom got in a fight with Mr Henry, who says the women should do all the
cooking and cleaning! Captain Batson says Mr Henry’s not in charge. He
didn’t say it to his face though, Dad says.

Trouble and strife, lah di dah!

_Day Forty-Three_.

I keep forgetting to write things down. I get too tired. Plus there’s
too much going on.

In the middle of the ice worlds you get milder types that are like home,
‘interglacial’ worlds (spelled by Dad). The interglacial worlds are just
FULL of animals. I saw huge herds that turned out to be horses and
funny-looking cows and antelopes and camels. Camels! Dad says these are
like animals that were probably around in America before humans came
along. Wolves. Coyotes. Elk. Curlews. Bears! Grizzlies in the forest
clumps, Captain Batson says, so we keep out of there. Snakes everywhere,
you have to watch out for them. Crows, ravens, turkey buzzards, owls. By
day you hear the birds, and at night the frogs croaking and the
mosquitoes whining, if you’re anywhere near water. Sometimes the men
hunt. Rabbit and duck and even antelope.

There are armadillos! Big ones, not like in zoos. Dad says they might
have wandered up from South America where they evolved. Apparently
people have seen apes, in America. Sometimes the continents join up and
these animals cross over, and sometimes they don’t. Nobody really knows.
Nobody has a map of any of these worlds.

In some worlds we can’t find any trees at all. Then we have to collect
‘buffalo chips’ for the fire. _Dung!!_ It burns well, but you can
imagine the smell, my dear.

And there are funny worlds, where everything is like ash, or like a
desert, or something. Just one world thick. There are usually signposts
if it’s dangerous, and we have to put on hats or cover our mouths with
filters. Captain Batson calls these worlds Jokers.

Sometimes you see where people have been before. Scruffy places, the
ruins of shacks, burned-out tepees. Even crosses, stuck in the ground.
In the Long Earth, hoping for the best isn’t good enough, as Mr Batson
puts it.

_Day Sixty-Seven_.

Ben Doak got sick. He drank from a waterhole that hadn’t been checked
out. They get polluted by buffalo piddle. He got pumped full of
antibiotics. I hope he’s OK. We’ve had a few people get sick, but nobody
died.

More people have turned back. Captain Batson tries to talk them round,
and Mr Henry laughs at them and calls them weak. I don’t think it’s weak
to admit you made a mistake. That takes strength, if you ask me.

We must look very strange, to these animals who live here, and have
never seen a human before, probably. What business have we got coming
through here and messing everything up?

_Day One Hundred and Two_.

We’re out of the Ice Belt! And only two days behind schedule!

Strange to think we’ve travelled across thirty-six thousand worlds, but
the distance we’ve covered sideways has only been a few miles. Well,
we’re going to travel in earnest across this particular Earth, and go a
few hundred miles north, to New York State. Then we’ll step on across
another sixty thousand worlds or so until we get to the place we’re
going to settle.

I thought we’d have to walk. No! There’s a regular town here, well, a
small one, a trading post. Here we can trade in our Ice Belt gear for
stuff that’s more suitable for the Mine Belt worlds.

And there’s a wagon train waiting for us! With big covered wagons that
Dad says are Conestogas. They look like boats on wheels, drawn by horses
– funny-looking horses, but definitely horses. There’s a foundry here to
make the iron they need, and the wagons have got tyres on their wheels,
like car tyres. When we saw the wagons we just whooped and hollered and
ran! Conestogas! I wonder if it will be more fun than the chopper ride?

_Day One Hundred and Ninety-Nine_.

We are on Earth West Seventy Thousand Plus Change, as Dad would say. I’m
writing in the early morning, before we break camp. Last night the
adults stayed up late arguing about the chores. But when they’re all
gassing in their Group Meetings, we kids can slip away, just for a
while.

Not that we do anything bad. Well, not mostly. Mostly, we

(Pause for thought. Search for word.)

watch. That’s it. We watch. I know Dad frets that we’re all turning into
zombies because there’s nothing to do out here but chores, and the
schooling they try to force on us. But it’s not like that. We just
watch, with nothing to distract us. That’s why we’re quiet. Not because
our brains are mush. Because we watch.

And we see things the adults don’t see.

Some _very_ odd animals and plants that don’t fit any storybook of
evolution I ever read.

The Joker Worlds, in the middle of these boring, arid Mine Belt worlds.
The adults think they’re mostly dead. They aren’t. Believe me.

And the Greys.

We call them that, even though they’re orange. They look like hairy
little kids, but if you ever see one up close, and see the equipment in
those orange crotches, believe me, they ain’t kids. And big eyes, like
cartoon aliens. They flicker around the camp. There, gone. Stepping,
obviously.

Animals that step!

The Long Earth is stranger than anybody thinks. Even Dad. Even Captain
Batson. Even Mr Henry.

_Especially_ Mr Henry.

_Day Two Hundred and Eighty-One_.

Is it November? Dad will know.

We made it!

We made it to Earth West 100,000! – or, Good Old Hundred K, as us
hardened pioneer types call it. The start of the Corn Belt.

Good Old Hundred K has a _gift shop_. You can buy T-shirts and mugs. ‘I
Stepped All The Way to Good Old Hundred K.’ But the labels say Made in
China!

The worlds had been changing for a bit. Greener. Damper. A different set
of animals. And, most important, _trees_. Trees, wood, that’s what you
need above all else to build a colony and a town and all the rest of it.
Which is why we’ve had to walk so far. Not enough trees in the Mine
Belt. Here there is prairie and rainfall and trees: good farming
country. Nobody knows how deep the Corn Belt is. Plenty of room out
here, and it’s hard to see how it could be filled up any time soon.

Anyhow, now we’re here. And to prove the point they have a couple of
fields out back of the shop where there’s corn stubble and sheep
grazing, just like home. Sheep! Dad said they were descended from little
lambs that had to be carried out here from the Datum in the arms of
stepping people, because there’s no native sheep in North America, on
any of the worlds that anybody’s found.

At the shop they made a fuss of us kids. They had beer and lemonade,
homemade stuff with pips in that was the most delicious drink I ever
had. They asked us questions about what’s going on back East on the
Datum and the Low Earths. We yapped and bragged, and we told our own
story, of our trek. Every year it’s a little bit different, apparently.

An English woman who introduced herself as Hermione Dawes wrote down our
story in a sort of big ledger, in a little library place full of records
like that. Ms Dawes told Mom her place in life was writing things down,
and she was happy to be out here, to have some real history to record.
She’ll probably be there for ever, writing stuff down as folk pass her
by. People are strange, but if she’s happy that’s fine by me. Apparently
she’s married to a cowgirl.

We shopped! What a luxury.

And meanwhile the adults had to go register their claims. There is a US
government official, rotated out once every few years, here to check and
validate the land grants we bought back on the Datum before we set off.
We all compared claim forms to work out where to go. In the event the
adults picked a world at random: number West 101,753. A week’s easy
stroll. We formed up, the Doaks and Harry Bergreen and his fiddle, yay,
and Melissa Harris, well, OK, and Reese Henry, the less said the better.
A hundred in all.

And we set off. We stepped and camped with a discipline that would have
made Captain Batson proud. Though Mrs Harris still didn’t take her turns
with the laundry.

A week later, when we got to 101,753, it was raining. So we all looked
at each other, and held hands in our groups, and took another step into
the sunshine.

And that was how we chose one whole world over another. Because it
happened to be sunny when we got there! There might have been diamond
mountains in Australia back in 753 and we’d never know. It didn’t
matter. Earth West 101,754: _our_ Earth. We’re there!

19

THAT FIRST AFTERNOON of flight, the _Mark Twain_ stepped again and
again, each transition causing a thrill to travel down Joshua’s spine.
The stepping rate was increasing, slowly, as Lobsang explored the
capabilities of his ship. Joshua could count the passing worlds using
little monitors Lobsang called earthometers, embedded in the walls of
every cabin. They had enough digits, he saw, to allow them to count up
to the millions.

And as it stepped, the airship was travelling laterally too, heading
west across Eurasia. The monitors had a little map display so Joshua
could follow its course; their position was derived from star sightings,
but the layout of the landscapes they crossed on these unexplored worlds
was based on guesswork.

On the observation deck, sitting opposite Joshua, Lobsang smiled his
plastic smile. They both cradled coffees – Lobsang sipped his too, and
Joshua imagined some tank in his belly filling up.

‘How’s the ride?’ Lobsang asked.

‘Fine so far.’ In fact it was better than fine. As always when Joshua
left the Datum behind, the oppressive sense of enclosure he invariably
experienced there dissipated quickly: a pressure he’d not really been
aware of when he was growing up, not until it wasn’t there any more. The
pressure of a world too full of other minds, he suspected, other human
consciousnesses. It seemed to be a fine sensitivity; even on remote
stepwise worlds he always registered it if somebody else showed up,
anywhere near by, even a small party. But he’d discussed this strange
quasi-telepathic facility, or disability, with nobody – bar Sister Agnes
– not even Officer Jansson, and he didn’t choose to talk it over with
Lobsang now. Still, the sensation of freedom, of release was there.
That, and his peculiar awareness of the Silence, as of a mind far away,
dimly sensed, like the toll of a huge and ancient bell in a far-off
mountain range … Or rather he did sense this when Lobsang wasn’t
talking, as he was now.

‘We will follow the line of latitude west, roughly. We can manage thirty
miles an hour easily. A nice leisurely pace; we are out here to explore.
That should bring us over the footprint of the continental US in a few
weeks …’

Lobsang’s face was not quite real, Joshua thought, like a slightly off
CGI simulation. But here in this fantastic vessel, in this realization
of Lobsang’s astonishing dreams, Joshua was oddly warming to him.

‘You know, Lobsang, I caught up with your story when I went back to the
Home, after my interview at transEarth. People were saying that the
smartest thing that any supercomputer could do the moment it was
switched on would be to make certain that it couldn’t be switched off
again. And that the story about the reincarnated Tibetan was a front,
precisely so you couldn’t be switched off. We all talked about that, and
Sister Agnes said, well, if a computer has a desire not to be switched
off then it has to have a sense of self, and that means a soul. I know
the Pope decreed otherwise later on, but I back Sister Agnes against the
Vatican any time.’

Lobsang thought that over. ‘I look forward to meeting Sister Agnes
someday. I hear what you are saying. Thank you, Joshua.’

Joshua hesitated. ‘While you’re thanking me, maybe you could answer a
question. Is this _you_, Lobsang? Or are _you_ back on the Datum, in
some store at MIT? Is that a meaningful question?’

‘Oh, certainly it is meaningful. Joshua, back on the Datum I am
distributed across many memory stores and processor banks. That’s partly
for security, and partly for efficiency and effectiveness of data
retrieval and processing. If I wished I could consider my _self_ to be
distributed among a number of centres, of foci of consciousness.

‘But I am human, I am Lobsang. I remember how it was to look out of a
cave of bone, from a single apparent locus of consciousness. And that is
how I have maintained it. There is only one me, Joshua, only one
Lobsang, though I have backup memory stores scattered over several
worlds. And that “me” is with you on this journey. I am fully dedicated
to the mission. And by the way, when I inhabit the ambulant unit, that
too, for the duration, is “me”, though there remains enough of “me”
outside that shell to enable the airship to fly. If I were to fail or
were lost then a backup copy on Datum Earth would be initiated, and
synched with whatever you were able to retrieve of my memory stores on
the ship. But that would be another Lobsang; he would remember me, but
he would not _be_ me … I hope that’s clear.’

Joshua thought that over. ‘I’m glad I’m just a standard-issue human.’

‘Well, more or less, in your case,’ Lobsang said dryly. ‘Incidentally,
now that we’re under way, be sure that my report on the congressional
expedition slaughter is already with the authorities. And, to be on the
safe side, with such newspapers as I find trustworthy. Including the
_Fortean Times_, a boon to all researchers of the Long Earth phenomenon.
You can access back issues on the screen in your stateroom … It’s done.
A deal’s a deal.’

‘Thank you, Lobsang.’

‘So here we are – on our way! By the way, don’t be alarmed if the coffee
percolator talks to you; it’s a beta-test AI from one of our associates.
Oh, and do you have a thing about cats?’

‘They make me sneeze.’

‘Shi-mi won’t.’

‘Shi-mi?’

‘Another first for transEarth. You’ve seen the size of this gondola; it
is lousy with hard-to-get-to spaces, and vermin may be a problem for us.
It wouldn’t be hard for them to scramble up our anchor cables when we
land. The last thing we want is a rat nibbling on a wire. So, meet
Shi-mi. Come, kitty kitty …’

A cat walked on to the deck. It was supple, silent, almost convincing.
But there was an LED spark in each green eye.

‘I can tell you that she—’

‘She, Lobsang?’

‘She can, on demand, make a pleasant purring noise designed to be
optimally soothing to the human ear. She can track mice via infra red,
and has excellent hearing. She will stun her prey with a low current,
swallow it into a designated stomach with a small food and water
dispenser, and then will carefully transfer the catch to a small holding
vivarium, where the mouse can live happily until it can be relocated
somewhere safe.’

‘That’s going to a lot of trouble for a mouse.’

‘That is the Buddhist way. This prototype is clean and hygienic, will
not harm her prey and, in general, will do most of the things you would
expect of a domestic cat, except for shitting in your stereo headphones
– a common complaint I’m told. Oh, in the default setting she will sleep
on your bed.’

‘A robot cat, on a robot ship?’

‘There are advantages. She has a gel brain, just like my own ambulant,
and is a whole lot smarter than the average cat. And synthetic hair. No
sneezes, I promise—’

Suddenly the stepping stopped, and Joshua felt an odd lurch, like being
thrown forward. The deck was flooded with light. Joshua glanced through
the windows. They were evidently in a world that happened to be sunny.
Sunny, but cloaked in ice.

‘Why have we stopped?’

‘Look down. There are binoculars in the lockers.’

A tiny multicoloured dot in the whiteness resolved into a Day Glo orange
domed tent, and a couple of people moving stiffly around, made
Doughboy-sexless by the thick Arctic gear they wore. A portable drilling
rig had been set up on the ice, and a Stars and Stripes hung limply on a
pole.

‘Scientists?’

‘A university party, from Rhode Island. Studying the biota, taking ice
cores and such. I’m recording all traces of human presence I find,
naturally. I was expecting these gentlemen, though they have travelled a
few worlds further than the nominal target they logged.’

‘But you found them even so.’

‘My view is godlike, Joshua.’

Joshua, peering down, wasn’t sure if the college guys had even noticed
the airship, a whale suddenly hovering in the air above them. ‘Are we
going down?’

‘That would serve no purpose. Though we could talk to them without
landing. We carry a range of communications gear, from medium-and
short-wave radios that ought to let us transmit to and receive from
anywhere on an individual world, to – well, simpler means. A heliograph,
Navy issue. Even a loudspeaker.’

‘A loudspeaker! Lobsang, booming from above like Yahweh.’

‘The equipment is merely practical, Joshua. Not every action carries
symbolic freight.’

‘Every human action does. And you are human, aren’t you, Lobsang?’

Lobsang resumed the stepping without warning, another gentle lurch. The
science camp winked into non-existence, and more worlds strobed past.

After his first night on the airship Joshua awoke feeling full of
diamonds. The ship stepped steadily, the sound of its various mechanisms
like the purring of a cat. In fact, he found the purring _was_ the cat,
curled up on his legs; when he stirred she elegantly rose, stretched,
and loped away.

Prompted by the rumbling of his stomach, Joshua investigated the galley.

These days a decent meal out in the stepwise worlds was pretty easy to
obtain, for him; the pioneering steppers kind of liked to see him
around, they knew his name and reputation, and treated him as if he were
a lucky mascot. And a meal was always his for the asking from any of the
halfway houses, the travellers’ lodges that were springing up across the
nearer Earths. But it didn’t pay to be a scrounger, Sister Agnes had
always said, and so he always took a fresh-killed deer along, or some
wild fowl. The greener pioneers liked their meat fresh but had as yet
not come to terms with the idea of chopping up Bambi, so Joshua would
spend a little time field-dressing his catch. He’d generally come away
with maybe a couple of bags of flour and a basket of eggs, as long as he
had a basket to carry them away in.

Well, the airship’s galley was rather more luxuriously appointed than
any halfway house. There was a freezer with a sufficiency of bacon and
eggs, and a dry cabinet stacked with sacks of salt and pepper. Joshua
was impressed with this: on many worlds a handful of salt would buy you
dinner and a night’s shelter, and the pepper was even more valuable.
Joshua got to work on the bacon.

The voice of Lobsang startled him. ‘Good morning, Joshua. I trust you
slept well?’

Joshua flipped his bacon and said, ‘I don’t even remember dreaming. It’s
as if we weren’t moving. Where are we now?’

‘We are more than fifteen thousand steps from home. I have slowed the
stepping for your comfort while you eat, and have steadied us at three
thousand feet, occasionally going lower if the sensors find anything
interesting. In many of the local worlds this morning it’s a sunny day
with a bit of dew on the grasses below, so I suggest you finish your
breakfast and come down to the observation deck and enjoy the view. By
the way, there are sacks of muesli in the larder; Sister Agnes would,
I’m sure, want you to keep your bowel movements regular.’

Joshua glared at the empty air, given the lack of anyone to glare at,
and said, ‘Sister Agnes isn’t here.’ Even so, guiltily, bearing in mind
that nuns somehow knew what you were up to wherever you were, he
rummaged in the larder and munched his way through dried fruit and nuts,
with a side order of watermelon.

Before he went back to his bacon.

And made himself a fried slice to mop up the bacon fat. After all, it
was chilly up here; he needed the fuel.

Prompted by that thought, he went back to his stateroom. In its roomy
closet, alongside the cold-weather gear he’d worn on arrival, he found a
range of intermediate clothing, some of it in various camouflage
patterns. Lobsang was thinking of everything, that was clear enough. He
selected a parka and went down to the observation deck, and sat alone,
watching Earths go by like a slideshow of the gods.

Without warning, the ship crossed a sheaf of ice worlds.

The light hit Joshua: dazzling, blinding sunlight reflecting from the
ice and filling the air, as if the whole deck had suddenly turned into a
flashbulb, with Joshua an insect trapped inside. The worlds below were
plains of ice, gently folded, with only an occasional ridge of high
ground showing as a dark bony stripe through the ice cover. And then
into cloud, then hail, then sunlight again, depending on the local
climate in each passing world. The flickering light was painful on the
eye. From Earth to Earth the level of the ice cover rose and fell, he
saw, like some tremendous tide. In each world the great ice sheet
covering Eurasia must be pulsing, ice domes shifting, the southern edge
rippling back and forth century by century; he was passing over
snapshots of that tremendous continental flux.

And when the ice band had passed and they were sailing over interglacial
worlds, mostly he saw tree tops. The Long Earth was big on tree tops,
Earth after Earth, tree after tree.

Joshua seldom got bored. But as the morning wore on he was surprised to
find himself growing bored now, so quickly. After all he was looking
over thousands of landscapes no one, probably, had ever seen before. He
remembered Sister Georgina, who liked her Keats:

_Then felt I …_

_… like stout Cortés when with eagle eyes_

_He star’d at the Pacific – and all his men_

_Look’d at each other with a wild surmise –_

_Silent, upon a peak in Darien_.

At the time he’d thought a wild surmise was some kind of exotic bird.
Well, he was now looking out over the new worlds with somewhat of a tame
surmise.

There were footsteps behind him. Lobsang’s ambulant unit appeared. He
was dressed for the occasion in safari shirt and trousers. And how
quickly, Joshua reflected, Lobsang had become a _he_ and not an _it_.

‘It can be disorienting, can’t it? I recall my reactions to my own
pioneer flight. The Long Earth goes on and on, Joshua. A surfeit of
wonders will dull the mind.’

At random they paused at a world somewhere around twenty thousand. The
sky here was overcast, threatening rain. Without the sunlight the
rolling grassland below was a dull grey-green, with scattered clumps of
darker forest. On this particular world Joshua could see no sign of
mankind, not so much as a thread of smoke. Yet there was movement. To
the north he saw a huge herd drifting over the landscape. Horses? Bison?
Camels, even? Or something more exotic? And by the shore of a lake below
he made out more groups of animals, a black fringe by the water.

Now they had stopped, the _Mark Twain_’s systems went to work. Hatches
on the gondola and on top of the envelope opened to release balloons,
and buoys which fluttered to the ground under parachutes, each marked
with the transEarth logo and the Stars and Stripes. There were even
small sounding-rockets that flew up with a hiss, creating streaky smoke
columns in the air.

‘This will be our regular routine when we stop to sample an Earth,’
Lobsang said. ‘A way for me to extend my study of any particular world
beyond this single viewpoint. I will gather some data now, and data from
ongoing observations will be downloaded from the probes when we return
through this world, or when another craft passes this way in the
future.’

Among the creatures by the lake below were some kind of rhino, giant
beasts with oddly slender legs. They clustered at the water’s edge,
shoving each other aside as they tried to get a drink.

Lobsang said, ‘You’ll find binoculars and cameras throughout the
observation deck. Those animals look something like an elasmotherium,
perhaps. Or a much-evolved descendant.’

‘That means nothing to me, Lobsang.’

‘Of course not. You want a species of your own? Name them if you like;
I’m recording everything we see, hear, say and do, and will lodge the
claims when we get home.’

Joshua sat back. ‘Let’s go on. We’re wasting time.’

‘Time? We’ve all the time in the worlds. However—’

The stepping began again, and the rhino-like herd disappeared. Joshua
felt the ride now as a gentle jolting, like a car with good suspension
travelling over a rutted road.

He figured they were now crossing an Earth every couple of seconds, over
forty thousand new worlds a day, if they kept this up around the clock
(which they wouldn’t). Joshua was impressed, but he wasn’t about to say
so. Landscapes swept beneath the prow of the ship, only their broadest
features possible for him to discern, whole worlds passing to the beat
of his own pulse. Animal herds and lone beasts were no sooner glimpsed
than they were gone, whisked into the unreality of stepwise otherness.
Even the tree clumps shifted in shape and size from world to world,
shift, shift, shift. And there were flickers – plunges into brief
darkness, occasional flares of light, washes of odd colours across the
landscape. Exceptional worlds of some kind, pulled from his sight before
they could be comprehended. Otherwise there was only the chain of
worlds, Earth after Earth smoothed to uniformity by the ship’s motion.

‘Joshua, do you ever wonder where you are?’

‘I know where I am. I’m here.’

‘Yes, but where is _here_? Every few seconds you enter a different
stepwise world. So _where_ is this world in relation to the Datum? And
the next, and the next? How can there be room for them all?’

Actually Joshua had wondered about that. It was impossible to be a
stepper without asking such questions. ‘I know Willis Linsay left a
note: “The next world is the thickness of a thought away.”’

‘Unfortunately that was about the only comprehensible thing he did write
down. Apart from that we’re floundering. So where is _this_ world, this
particular Earth? It’s in exactly the same space and time as Datum
Earth. It’s like another mode of vibration of a single guitar string.
The only difference is that now we can visit it; we couldn’t even detect
it before. That’s pretty much the best answer transEarth’s tame
physicists can supply.’

‘Is all this science stuff in Linsay’s notes?’

‘We don’t know. He seems to have invented his own mathematics. We have
Warwick University working on that. But he also compressed everything he
wrote into a fantastically arcane code. IBM won’t even quote on
untangling _that_. Also his handwriting’s appalling.’

He kept talking, but Joshua managed to tune him out. It was a skill, he
suspected, he was going to have to develop.

Music filled the deck, the cold notes of a harpsichord.

‘Would you mind shutting that off?’

‘It’s Bach,’ Lobsang said. ‘A fugue. A clichéd choice for an entity of
mathematics such as myself, I know.’

‘I prefer silence.’

‘Of course you do.’ The music died. ‘It will not offend you if I
continue to listen, in my head, as it were?’

‘Do what you like.’ Joshua stared at the latest landscape blankly.

And the next, and the next.

He rolled off his couch and tried out the deck’s can. It was a chemical
toilet with a narrow bay for a shower, inside a plastic-walled
compartment. Joshua wondered if Lobsang had eyes in here too. Well, of
course he did.

Thus the day wore away. At last it grew dark on all the Earths, the
myriad suns sinking to their respective horizons.

‘Do I have to go up to my stateroom to sleep?’

‘Your couch will fold out. Pull the lever to your right. There are
blankets and pillows in the trunk.’

Joshua tried it out. The couch was like a first-class airliner seat.
‘Wake me if anything interesting happens.’

‘It’s all interesting, Joshua. Sleep now.’

As he settled under a comfortingly heavy throw, Joshua listened to the
thrum of the engines, and felt the slight, vertiginous tug of the
stepping. For Joshua Valienté, to rock between worlds was almost
soothing. He slept easily.

When he woke, the airship had stopped again.

20

THE SHIP HAD descended near a clump of heaped-up rock, into which
Lobsang had thrown out an anchor. It was early in the day, the sky a
deep blue littered with scattered cloud. But this was a typical Ice Belt
world, and snowfields dazzled, though a little way away was a scrap of
open water.

Joshua refused to even look out of the window until he had used the
coffee spigot.

‘Welcome to West 33157, Joshua. We’ve been stationary since before dawn.
I’ve been waiting for you to wake up.’

‘I take it you found something interesting.’

‘Look down.’

On the outcrop to which they were anchored, black rock protruding
through the snow, stood a natural monument: a lonesome pine, big,
elderly and isolated. But the tree had been neatly cut down close to the
root, the tangled branches and the upper trunk lying discarded on the
ground, and a pale disc of core wood exposed to the air. An axe had
evidently been used.

‘I thought you might be drawn to that sign of humanity. And, Joshua, the
second reason: it’s time to try out my backup ambulatory unit.’

Joshua glanced around the gondola. ‘Which is?’

‘You.’

A trunk held the gear. On his chest he was to wear a lightweight pack
which contained a facemask and an emergency oxygen supply, a first-aid
kit, a flashlight, a gun of some non-ferric metal, a length of very fine
rope, other items. On his back would go a canvas pack containing an
enigmatic module in a hard, robust, sealed case. He would wear an
old-fashioned-looking bluetooth-type earpiece to talk to Lobsang, but he
suspected the gear contained other speakers and microphones.

He went back to his stateroom, returned in his bulky Pillsbury gear, and
hauled on the backpack. ‘This damn thing’s heavy.’

‘You’ll wear it at all times outside the ship.’

‘And inside the sealed module in the backpack is?’

‘Me,’ Lobsang said shortly. ‘Or a remote unit. Call it a backup. As long
as the airship survives, the pack will stay synched with the main
processors aboard. If the airship is lost the pack will host my memory
until you can get home.’

Joshua laughed. ‘You’ve wasted your money, Lobsang. In what
circumstances do you imagine this will be useful? Far enough out, if the
airship is lost, neither of us is going home.’

‘It never hurts to plan for all conceivable contingencies. You are my
ultimate failsafe, Joshua. That’s why you’re here. Anyhow your kit isn’t
complete yet.’

Joshua looked into the trunk again, and pulled out another gadget. It
was a framework bristling with lenses, microphones, other sensors,
sitting atop a shoulder unit. ‘You have got to be kidding me.’

‘It’s lighter than it looks. The sensor bus should strap securely on
your shoulder, and there’s a data feed that plugs into the backpack—’

‘You’re expecting me to explore Earth Million with this _parrot_ on my
shoulder?’

Lobsang sounded offended. ‘Parrot it is, if you must … I didn’t expect
vanity from you, Joshua. Who’s going to see you? Besides, it’s very
practical. I’ll see what you see, hear what you hear; we’ll be in
constant touch. And if you have trouble—’

‘What will it do, lay an egg?’

‘Just wear it, please, Joshua.’

It fitted snugly on Joshua’s right shoulder, and was as lightweight as
Lobsang had promised. But Joshua knew he was never going to be able to
forget the thing was there, that Lobsang was literally at his shoulder
with every breath. The hell with it. He hadn’t expected this trip to be
a joyride anyhow, and the parrot hardly made it any worse. Besides, the
thing would probably break down soon enough.

Without further conversation Joshua went down to an access deck, pulled
the door open against the cabin’s slight overpressure – the air pressure
was kept high to ensure no external atmosphere could enter the ship
until Lobsang had tested it for safety – and stepped into a small
elevator cage. A winch lowered him smoothly to the ground, beside the
rocky outcrop.

Once on the ground, knee deep in snow, he took a deep breath of the air
of this cold Earth, and turned slowly around. The sky had clouded over
now, and there was a translucent quality to the air: snow threatening.
‘I take it you’re seeing this. Standard-issue snowfield.’

Lobsang whispered in his ear. ‘I see it. You know, the parrot has nose
filters which would enable me to smell—’

‘Forget it.’ Joshua took a few paces, turned and surveyed the airship.
‘Can you see this? Just giving you a chance to check for wear and tear.’

‘Good thinking,’ murmured the parrot.

Joshua knelt beside the tree. ‘There are little flags, marking the trunk
rings.’ He plucked one, and picked out the lettering. ‘University of
Krakow. Scientists did this. What’s the point?’

‘For climate records from the tree rings, Joshua. Just like on the
Datum. Interestingly, such records suggest the split between
neighbouring worlds is usually around fifty years deep. Within the
lifetime of your average pine tree. Of course that raises a lot of
questions.’

Joshua heard a rumble, a splashing sound, a kind of shrill trumpet. He
turned slowly; evidently he wasn’t alone on this world. A short distance
inland he glimpsed a scene of predator and prey: a cat-like creature
with fangs so heavy it could barely lift its head, it seemed, was
tracking a waddling beast with a hide like a tank. These were the first
animals he had seen on this world.

Lobsang saw what he saw. ‘The over-armed in pursuit of the
over-armoured: the result of an evolutionary arms race. And one that has
played out on Datum Earth many times, in various contexts, until both
parties succumbed to extinction, all the way back to the dinosaur age
and beyond. A universal, it seems. As on the Datum, so on the Long
Earth. Joshua, go around the rocky outcrop. You’ll come to the open
water.’

Joshua turned and walked easily around the outcrop. The snow was deep,
heavy to push through, but it felt good to stretch his legs after so
many hours in the gondola.

The expanse of the lake opened up before him. On the lake itself ice lay
in a sheet, but there was open water close to the shore, and here there
was movement, massive, graceful: elephants, a family of them, furry
adults with calves between their towering legs. Some of them were wading
out into the shallow water. The adults had extraordinary shovel-shaped
tusks that they used to scoop at the lake bed, muddying the water for
yards around. In a crystalline sparkle of spray a mother played with a
calf. Fresh snow started to fall now, big heavy flakes that settled on
the fur of the oblivious elephantids.

‘Gompotheres,’ Lobsang murmured. ‘Or relatives, or descendants. I’d keep
away from the water. I suspect there are crocodiles.’

Joshua felt oddly moved by the scene; there was a sense of calm about
these massive creatures. ‘This is what you brought us down to see?’

‘No. Although these worlds are full of elephant types. A plethora of
pachyderms. I wouldn’t normally have brought them to your attention. But
they are a high-order prey species, and it appears that they are being
tracked. And, interestingly, so are you.’

Joshua stood quite still. ‘Thank you for sharing.’ He looked around,
peering through the thickening snow, but saw nothing else moving. ‘Just
tell me when to run, OK? I don’t mind if you say _right now_ …’

‘Joshua, the creatures moving cautiously towards you are holding a
conversation about you, though I doubt very much if you can hear it
because it is very high pitched. Your fillings might tingle.’

‘I have no fillings. I always brushed my teeth properly.’

‘Of course you did. The communication is also quite complex, and
becoming more rapid, as if some kind of conclusion is being reached as
to what they’re going to do. It comes and goes because they are
constantly stepping. This is almost too fast to see – too fast for _you_
to see. From this behaviour I can deduce that they have a very ingenious
method of triangulating the point at which all of their major hunters
will surround the victim, which is to say, _you_—’

‘Hold on. Rewind. You said they are _stepping_? Stepping animals,
stepping predators?’ The world pivoted around Joshua. ‘Well, that’s
new.’

‘Indeed.’

‘These creatures are the reason you stopped here, aren’t they?’

‘By the way, I see no need for you to be afraid.’

‘_You_ see no reason for _me_ to be afraid?’

‘Well, they appear to be inquisitive creatures. As opposed to hungry
creatures. Possibly more frightened of you than you currently are of
them.’

‘How much do you want to bet? My life, for instance?’

‘Let’s see how this plays out. Joshua, wave your hands in the air,
please. That’s good. Let them see you. The snow is reducing visibility,
obviously. Now shuffle round in a circle. That’s right, just stand there
until I say otherwise. Don’t worry. I’m in control of the situation.’

This reassurance meant nothing to Joshua. He kept as still as he could.
The snow was coming down hard now. If he panicked he might inadvertently
step, and he would step into … what? Given the presence of stepping
predatory animals he might land in some even worse situation.

Lobsang murmured in his ear, apparently aware of his tension, trying to
calm him. ‘Joshua, just remember that I built the _Mark Twain_. And it,
which is to say of course _I_, watches over _you_ at all times. Anything
that I perceive is attempting to do harm to you will be dead before it
knows it. I am of course a pacifist, but the _Mark Twain_ carries
weapons of many types, from the invisibly small to the invisibly large.
I will not mention the word nuclear, of course.’

‘No. Really don’t mention nuclear.’

‘Then we are of one accord. This being so, would you now please sing a
song?’

‘A song? What song?’

‘_Any_ song! Choose a song and sing. Something jaunty … _just sing the
song!_’

Lobsang’s command, while wholly insane, had the authority of Sister
Agnes’s voice at the extreme limit of her patience, when even the
cockroaches knew to get out of town. So Joshua launched into the first
song that came to mind: ‘Hail to the Chief, he’s the chief and we must
hail him. _Hail to the Chief, he is the one we have to hail …_’

When he finished, there was silence on the snowfield.

Lobsang said, ‘Interesting choice. Another legacy of those nuns of
yours, no doubt. Spirited when it comes to political debate, are they?
Well, that should do it. Now we wait. _Please do not move_.’

Joshua waited. And just as he opened his mouth to declare that enough
was enough, there were dark figures all around him. They were jet black,
holes in the snow, with wide chests, big heads and enormous paws, or
rather hands, which thankfully did not seem to have claws; they were
hands that looked more like boxing gloves, or maybe catcher’s mitts.

And they were singing, with big pink mouths opening and shutting with
every sign of enjoyment. But this wasn’t the political silliness that
Joshua had sung, and nor was it some animal howl. It was _human_, and he
could understand all the words as they were repeated again and again,
with the singers chiming in with different harmonies and repetitions,
multi-part chords hanging in the air like Christmas decorations. It went
on for minutes, the avenues and trajectories of this wild music, until
it gradually converged into one great warm silence.

And the main refrain had gone like this: _‘Wotcher!’ all the neighbours
cried, ‘Oo yer gonna meet, Bill? ’Ave yer bought the street, Bill?’
Laugh? – I fort I should’ve died. Knocked ’em in the Old Kent Road …_

Astonished, Joshua could barely breathe. ‘Lobsang—’

‘Interesting song choice. Written by one Albert Chevalier, a native of
Notting Hill, London. Curiously enough it was later recorded by Shirley
Temple.’

‘_Shirley Temple_ … Lobsang, I’m guessing there’s a good reason why
these Mighty Joes in the blizzard are singing old comedy songs from
England.’

‘Oh, certainly.’

‘And I’m also guessing you know what that good reason is.’

‘I’ve a fair idea, Joshua. All in good time.’

Now one of the creatures walked right up to him, with
tennis-racket-sized hands cupped as if cradling something. Its mouth was
open, and it was still panting with the energy of the singing; there
were a lot of teeth in there, but the general expression was a smile.

‘Fascinating,’ Lobsang breathed. ‘A primate, certainly, surely some
species of ape. As convincingly upright as any hominid, but that doesn’t
necessarily imply a correlation with human evolution—’

‘It’s not the time for a lecture, Lobsang,’ Joshua murmured.

‘Of course you’re right. We must play out the moment. Take the gift.’

Joshua cautiously took a step forward and held out his own hands. The
creature seemed excited, like a child who’d been given an important job
to do and wanted to make certain that it was done exactly right. It
dropped something moderately heavy into Joshua’s hands. Joshua looked
down. He was holding what looked like a large salmon, beautiful and
iridescent.

He heard the voice of Lobsang. ‘Excellent! I can’t say that this is what
I expected, but it is most certainly what I had hoped for. By the way it
would be appropriate if you gave them something of yours.’

The previous keeper of the magnificent fish was beaming encouragingly at
Joshua.

‘Well, I’ve got my glass knife, but somehow I don’t think this guy ever
needs a knife.’ He hesitated, feeling awkward. ‘And it _is_ my knife, I
knapped it myself from a bit of imported obsidian.’ A gift from somebody
whose life he had saved. ‘Been with me a long time.’

Lobsang said impatiently, ‘Consider the following. A little while ago
you were expecting to be viciously attacked, yes? And now we have the
obvious point that it was _his_ fish and _he_ gave it to _you_. I
suspect the act of giving is more important than the gift here. Should
you feel naked without a weapon, please do help yourself later to one of
the laminated knives in the armoury, OK? But right now, _give him the
knife_.’

Angry, mostly at himself, Joshua said, ‘I didn’t even know we had an
armoury!’

‘We live and we learn, my friend, and be grateful that you still have
the chance to do both. A gift has a worth that has little to do with any
currency. Hand it over with a cheerful smile for the cameras, Joshua,
because you are making history: first contact with an alien species,
albeit one which has had the decency to have evolved on Earth.’

Joshua presented his beloved knife to the creature. The knife was taken
with extravagant care, held up to the light, admired, had its blade
gingerly tested. Then there was a cacophony in his headset that sounded
like bowling balls in a cement mixer.

After a few seconds this mercifully stopped, to be replaced by Lobsang’s
cheerful voice. ‘Interesting! They sing to you using the frequencies
that we think of as normal, while among themselves they appear to
communicate in ultrasonics. What you heard was my attempt to translate
the ultrasound conversation down to a range that a human could perceive,
if not understand.’

And then, in an instant, they were gone. There was nothing to show that
the creatures had been there, apart from very large footprints in the
snow, already being filled in by the blizzard. And, of course, the
salmon.

Back on the ship Joshua dutifully put the huge fish in the galley’s
refrigerator. Then, cradling a coffee, he sat in the lounge outside the
galley, and said to the air: ‘I want to speak to you, Lobsang. Not to a
voice in the air. A face I can punch.’

‘I can see you are annoyed. But I can assure you that you were never in
any danger. And as you must have guessed you are not the first person to
have met these creatures. I have a strong hypothesis that the first
person who did meet them thought they were Russians …’

And Lobsang told Joshua the story of Private Percy Blakeney, as
reconstructed from notes found in his diary, and comments he made to a
very surprised nurse in the hospital in Datum France where he was taken
after appearing there suddenly in the 1960s.

21

FOR PRIVATE PERCY, faced by his row of impassive singing strangers in
the green of his unsmashed forest, the penny had quickly dropped.

Of course! They had to be Russians! The Russians were in the war now,
weren’t they? And hadn’t there been a copy of _Punch_ magazine passed
around in the trenches which showed Russians looking, yes, just like
bears?

His granddad, who had been a Percy too, had once been taken prisoner in
the Crimea, and he was always ready to talk about the Russians to an
attentive boy. ‘Stank, they did, lad, dirty sods to a man, savages to my
mind, and some of them from God knows where in the wilds, well, I’ve
never seen the like! So much fur, and beards a man could keep a goat in,
except I would warrant the goat would leap out straight away being
particular about the company it kept. But they could sing, lad, stinking
though they was, they could sing, better than the Welsh, oh yes, _they_
could sing! But if you hadn’t been told, you would have thought they
were animals.’

Now Percy looked at the row of hairy, emotionless, but not particularly
hostile faces, and said boldly, ‘Me English Tommy, yes? On your side!
Long live the Czar!’

This won some polite attention, with the hairy men looking at one
another.

Maybe they wanted another song. After all, hadn’t his mother told him
that music was the universal language? And at least they weren’t
imprisoning him, or shooting him, or suchlike. So he gave them a
resounding chorus of ‘Tipperary’, and finished by saluting and crying,
‘God save the King!’

Whereupon the Russians surprised him by waving their heavy great hands
in the air and booming ‘God save the King!’ with considerable
enthusiasm, their voices sounding like men shouting into a tunnel. Then
they put their shaggy heads together as if reaching a conclusion, and
once again broke into ‘Pack Up Your Troubles’.

Only this wasn’t the same kit bag and nor were they the same troubles.
Private Percy tried hard to understand what he was listening to. Oh,
yes, the song was there, but they sang it like a Sunday choir. Somehow
the singers took his song apart so that it gained a strange life of its
own, harmonies that broke and twisted into one another like mating eels
and then came apart again in another bubble-rush of sound, and yet it
was still good old ‘Pack Up Your Troubles’. No, it was a better ‘Pack Up
Your Troubles’, it was more, well, _there_, more real. Private Percy had
never heard music like it, and clapped his hands, and so did the
Russians with a sound like heavy artillery. They clapped as
enthusiastically as they sang, possibly more so.

And now it occurred to Percy that last night’s crayfish had been more of
a snack than a meal. Well, if these Russians were his friends, then
maybe they had some Russian rations to share? They looked bulky enough
under those furry greatcoats. It had to be worth a try, so Percy rubbed
his stomach, poked his finger suggestively in his mouth and looked
hopeful.

After their singing, again they huddled amongst themselves, and the only
sounds he could make out were whispers as faint as a gnat, that tiny
annoying whine that keeps you awake at night. However, once they had
reached some sort of accord, they burst into song again. This time it
was whistles and trills, very much like impressions of birds, and good
impressions at that, a touch of nightingale, a hint of starling,
birdsong that flowed like the best dawn chorus he had ever heard. Still,
somehow he got the impression that they were talking, or rather singing,
about _him_.

Then one of them walked closer to him, watched carefully by the others,
and sang, in the voice of Percy, ‘Tipperary’ perfectly all the way
through, and it was _his own voice_, he was certain, his mother would
have known it.

After that a couple of Russians disappeared into the woods, leaving the
rest sitting around Percy placidly.

When Percy sat on the ground with the Russians, waves of tiredness
suddenly washed over him. He’d had years of war and not even a day of
this peaceful green, and maybe he deserved a little nap. So he drank a
few scoops of water from the river and, despite the presence of the
hairy Russians all around him, lay down on the grass and closed his
eyes.

He surfaced only slowly from his nap.

Private Percy was a practical and methodical young man. And therefore,
still lying in the grass, he decided, in this waking dream, not to worry
about these Russians, as long as the Russians weren’t trying to kill
him. Save your worrying for your boots, boys, the veterans always said.

Boots! So his sleepy brain reminded him. They were the thing! Look after
your boots and your boots would look after you! He had always spent a
lot of time thinking about his boots.

At this point it occurred to Private Percy, waking slowly, still
somewhat battered by his war and adrift in time and space, to wonder if
he still had any legs on which to hang those boots. You could lose your
legs and not know until the shock wore off, or so he had been told. It
was like poor old Mac who never knew his feet had gone until he tried to
stand up. He remembered walking around this forest, of course he did,
but maybe _that_ was all a dream as like as not, and maybe he was back
in the mud and the blood after all.

And so he tried gingerly to pull himself upright, and was cheered by the
realization that at least he appeared to have both hands. Shifting
gently he moved his aching body until he could rise enough to see, yes,
boots! Blessed boots! Apparently on legs that were probably his and, as
a bonus, apparently still attached to him.

They could be treacherous, could boots, just like legs. Like the time
when a forty-pounder hit a box of ammunition and he was part of the
detail that had to go and sort things out. The sergeant had been a bit
quiet, and uncharacteristically soothing when Percy was in distress
because, even though he found a boot, lying in the churned-up mud, he
couldn’t find a man’s leg to go with said boot. And the sergeant had
said, patting Percy on the shoulder, ‘Well lad, seeing as he has no head
either, I reckon he won’t notice, don’t you? Just stick to doing what I
told you, lad: pay-books, watches, letters, anything that can identify
the poor sods. And then stick ’em looking up over the top of the trench.
Yes, lad, stick those dead bodies up there! They might take a bullet
but, as sure as salvation, they won’t feel anything where they’ve gone,
and there will be one bullet less for you or me. Good lad. Fancy a tot
of rum? It’s the medicine for what ails you.’

So the discovery of feet, his own feet, still attached as per,
exhilarated Private Percy, known to his chums as Pimple because when
your name is really and truly Percy Blakeney, pronounced ‘Black-knee’,
_and_ you still have bad acne in your twenties, you accept Pimple as a
nickname and are grateful that it wasn’t anything worse. He lay back
again and must’ve dozed off for a while.

The next time he opened his eyes, it was still full daylight, and he was
thirsty. He sat up. The Russians were still here, patiently watching.
Looking at him almost kindly, through those furry faces, he thought.

Maybe his head was clearing, a bit. It occurred to him for the first
time that he ought to have a good look at his kit.

He opened up his kit bag and emptied out the contents on the green
ground. And he found that somebody had robbed him! His canteen had gone,
his bayonet blade had gone, as had the blade of his entrenching tool.
Come to that, his helmet was nowhere to be found; he didn’t remember
having that when he woke up, although he did find the strap around his
neck. Blimey, they’d even taken the aglets off his boots and the nails
out of the heels! All the bits of steel. And what was very odd was that
even though his canteen had gone, what was actually missing was the
steel flask – there was the stitched-leather container lying on the
grass, intact. But his pay-book was untouched, and nobody had bothered
about the few pennies in his kit bag, and even the glass bottle
containing his rum ration was still here. It must have been a funny sort
of thief! And he still had his paints – but the metal box that had
contained the little tubes had vanished. Not only that, somebody had
even taken the trouble to unwrap the metal bands around the bristles of
his paint brushes, so that the little bits of stubble were left lying at
the bottom of the canvas bag. Why?

And what about his weapons? He checked the pistol at his belt. All that
was left of _that_ was the wooden stock. Again, why? Steal a pistol,
yes, but you would have a devil of a job to use it without the stock. It
made no sense. But then, what did? Where, on the western front, had good
sense ever played a part?

The Russians watched, silent, apparently baffled by his fiddling about
with all this stuff.

Memory came trickling back from whatever foxhole it had been hiding in.

Private Percy had been seconded to the camouflage corps after his leg
wound. This was because, amazingly enough, the Army had recognized that
he had once been a draughtsman, and sometimes this Army who needed men
who could hold a gun, and even more men who could take a bullet, also
needed men who could wield a pencil, and select from God’s good rainbow
just the right hue of paint to turn a Mark I tank into a harmless
haystack, albeit with a wisp of smoke coming out of it if the lads were
having a quick drag behind it. He’d been happy for the respite. And that
was why he carried a paint box, for colour matching, and for bits of
fine work after the usual application of daubs of camouflage green.

What else could he remember? The very last thing before the shelling? Oh
yes, the sergeant roasting the new kid because he had one of those
wretched Testaments that fitted into his breast pocket, the kind of
thing mothers and sweethearts sent to the front in the hope that the
holy words would keep their boys safe, and maybe, if words alone did not
do the trick, then the gunmetal coating might achieve what mere faith
could not. And Percy, packing up his gear to go on to the next job,
remembered the sergeant was apoplectic, waving the offending article in
front of the kid and screaming, ‘You bloody, bloody idiot, ain’t your
bloody mother ever heard of shrapnel? There was a sapper once, a good
lad, and a round hit his bloody iron Testament and it drove the living
heart right out of his body, poor devil!’

And then he had been rudely interrupted by the shelling. Why had the
red-faced kid and the sergeant disappeared into the incandescence of a
bomb which hit only a little way away from Percy, who was now sitting
here in this peaceful world, in the company of these friendly-looking
Russians, and still managing to hear the wonderful birdsong? Deep
inside, Percy knew he was never going to get answers to such questions.

Best not to ask, then.

The Russians, sitting there in the green, watched him patiently as he
struggled to climb out of the black pit inside his head.

When the two Russian hunters returned, one of them was carrying a
freshly killed deer, a big floppy animal, with apparent ease.

Having the carcass of a deer dropped right in front of him by a huge
furry Russian might have perplexed a lesser man. But Private Percy’s
brief adolescence as a poacher, and years of near malnutrition on the
front line, combined firmly around one purpose. The butchery was a messy
job without steel, but the button rod in his small pack was thin brass
and helped a little, and so did smashing the bottle that had contained
the last of his rum ration to make a few more cutting edges.

He was disconcerted by the way the Russians ate with their bare hands,
and carefully picked out the creature’s guts and the lungs, what Percy
had grown up calling the lights, and crammed them into their mouths, but
he took the charitable view that the poor souls probably knew no better.
He saw no steel, and certainly not any rifles, and that was odd. After
all, the Russians had come to fight alongside the English, yes? Surely
they would have had guns of some sort, because what was a soldier
without a weapon?

Light dawned, for Private Percy. Of course, some might say that _he_ was
a deserter, although heaven only knew what had really happened to him.
Maybe these Russians were deserters. They had surely flung their weapons
away and kept only their enormous hairy greatcoats. And if that was so,
why should Percy worry? That was their business, and the Czar’s.

So he took a venison steak for himself, diplomatically walked away to
avoid staring at the Russians’ table manners, found some dry grass,
pulled some dried twigs off some half-rotted branches of a fallen tree,
and used one more precious lucifer to light another fire.

Five minutes later, as the steak cooked, they were sitting around him as
if he had become King himself.

And later, when they walked away with him, singing as they went, he
regaled them with every music-hall song he knew.

22

‘HOW DO YOU know all this, Lobsang?’

‘About Private Percy? Mostly from that chronicle of the unexplained, the
_Fortean Times_. The December 1970 issue recounted the story of an
elderly man wearing antiquated British battledress being admitted to a
French hospital some years before. He appeared to be trying to
communicate by whistling. According to the British Army pay-book still
in his blouse he was Private Percy Blakeney of a Kent regiment, recorded
as missing in action after the battle of Vimy Ridge. Nevertheless, he
appeared well nourished and in good, if somewhat puzzled spirits –
although severely injured, having been run over by the tractor driven by
the farmer who brought him into the hospital. The farmer protested to
the police that the man had just stood there in the middle of the field,
as if he’d never seen such a vehicle before, and the farmer had been
unable to stop in time.

‘Despite the efforts of the hospital staff, Percy died of wounds from
the collision. An ironic end! But not before one of the nurses who spoke
English heard him say something like, “In the end I told the Russians
that I wanted to go back, to see how the war was getting on. They were
good lads, found me a way home. Good lads, loved singing. Very kind …”
And so forth.

‘The fact that the man was wearing the remains of a British Army uniform
and mentioned the word “Russians” raised sufficient security concerns to
cause the gendarmerie to be called to investigate. Well, according to
the British Legion, there was indeed a Percy Blakeney involved in the
fighting on Vimy Ridge, who was reported missing after the opening
bombardment. There appears to have been no attempt at an official
explanation as to why his pay-book should show up decades later in the
hands of a mysterious itinerant now buried in a graveyard in central
France.’

‘But you have an explanation, I take it.’

‘I’m sure you can see it, Joshua.’

‘He stepped there? Into the forest with his Russians?’

‘Possibly,’ said Lobsang, ‘or perhaps one of the trolls found itself in
the trenches by accident, and helped him away.’

‘ “Trolls”?’

‘That seems the mythological term that best describes these creatures,
extrapolating from legends that must derive from even older sightings:
creatures glimpsed in our world only to vanish again, entirely
misunderstood, the seeds of legend … a term that already has become
current in some parts of the Long Earth, Joshua. Percy’s wasn’t the only
sighting.’

‘So you anticipated finding these – stepping humanoids, did you?’

‘From logical extrapolation. And I anticipated the singing from Percy’s
own account. Consider: humans can step; chimps can’t – there have been
experiments to establish that. But perhaps our hominid relatives of the
past, or rather their modern descendants, were, or _are_, able to step.
Why not? To have encountered such beings so early in our journey is of
course the achievement of a major goal. And we must expect, we must hope
at least, to meet many more such groups as we continue. What an
intellectual thrill this is, Joshua!’

‘So they kept Percy alive, all those years?’

‘It seems so. These “Russians” found Percy wandering in a France which
had no Frenchmen living in it, and they were kind to him, for decades.
Over several of their generations, perhaps. Remarkable. As far as I
know, he never understood the truth about his friends. But Percy
probably had never seen _anybody_ from another country before being
shipped to France, and, of course, being English and unlettered, was
probably half prepared to believe that a foreigner could look like just
about anything. Why shouldn’t a Russian look like a big hairy ape?

‘For much of the rest of his life Private Percy travelled with his
“Russians” across a calm, well-wooded, well-watered world where they
kept him fed with meat and vegetables, and were in all respects
considerate in their treatment of him, right up until the day when he
made it clear – and I must say that I don’t know how he communicated
this to them – that he wanted to go back to the place where he had come
from.’

‘Songs can be very expressive, Lobsang. You can sing your homesickness.’

‘Perhaps. And, as we’ve experienced ourselves, they learned those songs
well, and remember them. They must have been passed between generations
of trolls, perhaps even from group to group … Intriguing. We must learn
something of the social lives of these creatures. Well – in the end the
trolls took him home, as good fairies should, back to France, but
fortunately not in an era when man was disassembling man with high
explosives.’

Now the ambulant unit strolled through the blue door at the rear of the
deck, and seamlessly, and rather eerily, took up the conversation from
its disembodied counterpart. ‘You have further questions, Joshua?’

‘I’ve read about that war. It didn’t last all that long. Why didn’t he
go back earlier?’

The ambulant unit put a cold hand on Joshua’s shoulder. ‘Would you have
done? It was a terrible, inhuman conflict, a war that had become a
machine for killing young men as efficiently, if as horribly, as
possible. How keen would he be to walk back into that? And don’t forget
he didn’t really know he was a stepper. He _thought_ that he had been
blown into another part of France. Besides, his “Russians” were happy to
know him. I suspect it was the songs that clinched it. He says they
loved hearing him sing. He taught them all the songs that he knew – and
you, Joshua Valienté, heard one of them today.

‘So – our first field trip. Perhaps we need an operational debrief. You
thought I’d put you in harm’s way, didn’t you? Please believe me, I
would not do that. It would not be in my own interest, would it?’

‘You know a hell of a lot about what we’re encountering, even before
we’ve encountered it. You might have warned me what was coming.’

‘Yes. I accept that. We must work on our communication. Look – we have
barely begun our epic journey; we barely know each other. What would you
say to some quality time together?’

Sometimes, the only thing you can do is stare blankly. _Quality time_,
said the artificial man! Joshua knew the term, of course, if only
because Sister Agnes went into a rage every time she heard it. As rages
went they were not volcanic: few bad words were said – apart from
‘Republican’, which was an extremely bad word to Sister Agnes – and
certainly nothing was ever thrown, at least not very hard, and never
anything that could hurt. But terms like ‘me time’ and ‘quality time’
lit her fuse. ‘Terms cut out of fog! Watering down the currency of
expression, causing anything to mean whatever you want it to mean, until
nothing is _meant_ and nothing is _precise_!’ He remembered the day when
someone on the television used the fatal term, ‘Think outside the box.’
Some of the kids went and hid in advance of the explosion.

_Quality time_, with Lobsang.

Joshua looked at the ambulant’s simulated face. He looked oddly weary,
or stressed, in as much as his expression could be reliably read at all.
‘Do you ever sleep, Lobsang?’

Now that face assumed an affronted expression. ‘All my components have a
downtime cycle, with secondary systems taking the load as required. I
assume this could be considered sleeping. I see you frowning. Is the
answer not sufficient?’

Joshua was aware of all the subtle sounds of the ship, its organic
creaking and groaning, its subsystems’ humming – Lobsang, constantly at
work. How must that level of continual consciousness feel? As if Joshua
had to control each individual breath he took, or regulate every
heartbeat. Lobsang certainly had to control the stepping, an artefact of
consciousness. ‘Is there anything specific bothering you, Lobsang?’

The visage broke into a smile. ‘Of course there is. Everything bothers
me, especially the things I don’t _know_, and can’t control. To _know_
is after all my job, my task, my reason for existing. My mental health
is optimal, however. I think this needs to be said. I don’t know where I
could even _find_ a bicycle made for two, although I am certain that I
could fabricate a reasonably speedy tandem within a couple of hours …
You don’t know what I’m talking about, do you? Tonight we will try out
the cinema option, and _2001_ will be the lead feature. We must complete
your education, Joshua.’

‘Accepting for the moment that you are in fact human, with human
weaknesses, is it possible you get stressed out? If so it would do you
some good to get out of yourself every so often. Sure, let’s spend some
“quality time” together. Just don’t tell Sister Agnes I said so.’ A
bizarre thought occurred to him. ‘Can you fight?’

‘Joshua, I could lay waste to whole landscapes.’

‘No, no. I meant hand to hand.’

‘Explain.’

‘A bit of sparring every now and again tones you up. Back home some of
us lads would spar just to keep our hand in, you know, on the street.
Even having a workout with a punch-bag seems to pull you back together.
Might be fun, too. What do you say? It’s a very human thing. And it
would be a chance for you to explore the responses of this body of
yours.’

There was no immediate reply.

‘Come on, how about it?’

Lobsang smiled. ‘Sorry. I was watching the Rumble in the Jungle.’

‘You were what?’

‘Yes, between George Foreman and Muhammad Ali. I always do my research,
Joshua. I see Ali won with the use of guile, being the older and more
experienced fighter. Excellent!’

‘Are you telling me that you have every single televised boxing match in
some portable memory?’

‘Yes, of course. Why not? Anticipating and extrapolating, I have now
begun the fabrication of two pairs of sparring gloves, the associated
hand wraps, two pairs of shorts, two gum shields for the look of the
thing, and one plastic protective for your genitals.’

Joshua could hear accelerated activity on the fabrication decks, and,
with the protection of his genitals very much at the forefront of his
mind, he said, ‘The Rumble in the Jungle wasn’t a sparring match, you
understand, Lobsang. It was more like a small war. I’ve seen it a couple
of times. Sister Simplicity watches the great bouts occasionally. We all
think she has a thing about big sweaty men—’

‘I have studied the rules of sparring for an adequate time,’ said
Lobsang, standing up. ‘Two millionths of a second, to be precise. Sorry,
did that sound smug?’

Joshua sighed. ‘Actually, it sounded like exaggeration for humorous
effect.’

‘Good!’ said Lobsang. ‘That’s exactly what I intended.’

‘_That_ sounds smug.’

‘Well, it must be said that I have a lot to be smug about, don’t you
think? And if you’ll excuse me …’

Lobsang walked away. When Joshua had first seen the ambulant unit move
it was rather jerky, obviously artificial, and he couldn’t help noticing
that now it moved like an athlete. Lobsang clearly believed in
self-improvement. He reappeared after a few minutes, dressed in a heavy
white robe, and handed Joshua a kit. Joshua turned his back and began to
get changed.

Lobsang recited, ‘Sparring: a healthy way of getting exercise while at
the same time honing those parts of the brain responsible for
observation, deduction and anticipation, and, not least, developing the
spirit of fair play. I suggest that we use the rules devised for a
training session rather than an all-out fight, as laid down in 1891 by
Brigadier General Houseman. Who, I notice, was shortly afterwards
accidentally shot in the head by one of his own men in the Sudan, an
incident from which no level of sparring expertise could have saved him.
Ironic! Subsequent to this I have since picked up several thousand other
allusions to the sport. Really, Joshua, I commend your modesty in
turning your back on me when pulling on your shorts, although it is not
really required.’

Joshua turned – and saw a new Lobsang. When he slipped off the robe,
under boxing vest and shorts was a body that would scare Arnold
Schwarzenegger.

‘You do take things seriously, don’t you, Lobsang?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘Never mind. OK,’ he said. ‘The idea is to touch gloves, step back, and
we’ll go for it …’ He glanced out of the window at worlds scrolling
past. ‘But shouldn’t you also be keeping an eye on the _Mark Twain_? I’m
not sure I like the idea of the two of us exchanging blows while the
ship steps on blindly.’

‘Don’t worry about that. I have autonomous sub-units that will take care
of the ship for a while. And, by the way, Mark Twain himself would find
this situation remarkably fitting! I will tell you about that after I
have won. Shall we dance, Joshua?’

Joshua was not surprised to find that he could still spar pretty well.
After all, out in the Long Earth, you either kept up good reflexes and
stamina, or you died. So now he seemed to be laying more glove on
Lobsang than Lobsang was laying on him. He said, as he blocked the next
blow, ‘Are you sure you are giving it all you’ve got, Lobsang?’

They moved apart and Lobsang grinned. ‘I could kill you with a single
blow; if necessary, these arms could serve as pile drivers.’ He
carefully stepped away from a tentative attack from Joshua. ‘That’s why
I let you hit me first, so that I could calibrate a suitable response. I
am fighting you at your own strength, but regrettably not with your
speed, which I suspect is innately better than mine because of the
phenomenon of muscle memory – embodied cognition, the muscles as part of
one’s overall intelligence, amazing! I am going to have to reflect that
in my own anatomy, a more distributed processing design, in the next
upgrade of this body. And, Joshua, you are also pretty good at deceit,
even with your limited body language. I salute you for that.’

Which was true, because at that moment Joshua landed a blow in the
middle of that enormous chest. Joshua said, ‘I am not certain that it’s
Tibetan, but there is an old saying: “If you are fighting, don’t talk,
fight!”’

‘Yes, of course you are right. One must fight with the whole mind.’

And suddenly there was a fist right between Joshua’s eyes. It didn’t
actually connect; Lobsang had pulled the punch with astonishing
precision, and Joshua could feel only a slight pressure on the tiny
hairs of his nose.

Lobsang said, ‘There _is_ an apt old Tibetan saying: “Don’t stand too
close to a Tibetan chopping wood.” You are much too slow in every
respect, Joshua. Still, perhaps you can defeat me with guile for a while
longer, until I pass your level of competence. I find this exercise
therapeutic and invigorating and educational. Shall we continue?’

Joshua got back to work, breathing hard. ‘You’re actually enjoying this,
aren’t you? Although with your background I was half expecting you were
going to try some kind of kung fu stuff.’

‘You have been watching the wrong kind of movies, my friend. I was a
motorcycle repairman, remember, better with all things mechanical and
electrical than with my fists or feet. I once wired a magneto on to the
door of my work room, so that the gentleman next door who regularly came
in to steal from me got quite a large electric shock. A little bit of
instant karma, and that was the only time I ever laid anyone low. No
kick-boxing required.’

They broke again.

Lobsang said, ‘And now you, my friend, have been instrumental in helping
me emulate the original Mark Twain who, if we can believe his
autobiographical _Life on the Mississippi_, fought with another pilot on
a stern-wheeler in full steam, the man having been bullying a trainee
pilot. Every now and again he had to leave the fight and make sure the
vessel was still on course – rather as I am guiding our ship through the
worlds, even as we spar. Given Twain’s cheerful tendency to put a shine
on any anecdote, I am not certain of the truth of this, but I admire the
man, which is why I named this ship after him … Actually he would have
called his book _Stepping Westward_, but the title, alas, had already
been claimed by William Wordsworth. The old sheep of the Lake District:
very fine poet, but somehow “exploring on the _Wordsworth_” does not
quite have the appropriate ring, does it?’

Joshua said, ‘Wordsworth had his moments, according to Sister Georgina.
_It is a beauteous evening, calm and free …_’

‘I know it, of course. _The holy time is quiet as a nun breathless with
adoration_. Very apt! Are we sparring with poetry too, Joshua?’

‘Shut up and box, Lobsang.’

23

WHEN THEY WERE done the sun was setting on all the worlds.

Joshua took a shower, musing on all the meanings and usages of the word
‘strange’. Boxing like a nineteenth-century steamboat captain with an
artificial man, while multiple worlds flickered by beneath. Could his
life get any odder? Probably, he thought, resigned.

He was coming to like Lobsang, although he was not entirely certain why.
Nor was he certain, even now, what exactly Lobsang was. Strange, that
was for sure. But then of course plenty of people called _him_ strange,
and worse.

He dried himself off, got into a new pair of shorts, put on a fresh
T-shirt which bore the slogan ‘Don’t worry! On another Earth it already
happened’, and headed back to the saloon deck. The empty staterooms he
passed bothered him; it made the _Mark Twain_ feel like a ghost ship,
with himself as the first, and possibly the last, ghost.

He walked into the galley, and there was Lobsang, dressed in a bland
coverall, standing patient as a statue. ‘Dinner time, Joshua? According
to a preliminary cladistic analysis your salmon is not, strictly
speaking, salmon, but salmon enough for the grill. We have all the
relevant condiments. We also have tracklements, and I bet you have never
heard of _them_ before.’

‘Tracklements are those things which complement the main ingredient of a
meal and, traditionally, at least, may be found in the vicinity of the
said ingredient – for example, horseradish root in good beef country. I
am impressed, Lobsang.’

Lobsang looked pleasantly shocked. ‘Well, if it comes to that, so am I,
given that I am a certifiable genius with access to every dictionary
ever published. May I ask how you came across such an archaic word?’

‘Sister Serendipity is a world expert on cookery through the ages. In
particular she has a book by somebody called Dorothy Hartley, called
_Food in England_. Serendipity knows all that stuff; she can make a good
meal out of anything. You should see her roadkill hot pot, always a
favourite. She taught me a lot about living off the land.’

‘It is remarkable for a woman with such skills to devote her time to
unfortunate young people. Such dedication.’

Joshua nodded. ‘Well, yes. And maybe also because she is wanted by the
FBI, which is why she doesn’t go out much and sleeps in the basement.
Sister Agnes said that it was all a big misunderstanding, and in any
case the bullet missed the senator by a mile. They don’t talk about it
much.’

Lobsang began walking backwards and forwards along the deck, turning
smartly when he reached a bulkhead and striding back again, like a
sentry.

Joshua set about dressing the salmon, but the endless striding and the
creaking of the floorboards began to get on his nerves. When Lobsang
came past for the twelfth time he said, ‘You know Captain Ahab used to
do that? And look what happened to him, right? What’s on your mind now,
Lobsang?’

‘On _my_ mind! Practically everything. Although I have to say that
gentle physical exercise, such as our sparring, does indeed do wonders
for the cognitive processes. A very human observation, don’t you think?’
The pacing continued.

Finally the quasi-salmon was cooking, although Joshua had to keep an eye
on it.

Lobsang stopped pacing at last. ‘You are good at concentrating, aren’t
you, Joshua? You can ignore distractions, a very useful skill, and it
makes for a certain tranquillity.’

Joshua didn’t respond. Through the window, light flared: a distant
volcano blossoming against the endless Eurasian green, to be snatched
out of existence in a heartbeat, as they stepped on, and on.

Lobsang said, ‘Listen, Joshua. Let’s talk about natural steppers. Like
you.’

‘And Private Percy?’

‘You asked me about my researches. Since Step Day I have endeavoured to
explore all aspects of this remarkable new phenomenon. As one example I
sent researchers off around the world, to study cave systems used by
early man. They were tasked to inspect similar caves in the adjoining
worlds, to investigate parallel habitations, if any. It was an expensive
endeavour but it yielded fruit, because my researchers quickly found in
a cave near Chauvet in a stepwise France, among other things, a
painting. More accurately it was the badge of a certain Kent regiment at
the time of the First World War, and rendered with great accuracy.’

‘Private Percy?’

‘Quite. Well, I already knew about him and his stepping exploits. But
then, in a stepwise version of the caves at Cheddar Gorge in Somerset,
England, my indefatigable investigators found the complete skeleton of a
middle-aged man, in possession of a corked flagon of cider, a few coins,
and one gold watch of mid-eighteenth-century manufacture with only the
gold and brass remaining of the metal parts. This was a wet cave, but
his boots had survived, slightly glistening like the poor man himself,
thanks to a sheen of calcium carbonate deposited by drips from the roof.
Interestingly, the hobnails and the aglets on his laces were not there.’

‘Aglets?’

‘The small steel caps once fitted to the end of a lace … I’m painting a
picture for you here, Joshua.’

‘It’s kind of a dull picture, Lobsang.’

‘Patience. The intriguing thing about this particular find is that the
corpse was discovered only because he was lying with the fingers of one
hand jammed into a very small space at the bottom of the cave. My
operatives found the gentleman in fact as they were exploring a lower
cave. They saw the bones protruding through the roof, as if the man had
been trying fruitlessly to widen the little gap. All very Edgar Allan
Poe, don’t you think? Of course they broke their way through from the
cave below, and you can work out the rest. The man was a notorious thief
and ne’er-do-well known locally as Passover.’

‘He was a stepper, wasn’t he?’ said Joshua, flatly. ‘And I just bet that
there was no other entrance to the cave.’ For a moment he imagined the
drip of icy water oozing over bleeding fingers in the darkness, a man
trying to scrabble his way out of a cave like a coffin … ‘So maybe he’d
had a few drinks. Sister Serendipity once told me that Somerset cider
was made of lead, apples and handsaws. He lost his bearings, _stepped_,
ended up in his small cave without even knowing that he’d stepped at
all, which would of course make him even more disorientated. He tried to
feel his way out, banged his head, knocked himself out. How am I doing?’

‘Superbly. And the skull itself was, indeed, slightly damaged,’ said
Lobsang. ‘Not a good death, and I wonder how many other individuals get
themselves trapped in some corner before they know what is happening to
them.

‘_Natural steppers_, Joshua. The history of Datum Earth is full of them,
if you know how to interrogate the record. Mysterious disappearances.
Mysterious arrivals! Locked-room mysteries of all kinds. Thomas the
Rhymer is a favourite example of mine, the Scots prophet who, it is
said, kissed the queen of the elves and left this world … In more modern
times there are plenty of cases documented in the black scientific and
intelligence literature, of course.’

‘Of course.’

‘You are unusual, you see, Joshua, but not unique.’

‘Why are you telling me all this now?’

‘Because I don’t want there to be secrets between us. And because now I
am going to tread on dangerous ground. And tell you about your mother.’

The _Mark Twain_ stepped Westward, with little sound other than the pop
of the air getting out of the way.

Carefully, Joshua turned down the heat on the cooking fish. He said, as
casually as he could, ‘What about my mother? Sister Agnes told me
everything there is to know.’

‘I don’t think so, because _she_ didn’t know all of it. I do. And let me
say that the whole truth is, on the whole, a good truth, and a truth
that explains many things. I think it would be good for you to know. But
I will put it out of my mind if you tell me to. That is, I will actually
delete the subject from my memory for good. The choice is yours.’

Calmly, Joshua kept his attention on the fish. ‘In what world can I say
anything other than “Tell me about her”?’

‘Very well. You know, surely, or at least you must have worked out, that
Sister Agnes took over the Home in the first place as a result of the
affair. I mean the scandalous business that surrounded your birth. It
was a coup that made the throwing of the moneylenders out of the Temple
look like a bachelor party. I’ve seen the files, believe me; I doubt
whether a convocation of cardinals would try to take Agnes’s office away
from her now. She knows all the dirt. Moreover, she knows what’s _under_
the dirt …

‘Your mother was young when she became pregnant with you, far too young.
The Home failed her in that, clearly. And your father, by the way, is
unknown, even to me.’

‘I know that. Maria would say nothing about him.’

‘Under the old regime, her world was one of daily penance. Relevant
affidavits to demonstrate how this penance was administered exist in
Sister Agnes’s personal safe, as well, of course, as in my own files,
awaiting the right time to be revealed. The regime was utterly
inappropriate in the modern age – and would have been in any age, though
it might once have been tolerated.’

Joshua faced Lobsang and said in a flat voice, ‘I know that somebody
took her monkey bracelet off her. It was a silly thing, but it was given
to her by her own mother. It was sort of all she had. Sister Agnes told
me. I suppose it was considered superstitious or something.’

‘They did think that way, yes. Although there was a strong streak of
petty cruelty in the mix. Maria was in the late stages of pregnancy at
the time. Yes, it seems a trivial incident, but it tipped her over the
edge, at the worst of times. And so that evening, when the labour pains
first started, Maria tried to flee the home, and panicked, and
_stepped_. At which point you entered the situation.

‘She actually stepped _twice_. She gave birth to you, and stepped back
to the Datum, emerging near the road outside the Home where Sister Agnes
caught up with her. Agnes tried to calm her down; Maria was clearly in a
dreadful state. But she realized what she had done, and stepped yet
again. And when she returned she brought you back with her, wrapped in
her pink angora sweater, and handed you over to an astonished Sister
Agnes, who understood nothing of what had happened. It was not until
Step Day, when stepping became common, that she began to grasp the
truth.

‘And Maria died, Joshua, of post-partum haemorrhaging. I’m very sorry.
Sister Agnes, quick to react though she was, could not help her.

‘All of which leaves you, my friend, as most unique, being, at the
moment of birth, if only for a matter of a minute or two, the only
person, almost certainly, _in a universe_. Totally solitary, utterly
alone! I wonder what that must have done to your infant consciousness?’

And Joshua, aware all his life of the far-off, solemn presence of the
Silence, wondered about that too. My miraculous birth, he thought.

Lobsang went on, ‘Now – you weren’t aware of any of these details, were
you? Does that help you understand yourself a little better?’

Joshua stared blankly at Lobsang. ‘I should serve the fish before it
spoils.’

Silently, Lobsang watched Joshua eat a respectable part of the fish,
cooked with finely chopped onions (there being no shallots on board),
and green beans, and a dill sauce the composition of which even
Lobsang’s forensic nose could not entirely work out although undoubtedly
there was a lot of fennel in it. He watched as Joshua methodically
washed and dried every utensil until it sparkled, and stacked everything
away in an order that could only be called shipshape.

And then he watched Joshua wake up, it seemed to Lobsang, as if reality
flowed over him like a spring tide.

Lobsang said gently, ‘I have something for you. Which I suspect your
mother would have liked you to have.’ He produced a small item wrapped
in soft paper and laid it gently on the bench, downloading as he did so
a number of recommended works on dealing with grief and the aftermath of
loss, and all the while making background system checks of the ship.

Joshua opened the packet cautiously. It contained his mother’s cheap,
precious plastic bracelet.

Then Lobsang left Joshua alone.

Lobsang walked back along the length of the ship, surprised once more at
how the process of walking helped thinking, just as Benjamin Franklin
had once remarked. An aspect of embodiment, he supposed, embodied
cognition, a phenomenon he must explore – or remember. Behind him, as he
walked, lights dimmed as the ship went into night-running mode.

When he got to the wheelhouse he opened the screen, enjoying the
freezing fresh air of world after world washing against the nano sensors
embedded in his artificial skin, and he stared out at the Long Earth, as
revealed by the light of many moons. The landscape itself seldom changed
significantly: the basic shapes of the hills, the paths of the rivers –
although occasionally there was sufficient volcanism to light up the
sky, or a lightning-struck forest blazing in the dark. The moon, the
sun, the basic geometry of the Earth itself, made a static stage for the
shifting, swarming biologies on the fleeting worlds. But even the
moonlight was not a constant across the worlds. Lobsang paid a lot of
attention to the moons, and he saw how that familiar, ancient face
shifted and flowed, subtly, as he crossed the worlds. While the ancient
lava seas endured, in each reality a different selection of random
cosmic rocks had battered the lunar surface, leaving a different pattern
of craters and rays. Sooner or later, he knew, they were bound to come
across a world with a _missing_ moon, a negative moon. After all the
moon was itself a contingency, an outcome of accidental collisions
during the creation of the solar system. An absence of moon was an in
evitability if you travelled far enough across the Long Earth; Lobsang
only had to wait, as for many other contingencies he had anticipated.

He understood a great deal. But the further they travelled, the more the
very mystery of the Long Earth worried Lobsang. Back home he employed
tame professors who spoke of the Long Earth as some kind of
quantum-physical construct, because that kind of scientific language
seemed at least to paint the right picture. But he was coming to believe
that on the contrary, his boffins might not just have the wrong picture,
they might be in the wrong art gallery entirely. That the Long Earth
might be something much stranger altogether. He didn’t know, and he
_hated_ not knowing things. This evening, he knew he would worry and
watch until the moons set, and then he would worry until it was daylight
and it was time for the chores of the day, which in his case would
include … worrying.

24

THE NEXT DAY Joshua, almost shyly, asked Lobsang for more information
about natural steppers. Others like himself, and his mother. ‘Not
legends from history: modern-day examples. I imagine you have plenty of
material.’

So Lobsang told Joshua the story of Jared Orgill, one of the first
natural steppers to come to the attention of the authorities.

It had been just another game of Jack in the Box: that was what they
called it in Austin, Texas, although kids had independently invented
variants of the game across the planet, with lots of different names.
And this particular day it was the turn of Jared Orgill, ten years old,
to be Jack.

They’d found an old fridge on the illegal tip, Jared and his friends. A
big slab of stainless steel, lying on its back amid the garbage. ‘It
looks like a robot’s coffin,’ remarked Debbie Bates. Once they’d pulled
out the shelves and plastic boxes and stuff it was more than big enough
to take one of them.

Jared wasn’t bullied into going into the box, though his parents would
later protest otherwise. In fact he would have fought the others for his
turn. He handed his cellphone to Debbie – you never took in a phone, of
course – climbed in and lay down. It wasn’t comfortable, with the bumps
and ridges of the fridge’s inner fittings poking into him, and there was
a stink of some chemical or other. The big heavy lid slammed down,
shutting out the sky, the grinning faces. It didn’t bother him, it would
only be for a few minutes. For a while he heard bumps and bangs and
scrapes, as the others followed the usual routine of heaping up garbage
on top of the fridge to pin down the lid.

Then there was a moment of quiet, a few more scrapes – and the fridge
started rocking. The other kids had thought of a better way of pinning
him in there. It took them a minute to get organized, but soon the
half-dozen of them were lined up, heaving at the heavy fridge, rocking
it a little further with each pull. The fridge rolled over, and fell
forward so its weight trapped the door closed. Jared, buffeted by the
rolling in the dark, landed face down on the inside of the door … and he
heard something crunch. His Stepper, at his waist, was just a plastic
box full of a jumble of components, tied on to his belt with string.
Kind of fragile.

The game was that he would wait five minutes, ten – maybe as long as an
hour. Of course he couldn’t tell the time. Then he would step out to
West 1 or East 1, move aside from the fridge, and step back – ta-da! –
there would be Jack, out of the box.

But he’d fallen on his Stepper.

It might still work. He didn’t try it, not straight away. He didn’t want
to look chicken by coming out too soon. Also, he didn’t want to _know_
that the Stepper was broken, and that he was stuck.

He didn’t know how long he waited. The air already felt hot, stuffy.
Maybe it was ten minutes, maybe more.

He felt for the sliding switch on the Stepper, closed his eyes, pulled
it over to East. Nothing. Only the stuffy dark. Fear stabbed again. He
pulled the slider to West, with no result. He yanked the slider this way
and that, until it broke off in his hand. He tried not to scream. He
turned on his back and pummelled at the fridge carcass. ‘Help! You guys!
Get me out! Debbie! Mac! Help, get me out!’

He lay, listened, waited. Nothing.

He knew what they’d do, for he would do the same. They’d wait for
minutes, a half-hour, an hour, maybe even more. Then they’d start to
fret that something had gone wrong, so they’d split up and run home.
They would blab in the end, and everybody would drive out to the tip,
and Dad would scream at the others to tell him where the damn fridge
was, and he’d pull off the garbage with his bare hands …

The trouble was, that could be hours away. The air was already starting
to feel thick, it strained his chest to breathe. He panicked again. He
pulled at the wreck of the Stepper until it started to come apart in his
hands. He screamed, and banged the hull of the fridge, and pissed his
pants. He started to cry.

Then, exhausted, he lay back down again, and felt over the wreck of his
Stepper in the dark: the potato, the power lead, the bits of circuit
board. He shouldn’t have pulled it about like that. He should have tried
to fix it. Maybe if he remembered how he’d made it in the first place he
could put it back together now. He remembered the circuit diagram, as it
had first come up glowing on the screen of his phone. He had a good
memory for stuff like that. He _thought_ his way around the diagram, the
coils, the tuning, and he—

And he fell, a foot or so, and landed with a thump on soft ground.
Suddenly there was sky above him, dazzling bright, and the air rushed
into his lungs.

Out! He got to his feet, trembling. Bits of the Stepper fell to the
ground. He was dizzy with the richness of the air. As if he’d been dead,
and was alive again. His pants were damp, to his shame.

He looked around. He was in a thick forest clump, but he could see
lights through the trees: Austin East 1 or West 1, whichever. He had to
get home. How? The Stepper was even more of a mess than before. Still,
he walked a couple of paces from where the fridge would be—

And he was standing on a heap of smashed-up, stinking debris, beside a
big mound that had to be the fridge with its covering of junk. He’d
stepped back, to the Datum. He didn’t get it. This time he hadn’t even
touched the Stepper. He didn’t even feel nauseous.

He didn’t care. He was home! He ran off, away from the fridge. Maybe his
parents wouldn’t have missed him yet. Elated, he started planning how he
would get back his phone and brag to his friends.

Unfortunately for Jared, he had been missed. His parents had already
called the cops, one of whom was bright enough to notice the smashed
Stepper, and ask the crucial question: how had Jared managed to step
between the worlds without a Stepper? To Jared’s dismay he was kept off
school for medical checks, and counselling by ‘experts’ in stepping and
in the Long Earth, such as they were, a physicist and a psychologist and
a neurologist.

The story made it into a local news site before it was pulled. After
that the incident took some covering up, but the US government, an old
hand at such assignments, was able to deny the whole thing, discredit
the witnesses including Jared himself, and bury the whole thing in
classified files.

Of course Lobsang was fully aware of the contents of those files.

Joshua asked, ‘So why do people need Steppers at all?’

‘Perhaps in a more indirect way than is imagined, Joshua. The brief
notes Linsay left insist that the placing of every component is crucial
and needs pin-sharp care, so that the builder’s attention is totally
wrapped up in the task. The need to align the two home-wound coils
reminds me of the tuning of early metal detectors. As for the other
components, they appear to be there for the _look_ of the thing, and the
look can be very important. The winding of the coils themselves is
especially hypnotic. If I may be Tibetan for a moment, I believe that
what we have here is a kind of technological mandala, designed to tilt
the mind into a subtly different state, disguised as a bit of everyday
western technology. It is the act of making a Stepper that enables one
to step, you see, not the gadget itself. I myself went through the
physical process of constructing a Stepper, via an ambulant unit. I
might venture to suggest that it is unlocking a door within us that most
of us don’t know exists. But as Jared Orgill’s story illustrates – or
even your own – some people are finding they don’t need the Steppers at
all, when they step accidentally with a broken box, or step in a panic
without a box at all.’

‘We’re all natural steppers,’ Joshua said, wondering. ‘It’s just that
most of us don’t know it. Or we need this aid to make those muscles in
the head work.’

‘Something like that. But not _all_, you’re wrong about that. Enough
steppers have been studied now to draw up some rough statistics. Perhaps
a fifth of mankind are thought to be natural steppers, to whom the Long
Earth is as accessible as a city park – without any aids at all, perhaps
with a little coaching, or mental disciplines of the kind Jared
inadvertently came across when visualizing his circuit diagram. On the
other hand, perhaps another fifth can never leave the Datum at all,
unless humiliatingly carried by somebody else.’

Joshua pondered the implications. Suddenly humanity was fundamentally
divided – even if it didn’t know it yet.

25

JOSHUA WATCHED WORLDS pass like the turning pages of a picture book.
And, heading steadily geographical west, they passed a boundary marker
of their own: the Ural mountains, a north–south band of crumpled
landscape that endured across most of the worlds.

But the worlds were different now. Both Ice Belt and Mine Belt were far
behind them. Now the Earths below were Corn Belt worlds, as the American
scouts and trek captains liked to call them: rich, warm worlds, and at
least in North America covered with grassland and prairie littered with
familiar-looking trees and scrub and dense with herds of healthy-looking
animals. Worlds ripe for farming. The Earths below now numbered over a
hundred thousand on Lobsang’s earthometer. It took trekkers nine months
to come out as far as this, on foot. The airship had made it in four
days.

Whenever they stopped, Lobsang scanned for short-wave radio
transmissions, which ought to carry around the curve of any Earth with
an ionosphere. They paused at a couple of Corn-Belt worlds to listen,
one being West 101,754, where they got a long and chatty news update
from a colony in a stepwise New England: some kid, originally from
Madison as it happened, blogging by reading from her journal. One of a
whole trail of such hopeful townships, Joshua imagined, scattered thin
across the continents of the Long Earth. And each, he supposed, would
have its own story to tell …

Hi, my loyal listeners, Helen Green here, your low-tech blogger clogging
up the airwaves again. This bit’s from three years ago. It was July 5 –
which, as you will be aware, is the day after July 4. Here goes …

Is this what they call a hangover?

Oh! My! God!

Yesterday was Independence Day! Yay. We’ve been here eight months, and
nobody’s dead yet, yay! That’s an excuse for a party if ever there was
one. We’re Americans, and this is officially America, and it was July 4,
and that was that.

Though to look at us, this first summer, you’d imagine we were Indians.
We’re all living in lean-tos and tepees and benders and big square
communal houses, and some folk are still using their trek tents. There
are chickens and puppy dogs that people carried here on their backs,
running around everywhere. We ain’t farming. Next year will be the first
harvest. We have a rota clearing the fields – burn, slash, haul away the
rocks, all brute labour, nothing but human muscle available to do it.
For the future we’ve brought seeds, corn and beans and flax and cotton,
enough to survive years of failed crops if necessary. Oh, we’ve already
planted pumpkins and squash and beans in the cleared ground near the
houses, in our ‘gardens’.

But for now we’re hunter-gatherers! And it’s a rich country to hunt and
gather in. In the winter we got bass from the river. In the forest we
took things that look like rabbits and things that look like deer and
some of those funny little horses, though we were all a bit squeamish
about that, it was like eating a pony. Now in the summer we’re spending
more time at the coast, where we’re fishing and collecting clams.

You do feel like you’re out in the wild. Back home on the Datum I was
living on top of centuries of other people’s efforts to _tame_
everything. Here the forest has never been cleared, the swamps never
drained, the river never dammed or leveed. It’s strange. And dangerous.

I think my Dad thinks some of the people are dangerous too. We’re all
learning more about each other, but slowly, you can’t always tell from
the outside. Some folk have come out here, not to go somewhere, but to
get away from something. An army veteran. A woman who my Mom thinks was
abused, as a child. Another woman who lost a child. Well, that’s fine by
me.

But anyhow, we’re here. And if you go tracking in the woods or up river
you can see the little plumes of smoke rising up from the houses, and
hear the voices of the workers in the fields. You can feel the
difference if you step even just a world or two to either side. A world
with humans in, versus a world without. Honestly, it’s true, you can
feel it in your head.

We had a big argument about what to call our new community. The adults
had a meet about it, and it turned into the usual word fest. Melissa was
determined it should be called some long uplifting name like ‘New
Independence’ or ‘Deliverance’ or maybe just ‘New Hope’, but my Dad
laughed at that one and made a joke about _Star Wars_.

I’m not sure if it was just my suggestion or Ben Doak’s, but we found
something that stuck. Or at least that nobody hated enough to veto
loudly. When it was agreed, Dad and a few others made up a sign, on the
trail up from the coast.

WELCOME TO REBOOT
FOUNDED 2026, A.D.
POP. 117

‘Now all we need is a zip code,’ said my Dad.

And now here’s a bit from a year later than that, written by my Dad!
Well, he has helped me out with this journal, including with the
spelling, huh. Thanks, Dad! …

My name is Jack Green. I guess if you’re reading this you’ll know I’m
Helen’s father. I have special permission from Helen to add a few notes
to this journal, which has become a rather precious thing itself. Just
now Helen herself is otherwise engaged, but this is her birthday, and I
wanted to be sure the day was marked properly.

So, where do I begin?

We have our houses built now, mostly. And fields we’re slowly clearing.
Usually I have my head down, working. We all do. But every so often I
take a walk around the town, and I see how we’re nibbling into the
green.

The sawmill is working. That was the first big communal project. I can
hear it now, as I write – we try to keep it going day and night, with
that distinctive two-stroke sound as it slowly processes forest into
town. We have a pottery kiln, and a lime kiln, and a soap kettle, and of
course our forge thanks to our Brit boy wonder Franklin. The geological
survey maps were spot on. In some ways it’s incredible how fast we’ve
been able to progress.

But we were able to rely on help from outside. A family of Amish came
our way, following a lead from the Reverend Herrin, our itinerant
preacher. Odd folk they are, but friendly enough, and very competent at
what they do. Such as when they helped us set up our pottery kiln, which
is a boxy oven with a chimney stack. Our pots are rough as hell, but you
can’t imagine the pride you get in setting a vase you made on a shelf
you built, full of flowers you grew in the garden you dug out from the
raw earth.

But that’s nothing compared to the first iron tools from Franklin’s
forge. We couldn’t function without our iron and steel tools, of course.
But the iron has had an odd impact on our domestic economy. When we
arrived the hundred of us actually spread out over a thin sheaf of
nearby worlds, rather than in just one. Why not? There was room. But of
course you can’t carry iron across the worlds, even stuff manufactured
locally. So people are slowly moving back into 754, the world with the
forge in it, rather than start up the whole process over again somewhere
else (although Franklin offered to do just that for multiples of his
fee).

Strikes me that everything about the way humanity is opening up the Long
Earth is shaped by one simple fact: that you can’t step metallic iron
across. As an example, we had the idea of opening up parallel fields on
next-door Earths so no single crop could be lost to a blight or poor
weather. Not worth it; better to use the iron tools we have already made
here to extend our holdings on 754.

The way we pay visitors like the Amish for their services is
interesting, by the way. Well, I find it so. Money! What has worth, out
here in the Long Earth? What has value when every man can own his own
goldmine? Interesting theoretical question when you think about it,
isn’t it?

Among ourselves we do use Datum currencies. Since the Long Earth
recession cut in, the yen and the US dollar have held up, especially
since they are unforgeable. The British pound collapsed earlier, when
half the population fled from that crowded little island – including
Franklin, our invaluable smith. Nevertheless, Britain, not for the first
time, showed the way out of adversity. In their bad economic years the
Brits evolved the ‘favour’, a currency of flexible worth. In short, it
was a unit notional coin whose value was agreed by the buyer and seller
at the point of transaction – which made it rather difficult to tax, and
so it worked very badly back on the Datum. But it’s the ideal currency
in the new worlds, which is not surprising since the system was once
used in the embryo United States of America, when there was no coin to
be had and no effective government to validate its use even if there
were.

In places like Reboot, you see, your life is full of small trades. You
boil animal fats and make tallow, and since you made too much, maybe
your neighbour could use some, and indeed she could, and offers a pound
of iron ore in return. That isn’t very useful to you, but it certainly
is to Franklin the smith, and you hand it over to him in exchange for
favour, to be repaid at some future time. So you are now _owed_ a
favour, which might be something solid, or even an offer to bring back
store-bought goods next time he has to go to Hundred K or the Datum. Or
whatever.

It’s no system to run a civilization on, but a pretty good one for a
colony of a hundred people every single one of whom you know personally,
and they know you. No point in cheating; _that_ will only work for a
little while. After all you don’t want to be the person who has the
doors shut on you when you most desperately need help.

And so every day or so you total up your favours, positive and negative,
and if you are ahead of the game then you might take a day off and go
fishing. The nurses and midwives do particularly well. How many favours
is a successful birth worth? What price an injured hand, treated so
conscientiously that you can work again?

Common sense works well in a small community like this, where everybody
ultimately depends on the goodwill and good humour of everybody else. It
even applies to the way we treat the hobos, as we call them, who
occasionally come trickling through our landscape. Drifters, working
their way from world to world across the Long Earth, without any
intention of settling down like us so far as I can see, just walking
through the green and helping themselves to the low-hanging fruit. Well,
why not? In the Long Earth there’s plenty of room for people to live
like that. They come to us drawn by the smoke of the fires; we make them
welcome, we’ll feed them and have our doctors treat them if they need
it.

We make it clear we expect something in return, usually a little labour,
maybe just interesting news from home. Most people accept that kind of
deal easily enough. People, unfettered, know how to live, how to treat
each other. I imagine Neanderthal man learned all this. I guess
sometimes the lesson doesn’t stick. Sometimes they seem kind of stunned,
as if they’ve been staring at the horizon too long, and they find it
difficult to sit still in any one Earth. Long Earth Syndrome, it’s
called, so I’m told.

We’ve had more formal contact from home. A postman does the rounds! A
good man called Bill Lovell. From the mail we learned that some remote
federal agency has validated our various land claims. The most important
missive for me was a statement from Pioneer Support, the government
agency that was set up to handle the affairs of emigrants. My bank
accounts and investment funds are still running. I’m providing for Rod,
of course, our ‘phobic’ son, our ‘homealone’, as I’m told current Datum
slang has it. Tilda feels this is somehow cheating. Not in the pioneer
spirit. But my intention was never to have any of us suffer out here.
Why should we? This is my solution, my compromise to ensure my family is
protected.

There’s been no letter from Rod, not one. We do write to him; he hasn’t
written back. For better or worse we don’t discuss this. It breaks my
heart slowly, however.

I want to finish this on a joyous note.

It’s now twenty-four hours or more since Cindy Wells went into labour,
the colony’s first birth. Cindy called in her friends, and Helen went
along, who’s training up on midwifery. She’s only just fifteen, my God.
Well, the labour was long, but the birth came without complications. And
as I write, it’s not long past dawn, they’re all still with Cindy.

I can’t tell you how proud I am. On Helen’s birthday too. (Thanks, Dad!)

So I have one extra chore to perform today. That town sign of ours needs
modifying:

WELCOME TO REBOOT
FOUNDED 2026, A.D.
POP. 117 118

And in a sky on the other side of the world a gaudy airship hovered in
the dawn light, listening to such whispered stories, before it vanished
into deeper stepwise realities.

26

JOSHUA WOKE UP. The big woollen throw he preferred to sleep under was
slightly musty, rather heavy, somehow very reassuring. Outside, he saw
through his stateroom window, Earths flickered by. There was the endless
Eurasian forest, sometimes burning, occasionally covered in snow.
Another morning on the _Mark Twain_.

He carefully negotiated his way out of bed, had a shower, dried himself
off and slipped the monkey bracelet on to his wrist. It was the only
thing of his mother’s that he had ever possessed. It was cheap plastic,
marginally too tight round his wrist, but in his mind it was worth more
than gold could ever be.

The _Mark Twain_ gave that tiny little lurch he had learned to expect
when the stepping stopped. In theory, he knew there was no reason why
there should be a lurch, but every ship has its idiosyncrasies. He
looked out of his window again.

Now, against expectation, the ship was hovering over an ocean that, as
far as he could see, went on for ever. They had been crossing the vast
landscapes of Eurasia for days. Joshua was a Madisonian who had grown up
with the lakes near by. God, he thought, I could do with a swim. He
stripped down to trunks.

Then, without consulting Lobsang, he ran to the gondola’s elevator and
let it down until the open cage was only a little way above the deep
blue sea, an ocean as calm as a lake.

The ambulant unit appeared in the hatch above him. ‘There you are. If
you are thinking of a dip in this briny sea, I suggest you think twice.
I’ve sent up my usual balloons and sounding-rockets, and I am pretty
certain that if there is any dry land on this planet there is little of
it. The sea level is very high: we hover over drowned continents,
probably.’

‘An ocean world, then.’

‘I have no idea if there is anything so sophisticated as a fish swimming
around in there. There _appears_ to be nothing much more than floating
seaweed, some of it extremely green. This is a fascinating world, and
exploring it would be an excellent undertaking. However, while I cannot
forbid you to go swimming, I urgently counsel you against doing so
before I have checked for safety.’

The untroubled sea sparkled beguilingly. ‘Oh, come on. It can’t hurt,
surely.’ He heard the sound of mechanical activity up above in the ship.

Lobsang said, ‘Can it not? But who knows how evolution might have
proceeded on such a world? Joshua, until I check it out, for all we know
something might just come up from the depths and you will depart this
and all other worlds with a sound that might be accurately described as
“clop”, with everything that sound suggests.’

Now Joshua heard a hatch opening on the ship, followed by a splash as
something dropped into the water.

Lobsang said, ‘Such a singular person as you has no right to be the
guinea pig when there are creatures more qualified – in this case, my
underwater ambulant unit. Behold!’

Something like a mechanical dolphin barrelled out of the sea, stood in
the air and dived back in again.

Joshua looked up at Lobsang. He continued to wonder whether the
expressions on that engineered face were carefully crafted or whether
they were reflexes in some way, true expressions of inner feelings.
Either way, right now Lobsang was evidently awash with happiness as he
watched his new creation. He did like his toys.

But the grin quickly faded. Lobsang said, ‘Various fish noted, water
specimens obtained, plankton identified, depth to ocean bed un certain …
something coming up … it might just be an idea to get back on board –
hold on tight!’

The elevator suddenly rose, clanging when it hit the stops. Joshua
looked down and saw the wonderful aquatic unit spin into the air one
last time, before huge jaws closed on it with dreadful finality.

Shaken, he turned to Lobsang. ‘Would you call that a clop?’

‘In fact, I think it might be, actually, when all is considered, a
CLOP!!’

‘Consider me chastened. I’m sorry about your toy submarine. Was it
expensive?’

‘Astonishingly so, and heavily patented, but, alas, not heavily
armoured. However, we have spares. Come on. I’ll make the breakfast, for
a change.’

When the meal was done, Lobsang waited for Joshua on the observation
deck.

‘I have labelled our hungry visitor a shark for now. Extremely large
sharks have certainly existed on Earth, and I got a good picture of it;
the ichthyologists can decide. Please enjoy, with my compliments, the
continued use of your legs.’

‘All right. I get it. Thank you …’

The _Mark Twain_ was already stepping onwards. Joshua found himself
looking down on forests again, the ocean world far behind: no more sea,
no more brilliant sunshine. In a manner that was becoming a habit,
Lobsang and Joshua sat together in silence. Though their relationship
was reasonable now, hours could pass like this, with barely a word
spoken between them.

And, as he turned his mind Westward once more, Joshua felt an odd
pressure in the head. It was almost as if he were heading home to the
Datum, not further outwards.

For the first time, for some reason, he found himself speculating about
an end to this journey. ‘Lobsang, how much further are you intending to
go? I am with you for the long haul, that’s the deal. But I do have
responsibilities at home. Sister Agnes and the rest of them are not so
spry as they were …’

‘Interesting reaction from the great loner,’ Lobsang said dryly. ‘It
occurs to me that you, Joshua, are very much like the old-time trackers
and hunters of the Old West. Like Daniel Boone, to whom I have compared
you before, you shun the company of other people, but not all the time.
And remember that even Daniel Boone had a Mrs Boone and a lot of little
Boones.’

Joshua said, ‘Although some of the little Boones weren’t _his_ Boones,
but the Boones of his brother, if I’m to believe what I once read.’

‘I do understand you, Joshua. That’s what I’m trying to tell you.’

Joshua bristled. ‘I very much doubt that you understand anything about
me, tin man.’

‘Well, how about this for a deal? If we don’t find anyone for you to
talk to in the next two weeks, shall we say, I will turn the ship around
and head back. We surely already have enough data to keep my friends at
the universities as happy as a bucket of clams. You can get some R&R,
and I will start work on plans for the _Mark Trine_, trusting that the
shade of Mr Clemens will forgive me.’ He looked at Joshua’s puzzled
expression, and relented. ‘In the dialect that gives us “twain”, meaning
the number two, “trine” means three. Just my little joke.’

‘I thought you trashed your airship workshop. A small Tunguska event,
you said.’

‘The Black Corporation has many skunk-work facilities, Joshua.
Interesting, incidentally, that you’ve suggested turning back just as
I’m learning that our singing friends from that frosty world some way
back have had the same idea.’

‘The trolls? What do you mean?’

‘I’ve been observing scattered bands of them, travelling across the
worlds. Trolls, and what appear to be other related species, of variant
forms. It’s difficult to tell in our brief glimpses; there is much to be
studied. But simple demographic tracking suggests that on the whole they
are heading _back_ along the line of our journey, quite a number of
them, too. Possibly some kind of migration.’

‘Hmm,’ Joshua said, feeling that faint pressure in his head. ‘Or maybe
they’re fleeing something.’

‘Either way, it’s interesting, don’t you think? Stepping humanoids! And
I wonder what will happen when more of the migrant trolls reach the
Datum itself.’

‘_More_ of them? What do you mean by that?’

‘I’ve told you of fragmentary reports from old traditions – glimpses of
transitory beings, tales from myth. I believe that trolls and other
species have been visiting our Earth for millennia – perhaps simply to
pass through, perhaps for other purposes. The frequency of such reports
drops in recent centuries, because of the growth of scientific literacy
perhaps.’

Or sheer mental pressure, Joshua thought, as the Earth’s population
grew, if the trolls and their cousins had the same reaction to crowds as
he had.

‘But in recent decades, and even since Step Day, such sightings have
been on the increase again. The wavefront of the migration we are
witnessing, perhaps. Let me give you an example, of a case that now
makes a certain kind of sense …’

27

ACCORDING TO THE report filed by the two students later – filed and
briskly covered up under Britain’s Official Secrets Act – the night of
the incident had been cloudy, the sky black. This was darkest
Oxfordshire, the very centre of England. By the light of their
battery-powered storm lantern Gareth unpacked his canvas rucksack and
set out the instruments: a cricket bat and stump, a baseball bat,
drumsticks filched from the college orchestra’s percussion section, even
a croquet mallet. Stuff to hit the standing stones with.

While Lol was thumping his forehead against an oak tree.

The oak, with its fellows, towered over the stones, which were like a
ring of broken giants’ teeth stuck in the ground. This was said to be
one of the oldest monuments in the country – possibly it even pre-dated
the age of the farmers who had produced most of the great stone
monuments in Britain. But nobody knew for sure, because there’d been no
decent archaeological investigation of the site. There was no nicely
laid footpath, no information trail with boards of factoids to guide the
visitors who never came. Just the stones, and the forest that had all
but overwhelmed them – and a legend, that these stones would sing, to
keep elves and other demons out of the world. A legend that had brought
Gareth here in the first place.

Lol wrapped his arms around the tree’s gnarly trunk. ‘Trees! Trees root
us, Gaz. They nurture us. There have been trees on this planet for three
hundred million years. Did you know that? Great huge tree ferns back in
the Carboniferous. A tree is defined by its form, not by its species.
Once we _lived_ in trees. Trees are at the centre of all our myths!
There are stories from all over of world trees, like ladders to the
sky.’

They were both science students, twenty-year-old undergraduates, Lol
studying quantum physics, Gareth acoustics. Lol looked younger than his
age, like a fifteen-year-old in biker fancy dress, and he did live at
home with his parents. But for all the green mythology stuff he liked to
spout, you had to remind yourself that Lol had a sharp mind. Gareth
found the nonlinear equations of fluid mechanics that underlay the
acoustics he studied pretty challenging, but Lol’s quantum physics was
_hard_ …

Gareth heard a pop, like somebody stepping. He turned. He thought he
glimpsed movement in the long shadows the stones cast in the lantern
light. Some forest creature out foraging?

Lol said now, ‘Give me a beer.’

Gareth stared at him. ‘You were bringing the beers.’

‘_You_ were.’

‘I brought the mallets. Christ. You never do buy your round.’ He threw a
kettledrum stick, narrowly missing Lol’s head. ‘If we’ve got no ale
let’s get this over with, and get back to the pub before we sober up.’

‘Sorry, man.’ Lol picked up the drumstick.

Gareth dug out his phone and set it to record the sounds they would make
when they started to strike the stones.

He was doing this to make a girl notice him.

She was on an arts course, and Gareth sometimes saw her on the bus ride
into town, but he had nothing to talk to her about. Certainly not his
geeky engineering studies. He’d vaguely thought this archaeo-acoustics
experiment of his might impress her.

For centuries archaeologists had been missing the element of _sound_ in
the monuments they studied. Gareth had once heard a barbershop quartet
perform in a Neolithic chambered tomb. Awesome; the place had obviously
been designed for its acoustics. Now he was trying to _play_ these
standing stones to see if they were laid out for their acoustic
properties – an idea that came from the obvious lead offered by their
traditional local name, the Singing Stones, and the attached legend that
the stones would sing to keep out malevolent spirits. And to explore,
vaguely, the way legends of ghosts and spirits and other transients had
come to have a whole new interpretation in this age of the Long Earth,
when reality had suddenly become porous.

Maybe it was all a bit too geeky. And he hadn’t achieved his main
objective: here he was with Lol, not _her_. But at least it was a more
imaginative way of thinking about the new worlds than you mostly got in
Britain. This was just a few years after Step Day. Gareth had spent a
gap year summer in the US where they were talking about treks out to the
remote worlds, of building an infinity of stepwise Americas. Whereas in
England, it was all a kind of dull nothingness. The Long Earth just
hadn’t inspired John Bull. Of course it didn’t help that the stepwise
Englands were uniformly choked with forest, but basically, all you saw
in England West or East was little rectangular plots cut into the
forest, precisely mapping suburban back gardens where middle-class
families popped over to grow beans or to catch the sunshine when it
rained at home, or, just occasionally, to get savaged by a wild boar.
And meanwhile the disadvantaged, young and old, drifted away from the
dole and their dead-end jobs and just vanished into the green, and the
cities were dying from their empty inner suburbs outward, and the
economy slowly crumbled …

Lol had been silent for a long time. A long time for him, anyhow. Gareth
looked up.

Lol was staring.

Something stood at the precise centre of the stone ring, a group of
squat stumpy shapes, that hadn’t been there before. At first glance the
figures looked like more standing stones to Gareth, more monoliths in a
rough circle. No, they weren’t monoliths. They had chimp faces, and
black, hairy bodies, and they stood upright. Like children in monkey
suits. The light of the lantern was uncertain, the shadows deep black.

‘They must have stepped in,’ Lol breathed.

‘Is this some kind of joke? Trick or treat? It’s not Halloween, losers.’
Gareth was nervous; he always was around unsupervised kids. ‘Look, if
you lot don’t—’

And, as one, the little people opened their mouths and sang. They went
straight into a chord, a multipart harmony. Then, after holding the
chord for an unreasonable time, they launched into a kind of song. It
was fast-moving, shapeless to Gareth’s ears. But the harmonies were
pitch-perfect, and beautiful, so much so they made Gareth’s guts twist.

Lol, on the far side of the ring, looked terrified. He clamped his hands
over his ears. ‘Make them stop!’

Gareth had an inspiration. He grabbed his mallets. ‘Hit the stones! Come
on!’ He whacked the nearest stone with the baseball bat. It _rang_.

He and Lol hammered the stones wildly. Dull tones rang out, ugly and
discordant. Despite his fear of the ape-things, Gareth felt a stab of
triumph, of vindication. He’d been right. These stones were lithophones,
shaped for the sound they made, not for the way they looked. So he
bashed and thumped the stones, and Lol did the same.

And the ape-things were disturbed. Their tight formation broke up, and
those monkey-mask faces crumpled, teeth bared, and their song dissolved
into hoots and chatters. One by one they began to wink away,
disappearing stepwise. Was this what the Singing Stones were _for_? To
make these ugly discords, to stop these singing ape-things stepping into
the world – just as the legend said?

Soon the clearing between the stones was empty once more. Gareth stared
around at the stones, at the long shadows. The walls of the world seemed
very thin.

All of which was how Lobsang and Joshua, on the _Mark Twain_, learned,
on considering records of such incidents, that the pioneers of the
trolls’ enforced migration had already penetrated further than anybody
had dreamed.

28

JOSHUA AND LOBSANG pressed deeper into the Long Earth, extending their
tentative survey.

Embedded in the blandness of the Corn Belt were plenty of Jokers. Here
was a locust world; the airship appeared right in the middle of a flying
plague of big heavy insects that battered briefly against the gondola
walls. They lingered in one world where, Lobsang suspected, the Tibetan
plateau, an accident of tectonic collision, had never formed. His aerial
drones revealed that without the Himalayas the climate of the whole of
central and southern Asia, even Australia, was radically different.

And there were worlds they couldn’t understand at all. A world immersed
in a perpetual crimson-red dust storm, like a nightmare version of Mars.
A world like a bowling ball, utterly smooth, under a cloudless deep blue
sky.

The stepping halted again. There was that usual odd lurch, like falling
off a swing. Joshua looked down. This was a world of yellowed grass and
spindly trees. The airship drifted over a river that had shrivelled in
its bed, exposing wide borders of cracked mud. Animals crowded thick
around the water, eyeing each other nervously. Joshua glanced at the
earthometer: 127,487. A meaningless string of digits.

‘You can see this world is suffering a particularly dry season,’ Lobsang
said. ‘Which has drawn an unusual concentration of animals to the water.
It gives us an opportunity to observe efficiently. You may have noticed
I am making a habit of pausing at such convenient locales.’

‘There are a hell of a lot of horses.’

And so there were, small and large, ranging in size from a Shetland pony
to a zebra, and of subtly different designs, some shaggier, some
tubbier, some with two toes on each foot, or three or four … None of
them looked quite like _real_ horses, like Datum horses.

But in amongst the herds, jostling to get to the water, were other
animals. One family of tall, spindly beasts were like camels rebuilt to
the plan of a giraffe. Their young, with legs like drinking straws,
looked heartbreakingly fragile. And there were elephants, with a variety
of tusk types. And things like rhinos, things like hippos … These
herbivores, temporarily forced together, were skittish, nervous, for
there were carnivores too. There were always carnivores. Joshua spotted
what looked like a pack of hyenas, and a cat not unlike a leopard.
Waiting, watching the throngs of wary drinkers at the lake.

Now a creature looking very much like a beefy ostrich approached. A
family of rhino-like beasts backed off nervously. But the bird stretched
out its neck, opened its beak wide, and fired out a ball, like a
cannonball. This slammed into the ribcage of a big male rhino, that went
down bellowing. The family scattered, and the bird closed in to feed on
the fallen male.

Lobsang used an anaesthetic rifle mounted on the gondola to bring down
the bird, and sent down his ambulant unit to inspect it. The bird had a
separate stomach sac which filled up with a mixture of faeces, bones,
gravel, bits of wood, other indigestibles. All this was mortared
together with guano to make a large ball as hard as teak. The Long Earth
truly was full of wonders, and for Joshua the cannonball bird duly took
its place in the gallery.

The world was logged, and the airship moved on. That night the movie was
Lobsang’s choice: _Galaxy Quest_. Joshua couldn’t concentrate on the
action, but, rocking with the stepping, mumbling ‘Never give up! Never
surrender!’, he slowly fell asleep.

He woke to bright sunlight. The ship had stopped again, and
sounding-rockets soared into an unsuspecting sky.

In this world, that bit warmer than those earlier – Lobsang observed a
steadily warming trend as they ploughed ever further West – a string of
lakes had been cut into the forest blanket. Lobsang speculated that they
were the result of a multiple meteorite strike. Two of the lakes were
separated by a narrow strip of land, a striking feature that reminded
Joshua of the isthmus between Mendota and Monona at Madison.

Lobsang announced, ‘This is Earth West 139,171. We’re still in the Corn
Belt.’

‘Why have we stopped?’

‘Look to the north.’

Joshua saw the smoke. It was a thin black column, a few miles away to
the north-east.

‘It’s not a campfire,’ said Lobsang. ‘Or a forest fire. A burning
township, perhaps.’

‘Human, then.’

‘Oh, yes. And I’m picking up a radio signal.’ Lobsang played a scrap of
it, a pleasant recorded female voice broadcasting her presence to a
silent world, in English, Russian, French. ‘Spindrift colonizers. The
signal claims they are the First Heavenly Church of the Cosmic
Confidence Trick Victims. We are far from home; there can be few
substantial settlements much further out … That fire is from burning
buildings. Evidently something has gone wrong here.’

‘Let’s go see.’

‘The danger is unknowable. Unquantifiable.’

Joshua might be a loner, but there was an unwritten rule out in the
reaches of the Long Earth that you helped the other, the wanderer, the
community in trouble. ‘We’re going.’

The airship’s big rotors started up, and they moved off towards the
smoke.

‘Shall I tell you about the Confidence Trick Victims?’

Joshua learned that while the mainstream religions remained concentrated
on the Low Earths because of access to the holy sites on the Datum – the
Vatican, Mecca – many splinter religious communities had gone out deep
into the Long Earth, each seeking freedom of expression, as similar
communities had done for millennia on Earth. Such pilgrims would often
choose places that (in Datum context) were geographically remote too,
like this one: on this distant Earth they were still far to the east of
the location of Moscow. And yet, even among these maverick groups, the
Cosmic Confidence Trick Victims stood out as somewhat unusual.

‘They consider their religion to reflect the truth about the universe,
which is its essential absurdity. True Victims believe that there is one
Born Again every minute. And they must be fruitful and multiply, to
create more human minds to appreciate the Joke.’

Joshua murmured, ‘I don’t think this Joke has had a good punchline.’

They sailed over a few square miles of cleared forest around a central
township, built around a hillock, the only high point on the isthmus. A
relatively grand building sat atop the hillock. There were fields,
marked by rows of stones. Lobsang pointed out a characteristic tint to
some of the crops: marijuana plants, acres of them, which told you a lot
about the nature of this community.

There were corpses everywhere.

Lobsang took the ship up to five hundred feet and hovered. Rooks,
disturbed, flapped and rose, to descend again. The Victims of the Cosmic
Confidence Trick apparently preferred to wear green robes, and so the
central square and the dirt roads radiating away from it were littered
with emerald splashes. Who would come all the way up here to wipe out
several hundred peaceful souls, whose only eccentricity lay in believing
life was a gold brick?

‘I’m going down,’ Joshua said.

Lobsang said, ‘This happened recently. This crime, this attack. Observe
that the bodies have not yet been scavenged. Something, or somebody,
butchered three hundred people, Joshua. The attackers may still be down
there.’

‘And maybe the three-hundred-and-first is still alive.’

‘The big building in the centre of the village, on that hillock.’ The
hill was the only high point on the isthmus. ‘That’s the source of the
radio beacon.’

‘Put me down a hundred yards away.’ Joshua thought it over. ‘And then
jump a few worlds away, shift a little in space, and step back. Maybe if
there is somebody still here you can lure them out.’

‘ “Lure them out.” Hardly a reassuring idea.’

‘Just do it, Lobsang.’

The airship descended.

There was a stink of grease, of burning meat.

Joshua, with parrot on his shoulder, walked down a straight-line dirt
street. A few rooks, irritated, climbed into the air. It was a
surprisingly well-developed community to find so far out. The buildings
were wattle and daub on sturdy timber frames, set out in neat
rectilinear rows. He supposed the pioneers who had laid out these plots
and street had dreamed of the city to be built one day on this plan. Now
many of the buildings were burned out; further away, a whole district
smoked fitfully.

He came to his first body. She was a middle-aged woman who had had her
throat ripped out. No human had done this, surely.

Joshua walked on. He found more people, in a ditch, in the doorways,
inside the houses, men, women and children. Some of them looked as if
they had been running when they were struck down. None of them seemed to
be wearing Steppers, but that wasn’t unusual. They had been at home
here, in this world; they thought they were safe.

He reached the big central building on its hillock. If this place
followed the pattern of most religion-based colonies, this was most
likely the church, the holy building, the first permanent structure to
be erected, and as such it would house a lot of the community’s common
property like the radio station and any power unit. It was also the
place of refuge when disaster struck, as churches had been throughout
western history. There were certainly a lot of bodies around the
building. Maybe the enemy had struck just after morning prayers, or
whatever equivalent ceremony the Victims had. Morning Stand-Up, perhaps.

The doors were closed. There could be anything inside. Black clouds of
flies flew up as Joshua approached, and rooks watched resentfully from
rooftops.

The airship reappeared, right above him.

‘Lobsang, any movement?’

‘No hot spots near you.’

‘I’m going to try the church. Temple, whatever.’

‘Be careful.’

He came to double doors set in a stout wall, of stone faced with some
kind of plaster. Joshua tried a kick, and nearly broke his ankle. He
braced for another try.

‘Save your fragile endoskeleton,’ Lobsang said dryly. ‘There’s an open
door at the back.’

The back door was, in fact, smashed off its hinges and sagged outward
into the street. Joshua walked through the broken frame into a little
radio room where a transmitter was still sending its innocent message to
the universe. Joshua respectfully shut it off. Another door led to a
utility room, the kind of combined kitchen and junk store that every
church or church hall would have; there was a tea urn, and playgroup
toys of crudely carved wood. There were even children’s finger paintings
on the walls, and a cleaning rota, written in English. It would have
been Sister Anita Dowsett’s turn next week.

A further door led into the main hall. And this was where most of the
bodies were. Blood filmed the floor and spattered the walls, and flies
buzzed in a cloud over the slumped, still forms.

Moving into the room, Joshua had to step over the bodies, a handkerchief
to his mouth. He turned some of them over, inspecting wounds. At first
he thought they’d fled in here, seeking the safety of thick walls and
heavy doors – even these far-flung pioneers would fall back on ancient
instincts. But there was something odd about the pattern.

‘Joshua?’

‘I’m here, Lobsang.’ He reached an altar. The centrepiece was a big
silver hand thumbing a golden nose. ‘These were comedy atheists. It must
have been _fun_ living here. They didn’t deserve this. If it’s a crime,
if humans did this, we’ll have to report it when we go back.’

‘It wasn’t people, Joshua. Look around. All the wounds are gouges.
Bites. Crushed skulls. This was the work of animals, frightened animals.
And that door behind you was broken outwards, not inwards. Whatever did
this didn’t come in through the door. It _stepped_ in here, and pushed
its way _out_ through the door.’

Joshua nodded. ‘So maybe the townsfolk didn’t seek shelter in here. They
were here already, at their morning service. And whatever it was erupted
right in the middle of them. Stepping animals, that were fleeing –
something.’

‘The beasts panicked, evidently. But I do wonder what effect the weed
fumes I detect in the air had on them …’

Joshua found himself staring down at one broken body. Naked,
hair-covered – not human. A body of roughly human proportions, slim,
obviously bipedal, of evident wiry strength, on which was set a small
head, like a chimp’s, with an ape’s flat nose. Not a troll, but some
other kind of humanoid. It had been killed by a knife wound to the
throat; the chest was soaked with drying blood. Somebody had had the
guts to fight back, then, against the fury of the terrified super-strong
ape-men that had stepped into the middle of his or her family.

‘You see this, Lobsang?’

Cameras on the parrot whirred and panned. ‘I see it.’

Joshua stepped back from the corpse and stood, eyes closed, imagining.
‘We’re on a hilltop, the highest point for a good way around. A dense
forest is a difficult place to step in a hurry. If you wanted to flee
with your family across many worlds you’d be forced to congregate in an
open place, a high point, because you’d otherwise be blocked by the
trees. But in this particular world the townsfolk had built their church
on the highest point. Right in the way.’

‘Go on.’

‘I think these creatures were stepping. Gathered on the hilltop, heading
East, fleeing away from the worlds further West, like the trolls.
Stampeding.’

Lobsang asked, ‘Stampeding from _what_? That’s a question we will have
to answer before we can go home, Joshua.’

‘Suddenly they found themselves _here_, in this enclosed space, with all
these humans. They panicked. More and more of them piled in … They
killed everybody in here, they broke out, they hunted down everybody
else.’

‘From what we know of them, Joshua, trolls wouldn’t do that. Consider
how they treated Private Percy. They could have killed him easily.’

‘Perhaps not. But these weren’t trolls.’

‘I would like to suggest we label these creatures _elves_. I’m drawing
on more mythology, partial records of more tentative, misunderstood
encounters, with mysterious, slender, human-like creatures who passed
through our world, ghost-like. The existence of a variety of stepping
humanoids could justify a large body of mythology, Joshua.’

‘And no doubt you’re drawing on other encounters out in the Long Earth
you haven’t told me about,’ Joshua said dryly.

‘That too. By the way,’ Lobsang said more urgently, ‘I’ve spotted
something else. Maybe a quarter-mile west of your position.’

‘Humans? Trolls? What?’

‘Go see.’

29

HE HURRIED OUT of the church, relieved to be in the open air, away from
the stink of blood.

A quarter-mile west, Lobsang had said. Joshua glanced at the position of
the sun, turned and ran that way. Before he had gone a couple of hundred
yards he heard the moaning.

It was a humanoid, lying in the dirt, on her back. Not a troll, perhaps
a variant of elf, given Lobsang’s definition based on what he had found
in the temple, but not identical to the one he’d inspected there – at
any rate another species new to Joshua. Maybe five feet tall, skinny,
coated with hair, she was a stretched, upright-posture chimp with a
hauntingly human face, despite her flat, chimp-like nose. And, unlike
the beast in the temple, her head seemed to bulge, the cranium outsized
for her body to Joshua’s eyes – the brain was evidently larger even than
a human’s. And she was in trouble. She was heavily pregnant. Barely
conscious, she moaned and thrashed, and tore at the fur over her swollen
belly, and watery blood leaked out between her legs.

As Joshua bent over her, her eyes opened. She had big slanting eyes,
like a cartoon alien’s, but ape-brown, lacking the whites of a human’s.
Eyes that widened in alarm, briefly, and looked at him imploringly.

He felt the creature’s stomach. ‘She’s close to term. Something’s wrong.
The baby should have been born by now.’

Lobsang murmured, ‘I would have hazarded that the big head of this
creature’s baby would make it impossible for her to deliver it.’

‘What did you put in this pack?’ Before Lobsang had a chance to reply he
had the pack on his chest open and was rummaging inside it for the
first-aid box. ‘And, Lobsang? Get that ship down here. I’m going to need
more supplies before we’re done.’

‘Done with what?’

‘I’m going to get that baby out.’ He stroked the cheek of the female.
His own mother had once lain alone in a world, in the throes of labour.
‘Too posh to push, are we? Let’s do it the American way.’

‘You’re going to perform a caesarean?’ Lobsang asked. ‘You don’t have
the capacity to do that.’

‘Maybe not, but I’m quite certain you do. And we’re going to do this
together, Lobsang.’ He dumped out the contents of the med kit, trying to
think. ‘I’ll need morphine. Sterilizing fluid. Scalpels. Needles, thread
…’

‘We’re very far from home. You’ll exhaust our medical supplies on this
stunt. I have the facility to manufacture more, but—’

‘I need to do this.’ He could do nothing for the Victims, but he could
do something for this elf female – or at least he could try. It was
Joshua’s way of fixing the world, just a little bit. ‘Help me, Lobsang.’

An aeons-long pause. Then: ‘I have of course full records of most major
medical procedures. Even obstetrics, though I scarcely imagined it would
be needed on this trip.’

Joshua fixed the parrot so Lobsang could see what he was doing, and
spread out his tools. ‘Lobsang. Speak to me. What’s first?’

‘We must consider whether to make a longitudinal incision or a lower
uterine section …’

Joshua hastily shaved the beast’s lower stomach. Then, trying to keep a
steady hand, he held a bronze scalpel over the abdomen wall. And just as
he was about to cut into the flesh, the baby vanished. He felt its
absence, as the womb imploded.

He sat back in shock. ‘It stepped! Damn it – the baby stepped!’

Then the adults came. Two females: a mother, a sister? They moved in a
blur of sprint paces and steps, flickering in and out of existence all
around him. Joshua wouldn’t have believed stepping at that speed was
possible.

Lobsang murmured, ‘Just stay still.’

The adults glared at Joshua, scooped up the mother and disappeared with
soft pops.

Joshua slumped. ‘I don’t believe it. What just happened?’

Lobsang sounded exhilarated. ‘Evolution, Joshua. Evolution just
happened. All upright humanoids have trouble giving birth. You know
that, and your mother learned it the hard way. As we evolved, the female
pelvis shrank to allow for bipedalism, but at the same time the baby’s
brain grew bigger – which is why we’re born so helpless. We emerge with
a lot of growing to do before we’re independent.

‘But it appears that in this species the problem of the pelvis has been
sidestepped. Literally.’ He laughed gently. ‘Here, the baby isn’t born
through the birth canal. It _steps_ out of the womb, Joshua. Placenta,
umbilical and all, I imagine. It makes sense. An ability to step must
shape all aspects of a creature’s life ways, if you give evolution time
to exploit it. And if you don’t have to go to all the trouble of being
born, your brain can get as big as you like.’

Joshua felt empty. ‘They care for their ill. If I’d have opened her up,
the mother wouldn’t have survived the wound I’d have inflicted.’

Lobsang murmured in his ear, ‘You weren’t to know. You tried your best.
Now come home. You need a shower.’

30

FURTHER WEST YET, the Long Earth gradually became greener, arid worlds
rarer. The forested worlds were blanketed thicker, with oak-like trees
spreading out of the river valleys and lapping at the higher ground,
like a rising tide of green. Out on the rarely glimpsed plains the
animals still mostly looked familiar to Joshua – kinds of horses, kinds
of deer, kinds of camels. Yet sometimes he glimpsed stranger beasts,
blocky, low-slung predators that were neither cats nor dogs, herds of
huge long-necked herbivores that looked like elephants crossed with
rhinos.

On the nineteenth day, around Earth West 460,000, Lobsang somewhat
arbitrarily declared they had reached the limit of the Corn Belt. The
worlds here were surely too warm, the forests too thick, to make farming
worthwhile.

And about the same time they crossed the Atlantic coast of Europe,
somewhere around the latitude of Britain. A journey that had become a
dull jaunt across a largely unbroken green blanket of forest became
duller yet as they sailed out over the breast of the sea.

Joshua sat in the observation deck for hour upon hour. Lobsang rarely
spoke, which was a mercy for Joshua. The gondola was almost soundless,
save for the whisper of the air pumps, the whirring of suspended
instrument pallets as they turned this way and that. Cooped up in this
drifting sensory deprivation tank, Joshua fretted about the loss of
muscle tone and fitness. Sometimes he performed stretching exercises,
yoga postures, or jogged on the spot. One thing the airship lacked was a
gym, and Joshua didn’t feel like asking Lobsang to fabricate any
equipment; he’d only end up in rowing-machine challenges with the
ambulant unit.

Lobsang had increased their lateral speed over the ocean. On the
twenty-fifth day they crossed the eastern coast of America, somewhere
around the latitude of New York, and found themselves coasting over
another forest-blanketed landscape.

There was no more talk of stopping, or turning back. They both
recognized the need to go on as long as they could, until they had made
some inroads into the mystery of whatever was driving the humanoid
migration. Joshua found himself shuddering when he imagined the panicky
carnage he had witnessed in the town of the Cosmic Confidence Trick
Victims unleashed in Madison, Wisconsin.

But, once over land again, they reached an arrangement. Lobsang
travelled on during the night. This didn’t trouble Joshua’s sleep, and
Lobsang’s senses were infinitely finer even in the dark than Joshua’s
were by daylight. By day, however, Joshua negotiated a stay of at least
a few hours each day in which he could stand on the good Earth,
whichever good Earth it happened to be. Sometimes Lobsang, in the
ambulant unit, came down in the elevator with him. To Joshua’s surprise
he handled even rugged terrain with ease, strolling, occasionally taking
a swim in a lake, very realistically.

Generally speaking the lapping forest endured, in these remote worlds.
During his daily descents Joshua observed differences of detail,
different suites of herbivores and carnivores, and a gradual change of
character in the grander frame: fewer flowering plants, more ferns, a
drabber feel to the worlds. Joshua was covering twenty or thirty
thousand new worlds in every day-night cycle. But, truth to tell, as
thousands more worlds clicked by it was a case of see one and you’ve
seen them all. In between stops, while Lobsang catalogued his
observations and drafted his technical papers, Joshua sat in his couch
and slept, or let his mind float in green, teeth-filled dreams so vivid
he wasn’t always sure if he was awake or asleep.

There were occasional novelties. Once, somewhere near where Tombstone
would have been had anyone been there to name it, Joshua dutifully took
samples from enormous man-high fungi that would have proved something of
an obstacle to Wyatt Earp and Doc Holliday had they come riding down the
street. The fungi had a creamy look, and not to put too fine a point on
it smelled wonderful, a thought which had also occurred to the little
mice-like creatures that had honeycombed them like Emmental cheese.

In the earpiece Lobsang said, ‘Try some if you wish. And in any case,
bring me back a reasonably large piece for testing.’

‘You want me to eat some before you know if it’s poisonous?’

‘I think that is very unlikely. In fact, I intend to try it myself.’

‘I shouldn’t be surprised. I’ve seen you drink coffee. So you eat too?’

‘Why, yes! A certain input of organic matter is essential. But as I
digest the fungus I will break it down and analyse it. A mildly tedious
process. Many humans with special dietary requirements must go through
the same routine, but without using a mass spectrometer, which
instrument is part of my anatomy. You would be surprised how many
foodstuffs actually do contain nuts …’

Lobsang’s verdict that evening was that a few pounds of the flesh of the
giant mushrooms contained enough proteins, vitamins and minerals to keep
a human alive for weeks, although in culinary terms totally bored.
‘However,’ he added, ‘something that grows so quickly, contains all the
nutrients a human being needs, and can flourish more or less anywhere,
is undoubtedly something for the fast food industry to take an interest
in.’

‘Always glad to help transEarth make a quick buck, Lobsang.’

To break up the routine, that night Joshua sat up to witness the journey
in the dark. Sometimes there were fires, scattered across the darkened
landscapes. But there are always fires, wherever you’ve got trees and
lightning and dry grass. Move on, folks, nothing to see here.

He complained about the drabness of the view.

‘What did you expect?’ said Lobsang. ‘Generally speaking, I would expect
many Earths to be, at least at a first glance – and remember, Joshua, a
first glance is mostly all we get – rather dull. Remember when you were
young, all those pictures of dinosaurs in the Jurassic? All those
different species gathered in one snappy frame, with a tyrannosaur
wrestling with a stegosaur in the foreground? Nature generally isn’t
like that, and nor were dinosaurs. Nature, by and large, is either
reasonably silent, or earth-shakingly noisy. Predators and their prey
spread out sparsely. Which is why I have maintained my habit of stopping
in relatively drought-stricken worlds, where many specimens collect at
waterholes, albeit in rather artificial conditions.’

‘But how much are we missing, Lobsang? Even when we stop at a world we
barely take a look at it before going on, despite your probes and
rockets. If all we are getting is one first glance after another …’ From
his own experience on his sabbaticals, Joshua had a visceral feeling
that you needed to live in a world to understand it, rather than scan it
as you riffled the Long Earth pack. This was the thirty-third day of the
journey. ‘So where are we now?’

‘I assume you mean in terms of Earth geography? Approximately around
Northern California. Why?’

‘Let’s take a halt. I’ve been more than a month in this flying hotel.
Let’s spend at least one whole day in one place just, well, chilling
out, OK? And _experiencing_. One whole day, and a night. You could fill
up your water tanks. And frankly I am getting stir crazy.’

‘Very well. I can hardly object. I will find a suitably intriguing world
and cease stepping. As we are over California, would you like me to
fabricate a surfboard for you?’

‘Ha ha.’

‘You have changed, Joshua, do you know that?’

‘You mean because I’m arguing with you?’

‘As a matter of fact, yes. I am intrigued; you are quicker, less
hesitant, less like a person walking around in his own head. Of course,
you’re still you. Indeed I’m wondering if possibly you are more _you_
than you have been for a very long time, now that you know how you were
born.’

Joshua shrugged this off. ‘Don’t push it, Lobsang. Thanks for the
bracelet. But you’re no therapist. Maybe travel broadens the mind—’

‘Joshua, if _your_ mind was any broader it would start pouring out of
your ears.’

Though it was midnight Joshua wasn’t sleepy, and he began to fix a meal.

‘How about a movie, Joshua?’

‘I’d prefer to read. Any suggestions?’

The book screen lit up. ‘I know of no more apposite a title!’

Joshua stared. ‘_Roughing It_?’

‘In many respects, Twain’s best work, I always think, although I will
always have a soft spot for _Life on the Mississippi_. Read it. It is
what it says, a journey into new territory, and often very funny in an
acerbic way. Enjoy!’

And Joshua enjoyed it. He read, and dozed, and this time dreamed of
Indian attacks.

The next day, around noon, the stepping stopped with that familiar
lurch. Joshua found himself looking down at a lake, a shield of
grey-blue that broke up the forest.

Lobsang announced, ‘Surf’s up, dude.’

‘Oh, good grief.’

On the ground, the forest was a pleasant place to be. Squadrons of bats
hurtled after flies in the green-lit air above, air that smelled of damp
wood and leaf mould. The soft sounds around Joshua were, oddly, much
_quieter_ than mere silence would have been. Joshua had learned that
absolute silence in nature was such an unusual state that it was not
only noticeable but positively menacing. But the murmur of this deep
forest was a natural white noise.

Lobsang said, ‘Joshua, look to your left. Quietly now.’

They were like horses, shy-looking, furtive creatures, with oddly
curving necks and padded feet, the size of puppies. And there was
something like an elephant with a stubby trunk, but only a couple of
feet tall at the shoulder.

‘Cute,’ said Joshua.

‘The lake is straight ahead,’ Lobsang said.

The lake was surrounded by a wall of tree trunks and a fringe of open
ground. The still water was choked with reeds and rushes, and in the
rare open sunlight, under a blue sky, exotic-looking birds descended in
clouds of pink-white flapping. On the far shore Joshua glimpsed a
dog-like animal, tremendously large – it had to be four, five yards
long, with a massive head and enormous jaws that must themselves have
protruded for another yard. Before he could raise his binoculars it had
slipped into the forest shadows.

He said, ‘That was surely a mammal. But it had jaws like a crocodile.’

‘A mammal, yes. In fact I suspect it’s a distant relative of the whale –
our whale, I mean. And there are real crocodiles in the water, Joshua,
as usual. A universal.’

‘It’s as if parts of animals have been jumbled up – as if somebody’s
been playing at evolution.’

‘We are now many hundreds of thousands of steps from the Datum, Joshua.
In this remote world we’re seeing representatives of many of the animal
orders we have on our branch of the probability tree, but as if
reimagined. Evolution is evidently chaotic, like the weather—’

He heard a kind of grunting, like a pig, a big heavy-chested pig, coming
from behind him.

‘Joshua. Don’t run. Behind you. Turn very slowly.’

He obeyed. He visualized the weapons he carried, the knife at his belt,
the air gun in his chest pack. And up above was the airship, Lobsang
with a flying arsenal at his command. He tried to feel reassured.

Huge hogs. That was his first impression. Half a dozen of them, each as
tall as a man at the shoulder, with powerful-looking legs, and backs
that rose in bristling humps, and tiny coal-black eyes, and jaws long
and strong. And each of them carried a humanoid – not a troll, a skinny
upright figure with a chimp face and rust-brown hair, sitting astride
his hog as if riding a huge ugly horse.

Joshua was a long way from the cover of the trees.

‘More elves,’ Lobsang whispered.

‘The same breed that wiped out the Victims?’

‘Or their first cousins. The Long Earth is a big arena, Joshua; there
must be many speciation events.’

‘You sent me down here to encounter these creatures, didn’t you? This is
what you call a restful break?’

‘You can’t deny it’s interesting, Joshua.’

One elf called out, a pant-hoot cry like a chimp’s, and kicked his mount
in the ribs. The six beasts trotted forward at Joshua, with guttural
grunts.

‘Lobsang, your advice?’

The hogs were speeding up.

‘Lobsang—’

‘Run!’

Joshua ran, but the pigs ran faster. He had barely closed any ground on
the descending airship, or the forest, when a huge body came plummeting
past him. Joshua smelled dirt and blood and shit and a kind of greasy
musk, and a small fist slammed into his back and sent him sprawling.

The pigs capered around him, oddly playful despite their size and bulk.
Their huge random violence was terrifying. He expected to be crushed, or
gored on the canine teeth embedded in the tips of their snouts. But
instead the pigs kept running by him, and the humanoids, the elves,
whooping and hooting, leaned over to make passes at him. Blades flashed
at him – blades of stone! He cowered and rolled.

At last they pulled back, into a loose circle around him. Shaking, he
got to his feet, feeling for his own weapons. He wasn’t cut, he
realized, save for nicks on his face, and on his shoulder where a swipe
had gone through the cloth of his coverall. But they had cut the supply
pack from his chest, even pickpocketed the knife at his waist. He had
been expertly stripped, leaving only the parrot on his shoulder, the
processor pack on his back.

The elves were toying with him.

Now the elves stood up on the backs of their strange mounts. They
weren’t like the trolls, they were much skinnier, more graceful, lithe,
strong, their hairy upright bodies like those of child gymnasts. They
had long tree-climbing arms, very human legs, and small heads with
wizened chimp-like faces. They all seemed to be male. Some of them were
sporting skinny erections.

Joshua looked for positives. ‘Well, they’re smaller than me. Five feet,
maybe?’

‘Don’t underestimate them,’ Lobsang’s whisper in his headset urged.
‘They’re stronger than you. And this is their world, remember.’

The pant-hooting cries began again, and seemed to reach a crescendo.
Then one of the elves kicked his animal’s ribs. The beast, its own eyes
fixed on Joshua, began to stride steadily forward. The elf bared
human-looking teeth and hissed.

This time they weren’t playing.

There are moments when terror is like a treacle that slows down time.
Once when Joshua was a kid he had slipped over an edge at a limestone
quarry, just a ten-minute bike ride from the Home, and his friends
couldn’t haul him back, and he had had to hang on while they ran for
help. His arms had hurt like hell. But what he remembered most of all
was the tiny detail of the rock right in front of his eyes. There had
been flecks of mica in it, and lichen, a miniature forest dried yellow
by the sun. That little landscape had become his whole world, until
somebody somewhere started yelling, and some other guy’s hands grabbed
his wrists, hauled on arms that felt like they were filled with hot lead
…

The elf leapt in the air, and flickered out of existence. The hog
trotted on, grunting, speeding up. The realization came to Joshua, with
all the clarity of a mica fleck on a sun-warmed rock, that the elf was
stalking him. And it had _stepped_.

The hog was still coming. Joshua stood his ground. At the last second it
hesitated, stumbled, veered away from him.

And the elf returned, stretching, its feet braced on the hog’s back, its
hands clamped around Joshua’s neck – hands in place to throttle Joshua,
_even as it stepped back into the world_. Joshua was astonished at the
precision of the manoeuvre.

But now the elf’s strong ape hands were squeezing, and Joshua was driven
to the ground, unable to breathe. He reached, but the elf’s arms were
longer than his; he flailed, unable to reach the creature’s snarling
face, and blackness rimmed his vision. He tried to think. His weapons,
his pack, were stolen and scattered, but the parrot still sat on his
shoulder. He grabbed the parrot’s frame with both hands, and shoved it
in the face of the elf. Bits of glass and plastic erupted, the elf fell
back screaming, and mercifully that death grip at his throat was
released.

But the other elves on their hogs screamed and closed.

‘Joshua!’ A loudspeaker, booming from the air. The airship was coming
down, slowly, ponderously, dangling a rope ladder.

He got to his feet, gasping for breath through a crushed throat, but a
bank of elves on hogs stood between him and the ladder, and the injured
elf on the ground shrieked its fury. The only gap in the circle
surrounding him was the way that lead elf had come.

So he ran that way, away from the airship, but out of the circle of
elves. The wrecked parrot was still attached to his coverall by cables;
it dragged through the dirt behind him. The yelling elves pursued him.
If he could somehow double back, or maybe reach the forest—

‘Joshua! No! Watch out for the—’

The ground suddenly gave way under him.

He fell a yard or so, and found himself in a hollow surrounded by dogs –
no, like a mix of dogs and bears, he’d glimpsed this kind before, lithe
canine bodies with powerful heads and muzzles like bears. Their
black-furred bodies squirmed all around him, females, puppies. This was
some kind of den, not a trap. But even the puppies were snapping,
snarling packets of aggression. The smallest of them, it was almost
cute, closed its bear-like jaws on Joshua’s leg. He kicked, trying to
loosen the little creature’s grip. The other dog-bears barked and
snarled, and Joshua expected them to fall on him in a moment.

But here came the elves on their swinish mounts. The adult dogs rose up
out of their den in a pack, and hurled themselves at the hogs. The fight
erupted in a cloud of yelps, barks, grunts, cries, pant-hoots, snapping
teeth, screams of pain and sprays of blood, while the elves flashed in
and out of existence, as if glimpsed under a strobe lamp.

Joshua climbed out of the den and ran away from the fight, or tried to.
But that stubborn pup clung to his leg, and he was still dragging the
absurd wreckage of the parrot. He glanced up. The airship was almost
overhead. Joshua jumped for the rope ladder, grabbed it, and viciously
kicked away the pup. The airship rose immediately.

Below, the dogs had now encircled the huge hogs, which fought back
ferociously. Joshua saw one big dog-bear sink its teeth into the neck of
a screaming hog, which crashed to the ground. But another hog scooped up
a dog in its big tusked jaw and threw it through the air, squealing, its
chest ripped open. Meanwhile the elves flickered through the carnage.
Joshua saw one elf face a dog that leapt for his throat. The elf flicked
away and reappeared beside the dog as it sailed through the air, spun
with balletic grace, and swiped at the animal’s torso with a thin stone
blade, disembowelling the dog before it hit the ground. The elves were
fighting for survival, but Joshua got the impression they were fighting
individually, not for each other; it wasn’t a battle so much as a series
of private duels. It was every man for himself. Or would have been, if
they had been men.

And the airship rose up, beyond the reach of the trees, and into the
sunlight. The fight was reduced to a dusty, blood-splashed detail in a
landscape across which the airship’s shadow drifted serenely. Joshua,
still barely able to breathe, climbed the ladder, and spilled into the
gondola.

‘You kicked a puppy,’ Lobsang said accusingly.

‘Add it to the charge sheet,’ he gasped. ‘Next time you pick a vacation
site, Lobsang, think a bit more Disneyland.’ Then the darkness around
his vision that had been there ever since the close encounter with the
elf folded over him.

31

HE WAS PRETTY badly hurt, he learned later. Lots of minor injuries, many
of which he hadn’t noticed at the time. The damage to his neck, his
throat. Scratches, cuts, even a bite mark – not from the puppy at his
ankle, this was the imprint of human-like teeth in his shoulder.
Lobsang’s ambulant treated the cuts, dosed him with antibiotics, and fed
him painkillers.

He drifted away. Sometimes he woke briefly, fuzzily, to see bone-white
stars above, or green carpets rolling beneath the airship. The steady
swinging rhythm of stepping was comforting. He slept away days, in the
end.

But the further they travelled, heading ever West, the more Joshua
became aware of that odd pressure in his head, even as he dozed. The
kind of stuffy feeling he always got when he had to go back to the
Datum: the pressure of all those crowding minds, drowning the Silence.
Could it be, as some said, that the Long Earth was a kind of loop that
closed back on itself, and he was being brought back to the start, back
to the Datum? That would be strange enough. But if not, what lay ahead?
And what was driving the trolls across the arc of worlds?

When he finally awoke fully the stepping had stopped once more. He sat
up on his couch and looked around.

‘Take it easy, Joshua,’ came Lobsang’s disembodied voice.

‘We’ve stopped.’ His voice was husky, but it worked.

‘You’ve slept deeply. Joshua, I’m glad you’re awake. We must talk. You
do realize you were never in any real danger, don’t you?’

He rubbed his throat. ‘It didn’t feel that way at the time.’

‘I could have taken out those elves individually at any time. I have
advanced laser sighting on—’

‘Why didn’t you?’

‘You’d asked for shore leave. I thought you were enjoying yourself!’

‘As you said before, we need to work on our communication, Lobsang.’

Joshua pushed back the throw, stood up and stretched. He was wearing
shorts and a T-shirt that he couldn’t remember putting on. He didn’t
feel like running a marathon, but on the other hand he wasn’t passing
out. He went to the head, walking carefully, and briskly washed some of
the sweat off his body. His small scars were healing, and his throat no
more than twinged. He emerged, and took fresh clothing from the closet.

Through the stateroom window he saw that the airship was anchored over a
thick reef of rainforest that stretched to a green-cloaked horizon. Mist
banks hung over swathed valleys. The sun was low; Joshua guessed it was
early morning. The airship was maybe a hundred feet up.

Lobsang said, ‘We haven’t been stopping every day, but it’s difficult to
observe much from up here.’

‘Because of the thickness of the forest?’

‘I’ve been sending down the ambulant unit. We’re far from home, Joshua.
We’re over nine hundred thousand steps out. Think of that. You can see
how it is here – this is typical, forest blanketing the landscape as far
as we can see. Probably covering the whole continent. Difficult to make
observations.’

‘But there’s evidently something here you’re interested in, yes?’

‘Look at the live feed,’ Lobsang said.

The image in the wall screen was jittery, uncertain, taken from a camera
far away. It showed an opening in the forest, a gash in the canopy
evidently caused by the fall of a giant tree, whose trunk lay at the
centre of the clearing, coated with lichen and exotic fungi. The access
of light had allowed saplings and under-storey shrubs to shoot up.

And the new growth attracted humanoids. Joshua spotted what looked like
a pack of trolls. They were sitting in the open in a tight cluster,
patiently grooming, each picking insects from the back of the one in
front. They sang, all the time, snatches of melody like half-forgotten
songs – scraps of harmony in two, three, four parts, improvised on the
spot and then forgotten, dimly heard by distant microphones.

‘Trolls?’

‘Apparently,’ Lobsang murmured. ‘It would take musicologists a century
to unravel the structure of that singing. Keep watching.’

As Joshua’s eyes became accustomed to the shaky images, he began to see
more groups of humanoids, across the clearing and in the forest shadows,
some of kinds he didn’t recognize, at play, working, grooming, maybe
hunting. They were all humanoids, it seemed, rather than apes; any time
one of them stood up you could see the neatness of its bipedal stance.
He said, ‘They don’t seem to bother each other. The different kinds.’

‘Evidently not. In fact quite the opposite.’

‘Why have they congregated here? After all, they’re different species.’

‘I suspect, in this particular community, they have become codependent.
They use each other. They probably have subtly different sensory ranges,
so that one kind may detect a danger before the others: we know that
trolls use ultrasonics, for example. Similarly, you get different
species of dolphins swimming together. I’m following your advice, you
see, Joshua. I’ve been taking more time to inspect Long Earth marvels
like this aggregation of humanoids. Remarkable sight, isn’t it? It’s
like a dream of humanity’s evolutionary past, many hominid types
together.’

‘But what of the future, Lobsang? What happens when human colonists get
out here in earnest? How can this survive?’

‘Well, that’s another question. And what happens if they are all driven
East in the greater migration? Do you wish to go down?’

‘No.’

Later, as the airship sailed on, they talked it over, the strange
uniqueness of mankind in the Long Earth. And Lobsang described how, not
long after Step Day, he had initiated searches for human cousins across
a thousand Earths, and he told Joshua the story of a man called Nelson
Azikiwe.

32

ACCORDING TO THE official family story he was christened Nelson after
the famous admiral. However, in reality he was probably named after
Nelson Mandela. According to his mother _that_ Nelson now sat on God’s
right hand, and Nelson junior, growing up, took the view that this was a
good thing, in that Mandela would be in a position to prevent the
vengeful god of the Israelites loading yet more troubles on the backs of
humanity.

His mother had raised him in Jesus, as she put it, and for her sake he
persevered, and in the end, after a somewhat complicated career, and a
still more complicated philosophical journey, he took holy orders.
Eventually he was invited to Britain to bring the Good News to the
heathen: proof positive that what goes around comes around. He quite
liked the English. They tended to say sorry a lot, which was quite
understandable given their heritage and the crimes of their ancestors.
And for some reason the Archbishop of Canterbury sent him to a rural
parish that was so white it glared. Perhaps the Archbishop had a sense
of humour, or wanted to make a point, or possibly she just wanted to see
what would happen.

This wasn’t the United Kingdom that his mother had talked about when he
was young, that was certain. Now, with her long dead, he walked through
a London that contained a great multihued population. You hardly saw a
news bulletin that wasn’t delivered by a reader whose recent ancestors
had walked under African stars. Hell, there were even black men and
women to tell you when it was going to rain on the cradle of democracy.
This despite the eeriness of an emptying country, a capital city being
abandoned suburb by suburb.

He said as much to the retiring incumbent of St John on the Water, the
Reverend David Blessed, a man who clearly supported the theory of
nominative determinism. And who said, when he saw Nelson Azikiwe for the
first time, ‘My son, you won’t be short of a dinner invitation for the
next six months at least!’ That turned out to be a successful prophecy
on the part of the Reverend Blessed who, with the help of some family
money, was retiring early to his own cottage, so that, in his own words,
he could ‘watch the fun when you take your first service.’

He left the occupancy of the rectory to Nelson, who had it to himself
apart from an elderly woman who cooked him his lunch every day and
tidied up around the place. She wasn’t very talkative, and for his part
he didn’t know what to talk to her about. Besides he had enough on his
plate due to the fact the presbytery had no draught-proofing whatsoever,
and a plumbing system that the Lord Himself could surely barely
understand; sometimes it flushed itself in the middle of the night for
no apparent reason.

This was a part of England miraculously untouched by the Long Earth. Or
even, as far as Nelson could see, the twenty-first century. The Middle
English were the Zulus of the British, he concluded. It seemed to Nelson
that every other man in the village had at some time been a warrior,
quite often of high rank. Now retired, they looked after their gardens,
drilling potatoes instead of men. But he was taken aback by their
courtesy. Their wives baked him so many cakes that he had to share them
with the Reverend Blessed (retired), who, Nelson suspected, had been
told to hold on and report back on Nelson’s progress to the authorities
in Lambeth Palace.

They were talking in David’s cottage while the Reverend Blessed’s wife
was at a meeting of the Women’s Institute.

‘Of course there will always be those who are perennially
unreconstructed,’ said David. ‘But you won’t find very many of them
around here, because the reflexes of the English class system take over,
you see? You are tall, handsome, and speak English considerably better
than their own children do. And when you quoted passages from W. H.
Hudson’s _A Shepherd’s Life_ at the funeral of old Humphrey, after the
service – which incidentally you took magnificently – some of them
sidled up to me and asked if I had put you up to that. Of course, I told
them that I hadn’t. And believe me when that news got around, well, you
had passed. They realized that you are not only very fluent in English,
but also fluent in _England_, which means a lot down here.

‘And then, to cap it all, you took an allotment, and are seen digging
and planting and in general tilling the soil of the Good Earth, and that
got everybody on your side. You see, everybody was a little nervous when
they heard about you coming. They were, and how can I put this,
expecting you to be a little more … earnest? You seem remarkably well
prepared for your mission among us.’

Nelson said, ‘In a way my whole life has prepared me for this, yes. You
know, as a child I was lucky, very lucky for a _bongani_ like me,
running around in the South Africa of those days. But my parents could
see a better future for those prepared to work for it. You might have
thought them tough parents, and I suppose you might be right. But they
kept me off the streets and made me go to school.

‘And then of course the Black Corporation came up with its “Searching
for the Future” programme, and my mother picked it up on her radar and
made sure I got myself an interview, and after that it was as if I had
been selected by fate. Apparently I hit the mark on every test they set.
Suddenly the Corporation found it had got itself a poster boy, a poor
African kid with an IQ of 210. They more or less told me to ask for the
moon. But I didn’t know what I wanted to do. Not until Step Day … Where
were you on Step Day, David?’

The elderly priest walked over to a large oak desk, produced a large day
book, turned the pages, and said, ‘I see that I was getting ready for
evensong when I first heard what was going on. What did I think of it?
Who had time to think coherently at all?

‘It wasn’t too bad around here. The countryside is different from the
town, you see? People don’t panic so easily, and I don’t think many of
the kids round here were very much interested in fiddling with
electronic components. Well, the closest place with a ready supply would
be Swindon. But everyone watched what was happening on television.
Around here people were looking at the skies to see if they could _see_
these other worlds – that was how little we understood. But the wind was
still blowing in the trees, the cows got milked, and I think we just
spent our time listening to the news bulletins, interspersed with _The
Archers_.

‘I don’t really remember formulating any sort of position whatsoever
until it was definitively announced that there were indeed other Earths,
millions of them, as close to us as a thought and, apparently, ours for
the taking. Now _that_ made ears prick up around here. It was about
land! In the countryside land gets attention.’ He looked into his brandy
glass, saw that it was empty and shrugged. ‘In short, I must say I found
myself wondering “What hath God wrought?”’

‘Book of Numbers,’ said Nelson, instinctively.

‘Well done, Nelson! And also, rather pleasingly, they were the first
official words sent by Samuel Morse over the electric telegraph in
1838.’ He topped up his brandy glass, and made a complex little sign to
enquire of Nelson if he might like another.

But the younger man seemed distracted. ‘What hath God wrought? Let me
tell you what God wrought, David, oh, indeed. Step Day came, and we
found out about the Long Earth, and suddenly the world was full of new
questions. By this time I had read all about Louis Leakey, and the work
he and his wife did in Olduvai Gorge. I was thrilled at the thought that
everyone in the world was an African at the core. So I said to the
Corporation that I wanted to know how man had become man. I wanted to
learn _why_. Most of all, I wanted to know what it was that we were
supposed to be doing here, in the new context of the Long Earth. In
short, I wanted to know what we were _for_.

‘Of course, my mother and her faith had lost me by then. I was too smart
for my own God, so to speak. I had found time to read up about the
affairs of the four centuries following the birth of the infant Jesus,
and indeed to look at the erratic progress of Christianity since then.
It seemed to me that whatever the truth of the universe was, it
certainly wasn’t something that could have been discerned by a
quarrelsome bunch of antique ecclesiasticals.’

David barked a laugh.

‘And I loved palaeontology. I was fascinated by the bones and what they
could tell us. Especially now that we have tools that researchers even
twenty years ago couldn’t have dreamed of. _That_ was the way to the
truth. And I was good at it. Extremely good, it was as if the bones sang
to me …’

The Reverend Blessed wisely stayed silent.

‘So, it was not long after Step Day, I got a call from the people at the
Black Corporation, who said they had fixed it for me to set up and lead
expeditions to as many iterations of Olduvai Gorge as funds would allow.
To the birthplace of mankind, on the new worlds.

‘Now when you are dealing with the Black Corporation, funds are
essentially without limit. The problem we had was a shortage of skilled
people. It was a very good time to be a palaeontologist, and we trained
up many youngsters. Anyone with a suitable degree and a trowel could
have a gorge of his or her very own to work. Whatever else was
happening, the bone-hunters had found their Eldorado.

‘Well, something like the African Rift Valley persists across much of
the Long Earth; geology is relatively fixed. And, as hoped, we did find
on many occasions bones in the target area that were definitely hominid.
I worked on the project for four years. We extended our fields of work,
and it was always the same: oh yes, there were bones, there were always
bones. I selected other likely sites around the world which might
possibly have been the home of a different Lucy – a Chinese branch, for
example, the result of an early diffusion out of Africa.

‘But after more than two _thousand_ excavations in contiguous Earths, by
Black Corporation-funded expeditions and others, we never found any sign
of the development of nascent humanity beyond those very early bones,
some deformed, some mauled by animals, most of them very small. There
was nothing past the australopithecines, the Lucies. The cradles of
mankind were empty.

‘There are still workers out there, still searching, and until last year
I was still running the programme. But in the end the emptiness of the
Long Earth – empty of humanity at least – disturbed me so much that I
resigned. I took the generous amount that the Black Corporation gave me
as a farewell present, although I know they hope that one day I will
return to the fold.

‘I’d had enough, you see, enough of those empty skulls. Enough of those
little bones. You could see the striving, but not the arriving. And one
day I suddenly found myself wondering where it had all gone wrong, in
all those other worlds. Or maybe it went wrong _here_? Maybe the
evolution of mankind is some ghastly cosmic mistake.’

‘And so you returned to the Church? Quite a change of course.’

‘I’ve been told that no one in recent history has been ordained as
quickly as I was. I understand that in times past the Church of England
was benign to people who, in those days, were considered natural
philosophers. Many a vicar spent his Sunday afternoons cheerfully
trapping new species of butterfly in jars. I always thought what a
wonderful life that was: the Bible in one hand and a stout bottle of
ether in the other.’

‘Isn’t that how Darwin got started?’

‘Darwin didn’t get as far as Holy Orders. He became rather distracted by
beetles … And that is why you see me here. I needed a new framework, I
suppose. I thought, why not get to grips with theology? Take it
seriously. See what I am able to tease out of it. My tentative
preliminary conclusion, by the way, is that there is no God. No
offence.’

‘Oh, none taken.’

‘That means I must find out what there _is_ instead. But right now, as
for my own philosophy, there is a quotation that rather sums it up:
“When you arise in the morning, think of what a precious privilege it is
to be alive – to breathe, to think, to enjoy, to love.”’

The Reverend Blessed smiled. ‘Ah, good old Marcus Aurelius. But, Nelson,
he was a pagan!’

‘Which rather proves my point. May I help myself to another splash of
brandy, David?’

‘Nelson was essentially right,’ Lobsang told Joshua. ‘The hominid line,
and the apes from which they came, clearly had great evolutionary
potential. But if the ability to step first originated on the Datum,
evidently the stepping humanoids quickly moved out far from Datum Earth,
leaving scant traces in the fossil record; only on the Datum will you
find bones to illustrate the slow plod towards mankind.’

‘What does it mean, Lobsang? That was Nelson’s question. What is the
Long Earth _for_?’

‘I suppose that’s what we came out here to find out. Shall we proceed?’

33

ON THEY SAILED, leaving the intricate humanoid community far behind.
They were travelling east for now, away from the Pacific coast and back
into the interior of the continent.

And, almost unobserved, they passed another milestone: a million steps
from Datum. There was no dramatic change, no new perception, only the
silent turning-over of a new digit on the earthometers. But now they
were in the worlds the wavefront pioneers called the High Meggers.
Nobody, not even Lobsang, knew for sure if anybody had actually stepped
this far before.

The jungle that clad North America gradually grew thicker, denser,
steamier. From the air you saw little but a green blanket, punctured
here and there by scraps of open water. Lobsang’s aerial surveys
suggested that in these worlds there might be forests all the way to the
ice-free poles.

As before, every day Lobsang paused to allow Joshua down to explore, and
stretch his legs. Joshua would find himself in a dense forest of ferns
of all sizes, and trees both unfamiliar and familiar, strung with
climbers like honeysuckle and grapevines. The flowers were always a riot
of colour. Some days Joshua came back with bunches of grape-like fruit,
small and hard compared with domesticated varieties of grape, but still
sweet. The dense forest inhibited the growth of large animals, but there
were strange hopping animals, a little like kangaroos but with long
flexible snouts. Joshua learned to trust these creatures, whose trails,
cleared through the undergrowth, led reliably to open water. And he saw
aerial creatures in the canopy itself. Giant flapping wings. And, once,
a flopping, squirming thing that looked for all the world like an
octopus, spinning like a Frisbee through the canopy trees. How the hell
had _that_ got there?

He spent a couple of nights outside the ship, just for old times’ sake.
It was almost like his sabbaticals, especially if he stepped a world or
two away from Lobsang, but his lord and master didn’t approve of that.
Still, when he got the chance he would sit by his fire, listening for
the Silence. On a good night he thought he could feel the other Earths,
vast empty spaces all around him, just beyond the reach of his tiny
circle of firelight. Untold possibilities. And then he would climb back
up to the airship, leaving behind a whole world with its own unique
mysteries barely examined.

On they would travel, to another, and another yet.

And then, after fifty days, more than one and a third million worlds
from home, the land and air seemed to shimmer, and the forest melted as
the worlds cleared away, to reveal a sea that stretched to the horizon,
foam-flecked and glimmering, at the heart of North America.

Still stepping, Lobsang turned the airship south, looking for dry land.

On world after world the sea persisted, teeming with life, the green of
algal blooms, pale white shapes that might have been coral reefs, and
creatures that jumped and swam that might have been dolphins. Cautious
dips to the water level proved that the sea was saline. That didn’t
necessarily mean this American Sea was open to the wider world ocean;
inland seas could become saline through evaporation. The water samples
Lobsang retrieved were full of exotic seaweed strands and crustaceans –
exotic to a specialist anyhow. Lobsang stored specimens and images.

At last, heading south, they hit a coastline. Lobsang cut the stepping,
and they inspected one particular world of this latest band, selected at
random. They came to fog banks first, then huge bird-like forms swooping
low over the sea, and then the land itself, where dense forest spilled
almost all the way down to the shore. Lobsang thought that the higher
land they were approaching might be some relative of the Ozark Plateau.

From here they sailed east until they came to a tremendous valley,
perhaps carved by some distant cousin of the Mississippi or the Ohio.
They followed this north to an estuary where the river spilled into the
inland sea. The fresh water pushing into the saline ocean was visible
from a muddy discoloration that persisted miles out from the coast.

And here, in the open, by the banks of the freshwater river, the animals
came to drink. As they cruised on, once more stepping through the
worlds, Joshua watched herds of tremendous beasts flick into existence
and vanish, quadrupeds and bipeds, creatures that might almost have been
elephants, others that might almost have been flightless birds, with
lesser creatures running at their feet. A few seconds’ glimpse, and then
another extraordinary, unearthly scene, and then another.

‘Like a Ray Harryhausen show reel,’ Lobsang said.

Joshua asked, ‘Who’s Ray Harryhausen? And what’s a show reel?’

‘Tonight’s movie will be the original version of _Jason and the
Argonauts_, followed by an illustrated talk. Don’t miss it. But – what a
find, Joshua! This American Sea, I mean. All this coastline. What a
place to come and colonize! _This_ North America has a second
Mediterranean, an enclosed sea, with all the riches and cultural
connectivity that promises. As for the potential for colonization, it
knocks the Corn Belt into a cocked hat. Why, this could be the seat of a
new civilization altogether. Not to mention the opportunities for
tourism. Just one of these worlds alone – and we’ve already sailed over
hundreds of them.’

Joshua said dryly, ‘Maybe they’ll call it “the Lobsang Belt”.’

If Lobsang got the joke he didn’t reveal it.

Another night, another easy sleep for Joshua.

And when he awoke the next morning the monitor in his room showed what
looked like a close-up of a campfire.

Joshua jumped out of bed. Lobsang came into his room when he was pulling
on his pants, causing him to pull a little quicker. He would have to
teach Lobsang the meaning of the word _knock_.

Lobsang smiled. ‘Good morning, Joshua, on this auspicious day.’

‘Yeah, yeah.’ Joshua had no time for Lobsang’s nonsense today. The idea
of company, authentic, undeniably human company, was electrifying.
Socks, sturdy boots … ‘OK, I’m ready to go down. Lobsang – that fire,
whoever built it. Are they human?’

‘Apparently so. You might find her sunbathing among the dinosaurs.’

‘Dinosaurs! Her! Sunbathing!’

‘You’ll have to see for yourself. But be careful, Joshua. The dinosaurs
look amiable enough. Well, some of them. But _she_ might bite …’

Apart from the elevator there was now a second means of getting to the
ground, a highly technical business which consisted of an old car tyre
(scavenged from a store of random garbage in the airship’s capacious
hold), a length of rope and a simple panic button on Joshua’s chest pack
which could call the tyre down, or, more importantly, get it moving
quickly back up if he were being chased. Joshua felt better for having
installed this escape mechanism as a backup after his encounter with the
murderous elves, and these days always insisted on having the tyre at
ground level, ready to run directly towards in an emergency.

Now he was being lowered towards a new Earth, once again. And there was
another human here … somewhere. He could _feel_ it. He really could.
People made a world feel different, to Joshua.

As was becoming customary for Lobsang, he had decided to land Joshua a
little way from the target to allow for a cautious approach, as opposed
to a drop from out of the open sky. So the airship floated over the edge
of the estuary, a place of scattered trees, scrub, marshland and small
lakes. The air was fresh but laden with the smells of salt, and a kind
of wet-rot stink from the jungle’s edge – and a subtler, drier scent,
Joshua thought as he descended, that he couldn’t quite place. The denser
forest lapped to the edge of this muddy plain, tumbling down from the
higher land to the south. And that thread of smoke rose up from
somewhere inland.

Joshua came down a little way from the water’s edge, in the forest. Once
on the ground he walked forward, watchfully, heading for the smoke. ‘I
smell … dryness. Rust. It’s like the reptile house in a zoo.’

‘This world may be very different from the Datum, Joshua. We’ve come a
long way across the contingency tree.’

The forest cleared away, revealing a stretch of beach, the slow-moving
water. And on a bluff of rocks, close to the water, Joshua came upon a
group of fat, big, seal-like creatures lazing in the sun, around a dozen
including a few infants. Pale blond hair lay streamlined along their
heavy bodies, and they had small, almost conical heads with black eyes,
and small mouths, and flat nostrils like a chimp’s. They were like seals
with humanoid faces. The parrot on Joshua’s shoulder, repaired since
being used as a club, whirred as lenses panned and zoomed.

The seal-beasts noticed the visitor long before he got close. They
looked up, ape heads swivelling, and with hoots of alarm they clambered
off their rocks and slithered over the sand towards the water, the
calves scuttling after the adults. Joshua saw that their limbs were a
kind of compromise between ape-like arms and legs and true flippers,
with stubby hands and feet that had webbing stretched between fingers
and toes. They slid easily into the water, evidently much more graceful
in the sea than on land.

But then there was a flurry of spray, and an upper jaw the size of a
small boat came levering out of the water. The seal-beasts scattered in
panic, squealing and thrashing.

‘Crocodile,’ Joshua muttered. ‘Every damn place you go.’ He picked up a
flat stone and headed for the water’s edge.

‘Joshua, be careful—’

‘Hey, you!’ He hurled the stone as hard as he could, skipping it over
the water. He was gratified to see it slam into the croc’s right eye.
The beast turned in the water, rumbling.

And it came bursting out of the sea, upright, on powerful-looking hind
legs. The croc must have been twelve yards long; it was as if some
amphibious craft had suddenly raced out of the water. He could feel the
very ground shudder as the croc’s footsteps slammed into the earth. And
it was coming for him, enraged.

‘_Shit_.’ Joshua turned and ran.

He reached the cover of another forest clump, and pushed his way into
the trees’ damp shadow. Excluded by the trees the beast roared, turned
its huge head, baffled – and then bounded away along the beach, after
some other prey.

Joshua leaned on a tree, breathing hard. There were flowers on the trees
around him, and on the ground; the place was full of colour, despite the
shade. And there was noise everywhere, calls echoing around the forest:
squeaking cries from the canopy, deeper grumbles from further away.

‘You were lucky with that super-croc,’ Lobsang said. ‘Stupid, but
lucky.’

‘But if he’s snacking on those humanoids right now, it’s my fault. They
_were_ humanoids, weren’t they, Lobsang?’

‘I would say so. But they’re only part-adapted – two million years isn’t
long enough to turn a bipedal ape into a seal. These humanoids are like
Darwin’s flightless cormorants …’

Shadows shifted, huge. Something passed across Joshua’s sky, a
tremendous mass, like a building on the move. A foot slammed down, round
like an elephant’s – a leg, thick as an oak trunk and taller than he
was. He squinted, not daring to break out of the cover of the trees, and
peered up at a body, the skin heavy and wrinkled and pocked with old
scars, crater-like, as if inflicted by artillery shells.

Then a predator came running, out of nowhere, like a tyrannosaur maybe,
with massive hind legs, smaller clawed forearms, a head like an
industrial crusher, a beast itself the size and speed of a steam
locomotive. Joshua flinched back into deeper cover. The hunter leapt up
at the giant beast, closed vast jaws and ripped away a chunk of flesh
the size of Joshua’s torso. The big beast bellowed, a distant noise like
a supertanker’s foghorn. But it kept moving, as oblivious to the huge
wound as Joshua might have been to a flea bite.

‘Lobsang.’

‘I saw it. I _see_ it. Jurassic dining.’

‘More like snacking,’ Joshua said. ‘Have we found dinosaurs, Lobsang?’

‘_Not_ dinosaurs. Though I suspected you would use the name. In this
case there has surely been too _much_ evolution for that. Some of these
are the much-evolved descendants, perhaps, of the Cretaceous-age
reptiles, in a sheaf of worlds where the dinosaur-killer asteroid never
fell. There was a dinosaur kisser here, perhaps, a gentle brush with
death … But the picture is not simple, Joshua. The big herbivore that
almost stepped on you is not reptilian at all, but a mammal.’

‘Really?’

‘It was a female – a kind of marsupial, I think. If you’d had the chance
you would have seen an infant the size of a carthorse carried in her
pouch. I will show you the images later. On the other hand, the
morphology – really big herbivores preyed upon by really ferocious
predators – _was_ common in the dinosaur era and may be another
universal.

‘Joshua, always remember, you have not travelled back in time, or
forward. You have travelled far across the contingency tree of the
possible, on a planet where dramatic but quasi-random extinction events
periodically obliterate much of the family of life, leaving room for
evolutionary innovation. On each Earth, however, the outcomes will
differ, by a little or a lot … You are close to the campfire now. Head
for the water.’

With a crunch of trampled undergrowth a new set of animals moved through
the forest clump, heading for the estuary and the fresh water. Through
the trees Joshua glimpsed low-slung bodies, horns, tremendous coloured
crests. There were several of these animals, the adults taller than
Joshua at the shoulder, the calves weaving through the moving pillars of
the adults’ legs. Immense beasts, but dwarfed by the big marsupial he’d
glimpsed earlier. They were making for the water, so Joshua followed as
best he could.

He came to the edge of the forest by a braid of fresh water. Across the
estuary’s marshy plain huge flocks of birds, or bird-like creatures,
strutted, squabbled and fed. The marsh flowers were a mass of colour
under a deep blue sky. Joshua thought he saw the ridged backs of more
crocodilians sliding through the deeper water. By the water’s edge,
those big crested beasts crowded to drink.

And at the edge of a beach of white sand, upright, bipedal lizards were
catching some rays, basking. Smaller specimens chased back and forth
across the sand and occasionally dived into the surf, such as it was.
They were remarkably human in their playfulness, like Californian
teenagers. Then one of the bigger bipeds noticed Joshua and prodded its
nearest neighbour. There was an exchange of hissing, after which the
miniature dinosaur of the second part returned to snoozing, while the
first one sat up and watched Joshua with bright-eyed interest.

‘Fun, aren’t they?’ A woman’s voice.

Joshua whirled around, his heart hammering.

The woman was short, sturdy, her blonde hair tied back in an efficient
bun. She wore a useful-looking sleeveless jacket that was all pockets.
She looked a little older than Joshua: early thirties, maybe. Her face
was square, regular, strong rather than pretty, tanned deep by the
weather. She eyed him, appraising.

‘They’re quite harmless unless attacked,’ she said. ‘Smart, too; they
have a division of labour and they make things that you might call
tools. Digging sticks, at least, for the clams. On top of that, they
make crude but serviceable boats, and fairly sophisticated fish traps.
That means observation, deduction, cogitation and teamwork, and the
concept of mortgaging today for a better tomorrow …’

Joshua was staring.

She laughed. ‘Don’t you think it’s time you closed your mouth?’ She held
out her hand.

Joshua looked at it as if it were a weapon of war.

‘_I know you_. You’re Joshua Valienté, aren’t you? I knew I would run
into you some day. Small worlds, don’t you think?’

Joshua was frozen. ‘Who are _you_?’

‘Call me … Sally.’

In Joshua’s ear the voice of Lobsang insisted, ‘Invite her to the ship!
Tempt her! We have superb cuisine, somewhat wasted on you, I must say.
Offer her sex! Whatever you do, get her on this damn ship!’

Joshua whispered, ‘Lobsang? You really don’t know anything about human
relationships.’

He sounded offended. ‘I have read every treatise on human sexuality ever
written. And I had a body once. How do you think that baby Tibetans are
made? Look, it doesn’t matter. _We must bring this young lady aboard_.
Think about it! What is a nice girl like her doing in the High Meggers?’

Lobsang had a point. Whoever she was – how had she got here, more than a
million steps out? Was she a natural stepper, someone who didn’t get the
nausea, like Joshua? Fine. But there were only so many times you could
step in a day. _He_ could manage a thousand steps a day unaided. Surely
everybody needed to sleep and eat? You could step-hunt an unwary deer
once you had the hang of it, but field dressing and cookery couldn’t be
hurried, and that slowed you down … It would take years to step out this
far.

She was watching him suspiciously. ‘What are you thinking? Who were you
talking to?’

‘Umm, the captain of my ship.’ Not exactly a lie, and since the Sisters
had always been rather down on lying, Joshua was relieved.

‘Really? You mean that ridiculous floating gasbag, I suppose. And how
big is the crew of that monster? Incidentally, Robur the Conqueror, I
hope you have no designs on this world. I rather like these little
guys.’

Joshua looked down. The miniature dinosaurs had formed a circle around
the pair of them and were carefully balancing upright, like meerkats,
with curiosity just outweighing caution.

‘The captain would like you to come aboard,’ Joshua managed.

She smiled. ‘Aboard that thing? Not a chance in hell, mister, no offence
meant … However,’ she said more hesitantly, ‘do you have any soap? I
make my own lye soap, of course, but I wouldn’t say no to something a
little more easy on the skin.’

‘I’m sure—’

‘Maybe with rose scent.’

‘Is that all?’

‘And some chocolate.’

‘Of course.’

‘In exchange I offer … information. OK?’

The voice in Joshua’s ear prompted, ‘Ask her what information she can
give us that we cannot find out for ourselves.’

When asked, Sally snorted. ‘I don’t know. What _can_ you find out for
yourselves? By the look of all those aerials and dishes up there you
could probably hack God’s email.’

Joshua said, ‘Look, I’m going back up, and will grab some soap and
chocolate, and will come right back down, OK? Just don’t go away.’

To his embarrassment Sally burst out laughing. ‘My-oh-my, a _real_
gentleman. I bet you were a Boy Scout.’

As he rose up to the _Mark Twain_ Lobsang whispered in his ear, ‘If
there is a more efficient way of stepping, it is vital that we find out
what it is!’

‘I know, Lobsang, I know! I’m working on it.’ But right now a stepping
mystery was the last thing on Joshua’s mind.

They ate lunch on the beach: fresh-caught oysters on an open fire.

The encounter fazed Joshua more than somewhat. He wasn’t used to the
company of women, not women without wimples anyhow. Back in the Home all
the girls were more or less like his sisters, and the nuns were all
possessed of laser eyesight and over-the-horizon hearing: when it came
to the opposite sex you were under constant surveillance. And if you
spent a lot of time out on the new Earths, seldom seeing another person
at all, anyone that you _did_ meet was a nuisance, taking up _your_
space.

And, right now, there was the added distraction of a circle of miniature
dinosaurs, craning their necks this way and that so as not to miss the
action. It was like being watched by a bunch of curious kids. He felt as
if he should be offering them a few bucks to take themselves to the
movies.

But he needed to talk to this enigmatic Sally. It was a tension within
him, a huge unfulfilled need. And, looking at her, he thought she felt
the same.

‘Don’t worry about the dinos,’ she said. ‘They’re no threat, though they
are pretty smart. And they’re very bright when it comes to keeping clear
of the larger dinos and the crocs. I make a point of coming back to see
how they’re doing every so often.’

‘_How?_ How did you get here, Sally?’

Sally poked the embers of her fire, and the little creatures jumped
back, startled. ‘Well, that’s none of your business. That was the code
of the Old West, and it’s sure as shit the same here. These oysters
roast up wonderfully, don’t they?’

They did. Joshua had just eaten his fourth. ‘I taste something like
bacon, and I’ve seen plenty of pig-like animals, they look like a
universal. But this tastes as if it’s got Worcester sauce in it. Am I
right?’

‘More or less. I travel prepared.’ Sally looked at him, with the juice
of oysters Kilpatrick leaking from her lips. ‘A deal, right? I will be
frank with you, and you will be frank with me. Well, within limits. Let
me tell you what I already think I know about you. First, that bloody
great thing floating up there contains only one person, I’m guessing.
Because when you found me, any crew would have been swarming all over me
and my little world. And, plus you, that means a crew of two people. Big
ship for two people, no? Second, it looks mighty expensive, and since
the universities don’t have that kind of money and governments don’t
have the imagination, that means some corporation or other. I guess it
was Douglas Black?’ She smiled. ‘Don’t blame yourself, you didn’t give
anything away. Black is smart, and this is just his style.’

There was silence from Joshua’s earpiece.

She read Joshua’s slight hesitation. ‘No word from headquarters? Oh come
on! Sooner or later anyone who has a talent that interests Douglas Black
ends up working for him. My own father did. Although in fact the money
isn’t really the lure. Because if you’re really good, your friend
Douglas will give you a sack of toys to play with, like that airship up
there. Isn’t that right?’

‘I’m not an employee of Black.’

‘Just contracting, is that the fig leaf?’ she said dismissively. ‘You
know, in their headquarters in New Jersey every employee of the
Corporation wears a little earpiece just like yours, so that Douglas
himself can talk to them individually whenever he likes. Even his
silence is threatening, they say. But one day my father said, “I am not
going to wear this thing any more.” And right now, Joshua, you will do
me the courtesy of taking yours off. I don’t mind talking to _you_. I
heard about you, how you saved all those kids on Step Day, you’re
obviously a decent human being. But take off that modern-day slave
bracelet.’

Joshua did so, feeling guilty.

Sally gave a little nod of satisfaction. ‘Now we can talk.’

‘There’s nothing sinister about us,’ Joshua said tentatively – although
he wasn’t entirely sure how true that was. ‘We are out here to explore.
To look and learn, to map the Long Earth. Well, that’s the expedition’s
intention.’ Or was, he thought, before it became focused on the issue of
the humanoid migrations, the disturbance they perceived in the Long
Earth.

‘Not _your_ intention. You aren’t an explorer, Joshua Valienté, whatever
else you are. Why are _you_ here?’

He shrugged. ‘I’m a failsafe, if you want the truth. Hired muscle.’

She grinned at that. ‘Ha!’

He said, ‘You say your father worked for Black.’

‘Yes.’

‘What did he do?’

‘He invented the Stepper. Though that was on his own time.’

‘Your father was _Willis Linsay_?’ Joshua just stared, thinking of Step
Day, and how his own life had been changed by what Linsay had done.

She smiled. ‘All right. You want the full story? I’m from a family of
steppers. Natural steppers … Oh, close your mouth, Joshua. My
grandfather could step, my mother could step and I can step. My father
_couldn’t_ step, however, and that’s why he needed to invent something
like the Stepper box. So he did. I first stepped when I was four. And I
soon found out that Dad could step if he was holding my hand. They took
a photograph of us. I never had any problem with it, the magic-door
stuff, because of Mom. Mom was a reader, and she read to me Tolkien and
Larry Niven and E. Nesbit and just about everything else. I was
home-schooled, needless to say. And I grew up with my own Narnia! To
tell the truth, since Step Day I’ve become pissed at having to share
_my_ secret place with the rest of the world. But back then Mom
explained to me that I shouldn’t ever tell anyone what I could do.’

Joshua listened, dumbfounded. He could barely imagine how it must have
been to be part of a family of steppers, a family all like himself.

‘It was pretty good in those days. I often hung out with Dad in his
shed, because the shed was in another world – though, of course, I had
to lead him in and out of that other Wyoming.

‘But Dad was hardly ever there, because he was always jetting away,
wherever the Black people wanted him, and that could be anywhere from
MIT to some research lab in Scandinavia or South Africa. Sometimes, late
at night, a helicopter might turn up, and he’d get in, and then maybe an
hour later he’d be back home and the chopper was flying away. When I
asked him what he’d been doing, it was always, “Just some stuff, that’s
all.” But that was OK by me because my Dad knew best. He knew
_everything_.

‘I didn’t know anything about his work projects. But I wasn’t surprised
when he succeeded in inventing the Stepper. He was an unusual mix of
brilliant theoretician and hands-on engineer; I believe he’s come closer
than anybody else to figuring out the true nature of the Long Earth …
But it did him no good when Mom died. That was one problem he couldn’t
untangle with technology. Things got weird after that.’ Sally hesitated.
‘I mean more weird than before.

‘He kept working. But I got the impression that he stopped caring about
what he was working on, and what it was for. He’d always been ethical,
you know? A hippie from a long line of hippies. Now he didn’t care.

‘But he was living a double life. He kept stuff like the Stepper hidden
away. Dad did like hiding things. He said he learned it in his hippie
days when he hid his marijuana plantation in the cellar. He showed me
once. It had a secret door that would only open if _one_ loose nail was
pushed just so far and _one_ of the paint pots was turned ninety
degrees, and then a panel would slide, and there was a large space that
you couldn’t believe was there, and you could still smell where the
plants had been …

‘So that’s my story. I always stepped, I grew up with it; Step Day was
just a bump in the road to my family. Whereas you had to discover
stepping for yourself, didn’t you, Joshua? I heard you were brought up
by nuns. It’s part of your legend.’

‘I don’t want a legend.’

‘Nuns, eh? Did they beat you up, or try anything … funny?’

Joshua narrowed his eyes. ‘There was none of that stuff. Well, apart
from Sister Mary Joseph, and Sister Agnes had her out of there in an
hour, boy, had she got the wrong number. But, yeah, it was a totally
weird place, looking back. But the right kind of weird. Good weird. The
nuns had a lot of freedom. We read Carl Sagan before the Old Testament.’

‘Freedom. Well, I can sympathize with that. That’s why my father walked
out on Douglas Black. Douglas found out about the Stepper box one day,
he somehow forced it out of my Dad. With Mom gone and everything I think
Dad was beginning to hate people anyhow. But what Black did was the
final straw. One day Dad just disappeared. He took a post at Princeton
under phony credentials. But that was kind of high profile, so when he
got a sniff of a pursuit by Black he went out to Madison, took a college
post under another assumed name. He took the Stepper technology he was
developing with him. I followed and went to college out there. Didn’t
see much of him. I guess I kept a watching eye on him, however. His real
name isn’t Willis Linsay, by the way.’

‘I didn’t think it was.’

‘And that was when he decided, because he suspected the Black
Corporation was on his tail _again_, that he would give stepping to the
whole world, so no one could own it or put chains around it, or slap a
tax on it. He really didn’t like big industry, and he really didn’t like
governments. I think he hoped the world would be a much better place if
everybody was able to step out of their grasp. As far as I know he is
still alive out here somewhere.’

‘And is that why you’re out here? Looking for him?’

‘One reason.’

There was a curious change in the air. The little dinosaurs stood,
stretching, their gaze combing the sky. Joshua looked at Sally. She
didn’t react; she was carefully retrieving the last wayward oyster in
the pan with a stick.

He asked, ‘Do you think he was right to do what he did? With the
Stepper?’

‘Well, maybe. At least he gave people a new option. Although he said
people were going to have to learn to _think_, out there in the Long
Earth. He said once, “I am giving mankind the key to endless worlds. An
end to scarcity and, may we hope, war. And perhaps a new meaning to
life. I leave the exploration of all these worlds to your generation, my
dear, though personally I think you will fuck it up royally.” Why are
you looking at me like that?’

‘Your father said _that_ to you?’

Sally shrugged. ‘I told you. He was a hippie born of generations of
hippies. He was always saying things like that.’

At that moment the loudspeaker voice of Lobsang boomed out over the
beach, startling the small dinosaurs again. ‘Joshua! Back to the ship
right now! Emergency!’

There was a strange new smell in the air, like burning plastic. Joshua
looked at the northern horizon; there was a grey cloud, and it was
getting bigger.

‘I call them suckers,’ said Sally calmly. ‘Rather like dragonflies. They
pump a venom into anything organic, which breaks down cells remarkably
fast, and you become a bag of soup that they suck up, as if through a
straw. For some reason they don’t bother the dinosaurs. Your electronic
friend is right about the emergency, Joshua. Now run along, there’s a
good boy.’

And she disappeared.

34

AS SHE STEPPED away, Joshua took a step back, to the East, away from the
direction of travel of the airship. That was the instinctive way when
you were in danger, to step back into the world you’d just arrived from,
because the world downstream might be even worse. Now he was in a timber
world, fairly standard stuff, nothing but endless trees as far as he
could see – which was only a hundred yards or so, because of the
aforesaid trees. No girl, no dinosaurs, no airship.

He could see a little more light than average to his right, so he got up
and strolled that way. He emerged into a vast area of burned stumps and
ash fields: not a recent fire, already new saplings were poking shoots
through the stinking black mess, with green leaves apparent here and
there. Just a forest fire, a dieback. It was all part of the great cycle
of nature which, when you’ve seen it one point three million times,
squarely pisses you off.

The airship was above him suddenly; its shadow sprawled across the
clearing, an abrupt eclipse. Joshua clipped his earpiece back on.

Lobsang’s voice was an irritating whine. ‘We have lost her! Could you
not have beguiled her into the ship? Clearly she has discovered a new
way to step! And what’s more—’

Joshua plucked out his earpiece again. He sat down on a stump, a
crumbling mass of colourful fungus. He felt stunned by the encounter
with Sally, the blizzard of words that had evidently been pent up inside
her. And she was travelling alone, as he used to. It was a slightly
electrifying thought. On his sabbaticals, he had survived in any number
of worlds like this.

Suddenly it occurred to him that he didn’t want or need a giant damn
airship hovering over his head any more.

Joshua put the earpiece back on, and considered what to say. What was
the phrase that Sister Agnes always used when some high-flying
ecclesiastical or other tried to throw his weight around at the Home?
‘Can you hear me, Lobsang? You ain’t the boss of me, sir, you surely
ain’t. The only thing you could do right now is kill me, and you _still_
wouldn’t be the boss of me.’

There was no reply.

He got up and strolled downhill, in so far as there was a hill at all.
But it was a definite slope, and that would mean a river, and _that_
would mean open ground, cover and, almost certainly, game of some sort.
All he’d need to survive here.

Lobsang replied at last. ‘You are right, Joshua. I am not the boss of
you and have no desire to be. On the other hand I can’t believe you are
serious in the hints you are giving that you might jump ship. We are
travelling with a purpose, remember.’

‘Whatever your purpose I’m not about to kidnap anybody, Lobsang.’ He
stopped. ‘OK, I’ll come aboard. But under certain conditions.’

The airship was right overhead now.

‘The foremost of these is that I come and go to the ground any time I
wish, OK?’

This time Lobsang replied by loudspeaker, a booming celestial voice.
‘Are you trying to _negotiate_ with me, Joshua?’

Joshua scratched his nose. ‘Actually I’m trying to demand, I think. And
as for Sally, I have a feeling we shall see her very shortly, regardless
of you and your plans. _You’ll_ never be able to find a solitary human
being in all these forest worlds, but she will find it very easy to see
a damn great airship in the sky. _She_ will find _us_.’

‘But she travels alone, as you do. She’s travelled much further in fact.
Perhaps she doesn’t need people, and will not be motivated to find us at
all.’

Joshua walked across the damp ashes towards the lift-ring that was
descending to the ground. ‘She doesn’t need people. But I believe she
_wants_ people.’

‘How can you possibly know that?’

‘Because of the way she talked to me. All those words pouring out,
because they needed to be said. Because your precious mountain men were
probably just the same at their rendezvous. Because _I’m_ the same.
Because this human called Joshua keeps going back home, just every now
and then, to visit, to be with folk. To be fucking human, not to put too
fine a point on it, and Daniel Boone can kiss my ass.’

‘I’ve said it before, Joshua. Travel has most definitely broadened your
mind, if not your vocabulary.’

‘And besides, there’s something else, Lobsang. Something you’re missing.
Do you imagine it’s _chance_ that she happened to show up under our
keel, with her campfire blazing?’

‘Well—’

‘She knew we were coming, Lobsang. I’m certain of it. She wants
something from us. The question is what?’

‘Your point is well made. I’ll consider it. Incidentally I have captured
and dissected several of those flying creatures. They appear to be
remarkably like wasps, although they act more like bees. A new order.
Which is why one should be wary of arbitrarily applying labels like
“dinosaurs”.’

‘Have you changed your voice?’

‘Yes, indeed, it is warm and reflective, is it not?’

‘It makes you sound like a rabbi!’

‘Ah yes, close enough; actually, it is the voice of David Kossoff, a
Jewish actor prominent in the 1950s and 60s. I believe the occasional
hesitation and slight air of bemused amiability has a friendly and
calming effect.’

‘It does, but I’m sure you are not supposed to tell me that it does.
It’s like a conjuror telling you how the trick was done—’ Damn it.
Lobsang was making him laugh again. It was very hard to stay mad at him.
‘OK, I’m coming aboard. Now do we have an arrangement?’

The ring ascended smoothly.

Aboard, ambulant Lobsang was waiting for Joshua in his stateroom. There
had been more upgrades.

Joshua burst out laughing, despite everything. ‘You look like a hotel
doorman! What’s that all about?’

Lobsang purred, ‘I hoped to give the effect of a British butler circa
1935, sir, and rather spiffily, if you don’t mind me saying so. I
believe the effect is not so creepy as the _Blade Runner_
killer-replicant chic I experimented with before, although I am open to
suggestions.’

_Spiffily_. ‘Well, at least it’s a different kind of creepy. I guess it
works. But knock it off with the sir, would you?’

The butler bowed. ‘Thank you … Joshua. Let me say, Joshua, that I think
that on this journey we are _both_ learning. For now, I will step us at
no more than an average human’s daily pace until the young lady wishes
to make her presence known.’

‘Good plan.’

There was the usual, brief feeling of mild disorientation as they began
to step once more. Below, passing at a leisurely pace of just a few
steps per hour, the Long Earth was like the old-fashioned slide-show kit
that Joshua had once found among junk in the attic back at the Home.
Click once and there was the Virgin Mary, click twice and there was
Jesus. You stayed still while worlds went past. Pick the one you want.

That night on the saloon deck’s big screen Lobsang showed an old British
movie called _The Mouse on the Moon_. In his mobile incarnation, he sat
next to Joshua watching it, which would have been weird, Joshua thought,
seeing the pair of them through Sally’s eyes, had not this voyage long
gone past weird and sailed full speed into bizarre. Nevertheless they
watched the ancient film, a spoof on the space race of the twentieth
century – and Joshua spotted David Kossoff instantly. For what it was
worth, Lobsang had got him exactly right.

After the movie had finished, Joshua was certain he saw a mouse run
across the deck and disappear. ‘The Mouse on Earth Million,’ he quipped.

‘I will set Shi-mi on it.’

‘The cat? I wondered what had happened to that thing. You know, Sally
told me how she’d grown up in a family of steppers. Natural steppers, I
mean. She wasn’t ever alone, out in the stepwise worlds. But her family
made her keep quiet about it, as _they_ always had.’

‘Of course they did. As you have always attempted to, Joshua. It’s a
natural instinct.’

‘Nobody wants to be different, I guess.’

‘There is that. With a power like stepping, once you might have got
yourself burned as a witch. And even nowadays, since Step Day, there are
an increasing number back on Datum Earth who are uncomfortable with the
whole idea of stepping, and the Long Earth.’

‘Who?’

‘You really have no instinct for politics, do you, Joshua? Why, those
who can’t step at all. _They_ resent the Long Earth and those who travel
it, and all that this great opening-up has brought. And those who are
losing money, in the new order of things. There are _always_ plenty of
those …’

35

SO HERE WAS Officer Monica Jansson, fifteen years after Step Day, her
life distorted by the Long Earth phenomenon as much as anybody’s had
been, trying to make sense of it all as one way or another the world
transformed itself around her own ageing carcass – and through it all
the police tried to keep the peace. This evening she stared gloomily at
a screen which showed Brian Cowley, increasingly notorious figurehead of
a poisonous movement called Humanity First, spewing out his manipulative
bile, folksy homespun anecdotes hiding some smart, but very divisive and
dangerous, politics. Impulsively she turned the sound off. Still the
hatred seeped like sweat out of the guy’s face.

But then the whole phenomenon of the Long Earth had been laced with
hatred and violence from the start.

Only two days after Step Day itself, terrorists had hit both the
Pentagon and the British Houses of Parliament. It could have been worse.
The boy who stepped into the Pentagon hadn’t got his distances and
angles right, and his makeshift bomb was triggered in a corridor, the
only fatality being its creator. The British terrorist had clearly paid
more attention in geometry class, and appeared slap (and instantly) bang
in the chamber of the House of Commons – but had failed to finish his
homework, so that the last thing _he_ ever saw was five Members of
Parliament debating a rather insignificant bill about herring fishing.
Had he thought to make his appearance in the Commons bar, he would have
reaped a greater harvest of souls.

Nevertheless, both of the explosions echoed around the world, and
authority panicked. There was concern among private individuals too; it
didn’t take a genius to figure out that, suddenly, anybody could step
into your house while you slept. And where there is panic, profit isn’t
far behind. Instantly anti-stepper devices were being developed in
workshops and private homes everywhere, some of them clever, many of the
worst stupid – and quite a few deadly, more often than not to their
owner rather than any would-be thief. Attempts to criss-cross the empty
spaces of an unoccupied room with anti-stepping hazards ended up
trapping children’s fingers and maiming pets. The most effective
deterrent, as people soon worked out, was simply to cram a room with
furniture, Victorian-style, to leave no room for steppers.

In truth, the threat of wholesale burglaries-by-stepping was more about
urban fears than reality. Oh, a lot of people jumped worlds to avoid
debts, obligations or revenge, and there were plenty of agents who would
follow them – and there would always be a few who stole and raped and
killed their way across the worlds, until somebody shot them. But in
general crime was low, per capita, out in the Long Earth, when the
social pressures that sparked so much crime and disorder on the Datum
were largely absent.

Of course governments weren’t too happy with their tax-payers stepping
out of reach. But only Iran, Burma and the United Kingdom had ever
actually tried to _ban_ stepping. Initially most governments in the free
world adopted some equivalent of the US aegis plan, demanding
sovereignty of their country’s footprint down all the endless worlds.
The French, for example, declared that all the French footprints were
available for colonization by anybody who wanted to _be_ French, and was
prepared to accept a carefully put together document which outlined what
being French _meant_. It was a brave idea, slightly let down by the fact
that despite a nationwide debate it appeared that no two Frenchmen could
agree exactly on what being French did mean. Although another school of
thought held that arguing about what made you French was _part_ of what
made you French. In practice, though, whatever regime was imposed, it
didn’t take you long to step out to a place where the government had no
say, simply because the government wasn’t there, benevolent or not.

And the people? They just stepped, here, there and everywhere, heading
not so much _to_ where they wanted to be, as, quite often, _from_ where
they emphatically didn’t want to be any more. Inevitably many went out
unprepared and without forethought, and many suffered as a consequence.
But gradually people absorbed the lessons learned by folk like the Amish
long ago, that what you needed was other people, and preparation.

Fifteen years on, there were successful communities thriving far out
across the empty landscapes of the Long Earth. The emigration push was
thought to be starting to decline, but it was estimated that fully a
fifth of Earth’s population had walked away to find a new world – a
demographic dislocation comparable to a world war, it was said, or a
massive pandemic.

But it was still early days, in Jansson’s opinion. In a way, mankind was
only slowly beginning to adjust to the idea of infinite plenty. For
without scarcity, of land or resources, entirely new ways of living
became available. On television the other night Jansson had watched a
theoretical anthropologist work her way through a thought experiment.
‘Consider this. If the Long Earth really is effectively endless, as it
is beginning to look, then _all mankind_ could afford to live _for ever_
in hunter-gatherer societies, fishing, digging clams, and simply moving
right along whenever you run out of clams, or if you just feel like it.
Without agriculture Earth could support perhaps a million people in such
a way. There are ten billion of us, we need ten thousand Earths – but,
suddenly, we have them, and more. We have no need of agriculture, to
sustain our mighty numbers. Do we have need of cities, then? Of literacy
and numeracy, even?’

But as this vast perturbation of the destiny of mankind continued, it
was becoming increasingly clear that there were an awful lot of folks
for whom the ambiguous treasures of the Long Earth were for ever out of
reach, and they were increasingly unhappy about it.

And that, fifteen years after Step Day, as she watched Brian Cowley
perform with gathering dismay, was what increasingly concerned Monica
Jansson.

36

THE AIRSHIP STOPPED again, at a barren world, the air just about
breathable when Joshua tried it, but stinking of ash under an overcast
sky into which the usual sounding-rockets ascended.

Lobsang said, ‘An aftermath world. Possibly an asteroid strike, but my
best guess would be a Yellowstone, maybe a century ago. There may be
life in the southern hemisphere, but nature’s clean-up job will take a
long time.’

‘It’s a wasteland.’

‘Of course it is. Earth kills her children over and over again. But the
rules are different now. It is a certainty that the volcano under
Yellowstone National Park on Datum Earth will become aggressively active
in the near future. And what will happen? People will step away. For the
first time in human history, such a calamity will be a nuisance rather
than a tragedy. Until the sun itself dies there will always be other
worlds, and mankind will persist, somewhere in the Long Earth, immune to
extinction.’

‘I wonder if that’s what the Long Earth is _for_.’

‘I’m not yet qualified to comment.’

‘Why have we stopped, Lobsang?’

‘Because I am picking up a signal on an AM frequency. Rather bad
reception. The transmitter is very close. Would you like to see who’s
calling?’ Lobsang’s face was a perfect simulation of a grin.

The airship’s restaurant boasted a pretty good dining table, Joshua had
to admit, and certainly better than the makeshift shelf on the
observation deck he used when there wasn’t any company. The staple of
the meal in front of him was a white meat, the flesh rather fine.

And he looked up, into the eyes of Sally.

She had provided the meat. ‘It’s a kind of wild turkey you see around in
the local worlds,’ she said now. ‘Good eating if you can be bothered,
but they are a prey species and can very nearly outrun a wolf. Sometimes
I catch a parcel of them and sell them to the pioneers …’

For a near-recluse, she did talk a lot, Joshua reflected. But he
understood why. Joshua meanwhile just ate, enjoying himself. Maybe he
was getting used to the company of women. This woman anyhow.

Lobsang entered, holding a tray. ‘Orange sorbet. Oranges aren’t native
to the New World, but I have brought seeds for planting at suitable
locations. Enjoy.’ He served, turned away and disappeared through the
blue door.

Sally had been reasonably polite upon learning the identity and nature
of Lobsang. Well, since she’d stopped laughing. Now she lowered her
voice. ‘What’s with the Jeeves bit?’

‘I think he wants to make you welcome. I knew you’d send a signal, you
know.’

‘How?’

‘Because I would have done in your place. Come on, Sally. You came back
to us, and we figure that’s because there’s something you want from us.
So let’s trade. You know what we need to learn from you. _How did you
get out so far?_’

She eyed him. ‘I’ll give you a clue. I’m not alone. There are more of us
out here than you’d think. Every so often, a stepping box _stutters_,
you might say. I met a man twenty thousand clicks from the Datum who was
certain that he was one jump away from Pasadena, and puzzled by the fact
that he couldn’t get home. I led him down to a halfway house and left
him there.’

‘I always wondered why I kept coming across so many bewildered people. I
thought they were just dumb.’

‘Possibly many of them were.’

The voice of Lobsang floated in the air. ‘I am aware of the phenomenon
you mention, Sally, and would like to take the opportunity to thank you
for giving it a most apposite label. _Stuttering_. But I have been
unable to duplicate it.’

Sally glared at the air. ‘Have you been listening to everything we have
been saying?’

‘Of course. My ship, my rules. Perhaps you will be good enough to answer
Joshua’s question. You’ve given only a partial response; the mystery
still divides us. How did you get out here? Rather more purposefully
than stuttering, I would hazard.’

Sally looked out of the window. It was dark outside, but the stars
glittered with a vengeance. ‘I still don’t entirely trust you two. Out
in the Long Earth everybody needs an edge, and this is my edge. I’ll
tell you one thing. If you go much further you will meet trouble coming
the other way.’

That throb in Joshua’s skull was never far from his awareness. ‘_What’s_
coming?’

‘Even I don’t know. Not yet.’

‘It’s caused the migration of the trolls and the other humanoids, hasn’t
it?’

‘So you know about that? I guess you could hardly miss it.’

‘Lobsang and I think we need to pursue this. Find out what’s causing
it.’

‘What, and save the world?’

Joshua was getting used to her mockery. She was resolutely unimpressed
by Lobsang’s treasure-ship dirigible, and by his grandiose talk and
dreams, as well, it seemed, as by Joshua’s own reputation. ‘So why have
you come back to us? To laugh at us, or to help us? Or because of what
we can do for you?’

‘Among other things. It will keep.’ She stood up. ‘Goodnight, Joshua.
Have Jeeves make up another stateroom, please. One that is not right
next to yours, preferably. Oh, don’t look so alarmed, your honour is
safe. It’s just that I snore, you see …’

37

THE SHIP STEPPED all through the night, and, for once, Joshua thought he
could feel every step. He sagged into something like sleep just before
dawn, and got maybe an hour before Sally hammered on his door.

‘Show a leg, sailor boy.’

He groaned. ‘What’s going on?’

‘Last night I gave Lobsang some coordinates to aim for. We’ve arrived.’

Once decent, Joshua hurried down to the observation deck. The ship was
motionless. They weren’t far from the Pacific coast in this version of
Washington State. And below, far, far into the deep Long Earth, far
beyond the consensus on where the colonizing wavefront might yet have
reached, was a township, where no township had a right to be. Joshua
just stared. It sprawled along the bank of a reasonably sized river,
with a clutter of buildings, tracks threading through a thick, damp
forest. But there were no fields, as far as he could see, no sign of
agriculture. There were people everywhere, doing what people always did
when there was an airship overhead, which was to point upwards and
chatter excitedly. But without farms, how could they live in such a
densely populated community?

Meanwhile, by the river, there were familiar hulking forms … Not quite
human. Not quite animal.

‘Trolls.’

She glanced at him, surprised. ‘That’s what they’re called out here. As
you know, evidently.’

‘As Lobsang knew before we set off.’

‘I suppose I should be impressed. You’ve met them, have you? Joshua, if
you want to understand the trolls, if you want to understand the Long
Earth, you need to understand this place. That’s why I’ve brought you
here.

‘Orientation, Joshua. If this was the Datum we would be hovering over a
township called Humptulips, in Grays Harbor County. We’re not so far
from the Pacific coast. Of course the details of the landscape differ,
the track of the river. I hope they’ve got the clam chowder boiling.’

‘Clam chowder? You know this place that well?’

‘Of course I do.’

In her way, she could be as irritatingly smug as Lobsang.

The airship came down over a broad dirt square at the heart of the
township. The buildings scattered around the square struck Joshua
immediately as _old_, of weathered wood, some on eroded-looking stone
bases. He had an immediate sense that this township, of maybe a couple
of hundred people, had been here long before Step Day. The square itself
was dominated by a stout communal wooden building that Sally said was
known simply as ‘City Hall’, and she led the way there. Inside, the
building, constructed on a frame of impressive cedar beams, had a high
ceiling, polished wooden floors and furniture, glassless windows at
eye-level, and large doors at either end. The fire pit in the centre
added a decent enough glow.

Lobsang had descended with them, his ambulant unit clothed in saffron
robes for the occasion. Despite his 1980s body-builder bulk, he had
never looked more Tibetan. And he seemed oddly self-conscious – as well
he might, because the hall was full of staring, smiling townsfolk, and
_trolls_, mixing with the people as unnoticed as family dogs at a
picnic. The air was full of their distinctive, faintly unpleasant musk.

In City Hall there was indeed chowder to be had, boiling up in huge
pots, a thoroughly incongruous treat given their remoteness from the
Datum.

The mayor greeted them. He was a small, sleek man who had an accent like
a middle European with good English. Of course Sally knew him. She
handed him a small package as soon as they met, and he led them to a
central table.

Sally saw Joshua’s glance at this exchange. ‘Pepper.’

‘You do a lot of bartering, do you?’

‘I guess. Don’t you? And I stay over. Not just here. If I find settlers
who are interesting enough, I stop a while and help them out with their
farming, whatever. That’s the way to learn a world, Joshua. Whereas you
two, rattling along in your great big penis in the sky, are learning
nothing.’

‘Told you so,’ Joshua murmured privately to Lobsang.

‘Perhaps,’ Lobsang replied quietly. ‘But even so, for all our flaws, she
came back to us. You’re right, Joshua. There is something she wants from
us. Among all these distractions we must persist in finding out what
that is.’

Sally was saying now, ‘This place is pretty unique, among my stopovers,
however. I call it Happy Landings.’

Lobsang observed, ‘Evidently it has been here a long time.’

‘A _very_ long time. Folk sort of end up here … It seems to be a kind of
people magnet. You’ll see.’

The only name the mayor gave was Spencer. Over bowls of chowder he was
happy to talk about his unique community.

‘A “people magnet” – yes, perhaps it is something like that. But over
the centuries that people have been coming here they have given it other
names, or have cursed it, in a multitude of languages. There is some
very old building stock, and we find old bones, some in crude coffins.
Centuries, yes. People have been arriving for a long, long time.
Thousands of years, even!

‘Of course most of the population you see around you were born here – I
myself was – but there is always a trickle of newcomers. None of those
incoming settlers knows how they got here, and everybody who comes here
fresh arrives with the same story: one day you are on Earth, the Datum
as they call it now, minding your own business, and suddenly you’re
here. Sometimes there’s stress involved, you’re trying to escape
something, oftentimes not.’ He lowered his voice and added, ‘Sometimes
there are lone children. Strays. Lost boys and lost girls. Even infants.
Often they’ve never stepped before at all. They are always made welcome,
you may be sure of that. Do try the ale, I like to think we are very
good at it. Some more chowder, Mr Valienté? Where was I?

‘Of course nowadays the scientific types among us are lining up behind
the idea that there is some physical singularity, some kind of hole in
space, that leads people here. As opposed to the old thinking that this
place is at the centre of some kind of mysterious curse – or possibly,
in the circumstances, a _blessing_.

‘Anyhow here we are, marooned, as it were, although I daresay no
shipwrecked mariner ever arrived on a more hospitable shore. We can
hardly complain. From what we hear from recent arrivals, our older folk
are generally glad they missed out on most aspects of the twentieth
century.’ Spencer sighed. ‘Some get here thinking that they have landed
in heaven. Most arrive disorientated and sometimes fearful. But
everybody who arrives here is welcomed. From newcomers we can learn
about how all the other Earths are going. And we welcome any new
information, concepts, ideas and talents; engineers, doctors and
scientists are especially welcome. But I am pleased to say that these
days we are growing our own culture, as it were.’

‘Fascinating,’ Lobsang murmured, as he carefully spooned chowder between
artificial lips. ‘An indigenous human civilization, spontaneously
forming in the reaches of the Long Earth.’

‘And a new way of travelling,’ Joshua said, feeling faintly stunned at
this latest conceptual leap. ‘A way to cut out the step-by-step plod.’
In fact, he thought, thinking of Sally, thinking of the ‘stuttering’ she
had mentioned, _another_ way.

‘Yes. The Long Earth is evidently even stranger than it seems; we may
learn a lot about its connectivity by studying this place. But it
remains to be seen how useful this new phenomenon will be.’

‘Useful?’

‘Less so if it is like a fixed wormhole, a tunnel between two fixed
points …’

‘Like the rabbit hole to Wonderland,’ Joshua said.

‘We must learn all we can.’

Sally, meanwhile, was watching Lobsang eat, her mouth gaping. ‘Joshua …
it _eats_?’

He grinned. ‘Wouldn’t it look odder if he didn’t, in this company?
Nobody else is bothered. We’ll discuss it later.’

Spencer leaned back comfortably in his chair. ‘We know Sally very well,
of course. Now, tell me about yourselves, please, gentlemen. The world
is evidently changing, and the change brings your wonderful zeppelin!
You first, Lobsang. You’ll forgive us our curiosity about your exotic
presence particularly …’

For the first time in Joshua’s experience, here in this crowded,
sociable place, and with trolls watching them like an audience at a
cabaret, it seemed that Lobsang was flustered. This was one of those
moments when Joshua genuinely couldn’t tell if Lobsang really was
ultimately a human, or just an incredibly smart simulation that was
adept at mimicking such subtle human aspects as being embarrassed.

Lobsang cleared his throat. ‘To begin with – I am a human soul, though
my body is artificial. You are familiar, perhaps, with the concept of
prosthetics? The use of artificial limbs, organs to sustain life …
Consider me as an extreme case.’

Spencer looked totally unfazed. ‘Amazing! What a step forward. At my age
you do begin to wonder why the universe places intelligence in such
fragile receptacles as our human bodies. May I ask if you have any
special talents to share with us? That’s what we ask all newcomers, so
please don’t be offended.’

Joshua groaned inwardly, anticipating Lobsang’s reaction to that.

‘Special talents? It would be easier to list the exceptions. I am not
very good at watercolours, as yet …’ He glanced around curiously.
‘Clearly this is an unusual community, with an unusual background of
development. What about industry? You have iron, evidently. Steel? Good.
Lead? Copper? Tin? Gold? Wireless radio? You have surely passed the
telegraph stage. In addition, printing, if you have the paper—’

Spencer nodded. ‘Yes, but only handmade, I’m afraid. Since arrivals in
Elizabethan times. We made improvements, of course, but we haven’t
chanced upon an artisan who knows much about paper manufactory for a
considerable time. We have to rely on the talents of those who drift
here, haphazardly.’

‘If you can provide me with ferrous metals, I will fabricate for you a
flatbed printing press utilizing waterpower – if you are familiar with
waterpower?’

Spencer smiled. ‘We’ve had water mills since the age of the Romans.’

Again Joshua was struck by the depth of time represented here. Sally
looked amused at his reaction.

‘In that case I can construct a robust alternator. Electrical current.
Mayor, I can leave you an encyclopaedia of discoveries in medicine and
technology to the present day – although I would advise you to take it a
bit at a time. Future shock, you see.’

The crowd around them in the hall, drawn by Lobsang’s strangeness,
murmured a general approval at this.

But Sally, who had been listening impatiently, said, ‘It’s very kind of
you, Lobsang, but all this Robert Heinlein stuff will have to wait. We
are here because of _the problem_ – remember?’ She looked at Spencer.
‘And you know all about that.’

‘Ah. The troll migration? Alas, Sally is right. There is clearly cause
for concern. It is a slow-burning problem, you might say, but, we
believe, it has serious repercussions across the worlds – the Long
Earth, as you call it. But even that will wait for tomorrow, Sally. Let
us go and enjoy the sunshine.’ He led them out of the building. ‘You are
very welcome here, I can’t emphasize that enough. You’ll see that we
embrace scatterlings from all the families of mankind. Sally is pleased
to call this place Happy Landings, which we find amusing. But to us it
is just home. There are always spare sleeping places in City Hall, but
if you prefer privacy all the family cabins are roomy. You are welcome,
welcome …’

38

THE VISITORS WALKED through smiling crowds.

Joshua thought the layout of the place was unusual, and the
architecture. There seemed to be no plan to the road system; it was a
tangle of criss-crossing lanes that wandered off into the forest, as if
it had just evolved that way. And the buildings were heaped up on often
very ancient-looking foundations. This really did have the feel of a
place that had grown slowly but continuously for a very long time, and
so was layered with structures one on top of the other, like a tree
trunk’s rings. But there did seem to be a preponderance of relatively
modern buildings overlaying a very ancient core, as if people had
arrived in greater numbers in recent times, the last couple of centuries
perhaps. Which was just when, he supposed, the population back on Datum
Earth had started to grow fast, no doubt sending a larger flood of
scatterlings to Happy Landings.

Walking by the river, Joshua began to get a sense of how people lived
here. All along the bank there were racks of drying fish – mostly
salmon-like fish, big healthy specimens, cleanly filleted – and more
hanging inside the dwellings, some smoked. Nobody seemed to be working
terribly hard, but he saw weirs in the river, traps, nets, and a few
workers mending hooks, lines, harpoons. Though there were in fact a few
cultivated fields, he learned, further out from the centre – mostly
growing potatoes as an emergency food store, and to power the Steppers
of those few visitors who used the boxes – the river provided much of
what sustained the people here. During the annual salmon runs, so the
friendly locals told him in a variety of bizarre accents, the whole
population, human and troll, would come down to the river and harvest
migrating fish that swam so thick the river water lapped up over the
banks. There were evidently other kinds of fish, and Joshua saw great
middens of the shells of clams and oysters. The forest was generous too,
as Joshua could tell from baskets of berries, acorns, hazelnuts, as well
as haunches of animals he could not identify.

‘This is why nobody farms here,’ Sally murmured to him. ‘Or hardly
anybody. Nobody _needs_ to, the country is so generous. Back on the
Datum, in this area pre-Columbian hunter-gatherer folk built societies
every bit as complex as any farmer’s, with a fraction of the labour. And
none of the backache. So it is here.’ She laughed, as rain sprinkled
down. ‘Maybe that’s why Happy Landings turned out to be _here_, one of
the most generous places on all the worlds. If only it didn’t rain all
the time it would be paradise.’

But there were trolls everywhere, and that was something you would _not_
have seen in Washington State back in the Datum. The humanoids threaded
their way through the human rubberneckers with a care and attention that
Joshua would not have expected from creatures that looked like the
offspring of a bear and an upright pig. The evidently contented
relationship between human and troll here, and the uniform welcome they
received, gave the place an air of peace.

Paradoxically, this made Joshua uncomfortable. He had no clear idea why.
It was just that with the trolls so firmly embedded in the place, the
community seemed _too_ calm. Not entirely human … Not for the first time
in his life he was conflicted and confused; there was much about this
place that he had yet to understand.

And then, in the central square, one of the trolls got down on its
haunches and sang. Soon the rest joined in. A troll song was always
extraordinary; hearing it seemed to nail you to the spot, in a way that
Joshua knew he would for ever be unable to explain. It seemed to go on
and on, the mighty chords echoing from the distant forest – although
when he looked at his watch when it was over, it had lasted only about
ten minutes.

Sally tapped him on the shoulder. ‘That, young man, is what is called
the short call of the troll. The long call can last a month.
Heart-warming, isn’t it? In a creepy sort of way. Sometimes you will see
them in a clearing, hundreds of them, all singing, apparently
independently, apparently unaware of each other – until suddenly it ends
on one great chord, like Thomas Tallis, you know? Like it’s coming at
you in four dimensions at once.’

‘I know Tallis’s entire canon, Sally,’ said Lobsang. ‘It is an apt
comparison.’

Joshua decided he was not going to be left out. ‘I’ve heard of Tallis.
Sister Agnes said that if he were alive today he would be riding a
Harley. Then again most of her heroes would have ridden Harleys,
according to her …’

‘I detect patterns in the music,’ said Lobsang. ‘It will take some time
to analyse.’

‘Good luck with that, mister,’ Sally said. ‘I have known trolls for
years, and _I_ can only guess what they are talking about. But I’m
pretty confident that in this case they are discussing us and the
airship. And by nightfall, every troll on this continent will be
repeating it until they all have it perfect. The songs represent a sort
of shared memory – that’s what I believe. There’s even a sort of
checksum in the songs, I think, a self-correction mechanism, so that in
time all the trolls get the same information reliably. Eventually it
will probably go worlds-wide, depending on troll migration patterns.
Sooner or later every troll that can be reached will know that we were
here today.’

The others absorbed that in silence. It struck Joshua as an astounding,
eerie thought, a song-memory that spanned worlds.

They walked on. It was a calm, warm afternoon, though marked by brief,
light showers that everybody seemed to ignore. There were no vehicles,
no pack animals, just a few handcarts, and the fish racks everywhere.

Joshua said to Sally, ‘Maybe we should cut to the chase. So you know
about trolls. In fact you seem very fond of trolls. You know about the
humanoid migration. You brought us to this place where there’s a strange
human–troll community … You want something from us, that’s obvious. Is
it to do with the migration, Sally?’

She said nothing at first. Then: ‘Yes. All right. I’ve had no intention
of concealing anything from you. It’s just that it’s better if you work
it out for yourselves. Yes, I’m concerned about the migration. It’s a
disturbance that’s echoing up and down the Long Earth. And, yes, I don’t
think I can, or should, go investigating the cause alone. But somebody
has to, right?’

‘Then we have the same goals,’ Lobsang said.

Joshua pressed, ‘Come on, out with it, Sally. Time for an honest trade.
We’ll help you but you need to be fully truthful with us. You knew this
place was here, and how to find it. How come? And how did you get out so
far in the first place?’

Sally looked wary. ‘Can I trust you two? I mean _really_ trust you?’

‘Yes,’ said Joshua.

‘No,’ said Lobsang. ‘Anything you tell me that can be used for the
betterment of mankind as a whole will be utilized as I see fit. However,
I will not do anything to harm you, or your family. Trust me on that.
You know something we don’t about the connectivity of the Long Earth,
don’t you?’

A couple walked by, hand in hand; she looked Swedish, he was very nearly
midnight black.

Sally took a deep breath. ‘My family calls them soft places.’

Joshua asked, ‘Soft places?’

‘Short cuts. They’re usually, but not always, far inland, at the heart
of a continent. They are usually near water and they get stronger around
twilight. Can’t exactly tell you what they _look_ like, or how I find
them. It’s more of a feeling than anything else.’

‘I don’t think I understand—’

‘They are places that allow you fast travel over multiple Earths at a
time.’

‘Seven-league boots—’

Lobsang murmured, ‘I suspect wormholes would be a better metaphor.’

‘But they shift,’ Sally said. ‘They open and close. You have to find the
way, and follow it … You have to be taught what to look for. But it
isn’t something you learn, it’s like something you remember – something
you were told about a long time ago and then when you need it, it pops
up. It’s not like Stepper stuttering. It’s more like, well, a helping
hand. It’s kind of organic, you know? Like sailors knowing the currents
of the sea, the ebb and flow, wind and tide, even the saltiness of the
water. And they do drift, they open and close, or reconnect to somewhere
new. It’s hit and miss at first, but these days I can get to any
destination in three or four steps, if the tide’s flowing right.’

Joshua tried to imagine this. He visualized the Long Earth as a tube of
worlds, a hosepipe, along which he plodded one world at a time. These
soft places were like – what? Holes in the pipe walls, enabling you to
short-cut vast strings of possible Earths? Or maybe it was like a metro
network, invisible beneath a city’s roads, connecting point to point, a
network with its own topology independent of what went on above ground.
And in that network there would be nodes, exchanges …

Lobsang asked bluntly, ‘How do they work? Your soft places.’

‘Well, how would I know? My father had hypotheses, about the structure
of the Long Earth. He spoke about solenoids. Chaotic mathematical
structures. Don’t ask me. If I ever find him—’

‘How many people do you know have this talent?’

She shrugged. ‘Not even all of my own family. But I know that there are
others out there; occasionally I meet people. All I can really say is
that I know a soft place when I find one, and then I generally have a
good idea of how far it will go and in which direction. My granddad on
my mother’s side, he was a _real_ stepper, he could sense a soft place
two miles off. Granddad called them the fairy ways. He was Irish by
birth, and he said that if you stepped into a soft place you could _step
lively_, as he called it. Mom said that when you stepped lively you were
building up a debt which would one day have to be repaid.’

Joshua asked, ‘So what about Happy Landings? How come people come
unstuck and drift here, like the mayor says? … Maybe it’s something to
do with the network of soft places. People drift and gather, like
snowflakes collecting in a hollow, maybe.’

‘Yes, perhaps it’s something like that,’ Lobsang said. ‘We know that
stability is somehow a key to the Long Earth. Maybe Happy Landings is
something like a potential well. And it’s clearly been operating long
before Step Day, deep into the past.’

‘Yeah,’ Sally said sceptically. ‘Look, all this isn’t the point. _The
trolls are nervous_ – even here; I can tell if you can’t. That’s what we
need to focus on. That’s why I’m sticking with you two clowns and your
ridiculous aerial barge. Because in your dim way you’ve seen what I’ve
seen. That all across the Long Earth something is scaring the trolls and
the other humanoids. And that scares me. And, like you, I need to figure
out what’s going on.’

Joshua asked, ‘But what concerns you most, Sally? The threat to people,
or to the trolls?’

‘What do you think?’ she snapped back.

At twilight there was evensong, courtesy of the trolls. Troll song _was_
the trolls; they lived in a world of constant chatter.

But then so did the people of Happy Landings. Even at dusk they were
still out and about, strolling, waving, laughing, generally finding
pleasure in one another’s company. Fires were lit everywhere; in the
Pacific North-west on most worlds there was no shortage of firewood.
And, Joshua noticed, as evening drew in more people were pouring in from
neighbouring communities, on foot, some drawing small carts bearing
children and old folk. The Humptulips core of Happy Landings wasn’t
isolated, then.

Some, they learned, came from as far away as this world’s footprint of
Seattle. And that district on this Earth had been called Seattle since
1954, when a lady called Kitty Hartman, minding her own business on her
way home from Pike Place Market, stepped without knowing, and was amazed
by the disappearance of the buildings around her. The travellers from
the _Mark Twain_ were introduced to Mrs Montecute, as she was now known:
white-haired, exceptionally spry, very happy to talk.

‘Of course, it was rather a shock, you know, and I remember thinking, I
don’t even know what _state_ I’m in! I’m not in Washington any more,
that’s for sure. I wondered if I should have brought a little dog and a
pair of red shoes! And then the first person I met here was François
Montecute, who really was kind of cute like his name, who really did
turn my head, and who really was an artist between the sheets if you get
my drift.’ She told them this with the cheerful directness of an elderly
lady who is determined to make young people aware that she has had sex,
too, and by the sound of it quite a considerable amount.

There was a certain contented aura about Mrs Montecute, and it seemed to
Joshua that everyone in Happy Landings shared it, to some extent. It was
hard to pin down.

Sally said when he tried to express this, ‘I know what you mean.
Everybody seems so, well, sensible. I have come here many times and it’s
always the same. You never get complaints, or competitiveness. They
don’t need government, not really. You could say that Mayor Spencer is
the first among equals. When there is any big project to be undertaken,
they just knuckle down and get on with it.’

Joshua said, ‘It all feels a bit Stepford Wives to me.’

Sally laughed. ‘It bothers you, does it? A happy human community
_bothers_ Joshua Valienté, the great loner who’s barely human himself.
Well, it is – odd. But in a positive way. I am not talking about
telepathy or any of that kind of shit.’

Joshua grinned. ‘As opposed to the hopping from one world to another at
a whim kind of shit?’

Sally said, ‘OK, I get your point, but you know what I mean. It’s all so
_nice_. I’ve talked to them about it and they say it’s the fresh air; no
crowding, plenty to eat, no unfair taxes, yada, yada, yada …’

‘Or maybe it’s the trolls,’ Joshua said bluntly. ‘Trolls and humans,
mixed up together.’

‘Maybe,’ she conceded. ‘Sometimes I wonder …’

‘What do you wonder?’

‘I wonder if there’s something so big going on here that even Lobsang
would have to recalibrate his thinking. Just a hunch, for now. I’m just
suspicious. But then a stepper who isn’t suspicious is soon a dead
stepper.’

39

JOSHUA ROSE EARLY the next morning and explored further, alone. People
were friendly and ready to walk, chat and even hand him pottery mugs of
lemonade. He overcame his natural inclination to silence, and talked
back, and listened.

The area was pretty well homesteaded by now, he learned, with thriving
settlements at the coast and along the river valleys. None of them had
many more than a couple of hundred inhabitants, though people would get
together on festival days – or when interesting visitors showed up, such
as Lobsang with his airship. And in response to the greater influx of
newcomers in recent decades, the community had had to expand, new
settlements seeding across the countryside.

The reason this rapid expansion had been possible, he learned, was the
trolls. Trolls were useful, trolls were friendly, companionable – and,
crucially, ever ready to lift a heavy load, an exercise they took much
delight in. This donation of muscle power had helped the colonists here
overcome their lack of manpower, draught animals and machinery.

But in a sense the reason for all the building work, the growth of the
new settlements, _was_ the trolls. Trolls, he discovered, were allergic
to crowds – that is to say, crowds of humans. No matter how many trolls
there were, they would get nervous if there were more than one thousand,
eight hundred and ninety humans in the immediate vicinity, apparently a
number found by careful experimentation in the past. They didn’t get
mad, they just got going, not coming back, sheepishly, until a few dozen
humans had kindly found somewhere else to be, and the numbers dropped
down under the limit. But as the goodwill of trolls was immensely
valuable, Happy Landings was spreading southwards as a confederacy of
small troll-friendly townships. This was hardly inconvenient, since you
could always walk to the next township in a matter of minutes, and there
was plenty of room in this riverine landscape for more.

Later that morning Joshua learned that this fact, the size of the
townships, was of intense interest to a young man called Henry. He had
been raised among Amish until one day he stepped into a soft place and
landed, as it were, among a different kind of chosen. It seemed to
Joshua that Henry had come to terms with this elevation quite happily.
He explained to Joshua that back home his people had always reckoned
that around a hundred and fifty people was just the right size for a
caring community, and so he felt at home here. He also thought, however,
that he had died, and that Happy Landings was, if not heaven, at least a
staging post for the journey onwards. Being dead didn’t seem to bother
him very much. He had his place in this little society: he was a good
husbandman, gentle around animals and particularly fond of trolls.

And that was why, this morning, when at Lobsang’s request Joshua brought
Henry up to the airship with a few trolls, Henry believed he had
ascended to heaven at last, and was speaking to God. There are some
things which you don’t put up with when you have been brought up by
nuns, even if they are nuns like Sister Agnes. Joshua tried to disabuse
Henry of the belief that the impressive saffron-clad personage he met
after travelling into the sky was, in fact, God. But given Lobsang’s ego
and air of omni-competence there was little to dissuade him.

Lobsang, meanwhile, was burning to learn more about the language of the
trolls. And that was why now, on the observation deck, there were
already a couple of female trolls flanking Lobsang’s ambulant unit, and
four or five juveniles having a lot of fun playing with Shi-mi. Henry
had been brought along to help calm the trolls – that had actually been
Sally’s suggestion – but nothing seemed to faze a Happy Landings troll.
They had trotted into the elevator quite happily, and once on board
seemed to take everything in their great, flat-footed stride, including
an artificial man and a robot cat.

Lobsang said, ‘Trolls are of course mammals. And mammalian creatures
love and cherish their offspring – well, for the most part. Mothers
teach their children. And so I am learning like a child, with baby
steps, as it were. As I myself play the part of a child, I feel I can
with care derive a certain elementary vocabulary: good, bad, up, down.
And thus we make progress.’

He was enjoying this, Joshua could tell. ‘You’re the troll whisperer,
Lobsang.’

But Lobsang took no notice of that and walked among his happy band of
trolls. ‘Please note, I offer a nice shiny ball. Good! Joshua, observe
the sounds of appreciation and interest. See the pretty shiny thing! And
now, I take it away. Ah, the sounds of sadness and privation, very good.
But note that the adult female is alert, emitting sounds of uncertainty,
with just a subtle hint that were I to try anything really nasty with
her favourite bag of woolliness she would quite likely rip off my arm
and beat me to death with the wet end. Splendid! Joshua, see, I give the
ball back to the pup; now mother is less apprehensive, and all is
sweetness and light once more.’

And it was, thought Joshua. The _Mark Twain_, anchored over Happy
Landings, moved gently in a sunlit breeze, with just enough creaking
from the woodwork to lull you almost as if you were in a hammock. A
pleasant place with happy, happy trolls.

The spell was broken when Lobsang asked, ‘Henry, could you provide a
dead troll, do you think?’

Henry looked deeply uncomfortable. When he spoke he had an odd, lilting
accent. ‘Mister, if one of them dies they scrape out a very deep hole
and bury the body, scattering flowers upon it beforehand to ensure the
resurrection, I do believe.’

‘Ah, then I suppose that a forensic dissection is out of the question? I
feared so … I beg your pardon,’ he added, with what struck Joshua as
unusual tact for him. ‘I intended no disrespect. But the scientific
value would be high. I am confronted with a hitherto unknown species
which, despite the lack of what we are pleased to call civilization, and
lacking our form of intelligence, has a method of communication of an
intricacy and depth unrivalled among humanity until the expansion of the
internet. Thanks to this facility I believe that anything interesting
and useful that a troll learns very shortly becomes known to every other
troll. They _appear_ to have expanded frontal lobes, I suspect mostly
utilized to store and process memory, both personal and species-wide …
Oh, for a body to dissect! Well, lacking that, I will do the best I can,
which will be the best that there is.’

Henry laughed. ‘You don’t believe in modesty, do you, Mr Lobsang?’

‘Absolutely not, Henry. Modesty is only arrogance by stealth.’

Joshua threw a ball towards a baby troll. ‘Neanderthals put flowers on
the bodies of their dead too. I’m no expert, I saw it on the Discovery
Channel. Are the trolls nearly human, then?’ He had the sense to duck as
the exuberant return from the pup sailed over his head and splintered
the bulkhead.

‘The young will experiment,’ remarked Lobsang. ‘“Nearly human” is right,
Joshua. Like the dolphins, orang-utans and, if I am being charitable,
the rest of the higher apes. It’s a tiny gap between us and them. And
nobody knows how _Homo sapiens_ became, well, sapient. Sally, do the
trolls use tools?’

She looked up from her playing. ‘Oh, yes. Away from humans I’ve seen
them use sticks and stones as improvised tools. And if you bring a fresh
band to Happy Landings, and if they see a guy fixing a weir in the
river, a troll might pick up a handsaw and help him, if he’s shown what
to do. By the end of the evening, every troll in that band will know how
to do it.’

Lobsang patted a troll. ‘So it’s a case of monkey see, monkey do.’

Sally said, ‘No, it’s a case of troll see, troll sit down, troll think
about things and then, if it’s appropriate, troll make a half-decent
lever or whatever and, by the end of that evening, troll tell other
trolls about the usefulness of it. Their long chant is a troll
Wikipedia, quite apart from anything else. If you want to find out
anything like “Am I going to throw up if I eat this purple elephant?”
then another troll will tell you.’

Joshua said, ‘Hang on. Are you telling me you’ve seen a purple
elephant?’

‘Not exactly,’ said Sally. ‘But out in one of the Africas there is an
elephant which, I swear, has the art of camouflage down to a tee.
Somewhere out there in the Long Earth you’ll find almost anything you
can imagine.’

‘“Anything you can imagine”,’ murmured Lobsang. ‘Interesting choice of
phrase. Between ourselves, Sally, I can’t help feeling that the Long
Earth as a whole has something approaching what I can only call a
meta-organic component. Or perhaps meta-animistic.’

‘Hmph. Maybe,’ said Sally, scratching a troll’s scalp. ‘But the whole
set-up irritates me. The Long Earth is too kind to us. It’s too pat!
Just as we’ve trashed the Datum, just as we’ve wiped out most of the
life we shared it with and are about to succumb to our own resource
wars, shazam, an infinity of Earths opens up. What kind of God sets up a
stunt like that?’

‘You object to this salvation?’ Lobsang asked. ‘You really are
misanthropic, aren’t you, Sally?’

‘I’ve got a lot to be misanthropic about.’

Lobsang stroked his own trolls. ‘But perhaps it’s nothing to do with any
kind of god. Sally, we – I mean humanity – are barely at the beginning
of our enquiry into the Long Earth. Newton, you know, spoke of himself
as a boy playing on a seashore, distracted by a smoother pebble or a
prettier shell, while the ocean of truth lay undiscovered before him.
Newton! We understand so little. Why should the universe open itself up
to careful and dedicated enquiry at all? And why should it be so
generous, so fecund, so nurturing of life, even intelligence? Perhaps in
some way the Long Earth is an expression of that nurturing.’

‘If so, we don’t deserve it.’

‘Well, that’s a debate for another day … You know, my researches _will_
be frustrated unless I can obtain the corpse of a troll.’

‘Don’t even think about it,’ said Sally.

Lobsang snapped back, ‘_Please_ don’t tell me what to think. I think,
therefore I am; it’s what I do. May I suggest that you two go and enjoy
the pleasures of Happy Landings, and leave me in peace to converse with
my friends? Whom I promise not to kill and dissect.’

On the access deck below, the elevator hatch slammed open, a clear
enough hint that they should leave.

When they were on the ground again, Sally giggled. ‘He can get pretty
ratty, don’t you think?’

‘Maybe.’ Joshua was faintly concerned. He’d never heard Lobsang sound
quite so unstable.

‘Is there _really_ a human being in there somewhere?’

‘Yes,’ said Joshua, flatly. ‘And you know there is, because you said
_he_ sounded ratty. You didn’t use the word _it_.’

‘Oh, very smart. Come on, let’s look around a few more happy
homesteads.’

For Sally that evening, it was like greeting one long-lost friend after
another. Joshua was happy to follow in her wake, trying to analyse his
feelings about Happy Landings.

He _liked_ the place. Why? Because it seemed, well, right somehow. Like
it was where all mankind belonged, perhaps. Maybe that was because he
too had some sense of the soft places, the soft routes all converging
here, in Lobsang’s well of stability. The _maybes_ in his mind annoyed
him, however, as he walked alone. And the sense that he disliked Happy
Landings as much as he liked it. As if he didn’t trust it.

He’d listened to Sally’s arguments with Lobsang – she was more voluble
on these issues, if not necessarily any better informed – and he tried
to make sense of all he was learning. Where _did_ man belong? On the
Datum, that was for sure, with ancestral fossils all the way down to
bedrock. But now the human race was expanding at speed across the Long
Earth, no matter what the governments thought, no matter about aegis;
nobody could stop it, and certainly nobody could control it, no matter
how many god-bothering spittle-flecked homealone tub-thumpers back on
the Datum tried. You would run out of people before you ran out of
Earths. But what was the point of it all? Sister Agnes used to tell him
that the purpose of life was to be all that you could be – with a side
helping, of course, of helping others to do the same. And maybe the Long
Earth was a place where, as Lobsang might put it, human potentiality
could be maximally expressed … Was there some sense in which that was
what the Long Earth was _for_? To allow mankind to make the most of
itself? And in the middle of this cosmic conundrum, here was Happy
Landings, where the scatterlings of mankind drifted and sifted. What was
_that_ all about?

Of course there were no answers.

In the gathering twilight Joshua was careful not to walk into trolls.
Trolls seldom walked into people. Indeed the general etiquette of Happy
Landings was that everybody should try not to walk into _anybody_. But
now, suddenly, Joshua walked into an elephant.

Fortunately, it was neither purple nor camouflaged. It was quite small,
about the size of an ox, coated with wiry brown hair, and it had a
rider, a stocky, grizzled man, who said cheerfully, ‘Another newcomer!
And where did you blow in from, sport? My name’s Wally, been here eleven
years. Rum go and no mistake, ain’t it? Bit of a bugger, good thing I
wasn’t married! Not for want of opportunity, you understand, before or
since.’ The self-confessed Wally slid off the back of his miniature
elephant, and held out a leathery hand. ‘Put it there!’

They shook hands, and Joshua introduced himself. ‘I’ve only been here a
couple of days. Flew in. In a flying machine,’ he added quickly.

‘You did? Great! When are you flying out? Got a spare seat?’

Joshua had wondered at the fact that so few residents of Happy Landings
had asked that question; so few wanted out. ‘I think the jury is out on
that one, Wally. We have a kind of mission to achieve.’

‘No worries,’ Wally said, apparently unfazed. ‘I’ve been poling down the
river, found Jumbo here. Amiable little fella, ain’t he? Just the job
for the long-haul, and pretty bright. They come up from the plains.’ He
sighed. ‘I like spaces, me, don’t like forests, too creepy. I like to
feel wind on my face.’ As they walked towards City Hall with Jumbo
following dutifully behind, he added, ‘We’ve been working on the new
road south, clearing the way. Don’t mind trees if I can cut them down!
But I reckon I have earned my keep here now, so it’s time to build a
boat and go discover Australia. That’s the longest haul of them all,
right enough.’

‘That’s halfway around the world, Wally. And it won’t be the Australia
you remember.’

‘Fair enough. _Any_ Australia will do for me. Of course, I can’t do it
all in one go. But a simple way would be to sail down the coast, staying
close to the shore, lots of good eating on the way, and strike out for
Hawaii. And you can bet your boots that’s one of the first places
steppers would want to colonize. And after that, well, we’ll have to
see, but where there are people there’s going to be a pub, and where
there’s a pub there’s sooner or later going to be Wally!’

Joshua shook hands with Wally, wishing him bon voyage.

He found Sally back in City Hall, surrounded by friendly faces, as ever.
She broke away when she saw Joshua. ‘People are starting to notice. Even
here.’

‘What?’

‘About the trolls. That more and more of them are stepping off East.
Wild bands come passing through, and even the local ones, what you might
loosely call domesticated, I suspect some of them want to leave too, but
they are being kind of polite. The locals are getting disturbed.’

‘Hmm. Ripples in the tranquil pool of Happy Landings?’

‘Is Lobsang finished playing at Dr Dolittle? It’s time we were airborne
and heading West again.’

‘Let’s go see.’

Back on the ship, the observation deck appeared empty save for a pile of
trolls, snuggling like puppies. Then the heap moved, and Lobsang poked
his head out, beaming.

‘Fur is wonderful against the tactile areas, is it not? I feel like one
blessed. And they speak! Extremely high-pitched, minimal vocabulary …
Multiple ways of communicating, apparently; it does seem that
communicating is what being a troll is all about. But I suspect the real
exchange of information takes place in the songs.

‘I believe I now have learned terms for good/bad, approval/refusal,
pleasure/pain, night/day, hot/cold, correct/incorrect, and “I wish to
suckle now”, although I suspect the last will not be of much use to me.
I will learn more when we continue our voyage, which by the way we will
be doing with alacrity at first light tomorrow. I intend to take these
trolls. I hope my new friends do not mind travelling by air. I believe
they _like_ me!’

Sally’s face was a carefully controlled mask. ‘Well, that’s just peachy,
Lobsang. But are you doing any actual work in there?’

‘I am coming to tentative conclusions. These are evidently very flexible
omnivores. No wonder they’re so widespread, across the Long Earth.
They’re ideal nomads. And the product of a couple of million years’
evolution, probably, since the root habiline stock learned to step.’

Joshua asked, ‘Habiline?’

‘_Homo habilis_. Handy Man. The first toolmakers in the human
evolutionary line. You see, I’m speculating that maybe the stepping
ability evolved alongside the ability to make tools. One surely needs a
similar imaginative capacity: to imagine how a bit of stone might become
an axe; to imagine how one world might differ from another, and then to
step into it. Or perhaps it is related to the ability to imagine
alternative futures depending on one’s choices: to go hunting today, or
to go back to that rich hazel clump again … Either way, once such an
ability developed the species would split, between increasingly adept
steppers who would drift away, and those less adept or unable to step at
all, who would stay at home, and perhaps become actively resistant to
the steppers, who would have a competitive advantage.’

‘A stay-at-home strand that gave rise to humanity on Datum Earth,’
Joshua guessed.

‘Possibly. My colleague Nelson’s archaeological searches would seem to
indicate that. But this _is_ just my guess. It may be the stepping
ability evolved even earlier, during the age of the pre-human apes. One
must describe these creatures as humanoid rather than hominid, until a
proper study is concluded, evolutionary relationships established.’

Sally asked, ‘Have they told you why they are migrating?’

‘I have an idea … My conclusion has to be tentative, even though the
alpha female is remarkably good at pantomime. Imagine a pressure in your
head. Storms in the mind.’

And Joshua was aware of the gathering storm in his own head, that sense
of pressure as they headed West, just as if the Datum itself with its
billions of souls was up ahead of him. Yes, he thought. Bad weather for
the psyche, coming this way. But what’s driving it?

Lobsang said no more. Amid the mewings of the troll pups, once again he
was submerged in his heap of fur. ‘Ah. Tactile surfaces …’

And suddenly there was no more Lobsang. The physical presence of the
ambulant unit was still here, but some subtle aspect of the ship had
dissipated.

Joshua looked at Sally.

Sally said, ‘You feel that too? Is it something we can’t hear, or see
any more? Where’s he gone? He can’t die, can he? Or – break?’

Joshua didn’t know what to say. The ship remained subtly busy, its
myriad mechanisms whirring and clicking away as if nothing had happened.
But inside this brightly lit complex Joshua could not detect the
controlling element, could not detect Lobsang. Something essential was
missing. It had been like this when old Sister Regina had died. She had
been bed-bound for years, but she liked to see the children, and still,
despite everything, had known all their names. They had filed in to see
her, nervous of the smell, her papery skin. And then suddenly it had
seemed that something that they hadn’t known was there … wasn’t any
more.

‘I have been thinking he might be ill,’ he said, uncertain. ‘He hasn’t
been himself since he got buried under troll cubs.’

The voice of Lobsang came over the loudspeaker: ‘Do not be unduly
worried.’

Sally was startled, and laughed nervously. ‘Should we be _duly_
worried?’

‘Sally, please bear with us. There has been no malfunction. You are
being addressed by an emergency subsystem. Right now Lobsang is
recompiling: that is, integrating vast volumes of new information. This
will take a few hours. However, we subsystems are fully capable of
fulfilling all necessary functions during the period stated. Lobsang
needs his time offline; sooner or later every sufficiently sapient
creature needs time to take stock, as we are sure you will understand.
You are quite safe. Lobsang looks forward to the pleasure of your
company around dawn.’

Sally snorted. ‘Somehow I was expecting him to add “Have a nice day”,
but I suppose you can’t have everything. How much of _that_ was true, do
you think?’

Joshua shrugged. ‘He is learning a lot, I guess, and very fast, from the
trolls.’

‘And now he’s absorbing their nightmares. So we have a free evening. How
about one more trip down to the bar?’

‘_Which_ bar? …’

At the end of a long round of farewell drinks, all of them free, he had
to carry her back to the ship. He laid her gently on the bed in her
stateroom. She looked younger when she slept. He felt an unreasonable
stab of protectiveness, and was glad she wasn’t awake to notice it.

There was no sign of Lobsang, no sound of his voice.

And the trolls, it turned out, had left of their own accord. Joshua
thought, troll see elevator button. Troll think about button. Troll
press button. Goodbye troll … Lobsang had wanted to get more out of his
contact with the trolls. But evidently the trolls had got all they
wanted out of _him_.

Alone, Joshua lay down on his couch on the observation deck, looking at
the stars.

At dawn, with all its passengers asleep, the ship rose gently, gaining
height until it was above the tops of the highest forest giants, and
then stepped, disappearing with a small thunderclap.

40

IN THE MORNING Lobsang was back. Joshua could sense him, sense that a
kind of purposefulness had returned to the ship, even before the
ambulant unit joined him on the observation deck, as he drank the first
coffee of the day. Sally was evidently still asleep.

They were stepping gently, and worlds washed beneath them. As ever the
Long Earth was mostly trees and water, silence and monotony. Joshua was
glad to be free of the hard-to-pin-down oddness of Happy Landings, but
as they headed West once more that gathering pressure in his head had
returned. He tried and failed to ignore it.

The two of them sat in silence. There was no mention of Lobsang’s
departed friends the trolls, or of his offline episode. Joshua couldn’t
read Lobsang’s mood. He wondered vaguely if he was _lonely_ without the
trolls, disappointed they had chosen to leave, frustrated that his
research was evidently unfinished. It was faintly disturbing that
Lobsang seemed to be becoming more unstable, more unpredictable.
Overloaded by new experiences, perhaps.

After an hour of this Lobsang said, out of nowhere, ‘Do you ever think
about the future, Joshua? I mean the far future?’

‘No. But I bet you do.’

‘The diffusion of humanity across the Long Earth will surely cause more
than mere political problems. I can foresee a time where mankind is so
dispersed across the multiplicity of worlds that there will be
significant genetic differences at either end of the human hegemony.
Perhaps there will have to be some kind of enforced cross-migration to
make certain that mankind remains sufficiently homogeneous to be united
…’

A burning forest below made the ship dance briefly on turbulent
thermals.

‘I don’t think we need worry about that just yet, Lobsang.’

‘Oh, but I do worry, Joshua. And the more I see of the Long Earth, the
more its scale impresses itself on me, and the more I fret. Mankind will
be trying to run a galactic empire, effectively, on one ever-repeating
planet …’

The airship shivered to a halt. The world below was shrouded in low
cloud.

Sally wandered on to the deck, wrapped in a robe, her hair in a towel.
‘Really? Do we have to copy the mistakes of the past? Must there be
Roman legions marching into endless new worlds?’

‘Good morning, Sally,’ Lobsang said. ‘I trust you are rested?’

‘The best thing about the beer at Happy Landings is its purity, like the
very best German brews. No hangover.’

Joshua said, ‘Although you did your best to test that theory to
destruction.’

She ignored him and looked around. ‘Why were we travelling so slowly?
And why, in fact, have we stopped?’

Lobsang said, ‘We travelled slowly in order that you might sleep late,
Sally. But also I took on board your criticism. It pays to inspect the
small details, and so I have slowed the flight of our flying penis, as
you so amusingly described it. Small details, such as the relic of an
advanced civilization just underneath us. Which is why we have stopped.’

Joshua and Sally, electrified, exchanged a glance.

As the ship lost height they peered down through the haze.

‘My radar scanner is returning images through the cloud,’ Lobsang said,
apparently staring into empty space. ‘I see a river valley, evidently
long dry. A cultivated flood plain. No recognizable electromagnetic or
other high technology. Signs of purposeful construction on the riverside
– including a bridge, long ago broken. And rectangles on the ground, my
friends, _rectangles_ of brick or stone! But no signs of complex life
surviving. I have no idea who the builders were. This may be a diversion
from our main goal, but I am sure I speak for all of us when I say that
we should make an initial survey of this phenomenon. Am I right?’

Again Joshua and Sally glanced at each other.

Sally asked, ‘What kind of weapons are we carrying?’

‘Weapons?’

‘Better safe than sorry.’

Lobsang said, ‘If you mean portable weapons we have various knives,
lightweight but nevertheless very useful handguns, crossbows that fire a
variety of darts tailored to the metabolism types we might expect to
encounter, ranging in power from “ever so sleepy” to “instantly dead”,
colour-coded, with Braille and pictogram options – I am rather proud of
that piece of kit. Aboard the airship there are a number of projectile
weapons under my command. If necessary, I can fabricate a small but very
sneaky tank.’

Sally snorted. ‘We’re not going to need a tank. We’re dealing with an
extinct civilization down there. Although extinct civilizations can
leave behind nasty surprises.’

Lobsang was silent for a moment. ‘Of course. You are right. One must
prepare appropriately. Please hold.’

He stood and went behind his blue door. Joshua and Sally exchanged
another glance.

Then, after a couple of minutes, the door opened and the ambulant unit
walked back on to the deck, wearing a fedora hat and carrying a
holstered revolver and, of course, a bull whip.

Sally stared. ‘Well, Lobsang, you have now passed my personal Turing
test!’

‘Thank you, Sally, I shall cherish that.’

Joshua was astonished. ‘You fabricated a bull whip in minutes? Braiding
leather takes time. How did you do it?’

‘Much as I would like to give you the impression that I am omnipotent, I
have to say that there was already a whip in the manifest. A simple and
versatile device, requiring little maintenance. Well – shall we go
exploring?’

They climbed down into a near desert. Joshua found himself in a broad
valley, with a few ragged trees struggling for life on the floor, cliffs
on either side honeycombed with caves. There was no sign of animal life,
he observed, not so much as a desert mouse. He spotted the remnants of
that broken bridge, and the rectangular scrapings on the ground.

But he instantly forgot about all that, because down the valley was a
building: one sodding great _big_ rectangle, not much from the air
maybe, but from down here it looked like the headquarters of some
international conglomerate with an aversion for windows.

They set off towards it, led by Lobsang in his hat.

‘Generally speaking,’ Lobsang pronounced, ‘reality having little sense
of narrative, ancient sites are _not_ heavy with swinging blades that
decapitate, or rock panels that fold back to fire darts. It’s rather a
shame, isn’t it? However, I have detected a textbook collection of
enigmatic symbols. The valley cliffs appear to be of pale grey
limestone, and have been extensively worked by creatures unknown. The
symbology seems to have no relation to any known human script. Meanwhile
the large building ahead is constructed of black blocks, basalt perhaps,
not well dressed as masonry goes. No obvious entrances as seen from this
side, but I believe that while we were still airborne I saw on the far
side of the building something like a sloping face, a shadow – perhaps a
way in.’ He added, deadpan, ‘Isn’t this fun? Any comments?’

Sally said, ‘Only that we are almost a mile from the thing and don’t
have your eyesight, Lobsang. Pity us poor mortals, will you? Why did you
land us so far away?’

‘I beg your pardon, both of you. I thought it might be sensible to
approach cautiously.’

‘It is his standard routine, Sally,’ Joshua said.

They walked on, with the ship drifting behind them. There were slopes of
scree at the base of the canyon walls, and here and there between the
sparse trees patches of lichen, moss and scrubby grass had managed to
find a footing. But still no animal life; there wasn’t even anything
like a buzzard in the sky. This was an inhospitable place, a place where
nothing had happened for a very long time, and went on not happening
now. And it was hot; the sunlight, breaking through the clouds,
reflected from the walls, and the arid canyon already felt like a solar
furnace. This didn’t faze Lobsang, who was striding along as if training
for the Olympics. Joshua, though, was hot, dusty, increasingly ill at
ease.

They reached the looming building. Sally said, ‘Good grief, will you
look at that thing? You don’t realize how big it is until you get
close!’

And Joshua looked up, and up, at the building’s sheer face. It wasn’t
exactly a miracle of architecture – it was unimpressive, in fact, save
for its sheer scale. The blocks of black basalt-like rock from which it
had been constructed had been roughly worked to fit, but were not of a
uniform size. Even from here you could see gaps and imperfections, some
of which had here and there been naturally mortared with what looked
like bird guano and nests, but even that had evidently been a long time
ago.

Sally said, ‘Nice architecture. Somebody ordered “big and heavy and last
for ever”, and got it. OK, let’s walk around to the entrance and dodge
the rolling rock ball—’

‘No,’ said Lobsang sharply, standing stock still. ‘Change of plan. I
have detected a rather more insidious danger. _The whole structure is
radioactive_. Short range only, not remotely detectable – I do
apologize. I suggest that we ambulate with alacrity back the way we
came. No arguments. Please don’t waste breath until we are safe …’

They didn’t exactly run; call it a very determined walk.

Joshua asked, ‘So what is this place? Some kind of waste dump?’

‘Did you notice a multiplicity of signs that would indicate that
entering this building unprepared is going to kill you? No, I didn’t
either. The technological level appears much too low for this to be some
kind of nuclear reactor, or other similar facility. I suspect they
didn’t know what they were dealing with. I am speculating that this
culture stumbled across a rather useful ore with interesting properties,
perhaps a natural nuclear pile …’

‘Like Oklo,’ Joshua said.

‘In Gabon, yes. A natural concentration of uranium. They found something
that made holy glass glow, perhaps … That would show the spirits at
work, wouldn’t it?’

Sally said, ‘Spirits that ultimately killed their acolytes.’

Lobsang said, ‘We can at least look at some of the more distant caves
before we depart. They should be far enough from the temple, or whatever
this is, to be safe.’

The first cave they chose to explore was big, wide, cool – and crowded
with the dead.

For a moment the three of them stood at the entrance of this house of
bones. Joshua felt utterly dismayed at the sight, yet somehow it seemed
an appropriate culmination of this lethally disappointing place.

They walked in cautiously, stepping on clear earth where they could find
it. The skeletons were fragile, often to the point of crumbling. The
bodies must have been dumped in here, Joshua thought, perhaps in a rush,
in the final days of the community when there was nobody left to dispose
of them properly, however they had managed that disposal. But what were
these creatures – or rather, what had they been? At first glance they
might have been vaguely human. To Joshua’s inexpert eye they looked
bipedal, as he could tell from the leg bones, the slim hips. But there
was nothing humanoid about their sculpted, helmet-like skulls.

In the heart of the cave the crew of the _Mark Twain_ stood there rather
helplessly. With a whir, Lobsang’s head turned steadily, and for once
mechanically, with no human-like artifice, scanning and recording the
symbols etched into the walls.

Sally said, ‘Have you noticed? These corpses were not scavenged, not by
animals. Nothing has disturbed them since they were dumped here.’

Lobsang murmured as he worked, ‘I launched the usual drone craft,
incidentally. There is no evidence of technology, of high intelligence,
anywhere else on this version of Earth. Only here. The mystery deepens.’

Sally grunted. ‘Perhaps the poisonous stuff that drew them here inspired
them to their greatest cultural peak – before killing them. What an
irony. Of course there is another possibility.’

‘What’s that?’ Joshua asked.

‘That the nuclear pile under that temple wasn’t natural at all. Merely
very, very old …’

Joshua and Lobsang had no response to that.

‘But still,’ Sally said, ‘a dinosaur civilization? It’s a unique find.’

Joshua asked, ‘Dinosaurs?’

‘Look at those crested skulls.’

‘A civilization built by post-dinosaur evolutionary descendants,
perhaps,’ Lobsang said fussily. ‘We must be precise about terms.’

Joshua stared at a bit of bone, what was probably a finger, adorned with
a gold ring, massive, set with sapphires. He bent and picked it up.
‘Look at this. It can’t be anything but decoration. They were so _like_
us, dinosaurs or not. They were sapient. They were tool-users. They
created buildings – a city, at least this one. And they had art –
adornment …’

‘Yes,’ Lobsang said. ‘They were like us in one essential regard, and
unlike the trolls, say. These creatures, like us, created an environment
of culture around themselves. Our artefacts, our cities, are external
stores of the wisdom of past ages. The trolls seem to have nothing like
it, though perhaps their songs are a step towards it. These creatures
had that faculty, evidently.’

Joshua said, ‘They even look as if they were upright bipeds, like us.
Don’t they?’

Lobsang said, ‘Perhaps we are seeing universals here – the upright biped
is a useful tool-wielding form given a basic four-limbed body plan; and
perhaps intelligent incarnate tool-wielding creatures have a natural
tendency to aggregate into something like cities. Perhaps even an
attraction for bright shiny ornaments is common. Yet it is all gone.
They poisoned themselves, and now they are poisoning us.’

Sally looked at Joshua. ‘I feel like I just found out I had a stillborn
twin brother.’

‘There’s little point our spending much more time here,’ said Lobsang.
‘This place clearly requires a properly equipped archaeological
expedition – with radiation suits. It will keep, after all; we are far
from the Datum, and I doubt if there will be tourists any time soon.
Come, children. Let’s go home. There is nothing for us here.’

As they made their way back to the elevator, Joshua said bitterly, ‘It
all seems such a waste, doesn’t it? All these worlds. What’s the point,
without mind?’

‘It is the way of things,’ Lobsang said. ‘You are looking at this the
wrong way. How likely is it that we might find sapient life on other
planets? The astronomers have detected several thousand planets of other
stars, but nothing as yet has given us any reason to believe that there
is anybody out there. Perhaps it is difficult to evolve tool-making
intelligences. And perhaps we should be grateful we came so _close_ to
meeting these creatures, so close in probability space.’

Sally said, ‘But if these creatures were sentient, why did we find them
in only one world? We would have picked up evidence of them in the
neighbouring worlds, wouldn’t we? At least in this location. Couldn’t
they step, despite their sentience?’

‘Perhaps not,’ Lobsang said. ‘Or perhaps the natural steppers were
driven out by those who could not step at all. As seems to be happening
on Datum Earth right now. Perhaps this is a glimpse of our own future.’

And Sally and Joshua, two secretive natural steppers, exchanged glances
of understanding.

41

‘_NATURAL STEPPERS_. SUCH a nice phrase, ain’t it? I mean, we all
_step_. We all learn to do it when we’re weaned off our mammy’s milk.
“Oh, look, it’s baby’s first steps.”’ Brian Cowley, who was nothing if
not a showman, took mincing baby paces back and forth across the stage,
mike in hand, picked out by the spotlights in the cavernous conference
room. The simple stunt won him a few whoops.

Monica Jansson, in plain clothes, glanced around the crowd in this
basement room to see who was doing the whooping.

‘It’s natural. _Walking_ is. But what _they_ call stepping?’ He shook
his head. ‘Nothing natural about that. You need a gadget to do it, don’t
you? You don’t need no gadget to walk. _Stepping_. That’s not what I
call it. That’s not what my granddaddy would have called it. We plain
folk, who don’t have the education to know any better, have other words
for practices like that. Words like _unnatural_. Words like
_abomination_. Words like _unholy_.’

Each term brought louder choruses of whoops. There would come a point,
Jansson knew, where she’d have to join in with the whooping to keep her
cover.

The room was overcrowded, and dimly lit aside from the stage, the air
hot, steamy. Cowley always made a point of appearing in public only
underground, in basements, cellars, subterranean venues like this
hotel’s below-ground-level conference room. Places the stepping folk
couldn’t get at him, not without digging a hole in the ground first.
Jansson was here undercover, along with colleagues from the MPD and
Homelands Security (the ‘s’ had been adopted ten years after Step Day)
and the FBI and a number of other agencies, who had become alarmed at
the wilder noises coming out of fringe elements of Cowley’s Humanity
First movement.

Jansson had already spotted some familiar faces in the crowd. There was
even one on stage, in the row of Cowley’s well-heeled backers: Jim
Russo, whose grandly named Long Earth Trading Company was still alive,
still trading, but who had lost various fortunes as the world had
changed beyond his imagination. Since she’d interviewed Russo a few
years back over complaints about workforce exploitation, Jansson had
made a mental note to keep an eye on him, and how he would react to the
next, and inevitable, downturn in his fortunes. Not well, it seemed. Now
here he was, aged fifty, bitter after yet another disappointment and
perceived betrayal, handing a portion of his remaining wealth to this
man, to Brian Cowley, self-appointed voice of the anti-steppers. And
Russo wasn’t alone in carrying financial bruises from the opening up of
the Long Earth; Cowley wasn’t short of backers.

Cowley was moving on to the economic arguments that had gained him most
traction in the press.

‘I pay my taxes. You pay your taxes. It’s part of our contract with our
government – and it _is_ our government, no matter what they might tell
you once they get themselves safely installed for life inside the
Beltway. But the other side of the contract is this: that they should
use _your_ tax money to benefit _you_. You and yours, your children and
your old folk, to keep you safe in your homes. That’s the deal, as I
always understood it. But then I’m not inside the Beltway. I’m just an
ordinary Joe, like you, like you,’ he said, pointing at the crowd. ‘And
you know what this ordinary Joe has found out they’re doing with your
taxes? I’ll tell you. They pay for _colonists_. They pay for those folk
playing at being pioneers, out on some unnatural world where they don’t
even have regular horses and buzzards and cattle like God made them
here. They give them _mail services_. They send up _census takers_. They
send up _fancy medicines_. They send _cops_, for when those deranged
fools take a fancy to killing their own mothers, or fathering children
by their own daughters …’

Jansson knew this much, at least, was a pack of lies. In the roomy
stepwise worlds, without the pressures of crowding and deprivation, such
crimes were comparatively rare.

‘And they have a whole system, propped up by your taxes, to ensure that
the money those _brave pioneers_ leave here, back on the real world, the
only true world, is all tied up to keep ’em supplied with all the toys
they need – I’m talking about this here Pioneer Support. Some of ’em
even have _homes_, standing empty. You know how many people are homeless
in America today?

‘And it’s all for what? What do _you_ get out of the deal? And you, and
you? There’s no _trade_ with these other worlds – not beyond Earths 1
and 2 and 3 where you can haul back lumber and stuff. You can’t run an
oil pipeline from Earth Gazillion to Houston, Texas. You can’t even
drive a herd of cattle over.

‘The federal government has spent years telling you that the expansion
into the Long Earth is some kind of analogy of the days of the pioneer
trails and the Old West. Well, I might not know much about the ways of
the Beltway, but I do know my own country’s heritage, and I know the
value of a dollar, and I can tell you this is a _lie_. This is a
_boondoggle_. Somebody sure as hell is getting rich off this folly, but
it ain’t you, and it ain’t me. Why, we’d be better off going back to the
moon. At least it’s God’s own moon! At least you can bring back moon
rocks!

‘And I can tell you, when I have my meeting with the President in a few
days’ time, my central demand is going to be this: cut your support of
the Long Earth colonies. If the steppers left assets here, seize ’em. If
they’re productive out there in the godless worlds, tax ’em until their
eyes water. Those guys up there want to be pioneers, fine, let ’em. But
not propped up by my tax dollars, and yours …’

Growls of approval, disturbingly loud.

Jansson spotted Rod Green, just eighteen years old, his strawberry-blond
mane easily distinguished. Rod was one of a class the cops had labelled
the ‘homealones’, non-stepper kids who had been more or less abandoned
by families seduced by the romance of going off to build a new life in
the stepwise reaches. A whole class of people injured by the very
presence of the Long Earth in ways much deeper than the mere financial.
And now here he was, lapping up Cowley’s poison.

Cowley was getting to the meat of his peroration. The hardcore stuff,
the stuff these disadvantaged people had really come to hear. The reason
he banned recordings of his speeches.

‘Here’s somethin’ I came across,’ he said, producing a clipping. ‘A
pronouncement from one of them _pro-fess-ors_ in the universities. And
this man says, now let me quote, “The stepping ability represents a new
dawn for humanity, the arrival of a new cognitive skill on a par with
the development of language and multi-component tool-making,” and blah,
blah, blah.

‘Do you understand what this man is saying, ladies and gentlemen? What
he’s talking about? He’s talking about _evolution_.

‘Let me tell you a story. Once upon a time there was another sort of
human being on this planet. We call them _Neanderthals_. They were like
us, you see, they wore clothes of skin and made tools and built fires,
why, they even cared for their sick and buried their dead with respect.
But they weren’t _quite_ as smart as us. They were around for hundreds
of thousands of years, but in all that time not one of ’em came up with
anything as complicated as a bow and arrow, which any seven-year-old
American boy could make.

‘But there they were, with their tools and their hunting and their
fishing. Until one day, along came a new sort of folk. A new sort with
flat faces and slim bodies and clever hands and big, bulging brains. And
these folk _could_ make bows and arrows. Why, I bet there was some
Neanderthal _pro-fess-or_ who said something like, “The ability to make
a bow and arrow represents a new dawn for humanity,” and blah, blah,
blah. Maybe that Neanderthal prof urged Ug and Mug to give over a tithe
of mammoth meat to fund more bow-and-arrow-making, for the benefit of
the new folk. And it was all dandy, and everybody got along fine.

‘But where are Ug and Mug now? Where are the Neanderthals? I’ll tell
you. Dead, these thirty thousand years. _Extinct_. Now there’s a
terrible word if you like. A word beyond death, because extinction means
your children are dead too, and your grandchildren and their children
will _never even be born_.

‘You know what I would say to those Neanderthals? You know what they
should have done when those bow-and-arrow folk showed up?’ He slammed
his palm on a table. ‘They should have raised their big fists and their
ugly old stone tools, and they should have smashed the bulging skulls of
those new folk, every last one of them. Because if they had, their
grandchildren would be around now.’ He kept slamming the palm,
punctuating his sentences. ‘Now I got federal politicians and university
_pro-fess-ors_ telling me there’s a new sort of human being amongst us,
a new evolution going on, a superman among us ordinary Joes. A superman,
whose only power is the ability to slip into your child’s bedroom at
night, without you even knowing it? What kind of superman is that?

‘You think I’m a Neanderthal? You think I’m gonna make the mistake they
made? Are you gonna let these mutants take over God’s good Earth? _Are
you gonna submit to extinction?_ Are you? Or you? Or you? …’

Everybody was on their feet, on the stage too, hollering and clapping.
Jansson clapped too, for cover. Around her she glimpsed FBI guys quietly
taking photographs of the crowd.

The world was going to change again. That was the buzz. Once the Black
Corporation’s more or less covert airship developments began to deliver
the massive transformations in interworld carrying capacity they
promised, huge trade flows and massive economic growth could be
expected. But it wouldn’t come soon enough for the likes of Russo, or
Cowley. Jansson fretted about how much harm might be done while
everybody waited for the next miracle.

42

THE _MARK TWAIN_ was a haven. Once you were airborne and stepping away
you left your troubles behind. Now it was a relief to get away from the
Rectangles, and head into the new and unknown. Joshua welcomed the
escape, despite the increasing, foreboding pressure in his head.

Lobsang was still stepping slowly, inspecting the Earths with relative
care, while Joshua and Sally hung out on the observation deck. They were
stepping at cloud height – but even so, once, over a dark green world,
Joshua thought that he heard the scraping of leaves along the keel, the
touch of what must be the titanic trees of some Joker planet.

‘Lobsang’s worried, isn’t he?’ said Sally. ‘And distressed by what we
found at the Rectangles.’

‘Well, he _is_ a Buddhist. Veneration for all living things and all
that. But bones are never feelgood. Elephants are the same, aren’t they?
Aware of the significance of bones, either as a signature of threat, or
of the death of one of their kind …’ He sensed her attention was
elsewhere. ‘Sally, is there something wrong?’

‘What do you mean by “wrong”?’ It sounded like an accusation.

Joshua recoiled from her tone; he didn’t feel like a fight. He went up
to the galley and started to peel potatoes, a gift from Happy Landings
delivered in a woven sack. He gave all his attention to the action of
knife on potato. Displacement activity, he knew, but comforting even so,
given what he was displacing.

Sally followed him, and stood in the doorway to the lounge beyond. ‘You
watch me a lot, don’t you?’

It wasn’t really a question, and so he replied with what wasn’t an
answer. ‘I watch everybody. It’s good to know what they are thinking.’

‘So what am I thinking now?’

‘You are frightened. You’re probably as spooked by the Rectangles as me,
and Lobsang, and under all that the troll migration has you seriously
spooked – you more than either of us, as you know the trolls better than
we do.’ With the potato chopped, he leaned down and picked another out
of the woven bag. He would have to keep the bag; somebody in Happy
Landings had probably spent hours making it. ‘I’ll make chowder.
Wouldn’t do to leave the clams too long. Another gift from Happy
Landings—’

‘Stop it, Joshua. Stop with the damn potatoes. Talk to me.’

Joshua cleaned the knife and put it down carefully; you always took care
of your tools. Then he turned around.

Sally glared at him. ‘What makes you think you know me at all? Do you
actually _know_ anybody?’

‘A few people. One policewoman. My friends at the Home. Even some of the
kids I helped on Step Day, who kept in touch later on. And then there
are the nuns. It is sensible to know nuns when you live close to them;
they can be somewhat mercurial—’

‘I’m sick of hearing about your damn nuns,’ she snapped.

He kept his calm, and defied his instinct to escape into the cooking
again. He had the feeling this was an important moment. ‘Look – I know
I’m not a people person. And Sister Agnes would leather me for using a
phrase like _that_. But there’s no substitute for people, I know that.

‘Look at the trolls. Yes, the trolls are friendly and helpful, and I
would not wish any harm to come to them. They are _happy_, and I could
envy that. But they don’t build, they do not make, they take the world
for what it is. Humans _start_ with the world as it is and try to make
it different. And that’s what makes them interesting. In all these
worlds we are rushing over, the most precious thing that we can find is
another human being. That’s what I think. And if we _are_ the only minds
like ours in the Long Earth, in the universe – well, that’s pretty sad
and scary.

‘Right now I see another human being. And it’s you, and you are not
happy, and I would like to help you if I can. You don’t have to say
anything. Take your time.’ He smiled. ‘The clam chowder won’t be ready
for a couple of hours anyhow. Oh, and the movie this evening will be
_The Ballad of Cable Hogue_. A bittersweet saga of the last days of the
West, starring Jason Robards, according to Lobsang.’

Of all their eccentricities, Sally most ferociously mocked the habit
Lobsang and Joshua had developed of watching old movies in the bowels of
the _Mark Twain_. (Joshua was glad she hadn’t been on board when the two
of them had dressed up for _The Blues Brothers_.) This time she didn’t
react. The silence was punctuated only by the metronomic clicks and
whirs of the galley’s hidden mechanisms. They were two flawed people,
Joshua thought, stranded together.

At last Joshua turned back to his work and finished the chowder, adding
bacon and seasoning. He liked cooking. Cooking responded to care; if you
did things right, then it went well. It was dependable, and he liked
dependable things. But he wished he could have got his hands on some
celery.

When he’d finished, Sally was in the lounge, sitting on the couch,
grasping her knees, as if trying to make herself small. He said, ‘How
about a coffee?’

She shrugged. He poured coffee from the pot.

Evening was falling on the worlds below, and the deck lights came on.
The lounge was wrapped in a honey glow, a great improvement.

Joshua said hesitantly, ‘I find it best to worry about the little
things. Things that can be helped by being worried about. Such as the
making of clam chowder, and giving you a coffee. The bigger stuff, well,
you have to handle that as it faces you.’

Sally smiled thinly. ‘You know, Joshua, for an antisocial weirdo you are
sometimes almost perceptive. Look – what bugs me above all is that I’ve
had to come to you two for help. Well, to _anybody_. I’ve been living on
my own resources for years. I suspect I can’t face this problem on my
own, but I hate to admit it. And there’s something else, Joshua.’ She
studied him. ‘You’re different. Don’t deny it. The super-powered
stepper. The king of the wild Long Earth. I have a feeling you’re
somehow central to all this. That’s the secret reason I came to _you_
specifically.’

That made him deeply uncomfortable, almost betrayed. ‘I don’t want to be
central to anything.’

‘Get used to it. And that’s my problem, you see. When I was a kid, all
the Long Earth used to be my playground, and mine alone. I’m _jealous_.
Because all this may be more yours than mine.’

He tried to take all this in. ‘Sally, maybe you and I—’

And at that moment, very precisely the _wrong_ moment, the door opened
and Lobsang sauntered in, smiling. ‘Ah! Clam chowder! With bacon,
excellent!’

Sally and Joshua shared a glance, parked their conversation, and turned
away.

Sally focused on Lobsang. ‘So here you are, the android that eats.
Gobbling down clam chowder, again?’

Lobsang sat down and, rather artificially, draped one leg over the
other. ‘Yes, of course, why not? The gel substrate that supports my
intelligence needs organic components, and why should those components
not be of the finest cuisine?’

Sally looked at Joshua. ‘But if he eats, then surely he must eventually
…’

Lobsang smiled. ‘Such minimal waste as I produce is expelled as
carefully compacted compost in biodegradable wrapping. Why is this
amusing? You did ask, Sally. At least your mockery makes a change from
your usual disdain for me. And now we have work to do. I need you to
identify these creatures, please.’

Behind him a wall panel lowered, to reveal a screen that flickered into
life. Joshua stared at a familiar biped, scrawny, dirty, yellowish in
colour. It was holding a stick like a club, and it was staring at its
unseen observers with malice aforethought, and possibly afterthought as
well. Joshua knew what it was all too well.

‘We call them elves,’ said Sally.

‘I know you do,’ said Lobsang.

‘I think in some of the colonies they call them Greys, after the old UFO
mythology. You see them everywhere in the High Meggers, and sometimes in
the lower worlds. They are generally leery of humans, but they will try
their luck if you’re isolated or wounded. Super-fast, super-strong,
highly intelligent hunters who use stepping when they go for their
prey.’

‘I know,’ Joshua said. ‘We’ve met them before.’

‘Elves. Not a bad name, when you think about it. Elves weren’t always
sweet little creatures, were they? Northern European legends portray
them as tall and powerful and quite without souls. A nasty name. I can
live with that. They need all the bad press we can give them. And in
mythology, aren’t elves often afraid of iron? No wonder, I guess; iron
could be used to trap them, to stop them stepping.’

Joshua went back to the chowder in the galley, and as he worked Lobsang
gave Sally a curt account of Joshua’s battle with the hog-riding
assassins.

When he returned, she looked at Joshua with new respect. ‘You did well
to survive.’

‘Yes. And that was supposed to be my day off. Long story.’

‘Fun guys to have around, right?’

‘Here’s another variant,’ Lobsang said. The screen displayed an image of
the pregnant, big-brained elf Joshua had tried to save.

‘I call this kind lollipops,’ Sally said. ‘Big-brained, you can see
that, but not actually all that bright that I’ve observed.’

Lobsang nodded. ‘It makes sense. The stepping-birth procedure has
allowed a dramatic expansion of the physical size of the brain, but
perhaps that has yet to be matched by an increase in functional
capability. They have the hardware; the software is yet to evolve.’

Sally said, ‘In the meantime some of the other elf types farm them. For
their brains, I mean. They eat the big brains. I’ve seen it.’

Silence greeted that pronouncement.

Lobsang sighed. ‘Not exactly Rivendell, then, is it, with all these
trolls and elves? Tell me, Sally, are there any unicorns in the Long
Earth?’

‘Chowder’s done,’ said Joshua. ‘Get it while it’s hot.’

As they sat down to eat, Sally said, ‘Actually there are unicorns. Some
not too many steps from Happy Landings. I can show you if you like. Ugly
devils, and _not_ the kind that hang out with Barbie. Just bloody great
slabs of battering ram, and so dumb they get their horns stuck in tree
trunks. Often happens in the mating season …’

Now the screen showed images of elves feeding on some carcass,
squabbling, bloody-mouthed.

Sally asked, ‘Why are you showing us all this, Lobsang?’

‘Because this is a live feed from what is below us, on our latest Earth.
Hadn’t you noticed we’d stopped stepping? Eat your chowder; the elves
will keep until morning.’

43

THE NEXT DAWN came late, to Joshua’s puzzlement. The daylight revealed a
wasteland below, a dried-up dustbowl world with, it seemed, precious
little water, and therefore precious little else.

Lobsang joined Joshua on the observation deck. ‘Not a prepossessing
place, is it? But it has its curiosities.’

‘Like the sun rising late.’

‘Indeed. Also, both trolls and elves are crossing through here, almost
all of them heading East, and I am getting good pictures of both species
on the belly cameras.’

The deck tilted slightly. Joshua said, ‘We’re going down?’

‘Yes, and I would like Sally to land with us. I would like to apprehend
an elf if possible. I wish to try to communicate with one.’

Joshua snorted sceptically.

‘I don’t expect very much from the encounter, but one never knows. Just
in case, I have fabricated helmets and neck armour for you both; anyone
trying to strangle you from behind will regret it, stepping or not. I
will see you by the elevator in half an hour.’

Sally was fully dressed when Joshua knocked at her door. ‘Helmets!’ she
snapped.

‘It was Lobsang’s idea, sorry.’

‘I’ve survived in the Long Earth for years without being nannied by the
likes of Lobsang. OK, OK, I’m the passenger here, I know. Any idea what
he’s planning?’

‘To catch an elf, I think.’

She blew a raspberry.

Lobsang brought the airship to a halt over a bluff of heavily eroded
rock. The landscape was a desert of rust-red dirt. This was a strange
Earth, even by the standards of most Jokers. Joshua felt heavy, as if
his bones were plated in lead, and his usual pack was a burden. The air
was dense, but oddly not satisfying, and his lungs laboured. A wind blew
constantly with an empty howl. On the barren plain there was no grass or
other vegetation – nothing but a sort of green-purple fuzziness, as if
the land hadn’t shaved that morning.

And occasionally, Joshua saw, there was a flicker, more sensed than
seen. Something stepping, he thought, and stepping away again so fast it
had hardly been there …

Sally asked, ‘What’s with this place, Lobsang? It’s like a cemetery!’

‘Indeed it is,’ said Lobsang. ‘Though a cemetery empty even of bones.’
He stood stock still, like a statue around which the dust swirled. ‘Look
up at mid-heaven, slightly to your left. What do you see?’

Joshua squinted and gave up. ‘I don’t know what I’m looking for.’

‘Something notable for its absence,’ said Lobsang. ‘If you were standing
at this exact spot on the Datum, right now, you would be looking at a
washed-out moon in a daylight sky. _This_ Earth has no moon to speak of.
Just a few orbiting rocks invisible to the naked eye.’

Lobsang said it was a contingency he had anticipated. The cataclysmic
impact which had created the moon of Datum Earth and most of its
stepwise sisters had evidently never happened here. The moonless Earth
that resulted was more massive than the Datum, which was why extra
gravity dragged them down. The tilt of the axis was different, and
unstable, and the world rotated more quickly, causing a different
day–night cycle, and a wind that endlessly scoured the rocky, lifeless
continents. It wasn’t a place for life: the lack of tides caused the
ocean waters to stagnate, and there were none of the rich intertidal
zones that had done so much on the Datum to promote the evolution of
complex life.

‘That’s the general theory,’ Lobsang said. ‘On top of that, I suspect
this world did not get its share of water during the big soaking towards
the end of the creation of the solar system, when comets rained like
hailstones. Perhaps this is somehow connected to the big moon-creating
impact, or the lack of it. Sadly, this planet is a loser; probably even
our Mars got a better deal.’

But there were compensations. When Joshua shielded his eyes from the
sun, a band of light was revealed, razor sharp, cutting right across the
sky. This Earth was circled by a ring system, like Saturn’s. A
spectacular sight from space, probably.

Lobsang said, ‘Right now I am waiting for a troll. I have been
ultrasonic-yelling for help in the troll language for fifteen minutes,
and I am extruding troll pheromones – quite easy to duplicate.’

‘That explains why my teeth are aching,’ said Sally. ‘And why I thought
somebody hadn’t washed today. Do we have to hang around here? This air
is crappy, and it stinks.’

She was right about the stench, Joshua thought. This world smelled like
the old house at the dirty end of the street that you were told never to
go to, the house that had been locked up and nailed shut after the last
person in it had died. It offended him, even more so than the
quasi-dinosaur world. OK, the Rectangle builders had died out, but at
least they had _lived_, they had had a chance.

But maybe, he thought, humans could bring this desolate world alive. Why
not? He liked to fix things; this place could absorb a lot of fixing.
Now _there_ would be something you could tell your grand children about.
There were still plenty of snowballs out in the Oort cloud, and a fairly
small spacecraft on the right trajectory could line itself up to tip one
of those and get a bit of water down here. Once you had the water you
were home and dry, so to speak … But it was all a pipe dream. Mankind
had started turning its back on anything more ambitious than the
electronic exploration of space even before the Long Earth was
discovered, offering a myriad habitable worlds within walking distance.

This reverie was broken when Lobsang said, ‘Trolls on the way. That
didn’t take long. Of course, they step in packs, so expect a large
number. I give you fair warning: I intend to sing to them. Join me if
you wish.’ He cleared his throat theatrically.

It wasn’t just the ambulant unit that began to sing. The sound of
Lobsang’s voice broke in a wave, thundering out of all the speakers on
the airship. ‘_Keep right on to the end of the road, Keep right on to
the end. Tho’ the way be long, let your heart be strong, Keep right on
to the end_ …’ Echoes were thrown up, quite possibly the first time this
dead place had known echoes of a human voice – or nearly human, Joshua
thought. ‘_Tho’ you are tired and weary still journey on, Till you come
to your happy abode, Where all the love you’ve been dreaming of, Will be
there at the end of the road_ …’

Sally just stared, astonished. ‘Joshua – tell me he hasn’t finally
crashed his circuits. What the hell’s he singing?’

Quickly and quietly Joshua told her the story of Private Percy Blakeney
and his Russian pals in an unfamiliar France, and she looked even more
astonished.

But the trolls came. By the end of the song Lobsang was surrounded by
trolls, who hooted in harmony with him. ‘Good, aren’t they? Group memory
with a vengeance! Now – bear with me while I try to figure out what’s
bothering them.’

As the trolls clustered around Lobsang, like big hairy children around a
department store Santa, Joshua and Sally backed away, which was
something of a relief. The trolls would do anything rather than tread on
a human, but after a while their musk, while not really offensive, could
simply take control over your sinuses.

But on the other hand this wasn’t a good world for taking a stroll in,
while you waited. There was simply _nothing here_. Joshua knelt down
and, at random, levered up a little piece of the green fuzz. There were
a couple of small beetles underneath; they weren’t even interestingly
iridescent, just mud brown. He let the piece of fuzz fall back again.

Sally said, ‘Do you know, if you took a leak on that patch it would be
doing those beetles a favour. Honestly! I won’t look. That bit of soil
will have more nutrients than it has seen in a long time. Sorry, was
that offensive?’

Joshua shook his head absentmindedly. ‘No. Just a bit incongruous.’

Sally laughed. ‘Incongruous! Lobsang sings Harry Lauder on a desolate
planet, and is now surrounded by trolls. Somehow “incongruous” just
can’t carry the load, don’t you think? And now my fillings aren’t
tingling so much. The trolls are heading out, see?’

Joshua saw. It was as if an invisible hand were picking up pieces on a
chessboard, but taking all the queens and pawns first, bishops and rooks
next, and knights and kings last of all.

Sally said, ‘The mothers go first, because they would punch the living
daylights out of anything that threatened their pups. Elders in the
middle, and males last, at the rear of the column … Elves attack from
the rear, you see, so you watch your back.’

And then there were none, leaving nothing more than a slight improvement
in the air quality.

Lobsang ambled over to them.

‘How does he _do_ that?’ said Sally. ‘Now he’s walking like John
Travolta!’

‘Haven’t you heard the fabrication deck working away day and night? He
is endlessly bettering himself, endlessly rebuilding. The way you’d go
to a gym, maybe?’

‘I have never in my life gone into a gym, sir. When you are by yourself
in the Long Earth you are either in shape, or you are dead.’ She
grinned. ‘Mind you, I wish I had legs like that.’

‘There’s nothing wrong with your legs.’ And he regretted that sentence
as soon as he’d uttered it.

She just laughed. ‘Joshua, you are fun to know, and a good companion,
reliable and all that, even if you are a little bit weird. Someday we
might be friends,’ she said a bit more gently. ‘But please don’t make
comments about my legs. You’ve seen very little of my legs since most of
the time they are inside premium grade thorn-proof battledress. And it’s
naughty to guess, OK?’

To Joshua’s relief Lobsang reached them, smiling. ‘I admit I am rather
pleased with myself.’

‘No change there then,’ Sally said.

‘We haven’t caught an elf,’ Joshua pointed out.

‘Oh, that’s no longer necessary. I have achieved my purpose. At Happy
Landings I learned the elements of troll communication. But that
sedentary population could tell me little about the forces behind the
migration. Now these wild trolls have told me more, much more. Don’t you
say a word, Sally! I’ll answer all your questions. Let’s get aboard – we
have a long journey still ahead of us, perhaps to the end of the Long
Earth itself – and won’t that be fun?’

44

SILENCE REIGNED ON the observation deck. Joshua was alone. Once back on
board, Lobsang had immediately retreated through the blue door, and
Sally to her stateroom.

Suddenly the _Mark Twain_ began stepping like a tap dancer on speed.
Joshua peered out. Outside, skies strobed by, landscapes morphed, rivers
writhed like snakes, and Joker worlds popped like flashbulbs. On the
ship, everything that could creak was creaking like an ancient tea
clipper going around Cape Horn, and the stepping itself was a juddering
deep inside Joshua, a hailstorm. And outside, Joshua estimated, they
were crossing many worlds with every second.

Sally came on deck spitting feathers. ‘What the hell does he think he’s
doing?’

Joshua had no answer. But again he fretted about Lobsang’s strange
instability and impulsiveness.

Lobsang’s ambulant unit glided through the blue door. ‘My friends, I am
distraught if I have alarmed you. I am now eager to progress our
mission. I told you I have learned a great deal from the trolls.’

‘You know what’s disturbing them,’ said Sally.

‘I do know more, at least. In short, the trolls, and probably the elves
and other humanoid types too, are indeed fleeing from something, but not
something physical – it is something that gets into their heads, so to
speak. And this confirms what we learned from the Happy Landings trolls.

‘The feeling is like a plague of pain – like migraine attacks – sweeping
over the worlds from West to East. There have been suicides. Creatures
throwing themselves off cliffs rather than suffer the anguish of it.’

Joshua and Sally looked at one another.

Sally said, ‘A migraine monster? What is this, _Star Trek_?’

Lobsang looked puzzled. ‘Do you refer to the original series, or—’

‘This really is plain crazy. Joshua, are there any manual controls on
this airship?’

‘I don’t know. But I do know that Lobsang has very acute hearing.’

‘Joshua is correct in that respect, Sally …’

‘Do the trolls understand what’s coming? Have any of them _seen_
anything?’

‘So far as I can tell, no. But they imagine it as enormous, physically.
To them it is a mix of physical and abstract. Like an approaching forest
fire, maybe. A wall of pain.’

The complaints from the fabric of the _Mark Twain_ were beginning to
bother Joshua. He had no idea what maximum safe stepping speed the ship
was capable of. And to plummet at such a rate into entire unknown
worlds, and towards an unknown danger, seemed unwise to him to say the
least. The earthometers, he saw, were whirling up ever closer to the two
million mark.

But Lobsang was talking and talking, apparently oblivious to such
concerns. ‘This is not the time to share all of my thinking with the two
of you. Suffice it to say that it is clear we are dealing with some kind
of genuine psychic phenomenon.

‘Here is the hypothesis. Humans broadcast their humanity in some way. We
sense one another. But we have long evolved to live on a planet
absolutely drenched with human thoughts. We don’t even notice it.’

‘Not until it’s gone,’ Joshua said.

Sally looked at him, curious.

‘I suggest that once upon a time some of these creatures, elves and
trolls and perhaps other variants, did occasionally step into the Datum,
and perhaps occasionally hung around for a spell. Thus giving rise to
volumes of myth. But this was in the days of comparatively low human
population. Now the planet is knee deep in humans, and for creatures
that spend most of their time in the mindless calm of woodlands and
prairies, it must be as if all the world’s teenage parties are being
thrown at once. So these days they stay away from the Datum. However,
the stepping species migrating from the West are fleeing from something
that is irrevocably pushing them _back_ towards the Datum. They are
caught between the hammer and the anvil. And sometimes they panic.
Joshua and I have seen what happens when they panic – even trolls may be
capable of harm when roused, and remember the Church of the Cosmic
Confidence Trick, Joshua?’

Joshua glanced at Sally. He would have expected nothing but scepticism
from her. But, amazingly, she looked thoughtful. He prompted, ‘What are
you thinking, Sally?’

‘That it’s all far-fetched. And yet … I mean, I’m like you, I’ll go into
a city for a purpose, but while I’m in one I’m nervous as a long-tailed
cat in a room full of rocking chairs. I can’t wait to get out, it
_pushes_ me out, back out into the empty worlds. Where I feel more
comfortable.’

‘But you don’t run, right? And you don’t notice it the rest of the time.
The way fish don’t notice water.’

Surprisingly, Sally smiled. ‘That’s very Zen. Almost Lobsang.’ She
looked at him carefully. ‘And what about you?’

She knows, he thought. She knows all about me. And yet still he
hesitated before answering.

Then he spoke to them, on this rushing airship, more freely than he ever
had to anybody, even to Sister Agnes or Officer Jansson, about his own
inner sensations.

He told them about the peculiar pressure in his head he felt every time
he went back to the Datum. A reluctance, that eventually turned into a
physical revulsion. ‘It’s something in my head. It’s like, you know how
as a kid if you _have_ to go to some party where everybody else is going
to fit in, except you? Like you physically can’t take another step, like
some magnetic field is pushing you away.’

Sally shrugged. ‘I never went to many parties.’

‘And you’re antisocial, Joshua,’ Lobsang said. ‘I think we knew that.
What’s your point?’

‘Here’s the thing. Whatever it means, whatever causes this, I’ve been
feeling something like it _here_. On the airship. A pressure, making it
harder to go on.’ He closed his eyes. ‘And it’s getting worse, the
further West we go. I feel it now. Like a repulsion, deep inside. I can
stand it when we stay still, but it’s harder to bear when we travel, and
it worsens.’

Lobsang asked, ‘Something out in the far West, pushing you away?’

‘Yes.’

Sally asked angrily, ‘Why didn’t you tell me this before? You let me
blab about the soft places, about my family’s secrets. I opened up to
you,’ she said almost with a snarl. ‘And all the time you were hiding
this?’

He just looked at her. He hadn’t told her because you kept your
weaknesses to yourself, in the Home, and in most places he’d had to
survive in since then. ‘I’m telling you now.’

She backed down with an effort. ‘All right,’ she said. ‘I believe you.
So this is all real. I admit it now. I am officially scared.’

Lobsang sounded excited. ‘Now can you see why I am so eager to bring on
this encounter? We are pursuing a mystery, Joshua, Sally! A mystery from
the ends of the Long Earth!’

Joshua ignored him and kept his attention on Sally. ‘We’re both scared.
But we’re going to face this, right? You won’t run away. Animals flee.
The trolls have to flee. _We_ keep on going, trying to find out what
scares us, and deal with it. That’s what humans do.’

‘Yeah. Until it kills us.’

‘There is that.’ He stood up. ‘Shall I get some coffee?’

Later, Joshua realized he should have been paying attention, especially
in the final few minutes. The last couple of hundred worlds, worlds
where the calm green below was broken up by craters punched like great
footprints into the ground. Should have stayed alert, despite the
gathering pressure in his head. Should have raised the alarm.

Should have halted the journey, long before the airship fell into the
Gap.

45

SUDDENLY JOSHUA WAS falling. He was rising up into the air, off the
floor. The observation deck was still around him, its frame, the big
windows, but the glistening display panels on the walls were fritzing
out one by one. Through the windows he could see the bulk of the
airship, its envelope damaged, torn silvery cloth fragments spilling
away from the skeletal frame.

Beyond that was only the sun, dazzling bright, against blackness. The
sun was just where it had been before, but it was all that was left of
the outside world now, as if the rest, the blue sky, the green world,
was a stage set that had been ripped away to reveal darkness. But now
even the sun was drifting slowly to the right. Maybe the gondola was
rolling.

Lobsang was silent, his ambulant unit fixed to the deck but still as a
statue, apparently not functioning. The cat was in mid-air, paddling
with her limbs, an expression of apparent fear on her small synthetic
face. And there was a hand on Joshua’s shoulder: Sally, floating in the
air, her hair, loose, rising around her head like a space station
astronaut’s.

The deck creaked. Joshua thought he heard a hiss of escaping air. He
couldn’t seem to think. His chest ached when he tried to take a breath.

Then the gravity came back, and blue sky unfolded.

They all hit the floor, which was, for the moment, the wall. A kettle
full of water spun its way across the deck, much to the apparent terror
of Shi-mi the cat, who scrambled to her feet and fled into a
compartment. All above and below and around them was a symphony of high
technology parting company with itself.

Joshua said, ‘We found the Joker of Jokers, didn’t we?’ And then his
stomach convulsed and he threw up. He straightened, embarrassed. ‘I’ve
_never_ got nauseous after stepping before.’

‘I don’t think it was the stepping.’ Sally rubbed her own stomach. ‘It
was the weightlessness. And then the sudden return of gravity. It was
like falling.’

‘Yeah. It really happened, didn’t it?’

‘I think so,’ Sally said. ‘We found a gap. A Gap in the Long Earth.’

The gondola slowly righted, but now the deck’s lights went out, leaving
only the daylight. Joshua could hear the sound of spinning metal things
gradually ceasing to spin, worryingly.

Lobsang suddenly came to life: his head, his face, though his body
remained inanimate. ‘_Chak pa!_’

Sally looked at Joshua. ‘What did he say?’

‘Tibetan swearing, I think. Or possibly Klingon.’

Lobsang sounded oddly cheerful. ‘Oh boy, is my face red! So to speak.
Well, to err is human. Is anyone hurt?’

Sally said, ‘What have you run us into, Lobsang?’

‘We have run into _nothing_, Sally, pure nothing. Vacuum. I stepped back
in a hurry, but it seems the _Mark Twain_ has taken a beating. Some
systems are inoperative. Fortunately the gas sacs are intact, but some
of my personal systems are compromised. I am checking, but it doesn’t
look good.’

Sally was furious. ‘How did you manage to hit a vacuum _on Earth_?’

Lobsang sighed. ‘Sally, we stepped into a place where there is no Earth.
A total vacuum, interplanetary space. At some point in time there _was_
an Earth there, I suspect, but presumably some catastrophe destroyed it.
An impact, probably. A big one, one that would make the dinosaur-killer
look like pea-shooter fire bouncing off an elephant. One that would
dwarf even the Big Whack, the moon impact.’

‘Are you saying you anticipated this?’

‘As a theoretical possibility.’

‘But you went plummeting into the dark anyhow? Are you crazy?’

Lobsang cleared his throat. He was getting better at that with practice,
Joshua noticed absently. ‘Yes, I anticipated it. I made a study of
likely contingencies based on perturbations of Earth’s history, and took
sensible precautions. Which included the automatic step-back module that
appears to have worked almost perfectly. Regrettably, however, leaving
us with a sea of problems.’

‘Are we stuck here?’

‘ “Stuck” in comparative safety, Sally. You are breathing perfectly good
air. This world, though right next door to the Gap, is a perfectly
healthy one, it seems. However, my ambulant unit is largely in operable;
I cannot access its auto-repair function. I assure you, all is not lost.
Back in the Low Earths, the Corporation’s airship development programme
has continued. The _Mark Trine_ should be completed by now and would be
able to reach us within a matter of days at full step.’

More lights had come back on now. Joshua started tidying up the debris.
From here, apart from the furnishings and some of the crockery
everything looked shipshape, but he worried very much about what damage
had been done beyond Lobsang’s blue doors. ‘Of course,’ he said, ‘the
operators of the _Trine_, even assuming it’s flightworthy, will not be
aware of our predicament. Will they, Lobsang?’

Relatively calmly, Sally said, ‘So we _are_ stuck here?’

Lobsang asked silkily, ‘Are you concerned, Sally? What about all those
famous soft places? And what are you thinking, Joshua?’

Joshua hesitated. ‘The bigger picture hasn’t changed, it seems to me. We
must still investigate the migraine monster. You say that the gasbag is
OK, yes? Then can you step?’

‘Yes. But I cannot steer, geographically I mean, and power is limited.
The solar-cell surfaces appear to be intact, but much of the
infrastructure—The problem, aside from rupture of gas sacs and
pipelines, was the boiling-away of lubricants—’

Joshua nodded. ‘Fine. Then _step forward_. Let’s go on.’

‘Across the Gap?’ Sally asked.

‘Well, why not? We know the trolls and the elves have been fleeing
through this area. Some at least must survive. They must be able to jump
the Gap in some way – you know, a two-step. Stepping takes no time at
all.’ He grinned. ‘We will be back in atmosphere long before our eyes
explode and dribble down our faces.’

‘That’s a particularly graphic imagination you have there, mister.’

But Lobsang smiled glassily. ‘I’m glad to see you were paying attention
during _2001_, Joshua.’

‘We’ve come this far,’ Joshua said. ‘I vote we continue, even if that
means we have to do it eventually on foot.’ He took Sally’s hand. ‘Are
you ready?’

‘Are you kidding? _Now_?’

‘Before we talk ourselves out of it again. Double-step us please,
Lobsang.’

Joshua was never able to make much sense of the memory of what came
next. Did he really feel the stinging cold of space? Did he really hear
the soughing of the wind of oblivion between the galaxies? Nothing
seemed real. Not until he found himself gazing out at a clouded-over
sky, and heard rain beating at the gondola windows.

They gave themselves a day to recover, to patch up the airship as best
they could.

Then the _Mark Twain_ stepped on, heading ever Westward, cautiously now,
one world at a time every few seconds, maybe half their old cruising
speed, and only in daylight.

After twenty or thirty worlds they stopped seeing the crater features
that littered the worlds around the Gap, perhaps traces of chance
near-misses of the object that had caused the Gap itself in nearby
realities. They were somewhere beyond Earth two million by now. The
worlds here were bland, uniform. In these deep footprints of America
this was still the Pacific coast, and they stuck mostly to the coastal
strip, trying to avoid the perils of the deep forest, and indeed of the
ocean itself. It seemed a dull band of worlds to Joshua, lacking
colourful flowers and insects and birds, and with the vegetation
dominated by huge tree-like ferns. But at the sea’s edge they sometimes
glimpsed spectacular fishing creatures, agile bipedal runners with big
sickle-shaped claws on their arms that they dipped into the water to
scoop out big fish, one after another, throwing them high up the beach.

Days passed. The character of the worlds began to change further. The
forest retreated from the sea, leaving wider coastal bands of scrub and
scattered trees. The sea changed too, becoming _greener_, Joshua
thought. Stiller, as if the water itself had become glutinous, denser.
They didn’t speak much. None of the coffee percolators would work,
despite their experimental smartness, causing Sally’s mood to
deteriorate quickly.

And Joshua found it increasingly difficult to endure the stepping.

Sally patted his arm. ‘Getting close to that teenage party, are we,
Joshua?’

He always resented people seeing any weakness in him. ‘Something like
that. Don’t you feel anything?’

‘No. I wish I did. I told you, I’m jealous, Joshua. You have some kind
of real talent there.’

That evening, as they relaxed as best they could while the ship stepped
cautiously on, Lobsang startled Joshua by talking about access to space.

‘I’ve been thinking. What an opportunity the Gap represents!’

Since the galley was mostly inoperative, Joshua was hammering a grill
out of a defunct piece of equipment. ‘An opportunity for what?’

‘Space travel! You could just put on a pressure suit and step off, into
space. None of that messy business of climbing out of Earth’s gravity
well on rockets. You’d presumably be in solar orbit, just as Earth is.
Once you had some kind of infrastructure in place in the Gap itself, you
could simply sail off. It would be a great deal more energy-efficient to
get to Mars, say …

‘You know, I was always a space buff. Even back in Tibet. I personally
have invested some money in the Kennedy Space Center, where they’re not
even taking care of the museum-piece rockets any more. Our pathetic
handful of microgravity orbital factories gives the illusion that we are
still a space-going species, but the dream has gone – gone even before
the Long Earth was opened up. As far as we know there is nowhere else in
the universe where a human being can exist un protected. And now, with
millions of Earths available to us, who wants to go up into the cold,
scorching emptiness in a spacesuit smelling faintly of urine? We could
have been _out there_, applying to join the galactic federation, not
slashing and burning our way across endless copies of the same old
planet.’

Sally said, ‘But you’re leading the slashing and the burning, Lobsang.’

‘Well, I don’t see why I can’t have both. And, don’t you see, if we can
develop the Gap, maybe we can find a way to do all that after all. From
the Gap the solar system is your oyster Kilpatrick. Don’t forget this
conversation, Joshua. When you get back to the Datum, stake a claim to
the Earths on either side of the Gap before the rush starts, and mankind
finds that there _is_ such a thing as a free launch. Think what might be
out there! Not just the other worlds of our solar system – though surely
a universe that has manufactured the Long Earth has manufactured the
Long Mars as well? Think about _that_.’

Joshua tried. It made his head spin. He concentrated on finishing his
grill. The galley ovens were out, but he planned to barbecue most of
what, had it been on Earth, might have been called a deer, the result of
some brisk hunting by Sally.

The ship stopped stepping, without warning.

And Joshua _heard_ …

It wasn’t a voice. Something wormed inside his brain, a sensation clear
and sharp, and offering no hint of anything other than its existence.

Only that it was calling to him.

He managed to say, ‘Lobsang, can you hear anything? On the radio
frequencies, I mean?’

‘Of course I can. Why do you think I halted the stepping? We’re being
pinged, with coherent signals at a range of frequencies. It appears to
be an attempt at the language of the trolls. I will concentrate on the
decoding, if you will excuse me.’

Sally looked from one to the other. ‘What’s happening? Am I the only one
who isn’t hearing anything? Is it coming from that thing underneath us?’

‘What thing?’ Joshua looked out of a galley window at the ocean below.

‘_That_ thing.’

‘Lobsang,’ Joshua asked, ‘is your port camera working?’

46

JOSHUA AND SALLY abseiled down the panic rope, the only way to the
ground now the winches were jammed.

Once down, Joshua clambered on top of a bluff for a look around. Under a
sunless, clouded-over sky, a dense green ocean lapped reluctantly at a
muddy beach. Inland, a bare landscape stretched away to folded hills,
far in the distance. But, just to the south of here, there was a
tremendous crater, like Meteor Crater in Arizona. Without warning a huge
pterosaur-like creature swept out of the crater, utterly silent, heading
over Joshua’s head and out into this world’s version of the Pacific.
Silhouetted against a darkening sky, it was like a nuclear bomber
heading for Moscow.

And something moved in this remote version of the Pacific. Something
vast, like a living island. Joshua’s headache had gone. Cleared utterly.
But the sensation he had always called the Silence had never been more
profound.

The voice of Lobsang chattered crisply from a small speaker in Joshua’s
backpack. ‘We are back on the Washington State coast of this planet … My
aerial drones are no longer functional; my view is limited. The object
appears to be twenty-three miles long and approximately five miles wide.
It’s a creature, Joshua. Without a clear analogue on the Datum. I have
noticed several appendages along its flank that are changing size and
shape – you might think it is a technology park; I see what appear to be
antennas, telescopes, but the instruments are morphing one into the
other, extraordinary – and a certain amount of movement along the
carcass as a whole. I can’t estimate threat. I can’t imagine that
something like this could make a sudden movement, but for all I know
right now it might develop wings and fly …’

There was a steady rippling along the thing’s upper surface. It was
slightly white, slightly transparent. Its movements affected Joshua
somehow, viscerally, a sensation seeming to arrive in his consciousness
by no discernible pathway.

‘Sally, have you ever seen anything like this before?’

She snorted. ‘What do you think?’

Lobsang said, ‘I have just shaken hands with it.’

Sally snapped, ‘What the hell are you talking about now?’

‘Communications protocols, Sally. We are in contact … It is evidently a
remarkable intellect; I can tell that immediately from the sheer
information-theoretic complexity of its communications. So far I’ve
learned one thing from it. Its name—’

‘It has a _name_?’

‘Its name is First Person Singular, and before you shout at me about
that, Sally, I know that because it has now told me as much in
twenty-six different languages of Earth. Including, I’m proud to say,
Tibetan. I have been beaming information at it, and it’s learning fast;
it has already downloaded much of the ship’s data store. I believe that
it’s harmless.’

‘What?’ Sally growled. ‘Something alive and the size of a small
reservoir de facto can’t possibly be harmless. What’s it for? Above all,
what does it eat?’

Joshua slipped his packs off his shoulders and dropped them on the
beach. There was no noise here, he realized. No animal cries, not even
the distant honking of the pterosaur fliers. Only the soft, oily
spilling of small waves on the shore. _Nothing but the Silence_. What he
had been hearing all his life, in the gaps between people. Huge
thoughts, like the echoes from some tremendous brass gong. Now here it
was, before him.

More than two million worlds from Earth, he felt oddly as if he had come
home.

He walked towards the ocean.

Sally called, ‘Joshua. Take it easy. You don’t know what you’re dealing
with …’

He kicked off his boots and pulled off his socks. Barefoot, he walked
into the water until his ankles were covered. He could smell salt, and
the sweetly rotten stink of seaweed. The water was warm, and thick,
dense, almost syrupy. And it swarmed with life, tiny creatures, white
and blue and green and mobile. Some were like tiny jellyfish, with
pulsing sacs and trailing tentacles. But there were things like fish in
there too, with huge, strange eyes, and things like crabs with
clever-looking claws.

And, a little further out, the thing. Joshua waded out, towards its
tremendous edge. The voice of Lobsang chattered in his ear, but he
ignored it. The flanks of First Person Singular were translucent, like
inferior glass, and if he squinted he could just about see what was
inside. And what was inside was … everything. Fish. Animals. A _troll_?
It was embedded in glutinous fluid, swathed in some kind of frond, like
seaweed, eyes closed. It looked asleep rather than dead. At peace.

Walking right up to that misty hull, he touched it with the tip of a
finger. There was a slight sensation, nothing painful.

A voice in his head said, ‘Hello, Joshua.’

And information poured into his mind, like a sudden awakening.

47

ONCE, LONG AGO, on a world as close as a shadow:

A very different version of North America cradled a huge, landlocked,
saline sea. This sea teemed with microbial life. All this life served a
single tremendous organism.

And on this world, under a cloudy sky, the entirety of the turbid sea
crackled with a single thought.

I …

This thought was followed by another.

To what purpose?

48

‘THIS IS A Historic moment,’ Lobsang babbled. ‘First contact! The dream
of a million years fulfilled. And I know what this must be. Shalmirane …
Didn’t you read _The City and the Stars_? It’s some kind of colony
organism.’

Sally said archly, ‘Behold the alien! So what now? Are you going to set
it mathematical puzzles, like Carl Sagan and those SETI guys?’

Joshua ignored them both. He spoke to First Person Singular. ‘I didn’t
tell you my name.’

‘You didn’t need to. You are Joshua. I am First Person Singular.’ The
voice in his head sounded like his own.

Inside the translucent skin, the creatures. He recognized fish, birds,
and, he realized after a while, a very definite _elephant_, moving
slowly through whatever was in there, half walking, half swimming, eyes
closed. And trolls, and elves, and other humanoids.

The tide was coming in. Very carefully, so as not to give offence or
cause alarm, Joshua walked backward. ‘What is First Person Singular …
for?’

‘First Person Singular is the observer of worlds.’

‘You speak good English.’ It was a dumb thing to say, but what _was_ the
right thing to say to a miles-wide slug? Sister Agnes would have known,
he thought.

The reply came back immediately. ‘First Person Singular does not know
what “Sister Agnes” is. I am still learning. Can you define for me a
nun?’

On this bleak shore, Joshua’s jaw dropped.

First Person Singular said, ‘Cross-reference, yes – a nun is a female
biped who refrains from procreation to service the needs of others in
the species. Comparison with eusocial insects, perhaps? Ants and bees …
More. Also rides large vehicles propelled ultimately by the remains of
ancient trees. More. Is dedicated to the contemplation of the numinous.
This is acknowledged as an interim description pending further
investigation of relevant details … I myself would appear to be a nun,
by some definitions. I perceive the world of worlds in their entirety. I
believe I understand what is meant by _breathless with adoration_ … You
should move back on to the shore.’

The incoming water was up to Joshua’s knees. He backed up across the
strand.

Sally was watching in amazement. ‘You’re _talking_ to it?’

‘She. Not it. I think so. I hear my own voice asking me questions. She
seems to know what I’m thinking – or rather, she knows what I know. I
have no idea what she is, but she seems to want to learn.’ He sighed.
‘I’m kind of overloaded with wonder here, Sally.’

From the backpack the voice of Lobsang called, ‘Come back to the
airship. Debriefing time, I think.’

As they walked back to the _Mark Twain_ more pterosaurs flew over, their
silhouettes gaunt against the sky.

Without the winches, the climb back up the rope to the gondola was
pretty gruelling, but there were working lights on all decks now, the
water heater was functioning, and there was instant coffee, at least.

Of course Sally wanted to talk things over immediately. But she was
overruled by both Joshua and Lobsang, for at least the time it took to
make the coffee.

Then Joshua tried to relate what he had sensed of First Person
Singular’s own story. ‘She was alone on her world.’

‘A survivor,’ Sally said.

‘No. Not that. She _emerged_ alone. She evolved that way. She was always
alone …’

Lobsang cross-examined him, and gradually they pieced together, if not
the truth, then a story.

On the Earth of First Person Singular, Lobsang speculated, as on many
Earths, the early ages of life were long aeons of struggle for survival
by half-formed creatures that had not yet discovered how to use DNA to
store genetic information, and whose control over the proteins from
which all living things were constructed was as yet poor. There had been
billions upon billions of swarming cells in the shallow oceans, but they
were not yet sophisticated enough to be able to _afford_ to compete with
each other. Instead, they co-operated. Any useful innovation flashed
from cell to cell. It was as if everything in this global ocean operated
as a single mega-organism.

‘With time,’ Lobsang said, ‘on most worlds, and certainly on Datum
Earth, complexity and organization reach a point where individual cells
can survive unaided. And then, on most worlds, competition begins. The
great kingdoms of life begin to separate, oxygen bleeds into the air as
a waste product of creatures that learn how to harness the power of
sunlight, and the long slow climb towards multicelled forms begins. The
age of global cooperation vanishes, leaving no trace save enigmatic
markers in genetic composition.’

Sally said, ‘On most worlds, but not on First Person Singular’s.’

‘No. Actually that world must have been a remarkable Joker. There, the
gathering complexity drove a familiar-looking evolutionary story – but
the unity of that single global organism _was never lost_. We really
have travelled to a very distant branch of the contingency tree. It—’

‘She, Lobsang,’ Joshua said.

‘_She_: yes, the feminine is appropriate, _she_ appears to be positively
gravid with apparently healthy life forms. She was more like a maturing
biosphere than a creature like a human. As complexity increased, knots
of control must have formed. To grow further it would have become
necessary for the information structure to construct and contain a copy
of itself, for the whole to become self-reflective. That is, conscious.’

Sally frowned, trying to take this in. ‘But what would such a creature
want?’

‘I can tell you that much,’ Joshua said. ‘Company. She was lonely.
Although she didn’t know it until she encountered the trolls.’

‘Ah.’

They would never know how a band of trolls had ended up on that remote
world, Joshua realized. They must have come through the Gap; perhaps
they were traumatized, some of them injured by exposure to vacuum. ‘But
she was fascinated,’ he said, eyes closed, concentrating, trying to
_remember_. ‘By the simple fact that there was more than one of them.
The way they looked at each other, worked together – each of them
recognized the other. They were not alone, as she was. They had each
other. She wanted what they had. The one thing in the world she lacked …

‘A troll came to the water.’ He had a vision, like a waking dream, of
the troll crouching, innocently scooping crabs from the shallow water –
a mound of water rising, embracing him.

‘Killing him,’ Sally said, when Joshua described this.

‘Yes. She didn’t intend it, but that was the outcome. The trolls fled.
Maybe she caught another one, an infant … studied it …’

‘And learned to step,’ Lobsang guessed.

‘Yes. It took her a long time. The thing we encountered isn’t all of
her, all she was; once she filled an ocean. The thing in the sea here is
– an expression of her. The essence. A form compact enough to step.’

‘So she followed the trolls,’ Sally said. ‘Heading West down the chain
of worlds.’

‘Yes,’ said Lobsang. ‘Slowly but surely heading towards the Datum. And
surely she is the reason for the stampede of the trolls, and perhaps
other life forms. I am incubating the hypothesis that she has the same
effect on pre-sapient species such as the trolls as does a large
congregation of humans. Imagine the thunder of her thinking …’

‘So, behold the migraine monster,’ Sally said. ‘No wonder the trolls are
fleeing.’

‘She doesn’t mean any harm,’ Joshua said. ‘She only wants to _know_
them. To embrace them.’

‘You know, Joshua, you make this thing sound almost human.’

‘That’s how it felt.’

‘But that is only a partial perception,’ Lobsang said. ‘There is more.
The entity you have encountered is only … a seed. An emissary of the
integrated biosphere from which she originated. Her absorption of local
life forms, even of higher mammals like trolls, is only an interim step.
Her goal is, _must be_, to transform each Earth’s biosphere into a copy
of her own. The entirety of it, enslaved. With every resource dedicated
to a single purpose. That is to say, her own consciousness. This is not
a malevolent phenomenon, or in any way _wrong_. There is no villain
here. First Person Singular is simply an expression of another kind of
sentience. Another model, if you like. But—’

Sally’s face was ashen. ‘But for the likes of us she represents a
termination. She brings the end of individuality, ultimately, to every
Earth she touches.’

‘And the end of evolution,’ Lobsang said gravely. ‘The end of the world,
in a sense. The end of world after world as she works her way along the
chain of the Long Earth.’

Sally said, ‘She is a destroyer of worlds. An eater of souls. If the
trolls sensed any of this, no wonder they were terrified.’

Lobsang said, ‘Of course there is the question of why she hasn’t
_already_ reached the inhabited worlds. Why she has not already consumed
the Earth. Destroyed it, with curiosity and love.’

Joshua frowned. ‘The Gap. It can’t be a coincidence we found her so
close to the Gap.’

‘Yes,’ Lobsang said. ‘She can’t cross the Gap. Not yet, at any rate. If
not for that she might already have reached the inhabited worlds.’

‘We can cross the Gap,’ Sally said. ‘The trolls can. Surely she’ll
learn. And then there are the soft places. If she could use them – my
God. It’s like a plague, consuming the Long Earth world by world.’

‘No,’ Lobsang said firmly. ‘This is no plague, no malignant virus or
bacterium. This is a conscious entity. And there, I believe, lies hope.
Joshua, how did she speak to you in the first place? You heard your own
voice in your head, yes? That doesn’t sound like telepathy – a species
of communication for which I have yet to find one single reliable piece
of evidence. This sounds like something new. It asked you what a nun
was! If I may hazard a guess, it accessed the information then currently
at the top of your thoughts. Thinking of Sister Agnes, were you? As an
engineer I find it all hard to believe. But as a Buddhist, I accept
there are more ways to think about the universe than one can imagine.’

‘I sincerely hope we are not going to start talking religion,’ said
Sally sharply.

‘Open your mind, Sally. It’s only another framework for understanding
the universe, just another tool.’

‘So what does that make Joshua?’ she snapped back. ‘The chosen one?’

The two of them looked at Joshua.

‘In a way,’ he said reluctantly. ‘Or at least, she seemed to recognize
me. If she hadn’t actually been expecting me.’

Sally scowled, evidently jealous. ‘Why you?’

Lobsang said gently, ‘Perhaps it is because of the circumstances of our
hero’s miraculous birth, Sally. Your first instants of life, Joshua,
when you were entirely alone on another world. Your cries echoed,
evidently, across the Long Earth. Or your loneliness, perhaps. And you
and First Person Singular, similarly lonely, make up a kind of dipole.’

This bewildered Joshua. Not for the first time he wished Sister Agnes
were here so he could talk it over with her. ‘Is this why you brought me
here, Lobsang? I keep finding you anticipated all we’ve experienced …
Did you know _this_ would happen?’

‘I knew you were special, Joshua. Unique. Yes, I thought that facet of
you would be – useful. But I didn’t know quite how, I admit that.’

Sally stared at Joshua, stone-faced. ‘How does it feel to be so
manipulated, Joshua?’

Joshua looked away, hot with anger, at Lobsang, at the universe for
singling him out.

Lobsang said now, ‘Evidently we need to learn more about First Person
Singular.’

Sally said, ‘True enough. And we need to find a way to stop her
panicking the trolls. Not to mention eating the Datum Earth.’

‘Tomorrow we will go and see her again. I suggest we have a decent
night’s rest, and prepare for another encounter with the ineffable in
the morning. But this time, with Joshua having made initial contact, I
will lead.’

‘Huh! The ineffable meets the intolerable! Oh, I’m going to bed.’ Sally
stormed off the deck.

‘She’s got a short fuse,’ Joshua said.

‘But you understand why she is angry, Joshua,’ Lobsang said mildly. ‘You
were chosen. She was not. She’ll probably never forgive you.’

It was a strange night for Joshua. He kept waking, convinced that
someone had spoken his name. Somebody desperately lonely, but he didn’t
know how he knew that. Then he would get a bit more sleep, and the cycle
would start all over again. It didn’t stop until the morning.

In silence they gathered in the observation deck once more. Sally was
bleary-eyed too, and Lobsang, in his soberly dressed and hastily
repaired ambulant, was unusually quiet. Joshua wondered how _their_
nights had been.

And the first surprise was that First Person Singular was no longer
there. She could be seen about half a mile out to sea, moving so slowly
there was hardly even a wake. First Person Singular was clearly not one
for hurrying, but on the other hand you had to remind yourself that what
was doing the not hurrying was twice the size of Manhattan Island.

There was no discussion about whether to follow her. They all took it as
a given that they would have to. But the _Mark Twain_, still capable of
stepping from world to world, no longer had the means to move across
this world.

Joshua said, ‘Lobsang, don’t you have another marine unit? I know what
you are like when it comes to backups. There’s hardly any wind, and
we’ve got more ropes than a circus tent. Our big friend over there is
hardly racing. Maybe your marine unit could _tow_ us?’

It did work, but only just. The _Mark Twain_, aloft, had a great deal of
drag to overcome. Sally remarked that it was like the _Titanic_ being
towed by a motorboat engine – but an engine devised by Lobsang and built
by the Black Corporation, which was why the solution worked at all.

Generally the wheelhouse was Lobsang’s private domain. But today it was
open house, and the three of them watched the barely visible wake of
First Person Singular. Most of the traveller was underwater now. ‘Only
heaven knows what her propulsion system is,’ Lobsang said. ‘And while
it’s about it, heaven might like to hazard a guess as to why the seas
around her are suddenly teeming with fish.’

It was true, Joshua saw. The water was bright with fins; there were even
dolphins somersaulting through the air. First Person Singular was
travelling with an honour guard. Joshua was used to seeing rivers
vibrantly alive across the worlds; in the absence of humanity the seas
everywhere seemed to be as crowded as the old Grand Banks off
Newfoundland, where, it was said, a man could once have walked on the
water, so heavy was it with cod. People who’d never left Datum Earth
didn’t know what they were missing. But probably even the Grand Banks at
their zenith couldn’t have been as alive with fish as the waters behind
the traveller.

‘Evidently,’ Sally said, ‘she has a way of attracting lesser creatures.
Maybe it’s how she lures them close enough to absorb them.’

Lobsang was in an expansive mood. ‘Magnificent, isn’t it? Do you see
those dolphins? Better than a Busby Berkeley routine!’

Sally asked, ‘Who on earth is a Busby Berkeley?’

Even Joshua knew the answer to that one.

Sally said, ‘If you two are going to start talking old movies again—’

Lobsang cleared his throat. ‘Did anyone experience anything _unusual_
last night?’

Joshua and Sally shared a glance.

Sally said, ‘You raised it, Lobsang. What are you talking about?’

‘In my case there was an attempt at what I experienced as hacking. Which
is quite a challenge. For the guys in the Black Corporation, trying to
hack me was a sport, and most certainly kept me on my toes.
Nevertheless, _something_ made a spirited attempt last night. I believe,
however, that this was done in a beneficent way. Nothing has been taken,
nothing was changed, but I believe that some memory stores have been
accessed, and copied.’

Sally asked, ‘Such as?’

‘Information about the trolls. About stepping. It backs up the story you
were given, Joshua. But this is a very partial hypothesis. For me it is
like trying to recover a memory.’

Sally said, ‘_Was it a vision, or a waking dream?_’ They stared at her,
and she blushed, and snapped defiantly, ‘What? So I know Keats? Lots of
people know Keats, my grandfather often recited Keats. Although he
always used to spoil it by saying afterwards that he loved Keats but had
never actually seen a keat.’

‘I know Keats,’ Joshua said reassuringly. ‘And so does Sister Georgina.
You’ll have to meet her. I had a waking dream too. I sensed loneliness
again.’

Sally admitted, ‘Me too. But in my case it was something wonderful. A
kind of welcome.’

Lobsang asked, ‘Welcoming enough to make you want to jump into the water
and lose your identity? We’re closing, by the way. I think she is
waiting for us to catch her up, and I very much want to catch up with
_her_.’

‘Excuse me,’ said Sally, ‘I have no intention of boarding that floating
thing and becoming another souvenir in some internal zoo.’

‘Happily, Sally, I intend to be the only one setting foot on First
Person Singular. Or at least this ambulant unit will be. I want to
communicate with her, much more fully, before she continues her stepping
journey, and persuade her to stop.’

Joshua thought that over. ‘And if she won’t turn back … Can she be
stopped?’

Lobsang snapped, ‘What are you suggesting, Joshua? How would you fight
her? Short of destroying each world she can inhabit – working your way
back up the line with nuclear bombers—’ He sounded contemptuous. ‘You
think so small, both of you. All you can perceive is threat. Maybe it’s
something to do with your own biological fragility. Listen to me. She
wants to learn from us. But there’s so much we can learn from _her_.
What does she know, she who can surely perceive on scales of space and
time utterly beyond the human?’ His artificial voice was flat, yet oddly
full of wonder. ‘Have you heard of the participatory universe, Joshua?’

‘Participatory bullshit.’

‘Listen. Consciousness shapes reality. That’s the central message of
quantum physics. _We_ participated in the creation of the Datum, our
solitary strand, our Joker world. We’ve met other minds now, the elves
and the trolls, and First Person Singular. Somehow, it seems, _they_
participated in the weaving of the Long Earth, a subtle and marvellous
ensemble, a multiverse created by a community of minds, which we only
now are beginning to join. This is the lesson you must take back to the
Datum, Joshua. Never mind variations of geology and geography and
collections of exotic animals. _This_ is fundamental to our
understanding of reality – fundamental to what we are. And if I can
communicate with First Person Singular, who surely has an apprehension
of the universe beyond anything we are capable of … Well, this is what I
intend to discuss with our fat friend. That, and to make her aware of
the threat she poses, all unconsciously.’

‘Wait a minute,’ Joshua said, thinking it through. ‘You’re going down
there. You’re actually going _into_ that thing.’

‘Since the creatures embedded in the structure appear to be entirely
healthy and mobile, I don’t see this as a risk. Bearing in mind that I,
and I alone, of the three of us, am dispensable, at least in the form of
my ambulant unit. But _I_ will be fully downloaded. I, Lobsang, will be
fully committed to the joining.’

‘You don’t intend to come back, do you?’

‘No, Joshua. I suspect my joining with the being must be long term, if
not one-way, irrevocable. Yet still I must do this.’

Joshua bristled. ‘I know you had all kinds of hidden motives for signing
me up for this trip. Fine. But _I_ signed up to achieve one objective:
to bring you home safely. I was your ultimate fall-back, you said.’

‘I respect your integrity, Joshua. I release you from your contract. I
will lodge an addendum in the ship’s files.’

‘That’s not good enough—’

‘It is done.’

‘Oh, don’t let’s have some kind of macho honour fest,’ Sally said
cynically. ‘You have backups all over the place, Lobsang. So you’re not
really at risk at all, are you?’

‘I don’t propose to tell you all my little secrets. But should I be
incapacitated or lost you will find iterations of my memory in various
stores, updated every millisecond. The ultimate “black box”, you might
say, is in the belly of the ship, armoured in an alloy that I
confidently believe makes adamantium look like putty and will, I am
sure, remain totally unscathed even in the event of a meteor strike of
mass-extinction proportions.’

Sally laughed. ‘What would be the point of surviving a collision that
scythes all life from a planet? I mean, who would there be to plug you
in?’

‘There is every likelihood that in the fullness of time sapient life
might once again populate the planet, and evolve to the point where it
could restore me. I can wait. I’ve plenty to read.’

It seemed to Joshua that Sally was at her loveliest, if you could use
such a term about Sally, when she was blowing her top. And for the very
first time, Joshua suspected Lobsang was teasing Sally deliberately.
Another Turing test passed, he supposed.

‘So,’ he said, ‘supposing you’re successful, and you get her to stop
eating worlds. What then, Lobsang?’

‘Then, together, we will continue the search for the truth behind the
universe.’

‘That sounds so inhuman,’ said Sally.

‘On the contrary, Sally, it is extremely human.’

First Person Singular was looming now. Scoop-shaped objects like fleshy
antennas sprouted along her length, and small crabs were hitching a ride
– as were a number of seabirds, possibly after the crabs.

‘Well,’ said Lobsang. ‘The rest is up to you. Obviously I need you to
get the airship back to Datum. Get in touch with Selena Jones at
transEarth. She’ll know what to do about the data stores on board, to
synch the copy of myself back on the Datum – you see, Joshua, you will
be taking me home, after a fashion. Give Selena my regards. I always
fancied she saw me as something of a father figure, you know. Even
though she is legally my guardian. Well, I am not yet twenty-one years
old.’

Sally said, ‘Wait – without you the _Mark Twain_ has no sentience. How
can it take us anywhere?’

‘Details, Sally! I’ll leave that as an exercise for you. And now, if you
will excuse me, I have a mysterious floating collective organism to
catch. Oh, one last thing – do please take care of Shi-mi …’

And with that he retreated through his blue door, for the last time.

49

WITH LOBSANG DISPATCHED to his strange close encounter, the remaining
crew of the _Mark Twain_ watched the wake of the traveller until she
disappeared from view, long before reaching the horizon. The honour
guard of animals, birds and fish flew, dived and undulated away.

The show was over. The carnival had left town. The spell had been
broken. And Joshua could feel something had gone from the world.

He stared at Sally, and felt the bewilderment he saw in her face. He
said, ‘First Person Singular scared me. And there were times when
Lobsang scared me, though for different reasons. The thought of the two
of them together, and what they might become …’

She shrugged. ‘We’ve done our best to save the trolls.’

‘And humanity,’ he pointed out gently.

‘So what do we do now?’

‘Have lunch, I’d suggest,’ Joshua said, and he headed for the galley.

A few minutes later Sally was grasping a brimming mug of coffee as if it
were a lifeline. ‘And did you notice? The traveller _steps_ underwater.
That’s a new one.’

Joshua nodded. He thought, that’s right, start by asking the little
questions – sort out the small problems first, rather than get
overwhelmed by the cosmic mysteries. Or even by the problem of how they
were going to get home, although he was starting to have an idea about
that. ‘You know, some of those creatures inside her hull, which must
have come from very remote worlds, looked familiar. I mean, one of those
floating things looked like a large kangaroo! The cameras have been
running. We can check through the footage together. The naturalists will
have a field day …’

There was a soft sound in the doorway. Joshua looked down to see Shi-mi.
She was indeed a most elegant cat, robotic or not.

And she spoke.

‘Number of mice and mice-like rodents put into the vivarium for
redeployment when we reach the ground: ninety-three. Numbers harmed:
zero. It is said that with a stout heart a mouse can lift an elephant
but not, I am glad to say, on this ship.’ The cat looked expectantly at
both of them. Her voice was soft, feminine – human, but somehow
suggestive of cat.

‘Oh, good grief.’

Joshua murmured, ‘Be nice, Sally. Shi-mi – thank you.’

The cat waited patiently for further response.

‘I didn’t know you could speak,’ Joshua ventured.

‘There was previously no need. My reports were made to Lobsang through a
direct interface. And the rubbish we speak is like froth on the water;
actions are drops of gold.’

Sally turned her glance slightly sideways, a warning sign in Joshua’s
experience. ‘Where did that proverb come from?’

‘Tibet,’ said Shi-mi.

‘You’re not some avatar of Lobsang, are you? I did hope we’d got rid of
him.’

The cat looked up from licking her paw. ‘No. Although I too am a
gel-based personality. Adapted for light conversation, proverbs, rodent
securement and incidental chit-chat with a thirty-one per cent bias
towards cynicism. I am of course a prototype, but will shortly be one of
a new line of pets available from the Black Corporation. Tell your
friends. And now if you will excuse me, my work is as yet incomplete.’
The cat walked out.

When she was gone, Joshua said, ‘Well, you have to admit it’s better
than a mousetrap.’

Sally was irritated. ‘Just when I think this _Titanic_ of yours can’t
get any more ridiculous … Are we still over the ocean?’

Joshua glanced out of the nearest port. ‘Yes.’

‘We should turn around. Head back to shore.’

‘We’ve already turned,’ said Joshua. ‘I set the controls after we let
down Lobsang. We started back thirty minutes ago.’

‘Are you sure that swimming robot thing has the power to get us back
over land?’ asked Sally, obviously nervous.

‘Sally, the _Mark Twain_ was designed by Lobsang. The marine unit has
enough power to circumnavigate the Earth. He backs up his backups. You
know that. Is there something wrong?’

‘Since you ask, I’m not any great fan of water. Especially water you
can’t see to the bottom of. As a rule, let’s keep some trees under the
keel, OK?’

‘You were hanging out on the coast when I first met you.’

‘That was the seashore. Shallow water! And this is the Long Earth. You
never know what’s going to surface underneath you.’

‘I imagine you didn’t stay long on the one water world Lobsang and I
passed through. There was a beast in that ocean that—’

‘When I got to that world I stepped from a hillside, fell six feet into
seawater, swam to a place I knew I could get back from, and stepped out,
all just before a set of jaws closed around me. I never saw what they
were attached to. The way I see it, my ancestors put a lot of effort
into getting out of the goddamn ocean and I don’t think I should throw
all of that hard work back in their faces.’

He grinned as he worked on the food.

‘Look, Joshua – I’m all for heading back to Happy Landings. What do you
say? Suddenly I feel in the mood for other people … Oh. But we have to
take the _Mark Twain_, don’t we? With all that’s left of Lobsang. Not to
mention the cat. We can find a way to move the _Mark Twain_ laterally,
if we have to drag it by hand. But how’s it going to step without
Lobsang?’

‘I’ve got an idea about that,’ Joshua said. ‘It will keep. More coffee?’

They treated the rest of that day as though it was a Sunday, that is to
say what you should expect of a Sunday. You need time for big and
complicated new concepts to shake themselves down in your brain slowly,
without damaging what is already there. In the end that had even applied
to Lobsang, Joshua realized.

Then, the next afternoon, Joshua let Sally guide them to what she sensed
as a soft place, a short cut that would take them back to Happy
Landings, only a little way in from the shore. They descended to the
ground. The _Mark Twain_ hovered over the beach where the marine unit
had delivered it. The ship was connected to Joshua and Sally by long
ropes held in their hands.

And there was a shimmer on the water’s edge that even Joshua could see:
the soft place Sally had found.

‘I feel like a kid with a party balloon,’ said Sally, holding her rope.

‘I’m certain this will work,’ said Joshua.

‘What will?’

‘Look – when you step you can take over whatever you can carry. Yes? In
a way, when he was aboard, Lobsang _was_ the airship, so he could step
over. Here we are holding the _Mark Twain_, which, though it has a lot
of mass, technically doesn’t weigh anything at all. Right? So, if we
step right now, we’ll be carrying it, won’t we?’

She stared at him. ‘And _this_ is your theory?’

‘It’s the best I can do.’

‘If the universe doesn’t get your joke, we might get our arms pulled
off.’

‘Only one way to find out. Are you ready?’

Sally hesitated. ‘Would you mind if we step hand in hand? We could get
in a mess if we got separated during this stunt.’

‘True enough.’ He took her hand. ‘OK, Sally. Do your stuff.’

She seemed to defocus, as if she was no longer aware of him. She sniffed
the air and eyed the light, and made moves oddly like tai chi, graceful,
testing, questing – or maybe as if she were dowsing for water.

And they stepped. The stepping itself was sharper than usual, and there
was a brief sensation of plummeting as if down a water slide, and it
left Joshua _colder_, as if the process somehow absorbed energy. They
emerged on another beach, another world – wintry, bleak. The soft places
didn’t get you all the way at once, then. And _they weren’t in the same
place_, geographically; Joshua could see that immediately. Stranger and
stranger. Again Sally turned this way and that, questing.

It took four steps in all. But at last there was Happy Landings, with
the _Mark Twain_ overhead.

People were pleased to see them back, if surprised. Everyone was
friendly. Genuinely friendly. Because this was Happy Landings, wasn’t
it? Of course they were friendly. The tracks were still clean,
spotlessly swept. The drying salmon still hung from rows of neat racks.
Men, women, children and trolls mixed happily.

And Joshua felt oddly uncomfortable, once more. A slight feeling you get
when everything is so _right_ that it might have gone all the way around
the universe and come back metamorphosed into _wrong_. He’d forgotten,
in fact, how persistent this feeling was from his last visit. And that
was without mentioning the ubiquitous stink of troll.

As a matter of course, the pair of them were offered lodgings in one of
the cottages at the heart of the township. But after a shared glance
they decided to bunk down on the _Mark Twain_. Inevitably a few troll
pups followed them up the cables. Joshua made supper up there, with
delicious fresh food; as before people had been amazingly generous with
gifts of food and drink.

Afterwards, poisoning herself with instant coffee once again – all that
was available now on the injured _Mark Twain_ – and with trolls lounging
around the observation deck, Sally said, ‘Come on, out with it, Joshua.
I watch people too. I see the look on your face. What’s on your mind?’

‘The same as on yours, I suspect. That there’s something wrong here.’

‘No,’ Sally said. ‘Not wrong. There’s something _off_, for sure … I’ve
been here many times, but I’m more aware of it with you sulking around
the place. Of course what we perceive as _wrong_ might be an expression
of the significance of the place. But—’

‘Go on. There’s something you want to tell me, right?’

‘Have you seen any blind people here, Joshua?’

‘Blind?’

‘There are people here with spectacles, old folk with reading glasses.
But nobody _blind_. Once I looked at the rolls in City Hall. You see
records of people missing a toe or a finger, and you find out that it
was the result of a bit of carelessness with a wood-chopping axe. But
nobody with any major disability seems to be led to Happy Landings in
the first place.’

He thought that over. ‘They aren’t perfect here. I’ve seen them get
drunk in the bars, for example.’

‘Oh yes, they know how to party, certainly. But the interesting thing is
that every single one of them knows when to stop partying, and, believe
you me, that talent is somewhat rare. And there’s nothing like a police
force here, have you noticed? According to the City Hall records, there
has never been a sexually motivated attack on a woman, man or child.
_Never_. Never a dispute over land that hasn’t been calmly resolved by
negotiation. Have you watched the kids? All the adults act as if all the
kids are their own, and all the kids act as if all the adults are their
parents. The whole place is so decent, level-headed and _likeable_ it
can make you scream, and then curse yourself for screaming.’ Sally
stroked a troll pup, whose purring would have put any cat to shame: pure
liquid contentment.

That prompted Joshua to blurt out, ‘It’s the trolls. It’s got to be.
We’ve discussed this before. Humans and trolls living side by side.
Here, and nowhere else we know of. So it’s like no other human
community, anywhere.’

She eyed him. ‘Well, now we know that minds shape minds, don’t we? We’ve
learned that much. Too many humans, and trolls will flee. But if there
are just the right amount of people the trolls will stick around. And
for humans, maybe you can’t get enough trolls. Happy Landings is a warm
bath of comfortable, happy feelings.’

‘But nobody disabled. Nobody mixed-up enough to commit a violent crime.
Nobody who doesn’t fit.’

‘Maybe they’re kept out, perhaps not even consciously.’ She regarded
him. ‘_Sieved_. That’s a rather sinister thought, isn’t it?’

Joshua thought it was. ‘But how? Nobody’s standing around with clubs to
exclude the unworthy.’

‘No.’ Sally leaned back and closed her eyes, thinking. ‘I don’t think
it’s a case of people being consciously excluded, not by the locals. So
how does it happen? I’ve never seen any signs of anybody _behind_ Happy
Landings. No designer, no controller. Does Happy Landings _itself_
somehow choose who comes here? But how can that happen?’

‘And to what end?’

‘You can only have an _end_ if you have a _mind_, Joshua.’

‘There’s no mind involved in evolution,’ Joshua said, remembering Sister
Georgina’s brisk homework classes at the Home. ‘No end, no intention, no
destination. And yet that’s a process that shapes living creatures.’

‘So is Happy Landings some analogy of an evolutionary process?’

He studied her. ‘You tell me. You’ve been coming here a long time—’

‘Since I was a kid, with my parents. It’s just that since I met you two,
the questions I have always had about it, I guess, have sharpened up. I
ought to wear a bracelet. “What would Lobsang think?”’

Joshua barked laughter.

‘You know, this place always seemed a regular garden of Eden – but
without the serpent, and I wondered where the serpent was. My family got
on well with the people here. But I never wanted to stay. I never had
the sense I fitted in. I would never dare to call it home, just in case
_I_ was somehow the serpent.’

Joshua tried to read the expression on Sally’s face. ‘I’m sorry.’

That seemed to be the wrong thing to say. She looked away. ‘I do think
this place is important, Joshua. For all of us. All humanity, I mean.
It’s unique, after all. But what happens when the colonists start
getting here? I mean the regular sort, the wavefront, with their spades
and picks and bronze guns, and their wife-beaters and fraudsters? How
can this place survive? How many trolls will be shot, slaughtered and
enslaved?’

‘Maybe whoever, whatever is running the experiment will start fighting
back.’

She shuddered. ‘We _are_ starting to think like Lobsang. Joshua, let’s
get out of here and go somewhere _normal_. I need a holiday …’

50

A DAY LATER, on a distant world, in a warm twilight, Helen Green was
gathering mushrooms. She wandered across a scrap of high ground, a
couple of miles out of the new township of Reboot.

And there was a kind of sigh, like an exhalation. Helen felt a whisper
of breeze on her skin. She turned.

There was a man, standing on the grass, slim, dark. A woman stood at his
side, and she looked as if she belonged there. Visitors stepping in
weren’t an unusual occurrence. They rarely looked quite so confused as
these two. Or as grubby. Or with _frost_ glistening on their jackets.

And very few appeared with a gigantic airship hovering over their heads.
Helen wondered if she should run and fetch somebody.

The man shielded his eyes against the sun. ‘Who are you?’

‘My name is Helen Green.’

‘Oh, the blogger from Madison? I hoped we’d meet you.’

She glared at him. ‘Who are _you_? You aren’t another tax man, are you?
We drove the last one out of town.’

‘No, no. My name’s Joshua Valienté.’

‘_The_ Joshua Valienté …’ To her horror she felt herself blush.

The woman with Joshua said witheringly, ‘Give me strength.’

To Joshua, Helen Green looked in her late teens. She wore her
strawberry-blonde hair tied sensibly back from her face, and had a
basket of some kind of fungi on her arm. She was dressed in shirt and
slacks of some soft deer-like leather, and moccasins. She wouldn’t have
fitted into the crowd on the Datum, but on the other hand she was no
colonial-era museum piece. This wasn’t some retro recreation of
pioneering days past, Joshua realized. Helen Green was something new in
the world, or worlds. Kind of cute, too.

There was no trouble finding a place to stay in Reboot, once they
accepted you weren’t any kind of criminal or bandit, or worse yet a
representative of the Datum federal government which had suddenly turned
so hostile to the colonists. In their time here Joshua saw the locals
welcome even the hobos, as they called them, a drift of rather
vague-looking people wandering through the Long Earth, evidently with no
intention of _ever_ settling down, and therefore with not much to
contribute to Reboot. But out here every new face, with a new story to
tell, was welcome, however briefly they stayed, so long as they tilled a
field or chopped some wood in return for bed and board.

In the evening, Joshua and Sally sat by the fire, alone together, under
the dark hulk of the _Mark Twain_.

‘I like these folk,’ Joshua said. ‘They’re good people. Sensible. Doing
things right.’ He felt like this because of the way he was, he accepted
that; he liked it when people did what they had to do, such as build
this community, properly and methodically. I could live here, he
thought, somewhat to his own surprise.

But Sally snorted. ‘No. This is the old way of living, or an imitation
of it. We don’t _need_ to plough the land to feed vast densities of
people. We don’t just have one Earth now, we have an infinite number and
they can feed an infinite number of us. Those hobos have it more right.
They are the future, not your starstruck little fan Helen Green. Look, I
suggest we stay here for a week, help with the harvest, take our pay in
supplies. What do you say? Then we’ll head for home.’

Joshua was embarrassed, but he said, ‘And then what? We can deliver
Lobsang, or what’s left of him in the _Mark Twain_, to transEarth. Not
to mention his cat. But then – I’m going to want to go back out, Sally.
With Lobsang or without. I mean, it’s all out there. All these years
since Step Day we’ve hardly scratched the surface of the Long Earth. I
thought I knew it all, but I’d never seen a troll before this trip,
never heard of Happy Landings … Who knows what might be left to find?’

She gave him her sideways look. ‘Are you suggesting, young man, that the
two of us might travel together again?’

He’d never suggested such a thing to any other human being in his life.
Not unless he was trying to save them. He evaded the question. ‘Well,
there is the Gap. The Long Mars! Who knows? I’ve been thinking about
that. Step far enough _there_ and we might find a Mars that’s
habitable.’

‘You’re beginning to dribble.’

‘Well, I did use to read a lot of science fiction. But, yeah, let’s go
home first. It feels like it’s time. Check out Madison. See how people
are. Sally, I would very much like to introduce you to Sister Agnes.’

She smiled. ‘And Sister Georgina. We can talk about Keats …’

‘And then, when Lobsang two point zero launches the _Mark Trine_, I
intend to be on board. Even if I have to stow away with the damn cat.’

Sally looked thoughtful. ‘You know, my mother had a saying when us kids
used to run around like wild things: “It’s all fun and games until
somebody loses an eye.” I can’t help thinking that if we keep pushing
our luck with this wonderful new toy of a multiverse, sooner or later a
big foot will come down on us hard. Though I guess you could look up and
see whose foot it was.’

‘Even that would be interesting,’ said Joshua.

As they prepared to leave they sought out Helen Green, who had been the
first to greet them here, more or less civilly, and now they wanted to
say goodbye to her.

Helen was in the middle of her working day, a bundle of much-read books
under her arm: calm, competent, cheerful, getting on with her life, a
hundred thousand Earths from where she had been born. She seemed a
little flustered, as always around Joshua. But she pushed her hair away
from her brow, and smiled. ‘Sorry to see you go so soon. So where are
you heading, back on the Datum?’

‘Madison,’ Joshua said. ‘Where you came from too, right? I remember that
from your blog. We still have friends there, family …’

But Helen was frowning. ‘Madison? Haven’t you heard?’

51

FOR MONICA JANSSON, Madison’s bad day had started when Clichy called,
and she had to leave her UW seminar on demographic impacts of the Long
Earth. She got glares from her fellow delegates, save for those who knew
she was a cop.

‘Jack? What is it? This better be good—’

‘Shut up and listen, Spooky. There’s a bomb.’

‘A bomb?’

‘A nuke. In central Madison. Believed to be stashed in Capitol Square
somewhere.’

This convention centre was a long way north-east of downtown. She was
already running, out of the building, heading for her car, and already
panting; there were times when she felt every one of her forty-plus
years.

An outdoor siren started to wail.

‘A nuke? How the hell—’

‘Some kind of suitcase thing. The warnings are going out. Listen to me.
Here’s what you have to do. _Get people indoors_. Understand?
Underground if you can. Tell them it’s a tornado if you have to convince
them. If that thing goes off, outside ground zero itself you can cut
your immediate casualties from radiation to a fraction if—damn it,
Jansson, was that your car door slamming?’

‘You got me, Chief.’

‘Tell me you’re heading out of town.’

‘Can’t tell you that, sir.’ Already people were coming out of office
buildings, shops, homes, into the sunlight of a bright fall day, looking
bewildered. On the other hand others were going indoors, reflexively;
Wisconsin did get its share of tornado touchdowns, and people knew to
listen to warnings. Another couple of minutes and the roads would be
jammed by people trying to get out of town, no matter what the official
advice was.

She put her foot down while the road was still relatively clear, started
up her siren, and roared south-west towards the Capitol.

‘Damn it, Lieutenant!’

‘Look, sir, you know as well as I do that it’s going to be some fringe
Humanity First-type group responsible for this. And that’s my business.
If I can be on the spot, maybe I’ll see something. Eyeball one of the
usual suspects. Kill this thing.’

‘Or get your sorry lesbian ass fried!’

‘No, sir.’ She patted her waist. ‘I got my Stepper …’

She heard more sirens wail, over the noise of the car. Inside the
vehicle emergency messages started popping up, coming via multiple
systems: a reverse-911 call on her civilian phone, emails to her tablet,
grave Emergency Alert System messages on the radio. None of it was
enough, she realized.

‘Listen, Chief. You have to change course on this.’

‘What are you talking about?’

‘Sounds like everybody’s following the standard plays. _We have to get
people to step, sir_. Anywhere, East or West, just away from Madison
Zero.’

‘You know as well as I do that not everybody can step. Aside from the
phobics there are the old, kids, bedridden, hospital patients—’

‘So people help each other. If you can step, do it. But _take someone
with you_, someone who can’t step. Carry them in your arms, on your
back. Then go back and step again. And again and again …’

He was silent a moment. ‘You’ve thought about this, haven’t you,
Spooky?’

‘It’s why you gave me the job all those years ago, Jack.’

‘You’re insane.’ A pause. ‘I’ll do it if you turn your damn car around.’

‘Not a chance, sir.’

‘You’re fired, Spooky.’

‘Noted, sir. But I’ll stay on the line even so.’

She hit East Washington, and her view of the Capitol opened up, shining
white in the sun. People were milling around, coming out of or going
into the offices and shops. Some of them tried to wave her down; they
looked annoyed, and probably wanted to complain about the noise of the
sirens, wailing on and on apparently without reason. The car ahead of
her had a prized old Green Bay Packer licence plate. On the walls she
saw posters of Brian Cowley, grave, finger-pointing, like a spreading
virus.

It was impossible to believe that in only minutes all this was going to
be a cloud of radioactive dust. But now, coming over the car radio, she
heard hurried instructions to step, interspersed with the standard
announcements. _Step and help. Step and help_ … She smiled. An instant
slogan.

Clichy came back with more information. The only warning the police had
had was from a kid who had wandered into a district station in
Milwaukee, in distress. Fifteen years old. He had run with a crowd of
Humanity-Firsters, for the social life, to meet girls. But he was lying
to them. He was actually a natural stepper. And when the Firsters found
out they had taken him to a doctor, a man on the MPD’s watch list, who
had opened up his head and inserted an electrode and burned out brain
centres believed to be associated with stepping. It had left the boy
blind, whether he could still step or not. So he went to the cops and
spilled the beans on what his friends were planning to bring down in
Madison.

‘All the kid knows is that the Firsters got hold of what they called a
“suitcase nuke”. Now, I’m reading my brief here, the only such device
ever to have been acknowledged as manufactured by the US is the W54. A
SADM, which stands for Special Atomic Demolition Munition. Yield of
around six kilotons, which is about a third of Hiroshima. Alternatively
they could have got hold of a Russian device, such as an RA-115 – get
this, Spooky, it’s thought the old Soviet Union salted some of these
things around the mainland US. Just in case, huh.’

She had reached Capitol Square. Most days this was cluttered with art
fairs or farmers’ markets, now expanded to feature the exotic produce of
a dozen worlds, or else some protest rally or other. Today there was a
concentration of cops and Homelands types and FBI officers, some in
nuclear-biological-chemical protection suits, as if _that_ would make a
difference, and their vehicles, including helicopters hovering overhead.
The bravest of the brave, she thought, running _towards_ the bomb. As
she ripped around the square Jansson looked down State Street, that
linked the main UW campus with the Square in a straight west–east line.
State was still full of bustling restaurants, espresso bars and shops,
despite the Long Earth recession and the depopulation, still the city’s
beating heart. This afternoon it swarmed with students and shoppers.
Some were evidently hurrying for shelter, but others sipped their
coffees and inspected their phones and laptops. Some were laughing, even
though Jansson could clearly hear the echoing voice of a cop loudspeaker
urging everybody to get indoors or step away, on top of the sirens’
wail.

‘People aren’t believing it, Chief.’

‘Tell me about it.’

She abandoned the car and, flashing her badge at everyone who got in her
way, pushed through the lines to the Capitol mound. The racket of the
sirens, echoing from the concrete, was deafening, maddening. Down the
four big staircases around the Capitol building itself people were
spilling out, members of the State legislature, lobbyists, lawyers, in
sharp-pressed business suits. And at the foot of one flight of steps a
more ragged group of civilians was sitting, watched over by a loose ring
of armed cops and Homelands officers. These folk, it turned out, had
been in the Square when the warning came, and had been immediately
rounded up, their Steppers confiscated along with their phones and any
weapons. Jansson, just outside the perimeter, searched for familiar
faces among the resentful, scared crowd of tourists, shoppers, business
types. Some of them wore proud-to-be-a-Stepper wrist bands that they
brandished at the officers who contained them. _I’m no Humanity-Firster!
Look at this!_

And there was Rod Green, sitting a little way from the rest.

She sat down with Rod. He was eighteen years old, she knew, but looked
younger. He wore jeans and a dark jacket, his strawberry-blond hair cut
short. He looked like any other student. But there were lines around his
mouth, his eyes. Frown lines, lines of resentment and hate.

‘You did this. Didn’t you, Rod?’ She had to yell to make herself heard
over the sirens. ‘Come on, kid, you know me. I’ve kept an eye on you for
years.’

He eyed her. ‘You’re the one they call Spooky.’

‘You got me. Did you do this?’

‘I helped.’

‘Helped who? Helped how?’

He shrugged. ‘I brought it to the square in a big backpack. I delivered
it, but I don’t know where it’s stashed. I also don’t know how it was
armed. Or how it can be disarmed.’

Shit, shit. ‘Is this necessary, Rod? Do all these people have to die
just so you can get back at Mommy?’

He sneered. ‘Well, _that_ bitch is safe.’

That shocked Jansson. Maybe he didn’t even know that his mother, Tilda
Lang Green, off in a colony on some remote Earth, was dead of a cancer.
Now wasn’t the time to tell him. ‘Do you even think it’s going to do any
good? I know you people have it in your heads that Madison is some kind
of stepping hub. But you can’t stop up the Long Earth. Even if you
flatten the whole of Wisconsin people will just keep on stepping from
wherever—’

‘I only know one thing about the bomb.’

She grabbed his shoulders. ‘What? Tell me, Rod.’

‘I know _when_.’ He glanced at his watch. ‘Two minutes forty-five
seconds. Forty-four. Forty-three …’

Jansson stood up and yelled at the cops, ‘Did you hear that? Report it
in. And get these people out of here. Their Steppers – for God’s sake,
give them back their Steppers!’

The cops didn’t need telling twice, and their captives rose in a mob,
panicked by Rod’s overheard words. But Jansson stayed by Rod’s side.

‘It’s all up for me,’ Rod said. ‘I can’t step. That’s why I came here.
It seemed right.’

‘Right, hell.’ Without warning she grabbed him, picking him up under
knees and shoulders like a child, and, straining, lifted him off the
ground. He was too heavy for her, and she immediately fell under him,
but she switched her Stepper before the two of them hit the ground.

And she landed on her back, on green grass. Blue sky overhead, just like
on the Datum today. The sirens had gone away. The scaffolding frame that
had been erected here in West 1 to interface with the Capitol loomed
over her.

Rod, lying on top of her, convulsed, puked over her, and started to
froth at the mouth. A paramedic in an orange jumpsuit pulled Rod aside.

‘He’s a phobic,’ Jansson said. ‘He needs—’

‘We know, ma’am.’ The paramedic took a syringe from her pack and shot
him up in the neck.

The convulsions eased. Rod looked Jansson in the eye. He said clearly,
‘Two minutes.’ Then his eyes rolled up and he was unconscious.

_Two minutes_. The word went out across Madison Zero, and its nascent
twins to East and West, and around a watching world.

And the stepping began.

Parents carried their children, and went back for their own old folk,
and their elderly neighbours. In care homes, some bewildered senior
citizens had Steppers slapped on them and were sent East or West for the
first time in their lives. In the schools, teachers carried over their
students, and big kids carried little kids. In the hospitals the staff
and the healthier outpatients found ways to lift and step the heaviest,
most immobilized patients, even coma victims and babies in incubators,
and went back for more, and then waited as surgeons hurried to close up
interrupted operations, and carried those patients over too. All across
Madison, the majority of humanity who could step aided the minority who
couldn’t. Even extreme phobics like Rod Green who couldn’t tolerate a
single step were met by medics who did their best to stabilize them,
until they could be hurried away from the danger zone and taken back to
the Datum.

In Madison West 1, Monica Jansson watched the results unfold. There were
TV cameras all around the area, and eye-in-the-sky images relayed down
from drone aircraft. For Jansson, it felt very odd to be _safe_ in such
a crisis, but the medics had taken away her Stepper, and there was
nothing more she could do. So she watched. Somebody even brought her a
cup of coffee.

From the air, here in West 1, you could clearly see the lakes, the
isthmus, the distinctive geography of the area laid out like a map, a
twin of the region on the Datum, a twin that had been entirely un
inhabited two decades ago. Madison West 1 had started to make its own
mark in this world, with swathes of forest cleared and marsh drained,
and some tracks wide and metalled well enough to be called roads, and
clusters of buildings, and steam and smoke rising from the mills and
forges. But today the inhabitants of West 1 were scrambling to
accommodate and help the incoming, fleeing from the Datum.

Here they came. Jansson saw them emerge, one by one or in little groups.
There were even some in the lakes, steppers coming over from their boats
or their surfboards. Rowboats cut across the bright blue waters to each
waving speck.

And, on land, as the steppers crossed, Jansson saw a kind of map of the
Datum city emerge on the green carpet of West 1. There were the
university students, a multicoloured blur that marked the location of
their campus, stretching south from the shore of Mendota. There were the
hospitals, St Mary’s and Meriter and the UW Hospitals and Clinics,
little rectangular huddles of doctors and nurses and patients. There
were the schools, teachers with their charges where their classrooms
should have been. On the Monona shore the contents of the convention
centre appeared, business types, in flocks, like penguins. The area
around Capitol Square itself started to fill in, the diamond shape of
the square, with the shoppers and diners from State and King lining up
along the tracks of the streets leading off to west and east, and the
office workers and residents of East and West Washington. It was indeed
a map of Madison, she realized, a map made up of the people, with the
buildings stripped away. She looked for Allied Drive, where a group of
nuns stepped across realities from the Home, with the vulnerable
children in their charge.

And in the very last second, she saw, in a view from ground level, that
where the high-rise buildings of downtown stood, people started
appearing in mid-air. Many were in business suits. They just stepped
over from the upper floors because there was no time left to get to the
elevator or the stairs, or do anything else. Three-dimensional ghosts of
the doomed buildings coalesced, ghosts composed of people who seemed to
hang in the air, just for an instant, before falling to the ground.

Somewhere near Jansson, a Geiger counter started clicking.

52

JOSHUA AND SALLY hurried through the last few Madisons, West 10, 9, 8 …
Joshua wasn’t interested in these crowded worlds; all he wanted now was
to get home. 6, 5, 4 … In one Low Earth they had taken the time to cross
geographically, from Humptulips to Madison, flying the airship on the
one engine Franklin Tallyman, boy genius of Reboot, had managed to fix
up for them. 3, 2, 1 … There were barriers in the last few worlds, some
kind of system of warning signs; they hurried on—

Zero.

Madison was gone.

Joshua stood in shock, gasping. Sally clutched his arm. They stood in a
plain of rubble. Gaunt shapes, fragments of wall sticking out of the
ground. A few twisted tangles that must be the remains of
reinforced-concrete structures. Dust, dry as hell, choked him
immediately. The battered airship hung blindly over these ruins.

Somebody was standing before them. Some guy in a coverall suit, no, a
woman, Joshua realized, seeing her face through a dusty visor.

‘We’re here to meet steppers,’ she said, her voice a relay from a
speaker. ‘Get out of here. Go straight back.’

Alarmed, shocked, Joshua and Sally stepped hand in hand back to West 1,
taking the airship with them. Here, in the bright sunlight, another
young woman in a FEMA uniform approached them with a clipboard and data
pad. She looked up at the airship, shook her head in disbelief, and said
reproachfully, ‘You’re going to have to go through decon. We do post
warnings in the neighbouring worlds. Hey, you can’t catch everybody.
Don’t worry, you’ve broken no law. I’ll need your names and social
security numbers …’ She started to peck at her pad.

Joshua began to take in the surroundings. This parallel Madison was
crowded, compared with the last time he was here. Tent cities, feeding
hospitals, feeding stations. A refugee camp.

Sally said bitterly, ‘Here we are in the land of plenty, with everything
anybody could ever want, multiplied a million times over. Nevertheless
somebody wants to start a war. What a piece of work is a man.’

‘But,’ Joshua said, ‘you can’t start a war if nobody turns up. Listen, I
need to get to the Home. Or where the Home would be …’

The FEMA official’s phone rang, at her waist. She looked at the screen,
seemed puzzled, and glanced at Joshua. ‘Are you Joshua Valienté?’

‘Yes.’

‘It’s for you.’ She handed him the phone. ‘Go ahead, Mr Lobsang.’

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We chose to use Madison, Wisconsin as a location in this novel partly
because as we were developing the book it occurred to us that in July
2011 the second North American Discworld convention was to be held
there, and we could get a hell of a lot of research done, as we authors
like to say, on the cheap. That convention became in part a kind of mass
workshop on the Long Earth. We’re grateful to all the contributors to
that discussion, who really are far too numerous to list here, but
particularly to Dr Christopher Pagel, owner of the Companion Animal
Hospital in Madison, and his wife Juliet Pagel, who gave up an
unreasonable amount of their time to show your authors Madison both
primeval and modern, from the Arboretum to Willy Street, and on top of
that made an incredibly helpful read-through of a draft of this book.
Thank you Madisonians, and we hereby apologize for what we have done to
your lovely city. All errors and inaccuracies are of course our sole
responsibility. Our thanks also to Charles Manson, the Tibetan Subject
Librarian at the Bodleian Library, Oxford, for helping us build
Lobsang’s world.

T.P.
S.B.
December 2011, Datum Earth

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Author of the bestselling Discworld series, TERRY PRATCHETT is one of
the UK’s most popular – and bestselling – writers. His books have sold
over 70 million copies worldwide and been translated into nearly 40
languages. He is the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
He lives in Wiltshire.

Visit www.terrypratchett.co.uk to discover everything you need to know
about Terry Pratchett and his writing, plus all manner of other things
you may find interesting, such as videos, competitions, character
profiles and games.

STEPHEN BAXTER is one of the UK’s most acclaimed writers of science
fiction and a multi-award winner. His many books include the classic
_Xeelee_ sequence, _A Time Odyssey_ novels (written with Arthur C.
Clarke) and _The Time Ships_, a sequel to H. G. Wells’s _The Time
Machine_. He lives in Northumberland.

More details of Stephen Baxter’s works can be found on
www.stephen-baxter.com

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

[image] THE DISCWORLD® SERIES [image]

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC (illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE & HIS EDUCATED RODENTS (for younger readers)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN (for younger readers)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY (for younger readers)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD

35. WINTERSMITH (for younger readers)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT (for younger readers)

39. SNUFF

[image] OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD [image]

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III: DARWIN’S WATCH (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION (with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK (with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO (with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK (with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK (with Alan Batley and Bernard
Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW? (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD (with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD (compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD (with Jacqueline Simpson)

[image] DISCWORLD MAPS [image]

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen
Player)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE – A DISCWORLD MAPP (with Stephen Briggs,
illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN (with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
WWW.TERRYPRATCHETT.CO.UK

[image] NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS [image]

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS (with Neil Gaiman)

[image] NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNGER READERS [image]

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND*

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

*www.ifnotyouthenwho.com

BOOKS BY STEPHEN BAXTER

[image] NORTHLAND [image]

STONE SPRING

BRONZE SUMMER

IRON WINTER

[image] FLOOD [image]

FLOOD

ARK

[image] TIME’S TAPESTRY [image]

EMPEROR

CONQUEROR

NAVIGATOR

WEAVER

[image] DESTINY’S CHILDREN [image]

COALESCENT

EXULTANT

TRANSCENDENT

RESPLENDENT

[image] A TIME ODYSSEY [image]

TIME’S EYE (with Arthur C. Clarke)

SUNSTORM (with Arthur C. Clarke)

FIRSTBORN (with Arthur C. Clarke)

[image] MANIFOLD [image]

MANIFOLD 1: TIME

MANIFOLD 2: SPACE

MANIFOLD 3: ORIGIN

PHASE SPACE

[image] MAMMOTH [image]

SILVERHAIR

LONGTUSK

ICEBONES

BEHEMOTH

[image] THE NASA TRILOGY [image]

VOYAGE

TITAN

MOONSEED

[image] THE XEELEE SEQUENCE [image]

RAFT

TIMELIKE INFINITY

FLUX

RING

XEELEE: AN OMNIBUS

VACUUM DIAGRAMS

[image] THE WEB [image]

THE WEB: GULLIVERZONE

THE WEB: WEBCRASH

[image] NON-SERIES [image]

ANTI-ICE

THE TIME SHIPS

TRACES

THE LIGHT OF OTHER DAYS (with Arthur C. Clarke)

EVOLUTION

THE H-BOMB GIRL

[image] NON-FICTION [image]

DEEP FUTURE

OMEGATROPIC

REVOLUTIONS IN THE EARTH: JAMES HUTTON AND THE TRUE AGE OF THE WORLD

More details of Stephen Baxter’s works can be found on
WWW.STEPHEN-BAXTER.COM

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

First published in Great Britain
in 2012 by Doubleday
an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett and Stephen Baxter 2012

Terry Pratchett and Stephen Baxter have asserted their right under the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the authors
of this work.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

Terry Pratchett® and Discworld® are registered trademarks.

The extract here from ‘Keep Right On To The End Of The Road’ by Harry
Lauder (Sir Henry Lauder) is reproduced with the kind permission of
Gregory Lauder-Frost (Sir Harry’s great-nephew).

The Stepper diagram here is by Rich Shailer

Every effort has been made to obtain the necessary permissions with
reference to copyright material, both illustrative and quoted. We
apologize for any omissions in this respect and will be pleased to make
the appropriate acknowledgements in any future edition.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781446465738
ISBN 9780857520098 (cased)
9780857520104 (tpb)

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk
The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009

2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
