
ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

 

by TERRY PRATCHETT

 

[]

 

Yet another one for Rhianna


CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION

 

Chapter 1    The Hero with a Thousand Extra Lives

 

Chapter 2    Operate Controls to Play Game

 

Chapter 3   Cereal Killers

 

Chapter 4   “No One Really Dies”

 

Chapter 5   If Not You, Who Else?

 

Chapter 6   Chicken Lumps in Space

 

Chapter 7   The Dark Tower

 

Chapter 8   Peace Talks, Peace Shouts

 

Chapter 9   On Earth, No One Can Hear You Say “Um”

 

Chapter 10  In Space, No One Is Listening Anyway

 

Chapter 11  Humans!

 

Chapter 12   Just Like the Real Thing

 

 

About the Author

 

Other Books by Terry Pratchett

 

Copyright


INTRODUCTION

 

This is Only You Can Save Mankind, the first book about a boy called
Johnny Maxwell. He’s English, but then, no one’s perfect.

It’s been a long time since the book was first published, and we had to
ask ourselves: How much should we change for this new edition? And the
answer was: Not much.

After all, a book’s a done and finished thing, a sort of picture of the
time in which it was written. No one expects Tom Sawyer to have a
skateboard (sigh…but I expect he’ll be given one, someday…). So we
haven’t made very many alterations to this book. We’ve changed some of
the slang and a few little details to make things clearer, and left it
at that. There’s no point in giving your dad a pair of Newrocks, pushing
him into the mosh pit, and trying to pretend he’s fourteen.*

But maybe there are one or two things I should point out. Only You Can
Save Mankind was written during the Gulf War—not the one we’ve just had,
which was the sequel, but the one more than ten years ago. I hope no one
intends to make it a trilogy.

Computers were just getting powerful enough to run realistic-looking
games, although they were pretty clunky by today’s standards. At the
same time, people were watching the first “video war.” Every night the
news showed the views from bombsight cameras, in what looked like live
action, often presented by General “Stormin’ Norman” Schwarzkopf, who
was in charge.

On your computer: games that looked like war. On your TV: a war that
looked like a game. If you weren’t careful, you could get confused….

Oh, and mobile phones weren’t that common, at least for kids. If you
were away from home, you had to use a phone attached by a wire to the
wall. It was terrible.

 

—Terry Pratchett
2004


 

THE MIGHTY SCREE WEE™ EMPIRE™
IS POISED TO ATTACK EARTH!

OUR BATTLESHIPS HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED IN A SNEAK RAID!

NOTHING CAN STAND BETWEEN EARTH AND THE
TERRIBLE VENGEANCE OF THE SCREEWEE™!

BUT THERE IS ONE STARSHIP LEFT…
AND OUT OF THE MISTS OF TIME COMES ONE WARRIOR,
ONE FIGHTER WHO IS THE LAST HOPE OF CIVILIZATION!
YOU!

YOU ARE THE SAVIOR OF CIVILIZATION.
YOU ARE ALL THAT STANDS BETWEEN
YOUR WORLD AND CERTAIN OBLIVION.
YOU ARE THE LAST HOPE.

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND!™

ACTION-PACKED WITH NEW FEATURES!

JUST LIKE THE REAL THING!

FULL-COLOR SOUND AND SLAM-VECTOR™ GRAPHICS!

Suitable for IBM PC, Atari, Amiga, Pineapple, Amstrad, Nintendo. Actual
game shots taken from a version you haven’t bought.

Copyright © 1992 Gobi Software, 17834 W. Agharta Drive, Shambala, Tibet.
All Rights Reserved. All company names and product names are registered
trademarks or trademarks of their respective companies.

The names ScreeWee, Empire, and Mankind are trademarks of Gobi Software
1992.

 


The Hero with a Thousand Extra Lives

 

Johnny bit his lip and concentrated.

Right. Come in quick, let a missile target itself—beep beep beep
beebeebeebeeb—on the first fighter, fire the missile—thwump—empty the
guns at the fighter—fplat fplat fplat fplat—hit fighter No. 2 and take
out its shields with the laser—bwizzle—while the missile—pwwosh—takes
out fighter No. 1, dive, switch guns, rake fighter No. 3 as it turns
fplat fplat fplat—pick up fighter No. 2 in the sights again up the
upcurve, let go a missile—thwump—and rake it with—

Fwit fwit fwit.

Fighter No. 4! It always came in last, but if you went after it first,
the others would have time to turn and you’d end up in the sights of
three of them.

He’d died six times already. And it was only five o’clock.

His hands flew over the keyboard. Stars roared past as he accelerated
out of the melee. It’d leave him short of fuel, but by the time they
caught up, the shields would be back and he’d be ready, and two of them
would already have taken damage, and…here they come…missiles away, wow,
lucky hit on the first one, die die die!, red fireball—swsssh—take
shield loss while concentrating fire on the next one—swsssh—and now the
last one was running, but he could outrun it, hit the
accelerator—ggrrRRRSSHHH—and just keep it in his sights while he poured
shot after shot into—swssh.

Ah!

The huge bulk of their capital ship was in the corner of the screen.
Level 10, here we come…careful, careful…there were no more ships now, so
all he had to do was keep out of its range and then sweep in and We wish
to talk.

Johnny blinked at the message on the screen.

We wish to talk.

The ship roared by—eeeyooowwwnn. He reached out for the throttle key and
slowed himself down, and then turned and got the big red shape in his
sights again.

We wish to talk.

His finger hovered on the Fire button. Then, without really looking, he
moved it over to the keyboard and pressed Pause.

Then he read the manual.

Only You Can Save Mankind, it said on the cover. “Full Sound and
Graphics. The Ultimate Game.”

A ScreeWee heavy cruiser, it said on page seventeen, could be taken out
with seventy-six laser shots. Once you’d cleared the fighter escort and
found a handy spot where the ScreeWee’s guns couldn’t get you, it was
just a matter of time.

We wish to talk.

Even with the Pause on, the message still flashed on the screen.

There was nothing in the manual about messages. Johnny riffled through
the pages. It must be one of the New Features the game was Packed With.

He put down the book, put his hands on the keys, and cautiously tapped
out: Die, alein scum/

No! We do not wish to die! We wish to talk!

It wasn’t supposed to be like this, was it?

Wobbler Johnson, who’d given him the disk and photocopied the manual on
his dad’s copier, had said that once you’d completed level 10, you got
given an extra 10,000 points and the Scroll of Valor and moved on to the
Arcturus Sector, where there were different ships and more of them.

Johnny wanted the Scroll of Valor.

Johnny fired the laser one more time. Swsssh. He didn’t really know why.
It was just because you had the joystick and there was the Fire button
and that was what it was for.

After all, there wasn’t a Don’t Fire button.

We Surrender! PLEASE!

He reached over and, very carefully, pressed the Save Game button. The
computer whirred and clicked, and then was silent.

He didn’t play again the whole evening. He did his homework.

It was Geography. You had to color in Great Britain and put a dot on the
map of the world where you thought it was.

 

 

The ScreeWee Captain thumped her desk with one of her forelegs.

“What?”

The First Officer swallowed and tried to keep her tail held at a
respectful angle.

“He just vanished again, ma’am,” she said.

“But did he accept?”

“No, ma’am.”

The Captain drummed the fingers of three hands on the table. She looked
slightly like a newt but mainly like an alligator.

“But we didn’t fire on him!”

“No, ma’am.”

“And you sent my message?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“And every time we’ve killed him, he comes back….”

 

 

He caught up with Wobbler in break.

Wobbler was the kind of boy who was always picked last when you had to
pick teams, although that was all right at the moment as the PE teacher
didn’t believe in teams because they encouraged competition.

He wobbled. It was glandular, he said. He wobbled especially when he
ran. Bits of Wobbler headed in various directions; it was only on
average that he was running in any particular direction.

But he was good at games. They just weren’t the ones that people thought
you ought to be good at. If ever there was an Interschool
First-One-to-Break-the-Unbreakable-Copy-Protection-on-Galactic-Thrusters,
Wobbler wouldn’t just be on the team, he’d be picking the team.

“Yo, Wobbler,” said Johnny.

“It’s not cool to say yo anymore,” said Wobbler.

“Is it rad to say cool?” said Johnny.

“Cool’s always cool. And no one says rad anymore, either.”

Wobbler looked around conspiratorially and then fished a package from
his bag.

“This is cool. Have a shot at this.”

“What is it?” said Johnny.

“I cracked Fighter Star TeraBomber,” said Wobbler. “Only don’t tell
anyone, all right? Just type FSB. It’s not much good, really. The space
bar drops the bombs, and…well…just press the keys, you’ll see what they
do….”

“Listen…you know Only You Can Save Mankind?”

“Still playing that, are you?”

“You didn’t, you know, do anything to it, did you? Um? Before you gave
me a copy?”

“No. It wasn’t even protected. Didn’t have to do anything except copy
the manual. Why?”

“You did play it, didn’t you?”

“A bit.” Wobbler played games only once. Wobbler could watch a game for
a couple of minutes and then pick up the joystick and get the top score.
And then never play it again.

“Nothing…funny…happened?”

“Like what?” said Wobbler.

“Like…” Johnny hesitated. He could tell Wobbler, and then Wobbler would
laugh, or not believe him, or say it was just some bug or something,
some kind of trick. Or a virus. Wobbler had disks full of computer
viruses. He didn’t do anything with them. He just collected them, like
stamps or something.

He could tell Wobbler, and then somehow it wouldn’t be real.

“Oh, you know…funny.”

“Like what?”

“Weird. Um. Lifelike, I suppose.”

“It’s s’posed to be. Just like the real thing, it says. I hope you’ve
read the manual properly. My dad spent a whole coffee break copying
that.”

Johnny gave a sickly grin.

“Yes. Right. Better read it, then. Thanks for Star Fighter Pilot—”

“TeraBomber. My dad brought me back Alabama Smith and the Jewels of Fate
from the States. You can have a copy if you give me the disk back.”

“Right,” said Johnny.

“It’s OK.”

“Right,” said Johnny.

He never had the heart to tell Wobbler that he didn’t play half the
games Wobbler passed on. You couldn’t. Not if you wanted time to sleep
and eat meals. But that was all right, because Wobbler never asked. As
far as Wobbler was concerned, computer games weren’t there for playing.
They were for breaking into, rewriting so that you got extra lives or
whatever, and then copying and giving away to everyone.

Basically, there were two sides to the world. There was the entire
computer games software industry engaged in a tremendous effort to stamp
out piracy, and there was Wobbler. Currently, Wobbler was winning.

“Did you do my History?” said Wobbler.

“Here,” said Johnny. “‘What it was like to be a peasant during the
English Civil War.’ Three pages.”

“Thanks,” said Wobbler. “That was quick.”

“Oh, in Geog last term we had to do one about what it’s like being a
peasant in Bolivia. I just got rid of the llamas and put in stuff about
kings having their heads chopped off. You have to toss in that kind of
stuff, and then you just have to keep complaining about the weather and
the crops and you can’t go wrong, in peasant essays.”

 

 

Johnny lay on his bed reading Only You Can Save Mankind.

He could just about remember the days when you could still get games
where the instructions consisted of something that said, “Press < for
left and > for right and Fire for fire.”

But now you had to read a whole little book that was all about the game.
It was really the manual, but they called it “The Novel.”

Partly it was an anti-Wobbler thing. Someone in America or somewhere
thought it was real clever to make the game ask you little questions,
like “What’s the first word on line 23 on page 19 of the manual?” and
then reset the machine if you didn’t answer them right, so they’d
obviously never heard of Wobbler’s dad’s office’s photocopier.

So there was this book. The ScreeWee had turned up out of nowhere and
bombed some planets with humans on them. Nearly all the starships had
been blown up. So there was only this one left, the experimental one. It
was all that stood against the ScreeWee hordes. And only you…that is to
say John Maxwell, aged twelve, in between the time you get home from
school and get something to eat and do your homework…can save mankind.

Nowhere did it say what you were supposed to do if the ScreeWee hordes
didn’t want to fight.

He switched on the computer and pressed the Load Game key.

There was the ship again, right in the middle of his sights.

He picked up the joystick thoughtfully.

There was an immediate message on the screen. Well, not exactly a
message. More a picture. Half a dozen little egg-shaped blobs, with
tails. They didn’t move.

What kind of message is that? he thought.

Perhaps there was a special message he ought to send. “Die, Creep”
didn’t seem to fit properly at the moment.

He typed: Whats hpaening?

Immediately a reply appeared on the screen, in yellow letters.

We surrender. Do not shoot. See, we show you pictures of our children.

He typed: Is this a trick WObbler?

It took a little while before the reply came.

Am not trick wobbler. We give in. No more war.

Johnny thought for a while, and then typed: Youre not supoosed to give
ni.

Want to go home.

Johnny typed: It says in the book you blue up a lot of planets.

Lies!

Johnny stared at the screen. What he wanted to type was: No, I mean,
this cant happen, youre Aliens, you cant not want to be shot at, no
other game aliens have ever stopped aliening across the screen, they
never said We DonT Want to Go.

And then he thought: They never had the chance. They couldn’t.

But games are a lot better now.

They never made things like the old MegaZoids seem real, with stories
about them and Full-Color Graphics.

This is probably that Virtual Reality they’re always talking about on
the television.

He typed: It is only a game, after all.

What is a game?

He typed: Who ARE you?

The screen flickered. Something a bit like a newt but more like an
alligator looked back at him.

I am the Captain, said the yellow letters. Do not shoot!

Johnny typed: I shoot at you and you shoot at me. That is the game.

But we die.

Johnny typed: Sometimes I die. I die a lot.

But YOU live again.

Johnny stared at the words for a moment. Then he typed: Dont you?

No. How could this be? When we die, we die. Forever.

Johnny typed desperately: No, thats not right because, in the first
mission, theres three ships you have to blow up before the first planet.
I@ve played it lots of times and there@s always three ships there—

Different ships.

Johnny thought for a while and then typed: What happens if I switch of
tthe machine?

We do not understand the question.

This is crazy, thought Johnny. It’s just a very unusual game. It’s a
special mission or something.

He typed: Why should I trust you?

LOOK BEHIND YOU.

Johnny sat bolt upright in his chair. Then he let himself swivel around,
very cautiously.

Of course, there was no one there. Why should there be anyone there? It
was a game.

The newt face had disappeared from the screen, leaving the familiar
picture of the inside of the starfighter. And there was the radar
screen—

—covered in yellow dots.

Yellow for the enemy.

Johnny picked up the joystick and turned the starfighter around. The
entire ScreeWee fleet was there. Ship after ship was hanging in space
behind him. Little fighters, big cruisers, massive battleships.

If they all had him in their sights, and if they fired…

He didn’t want to die.

Hang on, hang on. You don’t die. You just play the game again.

This was nuts. It was time to stop it.

He typed: All right what happens now?

We want to go home.

He typed: All right no problem.

You give us safe-conduct.

He typed: OK yes.

The screen went blank.

And that was it? No music? No “Congratulations, You’ve Got the Highest
Score”?

Just the little prompt, flashing on and off.

What did safe-conduct mean, anyway?


Operate Controls to Play Game

 

You never said to your parents, “Hey, I really need a computer because
that way I can play Megasteroids.”

No, you said, “I really need a computer because of school.”

It’s educational.

Anyway, there had to be a good side to the Trying Times everyone was
going through in this house. If you hung around in your room and
generally kept your head down, stuff like computers sort of happened. It
made everyone feel better.

And it was quite useful for school sometimes. Johnny had written “What
it felt like to be different sorts of peasants” on it and printed them
out on the printer, although he had to rewrite them in his handwriting
because although the school taught Keyboard Skills and New Technology,
you got into trouble if you used keyboard skills and new technology
actually to do anything.

Funnily enough, it wasn’t much good for math. He’d always had trouble
with algebra, because they wouldn’t let you get away with “What it feels
like to be x².” But he had an arrangement with Bigmac about that,
because Bigmac got the same feeling when he looked at an essay project
as Johnny did when he was faced with a quadratic equation. Anyway, it
didn’t matter that much. If you kept your head down, they were generally
so grateful that you were not, e.g., causing policemen to come to the
school, or actually nailing a teacher to anything, that you got left
alone.

But mainly the computer was good for games. If you turned the volume
control up, you didn’t have to hear the shouting.

 

 

The ScreeWee mother ship was in uproar. There was still a haze of smoke
in the air from the last bombardment, and indistinct figures pattered
back and forth, trying to fix things up well enough to survive the
journey.

The Captain sat back in her chair on the huge, shadowy bridge. She was
yellow under the eyes, a sure sign of lack of sleep. So much to be
done…half the fighters were damaged, and the main ships were in none too
good condition, and there was hardly any room and certainly no food for
all the survivors they were taking on board.

She looked up. There was the Gunnery Officer.

“This is not a wise move,” he said.

“It is the only one I have,” said the Captain wearily.

“No! We must fight on!”

“And then we die,” said the Captain. “We fight, and then we die. That’s
how it goes.”

“Then we die gloriously!”

“There’s an important word in that sentence,” said the Captain. “And
it’s not the word ‘gloriously.’”

The Gunnery Officer went light green with rage.

“He’s attacked hundreds of our ships!”

“And then he stopped.”

“None of the others have,” said the Gunnery Officer. “They’re humans!
You can’t trust a human. They shoot everything.”

The Captain rested her snout on one hand.

“He doesn’t,” she said. “He listened. He talked. None of the others did.
He may be the One.”

The Gunnery Officer placed his upper two front hands on the desk and
glared at her.

“Well,” he said, “I’ve talked to the other officers. I don’t believe in
legends. When the full enormity of what you have done is understood, you
will be relieved of your command!”

She turned tired eyes toward him.

“Good,” she said. “But right now, I am Captain. I am responsible. Do you
understand? Have you got the faintest idea of what that means? Now…go!”

He didn’t like it, but he couldn’t disobey. I can have him shot, she
thought. It’d be a good idea. Bound to save trouble later on. It’ll be
No. 235 on the list of Things to Do….

She turned back to continue staring at the stars outside, on the huge
screen that filled one wall.

The enemy ship still hung there.

What kind of person is it? she thought. Despicable though they are,
there’s so few of them. But they keep coming back! What’s their secret?

But you can be sure of one thing. They surely only send their bravest
and their best.

 

 

The advantage of the Trying Times was that helping yourself from the
fridge was OK. There didn’t seem to be any proper mealtimes anymore in
any case. Or any real cooking.

Johnny made himself spaghetti and baked beans. There was no sound from
the living room, although the TV was on.

Then he watched a bit of television in his room. He’d been given the old
one when they got the new one. It wasn’t very big, and you had to get up
and walk over to it every time you wanted to change channels or the
volume or whatever, but these were Trying Times.

There was a film on the news showing some missiles streaking over some
city. It was quite good.

Then he went to bed.

 

 

He was not entirely surprised to wake up at the controls of a
starfighter.

It had been like that with Captain Zoom. You couldn’t get it out of your
head. After an evening’s concentrated playing, you were climbing ladders
and dodging laser-zap bolts all night.

It was a pretty good dream, even so. He could feel the seat under him.
And the cabin smelled of hot oil and overheated plastic and unwashed
people.

It looked pretty much like the one he saw on the screen every evening,
except that there was a thin film of grease and dirt over everything.
But there was the radar screen, and the weapons console, and the
joystick…

Hey, much better than the computer! The cabin was full of noises—the
click and whirr of fans, the hum and buzz of instruments.

And better graphics. You get much better graphics in your dreams.

The ScreeWee fleet hung in the ai—hung in space in front of him.

Wow!

Although dreams ought to be a bit more exciting. You got chased in
dreams. Things happened to you. Sitting in the cockpit of a starfighter
bristling with weapons was fun, but things ought to happen….

He wondered if he should launch a missile or something…. No, hang on,
they’d surrendered. And there was that thing about safe-conduct.

His hands wandered over the switches in front of him. They were a bit
different from the computer keyboard, but this one—

“Are you receiving me?”

The face of the Captain appeared on the communications screen.

“Yes?” said Johnny.

“We are ready.”

“Ready?” said Johnny. “What for?”

“Lead the way,” said the Captain. The voice came out of a grille beside
the screen. It must be being translated by something, Johnny thought. I
shouldn’t think giant newts speak English.

“Where to?” he said. “Where are we going?”

“Earth.”

“Earth? Hang on! That’s where I live! People can get into serious
trouble showing huge alien fleets where they live!”

The grille hummed and buzzed for a while. Then the Captain said:
“Apology. That is a direct translation. We call the planet that is our
home ‘Earth.’ When I speak in ScreeWee, your computer finds the word in
your language that means the same thing. The actual word in ScreeWee
sounds like…” There was a noise like someone taking their foot out of a
wet cowpat. “I will show our home to you.”

A red circle suddenly developed on the navigation screen.

Johnny knew about that. You just moved a green circle over it, the
computer went binkabinkabinka, and you’d set your course.

They’ve shown me where they live.

The thought sank in.

They trust me.

As he moved his fighter forward, the entire alien fleet pulled in behind
him. They eclipsed the stars.

The cabin hummed and buzzed quietly to itself.

Well, at least it didn’t look too hard….

A green dot appeared ahead of him.

He watched it get bigger and recognized the shape of a starfighter, just
like his.

But it was a little hard to make it out.

This was because it was half hidden by laser bolts.

It was firing at him as it came.

And it was traveling so fast, it was very nearly catching up with its
own fire.

Johnny jerked the joystick and his ship rolled out of the way as the…the
enemy starfighter roared past and barreled on toward the ScreeWee ships.

The whole sky full of ScreeWee ships.

Which had surrendered to him.

But people out there were still playing the game.

“No! Listen to me! They’re not fighting anymore!”

The starfighter turned in a wide curve and headed directly for the
command ship. Johnny saw it launch a missile. Someone sitting at a
keyboard somewhere had launched a missile.

“Listen! You’ve got to stop!”

It’s not listening to me, he thought. You don’t listen to the enemy. The
enemy’s there to be shot at. That’s why it’s the enemy. That’s what the
enemy’s for.

He swung around to follow the starship, which had slowed down. It was
pouring shot after shot into the command ship…

…which wasn’t firing back.

Johnny stared in horror.

 

 

The ship rocked under the hail of fire. The Gunnery Officer crawled
across the shaking floor and pulled himself up beside the Captain’s
chair.

“Fool! Fool! I told you this would happen! I demand that we return
fire!”

The Captain was watching the Chosen One’s ship. It hadn’t moved.

“No,” she said. “We have to give him a chance. We must not fire on human
ships.”

“A chance? How much of a chance do we have? I shall give the order to—”

The Captain moved very fast. When her hand stopped, she was holding a
gun very close to the Gunnery Officer’s head. It was really only a
ceremonial weapon; normally ScreeWee fought only with their claws. But
its shape said very clearly that things came out of the hole in the
front end with the very definite purpose of traveling fast through the
air and then killing people.

“No,” she said.

The Gunnery Officer’s face went blue, a sure sign of terror. But he had
enough courage left to say: “You would not dare fire!”

 

 

It’s a game, thought Johnny. There’s not a real person in that ship.
It’s someone playing a game. It’s all a game. It’s just things happening
on a screen somewhere.

No.

I mean, yes.

But…

…at the same time…

…it’s all happening here….

His own ship leaped forward.

It was easy. It was so easy. Just line up circles on the screen,
binkabinkabinka, and then press the Fire button until every weapon on
the ship was empty. He’d done it many times before.

The invader hadn’t even seen him. It launched some missiles—and then
blew up in an impressive display of graphics.

That’s all it is, Johnny told himself. Just things on a screen. It’s not
real. There’s no arms and feet spinning away through the wreckage. It’s
all a game.

The missiles arrived….

The whole cockpit went blinding white.

He was aware, just for a moment, of cold space around him, with things
in it….

A bookcase. A chair. A bed.

He was sitting in front of the computer. The screen was blank. He was
holding the joystick so hard that he had to concentrate to let go of it.

The clock by his bed said 6:3[] because it was broken. But it meant he’d
have to get up in another hour or so.

He sat with his quilt around him watching the television until the alarm
went off.

There were some more pictures of missiles and bullets streaking over a
city. They looked pretty much the same as the ones he’d seen last night,
but were probably back by popular demand.

He felt sick.

 

 

Yo-less could help, Johnny decided.

He normally hung out with Wobbler and Bigmac on the bit of wall behind
the school library. They weren’t exactly a gang. If you take a big bag
of potato chips and shake them up, all the little bits end up in one
corner.

Yo-less was called Yo-less because he never said “Yo.” He’d given up
objecting to the name by now. At least it was better than Nearly
Massive, which was the last nickname, and O. J. Bottle, which was the
one before that. Johnny was the official nickname generator.

Yo-less said he’d never said “massive,” either. He pointed out that
Johnny was white and never said, “YerWhat? YerWhat? YerWhat?” or “God
save the Queen” and anyway, you shouldn’t make jokes about racial
stereotyping.

Johnny didn’t go into too much detail. He just talked about the dream,
and not about the messages on the screen. Yo-less listened carefully.
Yo-less listened to everything carefully. It worried teachers, the way
he listened carefully to everything they said. They always suspected he
was trying to catch them out.

He said, “What you’ve got here is a projection of a psychological
conflict. That’s all. Want a cheese ring?”

“What’s that?”

“It’s just crunchy cheesy-flavored—”

“I mean the other thing you said.”

Yo-less passed the bag on to Bigmac.

“Well…your mum and dad are splitting up, right? Well-known fact.”

“Could be. It’s a bit of a trying time,” said Johnny.

“O-kay. And there’s nothing you can do about it.”

“Shouldn’t think so,” said Johnny.

“And this definitely affects you,” said Yo-less.

“I suppose so,” said Johnny cautiously. “I know I have to do a lot of my
own cooking.”

“Right. So you project your…um…suppressed emotions onto a computer game.
Happens all the time,” said Yo-less, whose mother was a nurse, and who
wanted to be a doctor if he grew up. “You can’t solve the real problems,
so you turn them into problems you can solve. Like…if this was thirty
years ago, you’d probably dream about fighting dragons or something.
It’s a projected fantasy.”

“Saving hundreds of intelligent newts doesn’t sound very easy to solve,”
said Johnny.

“Dunno,” said Bigmac happily. “Ratatatat-blam! No more problem.” Bigmac
wore large boots and camouflage trousers all the time. You could spot
him a mile off by his camouflage trousers.

“The thing is,” said Yo-less, “it’s not real. Real’s real. But stuff on
a screen isn’t.”

“I’ve cracked Stellar Smashers,” said Wobbler. “You can have that if you
want. Everyone says it’s a lot better.”

“No-oo,” said Johnny. “I think I’ll stick with this one for a while. See
if I can get to level twenty-one.”

“If you get to level twenty-one and blow up the whole fleet, you get a
special number on the screen, and if you write off to Gobi Software, you
get a five-pound token,” said Wobbler. “It was in Computer Weekly.”

Johnny thought about the Captain.

“A whole five pounds?” he said. “Gosh.”

It was Gym in the afternoon. Bigmac was the only one who played. He’d
never been keen until they’d introduced hockey. You got a club to hit
people, he said.

Yo-less didn’t do sports because of intellectual incompatibility.
Wobbler didn’t do sports because the sports coach had asked him not to.
Johnny didn’t do sports because he had a permanent note, and no one
cared much anyway, so he went home early and spent the afternoon reading
the manual.

He didn’t touch the computer before tea.

There was an extended news, which meant that Cobbers was postponed.
There were the same pictures of missiles streaking across a city that
he’d seen the night before, except that now there were more journalists
in sand-colored shirts with lots of pockets talking excitedly about
them.

He heard his mother downstairs complain about Cobbers, and by the sound
of the raised voices, that started Trying Times again.

Then there was some History homework about Christopher Columbus. He
looked him up in the encyclopedia and copied out four hundred words,
which usually worked. He drew a picture of Columbus as well, and colored
it in.

After a while he realized that he was putting off switching the computer
on. It came to something, he thought, when you did schoolwork rather
than play games….

It wouldn’t hurt to at least have a game of Pac-Man or something.
Trouble was, the ghosts would probably stay in the middle of the screen
and refuse to come out and be eaten. He didn’t think he could cope with
that. He’d got enough to worry about as it was.

On top of it all, his father came upstairs to be fatherly. This happened
about once a fortnight. There didn’t seem to be any way of stopping it.
You had to put up with twenty minutes of being asked about how you were
getting on at school, and had you really thought about what you wanted
to be when you grew up.

The thing to do was not encourage this, but as politely as possible.

His father sat on the edge of the bed and looked around the room as
though he’d never seen it before.

After the normal questions about teachers Johnny hadn’t had since the
first year, his father stared at nothing much for a while and then said,
“Things have been a bit tricky lately. I expect you’ve noticed.”

“No.”

“It’s been a bit tricky at work. Not a good time to start a new
business.”

“Yes.”

“Everything all right?”

“Yes.”

“Nothing you want to talk about?”

“No. I don’t think so.”

His father looked around the room again. Then he said, “Remember last
year, when we all went down to Falmouth for the week?”

“Yes.”

“You enjoyed that, didn’t you?”

He’d got sunburned and twisted his ankle on some rocks and he had to get
up at eight thirty every morning, even though it was supposed to be a
vacation. And the only TV in the hotel was in front of some old woman
who never let go of the remote control.

“Yes.”

“We ought to go again.”

His father was staring at him.

“Yes,” said Johnny. “That would be nice.”

“How’re you getting on with Space Invaders?”

“Sorry?”

“Space Invaders. On the computer.”

Johnny turned to look at the blank screen.

“What’re Space Invaders?” he said.

“Isn’t that what they’re called anymore? Space Invaders? You used to get
them in pubs and things, oh, before you were born. Rows of spiky
triangular green aliens with six legs kept on coming down the screen and
we had to shoot them.”

Johnny gave this some thought. “What happened when you’d shot them all,
then?”

“Oh, you got some more.” His father stood up. “I expect it’s all more
complicated now, though.”

“Yes.”

“Done your homework, have you?”

“Yes.”

“What was it?”

“History. Had to write something about Christopher Columbus.”

“Hmm? You could put in that he didn’t set out to discover America. He
was really looking for Asia and found America by accident.”

“Yes. It says that in the encyclopedia.”

“Glad to see you’re using it.”

“Yes. It’s very interesting.”

“Good. Right. Right, then. Well, I’m going to have another look at those
accounts…”

“Right.”

“If there’s anything you want to talk about, you know…”

“All right.”

Johnny waited until he heard the living-room door shut again. He
wondered if he ought to have asked where the instruction manual for the
dishwasher was.

He switched on the computer.

After a while the screen for Only You Can Save Mankind came on. He
watched the introductory bit moodily and then picked up the joystick.

There weren’t any aliens.

For a little while he thought he’d done something wrong. He started the
game again.

There were still no aliens. All there was, was the blackness of space,
sprinkled with a few twinkling stars.

He flew around until he was out of fuel.

No ScreeWee, no dots on the radar screen. No game.

They’d gone.


Cereal Killers

 

There was more news these days than normal. Half the time the TV was
showing pictures of tanks and maps of deserts with green and red arrows
all over them, while in the corner of the screen would be a photo of a
journalist with a phone to his ear, talking in a crackly voice.

It crackled in the background while Johnny phoned up Wobbler.

“Yes?”

“Can I speak to Wob—to Stephen, please?”

Mutter, clonk, bump, scuffle.

“Yes?”

“It’s me, Wobbler.”

“Yes?”

“Have you had a look at Only You Can Save Mankind lately?”

“No. Hey, listen, I’ve found a way to—”

“Could you have a go with it right now, please?”

Pause.

“You all right?”

“What?”

“You sound a bit weird.”

“Look, go and have a go with the game, will you?”

It was an hour before Wobbler phoned back. Johnny waited on the stairs.

“Can I speak—”

“It’s me.”

“There’s no aliens, right?”

“Yes!”

“Probably something built into the game. You can do that, you know. A
kind of time bomb thing. Maybe it’s programmed to make all the aliens
vanish on a certain date.”

“What for?”

“Make things more interesting, I expect. Probably Gobi Software will be
putting adverts in the computer papers about it. You all right? Your
voice sounds a bit squeaky.”

“No problem.”

“You coming down to the mall tomorrow?”

“Yeah.”

“See you, then. Chow.”

Johnny stared at the dead phone. Of course, there were things like that
on computers. There’d been something in the papers about it. A
Friday-the-thirteenth virus, or something. Something in the program kept
an eye on the date, and when it was Friday the thirteenth, it was
supposed to do something nasty to computers all over the country.

There had been stories about Evil Computer Hackers Menacing Society, and
Wobbler had come to school in homemade dark glasses for a week.

Johnny went back and watched the screen for a while. Stars occasionally
went past.

Wobbler had written an actual computer game like this once. It was
called Journey to Alpha Centauri. It was a screen with some dots on it.
Because, he said, it happened in real time, which no one had ever heard
of until computers. He’d seen on TV that it took three thousand years to
get to Alpha Centauri. He had written it so that if anyone kept their
computer on for three thousand years, they’d be rewarded by a little dot
appearing in the middle of the screen, and then a message saying,
“Welcome to Alpha Centauri. Now go home.”

Johnny watched the screen for a bit longer. Once or twice he nudged the
joystick, to go on a different course. It didn’t make much difference.
Space looked the same from every direction.

“Hello? Anybody there?” he whispered.

He watched some television before he went to bed. There were some more
missiles, and someone going on about some other missiles that were
supposed to knock down the first type of missile.

 

 

The fleet traveled in the shape of a giant cone, hundreds of miles long.
The Captain looked back at it. There were scores of mother ships,
hundreds of fighters. More and more kept joining them as news of the
surrender spread.

The Chosen One’s ship flew a little way ahead of the fleet. It wasn’t
answering messages.

But no one was shooting at them. There hadn’t been a human ship visible
for hours. Perhaps, the Captain thought, it’s really working. We’re
leaving them behind….

 

 

Johnny woke up in the game.

It was hard to sleep in the starship. The seat started out as the most
comfortable thing in the whole world, but it was amazing how
uncomfortable it became after a few hours. And the lavatory was a
complicated arrangement of tubes and trapdoors and it wasn’t, he was
beginning to notice, entirely smellproof.

That’s what the computer games couldn’t give you: the smell of space. It
had its own kind of smell, like a machine’s armpit. You didn’t get
dirty, because there was no dirt, but there was a sort of grimy
cleanliness about everything.

The radar went ping.

After a while he could see a dot ahead of him. It wasn’t moving much,
and it certainly wasn’t firing.

He left the fleet and went to investigate.

It was a huge ship. Or, at least, it had been once. Quite a lot of it
had been melted off.

It drifted along, absolutely dead, tumbling very gently. It was green,
and vaguely triangular, except for six legs, or possibly arms. Three of
them were broken stubs. It looked like a cross between a spider and an
octopus, designed by a computer and made out of hundreds of cubes bolted
together.

As the giant hulk turned, he could see huge gashes in it, with melted
edges. There was a suggestion of floors inside.

He switched on the radio.

“Captain?”

“Yes?”

“Can you see this thing here? What is it?”

“We find them sometimes. We think they belonged to an ancient race, now
extinct. We don’t know what they called themselves, or where they came
from. The ships are very crude.”

The dead ship turned slowly. There was another long burn down the other
side.

“I think they were called Space Invaders,” said Johnny.

“The human name for them?”

“Yes.”

“I thought so.”

Johnny was glad he couldn’t see the Captain’s face.

He thought: No one knows where they came from, or even what they called
themselves. And now no one ever will.

The radar went ping again.

There was a human ship heading toward the fleet at high speed.

This time he didn’t hesitate.

The point was, the ScreeWee weren’t very good at fighting. After the
first few games it was quite easy to beat them. They couldn’t seem to
get the hang of it. They didn’t know how to be sneaky, or when to dodge.

It was the same with all of them, come to think of it. Johnny had played
lots of games with words like “Space” and “Battle” and “Cosmic” in the
titles, and all the aliens were the sort you could beat after a few
weeks’ playing.

This player didn’t stand a chance against a real human.

You got six missiles. Johnny had two streaking away before the enemy was
much larger than a dot. Then he just kept his finger on the Fire button
until there was nothing left to fire.

A spreading cloud of wreckage, and that was it.

It wasn’t as if anyone would die, after all. Whoever had been in there
would just have to start the game again.

It felt real, but that was just the dream….

Dreams always felt real.

He turned his attention to the thing by the control chair. It had a
nozzle which filled a paper cup with something like thin vegetable soup,
and a slot that pushed out very large plastic bags containing very small
things like sandwiches. The bags had to be big to get all the list of
additives on. They contained absolutely everything necessary to keep a
star warrior healthy. Not happy, but healthy…

He’d taken one mouthful when something slammed into the ship. A red
glare filled the cabin; alarms started to blare.

He looked up in time to see a ship curving away for another run.

He hadn’t even glanced at the radar.

He’d been eating!

He spun the ship. The multivitamin sandwich flew around into the wiring
somewhere.

It was coming back to get him. He prodded furiously at the control
panel.

Hang on….

What was the worst that could happen to him?

He could wake up in bed.

He took his time. He dodged. He weaved. Another missile hit the ship. As
the attacker roared past, Johnny fired, with everything.

Another cloud of wreckage.

No problem.

But it must have fired a missile just before he got it. There was
another red flash. The lights went out. The ship jumped. His head
bounced off the seat back and banged onto the control panel.

He opened his eyes.

Right. And you wake up back in your bedroom.

A light winked at him.

There was something beeping.

Bound to be the alarm clock. That’s how dreams end….

He lifted his head. The flashing light was oblong. He tried to focus.

There were shapes there.

But they weren’t saying 6:3[].

They were spelling out “AIR LEAK,” and behind the insistent beeping was
a terrible hissing sound.

No, no, he thought. This doesn’t happen.

He pushed himself up. There were lots of red lights. He pressed some
buttons hurriedly, but this had no effect at all except to make some
more lights go red.

He didn’t know much about the controls of a starship, other than fast,
slow, left, right, and fire, but there were whole rows of flashing
alarms that suggested that a lot of things he didn’t know about were
going wrong. He stared at some red letters that said “SECONDARY PUMPS
FAILURE.” He didn’t know what the secondary pumps were either, but he
wished, he really wished, they hadn’t failed.

His head ached. He reached up, and there was real blood on his hand. And
he knew that he was going to die. Really die.

No, he thought. Please! I’m John Maxwell. Please! I’m twelve. I’m not
dying in a spaceshi—

The beeping got louder.

He looked at the sign again.

It was flashing 6:3[].

About time, he thought, as he passed out….

 

 

And woke up.

He was at the computer again. It wasn’t switched on, and he was freezing
cold.

He had a headache, but a tentative feel said there was no blood. It was
just a headache.

He stared into the dark black screen and wondered what it felt like to
be a ScreeWee.

It felt like that, except that you didn’t wake up. It was always AIR
LEAK, or *Alert*Alert*Alert* beeping on and off, and then perhaps the
freezing cold of space, and then nothing.

He had breakfast.

You got a free alien in every box of sugar-glazed Snappiflakes. It was a
new thing. Or an old thing, being tried again.

The one that ended up in his bowl was orange and had three eyes and four
arms. And it was holding a ray gun in each hand.

His father hadn’t got up. His mother was watching the little television
in the kitchen, where a very large man disguised as an entire desert was
pointing to a lot of red and blue arrows on a map.

He went down to Neil Armstrong Mall.

He took the plastic alien with him. That’d be the way to invade a
planet. One alien in every box! Wait until they were in every cupboard
in the country, send out the signal, and bazaam!

Cereal killers!

Maybe on some other planet somewhere you got a free human in every
packet of ammonia-coated Snappicrystals. Hey, zorks! Collect the Whole
Set! And there’d be all these little plastic people. Holding guns, of
course. You just had to walk down the street to see that, of course,
everyone had a gun.

He looked out of the bus window.

That was it, really. No one would bother to put plastic aliens inside
the plastic cereal if they were just, you know, doing everyday things.
Holding the Cosmiczippo Ray™ hedge clippers! Getting on the Megadeath™
bus! Hanging out at the Star Thruster Mall!

The trouble with all the aliens he’d seen was that they wanted to either
eat you or play music at you until you became better people. You never
got the sort that just wanted to do something ordinary like borrow the
lawn mower.

Wobbler and Yo-less and Bigmac were trying to hang out by the ornamental
fountain, but really they were just hanging around. Yo-less was wearing
the same gray trousers he wore to school. You couldn’t hang out in gray
trousers. And Wobbler still wore his sunglasses, except they weren’t
real sunglasses because he had to wear ordinary glasses anyway; they
were those clip-on sunglasses for tourists. Also, they weren’t the same
size as the glasses underneath, and had rubbed red marks on his nose.
And Bigmac, in addition to his camouflage trousers and “Terminator”
T-shirt with “Blackbury Skins” on the back in pen, had got hold of a
belt made entirely of cartridge cases. He looked stupid.

“Yo, duds,” said Johnny.

“We’ve been here ages,” said Yo-less.

“I went one stop past on the bus and had to walk back,” said Johnny.
“Thinking about other things. What’s happening?”

“Do you mean what’s happening, or sort of hey, my man, what’s
happening?” said Wobbler.

“What’s happening?” said Johnny.

“I want to go into J&J Software,” said Wobbler. “They might have got
Cosmic Coffee Mats in. It got a review in Bazzammm! and they said it’s
got an unbreakable copy protection.”

“Did they say it was any good?” said Bigmac.

“Who cares?”

“You’ll get caught one day,” said Yo-less.

“Then you get given a job in Silicon Valley designing antipiracy
software,” said Wobbler. Behind his two thicknesses of glasses, his eyes
lit up. Wobbler thought that California was where good people went when
they died.

“No, you don’t. You just get in trouble and you get sued,” said Yo-less.
“And the police take all your computers away. There was something in the
paper.”

They wandered aimlessly toward the computer shop.

“I saw this film once, right, where there were these computer games, and
if you were really good, the aliens came and got you and you had to fly
a spaceship and fight a whole bad alien fleet,” said Bigmac.

“Did you beat it? I mean, in the film, the alien fleet got beaten?”

Bigmac gave Johnny an odd look.

“Of course. Sure. There wouldn’t be any point otherwise, would there?”

“Only you can save mankind,” said Johnny.

“What?”

“It’s the game,” said Wobbler.

“But it always says something like that on the boxes you get games in,”
said Johnny. Except if you get them from Wobbler, he added to himself,
when you just get a disk.

“Well. Yeah. Something like that. Why not?”

“I mean they never say, ‘Only You are going to be put inside a Billion
Pounds Worth of Machine with more Switches than you’ve Ever Seen and be
Blown to Bits by a Thousand Skilled Enemy Pilots because You Don’t
Really Know how to Fly It.’”

They wandered past Mr. Zippy’s Ice Cream Extravaganza.

“Can’t see that catching on,” said Wobbler. “Can’t see them ever selling
a game called Get Shot to Pieces.”

“You still having trouble at home?” said Yo-less.

“It’s all gone quiet,” said Johnny.

“That can be worse than shouting.”

“Yes.”

“It’s not that bad when your mum and dad split up,” said Wobbler,
“although you get to see more museums than is good for you.”

“Still found no aliens?” said Yo-less.

“Um. Not in the game.”

“Still dreaming about them?” said Wobbler.

“Sort of.”

Someone handing out leaflets about Big Savings on Double Glazing gave
one, in desperation, to Yo-less. He took it gravely, thanked her, folded
it in two and put it in his pocket. Yo-less always filed this sort of
thing. You never knew when it might come in handy, he said. One day he
might want to double glaze his surgery, and he’d be in a good position
to compare offers.

“Anyone see the war on the box last night?” said Bigmac. “Way to go,
eh?”

“Way to go where?” said Yo-less.

“We’re really kicking some butt!”

“Some but what?” said Wobbler.

“We’ll give them the ‘Mother-in-law of All Battles,’ eh?” said Bigmac,
still trying to stir some patriotism.

“Nah. It’s not like real fighting,” said Wobbler. “It’s just TV
fighting.”

“Wish I was in the army,” said Bigmac wistfully. “Blam!” He shot the
double-glazing lady, who didn’t notice. Bigmac had a habit of firing
imaginary guns. Other people played air guitar, he shot air rifles.

“Couple more years,” he said. “That’s all.”

“You ought to write to Stormin’ Norman,” said Wobbler. “Ask him to keep
the war going until you get there.”

“He’s done pretty well for someone called Norman,” said Yo-less. “I
mean…Norman? Not very macho, is it? It’s like Bruce, or Rodney.”

“He had to be Norman,” said Wobbler, “otherwise he couldn’t be Stormin’.
You couldn’t have Stormin’ Bruce. Come on.”

J&J Software was always packed on a Saturday morning. There were always
a couple of computers running games, and always a cluster of people
gathered around them. No one knew who J&J were, since the shop was run
by Mr. Patel, who had eyes like a hawk. He always watched Wobbler very
carefully, on the fairly accurate basis that Wobbler distributed more
games than he did and didn’t even charge anyone for them.

The four of them split up. Bigmac wasn’t much interested in games, and
Yo-less went down to look at the videos. Wobbler had found someone who
knew even more complicated stuff about computers than he did himself.

Johnny wandered down the racks of games.

I wonder if the ScreeWee do this, he thought. Or people on Jupiter or
somewhere. Go down to a shop and buy “Shoot the Human” games. And have
films where there’s a human running around the place terrorizing a
spaceship—

He became aware of a raised voice at the counter.

You didn’t often get girls in J&J Software. Once, quite a long time ago,
during a bit of time she’d set aside for parenting, Johnny’s mother had
tried playing a game. It had been quite a simple one—you had to shoot
asteroids and flying saucers and things. It had been embarrassing. It
had been amazing that the flying saucers had even bothered to shoot
back. More likely they should have parked and all the aliens could have
looked out of the windows and made rude noises. Women didn’t have a
clue.

A girl was complaining to Mr. Patel about a game she’d bought. Everyone
knew you couldn’t do that, even if you’d opened the box and it was full
of nothing but mouse droppings. Mr. Patel took the view that once the
transparent wrapper had come off, even the pope wouldn’t be allowed to
return a game, not even if he got God to come in as well. This was
because he’d met people like Wobbler before.

The boys watched in fascinated horror.

She kept tapping the offending box with a finger.

“And who wants to see nothing but stars?” she said. “I’ve seen stars
before, actually. It says on the box that you fight dozens of different
kinds of alien ships. There isn’t even one.”

Mr. Patel muttered something. Johnny wasn’t close enough to hear. But
the girl’s voice had a kind of penetrating quality, like a corkscrew.
When she spoke in italics, you could hear them.

“Oh, no. You can’t say that. Because how can I tell if it works without
trying it? That comes under the Sale of Goods Act [1983].”

The awed watchers were astonished to see a slightly hunted look in Mr.
Patel’s eyes. Up until now he’d never met anyone who could pronounce
brackets.

He muttered something else.

“Copy it? Why should I copy it? I’ve bought it. It says on the box you
meet fascinating alien races. Well, all I got was one ship and some
stupid message on the screen and then it ran away. I don’t call that
fascinating alien races.”

Message…

Ran away…

Johnny sidled closer.

Mr. Patel muttered something else, then turned to one of the shelves.
The shop watched in amazement. There was a new game in his hand. He was
actually going to make an exchange. This was like Genghis Khan deciding
not to attack a city but stay at home and watch football instead.

Then he held up his hand, nodded at the girl, and stalked over to one of
the shop’s own computers, the ones with so many fingermarks on the keys
that you couldn’t read them anymore.

Everyone watched in silence as he loaded up the copy of the game that
the girl had brought back. The music came on. The title scrolled up the
screen, like the one in Star Wars. It was the usual stuff: “The mighty
ScreeWee fleet have attacked the Federation,” whatever that was, “and
only you…”

And then there was space. It was computer space—a sort of black, with
the occasional star rolling past.

“There ought to be six ships on the first mission,” said someone behind
Johnny.

Mr. Patel scowled at him. He pressed a key cautiously.

“You’ve just fired a torpedo at nothing, Mr. Patel,” said Wobbler.

Finally Mr. Patel gave up. He waved his hands in the air.

“How d’you find the things to shoot?” he said.

“They find you,” said someone. “You should be dead by now.”

“See?” said the girl. “You get nothing but space. I left it on for
hours, and there was just space.”

“Maybe you’re not persevering. You kids don’t know the meaning of the
word ‘persevere,’” said Mr. Patel.

Wobbler looked over the shopkeeper’s head to Johnny and raised his
eyebrows.

“It’s like persistently trying,” said Johnny helpfully.

“Oh. Right. Well, I persistently tried the other night and I didn’t find
any, either.”

Mr. Patel carefully unwrapped the new copy of the game. The shop watched
as he slotted the disk into the computer.

“Then let us see what the game looks like before Mr. Wobbler plays his
little tricks,” he said.

There was the title screen. There was the story, such as it was. And the
instructions.

And space.

“Soon we shall see,” said Mr. Patel.

And then more space.

“This one was delivered only yesterday.”

Lots more space. That was the thing about space.

Mr. Patel picked up the box and looked at it carefully. But they’d all
seen him take off the shrink-wrap.

They’ve gone, thought Johnny.

Even on the new games.

They’ve all gone.

People were laughing. But Wobbler and Yo-less were staring at him.


“No One Really Dies”

 

“I reckon,” said Bigmac, “I reckon…”

“Yes?” said Yo-less.

“I reckon…Ronald McDonald is like Jesus Christ.”

Bigmac did that kind of thing. Sometimes he came out with the kind of
big, slow statement that suggested some sort of deep thinking had been
going on for some time. It was like mountains. Johnny knew they were
made by continents banging together, but no one ever saw it happening.

“Yes?” said Yo-less in a kind voice. “And why do you think this?”

“Well, look at all the advertising,” said Bigmac, waving a fry in the
general direction of the rest of the burger bar. “There’s this happy
land you go to where there’s lakes of banana milkshake and—and trees
covered in fries. And…and then there’s the Hamburglar. He’s the Devil.”

“Mr. Zippy’s advertised by a giant talking ice cream,” said Wobbler.

“I don’t like that,” said Yo-less. “I wouldn’t trust an ice cream that’s
trying to get you to eat ice creams.”

Occasionally they talked like this for hours, when there was something
they didn’t want to talk about. But now they seemed to have run out of
things to say.

They all looked silently at Johnny, who’d hardly touched his burger.

“Look, I don’t know what’s happening,” he said.

“Gobi Software’s going to be really pissed off when they find out what
you’ve done,” said Wobbler, grinning.

“I didn’t do anything!” said Johnny. “It’s not my fault!”

“Could be a virus,” said Yo-less.

“Nah,” said Wobbler. “I’ve got loads of viruses. They just muck up the
computer. They don’t muck up your head.”

“They could,” said Yo-less. “With flashing lights and stuff. Kind of
like hypnosis.”

“You said before I was making it all up! You said I was projecting
fantasies!”

“That was before old Patel went through half a dozen boxes. I’m glad I
saw that. You know she actually got another copy and her money back,
actually?”

Johnny smiled uncomfortably.

Wobbler drummed his fingers on the table, or partly on the table and
partly in a pool of barbecue sauce.

“No, I still reckon it’s just something Gobi Software did to all the
games. I like the virus idea, though,” he said. “Humans catching viruses
off of computers? Nice one.”

“It’s not like that,” said Johnny.

“They used to do this thing with films where they’d put in just one
frame of something, like an ice cream or something, and it’d enter
people’s brains without them knowing it and they’d all want ice cream,”
said Yo-less. “Subliminal advertising, it was called. That’d be quite
easy to do on a computer.”

Johnny thought about the Captain showing him pictures of her children.
That didn’t sound like hypnosis. He didn’t know what it did sound like,
but it didn’t sound like hypnosis.

“Perhaps they’re real aliens and they’re in control of your computer,”
said Yo-less.

“OOOO—eee—OOO,” said Bigmac, waving his hands in the air and speaking in
a hollow voice. “Johnny Maxwell did not know it, but he had just strayed
into…the Toilet Zone…deedledeedle, deedledeedle, deedledeedle…”

“After all, you’re supposed to be leading them to Earth,” Yo-less went
on.

“But that’s just their own name for their own world,” said Johnny.

“You’ve only got their word for it. And they’re newts, too. You could be
bringing them here.”

They all looked up, in case they could see through the ceiling, T&F
Insurance Services, and the roof to a huge alien fleet in the sky above.

“You’re just getting carried away,” said Wobbler. “You can’t invade a
planet with a lot of aliens out of a computer game. They live on a
screen. They’re not real.”

“What’re you going to do about it, anyway?” said Yo-less.

“Just keep doing it, I suppose,” said Johnny. “Who was that girl in
Patel’s?”

“Oh, she’s always around,” said Wobbler. “Saw her in there once playing
Cosmic Trek. Girls aren’t much good at computer games because they
haven’t got such a good grasp of spatial…something or other like we
have,” he went on airily. “You know. They can’t think in three
dimensions, or something. They haven’t got the instincts for it.”

“The Captain’s a female,” said Johnny.

“It’s probably different for giant alligators,” said Wobbler.

Bigmac sucked a packet of tomato ketchup.

“Do you think IT might still be going on when I’m old enough to join the
army?” he asked thoughtfully.

“No,” said Yo-less. “Stormin’ Bruce’ll get it all sorted out. He’ll kick
some butt.”

They chorused “Some but what?” like tired monks.

They went to the movies in the afternoon. Alabama Smith and the
Emperor’s Crown was showing on Screen S. Wobbler said it was racist, but
Yo-less said he quite enjoyed it. They discussed whether it could still
be racist if Yo-less enjoyed it. Johnny bought popcorn all around. That
was another thing about Trying Times—pocket money was erratic, but you
tended to get more of it.

He had spaghetti hoops when he got home, and watched TV for a while. The
pyramid-shaped man disguised as a desert seemed to be on a lot now. He
told jokes sometimes. The journalists laughed a bit. Johnny quite liked
Stormin’ Norman. He looked like the sort of man who could talk to the
Captain.

Then there was a program about saving whales. They thought it was a good
idea.

Then you could win lots of money if you could put up with the game
show’s host and not, for example, choke him with a cuddly toy and run
away.

There was the news. The walking desert again, and pictures of bombs
being dropped down enemy chimneys with pinpoint precision. And sports.

And then…

All right. Let’s see.

He switched on.

Yes. Space. And more space.

No ScreeWee anywhere.

Hang on, he thought. They’re all in the big fleet, aren’t they?
Following me. They followed me out of—out of—out of game space. You must
be able to get there from here, if you keep going long enough. In the
right direction, too.

Which way did I go?

Can I catch up to myself?

Can anyone else catch up to me?

He watched the screen for a while. It was even more boring than the quiz
show.

Sooner or later he’d have to go to sleep. He’d thought hard about this,
while Alabama Smith was being chased by bad guys through a native
marketplace….

…Johnny had a theory about these marketplaces. Every spy film and every
adventure had a chase through the native marketplace, with lots of
humorous rickshaws crashing into stalls and tables being knocked over
and chickens squawking, and the theory was: It was the same marketplace
every time. It always looked the same. There was probably a stallholder
somewhere who was getting very fed up with it….

Anyway…

He’d take his Polaroid camera.

He went to bed early with the camera strap wound around his wrist.
Cameras didn’t dream.

 

 

The ship smelled human.

There were no alarms, no hissing noises.

I’m back, thought Johnny.

And there was the ScreeWee fleet, spread out across the sky behind him.

And the camera, with its strap wrapped around his arm. He untangled it
quickly and took a photo of the fleet. It whirred out of the machine
after a few seconds. He held it under his armpit for a moment, and it
gradually faded up. Yep. The fleet. If he could get it back, he’d have
proof…

There was a red light flashing beside the screen on the console. Someone
wanted to talk to him. He flicked the switch.

“We saw your ship explode,” came the voice of the Captain. The screen
crackled for a moment and then showed her face. It looked concerned.
“And then it…returned again. You are alive?”

“Yes,” said Johnny, and then added, “I think so.”

“Excuse me. I must ask. What happens to you?”

“What?”

“When you…go.”

Johnny thought: What do I tell her? I stay awake in school. I stay in my
room a lot. I hang out with Wobbler and the others. We hang around in
the mall, or in the park, or in one another’s houses, although not my
house at the moment because of Trying Times, and say things like “I’m
totally splanked” even though we’re not sure what they mean. Sometimes
we go to the movies. We live in Blackbury, most excellent city of cool.

I must have the most boring life in the entire universe. I expect
there’s blobs living under rocks on Neptune that have a more interesting
life than me….

“It’d be too hard to explain,” he said. “I—”

There was a ping from the radar.

“I have to go,” he said, feeling a bit relieved. Facing someone else in
mortal combat was better than trying to tell a giant newt about Trying
Times.

There was a ship coming in fast. It didn’t seem to notice him. Its
screen must be full of ScreeWee ships.

It was in the middle of his targeting grid. Around him, the starship
hummed. He could feel the power under his thumb. Press the button and a
million volts or amps or something of white-hot laser power would
crackle out and—

His thumb trembled.

It didn’t seem to want to move.

But no one dies! he told himself. There’s just someone somewhere sitting
in their room in front of a computer! That’s what it looks like to them!
It’s all just something on a screen! No one really dies!

I can fire right into his retrotubes with pinpoint precision!

No one really dies!

The ship roared past him and onward, toward the fleet.

On the radar screen he saw two white dots, which meant that it had fired
a couple of missiles. They streaked toward one of the smaller ScreeWee
ships, with the attacker close behind them, firing as he went.

The ScreeWee burst into flame. Johnny knew you shouldn’t be able to hear
sound in space, but he did hear it—a long, low rumble, washing across
the stars.

The human ship turned in a long curve and came back for another run.

The Captain’s face appeared on the screen.

“We have surrendered! This must not be allowed!”

“I’m sorry, I—”

“You must stop this now!”

Johnny let his own ship accelerate while he tried to adjust the
microphone.

“Game player! Game player! Stop now! Stop now or—”

Or what, he thought—or I’ll shout “stop” again?

He raised his thumb over the Fire button, took aim at the intruder—

“Please! I mean it!”

It was plunging on toward another ship, taking no notice of him.

“All right, then—”

Blinding blue light flashed across his vision. He shut his eyes and
still the light was there, purple in the darkness. When he opened them
again, the ship ahead of him was just an expanding cloud of glittering
dust.

He turned in his seat. The Captain’s ship was right behind him. He could
see its guns glowing.

They never did this in the game. They had much more firepower than you,
but they used it stupidly. It had to be like that. You could only win
against hundreds of alien ships if they had the same grasp of gunnery
techniques as the common cucumber.

This time, every gun had fired at exactly the same time.

The Captain’s face appeared on the screen.

“I am sorry.”

“What? What happened?”

“It will not happen again, I promise you.”

“What happened?”

There was silence. The Captain appeared to be looking at something
beyond the camera range.

“There was an unauthorized firing,” she said. “Those responsible will be
dealt with.”

“I was going after that ship,” said Johnny uncertainly.

“Yes. It is to be hoped that another time you can do so before one of my
ships is destroyed.”

“I’m sorry. I—I didn’t want to fire. It’s not easy, shooting another
ship.”

“How strange that a human should say that. Clearly the Space Invaders
shot themselves?”

“What do you mean?”

“Were they doing you any harm?”

“Look, you’ve got the wrong idea,” said Johnny. “We’re not really like
that!”

“Excuse me. Things appear differently from where I sit.”

It would have been better if she had shouted, but she didn’t. Johnny
could have dealt with it if she had been angry. Instead, she just
sounded tired and sad. It was the same tone of voice in which she’d
spoken about the Space Invaders wreckage.

But he found he was quite angry too.

She couldn’t be talking about him.

He picked spiders out of the bath, even if they’d got soapy and didn’t
have much of a chance. Yet she’d looked at him as if he was Genghis the
Hun or someone…after blowing a ship into bits.

“I didn’t ask for this, you know! I was just playing a game! I’ve got
problems of my own! I ought to be getting a good night’s sleep! That’s
very important at my age! Why me?”

“Why not?”

“Well, I don’t see why I should have to be told how nasty we are! You
shoot at us as well!”

“Self-defense.”

“No! Often you shoot first!”

“With humans, we have often found it essential to get our self-defense
in as soon as possible.”

“Well, I don’t like it! Find someone else!”

He switched off the screen and turned his ship away from the fleet. He
half expected the Captain to send some fighters after him, but she did
not. She didn’t do anything.

Soon the fleet was merely a large collection of yellow dots on the radar
screen.

Hah! Well!

They could find their own way home. It wasn’t as if they needed him
anymore. The game was ruined. Who was going to spend hours looking at
stars? They’d have to manage without him.

Serve them right. He was doing things for them, and they were only
newts.

Occasionally a star went past. You didn’t get stars going past in real
space. But they had to put them in computer games so that people didn’t
think they’d got something like Wobbler’s Journey to Alpha Centauri.

Interesting point. Where was he going?

The radar screen went bing.

There were ships heading toward him. The dots were green. That meant
“friendly.” But the missiles streaking ahead of them didn’t look
friendly at all.

Hang on, hang on—what color was he on their radar?

That was important. Friendly ships were green and enemy ships were
yellow. He was a starship. A human starship.

But on the other hand, he’d been on the same side as the ScreeWee, so he
might show up—

He grabbed the microphone and got as far as “Um, I—” before the rest of
the sentence was spread out, very thin, very small, against the stars.

 

 

He woke up.

It was 6:3[].

His throat felt cold.

He wondered why people made such a fuss about dreams. Dream Boat. Dream
River. Dream a Little Dream. But when you got right down to it, dreams
were often horrible, and they felt real. Dreams always started out well
and then they went wrong, no matter what you did. You couldn’t trust
dreams.

And he’d left the alarm set, even though this was Sunday and there was
nothing to do on a Sunday. No one else would be up for hours. It’d be a
couple of hours even before Bigmac’s brother delivered the paper, or at
least delivered the wrong paper. And he was all stiff from sitting at
the computer, which wasn’t switched on.

Maybe tonight he’d put some stuff on the floor to wake him up.

He went back to bed and switched the blanket on.

He stared at the ceiling for a while. There was still a model space
shuttle up there. But one of the two bits of string had come away from
the thumbtack, so it hung down in a permanent nosedive.

There was something in the bed. He fumbled under the covers and pulled
out his camera.

Which meant…

Some more fumbling found a rectangle of shiny paper.

He looked at it.

Well, yes. Huh. What’d he expect?

He got up again and turned the computer on, then lay in bed so that he
could watch the screen. Still more fake stars drifted past.

Maybe other people were doing this too. All over the country. All over
the world, maybe. Maybe not every computer showed the same piece of game
space, so some people were closer to the fleet than others. Or maybe
some people were just persistent, like Wobbler, and wouldn’t be beaten.

You saw people like that in J&J Software sometimes. They’d take a shot
at whatever new game old Patel had put on the machine, get blown to bits
or eaten or whatever, which was what happened to you on your first time,
and then you couldn’t get rid of them with a crowbar. You learned a bit
more, and then you died. That’s how games worked. People got worked up.
They had to beat some game, in the same way that Wobbler would spend
weeks trying to beat a program. Some people took it personally when they
were blown to bits.

So the ships he’d seen, then, were the ones that wouldn’t give up.

But the Captain hadn’t been at all grateful to him! It wasn’t fair,
making him feel like some kind of monster. As if he’d like shooting
anyone in cold blood! They’d just totally destroyed another ship. OK, it
was attacking them after they had surrendered, but after all it was a
only a game….

Except, of course, it wasn’t game to the ScreeWee.

And they’d surrendered.

That didn’t make them his responsibility, did it? Not the whole time? It
had been OK for a little while, but he was getting tired of it.

He padded downstairs in the darkened house and pulled the encyclopedia
off its shelf under the video player. It had been bought last year from
a man at the door, who’d persuaded Johnny’s father that it was a good
encyclopedia because it had a lot of color pictures in it. It did have a
lot of color pictures in it. You could grow up knowing what everything
looked like, if you didn’t mind not knowing much about what it was.

After ten minutes with the index he got as far as prisoners of war, and
eventually to the Geneva Convention. It wasn’t something you could
illustrate with big colored pictures, so there wasn’t much about it, but
what there was he read with interest.

It was amazing.

He’d always thought that prisoners were, well, prisoners—you hadn’t
actually killed them, so they ought to think themselves lucky. But it
turned out that you had to give them the same food as your own soldiers,
and look after them and generally keep them safe. Even if they’d just
bombed a whole city, you had to help them out of their crashed plane,
give them medicine, and treat them properly.

Johnny stared at the page. It was weird. The people who’d written the
encyclopedia—it said inside the cover that they were Universal Wonder
Knowledge Data Printing, Inc., of Power Cable, Nebraska—had shoved in
all these pictures of parrots and stuff because they were the Natural
Wonders of the World, when what was really strange was that human beings
had come up with an idea like this. It was like finding a tiny bit of
the Middle Ages in the middle of all the missiles and things.

Johnny knew about the Middle Ages because of doing his essay on “What it
felt like to be a peasant in the Middle Ages.” When a knight fell off
his horse in battle, the other side weren’t allowed to open him up with
a can opener and torture him, but had to look after him and send him
back home after a while, although they were allowed to charge for the
service.

On the whole, the ScreeWee were letting him off lightly. According to
the Geneva Convention, he ought to be feeding all of them as well.

He put the book back and turned the television on.

That was odd. Someone was complaining that the enemy were putting
prisoners of war in buildings that might be bombed, so that they could
be bombed by their own side. That was a barbaric thing, said the man.
Everyone else in the studio agreed.

So did Johnny, in a way. But he wondered how he would explain something
like this to the Captain. Everything made sense a bit at a time. It was
just when you tried to think of it all at once that it came out wrong.

There was too much war on television now. He felt it was time to start
showing something else.

He went out into the kitchen and made himself some toast, and then tried
to scrape the burned bits off quietly so as not to wake people up. He
took the toast and the encyclopedia upstairs and got back into bed.

To pass the time, he read some more about Switzerland, which was where
Geneva was. Every man in the country had to do army training and keep a
gun at home, it said. But Switzerland never fought anyone. Perhaps that
made sense somewhere. And what the country used to be known for was
designing intricate and ingenious mechanical masterpieces that made a
little wooden bird come out and go cuckoo.

After a while he dozed off and didn’t dream at all.

On the screen the fake stars drifted by. After an hour or so a yellow
dot appeared in the very center. After another hour it grew slightly
bigger, enough to be seen as a cluster of smaller yellow dots.

Then Johnny’s mother, who had come to see where he was, tucked him in
and switched it off.


If Not You, Who Else?

 

There was a constant smell of smoke and burned plastic in the ship now,
the Captain noticed. The air conditioners couldn’t get rid of it
anymore. Some of the smoke and burned plastic was the air conditioners.

She could feel the eyes of her officers on her. She didn’t know how many
of them she could count on. She got the feeling that she wasn’t very
popular.

She looked up into the eyes of the Gunnery Officer.

“You disobeyed my orders,” she repeated.

The Gunnery Officer looked around the control room with an air of
injured innocence.

“But we were being attacked,” he said. “They fired the first shots.”

“I said that we would not fire,” said the Captain, trying to ignore the
background murmur of agreement. “I gave my word to the Chosen One. He
was about to fire.”

“But he did not,” said the Gunnery Officer. “He merely watched.”

“He was about to fire.”

“About is too late. The tanker Kreewhea is destroyed. Along with half
our campaign provisions, I should add…Captain,” said the Gunnery
Officer.

“Nevertheless, an order was directly disobeyed.”

“I cannot believe this! Why can’t we fight!”

The Captain pointed out of the window. The fleet was passing several
more ships of the ancient Space Invader race.

“They fought,” she said. “Endlessly. And look at them now. And they were
only the first. Remember what happened to the Vortiroids? And the
Meggazzoids? And the Glaxoticon? Do you want to be like them?”

“Hah. They were primitive. Very low resolution.”

“But there were many of them. And they still died.”

“If we are going to die, I for one would rather die fighting,” said the
Gunnery Officer. This time the murmur was a lot louder.

“You would still be dead,” said the Captain.

She thought: There’ll be a mutiny if I shoot him or imprison him. I
can’t fine him because none of us have been paid. I can’t confine him to
his quarters because…she hated to think this…we might need him, at the
end.

“You are severely reprimanded,” she said.

The Gunnery Officer smirked.

“It will go on your record,” the Captain added.

“Since we will not escape alive—” the Gunnery Officer began.

“That is my responsibility,” said the Captain. “You are dismissed.”

The Gunnery Officer glared at her.

“When we get home—”

“Oh?” said the Captain. “Now you think we will get home?”

 

 

By early evening Johnny’s temperature was a hundred and two, and he was
suffering from what his mother called Sunday-night flu. He was lying in
the lovely warm glow that comes from knowing that, whatever happens,
there’ll be no school tomorrow.

The backs of his eyeballs felt itchy. The insides of his elbows felt
hot.

It was what came of spending all his time in front of a computer, he’d
been told, instead of in the healthy fresh air. He couldn’t quite see
this, even in his itchy-eyeball state. Surely the fresh air would have
been worse? But in his experience being ill always came of whatever
you’d been doing. Parents would probably manage to say it came of taking
vitamins and wrapping up nice and warm. He’d probably get an appointment
down at the health center next Friday, since they always liked you to be
good and ill by the time you came, so that the doctors could be sure of
what you’d got.

He could hear the TV downstairs. He spent twenty minutes wondering
whether to get out of bed to switch on his old one, but when he moved
there were purple blurs in front of his eyes and a goioioing hum in his
ears.

He must have managed it, though, because next time he looked, it was on,
and the colors were much better than usual. There were the
newscasters—the black one and the one who looked like his glasses fitted
under his skin instead of over the top—and there was the studio, just
like normal.

Except that it had the words “ScreeWee War” in the corner, where there
were usually words like “Budget Shock” or “Euro Summit.” He couldn’t
hear what people were saying, but the screen switched to a map of space.
It was black. That was the point of space. It was just infinity, huge
and black with one dot in it that was everything else.

There was one stubby red arrow in the middle of the blackness. Several
dozen blue ones were heading toward it from the edge of the map. In one
corner of the map was a photo of a man talking into a phone.

Hang on, thought Johnny. I’m almost certain there wasn’t a BBC reporter
with the ScreeWees. They’d have said. Probably there isn’t even a CNN
one.

He still wasn’t getting any sound, but he didn’t really need any. It was
obvious that humans were closing in on the fleet.

The scene changed. Now it showed a tent somewhere, and there was the
huge man standing in front of another copy of the map.

This time the sound came up. He was saying: “…that Johnny? He’s no
fighter. He’s no politician. He goes home when the going gets tough. He
runs out on his obligations. But apart from that, hey, he’s a real nice
kid….”

“That’s not true!” Johnny shouted.

“It isn’t?” said a voice behind him.

He didn’t look around immediately. By the sound of it, the voice had
come from his chair. And that was much more impossible than the ScreeWee
being on television. No one could sit in that chair. It was full of old
T-shirts and books and supper plates and junk. There was a deep sock
layer and possibly the Lost Strawberry Yogurt. No one could sit down
there without special equipment.

The Captain was, though. She seemed quite at home.

He’d only ever seen her face on the screen. Now he could see that she
was about six feet long, but quite thin—more like a fat snake with legs
than an alligator or a newt. She had two thick, heavy pairs of legs
about halfway down, and two pairs of thinner ones at the top, on a set
of very complicated shoulders. Most of her was covered in a brown
overall; the bits that stuck out—her head, all eight hands or feet, and
most of her tail—were a yellow-bronze, and covered in very small scales.

“If you parked out in the street, Mrs. Cannock opposite will be really
mad,” Johnny heard himself say. “She carries on about my dad leaving his
car parked out in the street and it’s not even a thousand yards long. So
this is a hallucination, isn’t it?”

“Of course it is,” said the Captain. “I’m not sure that real space and
game space are connected, except in your head.”

“I saw this film once where spaceships could go anywhere in the universe
through wormholes in space,” said Johnny. “That means I’ve got a
wormhole in my head?”

The Captain shrugged, which was a very interesting sight in a being with
four arms.

“Watch this,” she said. “This is very impressive. I expect this will be
shown a lot.”

She pointed at the screen.

It showed stars, and a dot in the distance. It got bigger very quickly.

“I think I know that,” said Johnny. “It’s one of your ships. The sort
you get on level seven, isn’t it?”

“The type, I think, will not matter for long,” said the Captain quietly.

The ship was heading away from the camera. Its rocket exhausts got
larger and larger. The camera seemed to be mounted on a…

“Missile?” said Johnny weakly.

The screen went blank.

Johnny thought of the dead Space Invader armada, turning over and over
in the frosty emptiness between the game stars.

“I don’t want to know about it,” said Johnny. “I don’t want you to tell
me how many ScreeWee there were on board. I don’t want you to tell me
what happ—”

“No,” said the Captain, “I expect you don’t.”

“It’s not my fault! I can’t help what people are like!”

“Of course not.”

The Captain had a nasty way of talking in a reasonable voice.

“We are under attack,” she said. “Humans are attacking us. Even though
we have surrendered.”

“Yes, but you only surrendered to me,” said Johnny. “I’m just me. It’s
not like surrendering to a government or something. I’m not important.”

“On the contrary,” said the ScreeWee, “you’re the savior of
civilization. You’re all that stands between your world and certain
oblivion. You are the last hope.”

“But that’s not…real. That’s just what it says at the start of the
game!”

“And you did not believe it?”

“Look, it always says something like that!”

“Only you can save mankind?” said the Captain.

“Yes, but it’s not really true!”

“If not you, then who else?”

“Look,” said Johnny, “I have saved mankind. In the game, anyway. There
aren’t any ScreeWee attacking anymore. People have to play it for hours
to find any.”

The Captain smiled. The shrug had been impressive. But the Captain’s
mouth was 20 inches long.

“You humans are strange,” she said. “You are warlike. But you make
rules! Rules of war!”

“Um. I think we don’t always obey all those rules,” said Johnny.

Another four-armed shrug.

“Does that matter? Even to have made such rules…You think all of life is
a game.”

The Captain pulled a small piece of silvery paper out of a pocket of her
overall.

“Your attackers have left us too short of food. So, by your rules,” she
said, “I must ask for the following: fifteen tons of pressed wheat
extractions treated with sucrose; ten thousand quarts of cold bovine
lactation; twenty-five tons of the baked wheat extraction containing
grilled bovine flesh and trace ingredients, along with chopped and fried
tubers and fried and corn-extract-coated rings of vegetables of the
allium family; one ton of crushed mustard seeds mixed with water and
permitted additives; three tons of exploded corn kernels coated with
lactic derivation; ten thousand quarts of colored water containing
sucrose and trace elements; fifteen tons of prepared and fermented wheat
extract in vegetable juice; one thousand tons of soured lactic acid
flavored with fruit extract. Daily. Thank you.”

“What?”

“The food of your fighting men,” explained the Captain.

“Doesn’t sound like food.”

“You are right,” said the Captain. “It is disgustingly lacking in fresh
vegetables and dangerously high in carbohydrates and saturated fats.
However, it appears that this is what you eat.”

“Me? I don’t even know what that stuff is! What are pressed wheat
extractions treated with sucrose?”

“It said ‘Snappiflakes’ on the package,” said the Captain.

“Soured lactic acid?”

“You had a banana yogurt.”

Johnny’s lips moved as he tried to work this out.

“The grilled bovine flesh and all that stuff?”

“A hamburger and fries with fried onion rings.”

Johnny tried to sit up.

“Are you saying that I’ve got to go down to the shops and get takeout
Jumboburgers for an entire alien space-fleet?”

“Not exactly.”

“I should think not—”

“My Chief Engineer wants a Bucket of Chicken Lumps.”

“What do ScreeWee usually eat?”

“Normally we eat a kind of waterweed. It contains a perfect balance of
vitamins, minerals, and trace elements to ensure a healthy growth of
scale and crest.”

“Then why—”

“But, as you would put it, it tastes like poo.”

“Oh.”

The Captain stood up. It was a beautiful movement. The ScreeWee body had
no angles in it, apart from the elbows and knees; she seemed to be able
to bend wherever she wanted.

“And now I must return,” she said. “I hope your attack of minor germs
will shortly be over. I could only wish that my attack of human beings
was as easily cured.”

“Why aren’t you fighting back?” said Johnny. “I know you can.”

“No. You are wrong. We have surrendered.”

“Yes, but—”

“We will not fire on human ships. Sooner or later, it has to stop. We
will run instead. Someone gave us safe-conduct.”

The worst bit was that she didn’t raise her voice, or accuse him of
anything. She just made statements. Big, horrible statements.

“All right,” said Johnny, in a dull voice, “but I know it’s not real.
I’ve got the flu. You get mild hallucinations when you get the flu.
Everyone knows that. I remember I was ill once and all the floppy
bunnies on the wallpaper started dancing about. This is like that. You
can’t really know about this stuff. You’re just in my head.”

“What difference does that make?” said the Captain. She stepped out
through the wall, and then poked her head back into the room.

“Remember,” she said, “only you can save mankind.”

“And I said I already—”

“ScreeWee is only the human name for us,” said the Captain. “Have you
ever wondered what the ScreeWee word for ScreeWee is?”

 

 

He must have slept, but he didn’t dream. He woke up in the middle of the
afternoon.

A huge ball of incandescent nuclear fire, heated to millions of degrees,
was shining brightly in the sky.

The house was empty. His mother had left him a breakfast tray, which was
to say that she’d put together a new Snappiflakes box, a spoon, a bowl
and a note saying “Milk in fridge.” She’d also put her office phone
number on the bottom of the note. He knew what it was anyway, but
sometimes she used the phone number like other people would use a
Band-Aid.

He opened the box and fished around inside. The alien was in a hygienic
little paper bag. It was yellow and in fact did look a bit like the
Captain, if you almost shut your eyes.

He wandered aimlessly through the rooms. There was never anything any
good on television in the middle of the day. It was all women talking to
one another on sofas. He sneaked a look out into the street, just in
case there were half-mile-long rocket-exhaust burns. And then he went
back upstairs and sat and stared at the silent computer.

OK.

So…you switch on. And there’s the game. Somehow it felt worse thinking
about playing it by just sitting in front of it now.

On the other hand, it was daytime, so most people would be at school or
at least keeping a low profile somewhere. Johnny wasn’t quite certain
about game time and real time, but maybe the attacks stopped when people
had to go to school? But no, there were probably people playing it in
America or Australia or somewhere.

Besides, when you died in your sleep, you woke up, so what happened now
if you died while you were awake?

But the ScreeWee were getting slaughtered out there. Or in there. Or in
here.

The Captain was stupid not to fire back.

His hand switched on the computer without his mind really being aware of
it.

The game logo appeared. The music started up. The same old message
scrolled up the screen. He knew it by heart. Savior of Civilization.
Certain Oblivion.

Only You Can Save Mankind.

If Not You, Who Else?

He blinked. The message had scrolled off the top of the screen. He
couldn’t have imagined that extra last line…could he?

And then the same old stars.

He didn’t touch the keyboard or the joystick. He wasn’t certain what
direction he should be going in. On the whole, straight ahead seemed
best. For hours.

He glanced at the clock. It was just past four o’clock. People would be
home from school now. They’d be watching Cobbers and She’ll Be Apples
and Moonee Ponds. Bigmac would be watching with his mouth open at his
brother’s. Wobbler would be watching while trying to rob some other poor
computer games’ writer of his just rewards. Yo-less probably wouldn’t be
paying much attention, exactly; it’d just be on while he did his
homework. Yo-less always did his homework when he got home from school
and didn’t pay attention to anything else until it had been finished to
his satisfaction. But everyone watched Cobbers.

Except Johnny, today.

He felt vaguely proud of that. The television was off. He had other
things to do.

Somewhere in the last ten minutes he’d made a decision. He wasn’t sure
exactly what it was, but he’d made it. So he had to see it through.
Whatever it was.

He went to the bathroom and found the thermometer. It was an electronic
one that his mother had bought from a catalogue, and it also told the
time. Everything in the catalogue had a digital clock built in. Even the
golf umbrella that doubled as a Handy Picnic Table. Even the thing for
getting fluff out of socks.

“Away with Not Being Able to Know What the Time Is All the Time Blues,”
said Johnny vaguely, and stuck the thermometer in his mouth for the
required twenty seconds.

His temperature was 60.87°.

No wonder he felt cold.

He went back to bed with the thermometer still in his mouth and looked
at the screen again.

Still just stars.

The rest of them would probably be down at the mall now, unless Yo-less
was trying for an A+ with his homework. Hanging out. Waiting for another
day to end.

He squinted at the thermometer. It read 60.93°.

Still nothing but stars on the screen…


Chicken Lumps in Space

 

He woke up. The familiar smell of the starship tickled his nose. He cast
his eyes over the control panel. He was getting a bit more familiar with
it now.

Right. So he was back in real life again. When he got back to…when he
got back to…He’d have to have a word with the medics about this odd
recurring dream that he was a boy in—

No! he thought. I’m me! Not a pilot in a computer game! If I start
thinking like that, then I’ll really die! Got to take charge!

Then he noticed the other ships on the screen. He was still a long way
from the fleet, of course. But there were three other ships spread out
neatly behind him, in convoy. They were bigger and fatter than his, and
insofar as it was possible to do this in space, they seemed to wallow
rather than fly.

He hit the Communications button. A plump face appeared on the screen.

“Wobbler?”

“Johnny?”

“What are you doing in my head?”

The on-screen Wobbler looked around.

“Well, according to this little panel riveted on the control thingy, I’m
flying a Class Three Light Tanker. Wow! Is it normally like this inside
your head?”

“I’m not sure,” said Johnny. By the main communication screen was
another switch saying “Conference Facility.” He had a feeling he knew
what it did.

Sure enough, when he pressed it, Wobbler’s face drifted to the top
left-hand corner of the screen. Yo-less’s face appeared in the opposite
corner, with Johnny’s own head above it. The other corner stayed blank.

Johnny tapped a button.

“Bigmac?” he said. “Yo-less?”

Bigmac’s face appeared in the blank. He appeared to be wiping his mouth.

“Checking the cargo?” said Johnny sarcastically.

“It’s full of hamburgers!” said Bigmac, in a voice like a good monk
who’s just arrived in heaven and found that all the sins of the flesh
are allowed. “Boxes and boxes of hamburgers! I mean millions! With
fries. And one Bucket of Chicken Lumps, it says here.”

“It says on this clipboard,” said Yo-less, “that I’m flying a lot of
Prepared Corn and Wheat Products. Shall I go and see what they are?”

“OK,” said Johnny. “Then that means you’re driving the milk tanker,
Wobbler.”

“Oh, yes. That’s right. Bigmac gets burgers, Wobbler gets boring milk,”
moaned Wobbler.

Yo-less’s face reappeared.

“Back there it’s breakfast cereals, mainly,” he said. “In
Giant-Jumbo-Mega-Civilization-Sized boxes.”

“Then Bigmac’d better bring his ship between you and Wobbler,” said
Johnny briskly. “We can’t risk a collision.”

“Snap, crackle, fababababBOOM!” said Bigmac.

“Will we remember this when we wake up?” said Wobbler.

“How can we?” said Yo-less. “We’re not dreaming.”

“OK. OK. Um. So will we remember this when he wakes up?”

“I don’t think so. I think we’re only here as projections from his own
subconscious mind,” said Yo-less. “He’s just dreaming us.”

“You mean we’re not real?” said Bigmac.

“I’m not sure if I’m real,” said Johnny.

“It feels real,” said Wobbler. “Smells real, too.”

“Tastes real,” said Bigmac.

“Looks real,” said Yo-less. “But he’s only imagining we’re here. It’s
not really us. Just the us that’s inside his head.”

Don’t ask me, thought Johnny. You were always best at this stuff.

“And I’ve just worked out, right,” said Yo-less, “that if we send in the
box tops from every single pack back there, we can get six thousand sets
of saucepans, OK? And twenty thousand books of football stickers and
fifty-seven thousand chances to win a Stylish Five-Door Ford Taurus.”

 

 

The four ships lumbered on toward the distant fleet. Johnny’s starship
could easily outdistance the tankers, so he flew in wide circles around
them, watching the radar screen.

There was an occasional zip and sizzle from Wobbler’s tanker. He was
trying to take its computer apart, just in case there were any design
innovations Johnny might remember when he woke up.

Ships appeared on the screen. There was the big dot of the fleet and,
around the edges of the screen, the green dots of the game players.

A thought occurred to him.

“Yo-less?”

“Yeah?”

“Have those things got any guns?”

“Er…what do they look like?”

“There’s probably a red button on the joystick.”

“Not got one on mine.”

“What about you, Wobbler? Bigmac?”

“Nope.”

“Which one’s the joystick?” said Bigmac.

“It’s the thing you’re steering with.”

“Yeah, wipe the mustard off and have a look,” said Yo-less.

“Nothing on it,” said Bigmac.

Unarmed, thought Johnny. And slow. One hit with a missile and Wobbler is
sitting inside the biggest cheese in the universe. What happens to
people in my dream?

Why does it always go wrong?

“I’ll just go on ahead,” he said, and pressed the Fast button.

There were three players attacking the ScreeWee fleet. It soon became
two; Johnny had one in his sights all the way in, curving away through
the smoke ring of the explosion and heading for the next attacker so
fast that he was only just behind his own missile.

It was going after the Captain’s ship, and the player wasn’t paying
attention to his radar. Another explosion, already behind Johnny as he
looked for the third player.

Johnny realized he wasn’t thinking about it. His eyes and hands were
doing all the work. He was just watching from inside.

The third player had spotted the tankers. It saw him, turned, and
actually managed to get some shots away.

Oh, no. Johnny’s mind whirred like a machine, judging speed and
distance…

He felt the ship buck under him, but he held it steady until the
crosshairs merged.

Then he pressed his thumb down until a beeping sound told him he hadn’t
got anything more to fire.

After a while the red mist cleared. He found thoughts slinking back into
his mind again. They moved slowly, uncertain of where they were, like
people drifting back into a bombed city, picking through rubble, trying
to find the old familiar shapes.

There was a metallic taste in his mouth. His elbow ached—he must have
banged it on something during the turn.

He thought: No wonder we make rules. The Captain thinks it’s strange,
but we don’t. We know what we’d be like if we didn’t have rules.

A light flashed by the communication screen. Someone wanted to talk to
him. He flicked a switch.

The face of the Captain appeared.

“Ah, Johnny. What an efficient technique.”

“Yes. But I had to—”

“Of course. And I see you have brought some friends.”

“You said you needed food.”

“Even more so now. That last attack was severe.”

“Aren’t you firing at all?”

“No. We have surrendered, I remind you. Besides, we must not stop. Some
of us at least will reach the Border.”

“Border?” said Johnny. “I thought you were going to a planet.”

“We must cross the Border first. Beyond the Border, we are safe. Even
you cannot follow us. If we fight, all of us die. If we run, some of us
live.”

“I don’t think humans can think like that,” said Johnny. He glanced out
of the cockpit. The tankers were getting nearer.

“You are mammals. Fast. Hot-blooded. We are amphibians. Cold-blooded.
Slow. Logical. Some of us will get across. We breed fast. To us, it
makes sense. To me, it makes sense.”

The Captain’s image moved to a corner of the screen. Wobbler, Bigmac,
and Yo-less appeared in the other three quarters.

“That was brilliant shooting,” said Bigmac. “When I’m in the army—”

“There’s a frog on my screen,” said Wobbler.

“It’s…she’s the Captain,” said Johnny.

“A woman in charge?” said Yo-less.

“No wonder the aliens always lose,” said Wobbler. “You should see the
side of my mum’s car.”

“Um. She can hear you, I think. Don’t use sexist language,” said Johnny.

The Captain smiled.

“I invite your comrades to unload their welcome cargoes,” she said.

They found out how to do it eventually. The whole of the middle of the
tankers came away as one unit. Small ScreeWee ships, not much more than
a seat and a pilot’s bubble and a motor, nudged them into the holds of
the biggest ships. Without them, the tankers were just a cockpit and
engine and a big empty network of girders.

Johnny watched the tank from Yo-less’s ship drift gently through the
hatch of the Captain’s ship.

“Er…if when you, you know…you’re pouring them out of the box,” he said,
“and you sort of find something plastic falls into your bowl…well, it’s
just a joke. It’s not on purpose.”

“Thank you.”

“If you save all the box tops, you could probably win a Ford Taurus,”
said Yo-less. There was a slight tremble in his voice as he tried to
sound like someone who talked to aliens every day. “You could get your
photo in Competitor’s Journal,” he added.

“That would be very useful. Some of the corridors in this ship are very
long.”

“Don’t be daft,” said Bigmac. “He’d—she’d never get spare parts.”

“Really? In that case we shall have to go for the six thousand sets of
saucepans,” said the Captain.

“How do we get back?” said Wobbler.

“How did you get here?”

Wobbler frowned.

“How did we get here?” he said. “One minute I was…was…and then here I
was. Here we were.”

“Come to that, where did all the milk and burgers come from?” said
Bigmac.

“It’s all right,” said Yo-less. “I told you. We’re not really here
anyway. We’re just anxiety projections. I read about it in a book.”

“That’s a relief, then,” said Wobbler. “That’s worth knowing when you’re
a billion miles out in space. Anyway…so how do we get back?”

“I don’t know,” said Johnny. “I generally do it by dying.”

“Is there some other way?” said Yo-less, after a long, thoughtful pause.

“I don’t think there is for me. This is game space. You have to die to
get out,” said Johnny. “I think you can probably just fly back. I’m not
definitely sure any harm can come to you. You’re not playing…in your
heads, I mean.”

“Well—” Wobbler began.

“But I’d go soon, if I was you,” said Johnny. “Before some more players
arrive.”

“We’d stay and help,” said Wobbler, “but there’s no guns on these
things, you see.”

He sounded worried.

“Yeah. Silly of me not to have dreamed of any,” said Johnny kindly.

“Yo-less might be right and we’re just stuff in your head,” said
Wobbler. “But even people in dreams don’t want to die, I expect.”

“Right.”

“You going to be in school tomorrow?”

“Might be.”

“Right. Well, then…chow.”

“See you.”

“You hang in there, right, Johnny?” said Yo-less anxiously.

“I’ll try to.”

“Yeah, give them aliens hell, my man!” said Bigmac, as the tankers
turned.

Johnny could hear them still talking as the three ships accelerated
away.

“That was a foe-par, Bigmac. Johnny’s on the aliens’ side!”

“What? You mean they’re on our side?”

“No, they’re on their side. And so is he.”

“Whose side are we on, then?”

“We’re on his side.”

“Oh. Right. Er. Yo-less?”

“What?”

“So who’s on our side?”

“Eh? He is, I suppose.”

“So is there anyone on the other side?”

The ships became dots on the radar, and then vanished off the edge of
the screen.

Where to, Johnny had no idea.

I may have wished them here, or dreamed them, or something. But I
mustn’t do it again. Maybe they’re not really here, but I don’t want to
see my friends die. I don’t want to see anybody die.

At least I’m on my side.

He scanned the sky. After a while the Captain said: “You are not
leaving?”

“Not yet.”

“Until you die, you mean.”

Johnny shrugged.

“It’s the only way out,” he said. “Fight until you die. That’s how all
games go. You just hope you can get a bit farther each time.”

There were still no more attackers on the screen. The fleet looked as if
it wasn’t moving, but it had built up quite a speed. Every second was
taking it farther from game space. Every second meant that fewer and
fewer players would have the patience or determination to go on looking
for it.

He helped himself to some of the horrible nourishing soup from its
spigot.

“Johnny?”

“Yes?”

“I believe I upset you some time ago by suggesting that humans are
bloodthirsty and dangerous.”

“Well. Yes. A bit.”

“In that case…I would like to say…I am grateful.”

“I don’t understand.”

“That you are on our side.”

“Yes, but I’m not bloodthirsty.”

“Then I think perhaps a little while ago someone else must have been
flying your ship?”

“No. It’s hard to explain it to you,” said Johnny. First of all, he’d
have to be able to explain it to himself.

“Shall I embark upon a less troubling topic of conversation?”

“You don’t have to,” said Johnny. “I mean, you’re in charge. You must
have things to do.”

“Oh, spaceships fly themselves,” said the Captain. “They keep going
until they hit things. There is little to do. Tend the wounded and so
on. I seldom have a chance to talk to humans. So…What is sexist?”

“What?”

“It was a word you used.”

“Oh, that. It just means you should treat people as people and, you
know…not just assume girls can’t do stuff. We got a talk about it at
school. There’s lots of stuff most girls can’t do, but you’ve got to
pretend they can, so that more of them will. That’s all of it, really.”

“Presumably there’s, uh, stuff boys can’t do?”

“Oh, yeah. But that’s just girls’ stuff,” said Johnny. “Anyway, some
girls go and become engineers and things, so they can do proper stuff if
they want.”

“Transcend the limitations of their sex. Outdo the other sex, even. Yes.
It is much the same with us. Some individuals show an awe-inspiring
desire to succeed, to make a career in a field not traditionally
considered to be appropriate to their gender.”

“You, you mean,” said Johnny.

“I was referring to the Gunnery Officer.”

“But he’s a man—I mean, a male.”

“Yes. Traditionally, ScreeWee warriors are female. They are more
inclined to fight. Our ancestors used to have to fight to protect their
breeding pond. The males do not do battle. But in his case—”

A speck appeared on the radar.

Johnny put down his cup and watched it carefully.

Normally, players headed straight for the fleet. This one didn’t. It
hovered right on the edge of the screen and stayed there, keeping pace
with the ScreeWee ships.

After a while, another dot appeared from the same direction, and kept on
coming.

This one at least looked like just another player.

There was a nasty equation at the back of Johnny’s mind. It concerned
missiles. There were the six missiles per level in Only You Can Save
Mankind. Once you’d fired them, that was it. So the longer he stayed
alive, the less he had to fight with. But all the attacking players
would have six missiles each. He’d only got four now. When they were
gone, it’d just be guns. One missile in the right place would blow him
up. Losing was kind of built in, in the circumstances.

The attacker came on. But Johnny kept finding his gaze creeping to the
dot at the edge of the screen. Somehow it had a watchful look, like a
shark trailing a leaky airbed.

He switched on the communicator.

“Attacking ship! Attacking ship! Stop now!”

They can’t speak, Johnny thought. They’re only a player—they’re not in
the game. They can’t speak and they can’t listen.

He found he’d automatically targeted a missile on the approaching dot.
But that couldn’t be the only way. Sooner or later you had to talk, even
if it was only because you’d run out of things to throw.

The attacker fired a missile. It streaked past Johnny and away, heading
on into empty space.

Not real, Johnny thought. You have to think they’re not real. Otherwise
you can’t do it.

“Attacking ship! This is your last chance! Look, I mean it!”

He pressed the button. The ship juddered slightly as a missile took off.
The attacker was moving fast. So was the missile. They met and became an
expanding red cloud. It drifted around Johnny’s ship like a smoke ring.

Someone, somewhere, was blinking at their screen and probably swearing.
He hoped.

The dot was still on the edge of the screen. It was irritating him, like
an itch in a place he couldn’t scratch. Because that wasn’t how you were
supposed to play. You spotted some aliens and you shot at them. That was
what the game was supposed to be about.

Lurking in the distance and just watching made him uneasy. It looked
like the kind of thing people would do if they were…well…

…taking it seriously.

 

 

The Captain sat in front of her desk, watching the big screen. She was
chewing. Anything was better than waterweed, even—she looked at the
box—even Sugar-Frosted Corn Crackles in cold bovine lactation. Sweet and
crunchy, but with odd hard bits in…

She inserted a claw into her mouth and poked around among her teeth
until she found the offending object.

She pulled it out and looked at it.

It was green, and had four arms. Most of them were holding some sort of
weapon.

She wondered again what these things were. The Chief Medical Officer had
suggested that they were, in fact, some sort of vermin that invaded food
sources. There was a theory among the crew that they were things to do
with religion. Offerings to food gods, perhaps?

She put it carefully on one side of her desk. In the right light, she
thought, it looked a bit like the Gunnery Officer.

Then she opened the little cage beside the bowl and let her birds out.

There had been things very like alligators among the ScreeWee’s distant
ancestors, and some habits had been handed down. The Captain opened her
mouth fully, which made her lower and upper jaws move apart in a way
that would make a human’s eyes water.

The birds hopped in and began to clean her teeth. One of them found a
small piece of plastic ray gun.

 

 

The watching ship was moving, still keeping at a great distance,
traveling around the fleet in a wide circle. It had watched one more
attacker come in; Johnny had got rid of this one with a missile and some
shots, although a flashing red light on the panel was suggesting that
something, somewhere, wasn’t working anymore. Probably those secondary
pumps again.

He found he was turning the ship all the time to keep the distant dot in
front of him.

“Johnny?”

It was the Captain.

“Yes? Are you watching it?”

“Yes. It is moving between us and the Border. It is in our direct line
of flight now.”

“You can’t sort of steer around it?”

“There are more than three hundred ships in the fleet. That may be
difficult.”

“It seems to be waiting for something. I’ll…I’ll risk going to have a
look.”

He let his ship overtake the fleet and run ahead of it, toward the
distant dot.

It made no attempt to get out of his way.

It was a starship just like his own. In fact, in a way…it was his
starship. After all, there was only one starship in the entire game, the
one You flew to Save Mankind. Everyone was flying the same one…in a way.

It hung against the stars, as lifeless as a Space Invader. Johnny moved
a bit closer, until he could see the cockpit and even the shape of a
head inside. It had a helmet on. Everyone did—it was on the cover of the
box. You wore a helmet in a starship. He didn’t know why. Maybe the
designers thought you were likely to fall off when you went around
corners.

He tried the communicator again.

“Hello? Can you hear me?”

There was nothing but the background hiss of the universe.

“I’m pretty sure you can. I’ve got a feeling about it.”

The tiny blob of the helmet turned toward him. You could no more see
through the smoked glass of the helmet than you could through a pair of
sunglasses from the outside, but he knew he was being stared at.

“What are you waiting for?” said Johnny. “Look, I know you can hear me,
I don’t want to have to—”

The other ship roared into life. It accelerated toward the oncoming
fleet on two lances of blue light.

Johnny swore under his breath and kicked his own engines into life.
There was no hope of overtaking the attacker. It had a head start, and a
starfighter’s top speed was a starfighter’s top speed.

It was just out of gun range. He raced along behind it.

Ahead, he could see some of the big capital ships of the fleet
maneuvering clumsily out of the way. They spread out slowly, trying to
avoid colliding with one another. Seen from the front, it was like
watching the petals of a flower opening.

The attacker roared for the middle of the fleet. Then it rolled gently
and fired six missiles, one after another. A moment later, two of the
small ScreeWee fighters exploded and one of the larger ships spun around
as it was hit.

The attacker was already heading for another fighter. Johnny had to
admit it—it was beautiful flying. He’d never realized before how badly
most players flew. They flew like people who lived on the ground—from
right to left and up and down, woodenly. Like someone moving something
on a screen, in fact.

But the attacker rolled and twisted like a swallow in flight. And every
turn brought another ScreeWee ship under its guns. Even if they had been
firing back, it wouldn’t have been hit, except by accident. It
pirouetted.

The Captain’s face appeared on the screen.

“You must stop this!”

“I’m trying! I’m trying! Don’t you think I’m trying!”

The attacker turned. Johnny hadn’t thought it was possible for a
starship to skid, but this one did. It paused just for a moment as its
jets slowed it down, and then it accelerated back the way it had come.

Right down his sights.

“Look, stop!” he shouted. He had a missile ready. Why even bother to
shout? Players couldn’t hear, they only saw the game on the screen—

“Who are you?”

It was a very clear voice, and very human. The Captain sounded as though
she’d learned the language out of a book, but this voice was one that
someone had really used since they were about one year old.

“You can hear me!”

“Get out of the way, stupid!”

The two pilots stared at each other across a distance that was getting
smaller very, very fast.

I’ve heard that before, Johnny thought. That voice. You can hear all the
punctuation….

They didn’t crash—exactly. There was a grinding noise as each starship
scraped the length of the other, ripping off fins, ripping open tanks,
and then spun drunkenly away.

The control panel in front of Johnny became a mass of red lights. There
were cracks racing across the cockpit.

“Idiot!” screamed the radio.

“It’s all right,” said Johnny urgently. “You just wake up—”

His ship exploded.


The Dark Tower

 

It was 61:41° by the thermometer. Time was different in game space.

No matter how often you died, you never got used to it. It wasn’t as if
you got better with pract—

She’d heard him. Inside the game.

He sat up.

The ScreeWee were inside the game because it was their world. Wobbler
and the rest hadn’t really been in it; he was pretty sure he’d just
dreamed them in because he needed someone to pilot the food tankers.

But he’d heard her in Patel’s. That ringing, sharp voice, which made it
very clear that its owner thought everyone in the whole world was
dim-witted and had to be talked to like a baby or a foreigner.

On the screen, empty space rolled onward.

He had to find her. Apart from anything else, no one who flew like that
should be allowed anywhere near the ScreeWee.

Wobbler’d probably know who she was.

He found the room moving around him when he stood up. He probably really
was ill, he thought. Well, not surprising. What with Trying Times and
stupid school and parents trying to be friends and now having to save an
entire alien race instead of getting proper sleep, it wasn’t surprising.

He made it to the hall and took the phone off its base and brought it
back upstairs. He’d just extended the antenna when it rang.

“Um, hello—Blackbury five-five-five
nine-eight-zero-who’s-that-speaking-please?”

“Is that you? This is me.”

“Oh. Hello, Wobbler.”

“You ill or something?”

“Flu. Look, Wobbler—”

“You seen the papers today?”

“No. Mum and Dad take them to work with them. Wobbler—”

“Thing in the papers about Gobi Software. Hang on…says ‘NO ENCOUNTERS OF
THE TWENTY-FIRST KIND.’ That’s the headline.”

Johnny hesitated.

“What does it say?” he asked, very cautiously.

“What does ‘inundated’ mean?”

“’S like ‘overwhelmed,’” said Johnny.

“Says that Gobi Software and computer game shops have been…inundated
with complaints about Only You Can Save Mankind. Because they made that
offer of five pounds if you shoot all the aliens, and it says people
aren’t finding any aliens. And Gobi Software is in trouble because of
the Trades Descriptions Act. And they keep on using the word hacker,”
said Wobbler in the sneering tones of one who knows what a hacker really
is and knows that most journalists don’t. “And there’s a quote from Al
Rampa, president of Gobi. He says they’re recalling all the games, and
if you send back the original disks they’ll send you a voucher for their
new game, Dodge City 1888. That got four stars in FAAzzzzAAAP!”

Recalling the games…

“Yes, but you haven’t got the original disks,” said Johnny. “You hardly
ever have any original disks.”

“No, but I know the guy whose brother bought it,” said Wobbler happily.
“So it was just a problem with the game, right? You weren’t crazy after
all.”

“I never said I was crazy,” said Johnny.

“No, but…well, you know,” said Wobbler. He sounded embarrassed.

“Wobbler?”

“Yes?”

“You know that girl who was in Patel’s?”

“Oh, her. What about her?”

“D’you know who she is?”

“She’s someone’s sister, I think.”

“Whose?”

“Goes to some kind of special school for the terminally clever. She’s
called Kylie or Krystal or one of those made-up names. What do you want
to know for?”

“Oh, nothing. Just because she complained about the game in Patel’s, I
suppose. Whose sister is she?”

“Some guy called…oh…Plonker. Yeah. Friend of Bigmac’s. You sure you’re
all right?”

“Yes. Fine. Cheers.”

“Cheers. You going to be in tomorrow?”

“’Spect so.”

“Cheers.”

“Cheers.”

 

 

Bigmac didn’t have a phone. Where Bigmac lived, people hardly even got
letters. Even muggers were frightened to go there. People talked about
the Joshua N’Clement housing block in the same way that they probably
once talked about the Black Hole of Calcutta or the Spanish
Inquisition’s reception area.

The tower loomed all alone, black against the sky, like someone’s last
tooth.

There wasn’t much else around the place. There was a row of boarded-up
shops, but you could see where the fire had been. And there was a pub
made out of neon lights and red brick; it was called The Jolly Farmer.

The tower had won an award in 1965, just before bits had started falling
off. It was always windy. Even on the calmest day, gales whistled icily
through the concrete corridors. The place was some kind of wind
reservation. If the Joshua N’Clement block had existed a few thousand
years ago, people would have come from all over the country to sacrifice
to the wind god.

Johnny’s father called it Rottweiler Heights. Johnny could hear them
barking as he walked up the stairs (the elevators had stopped working in
1966). Everyone in the tower seemed afraid, and mostly they seemed
afraid of one another.

Bigmac lived on the fourteenth floor, with his brother and his brother’s
girlfriend and a pit bull called Clint. Bigmac’s brother was reliably
believed to be in the job of moving VCRs around in an informal way.

Johnny knocked cautiously, hoping to be loud enough to be heard by the
people but quiet enough to be missed by Clint. No such luck. A wall of
sound erupted from behind the door.

After a while there was the clink of a chain and the door opened a few
inches. A suspicious eye appeared at about the height an eye should be,
while a few feet below there was a certain amount of confused activity
as Clint tried to get both eyes and his teeth into the same narrow
crack.

“Yeah?”

“Is Bigmac in?”

“Dunno.”

Johnny knew about this. There were only four rooms in the flat. Bigmac’s
family was huge and lived all over the town, and practically no member
of it knew where any other member was until they were quite sure who was
asking.

“It’s me, Johnny Maxwell. From school.”

Clint was trying to push a six-inch-wide head through a two-inch-wide
hole.

“Oh, yeah.” Johnny felt that he was being carefully surveyed. “He’s down
the pub. Yeah.”

“Oh, right,” said Johnny in what he hoped was a normal voice. “I mean,
yeah.”

Bigmac was thirteen. But The Jolly Farmer was reputed to serve anyone
who didn’t actually turn up on a tricycle.

His way home led back past the pub anyway. He agonized a bit about going
in. It was all right for Bigmac. Bigmac had been born looking seventeen.
But Bigmac turned out to be outside anyway, leaning against the hood of
a car. He had a couple of friends with him. They watched Johnny intently
as he approached, and the one who had been nonchalantly fiddling with
the car’s door handle stood up and glared.

Johnny tried to swagger a bit.

“Yeah, Johnny,” said Bigmac, in a vague kind of way.

He’s different here, Johnny thought. Older and harder.

The other youths relaxed a little. Bigmac knew Johnny. That made him
acceptable, for now.

“Don’t often see you up here,” said Bigmac. “You drinking now or what?”

Johnny got the feeling that asking for a Coke would definitely be bad
for his street credentials. He decided to ignore the question.

“I’m looking for Plonker,” he said. “Wobbler said you know him?”

“What d’you want him for?” said Bigmac.

On the wall in school, or down at the mall, Bigmac wouldn’t have even
asked. But there were different rules here. Like, in school Bigmac tried
to hide how good he was at numbers, and up here he had to hide his
ability to hold a normal conversation.

Johnny saw a way through.

“Actually I’m looking for his sister,” he said.

One of Bigmac’s friends sniggered.

Bigmac took Johnny’s arm and led him a little way off.

“What’d you come up here for?” he said. “You could’ve asked me
tomorrow.”

“It’s…important.”

“Bigmac! You coming or what?”

Bigmac glanced over his shoulder.

“Can’t,” he said. “Got to sort out something else.”

One of the kids said something to the other one, and they both laughed.
Then they got into the car. After a little while it started up, bumped
up onto the pavement and off again, and then accelerated into the night.
They heard the tires screech as it turned the corner on the wrong side
of the road.

Bigmac relaxed. Suddenly he was a lot less tough, and a bit shorter, and
more like the amiable not-quite-thicko Johnny had always known.

“Didn’t you want to go with them?” asked Johnny.

“You’re a nerd, aren’t you,” said Bigmac, in a friendly-enough voice.

“Wobbler says you have to say dweeb now, not nerd,” said Johnny.

“I usually say loser. Come on, let’s go,” said Bigmac. “’Cos there’ll
probably be some unhappy people around here pretty soon. ’S their own
fault for leaving a car here.”

“What?”

“Dweeb. You don’t know nothing about real life, you.”

“It’s just games,” said Johnny, half to himself. “All different sorts.
Bigmac?”

Somewhere away in the distance a car horn wailed and was suddenly cut
off. Bigmac stopped walking. The breeze blew his T-shirt against him, so
“Terminator” was superimposed on a chest that looked like a rake.

“What?” he said.

“Look, have you ever wondered what’s real and what isn’t?”

“Bloody stupid thing to wonder,” said Bigmac.

“Why?”

“Real’s real. Everything else isn’t.”

“What about…well, dreams?”

“Nah. They’re not real.”

“They’ve got to be something. Otherwise you couldn’t have them, right?”
said Johnny desperately.

“Yeah, but that’s not the same as really real.”

“Are people on television real?”

“Course!”

“Why’re we treating them as a game, then?”

“You mean…on the news—”

“Yes!”

“That’s different. You can’t have people going around doing what they
like.”

“But we—”

“Anyway, space games aren’t real,” said Bigmac. He kept looking down the
dark street.

Johnny relaxed a little.

“Are you real?”

“Dunno. Feel real. It’s all crap anyway.”

“What is?”

“Everything. So who cares? Come on, I’m going back home.”

They strolled past what had been, in 1965, an environmental green space
and was now a square of dog-poisoned earth where the shopping carts went
to die.

“Plonker’s a bit of a maniac,” said Bigmac. “Bit of a wild man. Bit of a
loony. Lives in a big posh house, though.”

“Where?”

“Oh, in Tyne Avenue or Crescent or somewhere,” said Bigmac.

A blue light lit his face for a moment as a police car flashed past the
end of the road, its siren dee-dahing into the distance.

Bigmac froze.

“What’s his real name?” said Johnny.

“Eh? Yeah. Garry, I think.”

Bigmac was staring at the end of the road. The blue light was still
visible. It had stopped about half a mile away; they could see it
reflected off a billboard.

“Just Garry?” said Johnny.

Bigmac’s face was wet in the light of the street-lamps. Johnny realized
that he was sweating.

“Might be Dunn,” said Bigmac. He shifted uneasily from one foot to the
other.

Another siren echoed around the night. An ambulance went past on the
main road, ghostly under its flashing light.

“Look, Bigmac—”

“Bugger off!”

Bigmac turned and ran, his Doc Martens crashing on the pavement. Johnny
watched him go. He thought of all the things he should have said. He
wasn’t stupid. Everyone knew what happened to cars around the dark
tower. What could he say now?

And his body thought: You don’t say anything. You do something. It
started running all by itself after his friend, taking his brain with
it.

Despite a bedroom full of weight-training equipment that would have been
of considerable interest if the police had ever bothered much about a
recent theft down at the Sports Center, Bigmac wasn’t in much of a
condition. He had been born out of condition. Johnny caught up to him on
the bend.

“I told you…to…buggeroff! Nothing…todo…withyou!” said Bigmac, as they
headed toward the distant lights.

“They crashed it, didn’t they.”

“Nozzer’s a good driver!”

“Yeah? Good at going fast?”

There was a crowd standing around at the traffic lights farther down the
road. As they ran, another ambulance overtook them and rocked to a halt.
The crowd parted. Johnny caught a glimpse of—well, not a car, but maybe
what a car would look like after trying to be in the same place as a
cement truck. He knew it was a cement truck, because one had climbed up
the pavement and lay on its side. Its load was fast becoming the biggest
brick in the world.

In the distance there was the scream of a fire engine, getting nearer.

He grabbed Bigmac’s arm, pulling him around.

“I don’t think you want to go any closer,” he said.

Bigmac shook himself free just as the police managed to lever the
crumpled door open.

Bigmac stared.

Then he turned, tottered over to a low garden wall by the roadside, and
was sick.

When Johnny reached him, his whole body was shaking with cold and
terror.

“Bugger you, I could have been in that, you—”

Bigmac was sick again, all down the front of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Johnny took his coat off and put it over the other boy’s shivering
shoulders.

“—they kept goin’ on at me, I told them, I said—”

“Yeah. Yeah, that’s right,” said Johnny, looking around. “Look, you just
sit here…there’s a phone—You just sit there, all right? You just—”

“Don’t go away!”

“What? Oh. Yes. Right. Come on then—”

 

 

Click!

“Hello, this—”

“Yo-less? It’s Johnny.”

“Yes?”

“Your mum in the hospital tonight?”

“No, she’s on days this week. Why?”

“Can you get her to bring her car down to Withe-ridge Road?”

“What’s up? You sound as if you’ve been—”

“Look, shut up! Get her to do it, right? Please! It’s Bigmac!”

“What’s up with him?”

“Yo-less! This is important! This is really important!”

“You know how she carries on when I—”

“Yo-less!”

“Oh, all right. Hey, is that a siren?”

“We’re in a phone booth. You’d better get her to bring a blanket or
something. And hurry up, it’s dead smelly in here.”

“That was a siren, wasn’t it?”

“Yes.”

He put the phone down.

Bigmac wasn’t being sick anymore. He hadn’t got anything to be sick
with. He was just leaning against the door, shaking.

“She’ll be along right away,” said Johnny as cheerfully as he could
manage. “She’s a nurse. She knows all about this stuff.”

Outside, one of the ambulances drove away. Firemen were all over the
wreck. Some of them were getting equipment off the engine.

Bigmac stared at the scene.

“They’re probably fine,” lied Johnny. “It’s amazing how people can—”

“Johnny?”

“What?”

“No one’s fine who looked like that,” said Bigmac in a flat voice.
“There was blood all over.”

“Well—”

“My brother’ll kill me when he finds out. He said if I have the cops
around again, he’ll throw me out of the window. He’ll kill me if he
finds out.”

“He won’t, then. You didn’t do anything. We were just hanging out and
you felt ill. That’s all.”

“He’ll kill me!”

“What for? No one knows anything except me, and I don’t know anything. I
promise.”

 

 

It was after eight when Johnny got home. He left his coat in the shed
until he could sneak it in and sponge it off, and said he’d been round
at Yo-less’s, which was true, and was a pretty good way of avoiding
questions, because his parents approved of Yo-less on racial grounds. To
object to him being round at Yo-less’s would be like objecting to
Yo-less. Yo-less was real handy.

Anyway, it wasn’t as if anyone had cooked any dinner. Mrs. Yo-less had
made him a hot chocolate when he was there, but he hadn’t accepted a
meal, because that suggested you didn’t have them all that often at home
and you didn’t do that. She’d put Bigmac to bed. Bigmac with his
skinhead haircut.

He microwaved himself something called a Pour-On Genuine Creole Lasagne,
which said it served four portions. It did if you were dwarfs.

The phone rang as he was carrying it upstairs. It was Wobbler.

“Yo-less just called me.”

“Right.”

“Why didn’t you get them to put Bigmac in an ambulance?”

“Who with?”

There was a moment of silence from Wobbler as he worked this out. Then
he said, “Yuck.”

“Right.”

“Anyway, people’d ask questions. Bigmac’s been in enough trouble as it
is, what with his brother and one thing and another.”

“Right.”

“Wow!”

“Got to go now, Wobbler. Got to eat my dinner before it congeals.”

He put the phone down on the tray and looked at it. There was something
else he was going to do. What was it? Something, anyway.

The lasagne looked real. It looked as though someone had already eaten
it once.

 

 

The Captain looked up.

Most of her officers were standing in front of her. Except for the
Gunnery Officer, who was looking smug, they all wore rather embarrassed
expressions.

“Yes?” said the Captain.

To her surprise, it wasn’t the Gunnery Officer who spoke. It was the
Navigation Officer, a small and inoffensive ScreeWee who suffered from
prematurely shedding scales.

“Um,” she said.

“Yes?” said the Captain again.

“Um. We—that is, all of us—” said the Navigation Officer, looking as if
she wished she was somewhere else, “—we feel that, uh, the present
course is, uh, an unwise one. With respect,” she added.

“In what way?” said the Captain. She could see the Gunnery Officer
grinning behind the little ScreeWee. No one could grin like a
ScreeWee—their mouths were built for it.

“We, uh—that is, all of us—we are still being attacked. And that last
attack was a terrible one.”

“The Chosen One stopped it, at the cost of his own life,” said the
Captain.

“Um. He will return,” said the Navigation Officer. “Um. Twenty of our
people will not.”

The Captain wasn’t really looking at her. She was staring at the Gunnery
Officer, whose grin was now wide enough to hold a set of billiard balls
and probably the cue too.

He’s been talking to them, she told herself. Everyone’s on edge, no one
can think straight, and he’s talking to them. I should have had him
shot. They wouldn’t have liked it, but I could probably have shouted
them down.

“So what is it you are suggesting?” she said.

“Um. We—that is, all of us,” said the little ScreeWee, with an imploring
glance at the Gunnery Officer, “we feel we should turn and—”

“Fight?” said the Captain. “Make a last stand?”

“Um. Yes. That’s right.”

“And that’s the feeling of all of you?”

The officers nodded, one after another.

“Um. Sorry, ma’am,” said the Navigation Officer.

“The others stood and fought,” said the Captain. “The…Space Invaders.
And the others. We’ve all seen the wrecks. All they knew was how to
attack. They stood and fought, and fought and died.”

“We are dying too, um,” said the Navigation Officer.

“I know. I am sorry,” said the Captain. “But many are living. And every
minute takes us farther from danger. We are so near the Border! If we
stop…you know what will happen. Game space will move. The Border will
retreat. The humans will find us. And then they will—”

“Die,” said the Gunnery Officer. “And we shall win. Those others were
stupid. We are not. We can win. We shall give the humans the mother of
all battles.”

“Ah, yes,” said the Captain. “Mother and grandmother of battles. Battles
that breed more battles.”

“And this is your leader speaking,” sneered the Gunnery Officer. “The
leader of the fleet. It is pathetic. Cowardly.”

“When we are home—” the Captain began.

“Home? This is our home! We have no other! All this talk of the Border,
and a planet of our own…have any of us seen it? No! It’s a legend.
Wishful thinking. A dream. We lie to ourselves. We make up stories. The
Chosen One. The Hero with a Thousand Extra Lives! It’s all dreams! We
live and breed and die on our ships. That is our destiny. There is no
choice!”


Peace Talks, Peace Shouts

 

Johnny awoke in the starship.

Normally he was some way from the fleet, but this time it was around
him. There were ScreeWee ships on every side.

They were flying the wrong way.

Immediately, a face appeared on the screen. Except for a few differences
on the crest, and a slight orange tint to the scales, it might have been
the Captain.

“Calling the human ship.”

“Who are you?”

“I am the new Captain. These are my instructions—”

“What happened to the old Captain?”

“She is under arrest. These are my instructions—”

“Arrest? What for? What did she do?”

“She did nothing. Listen to me. You have sixty seconds to get beyond
range of our guns. For honor. After that, you will be fired upon with
extreme force.”

“Hang on—”

“The count has started.”

“But—”

“End of communication. Die, human.”

The screen went blank.

Johnny stared at it.

It hadn’t been a friendly face. The voice had sounded as though it had
learned Human out of a book, just like the real Captain. But in this
case it had been a nasty book. It also sounded as though it belonged to
someone who would count to sixty like this: “One, two, three, four,
five, seven, eighteen, thirty-five, forty-nine, fifty-eight, fifty-nine,
sixty—firing, ready or not—”

His ship jerked forward, ramming him back in his seat. That was one good
thing about game space—you could do the kind of turns and maneuvers
that, in real space, would leave the human body looking like thin pink
linoleum across the cabin wall….

The fleet slid past, dwindling to a collection of dots behind him. A
couple of laser beams crackled past, but some way away; it looked as
though they were trying to frighten him off rather than kill him.

The ScreeWee had turned around. They were heading back deeper into game
space. Why? They’d show up on people’s screens soon! There were always
some players who’d go looking. Any day now some kid’d switch on his
machine and there’d be wall-to-wall ScreeWee, heading straight for him.
They weren’t safe even now. Yes—there were always some people who’d go
looking….

And there was a green dot ahead of him. He recognized the way it moved,
like a dog creeping around the edge of a sheep field.

He headed toward it.

Now he could remember. You thought better in game space, too. It was as
if he was more him in game space. Krystal or Kylie or one of those
made-up names, Wobbler had said. And Bigmac said the other name was
Dunn….

He twirled the knob of the communicator panel.

“Krystal?” he tried. “Kylie? Kathryn? Whatever?”

There was just the hiss of the stars, and then: “It’s Kirsty, actually.”

“Don’t fire!” said Johnny, quickly.

“Who are you?”

“Don’t fire, first. Promise? I hate dying. It makes it hard to think.”

The other ship had stopped being a dot now. If she was going to fire, he
was as good as dead—if dead was good.

“All right,” she said slowly. “No firing. Peace talk. Now tell me who
you are.”

“I’m a player, like you,” said Johnny.

“No you’re not. None of the other players talk to me. Anyway, you’re on
their side. I’ve been watching you.”

“Not…exactly on their side,” said Johnny.

“Well, you’re not on my side,” said Kirsty. “No one is.”

“Did they try to surrender to you too? I heard you say in Patel’s shop
that they’d sent you a message.”

There was another silence filled with the whispers of the universe, and
then a cautious voice: “You’re not the fat one who looks as though he
could do with a bra, are you?”

“No. Listen—” Johnny tapped his controls hurriedly.

“The black one who looks like an accountant?”

“No. Look—”

“Oh, no…not the skinny one with the big boots and the pointy head…?”

“No, I’m the one who kind of hangs around and no one notices much,” said
Johnny desperately.

“Who? I didn’t see anyone.”

“Right! That was me!”

“They surrendered to you?”

“Yes!” Number three missile went ping as it locked onto her ship. Now
for number four—

“But you’re a nerd!”

Ping!

“I think it’s dweeb now. Anyway, I’m more than a dweeb.”

Ping!

“Why?”

“I’m a dweeb with five missiles targeted on you.”

“You said you weren’t going to fire!”

“I haven’t yet.”

“You said this was a peace talk!”

“You did. Anyway, it is. It’s just that I’m…kind of shouting.”

If he concentrated, he thought he could hear music in the background
when she spoke.

“You’ve really got missiles targeted on me?”

“Yes.”

“I’m amazed you thought of it.”

“So am I. Look, I don’t want to shoot anyone. But I need help. The
fleet’s turned around. They fired at me!”

“That’s their job, dweeb. They fire at us, we fire at them. Why did they
stop? It’s no fun if they don’t fire back.”

“They surrendered.”

“They can’t surrender. It’s a game.”

“Well, they did. Sometimes you change the game. I don’t know, Kirsty!”

“Listen, I hate that name!”

“I’ve got to call you something,” said Johnny. “What do you call
yourself?”

“If you tell anyone else I’ll kill you—”

“I thought you were planning to do that anyway.”

“I don’t mean just kill you, I mean really kill you.”

“All right. What’s your game name?”

“Sigourney—you’re laughing!”

“I’m not! I’m not! It was a sneeze! Honest! No, it’s a…good name.
Very…appropriate…”

“It’s just dreaming, anyway. I’m dreaming this. You’re dreaming this.”

“So what? Doesn’t make things unimportant.”

There was some more silence with the scratchy suggestion of music in the
background, and then: “Ah-ha! While we’ve been talking, Mr. Clever, I’ve
targeted missiles on you!”

Johnny shrugged, even though there was no way she could see that.

“Doesn’t matter. I thought you would, anyway. So we kill each other.
Then we’ll have to go through all this again. It’s stupid. Don’t you
want to find out what happens next?”

More scratchy music.

“I can hear scratchy music,” said Johnny.

“It’s my Walkman.”

“Clever, I wish I’d thought of that. I tried dreaming my camera, but the
pictures weren’t any good. What’re you listening to?”

“C Inlay 4 Details—‘Please Keep This Copy for Your Records.’”

There was another scratchy pause.

Then, as if she’d been thinking deeply, she said: “Look, we can’t be in
the same dream. That can’t happen.”

“We could find out. Where d’you live?”

This time the pause went on for a long time. The ScreeWee fleet appeared
on the radar.

“We’d better move,” said Johnny. “They’ve started firing. Something’s
happened to the Captain. She’s the one who wanted peace in the first
place. Look, I know you live in Tyne Avenue or Crescent or somewhere—”

“How come we live so close?”

“Dunno. Bad luck, I suppose. Look, they’re going to be in range soon—”

“No problem. Then we shoot them.”

“We’ll be killed. Anyway—”

“So what? Dying’s easy.”

“I know. It’s living that’s the problem,” said Johnny, meaning it. “You
don’t sound like someone who takes the easy way.”

C Inlay 4 Details played on in the distance.

“So what do you have in mind?”

Johnny hesitated. He hadn’t thought that far. The new Captain didn’t
seem to want to talk.

“Dunno. I just don’t want any ScreeWee to get killed.”

“Why not?”

Because when they die, they die for real.

“I just don’t, OK?”

Several fighters had left the fleet and were heading purposefully toward
them.

“I’m going to try and talk one more time,” he decided. “Someone must be
listening.”

“Nerdy idea.”

“I’m not much good at the other kind.”

Johnny turned his ship and hit the Go-faster button. A few shots
whiffled harmlessly past him and did a lot of damage to empty space.

And then he was heading at maximum speed toward the fleet.

Music came over the intercom.

“Idiot! Dodge and dive! No wonder you get shot a lot!”

He wiggled the joystick. Something clipped one of the starship’s wings
and exploded behind him.

“And you’ve got the fighters after you! Huh! You can’t even save
yourself!”

Johnny didn’t take his eyes off the fleet, which was bouncing around the
sky as he flung his ship about in an effort to avoid being shot at.

“You might try to be some help!” he shouted.

There was a boom behind him.

“I am.”

“You’re shooting them?”

“You’re very hard to please, actually.”

 

 

The Captain tried the door of her cabin again. It was still locked. And
there was almost certainly a guard in the corridor outside. ScreeWee
tended to obey orders, even if they didn’t like them. The Gunnery
Officer was very unusual.

That, she thought bitterly, is what comes of promoting a male. They’re
unreliable thinkers.

She looked around the cabin. She didn’t want to be in it. She wanted to
be outside it. But she was in it. She needed a new idea.

Humans seemed much better at ideas. They always seemed to be on the
verge of being totally insane, but it seemed to work for them. The
inside of their heads would be an interesting place to visit, but she
wouldn’t want to live there.

How do you think like a human? Go into madness first, probably, and then
out the other side….

 

 

“Listen! Listen! If you keep going this way, you’ll all be killed!
You’re going back into game space! People like me will find you! You’ll
all be killed! That’s how it goes!”

And then he died.

 

 

It was 6:3[]. He was lying on his bed with his clothes on, but he still
felt cold.

Bits and pieces of his…his previous life trickled through his mind.

Sigourney!

Well, Yo-less would say that explained anything. And now it looked as if
he’d be spending every night watching the ScreeWee get killed.

It was bad enough fighting off people in ones and twos. But they were
just the ones who were weird or lonely or bored enough to go looking.
Wobbler said thousands of copies of the game had been sold. Even if most
people took them back to the shops, there’d always be someone playing.
Once the ScreeWee turned up again, the news would get around….

And then, one day, long after no one played the game anymore, there’d be
these broken ships, turning over and over in the blank-screen darkness
of game space.

And he couldn’t stop it. Kir—Sigourney was right. That’s what they were
there for.

It was Tuesday, too. It was Math for most of the morning. And then
English. He’d better write a poem at lunchtime. You could generally get
away with a poem.

He got his coat out of the shed and sponged it off as best he could, and
then propped it up by the heater. Then he investigated the fridge.

His father had been doing the shopping again. You could always tell.
There were generally expensive things in jars, and odd foreign
vegetables. This time there was Yogurt Vindaloo and more celery. No one
in the house liked celery much. It always ended up going brown. And his
father never bought bread and potatoes. He seemed to think that stuff
like that just grew in kitchens, like mushrooms (although he always
bought mushrooms, if they were the special expensive dried kind that
looked like bits of moldy bark and were picked by wizened old
Frenchmen).

There was a carton of milk that thumped when he shook it.

Johnny found a cup in the ghastly cavern of the dishwasher and rinsed it
under the tap. At least there wasn’t much that could go wrong with black
coffee.

He quite enjoyed the time by himself in the mornings. The day was too
early to have started going really wrong.

The war was still on television. It was getting on his nerves. It was
worrying him. You’d really think everyone would have had enough by now.

 

 

Bigmac was in school. He’d stayed the night at Yo-less’s. Mrs. Yo-less
had washed out his clothes, even the T-shirt with “Blackbury Skins” on
the back. It was a lot cleaner than it had ever been.

He could feel Wobbler and Yo-less looking at him with interest. So were
one or two other people.

Later on, when they were in the middle of the rush that meant that every
pupil in the school had to walk all the way across the campus to be
somewhere else, Yo-less said: “Bigmac said you pulled him out of the
wreck. Did you?”

“What? He wasn’t even—” Johnny paused.

It was amazing. He’d never thought so fast before. He thought of
Bigmac’s room, with its Weapons of the World posters and plastic model
guns and weight-training stuff he couldn’t lift. Bigmac had been thrown
out of the school role-playing games club for getting too excited.
Bigmac, who spent all his time trying hard to be a big thicko; Bigmac,
who could work out math problems just by looking at them. Bigmac, who
played the game of being…well, big tough Bigmac.

Johnny looked around. Bigmac was watching him. It was amazing, given
that Bigmac’s ancestors were a sort of monkey, how much his expression
looked like the one he’d first seen on the face of the Captain, whose
ancestors were a kind of alligator. It said: Help me.

“Can’t really remember,” he said.

“Only my mum called the hospital and they said there were only two boys
and they were—”

“It was dark,” said Johnny.

“Yes, but if you’d really—”

“It’s just best if everyone shuts up about it, all right?” said Johnny,
nodding meaningfully at Bigmac.

“She said you did everything right, anyway,” said Yo-less. “And she said
you aren’t being properly looked after.”

“Yo-less.”

“She said you ought to come round our house to eat sometimes—”

“Thanks,” said Johnny. “I’m a bit busy these days—”

“Doing what?” said Yo-less.

Johnny fumbled in his pocket.

“What does this look like to you?” he said.

Yo-less took it gravely.

“It’s a photograph,” he said. “Just looks like a TV screen with dots
on.”

“Yes,” sighed Johnny. “It does, doesn’t it.”

He took it back and shoved it deep into his pocket.

“Yo-less?”

“What?”

“If someone was…you know…going a bit weird in the head—”

“Crazy, he means,” said Wobbler behind him.

“Just a bit overstrained,” said Johnny. “I mean…would they know?
Themselves?”

“Well, everyone thinks they’re a bit mad,” said Yo-less. “It’s part of
being normal.”

“Oh, I don’t think I’m mad,” said Johnny.

“You don’t?”

“Well—”

“Ah-aha!” said Wobbler.

“I mean—the whole world seems kind of weird right now. You watch TV,
don’t you? How can you be the good guys if you’re dropping clever bombs
right down people’s chimneys? And blowing people up just because they’re
being bossed around by a loony?”

“Shouldn’t let ’emselves be bossed around, then,” said Bigmac. Johnny
looked at him. Bigmac deflated a bit. “It’s their own fault. They don’t
have to. That’s what my brother says, anyway,” he mumbled.

“Is it?” said Johnny.

Bigmac shrugged.

“Oh, well, yes,” said Wobbler. “How? It’s hard enough to get rid of
prime ministers, and at least they don’t have people taken out and shot.
Not anymore, anyway.”

“My brother’s stupid,” said Bigmac, so quietly under his breath that
Johnny wondered if anyone else even heard it.

“There was a man on the box saying that the bomb aimers were so good
because they all grew up playing computer games,” said Wobbler.

“See?” said Johnny. “That’s what I mean. Games look real. Real things
look like games. And…and…it all kind of runs together in my head.”

“Ah,” said Yo-less knowingly. “That’s not crazy. That’s shamanism. I
read a book about it.”

“What’s shamanism?”

“Shamans used to be these kind of people who lived partly in a dream
world and partly in the real world,” said Yo-less. “Like medicine men
and Druids and guys like that. They used to be very important. They used
to guide people.”

“Guide?” said Johnny. “Where to?”

“Not sure. Anyway, my mother says they were creations of Satan.”

“Yes, but your mother says that about practically everything,” said
Wobbler.

“This is true,” said Yo-less gravely. “It’s her hobby.”

“She said role-playing games were creations of Satan,” said Wobbler.

“True.”

“Real clever of him,” said Wobbler. “I mean, sitting down there in Hell,
working out all the combat tables and everything. I bet he used to
really swear every time the dice caught fire…”

Shamanism, thought Johnny. Yes. I could be a shaman. A guide. That’s
better than being crazy, at any rate.

 

 

It was Math again. As far as Johnny was concerned, the future would be a
better place if it didn’t contain 3y + x². He had problems enough
without people giving him pages of them.

He was trying to put off the idea of calling someone up.

And then there was Social Education. Normally you could ignore Social
Education, which tended to be about anything anyone had on their minds
at the time or, failing that, AIDS. Really the day ended with Math. SE
was just there to keep you off the streets for another three quarters of
an hour.

He could try calling up. You just needed the phone book and a bit of
thought….

Johnny stared at the ceiling. The teacher was going on about the war.
That was all there was to talk about these days. He listened with half
an ear. No one liked the bombing. One of the girls was nearly in tears
about it….

Supposing she was really there? Or supposing she said she’d never heard
of him?

Bigmac was arguing. That was unusual.

And then someone said, “Do you think it’s easy? Do you think the pilots
really just sit there like…like a game? Do you think they laugh? Really
laugh? Not just laugh because they’re still alive, but laugh because
it’s…it’s fun? When they’re being shot at for a living, every day? When
any minute they might get blown up too? Do you think they don’t wonder
what it’s all about? Do you think they like it? But we always turn it
into something that’s not exactly real. We turn it into games and it’s
not games. We really have to find out what’s real!”

They were all looking at him.

“Anyway, that’s what I think,” said Johnny.


On Earth, No One Can Hear You Say “Um”

 

Click!

“Yes?”

“Um.”

“Hello?”

“Um. Is Sig—is Kirsty there?”

“Who’s this?”

“I’m a friend. Um. I don’t think she knows my name.”

“You’re a friend and she doesn’t know your name?”

“Please!”

“Oh, hang on.”

Johnny stared at his bedroom wall. Eventually a suspicious voice said,
“Yes? Who’s this?”

“You’re Sigourney. You like C Inlay 4 Details. You fly really well.
You—”

“You’re him!”

Johnny breathed a sigh of relief. Real!

Going through the phone book had been harder than flying the starship.
Nearly harder than dying.

“I wasn’t sure you really existed,” he said.

“I wasn’t sure you existed,” she said.

“I’ve got to talk to you. I mean face-to-face.”

“How do I know you’re not some sort of maniac?”

“Do I sound like some sort of maniac?”

“Yes!”

“All right, but apart from that?”

There was silence for a moment. Then she said, reluctantly: “All right.
You can come round here.”

“What? To your house?”

“It’s safer than in public, idiot.”

Not for me, Johnny thought.

“OK,” he said.

“I mean, you might be one of those funny people.”

“What, clowns?”

And then she said, very cautiously: “It’s really you?”

“Really I’m not sure about. But me, yes.”

“You got blown up.”

“Yes, I know. I was there, remember.”

“I don’t die often in the game. It took me ages even to find the
aliens.”

Huh, thought Johnny.

“It doesn’t get any better with practice,” he said darkly.

 

 

Tyne Crescent turned out to be a pretty straight road with trees in it,
and the houses were big and had double garages and a timber effect on
them to fool people into believing that Henry VIII had built them.

Kirsty’s mother opened the door for him. She was grinning like the
Captain, although the Captain had the excuse that she was related to
crocodiles. Johnny felt he had the wrong clothes on, or the wrong face.

He was shown into a large room. It was mainly white. Expensive
bookshelves lined one wall. Most of the floor was bare pine, but
varnished and polished to show that they could have afforded carpets if
they’d wanted them. There was a harp standing by a chair in one corner,
and music scattered around it on the floor.

Johnny picked up a sheet. It was headed “Royal College, Grade V.”

“Well?”

She was standing behind him. The sheet slipped out of his fingers.

“And don’t say ‘um,’” she said, sitting down. “You say ‘um’ a lot.
Aren’t you ever sure about things?”

“U—No. Hello?”

“Sit down. My mother’s making us some tea. And then staying out of the
way. You’ll probably notice that. You can actually hear her staying out
of the way. She thinks I ought to have more friends.”

She had red hair, and the skinny look that went with it. It was as if
someone had grabbed the frizzy ponytail on the back of her head and
pulled it tightly.

“The game,” said Johnny vaguely.

“Yes? What?”

“I’m really glad you’re in it too. Yo-less said it was all in my head
because of Trying Times. He said it was just me projecting my problems.”

“I haven’t got any problems,” snapped Kirsty. “I get on extremely well
with people, actually. There’s probably some simple psychic reason that
you’re too stupid to work out.”

“You sounded more concerned on the phone,” said Johnny.

“But now I’ve had time to think about it. Anyway, what’s it to me what
happens to some dots in a machine?”

“Didn’t you see the Space Invaders?” said Johnny.

“Yes, but they were stupid. That’s what happens. Charles Darwin knew
about that. I am a winning kind of person. And what I want to know is
What were you doing in my dream?”

“I’m not sure it’s a dream,” said Johnny. “I’m not sure what it is. Not
exactly a dream and not exactly real. Something in between. I don’t
know. Maybe something happens in your head. Maybe you’re in there
because—because, well, I don’t know why, but there’s got to be a
reason,” he ended lamely.

“Why’re you there, then?”

“I want to save the ScreeWee.”

“Why?”

“Because…I’ve got a responsibility. But the Captain’s been…I don’t know,
locked up or something. There’s been some kind of mutiny. It’s the
Gunnery Officer. He’s behind it. But if I—if we could get her out, she
could probably turn the fleet around again. I thought you might be able
to think of some way of getting her out,” Johnny finished lamely. “We
haven’t got a lot of game time.”

“She?” said Kirsty.

“She started all this. She relied on me,” said Johnny.

“You said ‘she,’” said Kirsty.

Johnny stood up.

“I thought you might be able to help,” he said wearily, “but who cares
what happens to some dots that aren’t even real. So I’ll just—”

“You keep saying ‘she,’” said Kirsty. “You mean the Captain’s a woman?”

“A female,” said Johnny. “Yes.”

“But you called the Gunnery Officer a ‘he,’” said Kirsty.

“That’s right.”

Kirsty stood up.

“That’s typical. That’s absolutely typical of modern society. He
probably resents a wo—a female being better than him. I get that all the
time.”

“Um,” said Johnny. He hadn’t meant to say “um.” He meant to say:
“Actually, all the ScreeWee except the Gunnery Officer are females.” But
another part of his brain had thought faster and shut down his mouth
before he could say it, diverting the words into oblivion and shoving
good old “um” in to their place.

“There was an article in a magazine,” said Kirsty. “This whole bunch of
directors of a company ganged up on this woman and fired her just
because she’d become the boss. It was just like me and the Chess Club.”

It probably wouldn’t be a good idea to tell her. There was a glint in
her eye. No, it probably wouldn’t be a good idea to be honest.
Truthfulness would have to do instead. After all, he hadn’t actually
lied.

“It’s a matter of principle,” said Kirsty. “You should have said so
right at the start.” She stood up. “Come on.”

“Where are we going?” said Johnny.

“To my room,” said Kirsty. “Don’t worry. My parents are very liberal.”

 

 

There were film posters all over the walls, and where there weren’t film
posters, there were shelves with silver cups on them. There was a framed
certificate for the Regional Winner of the Small-Bore Rifle
Confederation’s National Championships, and another one for chess. And
another one for athletics. There were a lot of medals, mostly gold, and
one or two silver. Kirsty won things.

If there was a medal for a tidy bedroom, she would have won that too.
You could see the floor all the way to the walls.

She had an electrical pencil sharpener.

And a computer. The screen was showing the familiar message: NEW GAME
(Y/N)?

“Do you know I have an IQ of one hundred and sixty-five?” she said,
sitting down in front of the screen.

“Is that good?”

“Yes! And I only started playing this wretched game because my brother
bought it and said I wouldn’t be any good at it. These things are
moronic.”

There was a notebook by the keyboard.

“Each level,” explained Kirsty. “I made notes about how the ships flew.
And kept score, of course.”

“You were taking it seriously,” said Johnny. “Very seriously.”

“Of course I take it seriously. It’s a game. You’ve got to win them,
otherwise what’s the point? Now…can we get onto the ScreeWee flagship?”

“Um—”

“Think!”

“Can we get into a ScreeWee battleship?”

Kirsty almost growled. “I asked you. Sit down and think!”

Johnny sat down.

“I don’t think we can,” he said. “I’m always in a starship. I think
things have to look like they do on the screen.”

“Hmm. Makes some sort of sense, I suppose.” Kirsty stuck a pencil in the
sharpener, which whirred for a while. “And we don’t know what it looks
like inside.”

Johnny stared at the wall. Among the items pinned over the bed was a
card for winning the Under-7 Long Jump. She wins everything, he thought.
Wow. She actually assumes she’s going to win. Someone who always thinks
they’re going to win….

He stared up at the movie posters. There was one he’d seen many times
before. The famous one. The slavering alien monster. You’d think she’d
have something like a C Inlay 4 Details photo over her bed, but no,
there was this thing…

“Don’t tell me,” he said, “you want to get inside the ship and run along
the corridors shooting ScreeWee? You do, don’t you?”

“Tactically—” she began.

“You can’t. The Captain wouldn’t want that. Not killing ScreeWee.”

Kirsty waved her hands in the air irritably.

“That’s stupid,” she said. “How do you expect to win without killing the
enemy?”

“I’m supposed to save them. Anyway, they’re not exactly the enemy. I
can’t go around killing them.”

Kirsty looked thoughtful.

“Do you know,” she said, “there was an African tribe once whose nearest
word for ‘enemy’ was ‘a friend we haven’t met yet’?”

Johnny smiled. “Right,” he said. “That’s how—”

“But they were all killed and eaten in eighteen hundred and two,” said
Kirsty. “Except for those who were sold as slaves. The last one died in
Mississippi in eighteen sixty-four, and he was very upset.”

“You just made that up,” said Johnny.

“No. I won a prize for History.”

“I expect you did,” said Johnny. “But I’m not killing anyone.”

“Then you can’t win.”

“I don’t want to win. I just don’t want them to lose.”

“You really are a dweeb, aren’t you? How can anyone go through life
expecting to lose all the time?”

“Well, I’ve got to, haven’t I? The world is full of people like you, for
a start.”

Johnny realized he was getting angry again. He didn’t often get angry.
He just got quiet, or miserable. Anger was unusual. But when it came, it
overflowed.

“They tried to talk to you, and you didn’t even listen! You were the
only other one who got that involved! You were so mad to win, you
slipped into game space! And you’d have been so much better at saving
them than me! And you didn’t even listen! But I listened and I’ve spent
a week trying to Save Mankind in my sleep! It’s always people like me
who have to do stuff like that! It’s always the people who aren’t clever
and who don’t win things who have to get killed all the time! And you
just hung around and watched! It’s just like on the television! The
winners have fun! Winner types never lose, they just come in second!
It’s all the other people who lose! And now you’re only thinking of
helping the Captain because you think she’s like you! Well, I don’t
bloody well care anymore, Miss Clever! I’ve done my best! And I’m going
to go on doing it! And they’ll all come back into game space and it’ll
be just like the Space Invaders all over again! And I’ll be there every
night!”

Her mouth was open.

There was a knock on the door and almost immediately, mothers being what
they are, Kirsty’s mother pushed it open. She brought in a wide grin and
a tray.

“I’m sure you’d both like some tea,” she said. “And—”

“Yes, mother,” said Kirsty, and rolled her eyes.

“—there’s some macaroons. Have you found out your friend’s name now?”

“John Maxwell,” said Johnny.

“And what do your friends call you?” said Kirsty’s mother sweetly.

“Sometimes they call me Rubber,” said Johnny.

“Do they? Whatever for?”

“Mother, we were talking,” said Kirsty.

“Cobbers is on in a minute,” said Kirsty’s mother. “I, er, shall watch
it on the set in the kitchen, shall I?”

“Good-bye,” said Kirsty, meaningfully.

“Um, yes,” said her mother, and went out.

“She dithers a lot,” said Kirsty. “Fancy getting married when you’re
twenty! A complete lack of ambition.”

She stared at Johnny for a while. He was keeping quiet. He’d been amazed
to hear his own thoughts.

Kirsty coughed. She looked a little uncertain for the first time since
Johnny had met her.

“Well,” she said. “Uh. OK. And…we won’t be able to fight all the players
when they get back to game space.”

“No. There’s not enough missiles.”

“Could we dream a few more?”

“No. I thought of that. You get the ship you play with. I mean, we know
it’s only got six missiles. I’ve tried dreaming more and it doesn’t
work.”

“Hmm. Interesting problem. Sorry,” she added quickly, when she saw his
expression.

Johnny stared at the movie posters. Sigourney! Games everywhere. Bigmac
was a tough guy in his head, and this one kept sharp pencils and had to
win everything and in her head shot aliens. Everyone had these pictures
of themselves in their head, except him….

He blinked.

And now his head ached. There was a buzzing in his ears.

Kirsty’s face drifted toward him.

“Are you all right?”

The headache was really bad now.

“You’re ill. And you look all thin. When did you last eat?”

“I dunno. Had something last night, I think.”

“Last night? What about breakfast and lunch?”

“Oh, well…you know…I kept thinking about…”

“You’d better drink that tea and eat that macaroon. Phew. When did you
last have a bath?”

“It’s kind of…”

“Good grief—”

“Listen! Listen!” It was important to tell her. He didn’t feel well at
all.

“Yes?”

“We dream our way in,” he said.

“What are you talking about? You’re swaying!”

“We go onto their ship!”

“But we agreed we don’t know what it looks like inside!”

“OK! Good! So we decide what it does look like inside, right?”

She tapped her pad irritably.

“So what does it look like?”

“I don’t know! The inside of a spaceship! Corridors and cabins and stuff
like that. Nuts and bolts and panels and sliding doors. Scotsmen saying
the engines canna tak’ it anymoore. Bright blue lights!”

“Hmm. That’s what you think is inside spaceships, is it?”

Kirsty glared at him. She generally glared. It was her normal
expression.

“When we go to sleep…I mean, when I go to sleep…I’ll try and wake up
inside the ship,” he said.

“How?”

“I don’t know! By concentrating, I suppose.”

She leaned forward. For the first time since he’d met her, she looked
concerned.

“You don’t look capable of thinking straight,” she said.

“I’ll be all right.”

Johnny stood up.


In Space, No One Is Listening Anyway

 

And woke up.

He was lying down on something hard. There was some sort of mesh just in
front of his eyes. He stared at it for a while.

There was also a faint vibration in the floor, and a distant background
rumbling.

He was obviously back in game space, but he certainly wasn’t in a
starship…

The mesh moved.

The Captain’s face appeared over the edge of the mesh, upside down.

“Johnny?”

“Where am I?”

“You appear to be under my bed.”

He rolled sideways.

“I’m on your ship?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Right! Hah! I knew I could do it….”

He stood up and looked around the cabin. It wasn’t very interesting.
Apart from the bed, which was under something that looked like a sun-ray
lamp, there was only a desk and something that was probably a chair if
you had four back legs and a thick tail.

On the desk were half a dozen plastic aliens. There was also a cage with
a couple of long-beaked birds in it. They sat side by side on their
perch and watched Johnny with almost intelligent eyes.

Right. Sigourney was right. He did think better in game space. All the
decisions seemed so much clearer.

OK. So he was on board. He’d rather hoped to be outside the cabin the
Captain was locked in, but this was a start.

He stared at the wall. There was a grille.

“What’s that?” he said, pointing.

“It is where the air comes in.”

Johnny pulled at the grille. There was no very obvious way of removing
it. If it could be removed, the hole behind it was easily big enough for
the Captain. Air ducts. Well, what did he expect?

“We’ve got to get this off,” he said. “Before something dreadful
happens.”

“We are imprisoned,” said the Captain. “What more can happen that is
dreadful?”

“Have you ever heard the name…Sigourney?” said Johnny cautiously.

“No. But it sounds a lovely name,” said the Captain. “Who is this
Sigourney?”

“Well, if she can dream her way here as well, then there’s going to be
trouble. You should see the pictures she’s got on her walls.”

“What of?”

“Um. Aliens,” said Johnny.

“She takes a very close interest in alien races?” said the Captain
happily.

“Um. Yes.” The mere thought of her arrival made him pull urgently at the
grille. “Um. There’s something on the inside…and I can’t quite get my
hand through…”

The Captain watched him with interest.

“Something like wingnuts,” grunted Johnny.

“This is very instructive,” said the Captain, peering over his shoulder.

“I can’t get a grip!”

“You wish to turn them?”

“Yes!”

The Captain waddled over to the table and opened the birdcage. Both of
the birds hopped out onto her hand. The Captain said a few words in
ScreeWee; the birds fluttered past Johnny’s head, squeezed through the
mesh, and disappeared. After a second or two he heard the squeak-squeak
of nuts being undone.

“What were they?” he said.

“Chee,” said the Captain. “Mouth birds. You understand?” She opened her
mouth, revealing several rows of yellow teeth. “For hygiene?”

“Living toothbrushes?”

“We have always had them. They are…traditional. Very intelligent. Bred
for it, you know. Clever things. They understand several words of
ScreeWee.”

The squeaking went on. There was a clonk, and a nut rolled through the
mesh.

The panel fell into the room.

Johnny looked at the hole.

“O-kay,” he said uncertainly. “You don’t know where it goes, do you?”

“No. There are ventilation shafts all over the ship. Will you lead the
way?”

“Um—”

“I would be happy for you to lead the way,” said the Captain.

Johnny stood on the bed and crawled into the hole. It went a little way
and then opened onto a bigger shaft.

“All over the ship?” he said.

“Yes.”

Johnny paused for a moment. He’d never liked narrow dark spaces.

“Oh. Right,” he said.

 

 

Kirsty’s mother put down the phone.

“There’s no one answering,” she said.

“I think he said his father works late and his mother sometimes works in
the evening,” said Kirsty. “Anyway, the doctor said he’s basically all
right, didn’t she? He’s just run-down, she said. What was the stuff she
gave him?”

“She said it’d make him sleep. He’s not getting enough sleep.
Twelve-year-old boys need a lot of sleep.”

“I know this one does,” said Kirsty.

“And you said he’s not eating properly. Where did you meet him, anyway?”

“Um,” Kirsty began, and then smiled to herself. “Out and about.”

Kirsty’s mother looked worried.

“Are you sure he’s all there?”

“He’s all there,” said Kirsty, climbing the stairs. “I’m not sure that
he’s all here, but he’s certainly all there.”

She opened the door of the spare room and looked in. Johnny was fast
asleep in a pair of her brother’s pajamas. He looked very young. It’s
amazing how young twelve is, when you’re thirteen.

Then she went to her own bedroom, got ready for bed, and slid between
the sheets.

It was pretty early. It had been a busy evening.

He was a loser. You could tell. He dressed like a loser. A ditherer.
Someone who said “um” a lot, and went through life trying not to be
noticed.

She’d never done that. She’d always gone through life as if there was a
big red arrow above the planet, indicating precisely where she was.

On the other hand, he tried so hard….

She’d bet he’d cried when E.T. died.

She pushed herself up on one elbow and stared at the movie posters.

Trying wasn’t the point.

You had to win. What good was anything if you didn’t win?

 

 

“Stuck? You’re an alien,” said Johnny. “Aliens don’t get stuck in air
ducts. It’s practically a well-known fact.”

He backed into a side tunnel and turned around.

“I am sorry. It occurs to me that possibly I am the wrong type of
alien,” said the Captain. “I can go backward, but I am forwardly
disadvantaged.”

“OK. Back up to that second junction we passed,” said Johnny. “We’re
lost, anyway.”

“No,” said the Captain, “I know where we are. It says here this is
junction [].”

“Do you know where that is?”

“No.”

“I saw a film where there was an alien crawling around inside a
spaceship’s air ducts and it could come out wherever it liked,” said
Johnny reproachfully.

“Doubtless it had a map,” said the Captain.

Johnny crawled around a corner and found…

…another grille.

There didn’t seem to be any activity on the other side of it. He
unscrewed the nuts and let it fall onto the floor.

There was a corridor. He dropped into it, then turned and helped the
Captain through. ScreeWee might have descended from crocodiles, but
crocodiles preferred sandbanks. They weren’t very good at crawling
through narrow spaces.

Her skin felt cold and dry, like silk.

There were no other ScreeWee around.

“They’re probably at battle stations,” said Johnny.

“We’re always at battle stations,” said the Captain bitterly, brushing
dust off her scales. “This is corridor []. Now we must get to the
bridge, yes?”

“Won’t they just lock you up again?” said Johnny.

“I think not. Disobedience to properly constituted authority does not
come easily to us. The Gunnery Officer is very…persuasive. But once they
see that I am free again, they will give in. At least,” the Captain
added, “most of them will. The Gunnery Officer may prove difficult. He
dreams of grandeur.”

She waddled a little way along the bare corridor, keeping close to the
wall. Johnny trailed behind her.

“Dreams are always tricky,” he said.

“Yes.”

“But they’ll wake up when the players start shooting again, won’t they?
They’ll soon see what he is leading them into?”

“We have a proverb,” said the Captain. “Skeejee-shejweeJEEyee. It
means…” She thought for a moment. “When you are riding a jee, a
six-legged domesticated beast of burden capable of simple instruction
but also traditionally foul-tempered, it is easier to stay on rather
than dismount; equally, better to trust yourself to a jee than risk
attack from the sure-footed JEEyee, which will easily outrun a ScreeWee
on foot. Of course, it is a little snappier in our language.”

They’d reached a corner. The Captain peered around it and then jerked
her head back.

“There is a guard outside the door of my cabin,” she said. “She is
armed.”

“Can you talk to her?”

“She is under orders. I fear that I will only be allowed to say
‘Aaargh!’” said the Captain. “But feel free to make the attempt. I have
no other options.”

Oh, well—you only die a few hundred times, thought Johnny. He stepped
out into the corridor.

The guard turned to look at him and half raised a melted-looking thing
that nevertheless very clearly said “gun.” But she looked at him in
puzzlement.

She’s never seen a human before! he thought.

He spread his arms wide in what he hoped was an innocent-looking way,
and smiled.

Which just goes to show that you shouldn’t take things for granted
because, as the Captain told him later, when a ScreeWee is about to
fight, she does two things. She spreads her front pairs of arms wide (to
grip and throttle) and exposes her teeth (ready to bite).

The guard raised the gun.

Then there was a thunderous knocking on the other side of the cabin
door.

The guard made a simple mistake. She should have ignored the knocking,
loud and desperate though it was, and concentrated on Johnny. But she
tried to keep the gun pointing in his general direction while she
pressed a panel by the door. After all, it was only the Captain in
there, wasn’t it? And the Captain was still the Captain, even if she was
locked up. She could keep an eye on both of them….

The door opened a little way. A foot came out, swinging upward, and
caught the guard under the snout. There was a click as all her teeth
met. Her eyes crossed.

Someone shouted: “Haiii!”

The guard swayed backward. Kirsty came through the door airborne and
started hacking at the guard’s arms with her hands. She dropped the gun.
Kirsty picked it up in one movement. The guard opened her mouth to bite,
spread her arms to grip and throttle, and then went cross-eyed again,
because the gun barrel was suddenly thrust between her teeth.

“Don’t…swallow…” said Kirsty, very deliberately.

There was a sudden, very heavy silence. The guard stayed very still.

“This is a friend of mine,” said Johnny.

“Oh, yes,” said the Captain. “Sigourney. One of your warriors. Is she a
friend of mine?”

“At the moment,” said Sigourney, without moving her head. She had tied
one of the strips of webbing from the Captain’s bed around her forehead.
She was breathing heavily. There was a wild glint in her eye. Johnny
suddenly felt very sorry for the guard.

“You know, I’m glad she’s a friend of mine,” said the Captain.

“Ee ee ogg ee?” said the guard. Her arms were trembling. The ScreeWee
didn’t sweat, but this one would probably have liked to.

“We’d better tie her up and put her in the cabin,” said Johnny.

“Ees!” said the guard.

“I could just fire,” said Sigourney wistfully.

“No!” said Johnny and the Captain together.

“Eep!” said the guard.

“Oh, all right.” Sigourney relaxed. The guard sagged.

“Sorry to be late,” said Sigourney. “I had a bit of trouble getting to
sleep.”

The Captain said something to the guard in ScreeWee. She nodded in a
strangely human way and trooped obediently into the cabin, where she
squatted down just as obediently and let them tie her hands and feet
with more bits of bed.

“You’ve got a black belt in karate too, I expect,” said Johnny.

“Only purple,” Sigourney said. “But I haven’t been doing it long,” she
added quickly. “Huh! Is that the only kind of knot you can tie?”

“I went to karate once, with Bigmac,” said Johnny, trying to ignore
that.

“What happened?”

“I got my foot caught in my trousers.”

“And you are the Chosen One? Huh! They could have chosen me.”

“They tried. But I was the one who listened,” said Johnny quietly.

Sigourney picked up the gun and cradled it in her arms.

“Well, I’m here now,” she said. “And ready to kick some butt.”

“Some but what?” said Johnny wearily. He really hated the phrase. It was
a game saying. It tried to fool you into believing that real bullets
weren’t going to go through real people.

Sigourney sniffed.

“Nerd.”

They went back into the corridor.

“By the way,” said Johnny, “what happened to me?”

“You just collapsed. Right there on the floor. We’ve got a doctor living
next door. Mum went and got her. Unusually bright of her, really. She
said you were just tired out and looked as though you hadn’t been eating
properly.”

“This is true,” said the Captain. “Did I not say? Too much sugar and
carbohydrate, not enough fresh vitamins. You should get out more.”

“Yeah, right,” said Johnny.

There was something different about the corridor. Before, it had been
gray metal, only interesting if you really liked looking at nuts and
bolts. But now it was darker, with more curves; the walls glistened, and
dripped menace. Dripped something, anyway.

The Captain looked different, too. She hadn’t changed, exactly—it was
just that her teeth and claws were somehow more obvious. A few minutes
ago she had been an intelligent person who just happened to be an
eight-legged crocodile; now she was an eight-legged crocodile who just
happened to be intelligent.

Game space was changing now that two people were sharing one dream.

“Hold on, there’s—” he began.

“Don’t let’s hang around,” said Sigourney.

“But you’re—” Johnny began.

Dreaming it wrong, he finished to himself.

This really is nuts, he told himself as he trailed after them. At home
Kirsty went around being Miss Brains. In here it was all: Make my
shorts! Eat my day!

The Captain waddled at high speed along the corridors. Now steam was
dribbling from somewhere, making the floor misty and wet.

There wasn’t that much in the ScreeWee ships. Perhaps they ought to have
sat down and worked out the inside of one in a bit more detail before
they’d dreamed, he thought. They could have added more cabins and big
screens and interesting things like that; as it was, all there seemed to
be were these snaking corridors that were unpleasantly like caves.

Bigger caves, though. They’d got wider. Mysterious passages led off in
various directions.

Sigourney crept along with her back against the wall, spinning around
rapidly every time they passed another passage. She stiffened.

“There’s another one coming!” she hissed. “It’s pushing something! Get
back!”

She elbowed them into the wall. Johnny could hear the scrape-scrape of
claws on the floor, and something rattling.

“When it gets closer, I’ll get it. I’ll leap out—”

Johnny poked his head around the corner.

“Kirsty?”

She took no notice.

“Sigourney?” he tried.

“Yes?”

“I know you’re going to leap out,” said Johnny, “but don’t pull the
trigger, right?”

“It’s an alien!”

“So it’s an alien. You don’t have to shoot them all.”

The rattling got closer. There was also a faint squeaking.

Sigourney gripped the gun excitedly and leaped out.

“OK, you—oh…um…”

It was a very small ScreeWee. Most of its scales were gray. Its crest
was nearly worn away. Its tail just dragged behind it. When it opened
its mouth, there were three teeth left and they were huddling together
at the back.

It blinked owlishly at them over the top of the cart it had been
pushing. Apart from anything else, Kirsty had been aiming the gun well
above its head.

There was one of those awkward pauses.

“Around this time,” said the Captain behind them, “the crew on the
bridge have a snack brought to them.”

Johnny leaned forward, nodded at the little old alien, and lifted the
lid of the tray that was on the cart. There were a few bowls of
something green and bubbling. He gently lowered the lid again.

“I think you were going to shoot the tea lady,” he said.

“How was I to know?” Kirsty demanded. “It could have been anything! This
is an alien spaceship! You’re not supposed to get tea ladies!”

The Captain said something in ScreeWee to the old alien, who shuffled
around slowly and went off back down the corridor. One wheel of the cart
kept squeaking.

Kirsty was furious.

“This isn’t going right!” she hissed.

“Come on,” said Johnny. “Let’s go to the bridge and get it over with.”

“I didn’t know it was a tea lady! That’s your dreaming!”

“Yes, all right.”

“She had no right to be there!”

“I suppose even aliens get a bit thirsty in the afternoons.”

“That’s not what I meant! They’re supposed to be alien! That means
slavering and claws! It doesn’t mean sending out for…for a coffee and a
jam doughnut!”

“Things are just like they are,” said Johnny, shrugging.

She turned on him.

“Why do you just accept everything? Why don’t you ever try to change
things?”

“They’re generally bad enough already,” he said.

She leaped ahead and peered around the next corner.

“Guards!” she said. “And these have got guns!”

Johnny looked around the corner. There were two ScreeWee standing in
front of a round door. They were, indeed, armed.

“Satisfied?” she snapped. “No hint of Danish pastries anywhere? Right?
Now can I actually shoot something?”

“No! I keep telling you! You have to give them a chance to surrender.”

“You always make it difficult!”

She raised the gun and stepped out.

So did the Captain. She hissed a word in ScreeWee. The guards looked
from her to Kirsty, who was squinting along her gun barrel. One of them
hissed something.

“She says the Gunnery Officer has instructed them to shoot anyone who
approaches the door,” said the Captain.

“I’ll fire if they move,” said Kirsty. “I mean it!”

The Captain spoke in ScreeWee again. The guards stared at Johnny. They
lowered their guns.

Suspicion rose inside him.

“What did you just tell them?” he said.

“I just told them who you were,” said the Captain.

“You said I was the Chosen One?”

One of the guards was trying to kneel. That looked very strange in a
creature with four legs.

Kirsty rolled her eyes.

“It’s better than being shot at,” said the Captain. “I’ve been shot at a
lot. I know what I am talking about.”

“Tell her to get up,” said Johnny. “What do we do now? Who’s on the
bridge?”

“Most of the officers,” said the Captain. “The guard says there have
been—arguments. Gunfire.”

“That’s more like it!” said Kirsty.

They looked at the door.

“OK,” said Johnny. “Let’s go….”

The Captain motioned one of the guards aside and touched a plate by the
door.


Humans!

 

Johnny saw it all in one long, long second.

Firstly, the bridge was big. It seemed to be the size of a soccer field.
And at one end there was a screen, which looked almost as big. He felt
like an ant standing in front of a TV set.

The screen was covered with green dots.

Players. Heading for the fleet.

There were hundreds of them.

Right in front of the screen was a horseshoe-shaped bank of controls,
with a dozen seats ranged in front of it.

It’s here, he thought. When I was sitting in my room playing, they were
in here in this great shadowy room, steering their ship, firing back….

Only one seat was occupied now. Its occupant was already standing up,
half turning, reaching for something….

“Go ahead,” said Kirsty. “Make my stardate.”

The Gunnery Officer froze, glaring at them.

“Too late,” he said. “You’re too late!” He waved a claw toward the
screen. “I’ve taken us back to where we belong. There is no time to turn
us around again. You must fight now.”

He focused on Johnny. “What’s that?” he said.

“The Chosen One,” said the Captain, starting to walk forward. The others
followed her.

“But we must fight,” said the Gunnery Officer. “For honor. The honor of
the ScreeWee! That’s what we are for!”

Johnny’s foot touched something. He looked down. Now that his eyes had
become accustomed to the gloom, he could see that he’d almost tripped
over a ScreeWee. It was dead. Nothing with a hole like that in it could
have been alive.

Kirsty was looking down too. Johnny could see other shapes on the floor
in the shadows.

“He’s been killing Sc—people,” he whispered.

Shoot them in space, shoot them on a screen, and there was just an
explosion and five points on the score total. When they’d been shot from
a few yards away, then there was simply a reminder that someone who had
been alive was now, very definitely, not alive anymore. And would never
be again.

He looked up at the Gunnery Officer. ScreeWee were cold-blooded and a
long way from being human, but this one had a look about it—about
him—that suggested a mind running off into madness.

There was a silvery sheen on his scales. Johnny found himself wondering
if the ScreeWee changed color, like chameleons. The Captain had always
looked more golden when she was acting normally, and became almost
yellow when she was worried….

She was the color of lemons now.

She hissed something. The guards looked at her in surprise but turned
and filed obediently off the bridge. Then she turned to the Gunnery
Officer.

“You killed all of them?” she said, softly.

“They tried to stop me! It is a matter of honor!”

“Yes, yes. I can see that,” said the Captain, in a level voice. She was
shifting position slightly now, moving away from the humans.

“A ScreeWee dies fighting or not at all!” shouted the Gunnery Officer.

The Captain’s scales had faded to the color of old paper.

“Yes, I understand, I understand,” she said. “And the humans understand
too, don’t you.”

The Gunnery Officer turned his head. The Captain spread her arms, opened
her mouth, and leaped. The male must have sensed her; he turned, claws
whirring through the air.

Johnny reached out and caught Kirsty’s gun as she raised it.

“No! You might hit her!”

“Why’d she do that? I could easily have shot him! So could the guards!
Why just jump at him like that?”

The fighters were a whirling ball of claws and tails.

“It’s personal. I think she hates him too much,” he said. “But look at
the screen!”

There were more green dots. Red figures that might have meant something
to a ScreeWee were scrolling up on one side too fast for a human to
read.

He looked down at the controls.

“They’re getting closer! We’ve got to do something.”

Kirsty stared at the controls too. The seats were made to fit a
ScreeWee. So were the controls themselves.

“Well, do you know what [] means?” she said. “Fast? Slow? Fire? The
cigarette lighter?”

The fighters had broken apart and were circling each other, hissing. The
green and red light from the screen threw unpleasant shadows.

Neither ScreeWee was paying the humans the least attention. They
couldn’t afford to. ScreeWee walked like ducks and looked like cartoon
crocodiles, but they fought like cats—it was mainly watching and
snarling with short, terrible blurs of attack and defense.

A light started to flash on the panel and an alarm rang. It rang in
ScreeWee, but it was still pretty urgent even in Human.

The Captain spun around. The Gunnery Officer jumped backward, hit the
ground running, and sped toward the door. He was through it in a blur.

“He can’t go anywhere,” said the Captain, staggering across to the
controls. “I…can deal with him later….”

“You’ve got some nasty scratches,” said Kirsty. ScreeWee blood was blue.
“I know some first aid….”

“A lot, I expect,” said Johnny.

“But not for ScreeWee, I imagine,” said the Captain. Her chest was
heaving. One of her legs seemed to be at the wrong angle. Blue patches
covered her tail.

“You could have just shot him,” said Kirsty. “It was stupid to fight
like that.”

“Honor!” snarled the Captain. She tripped a switch with a claw and
hissed some instructions in ScreeWee. “But he was right. Sadly, I know
this now. There is no changing ScreeWee nature. Our destiny is to fight
and die. I have been foolish to think otherwise.”

She blinked.

“Take off your shirt,” Kirsty demanded.

“What?” said Johnny.

“Your shirt! Your shirt! Look at her! She’s losing blood! She needs
bandaging!”

Johnny obeyed, reluctantly.

“You’ve got an undershirt on? Only grandads wear undershirts. Yuck.
Don’t you ever wash your clothes?”

He did, sometimes. And occasionally his mother had a burst of being a
mother and everything in the house got washed. But usually he used the
wash-basket laundry, which consisted of going through the basket until
he found something that didn’t seem all that bad.

“But she said you wouldn’t know anything about ScreeWee medicine,” he
said.

“So what? Even if it’s blue, blood’s still blood. You should try to keep
it inside.”

Kirsty helped the Captain to a chair. The alien was swaying a bit, and
her scales had gone white, speckled with blue.

“Is there anything I can do?” said Johnny.

Kirsty glanced at him. “I don’t know,” she said. “Is there anything you
can do?”

She turned back to the Captain.

We’ll all die, Johnny thought. They’re all out there waiting. And here’s
me at the controls of the main alien ship. We can’t turn around now. And
I can’t even read what it says on the controls!

I’ve done it all wrong. It was all simple, and now it’s all complicated.

You think about doing things in dreams, but we’re always wrong about
dreams. When people talk about dreams they mean daydreams. That’s where
you’re Superman or whatever. That’s where you win everything. In dreams
everything is weird. I’m in a dream now. Or something like a dream. And
when I wake up, all the ScreeWee will be back in game space and they’ll
be shot at again, just like the Space Invaders.

Hang on….

Hang on….

He stared at the meaningless controls again.

On one of them the symbols [] rearranged themselves to form “Main
Engines.”

This is my world, too. It’s in my head.

He looked up at the big screen.

All of them. They’re all there, waiting. In bedrooms and dens around the
world. In between watching Cobbers and doing their homework.

All waiting with their fingers on the Fire button, and each one thinking
that they’re the only one….

All there, in front of me….

“I wasn’t expecting to do this,” said Kirsty behind him. “I wasn’t
expecting to be bandaging aliens. Put a claw on this knot, will you?
What’s your pulse level?”

“I don’t think we have them,” said the Captain.

The ship thumped.

The distant background rumble of the engines was suddenly a roar.

The seats had bits sticking up where humans didn’t expect bits to stick
up. Johnny was sitting cross-legged on one, both hands on the controls,
face multicolored in the light of the screen.

Kirsty tapped him on the shoulder. “What are you doing?”

“Flying,” said Johnny, without turning his head.

“He said it’s too late to turn around.”

“I’m not turning around.”

“You don’t know how to fly one of these!”

“I’m not flying one of these. I’m flying the whole fleet.”

“You can’t understand the controls!”

Green and red light made patterns on his face as he turned to her.

“You know, everyone tells me things. All the time,” he said. “Well, I’m
not listening now. I can read the controls. Why not? They’re in my head.
Now sit down. I shall need you to do some things. And stop talking to me
as if I’m stupid.”

She sat down, almost hypnotized by his tone of voice.

“But how—”

“There’s a control that lets this ship steer all the others as well.
It’s used on long voyages.” He moved a lever. “And I’m flying them as
fast as I can. I don’t think they can go any faster. All the dials have
gone into the []—that’s ScreeWee for red.”

“But you’re heading straight for the players!”

“I’ve got to. There isn’t time to turn around….”

 

 

Wobbler had a pinup over his bed. It was a close-up photograph of the
Intel 80586–75 microprocessor, taken through a microscope; it looked
like a street map of a very complicated modern city. His grandfather
complained that it was unhealthy and why didn’t he have a double-page
spread from Giggles and Garters instead, but Wobbler had a vision: One
day, if he could master basic math and reliably pick up a soldering iron
by the end that wasn’t hot, he was going to be a Big Man in computers. A
Number One programmer, with his hair in a ponytail at the back like they
all wore. Never mind about Yo-less saying it was all run by men in suits
these days. One day the world would hear from Wobbler Johnson—probably
via a phone line it didn’t know was connected to its computer.

In the meantime, he was staring at columns of numbers in an effort to
make a completely illegal copy of Mr. Bunky Goes Boing. It had been
given four stars and declared “megabad!!!,” which was what Splaaaaatttt!
magazine still thought meant pretty good if you were under sixteen.

He blinked at the screen and smeared the grease on his glasses a bit
more evenly.

And that was enough for tonight.

He sat back, and his eye caught sight of Only You Can Save Mankind under
a pile of other disks.

Poor old Rubber. Of course, you called people crazy all the time, but
there was something weird about him. His body walked around down on
Earth, but his brain was probably somewhere you couldn’t find with an
atlas.

Wobbler shoved the disk into the drive. Odd about the game, though.
There was probably a logical reason for it. That’s what computers were,
logical. Start believing anything else and you were in trouble.

The title came up, and then the bit that Gobi Software had stolen from
Star Wars, and then—

His jaw dropped.

Ships. Hundreds of them. Getting bigger and bigger. Yellow ships filling
the screen so that it was just black and yellow and just yellow and then
blinding white—

Wobbler ducked.

And then a black screen.

Almost black, anyway.

For a moment the words hung there—

Hi, Wobler—

—and then vanished.

 

 

More alarms were clanging and whooping.

Kirsty peered out from between her fingers.

“I don’t think we hit anyone,” said Johnny, tapping on the keys.

“You flew straight through them!”

“That’s right!”

“OK, but they’ll still come after us.”

“So now we turn around. It’ll take a little while. How’s the Captain?”

A clawed hand gripped the back of his chair, and her snout rested on his
shoulder.

“This is very bad,” said the Captain. “Our engines are not designed to
run at this sort of speed for any length of time. They could break down
at any moment.”

“It’s a calculated risk,” said Johnny.

“Really? How precisely did you calculate it?” said the ScreeWee.

“Well…not exactly calculate…I just thought it was worth a try,” said
Johnny.

“You’re turning back toward the players!”

“And we’re still accelerating,” said Johnny.

“What were you typing just then?” said Kirsty.

“Oh, nothing,” said Johnny, grinning. “Just thought I saw someone I
recognized. You know, as we flashed past.”

“Why are you looking so happy?” she demanded. “We’re in terrible
trouble.”

“Dunno. Because it’s my trouble, I suppose. Captain, why have all those
lights over there come on?”

“They’re the ships of the fleet,” said the Captain. “The commanders want
to know what’s happening.”

“Tell them to hold on to something,” said Johnny. “And tell them—tell
them they’re going home.”

They both looked at him.

“Oh, yes, very impressive,” said Kirsty. “Very dramatic. All very—”

“Shut up.”

“What?”

“Shut up,” said Johnny again, his eyes not leaving the screen.

“No one tells me to shut up!”

“I’m telling you now. Just because you’ve got a mind like a, a hammer
doesn’t mean you have to treat everyone else like a nail. Now—here they
come again….”

 

 

Wobbler took the disk out of the drive and looked at it. Then he felt
around the back of his computer in case there were any extra wires.

That Johnny…he was the quiet type. He always said that all he knew about
computers was how to switch them on, but everyone knew about computers.
He’d probably messed around with the game and given it back. Pretty
good. Wobbler wondered how he’d done it.

He put the disk back in and started the game again.

Only You Can Save Mankind…yeah, yeah.

Then the inside of the starship. Missiles, guns, score total, yeah,
yeah…

And stars ahead. The sparkly ones you got in the game. He’d done much
better ones for Voyage to Alpha Centauri.

No ships to be seen.

He picked up the joystick and moved it, watching the stars spin as the
ship turned…

There was a ship right behind him. Very much behind him. Dozens of
ships, again. Hundreds of ships. All getting bigger. Much bigger. Very
quickly.

Very, very quickly.

Again.

When he got up off the floor and put the leg back on the chair, the
screen was all black again, except for the little flashing cursor.

Wobbler stared at it.

Logic, he said. Not believing in logical reasons was almost as bad as
dropping hot solder onto a nylon sock. There had to be a logical
explanation.

One day, he’d think of one.

 

 

“They’re following us! They’re following us!”

Little coils of smoke were coming up from the controls. There were all
sorts of vibrations in the floor.

“I’m pretty sure we can outrun them,” said Johnny.

“How sure?” said Kirsty.

“Pretty sure.”

Kirsty turned to the Captain.

“Have we got any rear guns?”

The Captain nodded.

“They can be fired from here,” she said. “But we should not do that. We
have surrendered, remember?”

“I haven’t,” said Kirsty. “Which one fires the guns?”

“The stick with the button on the top.”

“This? It’s just like a game joystick,” she said.

“Of course it is,” said Johnny. “This is in our heads, remember. It has
to be things we know.”

The screen showed the view behind the fleet. There were green ships
bunched up behind them.

“They’re coming right down our tailpipe,” said Kirsty. “This is going to
be really easy.”

“Yes, it is—isn’t it,” said Johnny.

There was a dull edge to his voice. She hesitated.

“What do you mean?” she said.

“Just dots in the middle of a circle,” said Johnny. “It’s easy. Bang.
Here comes the high score. Bang. Go ahead.”

“But it’s game space! It’s a game. Why are you acting like that? It’s
just something on a screen.”

“Fine. Just like the Real Thing. Press the button, then.”

She gripped the stick. Then she paused again.

“Why do you have to spoil everything?”

“Me?” said Johnny vaguely. “Look, if you’re not going to fire, switch
the screen back to what’s ahead of us, will you? This dial here says
we’re moving at [] per[], and that’s [] times faster than it says we
ought to be going.”

“Well?”

“Well, I just think it’d be nice not to run into an asteroid or
something. Of course, if you want us to end up five miles across and one
inch thick, keep looking back.”

“Oh, all right!”

She took her finger off the screen switch.

And then she gasped.

They stared at the expanse of space ahead of them, and what was in the
middle of it.

“What,” said Kirsty, after a long pause, “is that?”

Johnny laughed.

He tried to stop himself, because the ship was groaning and creaking
like a tortured thing, but he couldn’t. Tears ran down his cheeks. He
thumped his hand helplessly on the control panel, accidentally switching
a few lights on and off.

“It’s the Border,” said the Captain.

“Yes,” said Johnny. “Of course it is.”

“But it’s—” Kirsty began.

“Yes,” said Johnny. “The Border, see? Beyond it they’re safe. Of course.
No one crosses the Border. Humans can’t do it!”

“It can’t be natural.”

“Who knows? This is game space, after all. It’s probably natural here. I
mean, we’ve all seen it before.”

“But it is still a very long way off,” said the Captain. “I fear that—”

There was a dull explosion somewhere behind them.

“Missiles!” said Kirsty. “You should have let me—”

“No, listen,” said Johnny. “Listen.”

“What to? I can’t hear anything.”

“That’s because something’s making a lot of silence,” said Johnny. “The
engines have stopped.”

“The engines have probably melted,” said the Captain.

“We’ve still got…what is it…momentum or inertia or one of those things,”
said Johnny. “We’ll keep going until we hit something.”

“Or something hits us,” said Kirsty.

She looked at the Border again.

“How big is that thing?” she said.

“It must be huge,” said Johnny.

“But there’s stars beyond it.”

“Not our stars. I told you, that’s one place humans can’t go….”

They looked at each other.

“What happens then,” Kirsty began, like someone exploring a particularly
nasty hole in a tooth, “if we’re on a ship that tries to go past the
Border?”

They both turned to the Captain, who shrugged.

“Don’t ask me,” she said. “It’s never happened. It is impossible.”

Now all three of them turned to look at the Border again.

“Is it just me?” said Kirsty, “or is it just a little bit bigger?”

There was some silence.

“Still,” said Johnny, “what’s the worst that can happen to us?”

Then he wished he hadn’t said that. He remembered thinking he’d hear the
alarm clock waking him up, that very first time, and then he recalled
the shock of realizing that he wasn’t being allowed to wake up at all.

“You know, I don’t want to find out,” he added.

“Without engines, we cannot turn the ship around,” said the Captain. “I
am sorry. You were too eager to save us.”

“It is getting bigger,” said Kirsty. “You can tell, if you watch the
stars behind it.”

“I am sorry,” said the Captain again.

“At least the ScreeWee should make it,” said Johnny.

“I am sorry.”

Kirsty stood up. “Well, I’m not,” she said. “Come on!”

She picked up the gun and strode away into the shadows. Johnny ran after
her.

“Where do you think you’re going?”

“To the escape capsule,” she said.

“What escape capsule?”

“Indeed,” said the Captain, scuttling after them, “I ask that too. There
is no such thing.”

“There can be if we want there to be,” said Kirsty, opening the door.
“You said the game is made up of things we know? Well, I know it’ll be
right down under the ship.”

“But—”

“It’s my dream as well as yours, right? Believe me. There’ll be an
escape capsule.” Her eyes had that gleam again. She hefted the gun. “I
know it,” she said. “I’ve been there.”

He remembered her room. He could picture her sitting there, with a dozen
sharp pencils and no friends, getting top marks in her History homework,
while in her head she was chasing aliens.

“I cannot understand,” said the Captain.

The corridor outside was full of steam. The ship might cross the Border,
but it was going to have to have a lot of repairs before it ever came
back.

“Um,” said Johnny. “It’s a bit like the models in the cereal boxes.
It’s…kind of a human idea.”

The ScreeWee hesitated in the doorway. Then she turned to look at the
screen.

“We are getting closer,” she said. “If you think there is something
there, then you must go now.”

“Come on!” said Kirsty.

“Uh—” Johnny began.

“Thank you,” said the Captain gravely.

“I haven’t really done much,” said Johnny.

“Who knows? You never thought of yourself. You tried to work things out.
You made choices. And I chose well.”

“And now we must go!” said Kirsty.

“Perhaps we shall meet again. Afterward. If all goes well,” said the
Captain. She took one of Johnny’s hands in two of her own.

“Good-bye,” she said.

Kirsty caught Johnny’s shoulder and dragged him away.

“Nice to have met you,” she said to the alien. “Sort of—interesting.
Come on, you.”

Some of the lights had gone out. The corridors were full of steam and
vague shapes. Kirsty ran on ahead, darting from shadow to shadow.

“We’ll have to go down,” she said over her shoulder. “It’ll be there.
Don’t worry!”

“You’re really into this, aren’t you?” said Johnny.

“Here’s a ramp. Come on. We can’t have much time.”

There was another passage below that, and another ramp, curling away
down through the steam.

They came out in a room bigger than the bridge. There was a very large
double door at one end, and banks of equipment around the walls. And, in
the middle, standing on three landing legs, was a small ship. It had a
stubby, heavy look.

“There! See? What did I tell you?” said Kirsty triumphantly.

Johnny walked over to the nearest equipment panel and touched it. It was
sticky. He looked at his fingertips.

“It hasn’t been here long,” he said. “The paint’s not dry.”

A screen in the middle of the panel lit up, showing the Captain’s face.

“How interesting,” she said. “I look down at my controls and discover a
new one. You have found your escape capsule?”

“It looks like it,” said Johnny.

“We have ten minutes until we reach the Border,” said the Captain. “You
should have plenty of time.”

There was a whirring noise behind Johnny. The escape capsule’s ramp was
coming down.

“I found a switch on the landing leg,” said Kirsty.

He joined her. The ramp was a silvery-gray color. It gleamed in the
misty blue light that streamed down from inside the capsule.

“Can you guess what I’m thinking?” said Kirsty.

“You’re thinking: We haven’t seen the Gunnery Officer lately,” said
Johnny. “You’re thinking: He’ll be in there somewhere, hiding. Because
this part is your dream, and that’s how your dream works.”

“Only I’ll be ready for him,” said Sigourney. “Come on.”

She sidled up the ramp, turning constantly in a series of small excited
hops to keep the gun pointed at any teeth that might suddenly appear.

There were two seats in the capsule in front of a very small control
panel. There was a big window. There were a couple of small cupboards.
And there wasn’t much of anything else.

Kirsty pointed to a cupboard and made a gesture to Johnny to open it.
She raised her gun.

He opened the door and stood back quickly.

Kirsty seriously menaced a stack of cans.

She caught Johnny’s expression.

“Well, he could have been in there,” she said.

“Oh, yes. Sure. Admittedly he’d have to stop to cut his arms and legs
off and then curl up really small, but he could have been in there.”

“Hah! Smart comment!”

“Why not try looking under the seat cushions? It’s amazing what gets
down behind them.”

Kirsty tried to prod behind the control panel without Johnny noticing.
He noticed.

“Maybe aliens don’t watch the same kinds of films we watch?” he said.

“All right, all right, no need to go on about it,” she snarled. She
looked at the controls and pressed a switch. The hatch swung up. The
Captain’s face appeared on a small screen in the middle of the panel.

“Eight minutes to the Border,” she said.

“Right,” said Kirsty. She shoved a hand down behind her seat cushion and
then looked at Johnny’s grin.

“You see aliens everywhere, don’t you,” he said.

“What’s that supposed to mean?”

“Nothing. Nothing. Just a thought.”

She glowered at him.

There were seat belts. They put them on. Kirsty started to drum her
fingers on the panel. She seemed to be looking for something.

“How do we open the doors?” said Johnny.

“All right, all right—it’s got to be here somewhere.”

She pressed a button. Behind them, the ramp rose up and hissed into
place.

Johnny looked around. There really was nowhere for anyone to hide. They
were aboard the escape craft. They were safe.

He didn’t feel safe. He grabbed Kirsty’s arm.

“Wait a minute,” he said urgently. “I think something’s wro—”

The screen flickered into life.

There was a ScreeWee there.

It was the Gunnery Officer.

“Run and hide, human scum,” he said.

They could see the screen behind him; he was on the bridge.

“You? Where is the Captain?” said Johnny.

“She will be dealt with. While you run away.”

“No!”

Kirsty nudged him.

“Look, the ScreeWee are safe,” she said. “The Border is only a few
minutes away. We’ve done it all! You can’t chase around after her now!
She’ll have to take her chances! That’s what she’d say if you asked
her!”

“But I can’t ask her, can I?”

He reached over and pushed a switch. There was a whirring behind them as
the ramp slid down.

“I’m going back up there,” he said.

“He’ll be waiting for you!”

“Fine.” He picked up the alien gun. “Which bit’s the trigger?”

She rolled her eyes. “This is stupid!”

“Scared, are you?” said Johnny. His face was pale.

“Me?” She shrugged and snatched the gun. “I’ll take this,” she said.
“I’m used to guns. You’ll only make a mess of it.”


Just Like the Real Thing

 

They ran down the ramp and back to the corridor.

“Got a watch on?” said Johnny.

“Yes. We’ve got more than six minutes.”

“I should have known!” said Johnny as they ran. “No one gets that long
to escape! James Bond never turns up with enough time to have a cup of
coffee and clean his shoes before he disarms the time bomb! We’re
playing games again!”

“Calm down!”

“If we find a cat, I’m going to kick it!”

The corridors were darker. Water dripped from the ceiling. There was
still some steam hissing out of broken pipes.

They reached a junction.

“Which way?”

Kirsty pointed.

“That way.”

“Are you sure?”

“Of course.”

They disappeared into the gloom.

About thirty seconds later they reappeared, running.

“Oh, yes, of course.”

“Well, they all look the same, actually. It must be this way!”

This one did lead to the wide corridor with the door to the bridge at
the far end.

It was open. They could see the blue-and-white flickering of the big
screen.

Kirsty changed her grip on the gun.

“O-kay,” she said. “No messing about this time, right? No talking?”

“All right.”

“Let’s go.”

“How?”

“You walk in there. When he leaps out at you, I’ll get him.”

“Oh? I’m bait, am I?”

Kirsty glanced at her wrist.

“You’ve got four and half minutes to think of something better,” she
said. “Oh, sorry. Four minutes and twenty-five seconds. Hang on, that’s
twenty seconds now….”

“I just hope you’re good!”

Kirsty patted the gun. “Regional Champion, remember? Trust me.”

Johnny walked toward the open doorway. He tried to swivel his eyes both
ways as he reached it.

“Four minutes and fifteen seconds,” said her voice far, far behind him.

He halted on the threshold.

“How come you weren’t National Champion?” he asked.

“I had food poisoning on the day, actually.”

“Oh. Right.”

He stepped through.

Multitoothed death failed to happen to him. He risked a better look to
either side and then, swallowing, upward as well.

“Nothing here,” he said.

“OK. I’m right behind you.”

On the screen the Border was already much bigger. We’re traveling very
fast, he thought, and it’s still more than four minutes away, and
already it’s filling the sky. Huge isn’t the word for it.

“I can see all around the room,” he said. “No one’s here.”

“There was a control panel, wasn’t there?” said Kirsty. “Hang on…I’m in
the doorway now. Yes. He’s got to be behind the controls. Go ahead. I’m
ready if he leaps out.”

I’m not, Johnny thought. He sidled across the floor until he could just
see behind the bank of instruments.

“There’s noth…hold it.”

“What?”

“I think it’s the Captain.”

“Is it alive?”

“She. She’s a she. You know she’s a she. I can’t tell. She’s just…lying
there. I’ll have a look.”

“What good would that do?”

“I’m going to have a look, all right?”

“Careful, then. Stay where I can keep an eye on you.”

He moved forward, searching the shadows around the edge of the huge
room.

It was the Captain, and she was alive. At least, bits of what was
probably her chest were going up and down. He knelt beside her.

“Captain?” he whispered.

She opened one eye.

“Chosen One?”

“What happened?”

“He was…waiting. While I…talked to you…he crept in…hit me….”

“Where’d he go then?”

“You…must…go. Not much time…left. The fleet…is…”

“You’re hurt. I’ll get Ki—Sigourney over here…”

Her claw gripped his arm.

“Listen to me! He’s going…to blow up the…ship! The fuel…the power
plant…he’s…”

Johnny stood up.

“Is she all right?” Kirsty called out.

“I don’t know!”

She was standing in the doorway, outlined against the light.

There was a shadow behind her. As Johnny watched, it spread its arms.

It was bigger than a ScreeWee should be. It wasn’t a funny
alligator—there was still a suggestion of alligator there, but now there
was insect, too, and other things…things that had never existed outside
of dreams….

Johnny shouted: “He’s behind you!” Then he lowered his head and ran.

Kirsty turned.

You can’t trust dreams. If you live inside them, they’ll turn on you,
carry you along….

He saw Kirsty turn and look up, and up, at the Gunnery Officer.

The ScreeWee opened his mouth. There were more teeth than he’d had
before; rows and rows of them, and every one glistening and sharp.

Her dream, Johnny thought. No wonder she always fights.

“Shoot it! Shoot it!”

She was just staring. She didn’t seem to want to move.

“You’ve got the gun!” he screamed.

She was like a statue.

“Shoot it!”

“…oh…”

Kirsty shook her head vaguely and then, as if she’d suddenly clicked
awake, raised the gun.

“OK,” she said. “Now—”

The ScreeWee ignored her. He jerked his head up and focused on Johnny.
He hardly had eyes now. The alien seemed to be looking at Johnny with
its teeth.

“Ah. The Chosen One,” it said. He slapped Kirsty out of the way. She
couldn’t even have seen his arm move. One moment she was aiming, and the
next she was lifted into the air and dropping in a heap a few yards
away.

The gun clattered onto the floor and slid toward Johnny.

“Chosen One!” hissed the ScreeWee. “Foolish! We are what we are! You
disgrace your race and mine! For you, and her…for you, there’s no going
back….”

Kirsty was trying to get to her feet, her face contorted with anger.

Johnny reached down and picked up the gun.

The ScreeWee waved two arms in a sudden movement. Johnny flinched.

He heard, from a long way away, Kirsty call out: “Quick! Throw it to me!
To me!”

The alien smiled.

Johnny backed away a little. The alien was concentrating entirely on
him.

“To me, you idiot!” shouted Kirsty.

“You?” said the alien to Johnny. “Shoot me? You can’t. Such weakness.
Like your Captain. A disgrace to the ScreeWee. Always weak. And that is
why you want peace. The strong never want peace.”

Johnny raised the gun.

The alien moved forward, slowly. His teeth seemed to fill the world. His
arms seemed longer, his claws sharper.

“You cannot,” he said. “I’ve watched you. At least the other humans
could fight! We could die honorably! But you…you talk and talk…you’d do
anything rather than fight. You’d do anything but face the truth. You
save mankind? Hah!”

Johnny stepped back again, and felt the edge of the control desk behind
him. There was no more retreating.

“Will you surrender?” he said.

“Never!”

Johnny saw a movement out of the corner of his eye. Kirsty was going to
try to leap on the thing. But the alien wasn’t like the guards now. She
wouldn’t stand a—

He fired.

There was a small, sharp explosion.

The ScreeWee looked down in shock at the sudden blue stain spreading
across his overall, and then back up to Johnny almost in bewilderment.

“You shot me…in cold blood…”

“No. My blood’s never cold.”

The alien toppled forward. And now he was smaller again, more like a
ScreeWee.

“And I had to,” said Johnny.

“You shot him,” said the voice behind him. He looked around. The Captain
had pulled herself to her feet.

“Yes.”

“You had to. But I didn’t think you could….”

Johnny looked down at the gun. His knuckles were white. With some
difficulty, he managed to persuade his fingers to let go.

“I didn’t think I could, either.”

He walked over to Kirsty, who was staring at the thing on the floor.

“Wow,” she said, but quietly.

“Yes,” he said.

“You—”

“Yes, I shot him. I shot him. I wish I didn’t have to, but I had to. He
was alive and now he isn’t.” There were more alarms sounding now, and
red lights flashing on the control panel. On the screen, the Border
completely filled the sky. “Can we go? How much longer have we got
left?”

She looked hazily at her watch.

“A minute and a half.”

He was amazed. He felt he was sitting inside his own head, watching
himself. There wasn’t any panic. The one who was watching didn’t know
what to do, but the one outside seemed to know everything. It was…like a
dream.

“Can you run?” She nodded. “Really fast? What am I saying? You’ve
probably won medals. Come on.”

He pulled her after him, out of the bridge and along the dark corridors.
Kirsty was hardly concentrating anymore; the walls glistened less. There
were even nuts and bolts again.

They reached the capsule. Johnny ran from leg to leg until he found the
button that let down the ramp. It seemed to take ages to come down.

“How long?”

“We’ve got fifty seconds…”

Up the ramp, into the seats.

There weren’t many controls. Johnny peered at them.

“What are you doing?” said Kirsty.

“Like you said before. Looking for one marked ‘Doors Open.’”

The screen flickered into life.

“Johnny? The doors open from up here,” said the Captain.

Johnny glanced up at Kirsty.

“We didn’t know that,” he said.

“Is the ramp back up?”

“Yes.”

“Doors opening.”

There was a clonk ahead of them, and a hiss as the air in the hall
escaped through the widening crack. The twinkling, unreal stars of game
space beckoned them.

Johnny’s hand hovered over the biggest red button on the panel.

“Johnny?”

“Yes, Captain.”

“Thank you. You did not have to help us.”

“If not me, then who else?”

“Hah. Yes. And now…good-bye. We will not…meet again.”

“Good-bye.”

Johnny looked at Kirsty.

“How long?”

“Ten seconds!”

“Let’s go.”

He hit the button.

There was a boom behind them. The walls flashed past. And suddenly they
were surrounded by space.

Johnny leaned back against the seat. His mind was blank, empty, except
for something that kept on replaying itself like a piece of film.

Over and over again, his memory fired the gun. Over and over again, the
alien collapsed. Action replay. Pinpoint precision. Just like the Real
Thing.

Kirsty nudged him.

“Can we steer it?”

“Hmm? What?” He looked vaguely at the controls. “Well, there’s this
joystick…”

“Turn us around, then. I want to watch them go through.”

“Yes. Me too.”

 

 

The capsule turned gently in the deep void of game space, right up
against the Border.

The ScreeWee fleet hurtled past. As each ship reached the Border, it
flickered and faded.

“Do you think they’ve got a planet to go to, really?”

“I think they think so.”

“Do you think they’ll ever be back?”

“Not now.”

“Um…look…when I looked up and I saw that thing…I mean, it was so real.
And I thought, but it’s alive, it’s living, how can I—”

“Yes,” said Johnny.

“And then it was dead and…and I didn’t feel like cheering….”

“Yes.”

“When it’s real, it’s not easy. Because people die and it’s really
over.”

“Yes. I know. Over and over. D’you know what?”

“What?”

“My friend Yo-less thinks dreams like this are a way of dealing with
real life.”

“Yes?”

“I think it’s the other way around.”

“Yo-less is the black one?”

“Yes. We call him Yo-less because he’s not cool.”

“Anticool’s quite cool too.”

“Is it? I didn’t know that. Is it still cool to say ‘well wicked’?”

“Johnny! It was never cool to say ‘well wicked.’”

“How about ‘vode’?”

“Vode’s cool.”

“I just made it up.”

The capsule drifted onward.

“No reason it can’t be cool, though.”

“Right.”

Game stars glittered.

“Johnny?”

“Yes?”

“How come you get on with people so well? How come people always talk to
you?”

“Dunno. Because I listen, I suppose. And it helps to be stupid.”

“Johnny?”

“Still here.”

“What did you mean…you know, back there? When you said I see aliens
everywhere?”

“Um. Can’t remember.”

“You must have meant something.”

“I’m not even sure there are aliens. Only different kinds of us. But I
know what the important thing is. The important thing is to be exactly
sure about what you’re doing. The important thing is to remember it’s
not a game. None of it. Even the games.”

The ship became a dot against the night.

“What do we do to get home? I’ve always had to die to get out.”

“You can get out if you win.”

“There’s a green button here.”

“Worth a try, yes?”

“Right.”

 

 

Light was streaming into the room when Johnny woke up. He lay in someone
else’s bed and looked around through half-closed eyes.

It was like all spare rooms everywhere. There was the lamp that was a
bit old-fashioned and didn’t fit in anywhere else. There was the
bookcase with the books that no one read much. There was a lack of small
things, apart from an ashtray on the bedside table.

There was a clock, but at some time in the past the power had gone off
for a while, and although people must have sorted out every other clock
in the house, they’d forgotten about this one, so it just sat and
flashed 7:41 continuously, day and night. But an absence of sound from
below suggested that it was still early in the morning.

He snuggled down, treasuring this time stolen between dreaming and
waking.

So…what next? He’d have to talk to Kirsty, who dreamed of being
Sigourney and forgot that she was trying to be someone who was acting.
And he had a suspicion that he’d see his parents before long. He was
probably going to be talked at a lot, but at least that’d make a change.

These were still Trying Times. There was still school. Nothing actually
was better, probably. No one was doing anything with a magic wand.

But the fleet had got away. Compared to that, everything else was…well,
not easy. But less like a wall and more like steps.

You might never win, but at least you could try. If not you, who else?

He turned over and went back to sleep.

 

 

The Border hung in the sky.

Huge white letters, thousands of miles high.

They spelled:

[]

And the fleet roared past. Tankers, battleships, fighters…they soared
and rolled, their shadows streaking across the letters as ship after
ship escaped, forever.

[]

 


About the Author

 

TERRY PRATCHETT’s novels have been translated into more than two dozen
languages and have sold over 45 million copies. In addition to his
bestselling series about the fantastical flat planet Discworld, he has
also written books for young readers, including The Bromeliad Trilogy:
TRUCKERS, DIGGERS, and WINGS, as well as two other books in the Johnny
Maxwell Trilogy: JOHNNY AND THE DEAD and JOHNNY AND THE BOMB. He has
also written three books about the young witch Tiffany Aching: THE WEE
FREE MEN, A HAT FULL OF SKY, and WINTERSMITH.
      Mr. Pratchett received the Carnegie Medal, Britain’s highest honor
for a children’s novel, for THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED
RODENTS. He lives in England.

 

You can visit Mr. Pratchett online at www.terrypratchettbooks.com.

 

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.

 


Books by TERRY PRATCHETT

 

The Carpet People
The Dark Side of the Sun
Strata

 

THE BROMELIAD TRILOGY:
Truckers • Diggers • Wings

 

 

THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY:
Only You Can Save Mankind • Johnny and the Dead
Johnny and the Bomb

 

The Unadulterated Cat
(illustrated by Gray Jollife)

 

Good Omens (with Neil Gaiman)

 

 

 

THE DISCWORLD SERIES

 

 

The Color of Magic
The Light Fantastic
Equal Rites • Mort • Sourcery
Wyrd Sisters • Pyramids • Guards! Guards!
Eric • Moving Pictures • Reaper Man
Witches Abroad • Small Gods • Lords and Ladies
Men at Arms • Soul Music • Feet of Clay
Interesting Times • Maskerade
Hogfather • Jingo • The Last Continent
Carpe Jugulum • The Fifth Elephant
The Truth • Thief of Time • Night Watch
The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents
The Wee Free Men • Monstrous Regiment
A Hat Full of Sky • Going Postal
Thud!
Where’s My Cow?
(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)
The Last Hero: A Discworld Fable
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)
The Art of Discworld
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

 


Copyright

      ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND. 

Copyright © 1992 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett, Introduction © 2004 by
Terry and Lyn Pratchett. 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. 

By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,
nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.

Mobipocket Reader 
March 2007 
ISBN 978-0-06-137677-1

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

[]
 


About the Publisher

 

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

 

Canada

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900

Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

 

New Zealand

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

 

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com

 

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

* For anyone reading this in 2013: Newrocks were—and maybe still are—a
cool boot like a cross between footwear and an armored car; the mosh pit
was that bit right up close to the stage at a punk or heavy metal
concert where all the stomping went on. Heavy metal was…oh, go and look
it up….

 

 
