

[IMAGES]


Dedication

_For Lyn and Rhianna, as always_

T.P.

_For Sandra_

S.B.


Contents

Dedication

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38

Chapter 39

Chapter 40

Chapter 41

Chapter 42

Chapter 43

Chapter 44

Chapter 45

Chapter 46

Chapter 47

Chapter 48

Chapter 49

Chapter 50

Chapter 51

Chapter 52

Chapter 53

Chapter 54

Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Chapter 57

Chapter 58

Chapter 59

Chapter 60

Chapter 61

Chapter 62

Chapter 63

Chapter 64

Chapter 65

Chapter 66

Chapter 67

Chapter 68

Chapter 69

Acknowledgements

About the Authors

Also by Terry Pratchett and Stephen Baxter

Credits

Copyright

About the Publisher

[images]


1

ON AN ALTERNATE WORLD, two million steps from Earth:

The troll female was called Mary by her handlers, Monica Jansson read on
the rolling caption on the video clip. No one knew what the troll called
herself. Now two of those handlers, both men, one in a kind of
spacesuit, faced Mary as she cowered in a corner of what looked like a
high-tech laboratory – if a beast built like a brick wall covered in
black fur could be said to cower at all – and she held her cub to her
powerful chest. The cub, itself a slab of muscle, was similarly dressed
up in its own silvery spacesuit, with wires dangling from sensors
attached to its flat skull.

‘Give him back, Mary,’ one of the men could be heard to say. ‘Come on
now. We’ve been planning this test for a long time. George here will
haul him over into the Gap in his spacesuit, he’ll float around in
vacuum for an hour or so, and then he’ll be right back here safe and
sound. He’ll even have fun.’

The other man stayed ominously silent.

The first approached Mary, a step at a time. ‘No ice cream if you keep
this up.’

Mary’s big, very human hands made gestures, signs, a blur. Rapid, hard
to follow, but decisive.

As the incident had been replayed over and over there had been a lot of
online speculation about why Mary hadn’t just stepped away at this
point. Probably it was simply that she was being held underground: you
couldn’t step into or out of a cellar, into the solid rock you’d find
stepwise. Besides, Jansson, a retired lieutenant formerly of Madison
Police Department, knew there were plenty of ways to stop a troll
stepping, if you could get your hands on the animal.

The theory of what these men were trying to do was much discussed too.
They were in a world next door to the Gap – a step away from vacuum,
from space, from a hole where an Earth ought to be. They were building a
space programme out there, and wanted to see if troll labour, highly
useful across the Long Earth, could be exploited in the Gap. Not
surprisingly adult trolls were very reluctant to step over into that
drifting emptiness, so the GapSpace researchers were trying to habituate
the young. Like this cub.

‘We haven’t got time for this,’ said the second man. He produced a metal
rod, a stunner. He walked forward, holding the rod out towards Mary’s
chest. ‘Time for Mommy to say goodnight for a while—’

The adult troll grabbed the rod, snapped it in two, and jammed the
sharp, broken end into the second man’s right eye.

Every time you saw it, it was shocking.

The man fell back screaming, blood spilling, very bright red. The first
guy pulled him back, out of shot. ‘Oh my God! Oh my God!’

Mary, holding her cub, her fur splashed with human blood, repeated the
gestures she had made, over and over.

Things happened quickly after that. These space cadets had tried to put
down this troll, this mother, immediately. They even pulled a gun on
her. But they’d been stopped by an older guy, more dignified, who looked
to Jansson like a retired astronaut.

And now retribution was on hold, because of the attention focused on the
case.

Since this lab recording had been leaked it had become an outernet
sensation in itself, and had led to a flood of similar reports. There
was cruelty to beasts, and especially the trolls, it seemed, all over
the Long Earth. Internet and outernet were alight with flame wars
between those who believed in mankind’s right to do as it wished with
the denizens of the Long Earth, all the way to putting them down when it
suited – some referring back to the Biblical dominion given to humans
over fish, fowl, cattle, and creeping things – and others who wished
that mankind didn’t have to take _all_ its flaws out into the new
worlds. This incident at the Gap, precisely because it had taken place
at the heart of a nascent space programme, an expression of mankind’s
highest aspirations – and even though it betrayed a kind of
insensitivity, Jansson thought, rather than downright cruelty – had
become a poster case. A vociferous minority called for the federal
government on Datum Earth to do something about it.

And others wondered what the trolls thought about it all. Because trolls
had ways of communicating too.

Monica Jansson, watching the clip in her apartment in Madison West 5,
tried to read Mary’s hand signs. She knew the language trolls were
taught in experimental establishments like this one was based on a human
language, American Sign Language. Jansson had had a little
familiarization with signing in the course of her police career; she was
no expert, but she could read what the troll was saying. And so, she
imagined, could millions of others across the Long Earth, wherever this
clip was being accessed:

_I will not_.

_I will not_.

_I will not_.

This was no dumb animal. This was a mother trying to protect a child.

Don’t get involved, Jansson told herself. You’re retired, and you’re
sick. Your crusading days are over.

There was, of course, no choice. She turned off the monitor, popped
another pill, and started making calls.

And on a world almost as far away as the Gap:

A creature that was not quite a human faced a creature that was not
quite a dog.

People called the humanoid’s kind _kobolds_, more or less inaccurately.
‘Kobold’ was an old German name for a mine-spirit. This particular
kobold, peculiarly addicted to human music – in particular 1960s rock
music – had never been near a mine.

And people called these dog-like creatures _beagles_, equally
inaccurately. They were not beagles, and they were like nothing Darwin
had seen from the most famous _Beagle_ of all.

Neither kobold nor beagle cared about names humans gave them. But they
cared about humans. Or rather, despised them. Even though, in the
kobold’s case, he was also helplessly fascinated by humans and their
culture.

‘Trollen unhap-ppy, everywhere,’ hissed the kobold.

‘Good,’ the beagle growled. She was a bitch. She wore a gold finger-ring
set with sapphires on a thong around her neck. ‘Good. Smell of
c-hrr-imes of stink-crotches stains world.’

The kobold’s speech was almost like a human’s. The beagle’s was a matter
of growls, gestures, postures, pawing at the ground. Yet they understood
each other, using a quasi-human language as a common patois.

And they had a common cause.

‘Drive stink-crotches back to their-hrr den.’ The beagle lifted her body
and stood upright, raised her wolf-like head, and howled. Soon responses
came from all across the humid landscape.

The kobold exulted at the chance of acquisition as a result of all this
trouble, acquisition of the goods he treasured himself, and of others he
could trade. But he strove to hide his fear of the beagle princess, his
unlikely customer and ally.

And at a military base on Datum Hawaii, US Navy Commander Maggie
Kauffman gazed up in wonder at the USS _Benjamin Franklin_, an airship
the size of the _Hindenburg_, the brand-new vessel that was hers to
command . . .

And in a sleepy English village the Reverend Nelson Azikiwe pondered his
little parish church in the context of the Long Earth, a treasured scrap
of antiquity amid unmapped immensity, and considered his own future
. . .

And in a bustling city more than a million steps from the Datum, a
one-time stepwise pioneer called Jack Green carefully phrased an appeal
for liberty and dignity in the Long Earth . . .

And at Yellowstone Park, Datum Earth:

It was only Ranger Herb Lewis’s second day on the job. He sure as hell
didn’t know how to deal with this angry in-your-face complaint from Mr.
and Mrs. Virgil Davies of Los Angeles about how upset their
nine-year-old, Virgilia, had become, and how Daddy had been made to look
a _liar_, on her _birthday_. It wasn’t Herb’s fault if Old Faithful had
failed to blow. It was no consolation at all when, later that day, the
family found their faces all over the news channels and websites as the
geyser’s misbehaviour hit the headlines . . .

And in a Black Corporation medical facility on a Low Earth:

‘Sister Agnes? I have to wake you again for a little while, just for
calibration . . .’

Agnes thought she heard music. ‘I am awake. I think.’

‘Welcome back.’

‘Back from where? Who are you? And what’s that chanting?’

‘Hundreds of Tibetan monks. For forty-nine days you have been—’

‘And that dreary music?’

‘Oh. You can blame John Lennon for _that_. The lyrics are quotes from
the Book of the Dead.’

‘What a racket.’

‘Agnes, your physical orientation will take some time yet. But I think
it should be possible for you to see yourself in the mirror. This won’t
take long . . .’

She could not tell _how_ long, but eventually there was light, very soft
but growing steadily.

‘You will feel some pressure as you are lifted to a standing position.
It should not be unpleasant. We cannot work on your ambulant abilities
until you are stronger, but you will meld into your new body with
minimal pain. Trust me, I have been through this myself many times
before. You will be able to see yourself about . . . now.’

And Sister Agnes looked down at herself. At her body: pink, naked, raw,
and _very_ female. Without feeling her lips move – and indeed without
actually feeling her lips at all – Agnes demanded, ‘Who ordered
_those_?’


2

SALLY LINSAY ARRIVED at Hell-Knows-Where fast and furious. But when had
_that_ ever been unusual?

Joshua Valienté heard her voice coming from the house, as he was heading
back from an afternoon’s work in his forge. On this world, as on all the
worlds of the Long Earth, it was late March, and the light was already
fading. Since she’d shown up on the day of his wedding nine years ago, a
visit from this particular old friend had been rare, and generally meant
that something was amiss – amiss in spades. As Helen, his wife, would
also know all too well. His stomach knotting, Joshua hurried his step.

He found Sally sitting at the kitchen table, nursing coffee in a
local-pottery mug. She was looking away from him, she hadn’t noticed him
yet, and he paused at the door to study her, taking in the scene,
getting his bearings.

Helen was in the dry store, and Joshua saw she was digging out salt,
pepper, matches. On the table, meanwhile, Sally had dumped enough
butchered meat to last for weeks. This was pioneer protocol. The
Valientés didn’t need the meat, of course, but that was no matter. The
deal was that the visiting traveller brought the meat, and the
householder repaid the gift not only with a meal, the catch properly
dressed and cooked, but also with some of those little comforts that
were hard to find in the wilderness, such as salt, pepper, a good
night’s sleep in a proper bed. Joshua smiled. Sally prided herself on
being somewhat more self-sufficient than Daniel Boone and Captain Nemo
put together, but surely even Daniel Boone must’ve craved pepper – just
like Sally.

She was forty-three years old now, a few years older than Joshua – and
sixteen years older than Helen, which didn’t help their various
interrelationships. Her greying hair was tied neatly back, and she wore
her usual garb of heavy-duty jeans and sleeveless, multi-pocketed
jacket. Just as she’d always been, she was lean, wiry, eerily still –
and watchful.

Right now she was watching an object on the wall: a gold ring set with
sapphires, hanging on a loop of string from a stubby local-forge iron
nail. It was one of the few trophies Joshua had kept of the journey of
discovery across the Long Earth that the two of them had made with
Lobsang. Or, _The Journey_, as the world knew it ten years later. It was
a gaudy thing, and too large for a human finger. But then, humans hadn’t
made it, as Sally would remember. Just below the ring hung another bit
of jewellery, a monkey bracelet, plastic and paste: a thing for a kid,
gaudy, silly. Joshua was pretty sure Sally would remember the
significance of that too.

He walked forward, deliberately pushing the door to make it creak. She
turned and surveyed him, critical, unsmiling.

He said, ‘Heard you arrive.’

‘You’ve put on weight.’

‘Nice to see you too, Sally. I take it you’ve a reason for coming here.
You always have a reason.’

‘Oh, yes.’

I wonder if Calamity Jane was like this, Joshua thought as he
reluctantly sat down. Like a gunpowder explosion going off periodically
in the middle of your life. Maybe, though Sally had marginally better
access to toiletries.

Helen was now in the kitchen, and Joshua smelled meat on the griddle.
When he caught Helen’s eye she waved away his silent offer of help. He
recognized tact when he saw it. Helen was trying to give them some
space. Tact, yes, but he also feared this was the beginning of one of
Helen’s icy silences. Sally after all was a woman who’d had a long,
complicated and _famous_ relationship with her husband before he’d even
known Helen. Sally had been at his side, in fact, when he first met
Helen, then a seventeen-year-old pioneer in a brand-new Long Earth
colony town. His young wife was never going to jump for joy when Sally
showed up again.

Sally was waiting for him to respond, ignorant of such subtleties, or
uncaring.

He sighed. ‘So tell me. What brings you here this time?’

‘Another slimeball killed another troll.’

He grunted. There had been a blizzard of such incidents in the news
brought by the outernet – incidents occurring across the Long Earth,
from the Datum to Valhalla and beyond, evidently all the way up to the
Gap, judging from recent sensational reports of a lurid case involving a
cub in a 1950s-type spacesuit.

‘Butchered it, in this case,’ Sally said. ‘I mean, literally. Reported
at an Aegis administration office at Plumbline, just inside the
Meggers—’

‘I know it.’

‘It was a young one this time. Body parts taken for some kind of folk
medicine. For once the guy’s actually been arrested on a cruelty charge.
But his family are kicking up because, what the hell, it was just an
animal, wasn’t it?’

Joshua shook his head. ‘We’re all under the US Aegis. What’s the
argument? Aren’t Datum animal cruelty laws supposed to apply?’

‘_That’s_ all a mess, Joshua, with different rulings at federal and
state level, and arguments about how such rulings extend to the Long
Earth anyhow. Not to mention the lack of resources to police them.’

‘I don’t follow Datum politics too closely. You know, here we protect
trolls under an extension of our citizenship rights.’

‘Really?’

He smiled. ‘You sound surprised. You’re not the only one with a
conscience, you know. Anyhow trolls are too damn useful to have them
bothered, or driven away.’

‘Well, not everywhere is as civilized, evidently. You must remember,
Joshua, that the Aegis is presided over by Datum politicians, which is
to say, buttholes. And they really don’t get it! They are _not_ the kind
of people to get mud on their shiny shoes anywhere much beyond a park in
Earth West 3. They have no idea of how important it is that humanity
stays friendly with the trolls. The long call is full of it.’

Meaning every troll everywhere would soon know all about this.

Sally said now, ‘You know, the problem is that before Step Day most of
what trolls knew and understood about humanity came from their
experiences in places like Happy Landings, where they lived closely with
humans. Peacefully, constructively . . .’

‘If a little creepily.’

‘Well, yes. What is happening now is that trolls are encountering
ordinary folk. That is, idiots.’

With a sense of dread he asked, ‘Sally – why have you come here? What do
you want me to do about this?’

‘Your duty, Joshua.’

She meant, Joshua knew, that he was to go with her, off into the Long
Earth. Saving the worlds once again.

The hell with that, he thought. Times had changed. He’d changed. His
duty was _here_: to his family, his home, this township which had,
foolishly enough, elected him mayor.

Joshua had fallen in love with the place even before he had seen it,
reckoning that the first-footers who had given their home a name like
Hell-Knows-Where were very likely to be decent people with a sense of
humour, as indeed they’d turned out to be. As for Helen, who had trekked
out with her family to found a brand-new township, this way of living
was what she had grown up with. And this place they had come to, in a
million-step-remote footprint of the Mississippi valley, had turned out
to have air that was clean, a river lively with fish, a land rich with
game and replete with other resources such as lead and iron ore seams.
Thanks to a twain mass-spectrometry scan of nearby formations that
Joshua had called in as a favour, they even had the makings of a copper
mine. As a bonus, the climate here happened to be just a little cooler
than on the Datum, and in the winter the local copy of the Mississippi
regularly froze over – a thrilling spectacle, even if it did threaten a
couple of careless lives every year.

When they’d arrived, Joshua, even compared with his new young wife, had
been a novice settler, for all his trekking experience in the Long
Earth. But now he was recognized as a skilled hunter, butcher, general
artificer – and pretty nearly, these days, blacksmith and smelter. Not
to mention mayor until the next poll. Helen, meanwhile, was a senior
midwife and a top herbalist.

Of course it was hard work. A pioneer family lived beyond the reach of
shopping malls, and bread always needed baking, hams needed curing,
tallow had to be made, and beer had to be brewed. Out here, in fact, you
worked all the time. But the work was pleasing. And the work was
Joshua’s life now . . .

Sometimes he missed isolation. His sabbaticals, as he called them. The
sense of emptiness when he was entirely alone on a world. The absence of
the pressure of other minds, a pressure he felt even here, though it was
a ghost compared with what he felt on the Datum. And the eerie sense of
the _other_ that he’d always called the Silence, like a hint of vast
minds, or assemblages of minds, somewhere far off. He’d once met one of
those mighty remote minds in the extraordinary First Person Singular.
But there were more out there, he knew. He could hear them, like gongs
sounding in distant mountains . . . Well, he’d had all that. But _this_,
he’d belatedly discovered, was far more precious: his wife, their son,
perhaps a second child some day.

Nowadays he tried to ignore what was going on beyond the town limits.
After all, it wasn’t as though he owed the Long Earth anything. He’d
saved lives on stepwise worlds on Step Day itself, and later had opened
up half of them with Lobsang. He’d done his duty in this new age, hadn’t
he?

But here was Sally, an incarnation of his past, sitting at his kitchen
table, waiting for an answer. Well, he wasn’t going to rush to reply.
Generally speaking, Joshua wasn’t a trigger-fast speaker at the best of
times. He took refuge in the concept that sometimes slowest is the
fastest in the end.

They stared it out.

To his relief, Helen walked in at last, and set out beer and burgers:
home-brewed beer, home-raised beef, home-baked bread. She sat with them
and began a pleasant enough conversation, asking Sally about her recent
ports of call. When they’d eaten, Helen bustled about once more,
clearing the plates, again refusing Joshua’s offer of help.

All the time there was another dialogue going on under the surface.
Every marriage had its own private language. Helen knew very well why
Sally was here, and after nine years of marriage Joshua could hear the
feeling of imminent loss as if it were being broadcast on the radio.

If Sally heard it, she didn’t care. Once Helen had left them alone at
the table once more, she started in again. ‘As you say, it’s not the
only case.’

‘What isn’t?’

‘The Plumbline slaughter.’

‘So much for the chit-chat, eh, Sally?’

‘It’s not even the most notorious, right now. You want an itemized
list?’

‘No.’

‘You see what’s happening here, Joshua. Humanity has been given a
chance, with the Long Earth. A new start, an escape from the Datum, a
whole world we already screwed up—’

‘I know what you’re going to say.’ Because she’d said it a million times
before, in his hearing. ‘We’re going to bollocks up our second chance at
Eden, even before the paint has dried.’

Helen deposited a large bowl of ice cream in the middle of the table
with a definite _thud_.

Sally stared at it like a dog confronted by a brontosaurus bone. ‘You
make _ice cream_? Here?’

Helen sat down. ‘Last year Joshua put in the hours on an ice house. It
wasn’t a difficult project once we got round to it. The trolls like the
ice cream. And we do get hot weather here; it’s wonderful to have
something like this when you’re bartering with the neighbours.’

Joshua could hear the subtext, even if Sally couldn’t. _This isn’t about
ice cream. This is about our life. What we’re building here. Which you,
Sally, have no part of_.

‘Go on, help yourself, we have plenty more. It’s getting late – of
course you’re welcome to stay the night. Would you like to come see
Dan’s school play?’

Joshua saw the look of sheer terror on Sally’s face. As an act of mercy
he said, ‘Don’t worry. It won’t be as bad as you think. We have smart
kids, and decent and helpful parents, good teachers – I should know, I’m
one of them, and so is Helen.’

‘Community schooling?’

‘Yes. We concentrate on survival skills, metallurgy, medical botany,
Long Earth animal biology, the whole spectrum of practical skills from
flint-working to glass-making . . .’

Helen said, ‘But it’s not all pioneer stuff. We have a high scholastic
standard. They even learn Greek.’

‘Mr. Johansen,’ said Joshua. ‘Peripatetic. Commutes twice a month from
Valhalla.’ He smiled and pointed to the ice cream. ‘Get it while it’s
cold.’

Sally took one large scoop, demolished it. ‘Wow. Pioneers with ice
cream.’

Joshua felt motivated to defend his home. ‘Well, it doesn’t _have_ to be
like the Donner Party, Sally—’

‘You’re also pioneers with cellphones, aren’t you?’

It was true that life was a tad easier here than for pioneers on the
Long Earth elsewhere. On this Earth, West 1,397,426, they even had
sat-nav – and only Joshua, Helen and a few others knew why the Black
Corporation had decided to use _this_ particular world to try out their
prototype technology, orbiting twenty-four nanosats from a small
portable launcher. Call it a favour from an old friend . . .

Among those few others in the know was Sally, of course.

Joshua faced her. ‘Lay off, Sally. The sat-nav and the rest are here
because of me. I know it. My friends know it.’

Helen grinned. ‘One of the engineers who called to fix up that stuff
once told Joshua that the Black Corporation sees him as a “valuable
long-term investment”. Worth cultivating, I suppose. Worth keeping sweet
with little gifts.’

Sally snorted. ‘Meaning that’s how Lobsang sees you. How demeaning.’

Joshua ignored that, as he generally ignored any mention of that
particular name. ‘And besides, I know that some people are drawn here
_because_ of me.’

‘The famous Joshua Valienté.’

‘Why not? It’s good not to have to advertise for good people. And if
they don’t fit, they leave anyhow.’

Sally opened her mouth, ready for a few more jabs.

But Helen had evidently had enough. She stood up. ‘Sally, if you want to
freshen up we’ve got a guest room down the passage there. Curtain up is
in an hour. Dan – that’s our son, maybe you remember him – is already
down at the town hall helping out, which is to say bossing the other
kids about. Take some of the ice cream when we go over if you like. It’s
only a short walk.’

Joshua forced a smile. ‘Everywhere’s a short walk here.’

Helen glanced out through the crude glass of the window. ‘And it looks
like another perfect evening . . .’


3

IT WAS INDEED a perfect early spring evening.

Of course this world was no longer pristine, Joshua thought, as the
three of them walked to the town hall for the school show. You could see
the clearances nibbling into the forest by the river banks, and the
smoke from the forges and workshops, and the tracks cutting through the
forest straight and sharp. But still, what caught your eye was the
essentials of the landscape, the bend of this stepwise copy of the
Mississippi, and the bridges and the wooded expanses beyond the banks.
Hell-Knows-Where looked the way its parent town back on the Datum –
Hannibal, Missouri – had back in the nineteenth century, maybe, Mark
Twain’s day. That was perfection, for his money.

But right now that perfect sky was marred by a twain hanging in the air.

The airship was being unloaded by rope chains, trunk by trunk, bale by
bale. In the gathering twilight, its hull shining like bronze, it looked
like a ship from another world, which in a sense it was. And though the
town hall show was about to start, there were a few students outside
watching the sky, the boys in particular looking hungry – boys who would
give anything in the world to be twain drivers some day.

The twain was a symbol of many things, Joshua thought. Of the reality of
the Long Earth itself, for a start.

_The Long Earth_: suddenly, on Step Day, twenty-five years before,
mankind had found itself with the ability to step sideways, simply to
walk into an infinite corridor of planet Earths, one after the next and
the next. No spaceships required: each Earth was just a walk away. And
every Earth was like the original, more or less, save for a striking
lack of humanity and all its works. There was a world for everybody who
wanted one, uncounted billions of worlds, if the leading theories were
right.

There were some people who, faced with such a landscape, bolted the door
and hid away. Some people did the same thing inside their heads. But
others flourished. And for such people in their scattered settlements
across the new worlds, a quarter-century on, the twains were becoming an
essential presence.

After the pioneering exploratory journey ten years back by Joshua and
Lobsang in the _Mark Twain_ – that ship had been a prototype, the first
cargo- and passenger-carrying craft capable of stepwise motion – Douglas
Black, of the Black Corporation who’d built the _Twain_, and the
majority owner of the subsidiary that supported Lobsang and his various
activities, had announced that the technology was to be a gift to the
world. It had been a typical gesture by Black, greeted with loud
cynicism about his motives, welcomed with open arms by all. Now, a
decade later, the twains were doing for the colonization of the Long
Earth what the Conestoga wagon and Pony Express had once done for the
Old West. The twains flew and flew, knitting together the burgeoning
stepwise worlds . . . They had even stimulated the growth of new
industries themselves. Helium for their lift sacs, scarce on Datum
Earth, was now being extracted from stepwise copies of Texas, Kansas and
Oklahoma.

Nowadays even the news was dispersed across the Long Earth by the
airship fleets. A kind of multi-world internet was growing up, known as
the ‘outernet’. On each world they passed through the airships would
download rapid update packets to local nodes to be spread laterally
across that world, and would upload any ongoing messages and mail. And
when airships met, away from the big Datum–Valhalla spine route, they
would hold a ‘gam’ – a word resurrected from the days of the old whaling
fleets – where they would swap news and correspondence. It was all kind
of informal, but then so had been the structure of the pre-Step Day
internet on the Datum. And being informal it was robust; as long as your
message had the right address, it would find its way home.

Of course there were some in places like Hell-Knows-Where who resented
the presence of these interlopers, because the twains, one way or
another, represented the reach of the Datum government: a reach that
wasn’t always welcome. The administration’s policy towards its Long
Earth colonies had swung back and forth with the years, from hostility
and even exclusion, to cooperation and legislation. Nowadays the rule
was that once a colony had more than one hundred people, it was supposed
to report itself back to the federal government on Datum Earth as an
‘official’ presence. Soon you would be on the map, and the twains would
come, floating down from the sky to deliver people and livestock, raw
materials and medical care, and carry away any produce you wanted to
export via local links to the great stepwise transport hubs like
Valhalla.

As they travelled between the old United States and the worlds of its
Aegis – all the way out to Valhalla, the best part of a million and a
half steps from the Datum – the twains connected the many Americas,
comfortably suggesting that they were all marching to the same drum.
This despite the fact that many people in the stepwise worlds didn’t
know which drum you were talking about or what the hell beat it was
playing, _their_ priority being themselves and their neighbours. The
Datum and its regulations, politics and taxes seemed an increasingly
remote abstraction, twains or not . . .

And right now two people looked up at this latest twain with suspicious
eyes.

Sally said, ‘Do you think _he_ is up there?’

Joshua said, ‘An iteration at least. The twains can’t step without some
artificial intelligence on board. You know him; he is all iteration. He
likes to be where the action is, and right now _everywhere_ is where the
action is.’

They were talking about Lobsang, of course. Even now Joshua would have
difficulty in explaining who exactly Lobsang was. Or what. _Imagine God
inside your computer, your phone, everyone else’s computer. Imagine
someone who almost_ is _the Black Corporation, with all its power and
riches and reach. And who, despite all this, seems pretty sane and
beneficent by the standards of most gods. Oh, and who sometimes swears
in Tibetan_ . . .

Joshua said, ‘Incidentally I heard a rumour that he has an iteration
headed out of the solar system altogether, on some kind of spaceprobe.
You know him, he always takes the long view. And there’s no such thing
as too much backup.’

‘So now he could survive the sun exploding,’ Sally said dryly. ‘That’s
good to know. You have much contact with him?’

‘No. Not now. Not for ten years. Not since he, or whichever version of
_him_ resides on the Datum, let Madison be flattened by a backpack nuke.
That was my home town, Sally. What use is a presence like Lobsang if he
couldn’t stop that? And if he _could_ have stopped it, why didn’t he?’

Sally shrugged. Back then, she’d stepped into the ruins of Madison at
his side. Evidently she had no answer.

He became aware of Helen walking ahead of the two of them, talking to a
gaggle of neighbours, wearing what Joshua, a veteran of nine years of
marriage, called her ‘polite’ expression. Suitably alarmed, he hurried
to catch her up.

He thought they were all relieved when they got to the town hall. Sally
read the title of the show from a hand-painted poster tacked to the
wall: ‘“The Revenge of Moby-Dick”. You have got to be kidding me.’

Joshua couldn’t suppress a grin. ‘It’s good stuff. Wait for the bit
where the illegal whaling fleet gets its comeuppance. The kids learned
some Japanese just for that scene. Come on, we’ve got seats up front
. . .’

It was indeed a remarkable show, from the opening scene in which a
narrator in a salt-stained oilskin jacket walked to the front of the
stage: ‘Call me Ishmael.’

‘Hi, Ishmael!’

‘Hi, boys and girls! . . .’

By the time the singing squid got three encores after the big closing
number, ‘Harpoon of Love’, even Sally was laughing out loud.

In the after-show party, children and parents mingled in the hall. Sally
stayed on, clutching a drink. But her expression, Joshua thought, as she
looked around at the chattering adults, the children’s bright faces,
gradually soured.

Joshua risked asking, ‘What’s on your mind now?’

‘It’s all so damn _nice_.’

Helen said, ‘You never did trust _nice_, did you, Sally?’

‘I can’t help thinking you’re wide open.’

‘Wide open to what?’

‘If I was a cynic I would be wondering if sooner or later some
charismatic douche-bag might stomp all over this _Little House on the
Prairie_ dream of yours.’ She glanced at Helen. ‘Sorry for saying
“douche-bag” in front of your kids.’

To Joshua’s amazement, and apparently Sally’s, Helen burst out laughing.
‘You don’t change, do you, Sally? Well, that’s not going to happen. The
stomping thing. Look – I think we’re pretty robust here. Physically and
intellectually robust, I mean. For a start we don’t do God here. Most of
the parents at Hell-Knows-Where are atheist unbelievers, or agnostics at
best – simply people who get on with their lives without requiring help
from above. We do teach our kids the golden rule—’

‘Do as you would be done by.’

‘That’s one version. And similar basic life lessons. We get along fine.
We work together. And I think we do pretty well for the kids. They learn
because we make it fun. See young Michael, the boy in the wheelchair
over there? He wrote the script for the play, and Ahab’s song was
entirely his own work.’

‘Which one? “I’d Swap My Other Leg for Your Heart”?’

‘That’s the one. He’s only seventeen, and if he never gets a chance at
developing his music there is no justice.’

Sally looked uncharacteristically thoughtful. ‘Well, with people like
you two around, he’ll get his chance.’

Helen’s expression flickered. ‘Are you mocking us?’

Joshua tensed for the fireworks.

But Sally merely said, ‘Don’t tell anybody I said so. But I envy you,
Helen Valienté née Green. A little bit anyhow. Although _not_ over
Joshua. This drink’s terrific, by the way, what is it?’

‘There is a tree in these parts, a maple of sorts . . . I’ll show you if
you like.’ She held up her glass in a toast. ‘Here’s to you, Sally.’

‘What for?’

‘Well, for keeping Joshua alive long enough to meet me.’

‘That’s true enough.’

‘And you’re our guest here for as long as you wish. But – tell me the
truth. You’re here to take Joshua away again, aren’t you?’

Sally looked into her glass and said calmly, ‘Yes. I’m sorry.’

Joshua asked, ‘It’s the trolls, right? Sally, what exactly is it you
want me to do about that?’

‘Follow up the arguments about animal protection laws. Raise the current
cases, at Plumbline and the Gap, and elsewhere. Try to get some kind of
troll protection order properly drawn up and enforced—’

‘You mean, go back to the Datum.’

She smiled. ‘Do a Davy Crockett, Joshua. Come in from the backwoods and
go to Congress. You’re one of the few Long Earth pioneers who have any
kind of profile on the Datum. You, and a few axe murderers.’

‘Thanks.’

‘So will you come?’

Joshua glanced at Helen. ‘I’ll think about it.’

Helen looked away. ‘Come on, let’s find Dan. Enough excitement for one
night, it will be a trial getting him to sleep . . .’

Helen had to get up twice that night before she got Dan settled.

When she returned the second time she nudged Joshua. ‘You awake?’

‘I am now.’

‘I’ve been thinking. If you do go, Dan and I are coming with you. At
least as far as Valhalla. And he ought to see the Datum once in his
life.’

‘He’d love that,’ Joshua murmured sleepily.

‘Not when he finds out we’re planning to send him to school at Valhalla
. . .’ For all she’d bigged up the town’s school to Sally Linsay, Helen
still wanted to send Dan to the city for a while, so he could broaden
his contacts, get an experience wide enough for him to make his own
informed choices about his future. ‘Sally’s really not so bad when she
isn’t channelling Annie Oakley.’

‘Mostly she means well,’ murmured Joshua. ‘And if she _doesn’t_ mean
well the recipient of her wrath generally deserves it.’

‘You seem . . . preoccupied.’

He rolled over to face her. ‘I looked up the outernet updates from the
twain. Sally wasn’t exaggerating, about the troll incidents.’

Helen felt for his hand. ‘It’s all been set up. It’s not just Sally
turning up like this. I get the impression that your chauffeur is
sitting waiting for you in the sky.’

‘It _is_ a coincidence that a twain should show up just now, isn’t it?’

‘Can’t you leave it to Lobsang?’

‘It doesn’t work like that, honey. _Lobsang_ doesn’t work like that.’
Joshua yawned, leaned over, kissed her cheek, and rolled away. ‘Grand
show, wasn’t it?’

Helen lay, still sleepless. After a while she asked, ‘Do you have to
go?’

But Joshua was already snoring.


4

JOSHUA WASN’T SURPRISED when Sally didn’t turn up for breakfast.

Nor to find she’d gone altogether. That was Sally. By now, he thought,
she was probably far away, off in the reaches of the Long Earth. He
looked around the house, searching for signs of her presence. She
travelled light, and was fastidious about not leaving behind a mess.
She’d come, she’d gone, and turned his life upside down. Again.

She had left a note saying simply, ‘Thanks.’

After breakfast he went down to his office in the town hall, to put in a
few hours’ mayoring. But the shadow of that twain in the sky fell across
his office’s single window, a looming distraction that made it
impossible to concentrate on the routine stuff.

He found himself staring at the single large poster on the wall, the
so-called ‘Samaritan Declaration’, drafted in irritation by some
hard-pressed pioneer somewhere, and since spread in a viral fashion
across the outernet and adopted by thousands of nascent colonies:

_Dear Newbie_:

_The GOOD SAMARITAN by definition is kind and forbearing. However, in
the context of the Long Earth land rush, the GOOD SAMARITAN demands of
you_:

_ONE. Before you leave home find out_ something _about the environment
into which you are heading_.

_TWO. When you get there, listen to what the guys already there tell
you_.

_THREE. Don’t be fooled by maps. Even the Low Earths haven’t been
properly explored. We don’t know what’s out there. And if we don’t, you
certainly don’t_.

_FOUR. Use your noggin. Travel with at least one buddy. Carry a radio
where feasible. Tell somebody where you’re going. That kind of thing_.

_FIVE. Take every precaution, if not for your own sake, then for the
sake of the poor saps who have to bring what’s left of your sorry ass
back home in a body bag_.

_HARSH language, but necessary. The Long Earth is bountiful but not
forgiving_.

_THANK you for reading_.

_The GOOD SAMARITAN_

Joshua liked the Declaration. He thought it reflected the robust,
good-humoured common sense that characterized the new nations emerging
in the reaches of the Long Earth. New nations, yes . . .

The town hall: a grand name for a solidly built wooden building that
housed everything the settlement needed in the way of paperwork, and
looked kind of battered this morning, in the aftermath of the kids’
show. Well, it was fit for purpose; marble could wait.

And of course it had no statues outside, unlike similar buildings in
towns back in Datum America. No Civil War cannons, no bronze plaques
with the names of the fallen. When the growing town had registered for
the twain service the federal government had offered a kind of
home-improvement monument kit, to cement this community of the future to
America’s past. But the residents of Hell-Knows-Where rejected that, for
a wide number of reasons, many of them going all the way back to
great-grandpa’s experiences at Woodstock or Penn State. Nobody had shed
blood for _this_ land yet, apart from when Hamish fell off the town
clock, and of course the predations of the mosquitoes. So why a
monument?

Joshua had been startled at the vehemence of his fellow citizens on the
issue, and he’d since given it some thought, in his patient way. He’d
come to the conclusion that it was all to do with identity. Look at
history. The founding fathers of the United States for the most part
were Englishmen, right up until the moment when they realized that they
needn’t be. The folk of Hell-Knows-Where by default still thought of
themselves as American. But they were starting to feel closer to their
neighbours on _this_ world, a handful of communities in stepwise copies
of Europe and Africa and even China with which they communicated by
shortwave radio, than to the Datum folks back home. Joshua found it
interesting to watch that sense of identity shifting.

And meanwhile the relationship with Datum America itself was becoming
increasingly uncomfortable. The wrangling had been going on for years.
Legally speaking, a few years back President Cowley’s administration had
worked out – Cowley having previously argued successfully to have all
the colonists’ rights and benefits removed – that in practice it was
losing out on significant tax revenues, from the trade that was
blossoming both between the various Long Earth communities, and between
the remote worlds on the one hand and the Low Earths and Datum on the
other. And so Cowley had declared that, if you were under the ‘Aegis’ of
the United States – that is, if you lived in the footprint of the
nation, projected across the stepwise worlds out to infinity, East and
West – you were de facto a United States citizen, living under United
States laws, and liable to pay United States taxes.

And there was the rub. Taxes? Taxes on what? Taxes to be paid how? A lot
of local trade was conducted by barter, or using local scrip, or even
with intangibles: a service for a service. It was only when you traded
with the Low Earths that dollars and cents came into play. It was a
burden on many tax-payers, in fact, to assemble enough currency to
satisfy said tax demands.

Even if you did pay, the taxes bought you what? The colonists were rich
in food, fresh water and unspoiled air, and land: lots and lots of land.
As for advanced products, even ten years ago you had had to run home to
Uncle Sam for anything high-tech or complicated, from dentistry to
veterinarian services, and you needed US dollars to purchase such
things. But now, why, there was a spanking new clinic in
Hell-Knows-Where itself, and a veterinarian downriver in Twisted Peak,
and he had a fast horse and a partner _and_ an apprentice. If you needed
a city, well, Valhalla was an authentic campus city growing up in the
High Meggers, with everything cultural and all the tech you could want.

The colonists found it increasingly hard to understand what they needed
the Datum government _for_ – and, therefore, what they were buying with
their taxes, principally sliced off the profits on the shipments of raw
materials the twain caravans hauled endlessly back to the Datum. Even in
this neat and civilized town, far from the think-tanks of Valhalla
inhabited by the likes of Helen’s father Jack, there were some who
called for cutting ties with the old US altogether.

And meanwhile, in turn, after years of relative appeasement, in recent
dealings with the Datum Joshua had detected an increasing unpleasantness
about the federal government’s regard for its new young colonies. There
were even mutterings back in Datum USA that the colonists were in some
way parasitical, even though all their residual holdings back home had
long since been liquidated. All this was no doubt linked to Cowley’s
push for re-election this year; having tacked to the centre during his
first run for the White House – a necessity in the aftermath of the
Madison incident, when much of the population had been saved from a
nuclear attack by stepping away from ground zero – some commentators
suggested he was now veering back to his original support base, the
virulently anti-stepper Humanity First movement. The United States had
long been used to being suspicious of every other country on the planet,
and was now becoming suspicious of itself.

Joshua, looking at the sunlit sky through his window, sighed. How far
could this go? It was well known that Cowley was putting together some
kind of twain-based military arm to go out into the Long Earth. Seeping
through the outernet there had been darker rumours, or maybe
disinformation, of sterner actions to come.

Could there even be war? Most wars of the past had been over land and
wealth, one way or another. Given the literally endless riches of the
Long Earth, surely there was no longer any reason for war. Was there?
But there were precedents, when the repressive taxation and other
policies of a central government had led to its colonies agitating for
independence . . .

_A Long War?_

Joshua gazed at the twain still mysteriously hanging over the town.
Waiting to take him away, to participate in the affairs of the wider
world once more.

He wandered out to look for Bill Chambers, the town’s secretary,
accountant, best hunter, excellent cook, and amazingly good liar,
although this latter skill threw minor suspicions on his claim to be a
distant heir to the Blarney estate in Ireland.

Bill was about Joshua’s age, and had once been a buddy at the Home, as
much as a recluse like Joshua had had any buddies at all. A few years
back Joshua had welcomed Bill, when he’d shown up at Hell-Knows-Where,
with open arms. When Joshua had returned from his journey with Lobsang
and discovered his unwelcome celebrity – not helped by the fact that
Lobsang himself, along with Sally, had retreated to the shadows, leaving
Joshua exposed – he’d found himself turning increasingly to people he’d
known _before_ he was ‘famous’, and who therefore were discreet and
tended not to demand anything of him.

In some ways Bill hadn’t changed. He had an Irish background, and he
liked to play that up when he got the chance. Also he drank a lot more
than he had as a teenager. Or rather, _even_ more.

Right now, Bill was ambling to the lumber yard when he spotted Joshua.
‘Top, Mister Mayor.’

‘Yeah, top to you too. Listen . . .’ Joshua told Bill about his need to
go to the Datum. ‘Helen’s insisting on coming, with Dan. Well, it’s not
a bad idea. But I could do with some backup.’

‘The Datum, is it? Full of hoodlums and thugs and other bad lads. Ah,
sure, I’m your man.’

‘Will Morningtide let you go?’

‘She’s busy making tallow in the yard right now. I’ll ask her later.’ He
coughed, his best attempt at delicacy. ‘There is the question of the
fare.’

Joshua looked up at the waiting twain. ‘I have a feeling none of us will
be paying for this trip, buddy.’

Bill whooped. ‘Fair play to you. In that case I’ll book us the finest
ride I can find. And you’ve got your own release forms signed by Helen,
have ye?’

Joshua sighed. Another hard scene waiting in his future. ‘I will do,
Bill. I will do.’

They walked together.

‘How was your lad’s show, by the way?’

‘Jumped the shark.’

‘Oh, was it that bad?’

‘No, Captain Ahab really did jump the shark. Big set piece of the second
act. Pretty impressive on one water-ski . . .’


5

HELEN VALIENTÉ, NÉE Green, remembered very well the moment when
relations between the Datum and its far-flung children across the Long
Earth had first soured.

She’d been a young teenager, still living at Reboot, on Earth West
101,754. She’d kept a journal throughout those years, all the way from
her childhood in Datum Madison, their move to Madison West 5, and then
her family’s trek across a hundred thousand worlds to found a new town
in an empty world, a town they had hammered together themselves,
starting with nothing but their own hands and minds and hearts. And
their reward from Datum America – and they _had_ still thought of
themselves as Americans – had been rejection. That had been the moment,
in retrospect, even more than her mother’s illness, when Helen’s
mild-mannered father Jack Green had completed his own inner journey from
Datum-raised software engineer, to sturdy colonist, to firebrand radical
thinker.

Twelve years ago. She had been fifteen years old . . .

Crisis. The still-young town of Reboot had split apart.

Some people had walked out, to start up again on their own. Others had
gone back to the Hundred K station to wait for a Company to form up for
a trek back to Datum Earth.

Worst of all for Helen, Dad wasn’t speaking to Mom, despite her illness.

It was all the government’s fault. They all got The Letter, every
household, delivered by shamefaced mailman Bill Lovell. Bill himself had
already been fired by the US Mail, but he said he was going to keep
making his rounds even so until his boots wore out, and the people
promised to feed him, in return.

The Letter was from the federal government. Everybody with a permanent
residence beyond Earth 20, West or East, with assets back on Datum
Earth, was having those assets frozen, and ultimately impounded.

With Mom ill in bed, Dad had to explain all this to Helen – words like
‘assets’ and ‘impounded’. Basically it meant that all the money Dad and
Mom had earned before upping sticks for their trek into the Long Earth,
and had left in bank accounts and other funds back on Earth to pay for
stuff like Mom’s cancer medicines and for stay-at-home brother Rod’s
care and for a college education for Helen and sister Katie if they ever
wanted it, had been stolen by the government. _Stolen_. That was Dad’s
word. It didn’t seem too harsh to Helen.

Dad said the economy on Earth had taken a knock from stepping. That was
obvious even before the Greens had left. All those people who
disappeared into the Long Earth had been a big drain from the labour
pool, and only a trickle of goods came back the other way; those left
behind were furious at having to subsidize work-shy hoboes, as they saw
the departed. Meanwhile some people couldn’t step at all, and had
started to resent those who could. People like Rod, of course, Helen’s
own home-alone non-stepper brother. She often wondered what he was
feeling.

Dad said, ‘I’m guessing the government is appeasing the anti-stepper
lobby by perpetrating this _theft_. I blame that loudmouth Cowley.’

‘So what are we going to do about it?’

‘We’ll hold a meeting in city hall, that’s what.’

Well, they didn’t have a city hall, at that time. They did have a
communal field cleared of forest and rocks that they _called_ city hall,
so that was where they gathered. Just as well it wasn’t raining, Helen
thought.

Reese Henry, the former used-car salesman who was the nearest they had
to a mayor, chaired the meeting, in his usual bullying way. He held up
The Letter. ‘What are we going to do about this?’

They weren’t going to put up with it, that was what. There was a lot of
talk about forming up a mass hike and marching on Datum Washington. But
who was going to feed the chickens?

They resolved to make inventories of all the stuff they still imported
from Datum Earth. Medicines, for one. Books, paper, pens, electronic
gadgets, even luxuries like perfumes. By sharing and swapping and
mending, maybe they could manage with what they had until things settled
down. The idea was floated of getting together with the neighbours.
There was a bunch of nearby settlements spread over a few dozen worlds
that some were starting to call ‘New Scarsdale County’. They could help
each other out in case of scarcities and emergencies.

Some spoke of going back. A mother with a diabetic kid. Folk who found
that advancing age wasn’t mixing well with the hard work of farming. A
few who just seemed to feel scared without the backing of the
government, however remote it was. But others, like Helen’s dad, urged
nobody to leave. They all relied on each other. They had put together a
spectrum of complementary skills that enabled them to survive if they
worked together. They couldn’t let the community they’d built be pulled
apart. And so on.

Reese Henry let it all ramble on, and run down. They broke up without
resolution.

The next morning, however, the sun rose on schedule, the chickens needed
feeding and the water needed toting from the well, and somehow life went
on.

Three months later.

Helen’s sister Katie had quietly brought forward her wedding. She and
Harry Bergreen had been planning to wait until the following year, when
they were hoping for a proper house-raising. Everybody knew that they
were getting married now while Mom was still around to see it.

Helen was enough of a girly girl that she had grown up dreaming of
fairytale-princess weddings. Well, this day turned out to be a pioneers’
wedding. Kind of different, but still fun.

The guests had started arriving early, but Katie and Harry and their
families were ready to meet them. Bride and groom were dressed in
informal clothes, no white gowns or morning suits here, but Katie was
wearing a small, pretty veil made by sister Helen from the lining of an
old hiking jumpsuit.

As time wore on people showed up from outside Reboot itself, friends and
acquaintances from communities like New Scarsdale and even further
afield. The guests brought gifts: flowers and food for the day, and
practical stuff – cutlery, pots, plates, coffee pots, kettles, frying
pans, a hearth set, a boot scraper. Some of this stuff had been made
locally, pottery cast on Reboot wheels, or iron gadgets hammered out in
Reboot forges. It didn’t look much, piled up before the Greens’ big
hearth, but Helen realized it soon amounted to pretty much all a young
couple would need to equip their first home.

Around noon Reese Henry arrived. Wearing a reasonably smart jacket,
clean jeans and boots, and a string tie, he scrubbed up well. Helen knew
that nobody in Reboot took ‘Mayor Henry’ as seriously as he took
himself. But still, you needed one individual in a community with the
authority to formalize a marriage – an authority backed by some remote
government, or not – and he played the part well. Plus his hair was
magnificent.

And when Harry Bergreen kissed his bride a little after midday and
everybody applauded, and the bride’s mother held on to her husband’s arm
to make sure she stayed standing for the pictures, even Bill the mailman
had tears welling in his eyes.

That one was a _good_ day, Helen recorded in her journal.

And three months later:

‘2nd baby for Betty Doak Hansen. Hlthy B, 7lb. Mthr ill, ndd stches &
bld . . .’

Helen had been tired. Too tired to write in this damn code in her
journal, even if they did have to conserve paper now.

This latest delivery hadn’t been a bad birth, as they went. Belle Doak
and her little team of midwives and helpers, including Helen, were
pretty competent at it by now. Although, this morning, it had been a
close-run thing. Helen had to run around town asking for blood donors.
They were all walking blood banks, for the benefit of their neighbours.
But it wasn’t always fast enough. Memo to self, she thought: set up some
kind of list of blood types and willing donors.

Dad had left early this morning, not long after Helen got in. Down at
Mom’s grave probably, the stone by the river. Mom had always loved that
spot. It was already a month since she’d died of her tumour, and Dad was
still racked by guilt over it, as if it were somehow his fault, somehow
caused by his bringing her here. It made no sense, especially since as
far as Helen remembered her mother had always been the driving force
behind their leaving the Datum in the first place.

A month, though, which made it more than six months since they had all
been fired en masse by the federal government. Gosh, Helen thought now,
we’re still here, who’d have thought it?

They had had to learn fast. They had relied more than they’d realized on
various props from the old country. Now they made _everything_! They
knitted, brewed beer, dipped candles, made soap. You could make a good
vinegar from pumpkin rind. Toothpaste! – from ground-up charcoal. It
helped a lot when Bill Lovell came round selling his new product:
miniaturized sets of encyclopaedias, and copies of _Scientific American_
from pre-1950, full of exploded diagrams of steam engines and practical
advice on a whole slew of stuff. They were even rethinking the crops
they were growing in the farms and gardens, after the vitamin pill
supply dried up and they’d even had a couple of cases of scurvy. Scurvy!

And they helped each other out: I fetch water for you while your little
one’s ill, you feed my chickens when I’m away up country. There was a
kind of unwritten price for everything, recorded as ‘favours’, a loosely
defined currency based on service and barter and promissory notes. Mom
would probably have loved the theory of it all, an emerging,
self-organizing local economy.

Despite dire warnings from some about what would happen when the
theoretical protection of the Datum government had been lifted, they
_hadn’t_ suddenly been overwhelmed by armies of bandits. Oh, there had
been problems, for instance the waves of ‘new’ colonists who
sporadically walked out from the Datum or the Low Earths and tried to
settle in Reboot’s country. Legally it was a tricky situation, since
such claims as the Reboot colonists did have were lodged with a Datum
federal government which showed no interest in them any more. But the
mayor in New Scarsdale was usually able to buy the newcomers off by
signing bits of paper granting them land fifty or a hundred worlds
further up West, a deal lubricated with fistfuls of vouchers for drinks
in the tavern. There was always _room_, so much room up here that almost
any problem like that could be resolved.

Of course there was a steady drizzle of thefts, of food, from the fields
– even, in this age of stepping, from within houses. Mostly you turned a
blind eye. Things got more serious when a boy called Doug Collinson was
caught red-handed taking beta blockers from Melissa Harris’s medicine
chest, prescribed for her mild heart condition. Doug didn’t need them
himself; he was just going to sell them someplace else. Decent drugs
were among the most precious commodities they had. Well, Melissa caught
him, and she had the presence of mind to swing her stick and smash his
Stepper so he couldn’t get away before the neighbours came running in.
Right now Doug was in confinement in somebody’s cellar, while the adults
debated what to do about it. Slowly, out of the need to react to such
incidents, a framework for maintaining law and order was emerging, maybe
ultimately based on some kind of court shared with communities like New
Scarsdale in the neighbouring worlds.

The framework of Helen’s own life was slowly emerging too. Dad
constantly pointed out that Helen was sixteen years old now and needed
to choose a path in life. Well, fine. There was her midwifery. And she
was thinking of specializing in medicines: herbs and stuff. A lot of the
plants and fungi they found on Earth West 101,754 weren’t familiar from
Datum Earth. She could become an itinerant seller, or maybe a tutor, a
guru, taking her arts and wares and unique flora across the worlds. Or
not. She thought she’d find her way.

They weren’t in paradise. The Long Earth was a big arena, where you
could feel lost, and you could lose yourself. But maybe all this room
was going to be the ultimate gift of the Long Earth to mankind. Room
that gave everyone the chance to live as they liked. Helen had decided
she liked the happy compromise they were figuring out in Reboot.

Well, not long after that, along had come Joshua Valienté, returning
from the far stepwise West, towing a defunct airship and trailing the
romance of the High Meggers – and, yes, with Sally Linsay at his side.
Helen, then seventeen years old, had had her world turned upside down.
Soon she’d moved away with Joshua, and married him, and now here they
were building another fine young community.

The Datum government, meanwhile, had reached out to its scattered
colonies once more, and gathered them into the embrace of its ‘Aegis’.
Suddenly everybody had to pay taxes. Jack Green, who had been enraged by
the Letter and the cut-off, was if anything even more enraged by the
imposition of the Aegis . . . Without her mother, Helen believed, he was
filling an empty life with politics.

And then Sally showed up again, and once more Joshua was distracted.

The night before they were due to leave on the twain for Valhalla, with
their bags all packed, Helen couldn’t sleep. She went out on to their
veranda, into air that was warm for March on this chilly Earth. She
looked at the twain still waiting at anchor in the sky over the town,
its running lights like a model galaxy. She murmured, ‘_We were young,
we were merry, we were very very wise_ . . .’

Joshua came out to find her. He folded his strong arms around her waist,
and nuzzled her neck. ‘What’s that, honey?’

‘Oh, an old poem. By a Victorian poet called Mary Elizabeth Coleridge. I
helped Bob Johansen teach it to the eighth-graders the other day. _We
were young, we were merry, we were very very wise, / And the door stood
open at our feast, / When there passed us a woman with the West in her
eyes, / And a man with his back to the East_. Isn’t that haunting?’

‘You won’t lose me, to West or East. I promise.’

She found she couldn’t reply.


6

NELSON AZIKIWE – or the Reverend Nelson as his congregation called him
in church, or Rev as they called him down the pub – watched as Ken the
shepherd grabbed a pregnant ewe and slung it over his shoulder. To
Nelson this was an astounding display of strength: Ken’s ewes were no
lightweights. Then Ken walked forward towards a hedgerow.

And took another step and completely vanished.

And reappeared a few seconds later, wiped his hands with a none too
clean towel, and said, ‘That will do for now. There’s still a few wolves
that haven’t got the message yet. I suppose I’d better get Ted to draw
me another thousand yards of electric fence. Don’t you want to come and
see, Rev? You’ll be surprised at how much we’ve done. Just a step away,
you know.’

Nelson hesitated. He hated the nausea that came with stepping; they said
that after a while you hardly noticed, and maybe so, at least for some,
but for Nelson every step was a penance. But it paid to be neighbourly.
After all it had been a long time since breakfast, and with luck he
might get away with a few dry heaves. So he fingered the Stepper switch
in his pocket, clapped his handkerchief over his mouth . . .

When he’d recovered somewhat, the first thing he noticed, in this
England one step away from home, was not the painstakingly cleared field
of grass at his feet but the trees of the remnant forest beyond Ken’s
dry stone wall. Big trees, old trees, giants. Some were fallen, their
trunks bright with moulds and fungi, and to a clergyman that could have
been the spark for a nice little inspirational sermon on the mighty and
the futility of their ambitions. But Nelson, in his late forties now,
wasn’t planning to be a clergyman for much longer.

The light seemed to be a little more golden than it was pre-step, and he
glanced up at the sun, which seemed to be in the right place this March
day . . . more or less. Though time on the various Earths seemed to flow
at the same rate, and the events that defined the calendar – sunrise and
sunset, the seasons – seemed synchronized from world to world, according
to last week’s _Nature_ some of the new Earths did not appear to tick
_exactly_ to the same clock, sometimes leading or following their
immediate neighbours by a fraction of a second, as you could prove by
such means as very precise astronomical observations, like the
occultation of stars by the moon. The discrepancies were minute but
real. Nelson could think of no plausible explanation for this. Nobody
knew how or why this phenomenon happened, but as yet nobody was
researching it because it was just one of a multitude of puzzles
generated by the multiple worlds. How strange, how eerie . . .

Of course he had stopped thinking like a priest, having, perhaps
shamefully, reverted to his ground state of being: a scientist. But
still, people all over the world – including some of his own flock – had
for a quarter of a century now been abandoning their homes and packing
up their kids and buggering off into this great hall of worlds called
the Long Earth, and yet nobody knew how it worked, even on the most
basic level of how time flowed, or how all those worlds had _got_ there
. . . and still less what they were _for_. How was a priest supposed to
react to that?

Which was, indirectly anyhow, the reason for Nelson’s current inner
turmoil.

Fortunately for the goats and the gravid sheep around him, and for Joy,
the young sheepdog Ken was training, _they_ did not have to lie awake at
night wondering about this sort of thing. Having given him their usual
slotted glances, the animals ambled away, the sheep eating the grass,
the goats devouring just about everything else.

Shepherd Ken had told him how the whole Long Earth deal worked for the
likes of him. In England West and East 1 and 2, the farmers had been
clearing forested land on a scale not seen since the Stone Age – and
they had had to relearn how to do it. First you cut down a _lot_ of
trees, being careful to put the timber to good use, and then you set
loose the animals, either bred here or carried over as young from the
Datum one by one. Any hopeful saplings would succumb to the onslaught of
the sheep and goats, forestalling the return of the forest. And in time
the grass would come. Clever stuff, grass, Ken liked to say, a plant
that actually thrived on being eaten down to the ground.

Nelson had rather misjudged Ken when he had first met this suntanned,
rugged, rather taciturn man, a local whose ancestors had lived on these
hills since there were such things as ancestors. It was only by chance
that he found out that Ken had been a lecturer at the University of Bath
until, like many others, shortly after Step Day he re-evaluated his
lifestyle and his future – which turned out, in his case, to be this
farm just one step away from the Datum.

In that, Ken was typical of his nation, in a way. The British experience
of the Long Earth had been in the beginning mostly a painful one. Such
had been the early exodus from these crowded islands, particularly from
the battered industrial cities of the north, Wales and Scotland, regions
isolated from the increasingly complacent city-state that was London,
that a rapid population loss had led to an economic crash – even a
collapse of the currency, briefly. They had called it the Great Bog Off.

But then the stepwise Britains had begun their own economic growth. And
there had been a second wave of emigration, more cautious, hard-headed
and industrious. By now there were whole new Industrial Revolutions
going on in the Low Earths; the British seemed to have the building of
steam engines and railways in their genes. Some of that hard-acquired
wealth had already started to flow back into the Datum.

In the long run, in their exploration and colonization of the Long
Earth, the British had proved to be thorough, patient, careful, and
ultimately pretty successful. Just like Ken.

But now Nelson had his own journey to make.

They spent some time discussing the vigour and health of Ken’s flock.
Then Nelson cleared his throat and said, ‘You know, Ken, I’ve loved my
time here in the parish. There’s been a kind of peacefulness. A sense
that although the surface of things changes, the soul of them does not.
Do you know what I mean?’

‘Umm,’ said Ken.

‘When I first came here I walked the hills. There are signs of people
having lived here for ever – since before England was England. In the
graveyard and on the war memorial I found family names repeated across
hundreds of years. Sometimes a man went away to fight for a king he
didn’t know, in a place he’d never heard of. Sometimes he didn’t come
back at all. And yet the land endured, you know? Even as this
countryside, remote from the urban centres, has survived more or less
intact through the great convulsions since Step Day. It must have been
very hard for such men to leave such a place. Just as it will be for
me.’

‘You, Rev?’

‘You are the first to know. I have had a word with the Bishop, and he
has agreed that I can move out just as soon as my successor is in
place.’ He looked out over the flocks. ‘Look at them. They graze as if
they will graze for eternity, and are content with that.’

‘But you’re no sheep, Rev.’

‘Quite so. The fact is I’ve spent a lot of my life being a scientist,
and am obligated to a different covenant than the one I bow to at the
moment – although I must say that in my head the two have rather melded
together. In short I need to find a new purpose, one more suited to my
talents and my background. If you’ll pardon my immodesty.’

‘You’ve pardoned me for worse, Rev.’

‘Perhaps, perhaps not. Now if you’re done here let me stand you a pint
down the pub. And then I have some calls to make.’

Ken said, ‘Well, that’s nice. About the pint, I mean.’ He whistled.
‘Joy! Here, girl.’

The dog came bounding up, tail wagging, and leapt into Ken’s strong
arms, just as she’d been trained, so she could be carried back to the
Datum. She was a dog whose supper bowl was currently lodged in a
different corner of the multiverse entirely, but who had no concern
about that as long as her master whistled for her.


7

TELLING KEN A bit of news like that was as good as hiring a skywriter,
Nelson knew. Well, what was done was done.

Once back at the rectory Nelson made a few follow-up calls, disclosing,
apologizing, accepting congratulations.

Then, with relief, he told his computer to boot up, leaned back in his
office chair, and watched the multiple screens light up. ‘Search terms.
One: the return of the airship the _Mark Twain_. Two: the Lobsang
Project. Supplementary: soc-media streams for last twenty-four hours,
slanting towards current concerns, depth three Occam’s razor . . .’

Bandwidth here was generally dreadful, but not for Nelson. A man with a
past like his – he’d once worked for the Black Corporation itself, if
only indirectly – had a great many contacts in many useful places:
favour speaks unto favour. Only last year a black helicopter had landed
just short of the graveyard and the team of technicians that stepped out
on to the glebe had left him with access to as much satellite traffic as
he wanted – including some channels known to very few people indeed –
and moreover the means to decipher those channels.

When he’d done with the latest soc-media chit-chat, he left his study
for the kitchen. A search like the one he’d just initiated was never
going to be quick, and, while his software agents were scuttling across
the web, he warmed up a microwave curry.

And he reflected, as he often did, about the previous inhabitants of
this parsonage. The equipment in his study – his phone, laptop, tablets
– was all state of the art, more or less, though it would mostly have
been familiar to a user of ten or twenty years ago. This was an argument
seized on by some critics of the Long Earth migration. Need exerted a
necessary pressure on humanity: you had to be hungry to innovate, and
you needed to be surrounded by competitors to be driven to achieve. And
in the Long Earth, with bellies filled too easily and plenty of space to
spread out into, invention had stalled. Still, none of Nelson’s
predecessors here, not even the most recent, had had access to anything
like the technology at his fingertips now, retro or not.

And every single one of them had been unable, just like Nelson, to make
the antique toilet work properly. He liked that reflection; it helped
keep him down to earth.

The cooking done, he returned to his study – the Lobsang search was
still in progress – and as he ate he logged into the Quizmasters.

This was a little-known chat room, access to which would only be
vouchsafed to you by invitation – and the invitation was a series of
tests. Nelson, intrigued by a quiz he’d been sent without explanation,
had completed it after evensong one day a few weeks ago. It took him
twenty-seven minutes. His reward was to be sent another quiz, of
similarly fiendish intricacy. Over the following days more quizzes
turned up randomly. Nelson had been impressed by the questions, which
demanded not only knowledge in a vast number of fields but also the
ability to make use of that knowledge against the clock, while drawing
on a multiplicity of disciplines, including _un_-disciplines . . . In
the nerdosphere, in pursuit of the elusive and the strange, the
strongest intellect, Nelson knew, was good for nothing without a
propensity for pack-rat fact accumulation, an appreciation of
serendipity, and an endless interest in the incongruous, the out of
place. And that was what the Quizmasters’ tests seemed to select for.

The room had opened for him on the seventh day. That was the first time
he’d learned the group’s name for itself. Initially the Quizmasters
seemed like any other chat room, except that everybody in it knew that
in some way they had been _chosen_, which gave a frisson to the
proceedings. A self-selecting elite of the nerdosphere – and very
useful, he’d found, if directed to a task.

But time and again conversations in that room came round to the monopoly
known as the Black Corporation, which was for the most part detested by
the circle members. That itself being a puzzle, of course.

When Nelson went online, or, more accurately, on_lines_, he mixed in
cyberspace with a lot of people who had a marked dislike of black
helicopters, governments, washing more than once a week, and above all,
_secrets_ – and, just to top it off, particularly didn’t like the Black
Corporation. Which was kind of strange if you thought about it, since
the infrastructure of the nerdosphere itself nowadays was more or less
supported by Black products. Certainly the nerdosphere was always full
of speculation, scuttlebutt and downright lies about what was happening
in the most ultra-secret laboratories of the organization.

Yes, everybody knew Black’s story, the elements of which had become as
familiar, it sometimes seemed to Nelson, as the Nativity. It was a
classic American narrative of its kind. It had all started when Douglas
Black and his associates had set up ‘just another computer company’,
with the help of Black’s late grandfather’s oil-money bequest. This was
the early 1990s; Black had only been in his mid-twenties. From the
beginning Black’s lines had included such much-longed-for-by-customers
products as computers with long battery power and fault-free software,
machines that were your partners, not just a gadget for extracting money
from you, not just an ad for some superior future version of themselves.
Machines that seemed mature. And from the beginning Black had begun to
make philanthropic donations of various kinds around the world,
including a scholarship programme in South Africa that Nelson himself
had benefited from.

With time the Black product line went from strength to strength, and
began to innovate significantly. Black was entitled to rewards aplenty
for his intellectual courage, as far as Nelson was concerned. He was
after all the founder of the first ‘serendipital laboratory’. The logic
was that since so many important new discoveries in science were made by
accident, then the process would be speeded up if you set up a situation
in which a very _large_ number of accidents happened, and watched the
results carefully. According to legend Black had even deliberately
employed people who didn’t _quite_ know what they were doing, or had a
bad memory, or who were known to be congenitally unlucky and careless.
It was, of course, a lunatic idea. Black did take some precautions, such
as building his laboratory to the same safety standards as were employed
by explosives manufacturers . . .

Black’s innovations had won him huge sales, public praise, and a
concerted attack by instant enemies. The established companies he was
wrong-footing, and whose profits he was trashing, accused him of
everything from monopolistic practices to a lack of patriotism. The
public didn’t buy any of these lies, it seemed, but it did keep on
buying Black’s neat stuff. And indeed the public bought into Black
himself, who became a hero, a cheerful rogue thumbing his nose at older,
lumbering companies, investing in spectacular super-rich indulgences
like homes under the sea and jaunts into orbit, while sprinkling
charities and good causes with staggering amounts of money.

Then the gods truly smiled on Black’s project when an experiment to find
a new type of surgical plaster was left too long in the sunshine and
turned into ‘gel’, as it became known, a curious quasi-organic matter
embedded with self-designing, self-repairing bio-neural circuitry, smart
enough to morph itself physically to fit the circumstances it found
itself in. The newspapers called it the _intelligent bandage_, after its
first applications, but it had soon proved to be much more than that –
and much smarter. As a self-correcting, self-repairing, physically
malleable data and processing store, gel in all its forms had become the
mainstay of the Black Corporation’s output. There was a wave of new
products, and indeed new types of product. This time many of Black’s
competitors were wiped out completely.

Now it was the turn of governments to become suspicious. Black was
simply too rich, too powerful – not to mention too generous and too
popular – to be borne. The US administration made attempts to take
control of Black’s operations under various national-interest
fig-leaves, or at least to break up his empire. Eminent domain was
quoted; militarization of Black’s enterprises was attempted.

But Black hastily diversified into obviously non-security, non-military
applications, such as medicine. Suddenly the corporation turned its
attention to the disadvantaged: to letting the dumb speak and the lame
walk. Nowadays there were people seeing, hearing, walking, running,
swimming, even juggling, thanks to the prosthetic aids, implants, and
other products developed by the Black Corporation and its subsidiaries.
With such a portfolio behind him Black was able to argue that there was
no national interest served in the government’s pursuit of him; its
actions were anti-capitalist – whisper it quietly, _socialist_.

Since then Black had made an even grander gesture when, nearly a decade
ago, he had more or less gifted twain technology, through an
international consortium of manufacturers, to the UN, governments
worldwide, and the peoples of the new Earths. Nowadays the twains that
plied the US Aegis – even the few police and military craft as well as
the commercial fleets – were all Black Corporation products, built at
cost. Not only that, the conglomerate disbursed even vaster funds to
good causes, and Black became even more of a hero.

Despite all this, however, the name of Douglas Black was anathema to
many in the chat rooms.

Nelson had searched in vain for plausible reasons, and found none. It
wasn’t as if many of those who poured out their bile could have any
personal grudge: none of them, for example, had been executives of the
moribund companies whose careers might have been ruined by Black’s rise.
It seemed the worst you could say about Douglas Black as a human being
was that he was a workaholic, who worked hard and expected people to
work hard for him. Maybe this had cost him, even significantly. There
had been an online legend that Black’s serendipity lab was even behind
the Stepper box that had opened up the Long Earth. Somehow Black had
pissed off the inventor, and in the end the box design had been dumped
into the public domain, galvanizing all mankind, but earning not a penny
for anybody, not directly at any rate.

That was all behind the scenes. And yet Black was hated, by some.

The minds hiding behind the various pseudonyms Nelson found himself
staring at among the Quizmasters were not stupid. They could not be,
given the high bar set for entrance in the first place; indeed it
sometimes felt as if a membership of Mensa might just about qualify you
to make the coffee for this particular metaphorical kaffee-klatch. Not
stupid, no. But . . .

Nelson had met many people in different walks of life, and he thought he
could read at least some of them. These men and women were bright, truly
bright. But in some, even through the impersonal medium of the chat
rooms, he sensed something dark and hidden, sometimes betrayed by the
occasional comment, or curious turn of phrase. Envy, to start with.
Paranoid suspicion, for another. A kind of seam of malevolence – a
capacity for cold hatred – a capacity that needed an outlet, _any_
outlet. A man like Black, who presented a public face, who could seem
either an object of envy, or too good to be true and therefore deserving
of suspicion, was an ideal target. This didn’t show itself often, no,
but it was apparent to those who really _watched_ other people.

And especially to a man who had grown up a black kid in South Africa,
and had not forgotten the experience.

Anyhow, whatever you thought about Black, Nelson _did_ like the Black
Corporation, in all its wonderful and manifold manifestations. And in
particular he liked the mysteries their various activities threw up for
him to ponder over.

For example, as he had drifted somewhat aimlessly through the periphery
of the information cloud that surrounded Black, he had started to notice
how often the ‘Lobsang Project’ was mentioned. But it was always a dead
end in any search, a link to nowhere. _Lobsang_: of course the name
meant ‘big brain’ in Tibetan, which showed that somebody in the Black
Corporation had not only a sense of humour but also some skills when it
came to languages. But Lobsang was a personal name too, and, slowly,
Nelson had come to envisage Lobsang as a person. A person to be tracked
down. Him _and_ his ‘Project’.

And now Nelson, all alone in this rather chilly rectory, with all eight
screens windows to the world, smiled. For suddenly his search had borne
fruit.

One of his screens filled up with an image of the airship _Mark Twain_,
rather battle-worn after its now famous journey, being towed into what
remained of Madison, Wisconsin, after the nuke attack ten years back:
towed by Joshua Valienté and a young woman whom no one to Nelson’s
knowledge had subsequently been able to identify.

Nelson was pretty sure that he’d seen just about everything that Joshua
Valienté had brought back from the extraordinary voyage of the _Mark
Twain_. The Black Corporation – in a gesture typical of Douglas Black –
had dumped Godzillabytes of data from the voyage into the archive of any
university that wanted it, for open public access and study.
(_Godzillabytes_: Nelson had an irrational dislike of ‘petabytes’, the
recognized term for a particular, and particularly large, wodge of data.
Anything that sounded like a kitten’s gentle nip just didn’t have the
moxie to do the job asked of it. ‘Godzillabytes’, on the other hand,
shouted to the world that it was dealing with something very, very big
. . . and possibly dangerous.)

Nelson had seen this particular clip, or variants of it from other
camera angles, many times before, and he wondered why his search engines
had thrown it up now. Watching, he saw that this bit of hasty amateur
footage showed a scene where Valienté, in a radiation-exposure
processing camp in West 1, seemed to be carrying a cat under one arm.
Some bystander off-screen burst out laughing and called, ‘What’s that,
the ship’s cat?’ And somebody else, almost certainly Valienté’s unknown
companion though she was out of shot, called back, ‘Yeah, wiseass, and
it can speak Tibetan.’

You had to listen very carefully to make out this piece of nonsense. But
that word was evidently what the search had picked on: ‘Tibetan’, a
subsidiary search tag from ‘Lobsang’, had brought this fragment of the
complicated saga of the _Mark Twain_ drifting to the surface for his
attention.

What had the woman meant? Why use such a word, ‘Tibetan’, if it wasn’t
somehow relevant? He had no idea yet where this was leading. But now he
had a link between one of Black’s more high-profile projects, the
_Twain_ and its journey, and one of the most low-profile, Lobsang,
embodied in that single word.

Of course the complete absence of any _other_ link was itself
suspicious.

For now the search was going no further; he was covering what he already
knew. Nelson yawned, blinked and shut down the screens. There was a
mystery here, he was sure, and he felt a tingle of anticipation at the
prospect of following this trail further. And this was precisely why he
was shedding his parochial duties: to have the time, while he had the
resources and the strength, to follow such trails wherever they led him.

But of course the overarching mystery that obsessed him in a background
kind of way was the conundrum of stepping itself: of the sudden
discovery of the Long Earth, into which Joshua Valienté and his airship
and his loudmouthed partner and, apparently, his Tibetan-speaking cat
had wandered so famously – of the utter realignment of the cosmos, in
Nelson’s own lifetime. How could he not be intrigued? What could it all
mean for mankind, the future – indeed, for God? How could he _not_
pursue such questions?

Well, the best strategy was usually to tackle smaller mysteries first.
And right now, in that spirit, before getting ready for bed, he put on
an apron, grabbed one of his toolboxes and walked to the stone-floored
toilet. This throne was a massive edifice that even included straining
bars, and would have been a wonderful asset if anybody over the years
could have made it work properly, whereas now it worked in various forms
of _im_properly. He had vowed to get the thing functioning before his
tenure was over, taking especial care to find out why it always backed
up during an east wind.

On the whole, he thought, as he knelt before the cracked china
sculpture, as if before a pagan idol, it was amazing what the English
put up with.


8

SO THE VALIENTÉ family travelled to the High Meggers city of Valhalla,
to catch a long-haul twain to Datum Earth. The twain journey, across
less than three thousand Earths, took only a few hours.

At Valhalla, Thomas Kyangu was waiting to greet them with a big
handwritten sign: VALIENTÉ. Another old buddy of Joshua’s, Thomas was
around fifty, with long black hair pinned back in a ponytail, and a wide
grin splitting a dark, reasonably handsome face. His accent was thick
Australian. ‘Greetings, clan Valienté! Welcome to Earth West One
Million, Four Hundred Thousand. Well, officially it’s one point four
million plus thirteen, since our founding fathers were stoned when they
first got here and lost count, but we like to round it down for the TV
ads . . . Good to see you again, Joshua.’

Joshua grinned and shook his hand. Thomas dived in to help with their
bags.

Getting their bearings, some of them a little woozy from the step-nausea
medication, they stood on a concrete apron under the swollen hull of the
airship: Joshua, Helen, Dan and Bill Chambers, with their baggage
accumulating at their feet. They and the other disembarking passengers
were lost in the expanse of this apron, Joshua thought.

And beyond sprawled the city of Valhalla itself, clusters of heavy
buildings under a blue sky faintly tinged with smog, with a din of
traffic, and construction engines clanking and roaring. The air was
warm, warmer than at Hell-Knows-Where. But still, behind the hot tar and
oil aroma of this brand-new city, Joshua could smell the salt of the
nearby inland American Sea, just as he remembered from his first visit
to these worlds ten years ago.

A huge form swept over their heads, with a drone of engines and a wash
of displaced air: a twain, a big one, a freight vessel heading for the
transit routes to the Low Earths and the Datum. Valhalla’s principal
function was as a transport nexus, one terminus of the river of airship
traffic that flowed endlessly across more than a million Earths to the
Datum and back again, carrying freight and passengers. And it was no
coincidence that Valhalla had grown up on a location that in most
stepwise Americas lay close to what in Datum terms was the Mississippi:
the twains took you across the worlds, while the river could carry your
goods across _a_ world.

Daniel Rodney Valienté, eight years old, had never seen ships of such a
size, and he jumped up and down, thrilled. ‘Are we going to ride in one
of those things, Dad?’

‘In a little while, son . . .’

‘And here comes Sally Linsay,’ Helen said. ‘Surprise, surprise.’

‘Give her a break,’ Joshua murmured to Helen. ‘I did arrange to meet her
here.’

Sally was wearing her usual pioneer-type gear, her signature fisherman’s
jacket with the thousand pockets, and she carried a light leather pack.
‘What a racket,’ she said as she walked up, theatrically clamping her
hands over her ears. ‘Noise, everywhere you go. We ought to call
ourselves _Homo clamorans_. Noisemaking Man.’

Helen just looked at her, unsmiling. ‘Travelling with us, are you? The
great wanderer hitching a ride on a commercial twain?’

‘Well, we’re all going the same way. Why not get reacquainted? We can
swap recipes for ice cream.’

Joshua grabbed his wife’s arm in case she felt like throwing a punch. It
wouldn’t have been the first time.

As he watched this byplay Thomas’s grin was becoming a little more
fixed. ‘Ri-ight. I’m sensing a little tension here.’

Bill murmured, ‘It’s complicated. Don’t ask.’

Sally snapped, ‘Who’s this character?’

‘He’s called Thomas Kyangu,’ Joshua said. ‘An old friend of mine.’

‘You don’t know me, Ms. Linsay, but I know of you, through Joshua.’

‘Oh, God, a fan-boy.’

Helen stepped forward. ‘And we still haven’t been properly introduced,
Mr. Kyangu. My name’s Helen Valienté, née Green—’

‘The wife. Of course.’ Thomas shook her hand.

‘“The wife”?’ Sally laughed.

‘You have all your bags? I have a buggy just over there. Joshua sent a
message ahead; I booked you all a hotel in Downtown Four . . .’ As they
walked over the apron, through a dispersing crowd of passengers, Thomas
said, ‘You can’t blame a Valhallan for following Joshua’s exploits, Ms.
Linsay.’

‘He’s a married man,’ Helen said sternly. ‘There’ll be no more
“exploits” if I have anything to do with it.’

‘Yes, but he did _discover_ this Valhallan Belt itself, during The
Journey. A band of North Americas with generous inland oceans, ripe for
colonization.’

‘“Discover”?’ Sally snapped back. ‘_I_ was there already, as I recall.’

They reached Thomas’s buggy, a low, open electric-engine vehicle with
eight plastic seats. ‘Please, jump in . . .’ The cart pulled away,
heading south.

‘Thomas and I are old buddies,’ Joshua said to Sally, by way of
explanation, or peacekeeping.

‘You mean, he’s a long-term stalker,’ Sally said.

‘We met up out in the High Meggers, years ago . . . We were both on
sabbatical, though Thomas calls it going walkabout. We’re like minds,
kind of. Knowing he was here in Valhalla I asked him to help us out.’

Helen said, ‘Well, thank you, Mr. Kyangu. But what do you do the rest of
the time?’

‘Look at him,’ Sally said. ‘Can’t you tell? Look at the way he’s
dressed. He’s a comber. A professional drifter.’

‘More or less,’ Thomas called over his shoulder as he drove. ‘I grew up
in Australia, and I’ve always been fascinated by combers. Many of my
family’s people went off to become combers themselves, you know, in
stepwise versions of Oz. And I’m intrigued by natural steppers – like
you, like Joshua, the whole phenomenon. Though I’m not one myself. I’m
also interested in the whole question of how human civilization is going
to be shaped by the Long Earth. I mean, it’s still only a single
generation since Step Day; we’re only at the beginning. I had a hand in
the concept design of Valhalla, of the city itself.’

Sally snorted. ‘“Concept design!”’

Thomas was unperturbed. ‘The purest way of life in the Long Earth is the
comber – the solitary individual, or maybe a family, a small cohesive
group, just wandering, picking the lowest-hanging fruit. The Long Earth
is so rich there’s no _need_ to do anything else. But the point of
Valhalla is that it’s a city, a genuine city with all the essential
attributes of a Datum community, but _sustained by combers_ . . .’

They were entering a more built-up area now, Joshua saw. He glimpsed a
sign: DOWNTOWN FOUR. The buildings, of brick, concrete or timber, were
low, squat, massively constructed, and set out in sprawling, empty
plots: typical colony-world architecture. If this was a downtown it was
definitely a High-Meggers downtown, full of room, with more of the feel
of a suburban mall back on the Datum. There were few vehicles on the
wide roads, most of them horse-drawn, and few pedestrians to be seen,
with most of _them_ wearing Steppers. This wasn’t a place you stayed put
in for long.

But it was evidently a city in political ferment. Some of those big
blank walls were adorned with posters and graffiti:

SUPPORT THE FOOTPRINT CONGRESS

NO TO DATUM TAXES!

And:

DOWN WITH COWLEY THE GENOCIDE

Thomas was still talking about combers and cities. ‘I’ve written a book
on the subject,’ he said now. ‘Combers, and a new theory of
civilization.’

Helen frowned. ‘A book? Nobody reads books now. Or at least, not new
books.’

Thomas, steering one-handed, tapped his forehead. ‘All in here. I travel
the worlds and give readings.’

‘A regular Johnny Shakespeare,’ Sally said dismissively.

The cart pulled up outside a four-storey building with an expansive
street-level frontage. Thomas said, ‘Here you go. The Healed Drum, the
best hotel in Valhalla. You’re in there for three weeks if you need it.’

Sally scowled. ‘How long? Why? We’ve only come here to catch a twain
down to the Datum.’

Joshua said gently, ‘Sally, Helen and I are here to look at a school for
Dan.’

Dan’s little jaw dropped. ‘You’re sending me here? To school?’

Helen glared at Joshua. ‘Great way to break the news.’

‘Sorry.’

She patted Dan’s arm. ‘Valhalla’s schools have got a reputation as the
best in the High Meggers, Dan. It would be fun, and you’d learn so much
new stuff. Things you could never learn at Hell-Knows-Where. But if you
don’t want to be away from home—’

Dan scowled. ‘I’m not a little kid, Mom. Can I learn to be a twain
driver here?’

Joshua laughed and tousled his hair. ‘You can be anything you want,
kiddo. That’s the point.’

Helen said to Sally, ‘Also I need to see my father.’

Thomas nodded. ‘Jack Green! Fast becoming another hero. A founder of the
Children of Freedom movement, now an organizer of the Footprint Congress
which has attracted delegates from thousands of inhabited Americas—’

‘He’s fast becoming a major embarrassment, is what he is,’ Helen said
sternly.

‘This hanging around wasn’t part of the deal,’ Sally snapped at Joshua.
‘Why didn’t you tell me?’

Joshua shrugged. ‘Well, you didn’t wait to be consulted. Besides, how
would you have reacted? Just like this, right?’

Sally picked up her pack. ‘I’m out of here.’ She disappeared with a pop
of displaced air.

Thomas sighed. ‘What a woman. I hope I have a chance to get her
autograph. Come on, let’s get you checked in.’


9

IN THE MORNING, Bill went off for ‘a bit of an old explore on me own’,
as he put it. Joshua made sure he had a cellphone so he could call for a
ride back, if he got ‘incapable’.

Bill had gone by the time Thomas showed up to give Joshua, Helen and Dan
a lift to Dan’s prospective school. This was in a different urban ‘hub’
called Downtown Seven, on the other side of this intricately designed
city. So they climbed into Thomas’s buggy once more, and set off across
town.

The city had grown hugely since the last time Joshua had seen it.
Valhalla, starting from a clean slate, was always intended to be more
than just another city. It looked attractively different even in its
basic layout, built on hexagonal plots that were spreading around the
southern shore of the American Sea of this world, and cutting into the
native forest. Many of the houses glittered with solar paint, but others
had grass and other plants growing thick on their roofs, a natural
thatch.

And wherever the view opened up to the north, Joshua glimpsed the sea, a
flat, silver horizon. The coastline lay at about the same latitude as
Datum Chicago. At the shore the city took on an older feel to Joshua’s
eyes, an echo of an antique America, a maritime past. There was a
respectable port now, mostly wooden buildings, warehouses and boat
yards, even what looked like a fishermen’s chapel – he supposed the
chapel would already have its memorial stones to those lost in this
version of the American Sea, stones without graves, stones with no bones
beneath. Further out there were wharves and jetties and moles. On the
sea itself there were ships, grey shadows, some mechanically driven,
mostly coal-burning probably, but many were sailing ships, like
reconstructions, museum pieces.

Sailors were working this new ocean, fishing, trapping. They hunted
tremendous reptilian swimmers, something like plesiosaurs, and adorned
their boats with their giant jaws and vertebrae. Like the whalers of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries back on the Datum, these seafarers
were studying their worlds with an intensity that outshone the more
scientific explorers, and were linking together the scattered, growing
communities around the shores of these stepwise American oceans. They
weren’t whalers, for there were no whales here, but Joshua thought he
would try to make time to explore all this with Dan, and they could talk
about _Moby-Dick_.

And whenever they glimpsed the city’s landward edge the party saw
something much stranger, in its mundane way. The outer suburbs, thick
with factories and forges, just ended, terminating in cut-back forest,
or partially drained swamp and marsh. There wasn’t a field anywhere, no
cattle grazing, not a blade of cultivated grass outside the city
boundary. This was a city without a hinterland of farmers.

Joshua knew the theory of Valhalla. It was part of this generation’s
response to the challenge of the endless spaces of the Long Earth. On
Step Day, mankind (or most of it, those unlike Sally and her family who
had known it all already) had begun to spread out across an extended
Earth that had a diameter of eight thousand miles and a surface area
that made a Dyson sphere look like a ping-pong ball. _How_ they lived
out there depended on preference, education and instinct. Some dashed
back and forth between the Datum and the Low Earths, looking for a
little more room, a way to make a little more money. Some, like Helen’s
family the Greens, had gone trekking out into the stepwise wilderness
and had begun to build new communities: the story of colonial-era
America, rerun across an infinite frontier. And some just wandered off,
helping themselves to the inexhaustible riches of the Long Earth:
Thomas’s combers.

All of which was fine, until the day you needed root-canal dentistry. Or
your e-book reader broke down. Or you worried whether your kids were
ever going to learn anything more than how to plough a field or trap a
rabbit. Or you got sick of the mosquitoes. Or, damn it, you just wanted
to go _shopping_. Some people drifted back to the Datum, or the crowded
Low Earths.

Valhalla was another response: a brand-new city growing out in the High
Meggers, the remote Long Earth, but deriving from Long Earth lifestyles:
that is, supported by combers, not farmers. There had been precursors in
human history, across Datum Earth. Given time and a rich environment,
hunter-gatherer populations could achieve huge feats, and develop
complex societies. At Watson Brake, Louisiana, five thousand years in
the past, nomadic Native American hunter-gatherers had constructed major
earthwork complexes. Valhalla had just taken this to a new, modern, more
consciously designed level.

As it happened, the theory of the city was the first topic Jacques
Montecute, the school’s headmaster, chose to talk about when he brought
Dan and his family into his office for an introductory chat.

‘The central ethos of Valhalla is balance,’ Montecute said.

Aged about thirty, slender, slightly severe, he had an accent that
Joshua might have pegged as French, but with a naggingly familiar
overlay. His name rang a bell too. _Montecute_ . . .

There was one other child here, aside from Dan, a dark, unsmiling girl
of about fifteen, called Roberta Golding.

‘Most of our adult citizens _chose_ to leave the old world, to leave the
old ways behind. They want some of what a city can give, but they didn’t
come out into the Long Earth to break their backs farming, or to live in
some slum suburb, in order to serve that city’s needs. But here we are,
maintaining city life without all that.’ He smiled encouragingly at Dan.
‘Can you see how we make a living, without farmers to grow our food for
us?’

Dan shrugged his slim shoulders. ‘Maybe you’re all robbers.’

Helen sighed.

Roberta Golding spoke for the first time since being introduced.
‘Valhalla is a city supported by combers. Hunter-gatherers. The logic is
elementary. Intensive farming can support orders of magnitude more
people per acre than hunting and gathering. On a single world a comber
community, even if natural resources are rich, would necessarily be
spread out, diffuse; the concentration of population needed to sustain a
city would be impossible. Here, it is sufficient for the combers to be
spread out, not geographically, but over many stepwise Earths – over a
hundred parallel Valhallas, left wild for the hunting.’ She made a
sandwich of her hands, pressing. ‘The city is the product of a layer of
worlds, each lightly harvested, rather than the product of a single
intensively farmed world. This is _intensive gathering_: a uniquely
post-stepping urban solution.’

Joshua thought the kid spoke like a textbook.

‘You’ve been reading up,’ said Helen, as if accusing her of cheating.

‘Very good, Roberta,’ said Montecute. ‘I mean, it also helps that we
live in such a rich location, geographically, by the shore of a fecund
sea . . .’

Joshua snapped his fingers. ‘Happy Landings. That’s it. You’re from
Happy Landings. Both of you, right? You, Mr. Montecute, I recognize your
accent – and your name. I may have met your grandmother once.’

He looked a little uncomfortable, but he smiled. ‘Kitty? Actually my
great-grandmother. She always remembered running into you, Mr. Valienté,
all those years ago. Yes, I’m from Happy Landings, as it’s become known.
As is Roberta.’

‘Happy Landings,’ Helen murmured to Joshua. ‘Sally Linsay’s name for it,
right? Seems to have stuck. Happy Landings, where all the kids are
super-smart. That’s what they say.’ She glanced uneasily at Dan, who
seemed to be trying to tie his legs in a knot.

‘It’s good for you to have met a schoolmate already, Dan,’ Joshua said.

‘Actually I will not be here long,’ Roberta said, politely enough, but
rather blankly. ‘I’ve been invited to join the East Twenty Million
mission.’

Joshua goggled. ‘With the Chinese?’

Montecute smiled. ‘And me,’ he admitted. ‘Though I’ll be there more in a
supervisory capacity. Roberta has won a sort of scholarship, a gesture
of good faith between the Datum US government and the new regime in
China . . . All of which is by the by. Well.’ He stood up. ‘Why don’t I
show you around the school, Dan? While Mom and Dad grab a coffee,
perhaps – our canteen is just down the corridor.’ Dan followed him,
willingly enough. ‘So what do you like at school? Logic, mathematics,
debating, technical drawing?’

‘Softball,’ said Dan.

‘Softball? Anything else?’

‘Wood-chopping.’

‘Really?’

‘I’ve got a badge.’

Joshua and Helen glanced at each other, and at the silent, serious
Roberta. Then: ‘Coffee,’ they said together, and followed Montecute and
Dan out of the room.


10

TO GET TO see her father Helen actually had to make an appointment,
which infuriated her.

Jack Green, sixty years old, had an office in the modest building which
served as Valhalla’s city hall, courtroom, police headquarters and
mayor’s residence. He was working when Helen was shown into the room,
sitting behind a desk laden with a laptop, a couple of cellphones, a
stack of grainy-looking writing paper. A big TV screen was fixed to the
wall. He barely glanced up at the daughter he hadn’t seen since – when?
The Christmas before last? Now he held up one finger, eyes fixed on the
laptop, while she stood there, waiting.

At last he tapped a key with finality and sat back. ‘There. Sent. Sorry
about that, honey.’ He got up, kissed her cheek, sat down again. ‘Just a
few last tweaks to the speech we’ve been writing for Ben.’ Ben being Ben
Keyes, she knew, mayor of Valhalla, for whom her father worked. ‘Oh,
which reminds me—’ He picked up a remote and pressed it; the big wall
screen lit up with an image of a podium, a couple of aides in suits, the
Stars and Stripes and the ocean-blue flag of Valhalla hanging from poles
side by side in the background. ‘Ben’s delivering the speech any moment
now. Talk about last minute, right? But as soon as he’s done his words
will be all over this world, of course, and will go all the way down to
the Datum as fast as the outernet can carry them. Impressive, huh?’

Evidently Helen had picked a bad moment to call. ‘Can I sit down, Dad?’

‘Of course, of course.’ He got up again, a little stiffly, and pushed
over a chair for her. Like many of his generation, who had built Long
Earth towns like Reboot from scratch, in his late middle age he was
plagued by arthritis. ‘How’s Dan?’

‘You got his age wrong on the last birthday card you sent.’

‘Umm. Sorry about that. I hope he wasn’t upset.’

She shrugged. ‘He’s used to it.’

He smiled, but he kept glancing at the screen.

She pushed down her irritation. ‘I’m just dropping in, Dad. You know
we’re going on to the Datum. We’re here to show Dan around the Free
School. We’re hoping to get him a place, if it suits him.’

‘Good idea,’ Jack said firmly. ‘That’s one point of Valhalla, of cities
like this, to found good schools and incubate free, open and educated
minds. Essential in any democracy.’

‘Dad! Less of the lectures.’

‘Sorry, sorry. It’s just my way, honey. And I’m sorry to be distracted.
But the situation is urgent. It’s not just the increasingly repressive
taxation. There’s a vicious undercurrent that seeps out of the Humanity
First douche-bags who are paying for Cowley’s re-election campaign, no
matter how inclusive he pretends to be. It’s worse than racism. In their
language we steppers are a lesser _species_, we’re malevolent,
moral-free mutants . . . We have to stand up for ourselves. And now
we’re doing it. Some of the commentators are already saying that Keyes’s
speech today will be our Declaration of Independence moment, before
they’ve even heard the text. Think of that!’

‘And you just have to be involved, don’t you?’

‘Well, what else should I be doing?’

‘You were just the same at Reboot. Distracting yourself from your own
life by ordering other people around, right?’

‘What’s this, are you channelling your sister?’

Katie, a few years older than Helen, married, had stayed in Reboot, and
generally disapproved of the rest of the family moving out. ‘No, Dad.
Look, I know you’re not _old_.’

‘I’m not about to become a minuteman, honey.’

‘I know, I know . . . I just think you need to stop running away.’

‘Running from what?’

‘It wasn’t your fault Mom got ill.’

‘Go on,’ he said. ‘What else wasn’t my fault?’

‘It also wasn’t your fault Rod did what he did.’

‘Your brother planted a nuke under Datum Madison, for God’s sake.’

‘No, he didn’t. He was part of a dumb plot by resentful home-alones,
which—I’m sorry, Dad. It’s just that I think you’re working on all this
stuff to, to—’

‘To assuage some kind of Freudian guilt? My daughter the psychologist.’
His tone turned harder now. ‘Look, it’s not about blame, or guilt.
People do what they do. But that doesn’t mean that, whatever your deeper
hidden personal motives, you can’t try to do something _good_.’

She pointed at the screen. ‘Like your Mayor Keyes right now?’

He turned that way.

Ben Keyes walked up to the podium, a sheaf of pulpy locally manufactured
paper in his hands. Aged maybe forty, he had media-star good looks, but
he’d let his hair grow long, pioneer style, and he wore, not a suit, but
a practical worker’s coverall in a drab olive. When he began to speak
Helen could barely make out his words over the clapping and hollering
from an off-stage audience: ‘People of Valhalla! This is an historic day
in this world, in all the worlds of the Long Earth. Today, we have it in
our power to begin the world over again . . .’

Her father grinned. ‘Tom Paine! That was one of my lines.’

‘. . . _certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty
and the pursuit of Happiness_ . . . _That whenever any form of
government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the
people to alter or to abolish it_ . . .’

‘Ha!’ Jack Green clapped his hands. ‘And _that_ is straight out of the
Declaration of Independence. What a moment for an American government,
to have its own founding principles thrown right back at it!’

Now the screen showed images of the crowd before Keyes, who were making
sign-language gestures, just like the troll at the Gap, and chanting,
‘_I will not! I will not!_’

Helen had lost her father to the screen, to the speech, to the
commentaries that would follow. Quietly she stood and crept out of the
room. He didn’t look round.

Helen knew nothing about revolutions. She couldn’t imagine what might
flow from this moment. She did wonder, however, about where the ‘rights’
of the trolls and other creatures who had to share the Long Earth with
mankind might fit into all this.

Thomas Kyangu was waiting for her in the lobby, with sympathetic eyes.
She guessed he knew enough about her complicated family now to
understand how she was feeling.

‘Come on,’ he said. ‘I’ll stand you a Valhallan coffee.’

And, in a cosy coffee shop a couple of blocks away, Thomas told her
something of his own story.


11

THOMAS KYANGU COULD remember precisely the day his life had turned. The
day he had left the conventional world and become a professional comber
– if that wasn’t a contradiction in terms. It had been twenty years ago,
just five years after Step Day itself, when the whole phenomenon was
still startling and new. Thomas had been thirty years old.

He had borrowed his father’s car, had driven out of Jigalong to a
weathered wooden marker, and climbed out into the midday heat, Stepper
box at his side. Apart from the dirt road back to Jigalong, and a
fenced-off scrap of bloodstained land that marked the portal to stepwise
roo farms, there was nothing here, even in the Datum. Nothing but the
expanse of the Western Desert, vast, crushing, its flatness broken by a
single, heavily eroded bluff of rock. Nothing anyhow in the eyes of the
first Europeans to come here, who had barely been able even to see the
people who already lived here. To them it was a _terra nullius_, an
empty land, and that had become a legal principle which justified their
land-grab.

But Thomas was a half-blood Martu. He had always been welcomed by his
mother’s people, even though her marriage, to a white man for love, had
broken the Martu’s strict marriage rules. And to Thomas’s eyes, educated
in the ways of his ancestors at least to a theoretical level, this land
was rich. Complex. Ancient: you could feel the weight of deep time here.
He knew how this at first glance barren land worked, how it supported
its freight of life. He even knew how to survive, how to feed himself
out here, if he had to.

And he knew of a secret out here, that was his alone.

He bent to look into a cave, cut into the side of the bluff by millennia
of wind. It was hardly a cave at all, just a hollow half choked by dry
drifting sand. But it was a site he had discovered for himself as a boy,
visiting his grandparents at Jigalong, exploring alone in the bush: even
then he’d been a solitary kid. And, so deep inside the cave you had to
crouch to see, there was the Hunting Man, as he called it, a stick
figure with some kind of spear chasing a huge, ill-defined creature,
while spirals and starbursts spun around him. It was thousands of years
old, he’d figured out, as you could tell by the patina over it.

And, as far as he knew, it had been discovered by nobody before his own
boyish eyes had settled on it. Nobody found it later, either. He’d kept
the secret of it ever since.

He’d always thought of the Hunting Man as a kind of friend. An invisible
companion. A stable point in a life of whirling change.

Thomas had been a bright kid. Picked out of the local school and groomed
for better things, he’d gone to college at Perth and even spent some
time in America, before returning to Melbourne to become a whizz-kid
games designer. He’d been black enough to serve as a poster boy for
liberals, white enough that those around him had been able to treat him
as one of their own.

Then he’d had his crisis of conscience, and he started to find out about
the plight of the people he’d left behind, his mother’s family. How a
culture a staggering sixty thousand years old, a people free and
self-sufficient a mere three centuries ago, had become the most
dependent on the planet: marginalized, removed from their lands,
shattered by unemployment and drug abuse, their culture broken up by
forced evictions and ‘white’ education. How in his own grandmother’s
time her clan had been moved from their country to avoid the British
Blue Streak missiles test-launched from Woomera.

Granted, all this hand-wringing had been brought on by Thomas’s own
beating-up by a bunch of thugs in Sydney who didn’t like his kind in
their city, even one in a suit and tie. But it was a real eye-opener
even so.

Then he’d got married. Hannah was a trainee lawyer, another bright young
thing, white, from a well-connected New South Wales family. They’d been
hoping for a kid.

But then the cancer had taken her, and that had been that. She had been
just twenty-three. Helen could sympathize with that part of his story,
remembering the suddenness of the loss of her own mother.

After that Thomas’s work seemed pointless. He’d gone back to Perth and
worked for a progressive association there, promoting Aboriginal rights.
And he’d taken the chance to study his mother’s culture. He’d even
become a ‘native guide’ for parties of earnest white tourists. His
mother’s family had sneered at that, but he’d learned a lot.

And then had come the Stepper box, and the opening up of the Long Earth.
Another huge jolt to Thomas’s personal universe, as to everybody else’s.
Many Aborigines, especially young men, had immediately grasped the
potential of the technology, and stepped away in search of a better
world than the Datum, and its bloody history.

Thomas himself had rarely stepped, in those early days, save for a
couple of experiments. Why should he? After all the turnarounds in his
life, Thomas no longer felt he knew who he was. He was a contradiction,
neither white nor black, married but alone. What was he going to
discover about himself out in all those other worlds that he couldn’t
find right here? Rather than travel forward, he kept on being drawn
back, in fact, to the same point, the Hunting Man in the cave, the one
stable locus in his life, like a nail hammered through his psyche.

But this time he had come back here with his Stepper. He had an
experiment in mind.

He picked a direction at random, and turned the switch.

Australia West 1.

They were farming kangaroos here, as indeed they were in East 1: he saw
heaps of carcasses, tethered horses, a stack of bronze-based rifles
heaped up like a tepee. A couple of ranchers sat on a log. When they saw
Thomas they raised plastic bottles of beer to him. He waved back.

Roo farming was becoming commonplace, even in the Datum. Kangaroos were
efficient as food animals. Pound for pound a roo needed a third the
plant material a sheep did, a sixth the water, and produced almost no
methane; roo farts were parsimonious. Thomas didn’t object for any
rational reasons. It just didn’t _feel_ right. Anyhow this new world was
an annexe to the old, and nothing to do with him.

He stepped away, to West 2. And 3. And 4. Each step was a wrench to the
stomach, and he needed time to recover.

It took him two hours to get to West 10, where he stopped. He sat on an
eroded shelf at the edge of the rocky outcrop, which appeared unchanged
from the ‘original’ in the Datum. He looked around, taking his time,
absorbing the new world.

And off in the distance he saw movement. A herd of some huge,
slow-moving, rather lumbering creatures, seen in silhouette against a
pale blue sky. Walking on all fours, they looked like rhinos to his
untutored eye. Presumably they were some marsupial equivalent, perhaps
hunted by a local version of a lion. There were kangaroos here too,
standing up, plucking at the lowest leaves of some tree, but these were
big animals, bigger than any roo in the Datum, big and muscular. And
there, scampering in the distance, a thing like a dinosaur, a raptor,
that was probably a flightless bird. The world was intensely silent,
save for the distant bellow of one giant herbivore or another.

He drank water from a plastic bottle. Some of the nearer worlds had been
visited by hunters unable to resist the lure of going after the native
megafauna, but here, ten steps out, there was no sign of humanity, not
so much as a footprint.

And it was a different sort of world, without humans. Naively you’d
think that one copy of the Western Desert was going to be much the same
as any other. Not so. This country was always going to be arid, but
Thomas could see at a glance that it was greener than he was used to,
with patches of tough-looking grass, scrubby trees. On the Datum his
mother’s people had shaped the land with fire for sixty thousand years;
this was a land without Europeans, but without the Martu and their
ancestors too.

Thomas wasn’t here for the flora and fauna, however.

When he felt well enough to stand he walked around the bluff to the cave
– it was here just as in the Datum – and knelt down, the Stepper box
awkward at his waist. He had to shield his eyes against the light of a
descending sun to see inside.

And there it was, in the cave. Somehow he had known it would be. Not
_his_ Hunting Man, not exactly. Another human figure chasing another
crudely sketched animal. Around it, a different array of spirals and
starbursts and hatchings and zigzags. And when he touched the drawing,
cautiously, he could feel the patina that covered it. It was every bit
as ancient as the one in the Datum. Put there by some scrawny guy who
had figured out how to step, all by himself, millennia ago.

He sat with his back to the rock. He would have laughed, save he didn’t
want to disrespect the silence, or indeed draw the attention of any
nearby marsupial lions. Of course there must have been Aboriginal
steppers. Where would an ability to step have been of more use than in
the arid heart of Australia? If his ancestors _had_ been able to exploit
a sheaf of worlds, even just in emergencies, the resources available to
them would have been multiplied hugely. And they had had sixty thousand
years to discover how.

But even so, surely not in such numbers as today. Maybe this was a new
Dreamtime, he thought, a replay of the age when the Ancestors had moved
across an empty landscape, and in doing so had brought the land itself
into being. It was the turn of his generation to become the new
Ancestors, to begin a new Dreamtime that might encompass all of the Long
Earth.

And this time they would shape a landscape no white colonist could ever
appropriate.

So here was Thomas, with a cellphone in his pocket, sitting by a rock,
alone in this world.

He could go back and report his bit of archaeology, at last.

Or maybe it was his own time to go walkabout. He could strip down to his
boxers, just dump everything, and wander off . . .

Living off the endlessly generous land, he became a comber – this was
before the word itself, derived from ‘beachcomber’, had become common
currency. In due course he would start to hear legends of Joshua
Valienté and other super-steppers, legends that were spreading across
the Long Earth, and he would begin to take a more academic view of those
who shared his new lifestyle . . . And then he met Joshua himself, in
the silence of a very distant America.

‘But all that lay in the future,’ he told Helen now. ‘As I remember it,
I just patted the Hunting Man – Hunting Man West 10 – and straightened
up, and touched my Stepper, and I was gone for good.’

She smiled. ‘The Long Earth has given us all stories, I guess.’

‘Too right. So what about yours. Tell me about this place Reboot.
Another coffee?’


12

THEY SPENT THREE more weeks in Valhalla, trying to get Dan used to the
place, and to the idea of coming here to school – even though headmaster
Jacques Montecute and the taciturn Roberta had in the meantime left for
the Datum, to join the Chinese expedition. Helen had plenty of time to
sample the local cuisine, including lots more coffee – enough to
establish that, whatever Valhalla was good at, coffee wasn’t it.

But that was remedied once they boarded the _Gold Dust_. In the first
twenty-four hours Helen spent most of her time relaxing, sitting in the
family’s saloon, sipping the finest coffee she’d drunk since – well,
since the last time her father had taken her to a Datum Madison
mom-and-pop local coffee shop aged about twelve, before they left the
old world behind for good.

That was the _Gold Dust_ for you. It was like the best hotel in all the
worlds, she thought, uprooted and drifting in the sky, an
eight-hundred-foot-long envelope from which hung a gondola of polished
High-Megger hardwood, like one vast piece of furniture. Helen had felt
embarrassed just to climb aboard. Even the gangplank was carpeted, and
you could have lost their whole Hell-Knows-Where house in the reception
hall.

Of course they were honoured guests, Joshua, Dan, Helen, even Bill
Chambers – and Sally Linsay, who Helen noticed wasn’t too high-minded to
hitch a ride aboard this flying palace. Honoured because of Joshua, of
course, the hero explorer. If he wished, _the_ Joshua Valienté could
dine out on his legend, but he hardly ever did. Full of contradictions,
her Joshua. But when he got offered such treats as this ride in the
_Gold Dust_, he’d learned not to turn them away – that was how Helen had
trained him anyhow.

Dan was in his element, of course. He’d wanted to be a twain driver
since he could walk, and would run after even the scrubby little local
ships that drifted over Hell-Knows-Where. Helen had thought his eyes
would pop out when they walked aboard the _Gold Dust_.

But there was some concern for him, at the beginning. This was Dan’s
first long-distance haul. Helen was not a natural stepper, while Joshua
was the world’s _model_ natural stepper. Just as his colouring was mixed
– Dan had his father’s dark hair but his mother’s paler complexion – as
a stepper Dan was somewhere in between his parents. And in his genetic
background he did have a phobic uncle, Helen’s brother Rod, who couldn’t
step at all. The medicinal treatments for controlling the symptoms of
stepping nausea were advanced now, so that almost everybody could
withstand even a high-speed journey like this – almost all, but not
quite all. If Dan had shown any distress, it would have been the end of
the journey for his parents (well, for Helen anyhow; she had no doubt
Joshua would have gone on with Sally) – and the end of a dream for Dan.
Joshua and Helen were both privately relieved when the ship’s surgeon,
who had been hovering over the passengers as the twain set off, gave
them a discreet thumbs-up.

After that the crew made a huge fuss of Dan. At Helen’s insistence he
was to be accompanied at all times by either one of his parents or a
junior crewman, appointed by the Captain. The crewman told Dan his name
was Bosun Higgs, and Helen didn’t believe that for a _second_. But apart
from that the crew gave Dan the run of the ship, from the ladders and
gantries inside the envelope itself with its huge sacs of helium, to the
gondola’s cargo hold and engine room, and the staterooms and restaurant
cum ballroom – even the wheelhouse, a huge transparent-walled blister at
the prow, where you could watch the great ships rising from world after
world to join the fleet as it ploughed East towards the Datum, with
views of the American Sea and its forest-coated fringe shivering by, a
new world with every heartbeat. An incredible, thrilling sight, even to
a sedentary type like Helen.

On the second evening of the voyage the grown-ups had a treat, when they
dined at the Captain’s table. What else would you expect, for the
Valienté family? The restaurant was at the prow, just beneath the
wheelhouse itself. Helen couldn’t believe how ornate the place was, with
white wooden filigree work everywhere, and gilt mammoth tusks and
oversized acorns hanging in the corners, and what looked like original
oil paintings of various Long Earth scenes hanging on the walls, and
armchairs and carpets soft as puppy fur – even a chandelier hanging over
the table. All of which was a pleasant distraction from their fellow
diners, who were generally the obnoxiously rich: Long Earth traders
splashing the profits, or tourists from the Datum on the ‘cruise of a
lifetime’, who mistook Helen and Joshua for staff more than once.

The view outside was the main attraction. From the Captain’s table right
up by the forward window you could see the worlds flash by below, and
the gleaming hulls of the companion ships of the fleet, dozens of them
hanging like Chinese lanterns under the changing sky. They had already
travelled a long way – at its top speed of a step a second, the twain
could cover the best part of ninety thousand worlds a day – but they
would be slower than that on average, and it would take some weeks to
reach the Datum. As the evening gathered in, most of the landscapes that
washed beneath the ship’s prow were dark, largely uninhabited – though
one sparkled with town lights, and the Captain told them that this was
Amerika, the new Dutch nation, one whole copy of the footprint of the
United States given by the federal government. The Long Earth hadn’t
been much use to the Dutch at first, since on all the stepwise worlds
the landscapes they had spent centuries carefully preserving from the
sea were still drowned . . .

The climax of the show – the Captain had timed the meal so they could
witness the specific moment, just as the dessert trolley reached their
table, and just as the setting sun touched the horizon – came when the
great American Sea, the inland ocean whose footprint had been their
constant companion since they left Valhalla, melted away, first
crumbling into scattered lakes, then submitting to a forest cover that
stretched as far as the eye could see, dark green-black in the light of
the setting sun. Helen’s heart ached a bit when they lost contact with
their sea, or at least its footprint.

But as the light faded further they began to see what had taken its
place, below the prow: a river, wide and placid, a shining ribbon
cutting across the land. It was the Mississippi, or a remote cousin of
that great river on the Datum, a constant in most Americas – indeed
Hell-Knows-Where stood on the banks of one stepwise copy. The river
would be an unfailing companion for the rest of the trip.

They had a hell of a time getting Dan to sleep after that. Helen blamed
the dessert: too much chocolate. Joshua, meanwhile, went off to find
Bill, who’d spent his own raucous night with the crew.


13

THE GOOD PEOPLE of Four Waters City, deep in a stepwise Idaho, seemed
happy to see the USS _Benjamin Franklin_ appear in the skies above their
town. They quickly threw a kind of mass lunch for the dirigible’s entire
fifty-person crew; the beef was so flavour-some and so relished that the
ghost of the steer was probably looking down approvingly, Maggie
thought.

But afterwards the conversation soon grew tricky, to say the least.

Captain Maggie Kauffman strolled along the main, indeed the only, drag
of Four Waters City. Somewhere in the region of a hundred and fifty
thousand steps from the Datum, set in a typical Corn Belt farming world,
the place was neatly laid out and was bustling with people. It looked at
first glance like Dodge City without the gunplay, but with, of course,
the inevitable mobile communications tower courtesy of the Black
Corporation. Maggie’s local guide, Mayor Jacqueline Robinson, pointed
out with some pride various other civic improvements, including a
reasonable hospital which the town shared with similar cities in
neighbouring stepwise worlds.

But the mayor, a tough-looking woman of about fifty, was oddly tense,
nervous. Maggie wondered if that was because of the small stands of
cannabis she saw flourishing in one or two gardens, along with a few
other exotic blooms, out in open view, by the street.

When Mayor Robinson finally noticed Maggie looking, she said, ‘Actually,
that’s mostly just hemp. Blameless. Gives a good fabric for working
clothes. My maternal family were originally Czech. My grandfather told
me that one day the cops raided what was eventually to have been his new
shirt . . .’

Maggie let that stand. She knew when to let silence do the questioning.
Then she said, ‘_Mostly?_’

Robinson admitted, ‘Look, as for the other usage – the kids don’t seem
interested, and the opinion of the town meeting, in _this_ town, is that
for mature people it’s OK, but keep the kids off it. Also, I have to
tell you, there’s some local stuff – an exotic flower in the woods to
the west, native to this world apparently. Wow, _that_ blows your head
off. Even a walk in the woods – well.’ She was talking too quickly;
eventually she ran down, and shrugged. ‘No offence to you, Captain,
seeing as you are, in theory at least, a representative of the
government. We have our own set of values here. I mean, we regard
ourselves as American, bound by the Constitution. But we don’t believe
in any remote authority telling us what we should or should not be
doing, or thinking for that matter.’

Maggie said, ‘I’m a serving Navy officer. I’m not a cop; in fact,
traditionally the Navy has specific directives against carrying out
internal policing functions. Mayor Robinson, I’m not here to criticize
or judge. On the other hand, we in the dirigible fleet are here to offer
help. As Captain, I do have a lot of discretion in how I interpret my
orders.’ She wasn’t sure how convincing that was. The mayor still
betrayed that odd nervousness. ‘Look – is there something else you want
to tell me?’

Suddenly the mayor looked as if she’d been caught out doing something
bad. ‘What would you do? I mean, about something serious.’

Maggie repeated deliberately, ‘I’m not a cop. Maybe we can help.’

Robinson still looked uncertain. But with a nervous defiance she said at
last, ‘There has been . . . a crime. In fact _two_ crimes. We’re not
sure how to handle the situation.’

‘Yes?’

‘A child was harmed. Drugs. OK – it was drugs. And a murder.’

Maggie felt her stomach turn. But she had thought that garbled defence
of the local drug culture had been a little forced.

‘Look,’ Robinson said, ‘I don’t want to talk any more out here. We’d
better go into my office.’


14

THE CREW OF the USS _Benjamin Franklin_ did not have a specifically
military mission, even though the dirigible was a Navy vessel.

The _Franklin_’s voyage, a long jaunt across the Long Earth, was
strictly speaking an exercise in maintaining the integrity of the United
States Aegis, the concept of which was still prized in Datum Washington,
DC, if nowhere else. Oh, the voyage did have scientific purposes. Every
stepwise world was to be logged, every Joker recorded. The crew was to
sample novel life forms, geological formations and climatic conditions –
and was specifically tasked to search for sapience wherever it could be
found. So, a ship fit for such a mission, the _Benjamin Franklin_ was no
cargo scow: it was an extremely modern aircraft, bristling with
scientific sensors – as well as weapons.

But the true reason for the voyage of the _Benjamin Franklin_ was to
travel the stepwise Earths within the footprint of the United States of
America and to show the flag to as many of the new colonies out there as
it could locate – or indeed discover; many of them had not registered
their existence with any Datum authority. It was the job of the
_Franklin_ to find, and count, Americans, and to remind them that they
_were_ Americans.

The operation had been launched three weeks before, on an April day in
Richmond, Virginia, Datum Earth. Maggie Kauffman had stood there in the
open, in a downtown park, with her officers and crew, Executive Officer
Nathan Boss and ship’s chief surgeon Joe Mackenzie at her side, before
an empty stage with an unoccupied podium, a big Stars and Stripes
dangling limply to either side, and a huge banner draped above: UNITY IS
STRENGTH. This downtown park wasn’t far from the north bank of the
James, and, this being Datum Earth, high-rise buildings had loomed out
of the smog, some obviously abandoned, their windows boarded up like
poked-in eyes.

The hundreds of Navy personnel drawn up here were separated by a barrier
from members of the public, lured in from across the Datum city and even
neighbouring worlds for the show. And it was quite a show, even if you
weren’t too impressed by rows of Navy grunts standing on their hind
legs. The twains themselves were a staggering sight, you had to admit
that, six brand-new state-of-the-art military-specification airships
hanging in the sky, proudly constructed by a consortium of United
Technologies, General Electric, the Long Earth Trading Company and the
Black Corporation: _Shenandoah. Los Angeles. Akron. Macon. Abraham
Lincoln_. And _Benjamin Franklin_, thirty-eight-year-old Maggie’s own
command. Proud old names on proud new vessels, and the mightiest in the
fleet save only for the experimental USS _Neil Armstrong_, already
dispatched on its own exploratory mission into the very remote stepwise
West.

At last there had been a stir by the podium, and here came President
Cowley, a heavy-set man visibly sweating in his dark suit, and with
lustrous hair sprayed so thick it was like a plastic sculpture sitting
on his head. He was flanked by security guys in regulation black suits
and glasses.

On stage he was greeted by Admiral Hiram Davidson, USN. Based in Camp
Smith, Hawaii, Davidson controlled the newly formulated Long Earth
military command, USLONGCOM. He in turn was shadowed by an aide, Captain
Edward Cutler, a straight-as-a-die bureaucrat if ever Maggie had met
one, and he was welcome to the desk he commanded as far as she was
concerned.

The famous, or notorious, Douglas Black was present in person too, one
of a group of pols and other dignitaries already lined up on the stage
to shake Cowley’s hand. Black was surprisingly short in person, Maggie
thought, staring curiously. In his seventies, kind of wizened, bald,
wrinkled, he looked like Gollum in sunglasses. Of course it was Black
who had donated the basic technology behind these military twains, the
same technology that underpinned all stepping twains; he had a right to
be here if anybody had. And whether or not he was handing over money to
Cowley’s re-election campaign (he was probably funding _both_ sides and
a gaggle of independent candidates, Maggie’s cynical side suspected),
his presence was going to make this telegenic event even more so for
Cowley.

As the handshakes and backslaps proceeded on the stage, a chopper
clattered overhead, a Little Bird, a sign of protection and menace. This
mission and the launch event had been planned for some time, but in
response to the Valhalla Declaration the military symbolism had been
beefed up.

But as Cowley approached the podium, despite all the hoop-la and the
obvious politicking, Maggie Kauffman felt a visceral thrill to be
standing here in front of the President himself.

Cowley started to speak, his voice amplified, his face projected on a
screen behind him. After some good-old-boy introductory stuff, he cut to
the chase. ‘On Step Day it was as if a tremendous door opened in the
wall of the world, to reveal a beguiling new landscape. And what were
people going to do with that? Why, some of them were just going to walk
away – those who believed that a better life waited for them out there,
rather than on this fine green world God gave to us, which we must now
call the Datum.

‘And off they went! Every family that ever felt dispossessed, every gang
or cult or faction that felt it could do better someplace else – the
restless, the antisocial, the just plain curious – all of them went
stepping off down the trek trails into the blue yonder. I can’t deny the
appeal of it. It was a door that couldn’t be locked, not ever again.
History will show that we lost fully a fifth of mankind from the Datum
Earth, the true Earth, in the first few years after Step Day.

‘And we all know the consequences of _that_.’ He waved a hand at the
mute buildings around the park, the boarded-up high-rises, and there was
a growl of agreement from sections of the crowd. ‘We are poorer, we who
remained in our homes to care for our families, to do our duty. We are
poorer, we who were left behind. Not only that, suddenly our secure
world was opened up to threats – new kinds of threats, pan-dimensional
threats we never faced the like of before.’

The screen behind him filled up with images, a kaleidoscope of horrors,
from notorious would-be assassins, terrorists, rapists, child abductors
and murderers who’d quickly learned to exploit the destructive potential
of stepping, to a gaggle of grubby High Meggers bandits who looked as
though they’d stepped out of a spaghetti western, to some of the
existential weirdness that had come down the turnpike from the strange
new worlds: of distorted-looking humanoids wearing mockeries of human
clothing – and Mary, the gentle-eyed yet murderous troll, a picture that
brought boos from the crowd.

‘That is why I, as your commander in chief, have assembled a new force
from across our fine armed services to deal with these new situations.
It is called USLONGCOM, as an analogy with our nation’s other
geographical commands. Many of its members are gathered here today, in
the historic heart of Richmond, Virginia. And many thousands more are in
training at sites around the world, and indeed in the nearby stepwise
neighbourhood. Let’s show them our appreciation.’

He led applause, which rippled around the watching crowd.

‘And today,’ Cowley boomed on, ‘I announce their first significant
mission: Operation Prodigal Son.’ More scattered applause, a little
puzzled. ‘I’m sure the name I chose is self-explanatory. This is a
mission, not to oppose any foe, but to reach out to our own lost
children. A demonstration not of military power but of the firm hand of
strong parenting. In these six fine new aircraft, companies of our young
warriors will set out across the worlds, heading West – and showing
their strength to the “colonies”,’ and he emphasized the quotes with
crooks of his fingers.

There were a few whoops at that, and cries of ‘Kick butt!’ and ‘Turn
Valhalla into a twain park!’

Cowley held up his hands. ‘Let me emphasize again. This is _not_ a
punitive mission. Indeed, my administration has nothing but support for
those entrepreneurs who are busily developing the economies of the
so-called Low Earths, as contributions to the overall national good. Our
argument is not with them. Our argument is with those who live further
out, some living entirely unproductive and feckless lives – who are
prepared to accept the protection of life in the American Aegis, and yet
contribute nothing to its upkeep.’ More applause and whoops.

Now Cowley held up a bit of paper. ‘I have here their so-called
“Declaration of Independence”. Nothing but a mockery of this nation’s
finest hour.’ Theatrically he ripped up the paper, to more cheers. ‘This
operation will reach a climax when its overall commander, Admiral
Davidson here, stands on the steps of the city hall at the rebel enclave
of Valhalla, and welcomes those particular prodigals back into the bosom
of the national family. America has scattered across the worlds. Now is
the time to gather those lost flocks back together again. Time to pick
up the pieces, and grow strong again, in unity,’ and he gestured up at
the slogan over his head.

Now he turned to the troops ranked before him. ‘And to fulfil this holy
mission, I turn to these fine young people. Isaiah six, verse eight:
_Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who
will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me_. Who shall I send on
Operation Prodigal Son? Who will go for us?’

They had been coached to respond: ‘I’ll go. Send me! Send me!’ The
discipline of the ranks softened a little, as the sailors and marines
whooped and yelled.

Beside Maggie, Joe Mackenzie grunted in grudging appreciation. ‘Cowley
may be a slimeball, but he is still the President.’

‘And he’s supple, Doc,’ Maggie murmured. ‘Here he is pleasing one
constituency by appearing to take on the colonists, while appeasing the
colonists by presenting our mission as a kind of embrace.’

Mac glanced up at the heavily armed twains. ‘Some embrace. That isn’t
Santa’s sleigh up there. We’ll be lucky if we don’t provoke some kind of
shooting war.’

‘It won’t come to that.’

‘Well, however it turns out you can’t beat being given a mission to
fulfil.’

‘Ain’t that the truth,’ said Maggie.

Of course, once they were actually out in the Long Earth, they had
encountered much wariness about their mission.

Many Long Earth pioneers, at least the first generation, had left the
Datum precisely _because_ they had been intensely suspicious of central
government, deriving from a country in which from its founding that
sentiment had always run deep. What could the Datum government offer a
far-stepwise colony now? It could threaten to tax, but provided damn few
services – and over the years had withdrawn what little it had once
offered. Protection? The major problem with that argument was that there
was no detectable adversary, no bad guys to spy on or shadow, no
bogeymen to point to as hostiles. China was still reeling from its own
post-Step Day revolution. The parallel Europes were filling up with
peaceful farmers. A new generation of Africans were reclaiming their
ravaged continent, or stepwise copies of it. And so on. There was no
threat to counter.

However weak the case, Maggie Kauffman knew she was expected to
diplomatically remind these estranged colonial sheep that they were part
of a bigger flock, because back in DC there was a profound sense that,
under the American Aegis, this newly extended country was fragmenting –
and _that_, it was instinctively felt, couldn’t be allowed. That had
been true even before the provocative ‘Declaration of Independence’ that
had come out of Valhalla.

All that was for the future. Right now Maggie found the present hard
enough to manage: a horrible ethical and legal knot for her raw crew to
untangle, in a ship still being shaken down, that they’d encountered
just weeks after Cowley’s send-off.


15

THE OFFICE OF the mayor of Four Waters City was predictable pioneering
architecture, though a veritable mansion compared with anything that
Daniel Boone would have known, Maggie thought. However, he _would_ have
recognized and approved of the drying pelts, the jars of pickles in the
corner, the miscellaneous shovels and other gardening implements – all
the detritus of a pioneering life busily being lived. And there was a
basement, which suggested that the mayor and her family were thoughtful
people, and perhaps mildly paranoid (or sensibly cautious): it was
impossible for an intruder to step into an underground room—

‘The child,’ Robinson blurted. ‘Let’s get to it, Captain.’

‘Fine.’ Maggie sat down.

‘Her name is Angela Hartmann. It happened a week ago. She was found by
her family, stoned out of her mind . . . Sorry. She wouldn’t wake up,
she was in a kind of coma, took days to come out of it. We know who did
it, who gave her the drugs and got high with her. And we know who
committed the murder.’

_What murder?_ ‘Where are these people now?’

The mayor shrugged. ‘It never dawned on us before to build a jail. We
were building a stone ice house for the winter. We used that. It’s
pretty well made. I don’t think anyone could possibly get out of it,
it’s real big and heavy.’

‘And this is where you put the guy who gave the kid the drugs?’

Robinson glanced at her. ‘I’m sorry. You’ve misunderstood, I’ve not been
clear, I kind of gabble stuff out when I’m nervous. _That_ bastard isn’t
in the ice house. That bastard’s in the mortuary. Such as it is. The guy
we’re keeping in the ice house – he was the father of the little girl.’

‘Ah. So the father found the pusher—’

‘And killed him.’

‘OK.’ Maggie began to see it. ‘Two crimes: the drugs, the murder.’

‘Nobody’s denying any of this. But as a result of all this, we are –
riven. About how to handle this. What to do with the father.’

_Why me?_ Maggie thought to herself. She was supposed to be cheerfully
showing the flag, and maintaining goodwill. Right now Nathan Boss, her
XO, was out bartering for fresh vegetables. And now this. _Well, why not
me? This is what I came out here for_. ‘I take it you haven’t tried to
contact the Datum authorities.’

Robinson flushed. ‘To tell you the truth, we were scared. We never even
told the Datum that we were here. We thought it wasn’t their business,
after all.’

‘And there’s no local justice system, in the stepwise neighbourhood?’

She shook her head.

Maggie sat in silence, letting the moment extend. ‘Very well. Here’s
what you’re going to do. First of all, you are going to get your act
together and make it clear to the Datum government that you _are_ here.
We’ll help you with that, and such details as ratifying property claims.
Then you have a man in custody without trial, or any due process, and we
need to sort that out. Look, to repeat: I’m not here with any mandate to
police you. But we can help. And before all that, you’re going to let my
ship’s doctor have a good look at the girl.’

A few hours later Joe Mackenzie came out of the Hartmann house. Mac was
in his fifties, grizzled, beaten up by a long career in emergency and
battlefield medicine. He was old for a field posting, in fact; Maggie
had helped him bend the regulations to have him at her side on this
mission. This bright afternoon, the doctor’s expression was as dark as
twilight.

‘You know, Maggie, sometimes there are no words . . . If I were to say
that it could have been worse, you need to understand that even so I
would like to spend some time alone in a room with the gentleman
concerned and a baseball bat, knowing with surgical precision the right
spots to hit—’

It was at times like this that Maggie was glad she’d stuck to her
career, never married, never had kids of her own, left the glorious
burden of caring for children to her siblings, cousins, friends; she was
happy to be an aunt, honorary or otherwise. ‘It’s OK, Mac.’

‘Well, no, it isn’t OK, not for that little girl, and may never be
again. I’d prefer her to be sent to a Datum hospital for a full
examination. At the least I want to take her up on to the ship for
observation for a while.’

Maggie nodded. ‘Let’s go meet the leaders of this joint.’

They met in the mayor’s office. At Maggie’s side were Mac and Nathan
Boss. Maggie had invited Robinson herself, and a few chosen citizens
from the town meeting whom the mayor reckoned to be well-balanced and
sensible, at least by the standards of this community, to consider the
verdict.

As they sat down, everybody looked to the Captain – looked to her as a
saviour, she realized. Maggie cleared her throat. Time to step up to the
plate, she thought.

‘For the record – and we are being recorded – this session is nothing
more than a panel of inquiry. Judicial processes can follow as
necessary. I have no policing role here. But I have taken it upon
myself, at the request of the mayor of the town, to ascertain fairly all
the facts of the matter.

‘I’ll summarize what I’ve been told; the facts are apparently not being
denied. A week ago Roderick Bacon plied with drugs Angela Hartmann, a
girl of nine years old, the daughter of Raymond Hartmann and Daphne
Hartmann. Hearing the girl cry out, her father, Ray Hartmann, rushed to
her room and saw Bacon with her. The girl was vomiting, fitting.
Hartmann pulled the man away, handed the girl to her mother, and then
beat Bacon, dragged him out of the house, and set about him again,
causing, after a minute or two, his death. The neighbours, alerted by
the screams, told us that Bacon was pleading for his life, saying that
“a lurid angel” made him do it, made him want to give this “pure child”
the gift of his own “inner light” . . . You get the picture.

‘In the absence of a lawyer I’ve had my XO, Commander Nathan Boss, take
a personal statement from Hartmann about the events of that night, and
also a statement by Bacon’s wife. And according to the wife, before the
crime Bacon had been out processing a harvest of the apparently
psychoactive flowers endemic in the woods hereabouts. He ran a side
business, of dubious legality, selling the stuff in stepwise worlds
. . .’

Maggie stopped there. She wished she’d had better training for something
like this. She looked around at the others in the room. ‘For the record
the child will be cared for overnight on the _Benjamin Franklin_, under
the care of Dr. Mackenzie. I’ll invite the girl’s mother to spend the
night with her daughter; I’ll send a crewman down to escort her up to
the ship. Meanwhile – well, Bacon is dead, and Ray Hartmann is in
custody.

‘I think I understand the feelings of all involved in this. I’m no
lawyer, I’m no judge, but I can give you my personal assessment. I have
to say that Bacon was guilty, in any reasonable sense of the word. He
knowingly exposed himself to narcotics, these flowers from the woods; my
view is he’s responsible for his behaviour thereafter. As for Hartmann,
murder is murder. Yet I find myself loath to condemn the actions of an
overwrought husband and father.

‘So, what next? We’ll file a report, and in the end the Datum cops will
come out here, go through this fully, refer it to the judicial system –
but that could take years; the Aegis is a big place, and tough to
police. In the meantime you have Ray Hartmann stuck in that ice house.
What to do with him? Well, frankly, you – _all of you_ – must be judge
and jury, prosecution and defence. We can leave you advice on due
process. But it’s up to you to run your own affairs, and I urge you to
work out how to deal with this yourselves, within US law as best you
understand it.’ She eyed them one by one. ‘This kind of autonomy was,
after all, presumably what you wanted when you came out here.

‘In the longer term, get together with your stepwise neighbours. I’m
sure that together you could support the equivalent of a county court.
I’m told that’s becoming common in the colony worlds. Hire a lawyer or
two – even a visiting circuit judge.’ She ran out of steam. She stood
up. ‘That’s all from me. The rest is up to you as a community. But for
God’s sake – Nathan, make sure the science boys take samples first, and
make sure they do this when the wind isn’t blowing into the town – _burn
those flowers_. That’s all, people, at least for today. I’ll have the
minutes of this session ready for all of you tomorrow.’

That evening, Maggie met Joe Mackenzie coming out of the ship’s small
medical bay.

‘How is she?’ she asked.

‘Thank goodness I spent a semester in a children’s hospital before I
signed up.’

‘Would coffee help?’

In Maggie’s sea cabin, Mackenzie accepted the mug with gratitude, and
after two blessed swigs, said, ‘You know, the bastard got what was
coming to him, in my personal view. But we are officers of the United
States Navy. Even Wyatt Earp had to _look_ as if he respected the law.’

‘I’m hoping they’ll work that out for themselves. Plenty of other
communities out here have done.’

‘But other communities don’t have those damn flowers. And, to me, there
was a definite feel of _hippie_ about the place – you know what I mean?
– the feeling that people aren’t taking care of business. The
counter-culture gone bad scenario, too many people frazzled out of their
brains.’

Maggie stared at the medic. ‘Where did all that come from, Mac?’

‘My grandfather left me a complete collection of the Whole Earth
Catalog, a load of sixties and seventies counter-culture stuff . . . I
got quite interested in it, you know. Some of their values were
laudable. But when it comes to the meat and potatoes – the secret to
building a home in a place like this isn’t about ideals and theory, and
not about getting high. It’s about hard work, alongside a sense of
humour, and the goodwill of your neighbours, and putting your back into
the future. But what you’ve got down there, I think, is the seed of
tragedy. Along with Margarita Jha from biology, I analysed that lovely
little flower that grows everywhere in their woods. Addictive and
hallucinogenic like there’s no tomorrow. Growing like a weed.’

‘But, Mac – ye gods! Are we going to have to send a Drug Enforcement
Agency unit to every settlement? They have to work it out for
themselves.’

‘That’s how it got resolved on the Datum, in the end. After Step Day
there was an explosion in the drug trade – with stepping pushers, there
was no way to police it. In the inner cities, the cops pulled back and
. . . Well, let’s say they let natural selection take its course.’

She looked at him as he said these words, his tone neutral. In the
course of his career Mac had evidently seen a lot of stuff even she, in
the military, had been shielded from. She said, ‘Well, we’re done with
this particular can of worms. I think they’ll let this guy Hartmann out.
But it’s been a salutary shock; they’ll figure out ways to order their
affairs better.’

‘Sure. A neat wrap-up,’ said Mac sourly. ‘But the frightening part of it
is that we’ve barely started this mission. What’s waiting for us in the
world next door?’


16

SIX DAYS OUT of Valhalla, somewhere around the Earth million mark, the
_Gold Dust_ made a stop at a clearing cut into yet another raw world’s
continent-sized forest. From the air the Valientés saw it as a neat
little rectangular patch etched out of the green, an oddly touching
island of humanity all but lost in this global forest.

But when you looked more closely you could see that it wasn’t humans
who’d created the clearing but a party of trolls, under the direction of
a human, labouring even as the passengers looked down on them, those
massive muscles working under their black pelts.

Bosun Higgs had proved to be a bright kid and surprisingly knowledgeable
about the Long Earth – and the importance of the trolls. The big
humanoids were ubiquitous, though not necessarily in large numbers. And
they shaped the country they moved through, just on account of what they
ate, pushed through, moved aside. In their ecological role they were
like the big animals of Africa, maybe, like elephants or wildebeest. As
a result, Helen learned now, the landscapes of the stepwise worlds,
while quite unlike the Datum, were not quite _like_ the Datum as it had
once been before humanity either, not for a long time – because as
mankind had risen up, the trolls had fled.

Well, the working trolls below looked content enough. But their overseer
carried a whip, as Sally quickly pointed out. Joshua suggested he only
used it to make a noise, to attract the trolls’ attention.

‘Yeah, right,’ said Sally.

Helen knew it was hard to tell how happy a troll was. You did hear of
distressing incidents, such as the notorious case of the troll called
Mary at the Gap, the case everyone was talking about, even the snobs
aboard the _Gold Dust_. But you saw trolls wherever people were, working
like this. They seemed to enjoy it. Of course if you pushed them too
hard they could simply step away.

Maybe they were just too useful to have a conscience about. Disturbing
thought. And, as Sally said to Joshua, you wondered what _they_ thought
about humans.

The party dropped off supplies for the logging team, and brought up
samples of exotic lichen in little plastic packs, lichen taken from very
_old_ trees. Old trees were rare on Datum Earth and were becoming so
even on the heavily logged Low Earths. That was the nature of the trade
across the ‘Long Mississippi’, as Helen had learned the pilots called
this stepwise route. Raw materials flowed in towards the Datum – timber,
foodstuffs, minerals – but bulk goods mostly came from the Corn Belt
worlds further in, and only rare or precious items were worth bringing
in from beyond the half-million-step mark, such as unique old-tree
lichens and other exotic flora and fauna. Indeed, Joshua suggested as
they watched this trade proceed, their own community ought to think
about exporting Hell-Knows-Where maple liquor. In exchange the Datum
shipped out low-mass but high-tech goods, from medical kit to electrical
generators, to coils of fibre-optic cable so the colonists could
establish decent communication networks in their new worlds. It was the
kind of trade that had always characterized the settlement of new
territories, such as between Britain and its American colonies before
the Revolution, with high-quality manufactured products being sent out
from the homeland in return for raw materials. Helen’s father and his
Footprint Congress buddies would probably claim it was exploitative.
Maybe, but it seemed to Helen to work.

And besides, whoever was ripping off whom, it had to be a good thing for
this great river of airships to be linking all the worlds of mankind
together. So Helen thought, anyhow.

Twelve days out from Valhalla and they crossed a diffuse boundary into
the Corn Belt, the great band of farming worlds a third of a million
steps thick, stretching in towards the Datum from about four hundred and
sixty thousand worlds out. The skies were a lot busier now, with twains
like their own heading towards the Datum passing those heading back out,
‘upstream’, so to speak.

The _Gold Dust_ had made pretty fast progress to this point, but from
now on the stops would be more frequent. There were waystations spread
out stepwise all along the Long Mississippi, and further down the river
geographically too, in many of these worlds. Helen was told that as they
approached the Datum these stations would show up more frequently. At
the waystations the twains stopped to take on cargo loads gathered here
from the nearby worlds for collection. Sacks of corn were the staple
export from these particular Earths, and the crews, with plenty of troll
labour, worked in chains to get the twains’ gaping holds loaded up. The
stations had inns and the like for rest and recreation. These weren’t
polite places, Helen observed. Many of them had a calaboose, a little
jailhouse.

One waystation they stopped at, however, was in a world that happened to
be a little warmer than the rest, and the owners had taken the
opportunity to establish sprawling sugar plantations and orange groves
and palmettos, rare this far north in any America. The sugar-house where
they processed their cane was a huge clanking factory. The owners’ house
was like a colonial mansion constructed of the local timber, with
verandas and carved pillars draped with magnolias, and the Captain, the
Valienté family, and a few other guests were invited down to drink
orange liqueur. In the fields you could see the bent backs of the troll
workers, and their song floated on the hot breeze.

The real tourist spectacle in the Corn Belt was the timber trade. Rafts
of the stuff from the forests to the north were floated downstream on
one Mississippi or another. At a waystation the rafts would be lifted
out of the water by a twain or two, and then ganged together by trolls
and human workers. The end result was one tremendous platform that might
be an acre in size, suspended in the air, constructed of long straight
trunks stripped and roped together, each held up by a squadron of
airships. And off the twains would go, stepping across the worlds with
their vast dangling freight, with parties of trolls and their human
supervisors riding in huts and tents on the timber platforms. Just an
astounding sight.

What was even more remarkable was what they saw going the other way. One
of the principal exports of the Low Earths to the outer worlds was
horses. So you’d see a twain descend, and the great ramps from the hold
fold down, and out would trot a herd of young horses, supervised by
cowboys on horseback.

Occasionally they passed over relics of what used to be an old trekking
trail, like the one Helen’s family followed to get out to Reboot, on
Earth West 101,754: information flags or warning posts, abandoned
halfway houses. Thanks to the twains the days of pioneer trekking, of
footslogging across a hundred thousand worlds, were gone, a phase of
history that had only lasted a few years but was already passing into
legend. Helen wondered what the likes of Captain Batson, who had led her
particular trek, were doing now. Yet the trails were still in use, by
gangs of humans driving troll bands one direction or the other across
the Long Earth. Helen could never tell if the trolls were singing, or
not.

These sights were mostly just glimpses, gone in a second or two as they
travelled on.


17

TEN YEARS AFTER the epic journey of Joshua Valienté and Lobsang, twain
technology, offered as open source by the Black Corporation, had become
the standard way of moving groups of people and large cargoes around the
Long Earth. But, Jacques Montecute reflected gleefully as he prepared
for his mission into deep stepwise China, some twain journeys were more
spectacular than others.

This particular journey, with Roberta Golding, was to begin from Datum
China. Once the rather lengthy preliminaries were complete, the sister
ships _Zheng He_ and _Liu Yang_ lifted into the dome of smog that hung
over Xiangcheng, Henan province. Standing in the _Zheng He_ gondola’s
main observation lounge, Jacques was able to look up through the window
to see the ship’s great silvery hull overhead, the skin flexing like the
hide of some muscular animal, as the twain began, literally, to swim
through the air. The ship’s mobile hull would have been a remarkable
sight even if it hadn’t been adorned with the clasped-hands symbol of
the eight-year-old Federated Republic of China.

They soon left the airfield behind, and drifted over the factories and
car parks and rubbish tips of a grimy industrial zone. Roberta Golding,
Jacques’s charge, fifteen years old, stood by the big floor-to-ceiling
windows, impassively inspecting the landscape drifting below.

And a dozen trolls, here in the observation lounge, began to sing ‘Slow
Boat to China’, the song strung out into a round and layered with
harmony like honey piled on a piece of toast, in the trolls’ usual
fashion.

Around Jacques a scattered handful of crew, along with a few more
informally dressed types who looked like scientists, glanced out of the
windows and laughed at jokes Jacques couldn’t catch, and couldn’t have
translated if he had. Jacques and Roberta, from Happy Landings, were
used to having trolls around. But some of the crew stared at the trolls,
as if they were an utterly unfamiliar sight. Jacques noticed one crewman
close to the big animals wearing a conspicuous weapon of some kind at
his hip, as if they might be about to go on the rampage.

A uniformed young Chinese, a woman, evidently a crew member, offered
Jacques and Roberta drinks: fruit juice, water. Jacques took a water and
sipped it. ‘Thanks.’

‘It is my pleasure.’

‘Nice choice of song.’

‘We thought it was an amusing choice to welcome you,’ she said brightly.
‘_We_ being the crew. For this is a _fast_ boat _from_ China, you see.’
She proffered a hand for a strong shake. Dark haired, sensible looking
rather than attractive, she might have been twenty-five years old. ‘I am
Lieutenant Wu Yue-Sai. A Federal Army officer, but attached to the China
National Space Administration.’

‘Ah. Which is running this East Twenty Million project.’

‘Exactly. You can see the logic. Our space engineers are trained to
handle advanced technology in unfamiliar and extreme environments. Who
better to confront the mysteries of the far East worlds? I however
trained as a pilot. I have ambitions to become an astronaut, some day.
For now I have been assigned an informal role as companion to your
protégée, Ms. Roberta Golding. If that is acceptable to you, and indeed
to Ms. Golding. You will call me Yue-Sai, I hope.’

‘And she’ll want you to call her Roberta, I’m sure.’

‘Perhaps she has informal names. Robbie, Bobbie . . .’

Jacques glanced at Roberta, who was solemnly sipping her orange juice.
‘Roberta,’ he said firmly. ‘What do you mean – what kind of companion?’

‘I am relatively close to her in age. Of course I am the same sex. I
have enjoyed a broad education, in philosophy and the humanities as well
as science and engineering, just as Ms.—as Roberta has.’

‘Well, Roberta’s basically self-taught.’

‘My primary duty is to ensure her safety, whenever we leave the ship.
During ground excursions and so forth. No doubt we will encounter many
hazardous incidents.’

‘That’s a thoughtful gesture.’

‘It is my honour. I have been studying English especially. As have many
of the crew, including the Captain.’

‘I can tell. Thank you. We’ll make a good team.’

‘I’m sure you will.’ Captain Chen Zhong approached now, bustling across
the carpeted floor of the deck. As he passed, his crew subtly
straightened up, and their faces became more solemn. Chen shook the
hands of Jacques and Roberta. He brandished some kind of control box in
his left hand. ‘In a moment we’ll be off! Of course we are already in
the air, but soon we will be swimming stepwise too . . .’

His accent was stronger than Wu’s, but more complex, some of his
phrasing almost British. Aged around fifty he was short, a little stout
for a military man, Jacques thought, but sleek, supremely confident.
Jacques would have been prepared to bet he was a survivor of the fallen
Communist regime.

‘So glad you could come with us, that all the various formalities were
overcome. A tricky process given the newness of our nation. Of course
the welfare of Ms. Golding is a top priority.’ Now he faced Roberta. ‘I
hope you’ll have time to enjoy the experience. Such a pretty thing!
Forgive me for saying it. Yet you are so serious.’

Roberta, taller than he was, just looked back at him.

Chen winked at Jacques. ‘Quiet one, is she? But observant. No doubt
you’re drinking in the details of the airships even as they are
launched. The unusual mode of propulsion, for instance.’

To Jacques’s relief, Roberta deigned to reply to this. ‘The flexible
hull, you mean. Strung with some kind of artificial muscle, contracting
when electrical impulses are applied?’

‘Very good, very good. With the electricity provided by solar power. You
can see why such a system is appropriate? When we observe the worlds we
explore, why not do it with as little noise and other disturbance as
possible? We hope to reach Earth East 20,000,000, our nominal target –
nearly ten times further than any human has ventured into the Long Earth
before! – in a mere few weeks. We estimate we will also need to maintain
a velocity, that is a lateral velocity, of over a hundred miles per hour
in the process. I’m sure you can see why.’

Roberta shrugged. ‘That’s trivial.’

Jacques exchanged a glance with Yue-Sai. That was one of Roberta’s more
annoying verbal tics; the need for a sideways speed might be obvious to
her, but wasn’t at all obvious to Jacques, or, it seemed, to Yue-Sai.
The point went unexplained.

Chen said, ‘You know your engineering, then. But what of your wider
education? Are you aware of the provenance of the names of our
pioneering ships?’

‘Liu Yang was the first Chinese woman in space. And Zheng He was the
eunuch admiral who—’

‘Yes, yes. I can see we have little to teach you.’ He smiled. ‘Then let
us explore together.’ He held up the gadget in his left hand; it was
like a television remote, Jacques thought, and on it was a familiar
corporate logo: a Black Corporation marque. Chen said, ‘I hope you have
all been following your nausea inoculation regimes? Now – are you ready?
– every journey must begin with a single step.’ He pressed a button.

Jacques felt a familiar jolt to the gut, but faint, a ghost sensation.

The crowded landscape of Datum Henan was whisked away. Suddenly rain
clattered on the windows and bounced off the great hull overhead. The
trolls, apparently unperturbed, sang on.

Chen led the party to the big downward-looking windows at the gondola’s
prow, so they could see better. At first glance Jacques could see little
difference in the landscape below, Henan East 1, compared with the
original: more, cruder factories and coal-burning power stations
belching smoke, roads like muddy tracks, a smoggy tinge to the air. Yet
in the distance there were patches of green, of forest, and that
_wasn’t_ like the original.

Chen said, ‘Henan! Long ago the cradle of Han civilization, you know.
But in more recent times something of a hellhole, exploited,
over-industrialized. A hundred million people crammed into an area the
size of the state of Massachusetts.’ That was a Datum Earth reference
that meant little to Jacques, but he got the idea. ‘Datum Henan was once
a prime source of migrants to cities like Shanghai, who became the
cleaners and the clerks and the barkeeps and the prostitutes. You can
imagine that on Step Day a rather large proportion of the population of
such places as this wandered over into the new worlds with alacrity. It
took the authorities some time to restore order. You should not
underestimate the impact that stepping had on the Chinese people as a
whole in those early days – and not just the economic or other practical
effects. I mean rather the psychological, as you will see. Of course you
know that the disruptions after Step Day eventually led to the, ah,
_retirement_ of the last Communist regime.’ He studied Roberta,
evidently curious about her reaction. ‘So we begin our exploration, Ms.
Golding. Here we are on Earth East 1, of twenty million. What do you
understand the purposes of this expedition to be?’

She thought before answering. ‘To see what’s out there.’

He seemed pleased by the simplicity of the reply. ‘Yes! We will count
the worlds, and we will catalogue them, number them. We will establish
the longitude of the Long Earth East, so to speak. I have seen your
academic record: your intellect is evidently remarkable. You don’t think
a mere voyage of exploration, of fact-gathering, is _trivial_? We are
like butterfly collectors, are we not?’

She shrugged. ‘If you want to understand butterflies, you first have to
collect butterflies. Or finches.’

Chen seemed to puzzle over that word. ‘Ah! Like Darwin on Galapagos. A
neat reference. Well, I can’t promise you finches, but butterflies
. . .’ He let that tail off mysteriously.

‘Why did you bring the trolls?’

He glanced at her sharply. ‘Good question. I should have known you would
ask it. In the planning, most people dismissed our trolls as – what, as
a cabaret, an animal show? Not you! The trolls, in a sense, _are_ the
Long Earth, are they not? Their long call stitches it together – and, I
believe, appeals to the musical sensibilities of all Chinese people. Now
we may be venturing further than _even any troll_ has travelled before.
Think of that! And we want whatever we discover in those remote
footprints of China to become part of the troll song.’

Jacques said, ‘Of course you know that trolls are an integral part of
our lives, in the community we come from.’

‘Ah, yes. So I hear. Although you keep its location secret, don’t you?’

‘We treasure our privacy.’

‘Of course you do.’ Chen pressed his button, and they stepped once
again. Jacques noticed a counter on the wall: flickering digits that
would count the worlds.

In East 2 the sky was bright, the sun high, and the land was carpeted
with green, with forest. The contrast with the Datum, and even East 1 –
the sudden flood of colour, the light illuminating the observation deck
– was breathtaking.

Chen said, ‘You can see why a sudden access to all this so _startled_
people. Our nation is older than yours, older than Europe. China has
been cultivated, built on, fought over, mined, for five thousand years.
It was a shock for us to walk into this primordial green. There were
immediate cultural responses. An upsurge in support for environmental
protection. Songs, poems, paintings, most of them bad. Ha! Well, there
was nothing much we could do about East 1, or West 1. Quickly ruined by
the first flood of travellers, the first helpless and hapless migrants.
Each footprint became one big shanty town. But the government organized
quickly, and we kept East 2 as a kind of national park, a memorial of
Step Day, of our sudden access to our country’s own past – as best we
could, anyhow; even here we are harmed by pollution from the heavy
industrialization of this Low Earth in such places as the United States
footprint, and there are ongoing negotiations in the United Nations
about that. We also store some of our treasures here – the heritage of
our deep culture. Even a few buildings, temples dismantled and rebuilt.
Just as humanity is preserved from extinction by the existence of the
Long Earth, should any calamity befall our home world, so now is our
cultural past.’

Roberta pressed her forehead against the window, gawping, briefly
looking like any curious teenager. ‘I see animals, moving through the
forest. Elephants? Heading towards that river over there, to the north.’

Chen smiled. ‘Elephants, which roam as far north as Beijing in some
worlds. And camels, bears, lions, tigers, black swans, even river
dolphins. Tapirs! Deer! Pangolins! On Step Day, our children choked in
the smog-free air, were frightened by the brightness of the sun, and
goggled at the animals.’

The Captain pressed his control button again.

In East 3 the forest had been cleared, and the river dammed to flood the
ground. In the resulting paddy fields, people laboured, bent over, not
looking up as the shadows of the airships passed. It was the same in
East 4, 5, 6 and beyond, though the methods of farming differed. In some
worlds there was industrialization, with smoke rising from distant power
stations and foundries, and crude-looking machines rolling across vast
fields; in others, just the people and their animals.

‘Very organized,’ Jacques said.

‘Oh, yes,’ Yue-Sai said brightly. ‘We Chinese were able to move out into
the stepwise worlds in a disciplined and industrious way, matched, I
would suggest, nowhere else in the world. Under the Communists we were a
one-party state equipped with the tools of late capitalism – capable of
very large-scale feats. In recent decades we had already had experience
of massive projects on the Datum: infrastructure like dams and bridges
and rail lines, even a space programme. Now the Long Earth offered a
blank canvas. Since the regime change, despite a revision of ideology,
we have lost none of those skills. That’s China for you!’

Roberta said, ‘Could we pause here?’

‘Of course.’ Chen pressed his buttons.

Jacques looked down. The airship was hovering over a waterlogged field,
where a peasant stood patiently, holding a piece of rope tied around the
neck of what looked like a buffalo. ‘That’s a scene that could be two
thousand years old,’ he said.

Roberta said, ‘Captain Chen, in some of these agricultural worlds there
are factories. Producing artificial nutrients?’

‘Also genetically engineered crops. Modern farming machinery—’

‘Yet here, you are evidently manuring the soil. It seems a
contradiction.’

Yue-Sai said, ‘We use both ways. This is an expression of an old tension
in Chinese philosophy.’

‘The Dao versus Confucianism,’ Roberta said.

Chen looked impressed.

Yue-Sai nodded. ‘Essentially correct. The Dao is the way – to follow the
way means a harmonization with nature. The Confucians by contrast argue
that man must master nature, for the betterment of nature as well as the
benefit of mankind. Wars have been fought over these ideas. The
Confucians won in the second century BC. But now we have room to spread
out, to explore other ways.’

‘_Dao zai shiniao_,’ Roberta said.

Chen laughed out loud. ‘The way is in the piss and the shit! Very good,
very good.’

Roberta seemed neither pleased nor offended by his praise.

The airship moved on. Around East 20, a belt of more industrialized
worlds began. Jacques looked down on factories, power stations, mine
heads, industrial parks cut into the green. Lines of workers moved
between workshops and shabby-looking dormitory, refectory and shower
blocks. Cargo airships hovered, or were tethered to masts. On many of
these worlds, smoke and soot and smog hung thick in the air.

Chen was observing their reactions. ‘Few westerners have seen this. Save
for those who have put money into these Third Front developments.
Douglas Black for one.’

Jacques asked, ‘Why “Third Front”?’

‘Ah, that’s a reference to Mao,’ Chen said, and winked again. ‘In
response to aggression from the Soviets in the 1960s Mao scattered
industrial production facilities across China – into the remote west,
for example. So that it became more difficult to cripple us with nuclear
bombs, you see. He encouraged workers to go out there. “The Further from
Father and Mother, the Nearer to Chairman Mao’s Heart” – that was the
slogan. As then, so now. One can despise Mao’s crimes while admiring his
ambition.’

Jacques wondered if you could have one without the other. He said, ‘You
can’t seriously be suggesting there’s a risk of some kind of shooting
war with the west.’

‘There are other threats. Stepping itself has destabilized nations –
including China of course. And climate collapse on the Datum, with all
that would follow, could yet be a serious issue.’

They came to a world – East 38, according to the wall counter – where a
thunderstorm was raging. The two airships drifted in a sky populated by
huge, lumpy, rushing grey clouds, and rain lashed down on the forest
below. Jacques observed what looked like the scars of lightning strikes,
blackened craters in the forest cover.

Chen watched them expectantly.

‘I don’t understand,’ Jacques said. ‘What is it we are meant to see
here?’

‘You could only perceive it properly from orbit, perhaps,’ Chen said.
‘Here, soldier-engineers are using atomic weapons to blast paths and
tunnels through the Himalayas, thus removing an accident of geology that
disrupted the flow of air and moisture across Eurasia. In this world,
the interior of Asia will be green.’

Jacques was astonished. ‘You’re reshaping a whole mountain range?’

‘Why not? And in another neighbouring world, we are diverting all the
rivers arising in the Himalayas, save for the Yangtze, again to bring
moisture to the heart of the continent.’

Roberta said, ‘More dreams of the Maoists.’

‘Yes! You know your history. Schemes that were too expensive, or too
risky, to be tried out when the Datum was all we had. Now we can
experiment with no harm done. What dreams we have, what ambition! Aren’t
we Chinese great?’

Maybe. But Jacques wondered what the experience of these new worlds,
these diverse environments, was doing to the souls of the colonists
here. In the West worlds, different Americas were evolving, sharing
their parent’s values maybe but subtly diverging. Here too that must be
true, with new kinds of China developing, still rooted in the same deep
history – surely the Chinese would always stay Chinese – but each
acquiring a whole new character. And he wondered how soon it would be
before those new Chinas became restless in search of freedom from their
gigantic parent, like the Valhallan Belt Americas.

As the lightning cracked in the sky, the trolls were growing anxious,
their song fragmented.

Chen lifted his remote control, apparently with regret. ‘I would love to
show you our new mountains. But we cannot linger; it is unsafe here.’

Jacques asked, ‘Why, the lightning?’

‘No, no. The fallout from the atomic mining. On we go . . . Now we will
speed up. You understand these ships are an experimental sort, developed
by our own engineering companies in conjunction with the Black
Corporation. One purpose of this exploration is to test the new
technologies.’

The passing of the worlds accelerated until, as Jacques could tell from
his own pulse, the realities were washing past at the rate of roughly
one a second, blink, blink, blink, then faster still. Most of the worlds
were unremarkable, blankets of green under sunshine or cloud. But in
some glaciated worlds the sunlight glared from ice sheets, safely far
beneath the prows of the twains.

They were shown to a kind of lounge area. A steward circulated with
food, soft drinks, China tea, and they sat, chatting while whole worlds
flapped by, unremarked. Jacques suspected Roberta would rather have been
alone, studying, reading, making her own observations. But she sat
politely enough, if mostly silently.

After an hour or so the airship paused, the light subtly different. When
Jacques looked up he saw butterflies, a tremendous swarm of them, all
around the ship, battering silently at the windows of the observation
deck. Most were small, plain, but some were more colourful, and some had
wings the size of saucers. The sunlight shone bright through their pale
substance.

Chen laughed at their reaction. ‘Butterfly world. What the westerners
call a Joker. Of course an ecology needs more components than just
butterflies. Nevertheless, here in this part of China, butterflies are
all that come to greet us. We have no idea how this has come about, what
is different here. Yet here we are. You see, Roberta Golding, I told you
we would be counting butterflies! What do you think?’

At length Lieutenant Wu Yue-Sai said, ‘It would certainly be hard to
demonstrate chaos theory here.’

They were all silent as they worked that out. Then Jacques was the first
to laugh.

Roberta, however, merely looked puzzled.


18

THE CREW OF the _Benjamin Franklin_ did take seriously their mandate to
project the authority of the US Datum government across the Long Earth.
It wasn’t _all_ about saving kittens stuck up trees, as Maggie told her
crew.

Which was why the twain made an unannounced stop at a town called
Reboot, Earth West 101,754, in a stepwise New York State.

A small group led by Executive Officer Nathan Boss – a rare jaunt for
him away from his desk – were landed from the twain in a kind of
clearing of trampled-down mud, beside a spidery trail that ran up from
the coast of the local copy of the Atlantic. Nathan had seen the layout
for himself clearly from the air, aboard the _Franklin_. The town itself
was out of sight but a short walk away, cut into the green of the
crowding forest: neat little fields and houses with smoke rising up, all
connected by wide dirt tracks.

This was one of the first of what Captain Kauffman was calling their
‘hearts and minds’ assignments. They would turn up unannounced at a
community on some world like this, in order to make themselves and their
mission known, and, well, to gently remind these colonial Americans that
they were still Americans . . . This early in the mission they were
still finding their way. So was Nathan Boss, his first time in charge of
a ground team.

And in this case the logistics were surprisingly complicated. This town
and its stepwise neighbours were linked in a kind of extended Long Earth
‘county’. So the _Franklin_ was hopping between the worlds, visiting one
community after another, dropping equipment and setting down groups of
sailors and marines at each of those neighbours.

There were lots of ways such an operation could go wrong, as Nathan was
all too well aware.

Add to that the fact that the worlds of the Long Earth were themselves
somewhat bewildering, for the twain’s mostly Datum-born crew. As the
Navy guys waited for the marines to follow them off the _Franklin_,
reflexively they spread out to form a perimeter, though there was no
visible threat, here in Earth West 101,754. They looked around,
evidently kind of baffled. Most of them were from urban backgrounds.
Well, there was no urban background _here_. Nothing but the muddy
clearing. Nobody around but a deer (well, Nathan _thought_ it was a
deer) that peered at them from out of a clump of forest. Nothing to read
but a sign, home-made, hand-lettered:

WELCOME TO REBOOT

FOUNDED 2026, A.D.

POP. 1465

Ensign Toby Fox, the IT nerd type from engineering who had been tasked
with making a census of the Long Earth, dutifully wrote down the
population number.

There was no sign of sun under a clouded-over sky, but the warmth was
intense for an early May day, and Nathan was immediately sweating in his
combat fatigues, with his pack on his back.

It was when Lieutenant Sam Allen came down from the twain, the last to
land, and the _Benjamin Franklin_ popped away stepwise with a soft
implosion of air, that the real trouble started.

Allen was in charge of the small chalk of marines attached to this
expedition. As his own guys stood around, evidently feeling a little
lost in this latest new world just like the sailors, Allen started
badgering Specialist Jennifer Wang. ‘So where’s our equipment?’

Wang already had her own pack off her back and was working her radio and
locator gear. ‘Lieutenant, our gear was supposed to be landed within a
half-mile, not on top of us—’

‘I know that. Which way, Specialist?’

Nathan knew that the equipment drop, a bunch of trunks in rope nets, had
radio beacons to alert the arriving troops of its location. But Wang
looked confused. She worked touchscreens, and even twisted dials on a
very old-fashioned-looking radio receiver. All she picked up was
squawking music, a clatter of guitars.

Midshipman Jason Santorini, listening in, grinned. ‘Chuck Berry. My
dad’s favourite. Mint stuff, even if it is like a hundred years old, or
something.’

‘That’s just some dumb local station,’ growled Allen. ‘Some kid in his
barn . . . Turn it off.’

Wang complied.

Ensign Toby Fox was a small guy, and more nervous than the rest. Now,
before Nathan had a chance to get hold of the situation, Fox was the one
who was unwise enough to ask Allen, ‘So, Lieutenant, where _is_ our
stuff?’

Allen turned on him. ‘In the wrong fucking place. Isn’t it obvious?’

‘Actually it’s probably in the wrong, umm, fucking world, Lieutenant,’
Wang put in. ‘Or I’d be picking up its bleep by now.’

By checking rosters, they soon figured it out. The drop had been made at
another town, New Scarsdale, the ‘county’ seat.

Wang said, ‘There’s your error, sir. Scarsdale is over on 101,752.’

Allen said, ‘Whereas this dump—’

Fox checked his milspec Earth counter. ‘Right now we’re on 101,754, sir.
Where we were supposed to be.’

Somebody had miscounted the stepwise worlds. Nathan suspected
miscommunication between the two command lines, the Navy crew and the
marines, Datum-born, Datum-trained crew who weren’t used to thinking in
terms of planning for operating across different stepwise worlds in the
first place. It happened.

‘What a screw-up,’ Allen raged. ‘And those damn Navy boys stepped on
without checking they got the rendezvous right.’

Everybody else just stood around, too nervous to be the one to reply.
Somewhere something growled, a huge bear maybe, a deep rumble like an
earth tremor, and they gathered closer together.

‘OK, OK,’ Allen said. ‘We need to send a runner. Get that ship back
here, and bring us to the gear, or the gear to us.’ He poked a finger at
random. ‘You, McKibben. Get your Stepper out and get moving—’

‘Sorry, Lieutenant,’ said the man, ‘no can do. I left behind my
Stepper.’

‘You did what? . . . OK, who the hell else is here in Earth One Hundred
Thousand and Shit without the most elementary and obvious piece of kit
of all, a Stepper to get him home again?’

They all looked at each other.

It was an obvious omission, Nathan thought. They were putting on a show
of force here; they had come down lightly armed but wearing flak-vests,
load-bearing harnesses, and packs with general gear and ammo, and
whatever specialist stuff they had to carry. Anyone with any experience
knew the score. From the K-pot on your head to the combat boots on your
feet, it was a heavy load, and you left behind whatever you didn’t
specifically need for the mission. They were only supposed to have been
down here, in this small town in this one peaceful world, for a couple
of hours. Why carry a Stepper box? Which, built to military
specification, was a heavy, robust piece of kit.

Turned out _none_ of them had a Stepper. Not Nathan, not even the
Lieutenant, and nobody dared grin at that. Nathan hadn’t the nerve to
meet Allen’s eyes.

Then one of the guys asked his buddy if he had some water to spare
because he was getting thirsty in the heat, but the other guy didn’t.
Turned out none of them had brought water either, because that was all
supposed to be in the drop. Not even Nathan, not even the Lieutenant.
There was a stream not far away, you could hear it running. But these
were all Datum-born types who had had drummed into them from childhood
that you didn’t drink the local water, not without an iodine tablet in
it at least, and none of them had even that.

Not even Nathan, not even the Lieutenant.

Allen prowled around, his fists clenched, looking as if he needed
somebody to punch. ‘All right, then. All right. So we go to this dump
Reboot, and start from there. Agreed, Commander Boss?’

Nathan nodded.

‘Which way, Wang?’

But there was no GPS on this world, no airship hovering to give them
orientation, and even their paper maps were, predictably, in the air
drop. Surrounded by trees like cathedral spires they couldn’t see the
rising smoke from the township; they couldn’t even get a direction from
the sun, given the cloudy sky. The fuck-up just got fucked-upper with
every second.

Then a man came strolling into the clearing, whistling, rods in his
hand, and some kind of big fish on a line he had thrown over his
shoulder. He might have been fifty, Nathan thought, with a deep-tanned
face, and a lithe toughness about him when he walked. When he found a
dozen armed warriors glaring at him he briefly froze, but then his face
broke into a broad grin. ‘Hey, soldiers,’ he said. ‘Did I break an
ordinance? I’ll throw it back, I promise . . .’

Lieutenant Allen glared at the civilian. Then he turned to Wang. ‘Ask
him if he knows the way to this Reboot place.’

‘Sir, do you know the way to Reboot?’

‘My name’s Bill Lovell, by the way,’ he said heavily. He looked around
at them; Nathan felt profoundly embarrassed, and somewhat overdressed.
‘Don’t tell me you’re lost.’

Allen didn’t respond.

Nathan tried to explain.

Lovell shook his head as he listened. ‘How the hell did your pilots
manage to make a drop in the wrong world?’

Nathan said ruefully, ‘We’re kind of learning our way around here, sir.’

Lovell was still grinning. ‘I can see that. You folks just don’t get the
Long Earth way of thinking, do you? Here you are, lost as babies. And
you’re really planning to go all the way up to Valhalla?’

Wang asked, ‘You know about our mission?’

‘Oh, news travels fast out here. That might surprise you, not me. I used
to be a postman. I mean, for the US postal service, before they cut out
the service to the far stepwise worlds. Yeah, we heard about you.’

Allen looked as if he longed to pistol-whip this guy. ‘You going to show
us to Reboot, or not?’

Lovell mock-bowed. ‘Follow me.’

Nathan wasn’t sure what he’d been expecting of Reboot. A Dodge City
movie set? Some kind of cluttered steampunk nirvana? A few primitive
farms hacked out of the wilderness? Banjo players? In fact, as you could
clearly see as you walked down the main drag from the river, it was a
town. An American town, judging by the big Stars and Stripes hanging
over the schoolhouse.

Bill Lovell pointed out the sights. ‘That’s the old Wells place. One of
the original plots.’ A woman worked a garden behind a neat whitewashed
fence, a real Acacia Avenue kind of scene. She looked up, smiled. ‘Not
that it looked like _that_ when the first trekkers got here in ’26
. . .’

Toby Fox asked, ‘As recently as that? Just fourteen years ago?’

‘There’s Arthurson’s general store. The only store in town right now,
though a few of the farmhouses will sell you beer or liquor, or make you
a meal, or hire you a room.’

Santorini asked, ‘Will they accept dollars?’

Lovell just laughed.

There were horses, and _camels_, tied up at the rail outside the store.
Laughter sounded from within.

Then a bunch of children burst out of one of the houses and ran across
the street. They might have been Native American kids to Nathan’s urban
eye, with hand-sewn leather trousers and jackets, and some kind of
moccasins on their feet.

‘School’s out,’ Bill said. He cupped a hand behind a fat ear. ‘And can
you hear that?’

When the kids had dispersed and their chatter subsided, Nathan heard a
distant clank-clank-clank . . .

‘The new sawmill. Or rather the old sawmill with its new steam engine.
Everything made locally, or at least every iron part. They’ve promised
themselves a water-turbine power supply soon. They’re even trialling a
telegraph system, to keep in touch with some of the outlying farms,
which are pretty remote. Geographically, I mean.’

He sounded as if he was proud of the citizens of Reboot, Nathan thought.
Fatherly.

‘Lots of little kids,’ Wang observed.

‘Well, you have population booms going on across many of the settled
Earths. In a few centuries you might have hundreds of Earths teeming
with billion-fold populations. Think of it. All those little
tax-payers!’

Wang’s eyes widened. Her mind was being opened up almost visibly, Nathan
thought.

‘But probably nobody’s ever going to count them,’ Wang said.

‘Actually that’s my job,’ said Toby Fox, with a touch of pride.

‘Hey, there she is. Katie! Katie Bergreen!’

A woman, strawberry-blonde, aged maybe thirty, was crossing the road
with a determined stride. She glanced over in surprise at Bill Lovell,
and with evident caution at Nathan and his buddies in their bristling
combat gear. ‘What’s this? An invasion?’

Lovell shrugged. ‘I think they’re here to count us. Or something. Right
now these guys have lost their way. You think your father would give the
US Navy some water?’

She grinned, almost cheekily. ‘Well, they could ask. This way,’ she said
to Nathan. ‘But you’ll need to leave your weapons at the door . . .’


19

JACK GREEN, AGED about sixty, was a bookish firebrand kind of a guy, it
seemed to Nathan Boss. He stared down Lieutenant Allen on his doorstep –
actually stared down this huge, armed marine – before allowing him and
his troopers into his house. Even then they did indeed have to leave
their weapons at the door, and take their combat boots off at the porch.

So they were all in their socks when they walked into the house’s big
living room, with its unlit hearth and a few hunting trophies, and heaps
of books and papers. It was very neat, Nathan thought, almost military
neat. He already knew this man had a daughter, the woman called Katie;
Nathan immediately guessed this was the home of a widower, with too much
time on his hands.

Jack Green glared at them all, as though they were naughty children.
‘OK. I’ll let you in, out of the heat. Common humanity demands that.
I’ll give you water. There’s a pump out back.’

With a nod, Allen deputized a couple of the guys to go fetch a few jugs.
They dumped their kit by the door and moved. Soon the guys were all
drinking from pottery mugs. ‘Glugging it faster than Boston natives on
St. Patrick’s Day,’ observed Wang.

Jack faced Lieutenant Allen. ‘I can loan you a Stepper. Then you can
send one of these warrior children of yours to track down your airship,
can’t you?’ He laughed. ‘What a comical mess.’

‘Thank you, sir—’

‘Don’t thank me, because it’s all I’m going to do for you.’ He waved a
hand. ‘Oh, you may as well sit. Just don’t break anything, or play with
anything, or mess up my papers.’

The marines began to dump more kit, unhook their body armour, take off
their camouflage jackets. They sat in little huddles, talking quietly,
and Nathan saw that within minutes one of them had his Travel Scrabble
set out and had started a three-hand game with a couple of the guys.

Allen looked on with disgust. ‘You don’t bring your Stepper, McKibben.
You don’t bring any goddamn drinking water. But you bring your
Scrabble.’

‘Got to get your priorities right, Lieutenant.’

Jack sat down at his paper-laden desk. All the furniture looked
hand-made, Nathan saw, kind of rough but sturdy. Jack said, ‘Well, I
can’t say I’m surprised to see you. The news of your triumphant progress
across the worlds precedes you. But, Bill, why the hell did you bring
these people to me?’

The former postman looked mischievous. ‘Why, who better in our little
community to welcome our, umm, liberators?’

That little exchange put Lieutenant Allen on alert. Without being asked,
he sat opposite Jack, and pulled a printed list of names out of his
jacket pocket. ‘John Rodney Green, called Jack. That’s you, right?’

‘What have you got there, your Christmas card list?’

‘A list of signatories of your so-called Valhalla “Declaration of
Independence”, sir, and their advisers.’

Jack just grinned. ‘So what are you going to do now, shoot me? Arrest me
and bundle me aboard your airship?’

‘We’re here to protect you, sir. Not to create trouble.’

‘Thanks!’

‘In fact we’re grateful to you for your assistance so far, Mr. Green,’
Allen said, precisely. ‘And you can help us out further. Now, Ensign Fox
here—’ he snapped his fingers to summon Fox ‘– is working on a census.’

‘Is he? Good for you, sonny.’

‘Now we’re here I can see it’s going to take some time, what with you
having this mish-mash you call a “county” spread over several worlds,
and so on. So if you have a spare room where Fox can bunk down—’

‘I’m not having Datum troops under my roof.’

‘We’re prepared to compensate you.’

Jack looked amused. ‘With what?’

‘Well . . . Monetarily, obviously. I’m authorized to sign cheques, up to
a limit. We carry cash.’

‘What cash? Dollars, right?’

Allen said sternly, ‘The legal tender of this community, being in the US
Aegis as it is, sir.’

Jack sighed. ‘But what am I going to do with dollars? You imagine I can
pay Bill here in dollars for a catch of fish? What the hell is _he_
going to do with them? You’d end up with bits of paper circling around
and around this community like flies over a cowpat . . .’

Allen was going to snap back some angry response.

But Fox leaned forward, interested. ‘Then how _would_ you want paying,
sir? How does that work around here?’

‘We call it favours,’ Jack said.

‘Favours?’

‘I give you a room for a few nights. That’s a favour. Now you owe me a
favour. We agree what that is before you move in, right? If it was Bill
it would be so many pounds of fish. He does the favour for me, and we’re
square. Or – if I don’t need any fish, then Bill can go to old Mike Doak
down the street, who can shoe horses like he was raised to it, and give
him the fish, thus transferring the favour he owes me to Mike, and then
when my horse throws a shoe—’

‘I get it.’ Allen raised his hands.

Fox said, ‘So you don’t use paper money. But you must get outside
workers coming through. Doctors, dentists—’

‘We support them with favours, one way or another.’

‘Specialists, like engineers to build you a dam. Something like that.
There must be occasions when there’s _nothing_ you can do for someone
like that. You can only eat one meal at a time, wear one pair of
trousers—’

Jack winked at Fox. ‘Good question. OK, we do have stashes. Gold,
silver, jewellery. Even a little paper money, if you must know – we
accept all this if there’s no other way for a person to pay, who’s
desperate enough. We’re not monks here, enslaved to a rule book. We
cheat a little. Whatever works. But basically we’re self-sufficient,
locally; almost all of it is favours.’

Allen eyed him. ‘So you do take dollars. But you won’t take dollars from
us. From members of the US armed forces.’

Jack laughed in his face. ‘Listen, you and your paymasters in Washington
forfeited any right to help from me and my community when you cut us off
a dozen years ago. When you trashed Pioneer Support, and impounded my
life savings. You even fired poor old Bill, here.’

Lovell grinned. ‘Don’t bring me into it. I’m doing fine.’

‘And none of the “Aegis rights and responsibilities” crap spouted by
President Cowley cuts any ice with _me_,’ Jack said. ‘Yes, Lieutenant,
I’ll give you water to relieve the discomfort of these children you’re
leading astray. Other than that – I could take your dollars, but I
won’t, because I don’t like you, or the Datum government you represent,
and I want to see the back of you.’

Nathan could see Lieutenant Allen’s temperature rising, like a volcano
on slow heat. ‘This is all bullshit!’

Fox said earnestly, ‘With respect, sir, it’s not. This kind of meeting
of minds is precisely why—’

‘Shut your cakehole, sailor.’

‘Yes, sir.’ Fox shrank back immediately.

Allen produced a fold of currency from an inside pocket, hundred-dollar
bills. He set this on Jack’s homemade desk. ‘I’m asking you to take
this, sir. Or face the consequences.’

Jack, totally at ease, just faced him. ‘What is it that poor troll said,
when the likes of you tried to take her cub away?’

‘That was nothing to do with the US military—’

‘_I will not_.’ He repeated the phrase, backing it up with troll sign
language. ‘_I will not_, sir. _I will not_.’

Allen glowered. ‘Ensign Fox, cuff this man.’

Jack just laughed. Fox sat frozen, indecisive.

There was a flurry in the corner where the guys were playing Scrabble.
‘McKibben, you butthole, there is no way under the sun that DUCTTAPE is
a single word . . .’

‘I don’t think cuffing is an appropriate response, Lieutenant Allen,’
Nathan said calmly.

Allen stalked out of the house, furious.

Nathan wondered how the hell he was going to explain all this to Captain
Kauffman.

When he did try, the first thing she did was to put Lieutenant Sam Allen
off her ship, the first opportunity she got.

The second thing she did was to ask to meet this character Jack Green,
so she could learn all about this business of the favours for herself.


20

IN THE MINE Belt, the Valientés aboard _Gold Dust_ witnessed a crisis.

The airship fleet had stopped a couple of times over the arid worlds of
this band, to take on board ore of various kinds – not just bulky stuff
like bauxite, or even obviously precious metals like silver and gold,
but a slew of minerals that were scarce now on the Datum, or at any rate
hugely valuable: germanium, cobalt, gallium.

But it wasn’t a colonized world where the incident happened.

The family happened to be making one of their visits to the wheelhouse
at the time, and Helen and Dan saw it all. The twain had slowed because
they were approaching a notorious Joker, some eighty thousand steps from
the Datum, and the pilot knew to take care, driving them forward at only
a couple of steps a minute. When they finally stepped into the Joker,
the landscape of the neighbouring world – a sparse green with forest
clumps and prairie – vanished to reveal bare, brick-red, dust-strewn
rock. Even the local Mississippi was reduced to a rusty trickle, striped
down the centre of a valley that looked much too wide for it. From
unknown causes, this Joker happened to be suffering from some kind of
global desertification. It was like a landscape on Mars.

And here was the downed ship.

She was called the _Pennsylvania_. She had been caught in a dust storm
when she tried, cautiously, to cross the Joker, and then one of her
helium sacs, maybe already carrying a fault, split open at the sudden
expansion caused by the heat of the Joker’s dry air. The leak had been
quick but the crash slow, relentless; it must have been a terrifying
experience. The _Gold Dust_ passengers saw the wreck now through a veil
of windblown dust that hissed against the windows, the remnants of the
storm that had killed the ship. From the air it was a six-hundred-foot
reef already half covered by drifting red sand.

The _Gold Dust_ was the first of the following fleet to come upon the
wreck, and the largest. As Dan and Helen hung back, trying to keep out
of the way, there was a hasty conference call with the Captain in his
cabin, and the commanders of the other craft as they arrived in this
world. A strategy was soon cooked up, and the crew swung into action
with an efficiency and dedication that warmed Helen’s soul. They dropped
anchor, and soon had a kind of improvised elevator working, taking crew
to and from the ground on an open platform. Helen saw Dan’s buddy Bosun
Higgs go down, joining working parties assembled from all the crews of
the fleet.

Then, as the crew worked, the Captain used the ship’s intercom to ask
for volunteers from among the passengers to go down to help. _Volunteers
from among the passengers_. Helen’s heart sank when she heard that
phrase.

Of course she couldn’t stop him.

It all went well enough, for three, four hours, as the sun slowly went
down, and the sandstorm finally petered out. From Helen’s godlike point
of view high in the sky, she watched what looked like very organized
ants working on the carcass of the fallen ship. They cut channels
through the wreckage, led out walking wounded, and carried out the worst
afflicted, and the dead. A field medical post was set up under a tent,
and soon the first of the most seriously injured were being brought up
to the _Gold Dust_ on the elevator. The _Gold Dust_ was the best placed
of the fleet to take the injured on board, with a well-equipped medical
bay that could be quickly expanded into a hospital. Other parties worked
at salvaging what they could of the _Pennsylvania_’s cargo, mostly Corn
Belt wheat. Still others performed the sad duty of digging out graves
around the crash site.

Then there was an alarm in the wheelhouse. One of the _Gold Dust_
contingent had got himself trapped, deep in the interior of the
_Pennsylvania_’s envelope, when a bit more of the structure had
collapsed around him as he was trying, heroically, to reach one last
group of stranded passengers. He was stuck in the collapsed framework,
too high off the ground to be able to step out safely. A rescue attempt
was quickly improvised.

‘Wow,’ Dan said, listening to the crackly radio messages. ‘Who do you
think it is, Mom?’

Not your father, Helen pleaded silently. Not Joshua. Just this once, not
Joshua.

A new line was let down from the nose of the _Gold Dust_, with two
individuals clinging to it: Bosun Higgs and Sally Linsay. Helen’s hopes
sank faster than the platform. With great caution they were lowered
through a rip in the twain’s collapsed envelope, and disappeared into
darkness. Helen heard muttered reports on the radio link, saw the spark
of cutting torches deep in the _Pennsylvania_’s carcass. Then a period
of silence.

At last Sally called: ‘Take her up!’

Slowly, cautiously, the winch turned. The platform came up first, with
Sally and the crewman, trailing a length of cable. Then the line
shuddered, and Sally waved a halt. Helen heard: ‘He’s OK. Not very
dignified, but OK. Keep lifting.’

Up came the cable, rising out of the wreck. And at last, lifted into the
low sunlight, dangling upside down with the cable wrapped around one
ankle, was Joshua.

Dan rolled his eyes. ‘Oh, _Dad!_’

Helen thought that summed it up.

Eventually, to Helen’s chagrin, the whole incident made it on to the
outernet, and the news channels. Sometimes it was hard being Lois Lane.

And – as Joshua had to point out later, for Helen hadn’t been looking at
_her_ – as soon as Joshua was clear of the wreck, Sally had grinned up
at the watching crew of the _Gold Dust_, and disappeared.


21

AS IT HAPPENED the _Benjamin Franklin_ passed through the Mine Belt only
a few days after the wreck. Via an outernet communiqué, the _Franklin_
had been ordered to backtrack from Reboot to a Mine Belt world around
seventy thousand steps from home, where some idiot had shot a couple of
trolls.

As the _Franklin_ ploughed through the worlds, Maggie Kauffman wondered
– not for the first time since the start of this mission – whether the
whole Long Earth was a test which humanity was singularly failing. On
the one hand there were still Datum-Earthers who led lives that had
nothing to do with the landscape outside their heads, the immensity
beyond their garden walls; and on the other hand, even now, twenty-five
years after Step Day, there were still people stepping East and West,
even to the High Meggers and beyond, without so much as looking up which
mushrooms were safe to pick. One of the unstated duties of this voyage,
as it had emerged, was to give a ride to a place of safety to the
wounded, or even just the severely embarrassed, who had given up after
their first winter without electricity, or a visit by an unexpected bear
or pack of wolves – or maybe the odd dinosaur-descendant if you went far
enough. Smart people, while they might at first have everything to
learn, soon developed effective ways of making things work out here, but
Maggie was seeing very little of _them_. Dumb people kept doing dumb
things – such as shooting trolls, despite the intense political
atmosphere after the Gap incident. And it was to the fallout from such
dumbness that the _Franklin_, Maggie was finding, was repeatedly
summoned.

So the dirigible drifted across arid versions of Texas, listening out on
shortwave, looking for a party whose location stepwise and
geographically was only roughly known. The crew was intrigued by
accounts of the disaster that had befallen the _Pennsylvania_; Maggie
ascertained that no assistance was needed from her in the aftermath.

At last, not far from the footprint of Houston, the ship flew over a
rough campsite, with a small, solitary figure looking up from below.
Nathan Boss pointed out a clump of woods near by which showed a lot of
disturbance, the result of some kind of fight maybe.

And Mac gently drew her attention to an infrared image of slumped,
cooling forms, deep inside the forest clump. Where the bodies had been
dumped, evidently.

Maggie, Nathan and Joe Mackenzie descended. The lone figure at the
campsite, a woman, waiting for them by a smoking fire, was a
tough-looking forty-something – a few years older than Maggie –
evidently a pioneer type. She gave her name simply as ‘Sally’. Among the
weaponry lashed to her back was a ceramic composite rifle, and she had a
face full of unfinished business.

Maggie knew her officers well enough to be sure they would step lightly.
And she also knew, she thought, from her pre-mission briefings on the
Long Earth, who this woman was.

Sally offered them coffee, rolls of bedding to sit on. After that she
didn’t waste any time. ‘I don’t want you here. I believe in handling
this kind of stuff myself. _I_ didn’t call you.’

Nathan asked, ‘Then who did?’

‘_He_’_s_ long gone – lit out of here. However, you’re here. So here’s
the set-up. I’ve secured near by several so-called scientists who have
killed at least three trolls.’

Nathan asked, ‘Scientists?’

‘Biologists. Actually up here to study the trolls, so they say. One of
them was the one who called for help; I let him go. The rest—’

‘And “secured”?’ Maggie asked sharply. ‘What do you mean by that?’

Sally grinned evilly. ‘The trolls were captured here for some kind of
“experiment” in cross-breeding with other humanoids. Unsurprisingly they
resisted and stepped away, heading due West, which led to a chase, and a
male and two females being shot dead – at least that number, I didn’t
see it all. Left behind one orphaned cub. I’m sure you’re aware of the
furore around our treatment of the trolls just now—’

‘That doesn’t sanction some kind of vigilante action by you, whoever you
are,’ Mac said thickly.

Sally just smiled. ‘Oh, nobody’s dead. They’re not exactly comfortable,
but nobody’s _dead_. Unlike those trolls. And by the way if your crew
try to apprehend me I’ll step out of here faster than you can say “beam
me up”.’

Maggie was all too aware that for all Sally’s self-confidence the
slightest evidence of a threat from her would bring down the lightning
from the _Franklin_. On the other hand Maggie needed to get a hold of
this situation – and, as she thought she recognized this woman, she saw
a way.

‘OK,’ she said now. ‘I’ve no intention of trying to apprehend you – umm,
_Sally_. We’re not out here to be a police force. For all I know, these
characters deserved whatever you dished out. However I would advise you
at the least to put aside those weapons on your back. Let’s just calm
tensions here. And then I suggest that you and I stroll over to that
clump of woods, where the bodies are, and have a little parley. Get this
situation resolved.’

Sally hesitated. Then she nodded, dumped her weapons, and the two walked
towards the woods, leaving Mac and Nathan to sample a little more
much-brewed coffee.

‘Of course, I know who you are,’ Maggie said quickly, seeking to put
Sally off her stride.

‘You do?’

‘Sure. You’re the woman who stepped out of the _Mark Twain_ with Joshua
Valienté. News gets around.’ More specifically, she had cropped up in
Maggie’s briefings as a well-known rogue element – and, yes, suspected
vigilante – out in the Long Earth. ‘Sally Linsay, right? That’s at least
one of the names you’re known by.’

Sally shrugged. ‘And I know about you, Captain Margaret Dianne Kauffman.
Oh, it wasn’t hard to find out about your military career – anybody
concerned about Long Earth politics knows all about the _Franklin_ and
its officers and the rest of the fleet and their galumphing
Starfleet-type mission. Actually I’m kind of glad it was you who showed
up; you’re evidently one of the less stupid of the Captain Kirks running
around out here.’

‘Thanks.’

Sally eyed Maggie shrewdly. ‘Listen – since you’re here. And since
you’re evidently not some military-issue psycho.’

‘Praise indeed.’

‘I do believe in serendipity. Grabbing opportunities. There’s an idea
I’ve been playing with, about law-enforcement.’

‘That’s not our role, strictly speaking . . .’ Somehow Maggie was back
on the defensive. ‘What are you talking about?’

‘You may be less stupid than your peers, but what a dumb mission you’re
engaged in. It really is like bloody _Star Trek_ – a handful of ships
patrolling an infinity of worlds. Look, if you want to manage the Long
Earth then you have to get holistic.’

‘I’ve no idea what you’re suggesting.’

‘I’m suggesting you need an ally that’s spread as wide as the Long Earth
itself.’ She looked directly at Maggie. ‘I’m talking about trolls.’

That took Maggie totally by surprise. ‘_What?_’

‘Use the trolls. Take a couple on your ship, even. Look, they are, or
were, being used all over the Long Earth already, wherever people want a
friendly hand. Why not the military too? They have an extensive
communications system, coupled to a huge folk memory—’

‘The long call.’

‘Yes. Not to mention being somewhat physically intimidating.’

This was too much for Maggie to take in. It occurred to her that her
mission had evolved a hell of a way from that tough-love speech by the
President, to _this_. On the other hand maybe she _should_ be making
some kind of response to this business of the trolls. ‘I’ll need to
think about it . . . Why would _you_ want this?’

Sally shrugged. ‘I’m on the trolls’ side. How better to protect them
than to have them work _with_ the soldiers? Also, maybe it will help
them learn to trust us again . . .’

They reached the clump of forest. Maggie followed Sally into the shade,
where they found two dead trolls – the third Sally mentioned had
presumably left a corpse off on some stepwise world – and a live
juvenile still trying to cuddle up to one of the bodies.

‘You say you have these scientist characters stashed somewhere near by.’

‘You’ll find them. You better had, in fact, before the other trolls get
here.’

‘What other trolls?’

Sally gave her a knowing look. ‘At twilight, young though it is, this
orphaned cub will attempt to join in with the long call. That will
summon other trolls. And when they turn up – look, trolls are
comparatively merciful. More than most human parents would be. But they
are protective of their cubs.’

‘Point taken.’

They began to walk back to the fire.

‘Listen,’ Sally said now, apparently on impulse. ‘There’s something
else. Since I believe you have the right stuff, Captain Maggie, take a
look at this.’ She rummaged under a small heap of gear, and pulled out a
piece of shining tech.

It was a tube encrusted with keypads, vaguely resembling some kind of
musical instrument, but technologically advanced. It was like an ocarina
redesigned by Einstein, Maggie thought.

‘This is a troll-call.’

‘A what?’

‘Call it a two-way translation device for talking with trolls. I’m
pretty good at it by now, I can call for help, or to signal danger. I
mean, our language is nothing like theirs – this is just a prototype –
and you can’t get across much more than basic concepts. But for now it’s
the best we can do. With a few trolls on your ship, and one of _these_
. . .’

‘How do I get hold of one?’

‘Oh, it’s not for sale,’ said Sally. ‘But I could get one for you from
the manufacturer.’

‘Who _is_ the manufacturer?’ asked Maggie.

Sally just smiled.

Maggie took a leap into the dark. ‘OK – get me one. That way I keep my
options open. And I will consider what you’ve said.’

‘Good.’

‘How will I find you? . . . Oh. You’ll find me, right?’

‘You’re getting the hang of this.’

Any dirigible crew, when on the ground, were routinely wired up and
monitored; Maggie’s officers had of course overheard every word.

Nathan Boss thought they should have apprehended Sally Linsay, or at
least tried to.

And Joe Mackenzie thought she was crazy even to be thinking about taking
trolls on board.

‘I don’t know, Mac. We do need new ways of working out here. I’ve
learned that much in the past month. I mean, she’s right, once you are
more than ten steps from the Datum, it’s like interstellar space. You
can’t control the Long Earth like it was some occupied city in a war
zone. Or even Datum New York. Freedom’s a mess, isn’t it? Listen, Mac –
do some research for me. Find me some troll experts . . .’


22

THE _GOLD DUST_ and its accompanying fleet crept through the Low Earths,
the last couple of dozen stepwise worlds before the Datum. The skies
were pretty crowded over these relatively heavily developed worlds, and
as the ships were stepped through collisions were a real threat. In the
last few worlds they actually had to follow a scout on the ground, who
would step forward, check out the route, and then come back when the way
was clear.

But even the clutter of West 3 or 2 or 1 was as nothing compared with
what they found when they finally crossed over to the Datum. They looked
down on the landscapes of West 1, and then with that last step it was as
if somebody had exploded a daisycutter bomb, scything away the greenery
for miles around and replacing it with concrete, tarmac and steel,
staining the shining river a turbid grey and penning it in with
reinforced banks and bridges, all under a grubby, colourless sky. Joshua
thought you couldn’t have had a better demonstration of what humanity
could do to a world, given a few centuries and a lot of oil to burn.

The _Gold Dust_ herself seemed diminished as she settled gingerly
towards her docking apron. And the very first detail Joshua saw as he
disembarked, on the wall of an old brick warehouse, was a giant portrait
of President Cowley, standing there glaring with his arm held out and
palm upraised, as if to say: Keep Out!

Sally, following Joshua, glared around dismissively. She was back with
them, however briefly, from her latest jaunt. Long as he’d known her,
Joshua still knew little of the various channels through which she kept
in touch with what was going on out in the Long Earth, a vast domain
which, in some sense, she seemed to feel responsible for policing. Now
she said grimly, ‘Welcome home.’

The disembarked passengers were decanted into an immigration hall, a
huge processing area full of snaking lines and checkpoints and screening
booths, Homelands goons visored so you couldn’t see their faces,
threatening instruction posters on the walls, enigmatic banners:

GENESIS 3:19

Like what he recalled of airports, Joshua saw now, this twain station
had brightly signed links to other transport networks: planes, trains,
buses, cabs. Transport had been one of the few big growth industries on
the Datum since Step Day. To make a long-distance journey across a Low
Earth, it was still generally easier to jump back to Datum Earth, catch
a bus or plane, and step back once you’d reached your destination. But
to access those services you had to get through immigration. Joshua
checked over his little party as they waited in line. Dan, who had never
had an experience like this in his life before, was confused. Helen
looked stoically patient, as ever. Bill was still paralysed by his
latest hangover, after his send-off by the crew of the _Gold Dust_.
Sally just rolled her eyes at the endless stupidity of humanity.

And as they waited in their line a man approached them, small, intense,
dressed in a black cassock, dog collar and crested hat. Dan flinched
back as he drew nearer. The guy carried a Bible, and a small brass globe
on a chain from which the rich scent of incense wafted. He was evidently
working the waiting crowd.

Coming right up to them he pressed a leaflet into Sally’s hand. ‘In the
name of the Lord, now you have returned home, _stay here_, on the Datum
Earth – the one true Earth.’

Sally glared at him. ‘Why should we? Who are you?’

He said earnestly, ‘There is not a shred of evidence, either scientific
or theological, that the discarnate soul can travel crossways through
the worlds. Let your children die _there_, out in the wilderness, and
their souls will _never_ find their way to the bosom of the Lord.’ He
crossed himself. ‘And as you know the Day of Judgement is approaching.
Even now, on all those so-called stepwise worlds, at the heart of all
those godless copies of the true America, fire and brimstone are
spreading sulphurous fumes across Yellowstone—’

Sally just laughed, and told him in crisp Anglo-Saxon to go away, more
forcibly than Joshua would have dared. The man shuffled off in search of
easier targets.

‘Well, _he_ was a bit mad,’ Bill said.

At last they reached the front of the line. Here their bags were opened
and searched meticulously, and each of the party was put through a
whole-body scanner. Joshua and Sally were first through. On the other
side they were both issued with wristbands, brightly coloured and no
doubt studded with tracker technology, that they would have to wear at
all times until they left the Datum.

As they waited for the others Joshua murmured, ‘I don’t get this. All
this processing and screening – all new since the last time I came back.
But what’s the point? I know there are stepwise hazards for the Datum:
infectious diseases, invasive species. But all these barriers – the Long
Earth is an open frontier. Here we are obediently riding in on a twain
and arriving at a transport hub, but we could step back _anywhere_ on
the Datum, with a backpack full of long-horned beetles. There’s no
logic.’

Sally rolled her eyes. ‘It’s all symbolism, Joshua. You never _do_ get
stuff like this, do you? This is President Cowley saying to his voters,
look how I’m protecting you. Look how terrible these travellers are,
what a threat they are.’ She glanced at the banks of security processing
gear. ‘Also there’s a lot of federal money to be earned by the companies
that manufacture gear like this. Fear generates big profits.’

‘You’re very cynical.’

‘Joshua, cynicism is the only reasonable response to the antics of
humanity. Especially on the Datum.’

At last Dan, Helen and Bill came through. Dan was wide-eyed and
bewildered, but not actively scared, Joshua was relieved to see.
Reunited, they picked up their luggage and moved through a crowded outer
hall, looking for a cab rank. Joshua noticed a feature that was new
since he’d last come through a place like this: small patches of the
crowded sidewalks marked off by yellow hatching, reserved as stepping
areas that you otherwise tried to keep clear, so as to allow an
unimpeded flow-through. Only on the Datum would you need such controls;
he felt an uncomfortable claustrophobia just thinking about it.

And now another man approached them, this one in a smart-looking
business suit, carrying a plastic shopping bag. Evidently they weren’t
to be left alone for a minute. Aged maybe thirty, this guy had thinning
hair, spectacles, and a winning smile.

He stood directly in their path, so they had to stop. Joshua thought he
was probably another religious nut. Then the man said, clearly and
calmly, ‘Welcome to Earth, mutants.’

And he reached into his bag.

Joshua lunged forward, putting his body between the man and his family.
From the corner of his eye he saw Sally pick up Dan and step away in an
instant with a pop of imploding air. And the man pulled out a blade,
short, heavy, wicked. In one movement he hurled it.

The knife hit Joshua above the right breast. He was thrown back, pain
flooding him.

He saw Helen charge forward and ram her fist into the man’s face. She
was a midwife, and strong in the upper body; he was laid flat out. Cops
and other security people came running.

For Joshua, the world greyed and fell away.


23

‘YOUR WOULD-BE killer is called Philip Mott,’ Monica Jansson said, as
she poured Joshua’s coffee. ‘A junior attorney working for one of the
big railroad combines. No previous record, no significant contact with
the police. He’s not a phobic, as far as we know, and he’s not a
home-alone – that is, never dumped by a family stepping away, a common
trigger for this kind of behaviour.’

Joshua knew all about that syndrome. Helen herself was the sister of the
Madison-bomb accomplice Rod Green, a home-alone gone rogue.

‘But,’ Jansson said, ‘Mott doesn’t own a Stepper box. He’s hardly ever
stepped at all as far as any of his character witnesses testify. He has
been running with President Cowley’s Humanity Firsters for years, some
of the more rabid elements, which even Cowley now officially disowns
. . .’

Joshua shifted in the sofa, which was a little too deep for him to feel
comfortable. A couple of days after the attack his shoulder was healing,
but was still strapped up, and was prone to deliver stabs of fresh pain
if he didn’t favour it. Sally sat beside him, cradling a coffee mug,
perched on the edge of her seat. As ever she looked as if she was about
to bolt through the door, or out of this reality altogether. Dan,
meanwhile, was outside, playing basketball with Bill, using a rusty old
hoop fixed to the wall of Jansson’s house. Joshua could hear them
running around in the sunshine, Dan jabbering out some imaginary
commentary.

And Helen, incredibly, was in custody, on assault charges.

They were staying with Joshua’s old sparring partner, former MPD
Lieutenant Monica Jansson. Jansson’s house, here on the outskirts of
Madison West 5 – to which the residents of Datum Madison had been
rezoned after the nuke – was typical Low Earth architecture, a massive
structure of wood of a quality that would once have been impossibly
expensive on the Datum. Jansson’s personal past showed in the way the
place was studded with bits of high-tech gear: a widescreen TV,
cellphones, a laptop.

Jansson was in her fifties now, but looked older, to Joshua’s inexpert
gaze. She was thinner than he remembered too, her hair greyed and cut
short. And he’d noticed a line of medicines, in small white plastic
bottles, on the mantelpiece over the big fireplace – and just above the
mantlepiece was Joshua’s sapphire ring on its leather loop, hanging in
pride of place from a picture hook on the wall. Encouraged by Helen,
he’d brought the ring here with the vague intention of showing it, one
of his few impressive trophies of his travels, to a few discreet
friends.

On the TV, some geologist was crawling around a bubbling mud pool in a
copy of Yellowstone, on some Low Earth or other. Apparently there had
been similar disturbances at Datum Yellowstone and at some of its Low
Earth footprints. The jokey commentator was talking about geysers
failing, wildlife fleeing and such, and how it was actually _good_ for
business at the National Park, with people coming in to rubberneck the
latest chthonic turmoil in the stepwise copies. Maybe that religious nut
at the twain port had been right about the fire and brimstone at
Yellowstone, even if he made the wrong interpretation.

Sally said now, ‘So this Mott guy has never pulled a stunt like this
before?’

‘Not on the record, no. But a lot of the Firsters are like that
nowadays. Their strategies have evolved. They soak up the propaganda,
they stay quiet, under the radar, they take to carrying around stakes—’

Joshua asked, ‘Stakes?’

‘That’s their jargon for the weapon he carried. Like staking a vampire,
you know? A stake of iron, for a stepper. Very hard to police. And then,
out of the blue, they find themselves in some situation where they’re
presented with a target of opportunity. Such as near a twain terminal,
but outside the security barriers so nobody knows what he has in the bag
– where this guy met you, Joshua.’

‘And recognized your face,’ Sally said dryly.

‘And – bang. He would have been aiming for your heart, by the way. Even
if he missed the heart, he might have caused you problems if you tried
to step away with a chunk of steel sitting in your chest.’

Sally grunted. ‘I’m hearing that there are countries on the Datum where
governments are doing that kind of thing purposefully. Surgically fixing
iron clips to your heart, or an artery.’

Jansson said, ‘Yeah. They call it stapling. Look, don’t worry. Mott’s
still in custody; he’ll be charged. Datum law-enforcement isn’t what it
was in my day, but you don’t get away with attacks like that.’

‘And nor does my wife, it seems,’ Joshua said bitterly. ‘I can’t believe
they charged Helen with assault.’

‘Well, she did lay the guy out. Quite a haymaker. She’ll get off with a
reprimand, it was self-defence—’

‘She’s still in custody! They took away her Stepper, won’t even give her
bail. How long will we have to wait to get her out?’

‘That’s the policy now with non-residents of the Low Earths or the
Datum, I’m afraid.’

Sally shook her head. ‘The Datum’s become a world full of paranoids, run
by paranoids. No wonder we never come back.’

‘Well, you came back this time for a reason,’ Jansson said to Joshua.
‘Your meeting with Senator Starling, right?’

‘To talk about this issue of the trolls, yes.’ He shrugged, making his
shoulder ache anew. ‘Thanks to you, Jansson – I know you opened a few
doors to set that up. But now I’m doubting the wisdom of coming here at
all.’

‘You have to try,’ Sally snapped. ‘We went through this back at
Hell-Knows-Where.’

He said tiredly, ‘Sure. But now we’re here it’s obvious that the issue
of the welfare of trolls isn’t going to be at the top of the Datum
political agenda.’

Jansson nodded. ‘You may be right. But the case of Mary out at the Gap
has made the news even on the Datum. It’s such an exceptional case, such
obvious cruelty and injustice, in the middle of a space programme, for
God’s sake. It couldn’t be higher profile, and presents an opportunity
for change. Which is why I did what I could to help set up your meeting
with Starling.’

Sally said, ‘Exactly. Joshua, what’s the use of your having a famous
face if you don’t use it for good?’

He grunted. ‘All my “famous face” has done for me so far is get me
stabbed, my wife put in custody, and my kid scared out of his wits.’

Jansson glanced out the window at Dan. ‘Oh, I think that little
pioneer’s tougher than that.’

Joshua grimaced. ‘President Cowley would say he’s a little mutant.’

Jansson smiled sadly. ‘Also a sinner.’

Sally nodded. ‘Genesis 3:19. We saw the posters.’

Joshua closed his eyes, remembering Bible classes at the Home. ‘What God
told Adam and Eve after the expulsion from Eden. _In the sweat of thy
face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of
it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return_.’

‘That’s it,’ Jansson said. ‘God has put us on this world, or worlds, to
work. You comber types, happy to just wander around – or at least that’s
how you’re painted here – are a bunch of slackers. Without work mankind
can’t progress . . . and so on.’

Joshua sighed. ‘And so, pushed by such madness, we slide into war, or
something.’

Jansson sipped her coffee. Joshua thought he saw her shiver, though the
day wasn’t cold.

He asked gently, ‘And how are you, Monica?’

She looked up. ‘Best to stick to Lieutenant Jansson, don’t you think?’

‘You’re settled here in West 5?’

‘Well, nobody’s allowed to stay long back in Datum Madison even now.
They might let you back for a while, Joshua, if you want to see it. I
could pull a few strings. It’s an eerie place to see. The wildlife is
flourishing. Prairie flowers sprouting in flash-burned rubble. America’s
Chernobyl, they call it. It’s slowly healing, I guess.’

He said carefully, ‘And are you?’

She looked at him tiredly. ‘Is it that obvious?’

‘Sorry.’

‘Don’t be. It’s leukaemia. My own stupid fault. I was too eager to go
hopping back and forth to the Datum after the blast. But it’s manageable
with drugs, and they’re talking about gene therapy.’

‘You always tried to put things right,’ Joshua said abruptly. ‘That’s
what I always recognized in you.’

She shrugged. ‘That’s a cop’s job.’

‘But you took it a bit further than most. I always responded to that.’
He reached over, wincing as his shoulder ached, and touched her hand.
‘Just don’t give up yet. OK?’

Sally stood up impatiently. ‘If you two are going to get all mushy on me
I’m out of here.’

Joshua turned. ‘You’re not going already?’

She winked. ‘I always have chores, Joshua. You know me. I’ll be back. So
long, Lieutenant Jansson.’ And she disappeared with a soft pop.

Jansson raised her eyebrows. ‘I’ll make some more coffee.’


24

MARLON JACKSON, Senator Starling’s aide, was determined to take the
meeting with this bizarre Valienté pioneer-type character on the chin.

Jim Starling was mostly manageable, in Jackson’s experience. Regrettably
the Senator had a good if erratic memory, which could make him
devilishly difficult to steer in the way a decent aide should be able
to. But at least the Senator’s tantrums were generally short and futile,
and in that the man was not unlike Jackson’s great-grandfather’s
description of Lyndon B. Johnson: ‘A goddamn tornado until he ran down,
and then you could get the work done.’ Jackson’s forebears had been
behind-the-scenes toilers for democracy for generations.

But great-grandpa had never had to deal with modern technology. Such as
a diary system into which an appointment for this Joshua Valienté had
got inserted, even though everybody with access denied putting it there.
Even when Jackson managed to delete the entry, it _got put back again_.
Evidently Valienté had some kind of support; Jackson, an old hand in DC,
knew the signs.

And it _would_ have to be someone like Valienté, who last time Jackson
had seen him in person had been stonewalling a Senate board of inquiry
about his spectacular but mysterious jaunt across the Long Earth, in an
apparently _pilotless ship_. Driven by apparently _covert technology_,
some of which was subsequently gifted by the Black Corporation to the
nation, much to the silent fury of the nation’s political classes.
Valienté, a walking talking symbol of the Long Earth, backed by some
kind of hidden hand – Valienté, who had forced his way in here, more or
less, to face a senator whose main support base despised the new
colonies and everything about them. A clash of minds occurring just as
the political situation vis à vis the colonies had never been trickier,
what with the Valhalla declaration on top of all this crap about trolls
. . .

In Jackson’s world this was a small incident, but one out of control and
fraught with danger. Like a hand grenade rolling across the floor. If he
just got the chance to smooth out the Senator’s more idiotic brain dumps
into something that sounded like constructive dialogue, then everything
would be fine. You just had to hope, in this business.

He gulped down one of his ulcer pills.

In fact Joshua Valienté and his buddy, both dressed in _Bonanza_-type
dung-coloured pioneer gear, were a few minutes late when security
finally showed them into the office. To Jackson they looked like an
irruption from America’s semi-mythic past into the clutter of this
mid-twenty-first-century office.

After a curt introduction, Valienté went straight on the attack. ‘Seven
minutes late because of your security protocol. Are you afraid just of
me, or all your voters?’ Before Jackson had a chance to respond,
Valienté looked around at the hunting trophies on the office walls. ‘And
what decor. Looks like they’re all either inedible or from a protected
species, or both. Nice symbolism.’

His companion guffawed.

Jackson hadn’t yet said a single word. He was struggling here; he felt
as if he’d been hit by some primal force. ‘Why don’t you take a seat,
Mr. Valienté, and Mr.—’ he glanced at his briefing ‘– Chambers?’

At least they complied to that degree.

What _was_ this Valienté? Jackson’s briefing had suggested some kind of
retard with nothing more than a gift for stepping . . . He was evidently
more than that. His very voice was strange, Jackson thought as he tried
to size up this man, a voice which laid down words as a poker player
laid down cards, with finality and decision. He seemed slow rather than
fast, but relentless. As hard to stop, once he came rolling at you, as
an oncoming tank.

As for the trophies on the wall, Jackson knew that the tiger head had
been acquired by Starling’s grandfather who’d bought it from a dealer in
Chinese aphrodisiacs, but most of the rest were the result of the
Senator’s own efforts. All these trophies were a signal – Valienté was
right to spot the symbolism – to inform any visitors that the Senator
had an impressive and well-oiled armoury and was not shy of using it.
But then, practically everybody who voted for him was a firearms
enthusiast. Jim Starling was _not_ a man to take any notice of
latter-day eco-tards wetting their pants because they thought somebody
was killing Bambi out in some dismal stepwise Earth. Which, of course,
was the background to this whole business.

Anyhow this was not Jackson’s problem; he just had to get through the
next hour or whatever until these guys were shown the door. ‘Coffee,
gentlemen?’

Chambers said, ‘You wouldn’t have a cup of tea at all?’

Jackson made a call; the drinks arrived in a couple of minutes.

Then, to Jackson’s relief, he heard a flush from the bathroom. The door
opened and the Senator came in with, fortunately, for once, everything
safely stowed away.

Starling, a burly fifty-something in shirtsleeves, evidently in the
middle of his working day, looked disarmingly welcoming. The colonists
stood up, and looked a little less, well, _bristling_, as the Senator
shook their hands. This was what Starling was good at, working people
even from the first second he walked in a room.

And Jackson could see it shook Valienté up when Starling asked for his
autograph, as they sat down. ‘Not for me, it’s for my niece. She’s a big
fan.’

Valienté seemed to feel the need to apologize as he signed a card. ‘I
didn’t vote for you. Postal votes don’t get out as far as
Hell-Knows-Where.’

Starling shrugged. ‘But you’re still my constituent, according to the
Aegis definition and the electoral records.’ Joshua maintained a legal
address at the Home in Madison West 5. ‘And you’re in politics yourself
now, right?’ He flipped through the paperwork on his desk. ‘A mayor in
some pioneer-type community. How admirable.’ The Senator flopped back in
his big chair and said, ‘Well, now, gentlemen, you came all the way back
from your distant Earth, you came all the way in to DC, you wanted to
see me urgently. So let’s get to it. I believe the issue is game
preservation in the subsidiary Earths, yes?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said the Irishman, Bill Chambers.

‘No,’ said Valienté, back on the attack again. ‘Trolls aren’t _game_.
And there are no such things as _subsidiary_ Earths; every Earth is an
Earth, a whole world. That’s a very Datum-centric point of view, sir.’

Jackson drew breath to intervene at this point. But the Senator took
this with good humour. ‘I stand corrected. But the Earths that interest
me are the ones containing US citizens, under the Aegis. And my concern
is to ensure that our citizens are allowed those liberties that our
Constitution demands.’ He shuffled his paperwork, glancing over it
again. ‘I believe I understand why you’re here. But why don’t you put it
in your own words?’

Valienté was no orator, evidently, Jackson saw, despite his own
political experience. Haltingly, as best he could, he tried to summarize
the concerns gathering across the Long Earth over the treatment of the
trolls.

‘Look – when I heard about this notorious case, of Mary and her cub at
the Gap, I was dismayed. But it’s only the tip of the iceberg where the
trolls are concerned. At Hell-Knows-Where, you know, we protect our
trolls under a citizenship extension.’

‘What? You’re serious? So how far do you take that? Oh, don’t answer
that. Look, whatever hayseed laws you pass in Who-Knows-What—’

‘_Hell_-Knows-_Where_.’

‘Don’t amount to a hill of beans back here, as your type might say.
Let’s get to the point. These trolls are humanoids. Right? Humanoid,
pre-human if you like, but _not human_, no matter what ordinances you
pass in your hick _Blazing Saddles_–type town. They are animals, and,
according to my best advice, dangerous animals. So we have these
creatures out there, powerful and aggressive creatures, who, according
to you, should not be killed or otherwise inconvenienced, yes? I have
read the paperwork, even though my assistant probably thinks I haven’t,’
and he winked at Jackson. ‘Powerful, aggressive animals, and now
killers.’

Valienté said, ‘Powerful, yes. Even a female troll will weigh as much as
a sumo wrestler and can punch like a heavyweight boxer . . . Aggressive?
Only if they’re pushed. Mostly they’re helpful.’

‘Helpful?’

‘Senator, humans and trolls work together. It happens all across the
Long Earth, even in the Low Earths – hell, you must be aware of that,
the economic value-add of troll labour . . .’

The trolls had become an ever-present in the worlds colonized by
mankind. To pioneers bereft of heavy machinery, trolls were willing and
clever workers who would clear your field, tote your bales of hay, even
help you put up the schoolhouse. Nowadays, in the more developed
societies in the Low Earths and beyond, trolls were put to work on the
vast sheep farms that covered many parallel Australias, even shearing
and spinning the wool, and in the tremendous rubber plantations of
stepwise Malaysias. They even worked in the assembly lines of factories
in some Low Earth Americas.

‘That’s as may be.’ Starling riffled the paperwork. ‘But here I have a
sheaf of reports of attacks by these trolls of yours on humans. In one
case leading to a man being paralysed, in another a small child
traumatized and its mother left lying dead. And so on. What do you say
to that?’

‘Senator – trolls are only dangerous in the way that bears in a national
park are dangerous. I mean, every so often some dumb tourist wants to
get a picture of his toddler sitting nicely with a cute little cub . . .
That kind of ignorance is bad enough back in the original USA, but it’s
deadly on the stepwise Earths, which are all more or less wild. We tell
people this all the time. In most stepwise worlds, being dumb is a
prelude to being dead.

‘And the situation’s going to get worse, Senator. The trolls have
something called the long call, which means that eventually every troll
in every world gets to know what every other troll knows. It takes a
while to permeate. But sooner or later, if humanity treats trolls as
ferocious animals, then our relationship with them everywhere will be
fundamentally altered—’

Starling laughed out loud. ‘And that, sir, sounds like a lot of wu-wu
tree-hugger bull hickey to me. The _long call_? You’ll be warning me
about the wrath of Eywa next. Bottom line, Mr. Valienté: our citizens
must be protected, even from being dumb, which is not a crime. Good
heavens, if it was, the jails would never empty. Especially here in DC.
Ha!’

Valienté pressed his point. ‘All I am asking for, sir, is some kind of
declaration that the United States gives the trolls the status of a
protected species throughout the Aegis.’

‘That’s all, is it?’ Starling spread his hands. ‘But you must know that
the situation regarding animal protection is complicated in this country
as it is. We have federal laws, but a lot of legislation is at state
level. Who exactly is it you want to define these laws, let alone
enforce them? And in any event, as with so much concerning the so-called
colony worlds, there’s endless debate about how our Datum laws extend
out there.’ He glanced again at his briefing. ‘I see you’ve floated the
idea that these trolls of yours could be considered an exotic species.
If so they would fall under the Department of Agriculture Animal and
Plant Health Inspection service. But there’s a counter-argument that
they aren’t exotic at all, but endemic – I mean, they’re native to all
the other Earths, aren’t they? So the old categories don’t necessarily
apply, legally or morally, it seems to me.

‘As regards the specific case of this base at the Gap, if it was under
the US Aegis they would need a Department of Agriculture permit to
justify the trolls’ use in research. They should have gone through a
process of obtaining such a permit, and maybe there’s some control to be
applied through that route. But you see, Mr. Valienté, though US
citizens are involved in this work, as I understand it this Gap base
isn’t even in the US footprint. Somewhere in England, right? Maybe you
should be arguing your case in London, not here.’ He shrugged and pushed
away his paperwork. ‘Look, the legal position is vague, and the issue
lacks moral clarity to me. I am listening, gentlemen, but I don’t
consider the case made. At best, all I could do is bring your concerns
to the Senate. But I don’t believe I’m minded to do that. And besides
you’re missing the wider issues.’

‘What wider issues?’

‘Whether you like it or not, Mr. Valienté, there are questions of
national security involved here. This isn’t about animals, for cripes’
sakes. I’m talking about _threat_. That’s what concerns my constituents,
here on the Datum. The threat of the unknown. It wasn’t so bad when all
we had to think about was aliens coming at us from another planet, like
in the movies! Shit, at least we’d get warning, you’d think. At least
we’d have a chance of shooting them out of the sky. But now we have open
borders, it seems to me. Now the aliens could just walk in!’

The Irishman – Jackson had to check the name again, Bill Chambers –
spoke for the first time, all but. ‘Senator, you’re talking about these
mad military twains you’ve sent out all over the place, aren’t you?’

Starling leaned forward.

Jackson tensed, ready for trouble; he knew the warning signs when his
lord and master was getting pissed.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Starling. ‘That’s one response. Somebody must plan for
the worst eventuality. That’s the job of a responsible government.’

To Jackson’s horror, Chambers actually blew a raspberry. ‘Ah, come off
it, Senator. Are you kidding? This is just another boondoggle, a
spending free-for-all, like the missile gap after Sputnik, like 9/11,
like Madison. The vaguer the threat the more money you get to chuck at
it, right? Look, I live out there, and here’s what I say. _I_ say you
can’t have one government for a million Americas, and this proves it. It
just can’t work, it would be one god-awful bureaucracy. Well, so it is
already. Hell, after all those centuries the fecking English never even
managed to run Ireland properly. How are you lot going to manage
_this_?’

Valienté laughed. ‘You’d better not go repeating that when those Navy
airships show up over our town hall, Bill.’

‘Yeah. Maybe you should hold that thought, pioneer guy.’

But Chambers wasn’t quite done. ‘You know, before Step Day one world was
enough for you characters. Because you didn’t even know the rest
existed, did you? Now we’ve gone out there and made something of it all,
and you lot who stayed at home want a piece of the fecking pie. Suddenly
one world is no longer enough for you. Can’t you just leave us alone?’

Starling just looked at the man, steadily. Then he sat back and turned
to Valienté, to Jackson’s relief; at least it didn’t look as though
there’d be any actual physical violence, not this time.

‘You know, Mr. Valienté,’ Starling said now, ‘I have nothing to say to
your companion here. I’m kind of disappointed in _you_, however. I
understand you are known to be a truthful man, a careful man. I have
seen depositions commending you for valour when you were younger, on
Step Day. Quite a number of young people owed their lives to you. Then
came that episode when you went charging off into the Long Earth – going
where no one had gone before, right? All very admirable. Now you come in
here with these ridiculous demands, this bullshit about these animals
. . . I’d have thought you’d see a bigger picture. Ah, what the hey.’
Then he grinned, unexpectedly. This was often Starling’s way, Jackson
knew, to become good-old-boy expansive having mauled his opponent to his
satisfaction.

‘Listen. Let’s not part on bad terms. I believe you to be brave but
naive, just as you probably believe that I am a mere tool of the
military-industrial complex. Nevertheless you have spoken your piece and
done it well, and I enjoyed disputing with you. I suspect your Sister
Agnes would be proud of you, if I may say so.’

That caught Valienté short, as no doubt it was meant to. Jackson was
impressed Starling had read that far in his briefing.

‘Oh, I know all about the Home that used to be on Allied Drive, Mr.
Valienté. It’s become part of your legend, for better or worse. And I
met Agnes once, when she came into this office to harangue me about a
different issue. I was very sorry to hear about her death. I know she
meant a great deal to you and other former inmates.’

Valienté actually smiled, which was a measure of Starling’s charisma.
‘Well – thank you. She had a calm death. There was even a representative
of the Vatican at her funeral.’

‘A nod of respect to a worthy foe, I imagine, from what I understand of
her career.’

‘Yeah. Even though they used to say she was the worst Catholic since
Torquemada, or so she claimed. You know, Mr. Starling, I don’t exactly
miss her. Somehow it’s as if she never died . . .’


25

HELEN WAS WAITING for him when he got back to Jansson’s house in Madison
West 5. To their shared relief she was out of custody now, but under
house arrest, here at Jansson’s.

She listened to his frustrated account of his meeting with Starling.

Then, to distract him, she showed Joshua correspondence they’d been sent
on the Black Corporation’s latest iteration of its ‘colony in a box’
package. This was a technology they’d been prototyping at
Hell-Knows-Where, in fact, evidently hoping to exploit Joshua himself as
a poster-boy face for the programme. It had now developed into a neat
integrated concept: a one-stop drop at a new colony site by one of the
larger twains containing technological manna from heaven, such as
satellite navigation supported by no fewer than three microsats injected
into synchronous orbit by a compact launcher, enough equipment to seed a
first-class hospital, a kit for a basic online university complete with
a choice of virtual professors, and comms gear from old-fashioned
landline telephony to shortwave radio packages and comsat aerials. More
exotic items included a few bicycles for fast transport before the
horses arrived, advice on mail-order marriage partners . . . The most
sophisticated bit of kit was a matter printer, able to convert basic raw
materials into complex parts. But such gadgets, Joshua knew, were prone
to breakdown – and with the general stalling of technological
development after Step Day, there hadn’t been much advance in areas like
nanotech. What was likely to be more useful to the average colonist, he
thought, was the miniaturized set of basic how-to manuals,
encyclopaedias, even a pharmacopoeia.

A basic thrust of the package was that you were encouraged to link up,
initially through the shortwave, with other colonies sharing the same
stepwise world; no one colony alone might be able to support a decent
college, for example, but share your resources around the scattered
townships of a whole world and you might just manage it.

‘That was my idea in the first place,’ Joshua said. ‘The lateral
link-ups. I like the idea of folk thinking of themselves from the outset
as citizens of a whole planet, of a world growing sideways rather than
just stepwise – a new world without borders from the beginning.’

‘You’re just a latter-day hippie.’

‘Identities change. The old concept of nationality just melts away . . .
Maybe we’ll see an end to war through initiatives like this. A new start
for all of us.’

‘And _now_ you sound like Dad. _Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive_,’
Helen said, only mildly sarcastically. ‘Shakespeare, I believe.’

‘I think you’ll find it was Wordsworth. Sister Agnes used to come out
with that line a lot.’

His wife watched his face. ‘You still miss her, don’t you? Agnes. You’ve
mentioned her a couple of times since we’ve been back here.’

Joshua shrugged. ‘Well, here we are back in Madison. And Senator
Starling mentioning her threw me. As he intended, I suppose. Agnes was
the best thing that could have happened to me when I was a kid. Same for
all of us. They want me to go back sometime, you know. To the Home.’

‘Will you go?’

‘Maybe. Not to be the great Joshua Valienté, alumnus made good, now an
icon of the Long Earth and a mayor . . . and blah blah. As long as they
let me just _talk_ to the kids, about stuff like, I don’t know, knife
usage, field medicine for beginners. How to make the night sky your
ally, with the Big Dipper a place to hang your hat, and Orion your
friend to guide you home. That’s what _I_ would have wanted to hear,
back then . . . I do wish she could have seen _this_ blissful dawn.
Agnes, I mean. I ought to get some flowers for her grave.’

‘Was she the type who would want flowers?’

Joshua smiled. ‘She always _said_ no to flowers. Then she’d accept them,
and grumble about a wicked waste of money, and would keep them in her
study until the petals dropped off.’

Helen kissed him on the cheek. ‘Go now.’

‘What?’

‘Just go see her. Never mind some invitation from the Home. Go for
yourself. You’ll feel better for it. And don’t worry about us. We’re not
going anywhere. I’m not, anyhow . . .’

He slept on that.

Then, the next day, he went.

In Madison West 5, this new city that was growing up to replace the
bombed-out hulk of the old – based on a new post-Step Day urban
development where, as it happened, Helen had briefly lived with her
family before their stepwise trek – the Home had been duplicated
meticulously, aside from having various flaws fixed; Joshua himself had
given over some money to see to that. Sister Agnes had lived to oversee
the rebuilding.

And then she had died, in the autumn sunlight of a new Earth. She had
been buried in the sight of plenty of important people – some of whom,
Joshua knew, would frankly have liked to see her dead a lot earlier.

For now, her body had a brand-new cemetery plot all to itself. It was a
clear, bright May afternoon when Joshua arrived with his bouquet and
placed it dutifully on the stone, in this small plot outside the Home.
There were flowers here already, from the Sisters themselves, and from
other grown-up inmates who had benefited from Agnes’s indefatigable
patience, her thoughtful love.

He lost track of time, alone for once, not moving. If he was spotted by
anybody within the quiet Home, he wasn’t disturbed.

He was surprised to notice the shadows starting to lengthen, the
afternoon drawing on. He left the little graveyard, to start the long
walk back to Jansson’s.

And he saw a figure standing across the road. A woman in a nun’s habit,
just standing, apparently watching him. He crossed the road. He couldn’t
see her face; she looked youngish. ‘Can I help you, Sister?’

‘Well, I’ve been away . . .’ Her voice was a soft brogue. ‘I only
learned of Agnes’s death recently . . . Would you be Joshua Valienté, by
any chance? Your face is familiar from the news. Oh dear me, where are
my manners? I am Sister Conception. Agnes and me, we went back a long
way. In fact we took our vows together. I knew she would become a force
in the world, always knew it, even though she could be a mouthy madam
. . .’

Joshua stayed silent.

‘Sister Conception’ took a long look at Joshua’s face. ‘It isn’t
working, is it?’

‘Well, if you want me to think that you aren’t who you really are, no.
I’d know her in the pitch dark. I can remember her walking through the
dormitory every night, before standing at the door and turning the light
out. The click of that old Bakelite switch, held together with glue
because there was never any money for a rewiring. The way she made us
all feel safe . . . Besides, she never was a good liar. _Or_ any good at
an Irish accent.’

‘Joshua—’

‘I think I can work it out. Lobsang?’

‘Lobsang.’

‘A stunt like this is just like him. And it was me who brought him in to
see Agnes when she was dying. All my fault, probably. And now – well,
here you are.’

‘Joshua—’

‘Hello, Agnes.’ He threw his arms around her, until she burst out
laughing and pushed him away.


26

FOR AGNES, IT had begun with a wakening. She had felt a gentle warmth,
and a certain sense of _pink_.

She thought this over for an indeterminate time. The last thing she
remembered was her own bed, in the Home, the murmuring of a priest. She
said, more cautiously than hopefully, ‘And I am in heaven?’

‘No. Heaven can wait,’ said a male voice calmly. ‘We have more urgent
matters to consider.’

Sister Agnes whispered (although she wasn’t sure _how_ she whispered),
‘And will there be a band of angels?’

‘Not exactly,’ said the firmament. ‘But top marks for getting in a
reference to the works of the late Jim Steinman in your first _minute_
of revived consciousness. Now, alas, you must sleep again.’ And darkness
returned to cover the firmament, and as it faded the firmament said,
‘Amazing . . .’

What was most amazing was that all this was spoken in Tibetan. And that
she _understood_.

More time passed.

‘Agnes? I have to wake you again for a little while, just for
calibration . . .’

That was when they showed Agnes her new body: pink, naked, raw, and very
female.

‘Who ordered _those_?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘Look – even before my bosom headed south for the winter, I assure you
it wasn’t that size. Can you please tone it down a little?’

‘Don’t worry. All things are mutable. If you will bear with us, we will
eventually be able to present you with a suite of bodies for all
occasions. All prosthetic, of course. You’ll certainly pass as human;
things have got a lot more sophisticated since I began my own
experiments. Although quite a lot of you, technically speaking, will
_not_ be human. Incidentally you are being attended by a number of
surgeons and other medical personnel in the pay of a little-known
subsidiary of the Black Corporation. They have no idea of your identity.
Fun, isn’t it?’

‘Fun?’ Suddenly Agnes knew exactly who was doing this to her. ‘Lobsang!
You bastard!’

The dark rose up again. But her anger stayed: the anger she had always
looked on as an ally, anger that filled her up. She clung to that heat
now.

Eventually the pinkness returned.

And the voice of Lobsang spoke again, gently. ‘My apologies once more,
but this is a very delicate procedure – what you might call the endgame.
I have been working on your revival for three years, and now it’s nearly
done. Sister Agnes, dear Agnes, you have nothing to fear. Indeed I
expect to meet you in person after breakfast tomorrow. While you wait,
would you care for some music?’

‘Not more bloody John Lennon.’

‘No, no. Knowing your taste – what is your position on the works of
Bonnie Tyler?’

Sister Agnes woke up yet again, bewildered. Bewildered, and smelling
coffee and bacon and eggs.

The scent emanated from a tray close by the bed on which she lay,
evidently placed there by a young lady – bespectacled, friendly,
Asiatic, perhaps Japanese. ‘There is no hurry, madam. Take your time. My
name is Hiroe. Please ask for anything you desire.’

In fact coming back to life seemed to get easier as it went along. With
Hiroe’s help she made her way to the bathroom of what appeared to be a
bland hotel suite, took a shower, stared at her perfect teeth in the
mirror, and voided her bowels of nothing very much.

Hiroe said, ‘You should find physical matters easy. We took your body
through many basic processes while you were in deep sleep. Training it,
so to speak. Would you be so kind as to walk up and down for a while,
and tell me what you feel?’

Sister Agnes did indeed walk around, and gave her report. She tasted the
coffee, which wasn’t bad at all, and was surprised to find that the
bacon was crisp to the point of charcoal, just as she had always liked
it.

And then there was a closet full of clothing, including a habit of the
kind she had worn for so many years. She hesitated. As a Catholic nun
somewhat estranged from her Church’s orthodoxy, if she had been
uncertain of her theological status before all _this_, she was
bewildered now. But she had made her vows long ago, and she supposed
they still applied, so she donned the garment. And as she dressed she
smiled, enjoying the surcease of old-age pain in every joint, a feeling
of liberty of movement long forgotten.

She said to the Japanese girl, ‘I imagine I have an appointment with
Lobsang himself?’

Hiroe laughed. ‘Well done! He said that you would be quick to get to the
point. If you would kindly follow me . . .’

Agnes followed the girl along a steel-walled corridor, passed through a
series of doors which opened and closed with a certain automated
panache, and was ushered into a room full of books and antique
furnishings – it might have been Charles Darwin’s study, down to the
blazing fire in an antique hearth. But it was a place Agnes recognized,
from Joshua’s description of a similar experience. Lobsang chic, it
seemed.

Across the room was a swivel chair, heavily stuffed, with its back to
her.

She snapped, ‘It’s fake, isn’t it? The fire. Joshua told me about it. He
said it wasn’t randomized properly.’

There was no answer from the swivel chair.

‘Now listen to me. I don’t know whether I should be incredibly grateful,
or incredibly angry—’

‘But this is what Joshua asked for on your behalf,’ a cultured voice
replied at last. ‘Or so I inferred. I was brought to see you when you
were ill – do you remember? In the Home, in Madison West 5. You had
already been given the last rites. You were suffering, Agnes.’

‘I’m not about to forget that.’

‘And Joshua asked me to ease that suffering. Surely you would have
wanted that—’

‘Joshua. Of course he’d come.’ Of all the children she’d cared for in
her years in the Home, Joshua Valienté had always been the most –
remarkable. It was typical of him never to have forgotten, not to have
stayed away – to have come back when she needed him most, as her life,
after too many decades, guttered like a fading candle. Come back to try
to put things right. ‘Joshua would ask for help. I suppose you weren’t
about to refuse him.’

‘No. Especially as he asked me through gritted teeth; we did rather fall
out after the Madison incident.’

‘But he was surely merely asking you to ease my way. I would never have
expected this – blasphemy!’

Now at last the chair swivelled, and Lobsang faced her, in an orange
robe, his head apparently shaved. She’d seen him in person only once
before, and she remembered that face – eerie, not quite the human norm,
of no clearly identifiable age, like the reconstructed face of a burns
victim perhaps. She remembered her own reflection; her new mechanical
carcass was better quality than _this_. Evidently she was a later model.

He asked, ‘Blasphemy? Must we talk in such terms?’

‘Then in what terms do you want to talk?’

‘Perhaps about the reason I . . . brought you back.’

‘Reason? What reason could there possibly be?’

‘Oh, a very good one. I would be very pleased if you would rise to this
unusual occasion and consider a proposition – a new purpose, which I
believe will accord with your own disposition. Will you hear me out?’

Sister Agnes took a seat in an almost identical overstuffed chair,
opposite him.

‘How are you finding your body, by the way?’

She raised her hand, looked at it, flexed her fingers, and imagined she
heard the whirring of tiny hydraulic motors. ‘I’m finding you’ve turned
me into Frankenstein’s monster.’

‘Actually Frankenstein’s monster was considerably more learned and
worthy than his so-called master. Just a thought.’

‘Get to the point. What do you _want_?’

‘Very well. Agnes, knowing a great deal about you from Joshua, and from
other sources including your own diaries – and knowing your most
excellent sympathy for an irrevocably flawed humanity – I have
shanghaied you, so to speak, on behalf of said humanity. I have a
mission for you. It is this: I need an adversary.’

‘A what?’

‘Agnes, you know me. You know what I am. I span the world! Indeed, the
worlds. I wield an enormous amount of power, starting with the ability
to fix parking tickets and working on up to a scale that no tyrant in
all of history has been able to boast. I have no master. I report to
nobody save myself. Even Douglas Black is only a patron, a facilitator.
He could not _stop_ me. And that’s what worries me.’

‘It does?’

‘Of course. Shouldn’t it? I need an adversary, Agnes. Somebody to tell
me when I am out of order. When I’m being inhuman. Or being too human,
even. It seems to me, given all that Joshua has said about you, that
_you_ are uniquely placed to be that person.’

‘You brought me back to life to be your conscience? This is ridiculous!
Even if I agreed – how could I stop you from doing anything that you
want to do?’

‘I will give you the means to shut me down.’

‘What? Is that even possible?’

‘It’s tricky,’ conceded Lobsang. ‘There are now a number of iterations
of myself scattered across the world, the Long Earth, and even various
locations around the solar system. You can’t have too much backup . . .
But, yes, I can find a way to make it happen. To have _me_ deleted from
all those places.’

‘Hmm. And in all those places,’ said Sister Agnes, ‘where is your soul?’

‘Here, talking to you like this, in these new bodies, surely we can
agree that the soul has no boundaries?’

‘Do I have a choice in any of this?’

‘Of course. You can walk away now and you will be taken anywhere on the
planet that you wish. You will never hear from me again. Or – well, you
too have an off switch, Agnes. But I know that you are not going to take
those options.’

‘Oh, you do, do you?’

‘You see, when I came to visit you with Joshua that day, and I asked you
if you had any regrets – do you remember? You whispered, “So much left
to do.” Now you have the chance to do more. What do you say? Will you be
Boswell to my Johnson, Agnes? Watson to my Holmes? Satan to my Miltonic
God?’

‘Your nagging wife?’

He laughed, an eerie, not quite human sound.

Sister Agnes was uncharacteristically silent for some time. The loudest
noise was the not-quite-authentic fire. In this womb of a room, she felt
stuffy, enclosed. She longed to be out of here. Out on the open road –
‘What happened to my Harley?’

‘Joshua had it stored properly: off the ground, tyres over-inflated,
fuel drained from the tank, everything greased up.’

‘Will I be able to ride it? I mean, will I be physically capable—’

‘Of course.’

‘And will this wretched alchemy of yours allow me to drink beer?’

‘Most certainly.’

‘Where the hell am I, by the way?’

‘In Sweden. At the headquarters of a wholly owned subsidiary of the
Black Corporation’s medical division. It’s a nice crisp day outside.’

‘Is it?’

‘There are bikes. I thought ahead, you see. Not Harleys, but . . . Would
you like to go for a ride?’

It was tempting. To be young again. Young, and on the road . . .

‘In a moment,’ she said firmly. ‘How’s Joshua?’


27

SO JOSHUA FOUND himself sitting with Sister Agnes reincarnate, in a
shabby coffee shop in Madison West 5.

It was an odd atmosphere. Two people trying to get a grip on this
inexplicable new world: a world where the dead could rise and sit
cheerfully sipping a coffee while talking of old times . . . Two people
not quite finding the words that needed to be said. As it was, however,
for now, the smiles were doing the job.

Agnes sat upright, a bit primly, sipping her coffee. Maybe her features
were just a little too regular, her skin a little too smooth, to be
convincingly human.

But as far as Joshua was concerned, too many of the regulars in this
coffee shop, mostly Low Earth construction workers, took a much too
irreligious interest in Agnes’s new curves. ‘They ought to have more
respect for the wimple.’

‘Oh, hush. All men are rudimentary creatures who respond to symbols a
lot more basic than a habit and a crucifix.’

‘I can’t quite believe this is happening.’

‘Neither can I. And it’s hard to even believe I’m here to do the
disbelieving, if you know what I mean.’

When he looked up she was smiling, that flagstone-cracking beam of a
smile that had always made her look twenty years younger. Agnes’s smile
wasn’t the kind of smile that the regular world would associate with the
word ‘nun’. It was a smile that had always contained a touch of
mischief, and also a terrible rage, kept in check until it was needed.
This was what had enabled her to sustain the Home, and her many other
projects, in the face of opposition from the Vatican on down. The smile
and the rage.

She sipped her coffee quite convincingly, just as Lobsang’s ambulant
units always had; he tried not to think about the internal plumbing that
made this possible. Now she lowered her cup and looked on him with
pride, it seemed. ‘Ah, me. And here you are, a full-grown man, a father,
a mayor—’

‘Lobsang did this to you.’

‘He did,’ she said warningly, ‘though he used some careless talk from
you as an excuse to do it, young man. We’ll have to have a serious chat
about that.’

‘How? I mean—’

‘Either I was downloaded from my poor dying brain via some kind of
neural scan into a bucket of gel, or I was brought back by Tibetan monks
chanting the Book of the Dead over my already interred corpse for
forty-nine days. Lobsang tried both ways, he says.’

Joshua smiled weakly. ‘That’s Lobsang, all right. “Always have a
backup.” I came to your funeral, you know, but he kept the rest from me,
I guess. I didn’t know about the reincarnation. Or the monks. They must
have driven the Sisters crazy . . . Does anybody else know you’re back?
I mean, at the Home—’

‘Yes, I got in touch with the Home as soon as I could. I asked for
Sister Georgina, she was the least likely to go bananas when she picked
up the phone and heard my voice, or so I thought. I got a note from the
Archbishop, if you want to know. The Church picks up more secrets than
Lobsang himself. But I’m not public knowledge yet. Of course I’ll have
to come out, so to speak, some time, if I’m to assume my place in the
world again. At least, thanks to Lobsang, I’m not the first, umm,
_revenant_ in silicon and gel, even if he is wrapped in a cloak of
mystery. Enough people are aware of his origins; at least my basic
existence might be accepted.’

‘What place in the world?’

She pursed her lips. ‘Well, Joshua, as you ought to know if you ever
paid any attention, before my final illness I was deputy chief executive
of the Leadership Conference of Women Religious, which represents most
of America’s Catholic sisters. I was actually in the middle of a
terrific fight with the Vatican itself, its Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith. That’s the Inquisition, to you. About a book by a
Sister Hilary in Cleveland.’

‘A book? What about?’

‘The spiritual benefits of female masturbation.’

Joshua sprayed coffee. The male heads turned again.

Her eyes glittered, as if she was ready for the fight. ‘We’ve been at
war with the Pope and his cardinals since the Second Vatican Council.
Just because we think social justice is more important than opposing
abortion or same-sex marriage. Just because we reject their patronizing
patriarchy – which is why nuns become nuns in the first place, one way
or another. Oh, I can’t wait to get back into the fray, Joshua. And with
this new body I’m never going to run out of steam, am I? I’ll be the
Energizer bunny of militant nuns.’

‘What’s an Energizer bunny?’

‘Oh my dear child, you have so much to learn.’

‘Tell me why Lobsang brought you back. Not for my benefit, I’m
guessing?’

She snorted. ‘Maybe that’s ten per cent of it. Apparently, I am to serve
as a moral compass for Lobsang himself.’

‘Hmm. That’s not necessarily a bad idea.’

‘Maybe so, but I remain astonished that he doesn’t realize that the
pointer of _my_ own moral compass is severely bent around the stop.’

He grinned. ‘I remember when you hit that papal nuncio with a shoe. We
all enjoyed that, even though we knew nothing about the scandal that guy
was wrapped up in at the time. Then about two years afterwards the
cover-up was exposed, and we all wished that you had hit him with _both_
shoes.’

‘Of course, at first, I hated Lobsang for bringing me back from the
dead. What a cheek. While at the same time, if you can understand me, I
was beside myself with gratitude that he did so.’ She looked down at her
body, at her hands.

‘But he gave you the choice of not going along with this, right? You
could have gone off and led some independent – umm, life. Or—’

‘Or have him show me where my off switch is.’

‘How did he convince you?’

She looked thoughtful. ‘Well, I’ll tell you the truth. It was one
particular conversation we had. Lobsang said about something or other,
“Does not compute.” “Right,” I said . . .’

‘That was an ironic allusion, by the way,’ Lobsang had added.

They had been in a kind of gym, both in more or less incongruous
tracksuits, where Lobsang was helping Agnes develop her physical
reflexes.

‘_What_ was an ironic allusion?’

‘The phrase “does not compute” was used in an ironic sense to imply
bewildered exasperation,’ said Lobsang patiently. ‘It was not used
unthinkingly as an error message in response to insufficient or
contradictory information.’

‘Lobsang?’

‘Yes?’

‘What the hell are you talking about?’

‘You persist in thinking of me as a computer. I am trying to dispel that
illusion. Why are you shaking your head?’

‘Sorry. It’s just, well, you’re trying too hard, I think.’

‘You may call me “Lobby”. Perhaps pet names will break the ice, do you
suppose?’

‘Lobby . . .’

(‘Joshua, he kept pausing, waiting for me to carry on talking. Have you
ever spent time with a foreigner who wants to practise his English on
you? Lobsang was like that, in those first few days, anxiously trying
out his humanity on me . . .’)

‘Look,’ Agnes said, ‘you’re going about it all _wrong_. You’re not a
human. You can’t _be_ a human. You’re a very intelligent machine. You’re
_more_ than human. Can’t you live with that? Being human isn’t about the
brain, it’s all tied up with messy things like – well, organs and juices
and instincts.’

‘You are describing your body, not yourself. In fact your former body.’

‘Yes, but—’

‘Externally you were an animal, but that was not your _self_. Externally
I am a machine, but you should not judge by appearances.’

‘OK, but—’

‘We could try the Turin test,’ said Lobsang.

‘Oh, machines have been able to pass the Turing test for years.’

‘No, the _Turin_ test. We both pray for an hour, and see if God can tell
the difference.’

And she had to laugh.

‘That was it? He made you laugh?’

‘Well, it was the first time he actually seemed authentically human. And
he did keep on. It was like being licked to death by puppies. He wore me
down in the end.’

Joshua nodded. ‘You know, if this works out even ten per cent, he’s
going to be lucky to have you.’

She snorted. ‘You’d better ask him that. I’m learning to crack the whip
. . . Joshua, I know you’ve had your differences with him.’

‘You can say that again. When I called him in to help you it was about
the only time I’ve spoken to him since the Madison nuke.’

‘I think he misses you, you know. He spans the world, but he has few
friends. If any.’

‘Which is why he has to manufacture them, right?’

‘That’s rather harsh, Joshua. On both of us.’

‘Yes. I’m sorry. Look, Agnes, as far as I’m concerned, however you got
here, it’s just good to have you back.’

Now she looked oddly concerned. She took both his hands in hers, as she
used to when he was small and there was something difficult she needed
to tell him. ‘But you and I know the real question, Joshua.’

‘What question?’

‘I look like Agnes. I think like her. I can carry on her work. I _feel_
like I’m her. But can I _be_ her? I’m a nun, Joshua. Or Agnes was. And
enough of a nun to know that there’s no place in Catholic theology for
Tibetan-style reincarnation.’

‘Then what?’

She looked away, which was not characteristic of her. ‘My death, Joshua
. . .’

‘Yes?’

‘I . . .. _experienced_ it. What we call the Personal Judgement, or
something like it. _And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes_.
I encountered God. Or so it feels. So I believe.’ She raised her hands
again and turned them over, inspecting them. ‘And now here I am in this
miraculous new form. _For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality_.’ She twinkled a smile at him.
‘Don’t worry, I won’t ask you for chapter and verse. Maybe I’m some sort
of electronic ghost – not Agnes at all, or at best a blasphemous mockery
of her. Or maybe, instead, I’m here to fulfil the will of God, in a new
way – in a world transformed by technology, to fulfil that will in a way
that was never possible before. I feel I’m ready to accept the latter
interpretation for now.’

He stirred the last of his coffee. ‘What does Lobsang _want_, do you
think? What’s he trying to become? The guardian of the whole human race,
maybe?’

She thought about that. ‘I rather believe that he might be more like a
gardener. Which sounds nice and bucolic and harmless, right up to the
time you remember that a gardener must sometimes _prune_ . . .’

He stood. ‘I have to go back. My family have had a lot of problems since
we got back here.’

‘I heard.’

‘About the nature of your new existence – well, I did spend a lot of
time with Lobsang. I’m no theologian. My advice is, just get on with it.
Do the good that’s in front of you. That’s what you always said.’

‘That’s true. Actually at some point I’m hoping for a bit of theological
guidance from those fellas in fancy dress from the Vatican.’

‘I don’t care about the Vatican. As far as I’m concerned you’re _my_
Agnes.’

‘Thank you, Joshua.’ She stood and hugged him. ‘Don’t be a stranger.’

‘Never.’


28

SALLY RETURNED TO Monica Jansson’s home, arriving without any warning,
without any explanation of where she’d been.

Jansson had been alone in the house. She had been waiting for Joshua to
return from his visit to the Home, Helen was off talking to cops and
lawyers about bail conditions, and Dan was happily playing softball with
Bill Chambers, who was monumentally hung over, as ever.

They sat over coffees. Two oddballs thrown accidentally together,
Jansson thought. Sally seemed restless, as usual. Her pack was waiting
at the door, and she wore the multi-pocketed sleeveless jacket that was
the basis of her field gear. They tentatively talked, about life, and
what they had in common: the Long Earth, and Joshua.

In an odd way, Joshua had always been at the centre of MPD Lieutenant
Monica Jansson’s experience of the Long Earth, as it had opened up on
her watch, and ultimately defined her career path, indeed her whole
life. Now she told Sally anecdotes about the old days.

Like about the repeated attempts she had made to recruit Joshua.

There was one time, seven months after Step Day, when Jansson had
arranged to talk to Joshua at the Home, then still located in Datum
Madison. The talk had been chaperoned, and that was fair enough, Jansson
had thought, sitting on a sofa with a Sister or two, as the old song
went. After all, Joshua was still just fourteen years old.

And his suspicion of her had been so solid it was like an extra person,
crowding on the sofa with Jansson and the Sisters.

He’d said, ‘Do you want to study me?’

‘What?’

‘Hand me over to the professors at the university. Put me in a cage and
_study_ me.’

She felt shocked. ‘No, Joshua. Never that. Listen. You’ve become
notorious. A legend, whether you like it or not. But right from the
start, from Step Day, I’ve done my best to keep you off the official
record.’

He thought that over. ‘Why?’

‘Because it would be bad for you. You can do as you please. But I want
you to think . . . well, about working with me. Not _for_ me. Put your
abilities, and all that positive energy you have, to good use. I can get
you assignments. Ways to help people. I’m talking about paid work. Like
a Saturday job – it won’t get in the way of your school work. Joshua, I
promise that if you work with me I’ll continue to protect you.’

He flinched. ‘But if I won’t work with you, you won’t protect me.’

‘No. No! Joshua, that came out wrong. Look, I’ll protect you come what
may—’

But he had just vanished, a pop of displaced air, gone, leaving the two
Sisters exasperated.

Jansson had looked on the bright side. He hadn’t actually said no.

She had kept on trying, until, grudgingly, he became an ally.

And he had been an ally ever since.

‘Nice story,’ Sally said. ‘And that was really your way of protecting
_him_, right?’

‘A friend for life, that’s Joshua. He does seem to surround himself with
strong women. You, Helen, Sister Agnes—’

‘And you too, retired Lieutenant Jansson.’

‘I’ll take that as a compliment. Must be difficult for Helen sometimes,
however. She is his wife.’

Sally looked away. ‘I’m profoundly uninterested in Helen. A gloomy
little stay-at-home. Although she did throw a good right hook at that
nutjob in immigration.’

‘That she did.’

Sally kept glancing at her watch.

Jansson asked cautiously, ‘So where are you going next?’

‘The Gap.’

‘Really? Because of Mary the troll, I guess.’

‘Yeah.’

Jansson smiled. ‘What will you do, wave a placard?’

‘Why not? It’s better than letting the poor creature be put to death,
out of sight and out of mind.’

‘True enough. It was a shocking incident. When I saw it I wrote a few
mails myself, you know . . . That was how I got the leverage to have
Joshua meet Senator Starling. I wish I could go with you.’

Sally faced her. ‘Are you serious?’

That took Jansson aback; she’d spoken on impulse. ‘What? Well – yes, I
guess. If I could. Why do you ask?’

‘Because you’re useful, that’s why. You’re Joshua’s “Spooky” Jansson.
You can get things done in the human world where I can’t.’ Sally looked
diffident, as if she hated to admit the slightest weakness. ‘Maybe
together we could do some good. Or at least scare the spacesuit pants
off those dweebs up at the Gap. Joshua said you put things right. That’s
your strength. Well, because of this whole business with the trolls,
there’s soon going to be something “not right” with the whole of the
Long Earth. Come with me. What do you say?’

Jansson smiled weakly. ‘What, just like that? It’s kind of Thelma and
Louise, isn’t it? And at my age, and my condition? I’m not supposed to
be more than a couple of hours from my hospital. I suppose I could
self-medicate. But I’ve never been nearly that far stepwise. It’s two
million steps to the Gap, right? I don’t think I’d make it.’

‘Don’t be so hasty.’ Sally winked. ‘Remember who you’re speaking to. I
know a couple of short cuts . . .’

‘It’s crazy. It’s impossible. Isn’t it?’


29

AS JANSSON AND Sally were preparing to leave Madison West 5, Maggie
Kauffman was just arriving.

‘Find me a troll expert,’ Maggie had told Joe Mackenzie. What the
Captain wanted, the Captain got.

It had taken a couple of days. No outernet search was quick, by the
nature of its very infrastructure, although the closer you got to the
Datum the faster information was swapped around. But Mac soon turned up
a number of universities that had investigated trolls in the wild. He
showed Maggie some of their reports. Trolls were found to be
inquisitive, convivial, and quick learners. It was generally agreed that
they were at least pre-sapient, but a minority of scholars declared that
they were in fact truly sapient, though their intelligence had a
different perspective, a different basis from human minds. Clearly they
learned at a phenomenal rate . . .

All this seemed a little dry to Maggie. She asked Mac to find somebody
who knew trolls better than as test subjects or specimens. Somebody who
lived with them.

Which was why she left her command briefly, and, without letting her
superiors know – stuffed shirts like Ed Cutler would have squashed this
initiative before it had begun – she dashed on a fast commercial twain
back East, ending up on a world five steps West of the Datum, at the new
city of Madison, Wisconsin . . .

A few miles outside the city, Dr. Christopher Pagel and his wife Juliet,
among other activities, ran a rescue centre for maltreated big cats,
animals bought illegally by drug barons and other slimeballs and
displayed for the machismo, then abandoned when they were no longer
cute. The business pre-dated Step Day – when it was set up the victims
had included lions and tigers – but since then, thanks to the
opportunities opened up for new kinds of trophies through access to the
Long Earth and its kaleidoscope of unspoiled worlds, the roomy cages had
also housed such beasts as a sabre-toothed smilodon, and even a cave
lion: _Panthera leo atrox_.

And the Pagels were using an extended family of trolls to help with the
business.

The Pagels, elderly but elegant and remarkably kindly, told Maggie that
the trolls helped with more than just heavy labour. Their very presence
seemed to calm the cats. Dr. Chris described how the male of the local
family of trolls had a very good way of dealing with one potentially
troublesome tiger, who after one attempted attack on its keeper was
gripped at the neck by a big troll hand and pushed slowly and carefully
to the ground, at a speed and pressure that made it clear to the big cat
that ending up underground was just a possibility if he didn’t get with
the programme . . .

Maggie learned a lot of other details about the trolls from the Pagels.
Such as, what they wanted from humans, it seemed, was entertainment:
variety, new concepts. Show even a juvenile troll something like a lawn
mower, with bolts big enough for troll fingers to work, and he or she
would carefully take it apart, keeping all the bits neatly in a line,
and then put it back together again, for the sheer joy of it. Juliet
Pagel had experimented with human music; a good gospel choir would have
trolls sitting in rapturous silence, as would 1960s close-harmony groups
like the Beach Boys.

Maggie’s decision about the trolls was slowly solidifying. As far as she
was concerned, she had to be mindful of the fact that her command was
tasked to be an ever-present symbol of the United States Aegis. As such,
it wasn’t enough for the _Benjamin Franklin_ to tour these outer worlds
like an old-fashioned dreadnought, projecting vague threat and handing
out leaflets about how you had to pay your taxes. Her mission had to
symbolize the nation’s positive values. And that meant, in this age of
the Long Earth, living in harmony with the other inhabitants of the
stepwise worlds, in particular with the trolls. Sally Linsay had been
right, she’d decided on reflection: how better to show that than by
having trolls actually aboard her ship?

As a twain Captain, Maggie had been granted a great deal of latitude in
her decision-making out here. Still, she spent time trying to make sure
she had got the support of at least a majority of her crew for this
experiment. And she had no intention of telling her superiors what she
was up to, until she absolutely had to.

So, when she returned to her ship, she brought three trolls with her.
They were a family, parents with a juvenile: the Pagels had called them
Jake, Marjorie and Carl.

As soon as they boarded, despite all Maggie’s groundwork in advance, the
arguments started once more. She let them run; the trolls weren’t going
anywhere.

In the event it was only a week before the crew of the _Franklin_, as
they drifted through the skies of countless stepwise Americas, became
accustomed to stopping work at twilight, when the big loading bay doors
were flung open, and the trolls joined in the harmonies and undertones
of the long call as it echoed across the reaches of world after world.

‘I mean,’ Maggie said to Mac and Nathan, ‘in _Star Trek_ they put a
Klingon on the bridge.’

‘And a Borg,’ said Nathan.

‘Well, there you go.’

‘Not a Romulan, though,’ Mac said. ‘Never a Romulan.’

‘The trolls are staying,’ Maggie said firmly.


30

IT TOOK NELSON Azikiwe a couple of months after that talk with Ken, when
he’d let the cat out of the bag about his resignation, for him to tidy
up his affairs in the parish, dispose of extraneous belongings, and
brief his successor – including on the temperamental toilet – before he
was ready to depart on the next phase of his life, in search of the
Lobsang Project and other mysteries. He took his time. He had always led
something of an itinerant life, but believed in making time to say his
goodbyes properly.

He decided to travel to America by plane; his generation wasn’t used to
the slow-boat nature of twain travel. But there weren’t as many
aeroplanes around these days, Nelson discovered, not since the Long
Earth had begun to be serviced by the twains. It was the new worlds, of
course, for which the twains were so well suited: airships didn’t need
airports, they could set you down easily almost anywhere. But even for
lateral, cross-Earth travel, even on the Datum, airships had come back
into vogue. For one thing helium, a safely non-flammable lift gas, was a
whole lot easier to obtain now, the Datum’s natural stock having been
badly depleted before the resources of the stepwise worlds had been
opened up. And the stately pace of airships certainly worked for cargo:
sacks of corn and mineral ore didn’t mind how long it took to get there,
and rarely complained about the in-flight movie.

But an industry like the traditional airlines would take some time to
die, and for now, on the Datum, the planes still flew – even though for
this trip Nelson had to put up with delays, as many US flights were
grounded because of ash clouds arising from an event at Yellowstone,
some kind of minor eruption there.

The plane Nelson finally caught swung out from England, crossed the
north Atlantic, flew down over the Canadian Shield, and at last reached
the endless farmland of Datum America, which spread beneath his window
like a glowing carpet. If you had the eye for it, he realized, there
were occasional gaps to be seen in that grand panorama of cultivation,
scraps of recovering wildness in the summer green where a homestead or a
farm had been abandoned, almost certainly because the owners had decided
to step Westward. (And it _was_ West for most Americans, despite the
assurances of the experts that the stepping labels ‘West’ and ‘East’
were purely arbitrary.) Off they stepped, in search of more land, a
better life. Or, he mused, possibly they went simply because, well, the
new worlds were _out there_, and there was something in the genes of an
American, and perhaps even a Canadian, that impelled you always to move
on. It was a frontier with apparently no end, and while there wasn’t
exactly a stepwise stampede these days the Long Earth still drew in the
pioneers.

His own destination was more modest: O’Hare. He’d stop in Chicago a
while. Then he had plans to visit a new university being built in
Madison, Wisconsin, West 5, as part of the city’s post-nuke recovery. He
had friends there, and interests. Madison was where Willis Linsay had
first posted the plans for a prototype Stepper box on the internet, a
glorious, destructive gesture that had changed the world for ever –
indeed, the worlds. And Madison had been the boyhood home of Joshua
Valienté himself. Nelson, on the track of the Lobsang Project, had an
inkling that Madison was a place where he might find some things out,
get some questions answered.

As it turned out, this tentative plan didn’t even survive his leaving
the airport.

Nelson was always glad to get out of the cramped enclosure of a plane.
He was a large man, the kind of man who had trouble fitting into an
airline seat, but who could walk through any neighbourhood anywhere
without having to worry overmuch about his security. Sometimes the
deference accorded to him simply because of his size bothered him. But
by and large, he reflected as he patiently queued his way through the
landing process, he had to admit it was useful to get your way without
even asking.

His size had certainly saved him from all but a few scuffles in the
South African townships of his boyhood. All such troubles had however
evaporated when he found the local library and discovered a universe of
ideas into which his young consciousness rose faster than a Saturn V
into the Florida sky. That wasn’t to say he had simply soaked up the
lessons of authority; almost from the beginning he was identifying
problems to solve, and indeed solving them. One teacher remarked that he
had a genius for connectivity.

His life had changed utterly, for better or worse, the day he had first
applied his analytical skills to the concept of the Almighty. Even if
you dismissed the traditional notion of God, it had always seemed to him
that without a First Cause of some kind there was a philosophical void,
a space to let. His buddies in the nerdosphere populated that void with
the Illuminati, maybe, or the staring eye in the dollar-bill triangle
. . . After Step Day, after the opening-up of a universe vast, fecund
and accessible to mankind, it seemed to him that the need to fill that
void had only deepened. Which was essentially why he had decided to
devote the next phase of his life to an exploration of that void, and
related mysteries.

Anyhow, this morning at O’Hare, Nelson’s intimidating size, backed up by
his problem-solving ability, certainly helped him thread his way through
the maze of US immigration.

And at the final customs barrier, after Nelson had cleared through, a
clerk chased him and produced a leaflet. ‘Oh – this was left for you,
Mr. Azikiwe.’

The leaflet was an ad for a Winnebago. Nelson was planning to fly to
Madison; he didn’t need a Winnebago. But when he looked up again, the
clerk was gone.

Nelson felt a thrill of connectivity, like solving a Quizmasters puzzle.
‘I get it, Lobsang,’ he said. And he pocketed the leaflet.

By an hour later he had rented a top-of-the-line Winnebago, with plenty
of generator capacity for his tech, and a bed, a big one, _just_ the
size for him.

He drove out of the airport parking area in this home on wheels and,
having no further instructions he could discern, picked a direction at
random and hit the freeway. Just the experience of driving on such roads
was glorious. He wondered if this, in the end, was the ultimate
expression of the American dream: to be in transit, all problems left
behind like discarded trash, nothing in life but follow-the-horizon
movement, motion for the sake of it.

He drove west for the rest of the morning.

Then he parked up in a small town, shopped for fresh food, and logged on
for a quick inspection of the latest sweepings of the online world,
including the findings of his buddies in the Quizmasters. He’d had them
working twenty-four/seven on his problem since he’d tantalized them with
the barest hint: ‘Say, we have all seen that clip of the _Mark Twain_
being towed into Madison and the girl talking about a cat that spoke
Tibetan, haven’t we? Is there a clue there? But a clue about what? Looks
like someone is playing with our heads . . .’

Given Nelson’s starting hint, the Quizmasters had been going crazy,
speculating, inferring and pattern-matching. Standing in the Winnebago,
making an elegant curry from fresh-bought ingredients, Nelson watched
messages and tangled hypotheses flicker across his screens, and thought
it all over.

When the curry was ready he largely ignored the screens. Nelson had
learned to love the manners of the English past, as he’d known them in
St. John on the Water, when people used to _address_ their food; there
was something about the phraseology that made the boy from the townships
smile. But while he ate, he saw from the corner of his eye how the
Quizmasters were beating themselves up, putting out theories at the rate
of one a minute, some of them completely outlandish.

And then up came one trace that drew his attention: thanks to an oddity
of TV scheduling, by hopping among various channels, starting just about
now it would be possible to watch the classic movie _Close Encounters of
the Third Kind_ continuously for the next twenty-four hours.

He murmured, ‘So: Devil’s Tower, Lobsang? It’s been done before, a bit
unoriginal. But I’ve never been there, I’ve always wanted to see it. I
won’t ask how to find you; I rather believe you will find me . . .’

Nelson finished his curry and cleaned up. His sat-nav told him it was
around a thousand miles north-west from Chicago to Wyoming. A dream ride
in a vehicle like this. He’d take his time, he decided, and see the
sights; he was nobody’s puppet.

Maybe he’d even catch one of those iterations of _Close Encounters_.


31

THEIR FINAL FALL through the soft places, the longest of all, brought
Sally and Jansson to a world only a dozen steps or so from the Gap
itself. Soft places transported you geographically as well as stepwise.
They landed in England, the north-west, near the Irish Sea coast – a
location Sally knew was close to the footprint of GapSpace, home of the
new space cadets.

Monica Jansson arrived exhausted, bewildered. Sally had to help her lie
down on the soft grass of this latest hillside, wrapped in a cocoon of
silvery emergency blankets.

It had taken a week for them to traverse the two million worlds to the
Gap through the soft places – a lot faster than any twain, but a
gruelling journey even so. Sally had to scry out the soft places, using
motions like a kind of tai chi. They seemed to cluster in the
continental heartlands, away from the coasts. They were easier to find
at dawn or sunset. Sometimes Jansson could even _see_ them, a kind of
shimmer. Weird stuff. But they would take you wherever you wanted to go,
in four or five steps.

Jansson had, for her part, never complained as they travelled, and it
had taken a few transitions for Sally to work out just how hard it was
for her. A soft place was a flaw in the Long Earth’s quasi-linear
pan-dimensional geometry. Finding soft places was the unique skill
Sally’s genetic inheritance had given her. And it was a hell of a lot
easier than plodding all the way out, step by step, the way that dull
little mouse Helen Valienté had once walked through a hundred thousand
worlds with her family to set up their pioneer-type log cabin. But
nothing came for free, and the soft places did take something out of
you. It wasn’t an instantaneous transition, like a regular step; there
was a sense of falling, of deep sucking cold, of a passage that lasted a
finite time – that was how you remembered it, even if your watch showed
that no time had passed at all. It was gruelling, energy-sapping. Plus
Jansson was already ill, even before they set off. Jansson wasn’t the
type who would complain, whatever you did.

Sally bustled around, collecting wood for a fire, unpacking their food
and drink. Then, in this late afternoon, a warm enough late May day in
this particular stepwise England, she sat quietly beside her fire,
letting Jansson sleep off the journey.

And Sally watched the moon rise.

It wasn’t the moon she was used to. In this world, only a few steps from
the Gap itself, Luna was liberally spattered with recent craters. The
Mare Imbrium, the man in the moon’s right eye, was almost obliterated,
and Copernicus was outdone by a massive new scar, a brilliant splash
whose rays stretched across half the visible disc. It must have been
something to see, she thought, on this world and its neighbours, when
Bellos and its stepwise brothers had made their shuddering close
approach – missing this particular Earth, but passing near by – and the
ground below would have convulsed from bombardment by random fragments,
while the face of the moon above lit up like a battlefield in the sky
. . .

Jansson stirred now, and sat up. Sally had set a pot of coffee on the
little stand over the fire. Jansson took a tin mug gratefully in gloved
hands, and looked up at the sky, in a vague way. ‘What’s wrong with the
moon?’

‘We’re too close to the Gap, is what’s wrong with it.’

Jansson nodded, sipping the coffee. ‘Listen. Before we get there. Just
imagine I’m a dumb cop who knows more about bloodstains and drunks than
about cosmology and spaceships. What exactly is the Gap? And what’s it
got to do with space cadets?’

‘The Gap is a hole in the Long Earth. Look, the alternate Earths go on
for ever, as far as we know, all broadly similar though differing in
detail. But the Gap is the only place so far found where the Earth is
missing altogether. If you were to step over you’d find yourself
floating in vacuum. There was an impact. A big rock – maybe an asteroid,
or comet, or something like a rogue moon – came calling. The space
cadets call this hypothetical object Bellos.’

‘Why Bellos?’

Sally shrugged. ‘Some dumb old movie reference, I think. Joshua might
know. And Lobsang’s probably _got_ the movie . . . Everything that can
happen must happen somewhere, right? Bellos, or copies of it, came
swimming out of the dark, and completely missed uncounted billions of
Earths. A few, like _this_ one, were close enough to its path to be
sideswiped by fragments, and suffered varying amounts of damage.’

‘Like what?’

‘Like splattering new craters over the moon. Like stripping away lots of
atmosphere from the Earth. Or changing the pole positions. Or messing
with continental shift. Generally making the extinction of the dinosaurs
look like a street fight. But not wiping out the planet altogether.’

Jansson nodded. ‘I can see where the story is going. And one Earth—’

‘One Earth was taken out entirely.’

Jansson whistled. The idea seemed to frighten her. ‘It could have hit
_us_,’ she said.

‘Datum Earth was way up the other end of the probability curve.’

‘Yes, but if it hadn’t been – even if we’d been living on one of these
nearby worlds—’

‘Earthquakes, tidal waves, that kind of fun. Oh, the dust winter would
probably have killed us off. Us, or our primate ancestors, more likely,
it was that long ago.’

‘Nasty.’

‘No, it’s just statistics. It happened, that’s all.’ Sally poured more
coffee. ‘It couldn’t happen _now_, at least. Not that way. The
extinction of mankind, I mean. We’ve spread out. The Long Earth is an
insurance policy. Even a Bellos couldn’t take out all of us.’

‘OK. And this Gap is useful because—’

‘Because you can just step into space. You see, on world Gap Minus One,
you put on a spacesuit, step over – and there you are, gently orbiting
the sun. No need to ride a rocket the size of a skyscraper to fight
Earth’s gravity, because there ain’t no Earth there. And once you’re out
there, you can go anywhere. That’s the dream, anyhow. Access to space.’

Jansson’s head was drooping. ‘Can’t wait to see it. In the morning,
yes?’

‘In the morning. You sleep. I’ll put the tent up before it gets dark.
Are you hungry?’

‘No, thanks. And I took my meds.’ She lay down again, pulling the
blankets over her.

‘Goodnight, then.’

‘Goodnight, Sally.’

As Jansson slipped back into sleep Sally sat silently, perhaps the only
awake, sapient mind on this planet.

And as the light dimmed, and the battered moon brightened, she felt as
if someone had knocked out the walls of her mind. The landscape, a
grassy hillside stretching away before her, seemed to acquire depth,
otherness in a direction she could almost see. It was bottomless,
multi-dimensional, endless. She had once dreamed that she had found out
how to fly; it was absurdly easy, all you had to do was jump into the
air and _jump again when you were up there_. Now she chased the
tantalizing feeling that all she needed was the trick of it and she
could step away, not into one world at a time, but spread _across_ the
Long Earth, a whole thick band of worlds, all at once. The very air
around her felt prickly, the land as insubstantial as smoke.

But then Jansson coughed, and moaned softly in her sleep. Sally’s
infinity high evaporated as quickly as it had come.


32

SLOWLY THE CREW of the _Franklin_ got used to their troll crewmates.

That didn’t apply to all the colonies they visited, though.

New Melfield was a grubby and unprepossessing farming community in the
Corn Belt. The whole township turned out when the _Franklin_ descended –
and seemed uniformly astonished when a family of trolls followed the
human crew down the lowered gangway.

The trolls and the rest strolled around while Maggie chatted to the
local mayor, passed over Datum documentation, and generally engaged the
man and put him at his ease. Indeed he evidently needed his ease putting
at, for her briefing had pegged this place as yet another nasty little
locus of spite towards trolls, not to mention humans and other dumb
animals. Well, change had to start by degrees.

So by mid-morning this mayor had three trolls in his office, actually
sitting on chairs; trolls just loved chairs, especially if they
swivelled. And when Maggie had finished the coffee she’d been offered,
she said clearly, ‘Wash up, please, Carl.’

The young troll, holding the mug like an heirloom, looked around the
room, spotted the open door to the little coffee station and sink area
in the room next door, carefully washed the mug in the sink, and placed
it just as carefully in a rack. Then he walked back to Maggie, who gave
him a peppermint.

The mayor watched this in blank astonishment.

That was the start of a couple more days at this township, days devoted
to seducing hearts and minds, with younger kids being given rides in the
_Franklin_ to see their homes from the air for the first time in their
lives, and older kids – heavily supervised – playing with the trolls.

But on the second day the crew went on the alert, when a second twain
showed up in the sky above New Melfield.

The ship was a merchant vessel. That evening the captain himself, with
an aide, crossed to the _Franklin_ and met Maggie in her sea cabin. And
they came bearing a package.

Maggie glanced quickly at Nathan Boss, who’d accompanied them aboard.
‘We scanned the parcel,’ Boss said. ‘It’s clean.’

The merchant’s captain, young, overweight, grinned at Maggie. ‘You must
be very important, Captain Kauffman, we were detoured a hell of a way to
bring you this. You have the assurance of Douglas Black himself—’

‘Douglas Black? Of the Black Corporation? _The_ . . .’ Wow, she thought.
Sally Linsay has contacts.

‘Yes, Captain. _The_ Mr. Black assures you that nothing in this package
is to the detriment of either you or the _Benjamin Franklin_.
Instructions can be found inside. I know nothing more . . .’

Maggie felt ridiculously like a kid at Christmas, eager to unwrap the
gift.

As soon as the guy was gone, at Nathan’s cautious suggestion she took
the package outside the ship to open it, just for extra security. And
inside she found, carefully wrapped, a curious instrument faintly
resembling an ocarina. A troll-call – Sally Linsay had come through. She
toyed with the controls; it looked more complex than the gadget Sally
had shown her, maybe some kind of upgrade. And there was a brief page of
instructions, signed by hand: ‘G. Abrahams’. The name wasn’t familiar.

She couldn’t wait to try it on the trolls.

She dismissed Nathan, who went off grinning and shaking his head. Then,
alone, she made for the observation deck, where the trolls preferred to
sleep, perhaps because of its cooler temperature. The trolls were
huddled together, grooming gently, half-asleep, communicating in their
usual soft, barely audible tones.

Maggie quietly switched on the ocarina, pointed it at Jake, and listened
carefully.

And was surprised when from the direction of Jake a clear voice said, ‘I
am fed / satisfied; this is fun; I yearn to return to /meaning not
understood/ . . .’ It emerged as a human male voice, firm, reasonably
pleasant, if rather synthetic.

So the troll-call worked, even if it did seem to be more like an
exchange of concepts than a true translation. Those nerds at the Black
Corporation – or whoever ‘G. Abrahams’ was – must have _loved_ working
on the development of this thing.

Now she pointed the troll-call at Marjorie.

‘Female here / watching / no mate female / meaning not understood:
tentative translation, a female choosing for her own purposes not to
have a mate . . .’

They meant her! ‘Everybody’s a relationship counsellor,’ Maggie grumbled
to herself. Plucking up her courage, she raised the troll-call and said
clearly into its mouthpiece, ‘My name is Maggie Kauffman. Welcome aboard
the _Benjamin Franklin_.’ A liquid warble accompanied her words.

The trolls seemed to snap to attention. They stared at her, mouths open,
eyes wide.

She pointed to herself. ‘Maggie. Maggie . . .’

Marjorie gabbled back, apparently attempting to find a label for her.
‘Friend / grandmother / interesting stranger . . .’

It was ‘grandmother’ that flabbergasted Maggie. _Grandmother!_ How human
was that? And was that how they saw her relationship to her crew, that
she was the old woman looking after all the little children? Well, they
_were_ mostly a lot younger than her . . .

She boldly walked up to the trolls, where they sat huddled in a corner
of the cabin, and sat on the carpet with them. ‘I’m Maggie. Maggie . . .
Well, you’re right. I have no husband. No mate. The ship is my home
. . .’

It seemed to her that Marjorie, the female, was looking at her
sorrowfully, with soulful brown eyes. With extreme care, a hand like a
leather shovel gently touched Maggie’s. Maggie felt she had no choice
but to move closer, and she felt huge arms close around her.

Carl, meanwhile, got hold of the ocarina and experimented until he found
a way to say, ‘Peppermint.’

That was how Maggie was found in the morning, coming awake as a crewman
very, very gingerly unwound his Captain from the snoring trolls.

Breakfast was somewhat embarrassing. Every last crew member knew how
she’d spent the night. But she never had been one for standing on her
dignity.

She spent a day letting the crew experiment with the troll-call, under
supervision. And she had Gerry Hemingway from Science study its
workings, or anyhow its inputs and outputs.

That night she had to order the crew to put the call away, to leave the
exhausted trolls to their slumbers on the observation deck.

Then, at breakfast the next day, she called the crew together. She
looked carefully around them, and picked out Jennifer Wang, one of the
marine detachment, whose grandparents, she knew, had come from China.
‘Jennifer, you spent a long time with Jake yesterday. What did he say to
you?’

Wang looked around, somewhat embarrassed. But she cleared her throat and
said, ‘A lot I couldn’t understand. But it was along the lines of, “far
from home”. It creased me up! I mean, I’m a Chinese American and proud
to be a citizen, but it’s in the blood. How did the big guy know?’

‘Because he’s smart,’ Maggie said. ‘He’s intuitive. He’s _sapient_.

‘You know, people, we were sent out here to find sapience in the Long
Earth, among other goals. Right? And now here it is, on this ship,
living among us: sapience. And that, by the way, will be my defence at
the court-martial.

‘I’m proud of you all for how you’re dealing with your new shipmates.
But if this room isn’t cleared and you’re not at your posts in two
minutes, you’re all on a charge. Dismissed.’


33

THE LAST STEP across was a sudden transition from a dune field, just
inland from a grey ocean, the local copy of the Irish Sea, into what
looked like a rudimentary industrial park, a place of gleaming tanks,
rusty gantries, smoke stacks, blocky concrete buildings. There was
nothing very space-age about it as far as Jansson could see at first
glance.

‘Come on.’ Sally shifted her pack and led the way.

Jansson followed, walking steadily across grass-covered ground that
gradually gave way to lumpy dunes. The morning was dry and bright in
this world, one step away from the Gap. She could smell salt and rotting
seaweed in the wind off the sea. She tried to visualize where she was:
tried to imagine that there was vacuum, space, a void, just one tap of
the Stepper at her waist away from this mundanity. Tried and failed.

They hadn’t covered a hundred yards when the landscape was illuminated
by a blinding light, coming from the rim of the development ahead, like
a droplet of sunlight brought down to the Earth.

Without hesitating Jansson pushed Sally to the ground, lay on top of
her, and pulled her jacket hood over her own head. Jansson had been in
the world next door when the Madison nuke went off; she hadn’t
forgotten. The noise of the explosion hit them, then a hot wind, and the
ground itself shuddered. But it passed over quickly.

Cautiously Jansson rolled off Sally, wincing as her enfeebled body
protested with a chorus of aches. They both sat up and looked west. A
cloud of white smoke and vapour was rising up from the explosion site.

‘Not a nuke,’ Sally said.

‘Not this time. Some kind of chemical factory blowing up? Sorry to jump
you.’

‘Don’t be.’ Sally got up and brushed away sandy soil. ‘This place is
going to be a playground for tech-boy nutjobs, who may or may not know
what the hell they are doing. Let’s watch our backs.’

‘Agreed.’

They walked on, eyes wide open, alert for more problems. A fire guttered
at the destroyed plant; as they approached they could see steam rising
from amateurish-looking attempts to douse it.

There was no security here that Jansson could see, not even a fence. But
as they entered the sprawling facility they were noticed. Jansson saw
workers staring at them.

At length a man walked out to greet them. In his fifties perhaps, he was
not tall but very upright, wiry, tanned, with greying crew-cut hair. He
wore a blue jumpsuit with a faded NASA logo and a name tag: WOOD, F. He
grinned at them, welcoming enough. ‘Ladies.’

‘Gentleman,’ Sally snapped back.

‘The name’s Frank Wood. Formerly of NASA, and now of – well, whatever
you want to call us here. GapSpace will do; we’re incorporated under
that name. Can I ask why you’re here? We don’t get too many casual
visitors this far out. Are you volunteers? If so, give me a hint of your
technical specialities and I’m sure you’ll fit right in. Journalists?’
Ruefully he glanced over his shoulder at the rising cloud of steam and
smoke. ‘You’ll see we just had an incident with a lox storage tank, but
that’s not so unusual.’

Jansson flashed her badge and warrant card. ‘I’m police. Madison,
Wisconsin, specifically.’ He glanced at it, but she put it away before
he had a chance to figure out she was long retired, and shouldn’t have
kept the shield anyhow.

‘Oh.’ He looked disappointed in her. ‘Frankly, Lieutenant Jansson, that
kind of Datum authority doesn’t have a lot of purchase out here. Even if
we were in the US Aegis, which we’re not. I guess you’re here about the
troll thing, right?’

‘Afraid so, Mr. Wood.’

‘Call me Frank . . .’

‘I think I recognize you,’ Sally said.

‘You do?’

‘The video clips. It was you who stopped that tech guy putting the troll
down on the spot.’

He actually blushed, and looked away. ‘Well, I never wanted to be
famous. Look, the guy you want to see about all that is called Gareth
Eames. Nearest thing to a chief executive we got here. English guy. If
I’m honest with you, if not for the fuss in the outernet – yes, we get
the news even out here – the troll _would_ have been put down by now.
But even guys like us take notice when we’re in the middle of a flame
war. Come on, I’ll take you to Eames—’

‘No need,’ Sally said briskly. ‘I’ll find the way.’

Wood looked dubious, then shrugged. ‘OK.’ He pointed to a low, squat
concrete building. ‘That’s the admin block, or the nearest we have to
it. We build everything like a blockhouse here; living with rockets you
learn to be cautious. You’ll find Gareth in there. And that’s where
we’re holding the troll too, in the calaboose.’

‘Great.’ Sally turned to Jansson, and whispered, ‘Let me get over there
and scout it out, without Buck Rogers here hovering over me.’

Jansson was doubtful, but this was Sally’s modus operandi, she was
learning. Always keep the other guy off balance. ‘OK. And as for me—’

‘Distract this guy. Let him show you his toy spaceships, or whatnot. I
think he has his eye on you, by the way.’

‘Garbage. Also, let me remind you, my personal rocket ship takes off
from a different launch pad.’

‘So he’s no more perceptive than most men.’ Sally winked. ‘Undo a button
or two and he’s your slave for life. See you later.’


34

‘WE DON’T THINK of this world as Earth West Two Million Plus Change, or
whatever,’ Frank Wood said. ‘We think of it as Gap East 1. Because the
Gap is the centre of our universe, not the Datum. And a strange kind of
world this is, right? Almost empty of humans. Whole continents nobody’s
even set foot on. We basically live off fishing and a bit of hunting –
while we build spaceships. We’re a tribe of hunter-gatherers with a
space programme! . . .’

As Frank Wood rambled on, Jansson inspected GapSpace. The facility was
like a fannish reconstruction of a half-remembered Cape Canaveral, she
thought, having visited that old wonderland once as a tourist – and it
was there, at the Cape, it turned out, that the GapSpace people had
recruited Frank Wood himself. She recognized basic facilities such as
kilns churning out bricks baked from the local clay, and forges, and
manufacturing plants. Then there were the traditional attributes of a
space centre, like huge spherical tanks whose walls were frosted
because, Frank told her, they held great volumes of super-cold liquid
fuels. The company even had its own logo, a roundel with a thin crescent
Earth cupping a star field, the GapSpace name below, and above, a
corporate slogan:

THERE IS SUCH A THING AS A FREE LAUNCH

Joshua had once told Jansson that that was a line of Lobsang’s. And,
most thrilling of all, even to a hardened old heart like Jansson’s,
there were spacecraft. There was one capsule-like craft that stood on
four robust-looking legs, and a gantry that held a rocket booster, a
tank maybe sixty feet tall topped by a flaring nozzle that pointed oddly
_up_ into the sky, as if the rocket were preparing for a launch down
into the Earth. It was a stand for static test firing, Frank explained.

The workers here were mostly male, mostly around thirty to forty years
old, mostly overweight. Some were dressed in protective gear, or
coveralls like Frank’s, but others wore shorts, sandals, and T-shirts
bearing slogans from long-forgotten TV shows and movies:

YOU DIDN’T HEAR ABOUT THE POLAR BEAR?

One guy bearing a sheaf of blueprints came right up to Jansson, looked
her in the face, and said, ‘Neo, huh? It’s like one unending con here,
man. Am I in heaven?’ And he walked off before she had a chance to
reply.

Frank raised his eyebrows, as if sharing a joke with Jansson. ‘Look,
this isn’t a corporate operation. Not yet. You can see that. These guys
are all volunteers. Hobbyists. We have amateur rocketeers, radio hams,
astronomers, and disappointed space cadets, like me, I guess. A few
folks back home are funding us privately. The big corporations don’t yet
see the value of this. Why go to all the trouble of crossing space to
some desert world like Mars when there are a billion habitable Earths a
walk away? But they’ll learn, and no doubt they’ll muscle in when we
start getting results.’

‘And you’ll all get rich.’

‘Maybe. Anyhow, as you’ll have guessed, social skills aren’t exactly
high on the list of selection criteria here. You’ll get used to it
. . .’

For Frank Wood, she learned, the Gap had turned out to be his chance to
recover the Dream.

Before he was recruited by Gareth Eames, Frank hadn’t even heard of
GapSpace. But he had been working at the Kennedy Space Center, what was
left of it, and it was sad. In the rocket garden, the open-air museum,
they weren’t even taking care of the precious relics any more, he told
her. You could see corrosion from the salty air eating its way into
papery cylindrical hulls, gaping rocket nozzles. They still flew
unmanned satellite launches, but for a man who would have flown in space
himself such routine shots had all the drama of a garage sale.

Frank remembered when he was a kid and watched bright-eyed men on TV
explaining how they were going to put mass drivers on the moon, and
break up asteroids for their metals, and build tin-can worlds in space,
and set up beanstalks, ladders into the sky from the surface of the
Earth. Who wouldn’t want to be a part of that?

And then the Steppers were invented. Frank was thirty-one years old on
Step Day, already an Air Force veteran, and had just been accepted into
NASA’s astronaut corps. But now you had the Steppers, and the Long
Earth. Mankind suddenly had all the space it wanted, a cheap and easy
route to a trillion Earths.

Once Frank Wood had dreamed of flying to the planets, if not the stars.
Now the spaceships of the future stayed on the launch pad of the
imagination, and as he worked towards retirement in what was left of
KSC, an astronaut candidate reduced to driving a tourist bus, he had
felt like an early mammal scuttling around the bones of the last
dinosaurs.

Then Gareth Eames, a smooth-talking Brit, had shown up, gabbling about
something called the Gap. A kind of Long Earth loophole for space
cadets, it seemed to Frank, who at first had barely understood.

And then Eames showed Frank a photograph of a spaceship.

What struck Jansson most in this brief tour wasn’t the space technology,
nor the nerdish workers, but the trolls. They were everywhere, labouring
in the factories beside clunky assembly-line robots, lugging heavy loads
to and fro – such as enigmatic structures of brick, arches and dome
segments – and, in one place, mixing and laying down concrete to build
what was evidently going to be a broad apron, like a landing pad. This
particular party were singing as they worked, and she strained to hear;
their song, softly sung, was a round based on what sounded like some old
pop song with lyrics about wishing you were a spaceman, the fastest guy
alive . . . No doubt they’d picked it up from the local nerd population.

Frank Wood didn’t even mention the trolls, as if they were invisible to
him.

After their walkabout Wood led her to a kind of rough open-air coffee
bar, beside the big inverted rocket booster. Jansson sat with relief.

‘This is a genuine space launch facility,’ he said. ‘I’m sure you
figured out that much. But we’re in a unique position here, next to the
Gap, and the way we work is like nothing that’s ever been done before.’

She instinctively liked Frank Wood, but she was quickly growing tired of
the fan-boy bragging. ‘It seems simple enough to me. All I have to do is
take one more step and I’ll be in space. Right?’

‘True,’ he nodded. ‘In the vacuum. Of course you’d be dead in under a
minute if you weren’t in a pressure suit. Then you’d find yourself being
flung off into space at hundreds of miles an hour.’

‘Really?’ She tried to visualize why, failed.

‘The Earth’s rotation,’ he said. ‘_This_ Earth. If you’re standing at
the equator you’re being rushed around at a thousand miles an hour. The
gravity holds you down, _here_. Step next door, and the gravity’s gone,
but you take that momentum over with you. It’s like I whirled you around
my head on a rope, and the rope broke, and you just went flying off into
space. Of course we can use that velocity vector if we’re clever, but
mostly it’s just a nuisance. The only stationary points are at the
poles, and it’s not convenient to work there. That’s why we’re at a
relatively high latitude, here in England. The further north the better.
Or south, of course.’

‘Of course,’ Jansson said uncertainly.

‘Which is opposite to the wisdom of launching from the Datum, where the
lower the latitude the better, to get a boost from that rotation . . .
What you have to do is step over in a spaceship.’ He pointed to the
capsule she’d spotted before, like an Apollo command module on four
legs. ‘_That_ is our shuttle. Adapted from twain technology, a stepping
vehicle, but wrapped in a rocket ship re-engineered from the old SpaceX
_Dragon_. All iron and steel components excluded, right? What you do is
step over into the Gap – you have to pick the right time of day, when
the turning Earth brings you to just the right spot – and the shuttle
fires its rockets to take off the spin velocity and bring you to
relative rest. Then you dock at the Brick Moon.’

‘The what?’

‘That’s what we’re calling the permanent station we’re building at the
location of the Earth, in the Gap. Brick and concrete are easy to make
over here, and easy to step in great sections over there, as long as you
use mortar and stuff that can withstand the conditions of the vacuum.
Even trolls can churn out great chunks of it.’ Which was the very first
time he had even mentioned the humanoids. ‘The station is going to be a
kind of honeycomb of sub-spheres in a cluster two hundred feet across.
Quick and dirty, but we can do what we like here, whatever we can carry
over, you haven’t got to cram everything into the nose-cone of a
converted ICBM and subject it to multiple gravities . . . A brick
structure won’t take pressure, but we can install inflatables or ceramic
shells within the frame. When it’s done, _that_ is where we’re going to
launch our space missions from.’ He pointed now at the inverted booster.
‘I guess you recognize this baby.’

‘I wish I could say I did,’ she said sadly.

‘It’s a re-engineered S-IVB. That is, a Saturn V third stage. You know,
the old moon rockets? Old technology but reliable as hell. This is just
a test article; we’re reworking it in steppable materials.

‘Here’s the beauty of the Gap. From the Datum, you needed a thing the
size of the Saturn V itself to get to the moon and back. Right? Because
of the need to escape Earth’s gravity. In the Gap, all you’d need to get
anywhere, Mars even, is no bigger than _this_. We’ve already launched
one test shot, a mission to Venus with a ship we called the
_Kingfisher_. In future we’re looking at nuclear rockets, which will
offer a much better delta-vee. That is—’

‘I believe you. I believe you!’

He stared at her, and laughed. ‘I think we’re going to get on, you and
I, Lieutenant Jansson. Sorry. I know I get carried away. Look – did you
ever read Robert Heinlein? Basically it’s like that here. You really can
build a backyard rocket ship and fly to Mars. What’s not to love about
that? All these worlds are ours, _including_ Europa . . . Sorry again.
Another nerdy reference.

‘Listen, Ms. Jansson. Given the reason you’ve come out all this way –
you mustn’t think badly of the young guys here. They _are_ mostly guys,
they mostly lack social skills, they’re kind of driven. Many of them
have some kind of personality disorder, probably. But their hearts are
in the right place, generally speaking. They may be thoughtless to
trolls, but they aren’t deliberately cruel.’ He looked distracted. ‘By
contrast – have you ever met anybody who was? I mean, a _really_ bad
person. I served in the Air Force. I saw some sights, in postings
overseas.’

‘I was a cop,’ she said in answer.

He glanced over and grinned. ‘“Was”? So when you flashed your badge at
me, Lieutenant Jansson—’

‘OK, you got me. Call me Monica, by the way.’

His grin widened. ‘Monica.’

A guy in a Bart Simpson cap came wandering over. ‘You’re Lieutenant
Jansson?’

‘That’s me.’

‘Your friend Sally Linsay sent me to fetch you. Oh, and she had a
message.’

‘What message?’

‘“The trolls are gone.”’

‘That’s it?’

The guy shrugged. ‘You coming, or not?’


35

JANSSON WAS ESCORTED over to the big admin block, where Sally waited for
her, and – Jansson couldn’t quite figure out how she did it – within
thirty seconds Sally had given Bart Simpson the slip.

They hurried through cramped, badly lit, roughly walled corridors. ‘Come
on,’ Sally said. ‘There’s things you need to see in this dump.’

They passed what looked like offices, study rooms, labs, even a kind of
computer centre. A few people glanced at them, curiously or not, but
nobody stopped them or questioned them. They must be used to strangers
here. Jansson was getting the impression that this was indeed a loose
organization, a bunch of fan types getting together, and no doubt with
people coming and going as enthusiasm or other commitments allowed. No
security at all.

They came to a staircase that led them down into an underground complex,
a warren of roughly walled corridors and rooms. Jansson remembered what
Frank had said about safety bunkers. And she remembered, too, the
speculation about why Mary the troll hadn’t just stepped away from her
tormentors; keeping her underground would be the simplest way, so she
couldn’t step at all.

And now, as they hurried along, Jansson started to hear music, of a
jagged, discordant kind.

‘So,’ Jansson said. ‘“The trolls are gone.” What does that mean?’

‘Just that,’ said Sally grimly. ‘Not from here, particularly, not yet,
but I bet the drift away has started – here like everywhere else –
they’re abandoning the Long Earth in general. Look – you know about the
long call. All the trolls everywhere sharing information. Well, it seems
they’ve reached some kind of tipping point.’

‘Tipping point about what?’

‘About us. About humans. Our relationship with them. All over the Long
Earth, _they’re leaving_ – leaving the human colonies anyhow, it seems,
any world where there’s a significant human presence. They’re not dumb
animals, you see. They learn, and they modify their behaviour. And now,
they’ve learned all they need to know about us.’

Jansson barely understood this, couldn’t comprehend an event of such
strangeness, of such magnitude. ‘Where are they going?’

‘Nobody knows.’

Jansson didn’t bother asking how Sally knew about any of this. She’d
seen herself how Sally could move around the Long Earth, and she was
somehow tuned into the trolls too, and their long call. To Jansson Sally
was like a homespun embodiment of some all-pervasive intelligence
agency, or a ubiquitous corporate presence, like the Black Corporation
maybe. _Naturally_ Sally Linsay knew what was going on, across all the
worlds.

And Jansson knew Sally held the cause of the trolls close to her heart –
well, they wouldn’t be here otherwise. So she was cautious when she
asked, ‘Does it really matter?’

Sally winced, but stayed civil. ‘Yes, it matters. The trolls _are_ the
Long Earth, as far as I’m concerned. Its soul. They’re also integral to
the ecology. Not to mention damn useful. This fall, on a thousand
farming worlds, without troll labour they’ll be struggling to bring in
the harvest.’

‘So,’ Jansson said, ‘of course _we’re_ going to do something about it.’

‘Of course we are,’ said Sally, grinning fiercely.

‘Starting with what?’

‘Starting with right here. This is the place . . .’

They had come to a door with a jokey hand-painted sign: SPACE JAIL. The
discordant music, if you could call it that, leaked out of the room,
sharp, unpleasant, and Jansson resisted the temptation to cover her
ears. And when Jansson looked through a spyhole in the door she saw,
cowering in the corner, a troll, a bulky female. She sat slumped,
immobile, yet somehow the misery seeped out of her. She had nothing in
there save a bowl of water.

‘Mary,’ Jansson breathed.

‘Our heroine. _I will not_.’ Sally made the signs as she spoke.

‘Well, we’re underground.’ She thought about what Frank had told her.
‘But we are at the Gap. Solid rock in one stepwise direction but not the
other. She _could_ step out into vacuum, I guess, to try to reach the
cub. She isn’t stapled, is she?’

‘I don’t think so. But she must recoil from the vacuum instinctively.
Also they’re using that noise to keep her confused and unhappy. You
should meet Gareth Eames, the supervisor here. A Brit. What a slimeball.
For some reason he hates the trolls with a passion. He has a background
in acoustics, and he said he started his own interaction with them when
he found out how to drive them away with discords. Now he’s developed
that into a weapon, a trap, a cage. But the other thing that’s holding
her here . . . Come see.’

A little further along the corridor was another locked door, this one
with a small window. When she looked through this time, Jansson saw
something like a crude nursery, or maybe a chimp enclosure at a zoo,
with climbing bars, ropes, big chunky toys. There was a solitary troll
in there, a cub, playing in a desultory fashion with a big plastic
truck. He wore an odd silvery suit, with his head, hands and feet bare.

‘Mary’s infant.’

‘Yes,’ said Sally. ‘The handlers call him Ham. You can see what they’re
doing. That’s some kind of experimental pressure suit he’s wearing. You
saw the images. They wanted to use him as a test subject.’

‘They didn’t mean to harm him—’

‘No. But Mary must have had some sense of the danger they were taking
him into – the Gap is surely a place a troll would avoid – which is why
she protested.’

Jansson knew Sally well enough by now. ‘You have a plan, don’t you?’

‘We’re only going to get one chance.’

Expecting the answer, dreading it, Jansson asked, ‘To do what?’

‘To bust them out of here. We take this kid to his mother, we all step
away—’

‘And then what?’

‘We go on the run. Hide out somewhere, until we can find a proper
sanctuary. Maybe wherever the rest of the trolls are going.’

‘I knew you were going to say something like that.’

Sally grinned. ‘And I know you’re going to help me. All cops want to
cross over to the dark side once in their lives, don’t they?’

‘No.’

‘Anyhow I need you, Jansson.’

‘To do what?’

‘To begin with, to get these doors open. You were a cop; you can do
that. Look, I don’t know how much time we have. Can you open this door,
or not?’

Jansson could, and she did, and she was committed.


36

THREE WEEKS AFTER Sally’s stunt, when the news of it percolated back
through the outernet to Datum Earth, Lobsang summoned Joshua for a
face-to-face meeting. Their first for years, the first since Agnes’s
funeral, in fact.

_Lobsang_.

As was his way, Joshua spent twenty-four hours thinking about it.

Then, reluctantly, he went along.

The transEarth Institute facility to which Joshua was directed, a couple
of miles from the footprint of Madison on Earth West 10, turned out to
be a low, blocky, sprawling structure of the ubiquitous
Low-Earth-architecture stone and timber, standing alone on a deserted
stretch of road that cut through banks of prairie flowers. Of course
Lobsang would have set up this office of his own part-owned subsidiary
of the Black Corporation at a stepwise Madison, to be close to Agnes and
the Home. A Low Earth it might be, but this was still a different world,
with a subtly different late-afternoon sky. Back on the Datum, on a June
day like this, the horizon would have been tinted orange-grey, the
beautiful and deadly colours of combustion. Not here; this sky was a
deep, flawless blue. In a way such comparative emptiness, such
cleanliness, even so close to the Datum, gave Joshua a renewed sense of
the sheer immensity of the corridor of worlds that was the Long Earth.

Inside the facility, Joshua encountered the usual office clutter:
deceptively uncomfortable chairs, stricken rubber plants, and a
determinedly pleasant young lady who did everything but check his chest
X-rays before allowing him to pass on. There seemed to be a camera in
every angle of the walls, each watching him steadily.

At last he was directed through a self-opening door into a white-walled
corridor. As Joshua followed the corridor another camera swivelled,
following him, its lens glittering with paranoia.

The door at the far end of the corridor opened and a woman stepped out.
‘Mr. Valienté? So glad you could make it.’ She was small and dark,
Asiatic, and wore the largest spectacles Joshua had ever seen. She held
out her hand. ‘My name is Hiroe. Welcome to transEarth. You need to wear
this badge.’ She handed him a badge on a lanyard, with the transEarth
name and chessboard-knight logo, and his name, mugshot, and a scrambled
code that could represent anything from his shoe-size to his DNA
sequence. ‘Wear that at all times, or our security killer-robots will
zap you with their laser-beam eyes. Just kidding!’

‘Really.’

‘Oh, sure. You may be interested to know that you’ve already cost Selena
Jones a dollar. You remember Selena?’

‘I remember Selena. Is she still Lobsang’s legal guardian?’

‘Under some jurisdictions, yes. She wagered me you wouldn’t come, that
you wouldn’t respond to Lobsang’s call for help.’

‘Did she now?’

‘But curiosity is a wonderful thing, is it not?’

That and a fool’s residual loyalty, he thought.

‘This way, please.’

Hiroe led Joshua now into a big, low-ceilinged room, with picture
windows looking out over a stretch of prairie. There were monitor
screens all around the place, and a worn keypad on the desk, which was a
slab of oak six inches thick. It was the kind of office that might
belong to someone who enjoyed their work, and didn’t do much else _but_
work.

More interesting was the stone trough in front of one window. The plants
in it were trumpets fully five feet high, a pale green with red and
white ribbing. They clustered together as though they shared a secret,
and gave Joshua an uneasy feeling that it wasn’t just the air currents
that were making them move.

‘_Sarracinea gigantica_,’ said Hiroe. ‘They’re carnivorous, you know.’

‘They look it. When’s feeding time?’

She laughed prettily. ‘They’re only interested in insects. They secrete
a nectar, a drugged bait, that’s got interesting commercial
possibilities. We got the original seeds from one of the stepwise
alternates, of course.’

‘Which one?’

‘You couldn’t even begin to afford to buy the answer to that question,’
she said pleasantly, motioning him to a chair. ‘Just a moment, please,
while I process you through the final stages of security . . .’ She
tapped at the keypad. ‘That’s our trade, you know, here at transEarth.
We buy and sell commercially useful information.’

So this wasn’t _just_ a Black-funded playpen for Lobsang, then, Joshua
thought cynically. He supposed it would be characteristic of Douglas
Black to demand a profit.

‘There: you’re in the system. Please do wear your badge at all times. So
are you ready to meet Lobsang?’

Hiroe took him out of the building, and they walked in the grounds. The
evening was gathering now, on this world as on all the others. A few
streetlights sparked on the local horizon, and the sun hung low in the
sky.

But there was a faintly sulphurous smell in the air. The news today was
that this world’s copy of Yellowstone was a little more restless than
most of its brothers. Reports of trees being poisoned by acid seeps, for
instance. Evidently there was ongoing geological unrest at the
Yellowstone footprint across most of the Low Earths. On the Datum itself
there had been an explosion that had killed a hapless young park ranger
called Herb Lewis: not a volcanic eruption, the scientists emphasized, a
hydrothermal event, an explosion of trapped, superheated water. All
minor events. _Minor_: even from here, a thousand miles away from
Yellowstone, Joshua thought he could smell this particular world’s
_minor event_, and, remembering the apocalyptic nutjob who had accosted
them at the Datum twain station about fire and brimstone at Yellowstone,
he felt a prickle of unease.

Hiroe sat down on a slab bench carved out of one great baulk of timber.
‘Please. We will wait here for Lobsang.’

Joshua sat stiffly.

‘You are nervous about meeting him again, aren’t you?’

‘Not nervous, exactly . . . How can you tell?’

‘Oh, the little things. The gritted teeth. The white knuckles.
Subtleties like that.’

Joshua laughed. But he glanced around before replying. ‘Can he hear us
out here?’

She shook her head. ‘Actually no. In this place he has limits on his
capabilities. Sister Agnes says that’s good for him. Not to be
omnipotent, in at least one place in the world. Or, the worlds. Why do
you think I brought you out here before speaking this way? I didn’t want
to hurt his feelings.’

‘You’re more than an employee, right?’

‘I do think of myself as a friend. He is everywhere, and yet he is very
alone, Mr. Valienté. He does need friends. Especially you, sir . . .’

An old man approached through the afternoon light – that was Joshua’s
first impression. He was slender, tall, with a shaven head, and he wore
a loose orange robe. His sandalled feet were dirty, and he carried a
kind of rake.

Joshua stood up. ‘Hello, Lobsang.’

Hiroe smiled, bowed, and gracefully slipped away.

‘First things first,’ Lobsang said. ‘Thank you for coming.’

The features of this particular ambulant unit reminded Joshua of some of
the guises, the bodies Lobsang had donned before. But he had allowed
himself to age – or at least, Joshua thought, he had programmed some
suite of nano-fabricators to carve wrinkles and inflate jowls and make
him look somewhere over sixty. His posture was bent, his movements slow,
and the hands that clasped the rake had slightly swollen joints and skin
pocked with liver spots. Of course it was all artifice. Everything about
Lobsang was artifice, and you had to keep reminding yourself of that.
But it was impressive artifice even so; if Lobsang was going to do
‘elderly monk’ he was going to get every detail right, down to the
frayed hem of his grubby orange robe.

Joshua, resolutely unimpressed, didn’t feel much like small talk. ‘Why
did you want to see me? Because of that stunt Sally pulled?’

Lobsang smiled. ‘In cahoots with your old friend MPD Lieutenant Jansson,
I’ll remind you. _Cahoots_.’ He repeated the word, forming the syllables
with exaggerated motions of his lips. ‘Lovely word, that. The kind of
word that’s necessary to use, purely for the pleasure of saying it. One
of the many unexpected joys of incarnation . . . What were we saying?
Oh, yes, Sally Linsay. Well, her tunnelling-out with the troll Mary and
her cub has made the news across the worlds.’

‘Tell me about it,’ Joshua said ruefully. Thanks to the old footage of
the return of the _Mark Twain_, and the liberal use of face-recognition
software, Joshua was now famously known as an associate of Sally. He had
been badgered by the media, and by groups adopting various positions on
the trolls and the issues surrounding them.

Lobsang said, ‘Sally’s stunt has brought the issue of the trolls and
their relationship with humanity to the top of the news agenda, yes. But
the whole business has been bubbling up into a crisis for some time. I’m
sure you’re aware of that. And now the trolls have started to take
action of their own. Action with direct consequences for us all.’

‘I heard. Trolls just clearing off all over, right?’

Lobsang smiled. ‘Let me show you. Or rather, let my trolls show you.’

‘_Your_ trolls?’

‘There’s a pack of them a dozen or so steps away. My holding here
extends stepwise, across several worlds.’ He held out his hand, as if in
invitation. ‘Shall we go see?’

There were perhaps twenty trolls in the group. Females sat lazily
grooming in the shade of a sprawling tree – the early evening was warm
in this particular world – while cubs played, a few young males wrestled
in a desultory way, and at the fringe of the pack adults flickered in
and out of existence. And as they worked or played or dozed, they sang,
a lively sing-along overlaid with complex hooting harmonies, the melody
line repeated in canon to form an unending round.

Lobsang led Joshua to a small fenced-off garden area. There were a
couple of benches, a water fountain. And, under the broken canopy of a
scattering of trees, the ground here was covered in moss, not grass,
moss that glowed bright green in the low sunlight.

‘Take a seat if you like,’ Lobsang said. ‘Help yourself to water. It’s
clean, from a freshwater spring. I should know; I have to clean the
pipes.’ He got down stiffly on to his hands and knees and began to work
his way across the moss lawn, plucking out stray blades of grass, like
removing weeds. ‘“The Rare Old Mountain Dew”,’ he said.

‘What’s that?’

‘The song the trolls are singing. An old Irish folk song. You know, it’s
possible to date the first contact with humans of any given troll pack
by the songs they sing. In this case, to the late nineteenth century. Do
you remember Private Percy? I have carried out such an exercise,
tentatively; the result is a kind of map of natural steppers in the
pre-Willis Linsay era. Though of course it’s not always possible to
track back the trolls’ own wanderings.’

‘What did you mean by _your_ trolls, Lobsang?’

He shuffled forward, working at the lawn patiently. ‘A figure of speech.
I found this pack in a Corn Belt world; I invited them to follow me
here, as best I could. There are other groups here. Of course they are
no more _my_ trolls than Shi-mi was _my_ cat, on the _Mark Twain_. But I
have created a reserve here, and on the neighbouring worlds, many square
miles in extent and many worlds deep. I have kept out humanity and done
my best to make the trolls, this pack and others, feel welcome. I have
been striving to study them, Joshua. Well, you know that I have been
pursuing that project for ten years, since our journey on the _Twain_
and our visit to Happy Landings. Here I can watch them in conditions
approaching their wild state.’

‘And is that the reason for the humble pose, Lobsang? You, a superhuman
entity that spans two million worlds, reduced to this?’

He smiled, not interrupting the rhythm of his work. ‘Actually, yes, it
does help with the trolls. I am a constant presence but not an alarming
one. But I would not use words like “reduced”. Not around Sister Agnes
anyhow. In her eyes I am expanding my personality.’

‘Ah. This was her idea, was it?’

‘I’d got too big for my boots, she says.’

‘That sounds like Agnes.’

‘If I wanted to be part of humanity, I had to become embedded in
humanity. Down in the dirt, at the bottom of the food chain, so to
speak.’

‘And you went along with it?’

‘Well, there wasn’t much point going to all the trouble of reincarnating
the woman if I’m not going to listen to her advice, was there? This is
why I felt I needed her, Joshua. Or someone like her. Someone with the
sense and moral authority to whisper doubts in my ear.’

‘Is it working?’

‘I’ve certainly learned a lot. Such as, how much less ornamental an
ornamental garden seems if you’re the one who has to sweep up the
leaves. How to handle a broom, which requires a certain two-handed
dexterity and a kind of rolling energy-conservation strategy. And it’s
remarkable how many _corners_ you discover there are in the world. Some
pan-dimensional paradox, perhaps. But there are chores I particularly
enjoy. Feeding the carp. Pruning the cherry trees . . .’

Joshua imagined Agnes laughing her reincarnated head off. But he didn’t
feel particularly amused.

Lobsang was aware of his stillness. ‘Ah. The old anger still burns, I
see.’

‘What do you expect?’

It had been ten years ago, after he had returned from his journey with a
lost avatar of Lobsang to the reaches of the Long Earth, to find Madison
a blistered ruin, destroyed by a fanatic’s backpack nuke. He had barely
been able to bring himself to speak to Lobsang since.

‘You still believe I could have stopped it,’ Lobsang said gently. ‘But I
was not even there. I was with you.’

‘Not all of you . . .’

Lobsang, by nature a distributed personality, had always claimed that
the essence of himself had travelled with Joshua into the far stepwise
worlds – and that essential core of him had not returned. Whatever
Joshua spoke to now was _another_ Lobsang, another personality locus,
partially synched with the residual _Mark Twain_ copy thanks to memory
stores Joshua had brought back. Another Lobsang – not the same – and not
the Lobsang Joshua had known, who presumably still existed far away. But
_this_ was the Lobsang who had witnessed the destruction of Madison, and
had stood by.

‘Even then, when the _Twain_ returned, ten years ago, you were . . .’
Joshua groped for the old religious word. ‘_Immanent_. You suffused the
world. Or so you claimed. Yet you let those nutjobs walk into the city
with a nuke, you let Jansson and the other cops run around trying to
find them, while all the time—’

Lobsang nodded. ‘All the time I could have snapped my metaphorical
fingers and put an end to it. Is that what you would have wanted?’

‘Well, if you could have, why didn’t you?’

‘You know, throughout the ages people have asked the same question of
the Christian God. If He is omniscient and omnipotent, why would He
allow the suffering of a single child? I am not God, Joshua.’

Joshua snorted. ‘You like to act that way, broom and sandals or not.’

‘I cannot see into the souls of men and women. I only see the surface.
Sometimes I find I have not even imagined what was lying within, when it
is eventually revealed through word or action. And even if I could have
stopped those bombers – _should_ I have? At what cost? How many would
you have had me kill, in order to avert an action that would have
remained entirely hypothetical? What would you have thought of me then?
Humans have free will, Joshua. God will not, and I _can_not, stop them
harming each other. I think you should talk to Agnes about this.’

‘Why?’

‘She might help you find it in yourself to forgive me.’

Joshua thought he could never do that. But he had to put it aside, he
knew. With an effort he focused on his surroundings. ‘So, the trolls.
What have you learned about them?’

‘Oh, a great deal. Such as about their true language. Which has nothing
to do with the crude signing and point-at-the-picture pidgin humans have
imposed on them when they want to give them orders.’

‘But even that’s pretty powerful, Lobsang. You see clips of Mary saying
“I will not” everywhere. On posters, in graffiti, online, even on
animated T-shirts.’

‘That’s true, but it’s irresponsible for the tax rebels of Valhalla to
mix up their symbols with those of the troll issue – conflating two
separate conflicts, each of which spans the whole of the Long Earth.’
Lobsang sat back on his heels, convincingly sweating. ‘You know that
their music is the heart of the trolls’ true language, Joshua. Surely
that’s no surprise. After contact with humans they pick up our songs,
but they make them their own, spinning endless variations . . . Music is
a way for them to express the natural rhythms of their bodies, from
their heartbeats, their breaths, the periodicity of their strides when
they walk, even the sparking of the neurons in their heads, perhaps. And
they use the rhythm of the song as a timing device, when they want to
step together, or hunt. Galileo did that, you know.’

‘Galileo?’

‘He used music as a kind of clock to time his early experiments in
mechanics. Pendulum swings and so on. And of course the trolls’ songs
carry information. Even a simple disharmony can carry a warning. But
there’s much more to it than that. Watch them now; I think they’re
planning a hunt . . .’

The flickering of the stepping trolls, around the core group, was
becoming more intense. The returning trolls would add a new line to the
ongoing harmonies, loudly or softly, boldly or subtly; the song as a
whole was evolving, adapting, and the other steppers seemed to react.

‘I plant food sources around the reservation,’ Lobsang said. ‘Across the
stepwise worlds, I mean. Honeycombs, for instance, and animals for them
to hunt, deer, rabbits. The pack works as a kind of single organism in
seeking out such resources. Stepper scouts spread out across the worlds,
and if one finds a promising resource, a deer herd say, he or she will
return and, well, sing about it.’

‘They’re still singing about getting drunk on Irish moonshine as far as
I can tell.’

‘The core song is only the carrier wave, Joshua. I’ve done some acoustic
analysis; there are variations in pitch, rhythm, even the phasing of the
song scraps, that carry information about how far away the find is, how
high a quality the food is. Other scouts will pick up on that, go and
check it out, and come back with a confirming report, or maybe a
contradiction. It’s an efficient way for the pack to explore _all_ the
local possibilities, and soon they’ll settle on a selection – often
they’ll switch to another key, or another song altogether, to signal
unanimity – and then they step away. Honeybees work this way; when they
need to find a new location for the hive they send out scouts, who come
back and dance out the data.

‘Trolls individually are not much smarter than chimps, but collectively
they have evolved a way for the group to make intelligent, robust
decisions. But it isn’t like human decision-making, or democracy. Even
the kind of democracy you practise out in the boondocks.’ He smiled at
Joshua. ‘I heard they made you a mayor.’

‘Sort of.’

‘Tightly contested election, was it?’

‘Oh, shut up. My main job is to moderate the town meeting.
Hell-Knows-Where is still small enough for all the capable adults to
gather on the common land, and debate the issues. We use Roberts’s
_Rules of Order_.’

‘Very American. But maybe there’s something of the trolls’ collective
wisdom in what you’re practising. Sooner that than suffer the errors of
a single wrong-headed leader. The trolls almost always get it right,
Joshua, even when I set them some pretty intricate puzzles to solve.’

‘Nobody’s observed this before, have they?’

‘Nobody’s had the patience. People always focus on what the trolls can
do for them. Not on what the trolls _want_. Not on what they can _do_.’

‘How come _our_ chimps don’t work that way? I mean, the ones on the
Datum.’

‘I suspect it’s an evolutionary adaptation to stepping. Out in the Long
Earth, where your food source may be near by geographically but a few
worlds away stepwise, you need different search and cooperation
strategies. The scouts have to spot the food, and return quickly with
the news; the group must decide to move in on it rapidly, or not . . .
It’s an environment which encourages efficient scouting, precise,
detailed communication and quick, robust decision-making. Just as we see
here.

‘But again, there’s still more to the music of the trolls than the needs
of the moment. The long call, the essence of which is spread across the
worlds, is a kind of encoded, shared wisdom. The call can last a _month_
before it repeats, and is laden with ultrasonics, beyond human hearing
altogether. But even more than that, it’s like a smearing out of
consciousness – like nothing humans experience. I’ve been making efforts
to decode it. You can imagine the challenge. I’m making some progress; I
have a kind of translation suite, in various prototypes.’

‘If anybody can achieve that, you can, Lobsang.’

‘That’s true,’ Lobsang said complacently. ‘But right now, Joshua, the
long call is vibrating with bad news for the trolls. Bad news because of
us. Watch this.’ He stood, stiffly, and held up his hands. ‘I am trying
to study the trolls in their natural state. I made of this group one
basic request, though: that in return for the sanctuary I offer them –
protection from humans – they stay here, until I release them. Verbally,
I mean, they aren’t physically restrained in any way. Simple as that.’

‘And?’

‘And now, Joshua, I _will_ release them.’ He clapped his hands, once,
twice, sharply.

The trolls stopped singing – they stopped stepping, once the scouts had
returned – and every head, save for the smallest infants’, turned to
Lobsang. After a few heartbeats of silence they broke into a new song, a
lilting ballad.

‘“Galway Bay”,’ Lobsang murmured to Joshua.

And then they began to step away, mothers with cubs first, males last
for protection from predatory elves. In less than a minute they were
gone, leaving only a scuffed patch of ground.

Joshua understood. ‘Gone with the rest, just as the reports say. All
over the Long Earth.’

‘It’s true, Joshua. And that is what I wanted to speak to you about.
Come. Let’s walk. I’m getting stiff from my weeding . . .’

Across the worlds, June skies remained clear, suns set in unison like
synchronized swimmers diving, and dark gathered softly, slowly. On one
world an owl hooted, for reasons best known to itself.

And Lobsang spoke further of the trolls.

‘They’ve become vital to the economy of the whole of mankind – including
the Datum, if only indirectly. So the corporations, including the Black
Corporation, are putting on a lot of pressure, wherever they can apply
it, to get the trolls back.’

‘And back at work.’

‘Yes. Also there are security implications. Worse than the trolls
disappearing, if they were to be seen to become an active threat to
mankind, if a coordinated military response were provoked – we need to
avoid _that_.

‘But there are other, more fundamental issues. The more I study trolls
the more convinced I am that they are central to the ecology of the
wider Long Earth itself. Like the elephants of the African savannah,
they’ve been out there for millions of years, and for all that time
they’ve been shaping the landscapes they inhabit – if only by _eating_
so much of them. Sally Linsay taught me this; she’s studied them in the
wild, in her way, far longer than I have. If you remove the big beasts
from an ecology you can cause something called a trophic cascade.
Knocking out the top of a food chain causes destabilization all the way
down – booms and crashes of populations – and that can even cause a rise
in greenhouse gases, and so on. A tremor of extinctions and eco-collapse
all across the Long Earth, or at least as far as the trolls reach. And
all because of us.’

Joshua grunted. ‘Makes you proud.’

‘The trouble is, Joshua, there’s no particular reason for the trolls to
return. Before Step Day they had a long and deep contact with humans,
and they were treated decently, and in turn they treated us decently.’

Joshua thought again of the story of Private Percy Blakeney, a veteran
of the First World War trenches, lost and bewildered in the stepwise
world into which he’d unconsciously tumbled, who had been kept alive by
trolls for decades.

‘But since Step Day it’s been a different story. The exploitation of
that cub for experiments at the Gap was only the tip of the iceberg.’

Joshua said, ‘Seems to me we’ll only get the trolls to come back if we
can somehow persuade them that we will respect them. That we will listen
when they say, “I will not,” as Mary did. Not an easy concept to convey
to a humanoid . . .’

‘I know you tried to convince Senator Starling to campaign for them to
be protected under US Aegis law. Even that’s not an insignificant
challenge.’

‘Yeah, animal protection legislation is a mess.’

‘Not just that, Joshua. For one thing we’d have to decide what the
trolls _are_.’

‘What do you mean by that?’

‘Well, they don’t comfortably fit the old categories, do they? Of human
versus animal, the distinction through which we believe we have dominion
over nature. It’s as if, I think, we’d found a band of _Homo habilis_ –
something between us and the animal. In some ways the trolls are
animal-like. They don’t wear clothes, they have no writing. They have no
language that’s quite analogous to our own. They don’t use fire, as even
_Homo habilis_ probably did. And yet they have some very human traits.
They make simple tools, out in the wild – poking sticks, stone
hand-axes. They have strong family bonds, which is why it’s so easy to
trap a troll mother, if you have her cub. They show compassion, even to
humans. They do have their own language, in their use of music. And they
laugh, Joshua. They laugh.

‘The distinction between human and animal is the clincher, you see. You
can own an animal; you can kill it with impunity, aside from feeble
anti-cruelty legislation. You can’t own a human, not in any civilized
society, and killing a human is murder. So should we extend human rights
to trolls?’

‘We have, kind of, in Hell-Knows-Where.’

‘Yes, but you’re more sane there than most. The basic quandary is:
should we embrace them in our own category of being?’

‘Which is a challenge to our pride. Right?’

‘And more,’ Lobsang said. ‘A challenge to our very self-image.
Meanwhile, there are others who argue that the trolls can’t be human
because they have no sense of God. Well, not as far as we can tell. What
would the Catholics, for instance, do about that? If trolls have souls,
then they must be fallen, as we are – that is, tainted with original
sin. In which case it is the duty of Catholics to go out and baptize
them, to save them from limbo when they die. But, you see, if the trolls
are actually animals, to baptize them is blasphemous. Apparently the
Pope is preparing an encyclical on the subject. But in the short term
the religious debates are just stirring everybody up even more.’

‘What does Agnes say?’

‘“Trolls like ice cream, and they laugh. Of course they’re bloody human,
Lobsang. Now go get your broom, you missed a bit.”’

‘That’s Agnes, all right . . . Let’s get to the point. Sally dragged me
out of my home and all the way to the Datum because of this. Of course
Sally found us in the first place, ten years ago, because of a
disturbance of trolls. When they fled from First Person Singular. Now
you want me to go out again, don’t you? Out into the Long Earth, beyond
the High Meggers. To do what? Find Sally and Jansson with Mary, I guess.
Then what? Find where the trolls are hiding? Persuade them to come out,
to join the human world again?’

‘That’s pretty much it,’ Lobsang said. ‘Sounds impossible, doesn’t it?
And it doesn’t help that we’re already in the middle of so much upheaval
from the Valhallan independence demands.’

‘You want to restore the balance.’

‘You and I always did share the same instincts, Joshua.’ Lobsang bent to
remove a single dead leaf from an otherwise immaculate lawn. _Will you
do it, Joshua?_ He didn’t ask the question, but left it hanging in the
air.

Joshua thought it over. He was in his late thirties now. He had a young
wife, a kid, a role in society at Hell-Knows-Where. He was no longer a
mountain man, if he ever had been. And now here was Sally, charging off
into the Long Earth through her soft places, as if challenging Joshua to
follow. Here was Lobsang, like a ghost from the past, snapping his
fingers once more. Was Joshua just going to jump as commanded?

Of course he was. Even if he wasn’t the man he used to be. But then,
even Lobsang wasn’t who he once was, quite.

They walked on, stepping occasionally from world to world, from sunset
to sunset. The troll songs hung in the richly scented air of each world
– but Joshua wondered if they were diminishing, even as he listened.

Tentatively he said, ‘Having met you now, I can see your instinct was
right.’

‘What do you mean?’

‘You did need Sister Agnes.’

Lobsang sighed. ‘But I think I need you too, Joshua. I often think back
to our days together on the _Mark Twain_.’

‘Watched any old movies recently?’

‘That’s another thing about Agnes. She won’t let me show any movies that
don’t have nuns in.’

‘Wow. That’s brutal.’

‘Something else that’s good for me, _she_ says. Of course there aren’t
that many movies that qualify, and we watch them over and over.’ He
shuddered. ‘Don’t talk to me about _Two Mules for Sister Sara_. But the
musicals are the worst. Although Agnes says that the freezer-raiding
scene in _Sister Act_ is an authentic detail from convent life.’

‘Well, that’s a consolation. Musicals with nuns in, huh . . .’

A voice rang out across the park, a voice Joshua remembered only too
well from his own past. ‘Lobsang? Time to come in now. Your little
friend will keep until tomorrow . . .’

‘She has loudhailers everywhere.’ Lobsang shouldered his rake and sighed
as they trudged across the grass. ‘You see what I’m reduced to? To think
I hired forty-nine hundred monks to chant for forty-nine days on
forty-nine mountain tops in stepwise Tibets, for _this_.’

Joshua clapped him on the shoulder. ‘It’s tough, Lobsang. She’s treating
you like you’re a kid. Like you’re sixteen, going on seventeen.’

Lobsang looked at him sharply. ‘You can pack that in for a start,’ he
snapped.

‘But I’ve got confidence you can overcome these difficulties, Lobsang.
Just face up to every obstacle. Climb every mountain—’

Lobsang stalked off sulkily.

Joshua waved cheerfully. ‘So long! Farewell!’


37

JOSHUA MADE HIS way out of the transEarth facility through the reception
building in Madison West 10. Of course he could have stepped away
anywhere, but it seemed polite to go back out that way. Besides, he had
to give Hiroe his badge back.

Bill Chambers was waiting for him in the foyer.

‘Bill? What are you doing here?’

‘Well, Lobsang sent for me. He figured you would need a companion for
the trip.’

‘What trip?’

‘To find Sally, and the trolls. What else?’

‘But we only just spoke about it . . .’ He sighed. ‘What the hell.
That’s Lobsang for you. OK, Bill, thanks.’

‘Fair play to him, he says he’ll give us some kind of translation
gadget, so we can talk to the trolls.’

‘If we can find them at all. If I’m honest I’ve no idea where to start.’

‘I do.’ His ruddy face creased in a wide smile. ‘Which is, I guess, why
he sent for me. We have to start with Sally. Figure out where she might
have gone.’

‘How do we do that?’

‘Well, Joshua, you’re as close to her as any member of the human race,
like it or not. There must be _something_ she’s done or said, some clue
we can follow.’

‘I’ll think about it. OK. What else?’

‘Then we need to track down them troll lads. And I’ve an idea about
that. Look at this.’ He dug an item out of his jacket pocket, and handed
it to Joshua.

It was a tape cassette, a bit of technology fifty years obsolete, or
more. Its plastic was worn and grubby, and the label unreadable. The
cassette _smelled_ strange, Joshua discovered now as he handled it. Half
rutting goat, half patchouli, half chemical. It smelled, in fact, of
clear nights in the High Meggers. ‘Who the hell plays cassette tapes,
outside of a museum? What is this, Bill?’

‘A lure.’

‘A lure for what? Or who?’

‘Somebody who’s going to help us. You’ll see. So – what first?’

‘I’m going to see my family. Try to explain all this to Helen.’

Bill looked squarely at him. ‘Ah, she already knows, man.’

And Joshua remembered that fragment of poetry Helen had quoted at the
very beginning of all this: _A woman with the West in her eyes, / And a
man with his back to the East_. ‘Yeah. Probably.’

‘As for me, I’m off to get bladdered while I’ve got the chance. See you
in the morning.’


38

THE _BENJAMIN FRANKLIN_ was summoned to the town of New Purity, a
hundred thousand worlds East of Valhalla, where there had been an
ambiguous report of yet more trouble with trolls.

Joe Mackenzie stood by Maggie on the observation deck, looking down on
the community. From the air it had a look of competence: town hall, neat
fields, and, of course, what looked like a large church. ‘New Purity,
huh?’ he said. ‘What’s the name of this sect again?’

Maggie checked her briefing. ‘The Uncut Brethren.’

‘Well, you’d expect a church. But there’s no stockade.’

‘No. And look over there.’ She pointed at what looked like a charnel
pit.

Even as the twain descended, Maggie’s instincts started pressing alarm
buttons. _The Uncut Brethren_. Maggie had been home-schooled by avowed
atheists – actually not that avowed, they had argued that an outright
fundamentalist atheist was just as bad as the worst fire-and-brimstone
spittle-dribbling Bible-puncher, and as an adolescent Maggie had been
fascinated by both extremes. So, as a connoisseur of believers and
unbelievers, she thought she recognized the Uncut Brethren’s type on
sight, as they gathered before the _Franklin_ party: uniformly dressed,
both male and female, in drab woollen smocks, with long queues of hair
down their backs.

Still, they seemed hospitable enough – right up until Jake the troll and
his family stepped down the ramp from the hovering twain, after the
human crew.

One young man promptly approached Maggie. ‘We don’t allow these
creatures on our premises, our homes, our farms. They are unclean.’

Maggie looked into his face, irritated. But she saw tension there. Even
grief. Something bad had happened here. ‘Unclean how? Also, Jake is not
a creature.’

The man’s face worked. ‘Very well, let _him_ tell me that.’

Maggie sighed. ‘Actually that’s possible, just. What’s your name, sir?’

‘My name is immaterial. I speak for all, it is our way.’

Maggie felt a gentle but persistent pressure on her arm. It was Jake.
She beckoned to Nathan Boss, who carried the troll-call. ‘This alive
person / close to dead / gone away / person was and is not / song of
sadness.’

Hearing these scratchy words coming out of the instrument, the Brethren
stared at the troll.

Maggie faced the young spokesman. ‘What happened here? Just show me.’

For answer, he led her away from the neat buildings to that pit they’d
spotted from the air.

It was indeed a hole in the ground, full of corpses. A dozen bodies in
total, she guessed, maybe more. There were no human remains here that
she could see, but many humanoids: trolls, and another species Maggie
recognized from her pre-mission briefings. _Elves_ – one of the more
vicious varieties, if she remembered the detail.

Maggie turned again to the young man, and said with a note of command,
‘I think you need to tell me your name, son.’

He blushed and said, ‘Brother Geoffrey. Auditor of the Uncut Brethren.
We are a contemplative order; we believe the prepared soul can overcome
all hostile circumstances . . .’ His voice faltered.

The story she extracted from Brother Geoffrey, in between his sobs and
_mea culpas_, had been repeated all over the Long Earth. Every stepwise
Earth was a new world, a world for free, a blank slate on which you
could write a wonderful life, if you dreamed a strong enough dream and
watched your back. Here, the Brethren had built a decent open township,
along, according to Geoffrey, Athenian lines. Their philosophy seemed to
be a melange of the teaching of figures that Maggie, in her vague
theological understanding, generally identified as the good guys, Jesus,
the Buddha and Confucius among them. But they had not listened to basic
warnings that must have been given them by more experienced hands, even
before they left the Datum.

And the peril that had befallen them, out of many possible out here, had
been elves.

Mac approached her. ‘We’ve done a little forensic analysis on that pit.
Captain, it was the elves did the attacking. Defensive wounds only on
the trolls. The elves evidently stepped in, targeting the humans . . .’

In her briefings Maggie had seen records of such bewildering attacks,
launched out of nowhere by stepping hunter-killers. ‘A stockade would
have been no use against steppers.’

‘No, but cellars would, and I don’t think this lot dug those either. The
trolls got caught in the crossfire – hell, they may have just been
passing through, they may even have been trying to help. Damned unlucky
for them, since trolls are getting so thin on the ground. And it didn’t
do the trolls themselves any good. _These_ guys don’t know the
difference between trolls and elves, I figure.’

‘So the colonists turned their guns on trolls and elves
indiscriminately.’

‘That’s about the size of it.’

‘Thanks, Mac.’

Geoffrey still stood beside her. ‘My mother – my own mother has been
taken. And—’

‘I know. But it wasn’t the trolls. Look.’ She pointed at little Carl,
playing with kids’ toys, much to the joy of the few children here in
their drab smocks. ‘_That_ is what trolls do. You need to understand the
reality of the Long Earth if you’re to survive here. And in your case,
if there are elves in the stepwise vicinity, that means accepting the
trolls. They will help you clear your fields, put up barns, dig wells.
And, best of all, they’ll deter the elves.’

He seemed to struggle to absorb that. But his next response was
positive. ‘How do we do that? Bring the trolls here, I mean.’

A difficult question, or at least bad timing, since the trolls seemed to
be withdrawing from the human worlds all over. She shrugged. ‘Be nice to
them. To start with, I suggest that with the help of my crew you bury
the corpses of those trolls alongside those of your own people. Pretty
soon every troll on this world, and all the other worlds, will know
about that bit of respect. Oh, and we’ll help you dig some cellars
before we go. Anti-step precautions, right? _And_ a stockade for good
measure . . .’

They worked through the rest of the day.

That evening, as the sun went down, the community gathered to listen to
the song of the _Franklin_’s trolls. Soon the replies started coming,
like echoes from beyond the dim horizon, the ones far away eerily
mingling with those near by, the calls flowing and floating over the
landscape and melding into one great symphony.

Yet there was a certain emptiness to the sound. This world, like all the
human-occupied worlds of the Long Earth, was becoming bereft of trolls,
and a silence was falling across all the Long Earth, as if there had
been an extinction event, some terrible plague. What a strange
phenomenon it was, Maggie thought. She could think of no precedent,
nothing like this before – it was as if all the elephants were
withdrawing from Africa, maybe. A rejection of mankind by the natural
world. Even her own trolls seemed oddly restless, and she was determined
to release them if they showed serious signs of wanting away.

The next thing, she thought with resignation, would be demands on her
from various homesteaders to bring back their troll labourers, how it
was about time the government _did_ something . . .

The _Benjamin Franklin_ hovered over New Purity for two more days,
before riding high into the air and vanishing stepwise.


39

SALLY KNEW THE world they had arrived at. Of course she did.

And of course it was new to Jansson. All of this, like the Gap, like
every world beyond the Lows, was new to her.

It had taken three weeks of travelling, since the Gap, to get here, with
regular stepping and falls through the soft places. Sally could have got
here quicker, Jansson suspected, but she had worked to keep them hidden
as well as on the move – and you couldn’t move trolls on too quickly;
those big frames took a lot of feeding, every day.

They emerged from the latest soft place into a landscape that was almost
but not quite desert. They stood in a broad valley, with cliffs on
either side pocked by caves. On the valley floor were a few stunted
trees, the remnants of a broken stone bridge, and a building, one vast
cubical mass of shaped black stone. The air was so dry it seemed to suck
the moisture out of your flesh, and Jansson instinctively searched for
shade. Sally remembered this place well. And the radiation threat, she
said. They would be safe enough as long as they stayed well away from
that building.

This was the world they had informally called Rectangles, when Sally had
found it with Joshua and Lobsang, ten years ago. A world of failed
intelligence, it had seemed, and death. The world where Joshua had found
a single beautiful artefact, a sapphire ring. A world that seemed
unchanged a decade on, save for the detritus of more recent visitors:
boot prints in the dirt, campfire scars, archaeologists’ trench-marker
flags – even some trash, plastic cartons, ripped bags.

The troll and her cub wandered off, looking for water, food, shade.

Sally got Jansson comfortable in the shade of one of the struggling
trees, on a rough bed of their piled-up gear and covered by a single
silver emergency blanket. Then she briskly built a fire – they didn’t
need the heat, but it might keep any critters away.

Jansson said, ‘So you’ve been here before. With Joshua, all those years
ago. And we’re here because the trolls are here . . . or near by. Hiding
out. That’s your guess, right? Whatever _that_’_s_ based on.’

Sally shrugged, non-committal.

Jansson thought she understood, by now. During the journey Sally had
kept disappearing, for a few hours at a time, a day, sometimes for
longer periods. Plugging herself into whatever network of contacts and
information she had built up out here. Jansson suspected Sally herself
would find it hard to sum up the various whispers she’d been hearing,
from various sources. If she came _here_ she’d find trolls, or trolls
would find her; that was the sum of her instincts. Jansson just had to
hope Sally’s scraps of information and gut sense added up to a good
guide . . .

Jansson gave up thinking about it. It would certainly do no good to ask
Sally. Taciturn nature or not, a selective silence was one of Sally’s
most irritating habits.

When Jansson had drifted off to sleep, Sally went hunting.

The valley bottom itself was suspiciously flat, Sally thought, just as
had been her impression the first time she was here. As if it was all
one slab: another artefact, maybe, like the building itself. There were
slopes of scree at the base of the canyon walls, and here and there
green extremophile-type plants, lovers of heat and dryness, struggling
for life. At first glance there was no sign of movement, no animals or
birds or even insects. That didn’t bother Sally. Where there was
greenery of any kind there were going to be herbivores to browse on that
greenery, and carnivores to browse on the herbivores. It was a question
of patience. All she had to do was wait. She never carried food – not in
the endless larder that was the Long Earth. A lizard or two would do.
Something like a naked mole rat, maybe. A deep burrower.

By the steep valley wall, in the shade of a rock face, she settled on
her haunches. This was how Sally had lived her life for a quarter of a
century now, ever since she’d left Datum Earth for good not long after
Step Day, when her father had made his ambiguous gift of Stepper
technology to mankind. And of course she’d had plenty of practice out in
the Long Earth in the years before that. Living off the land on the move
was easy, but it was a fantasy to believe that animals that had never
met man were naturally tame. An awful lot of good things to eat were too
used to running from _anything_ strange. You had to wait . . .

This place was just as she remembered, save for the more recent boot
prints, she saw as she relaxed, and took in her surroundings. Of all the
discoveries Joshua and Lobsang had taken back to the Datum from their
voyage of exploration a decade ago, this was probably the most
sensational: evidence of intelligent dinosaur-like creatures more than a
million and a half steps away from the Datum. It had done Lobsang no
good to protest that the colony-organism that had called itself First
Person Singular was far more interesting and exotic, because nobody
_understood_ that. Nor was it any use to point out that the creatures
whose remains they’d found here, though reptilian, could not _really_ be
dinosaurs in any meaningful sense . . .

There had been a clamour to know more. The universities had received a
flood of funding to send out follow-up parties. For a few years
researchers had crawled over this site, though the radioactivity made
the work hazardous, and they had sent out drone planes and balloons
equipped with infrared sensors and ground-penetrating radar to take a
look at the rest of this world.

It had surprised nobody to learn that the pyramid, this valley, was only
the visible tip of a worldwide culture: ancient, long fallen, buried in
the sands of this arid world, which Lobsang and the _Mark Twain_ had not
been equipped to explore properly, or even detect. In and under the dust
there were traces of cities, roads, canals – not human-like in layout,
clearly the product of _different_ minds, but otherwise eerily familiar,
and all very ancient.

No, these were not dinosaurs, but their ancestors might once have been
dinosaurs – just as humans had had ancestors in the dinosaur age,
furtive squirrelly quadruped mammals . . . Perhaps in this world the
tremendous asteroid impact that had destroyed the dinosaur-dominated
ecology of the Datum had worked out differently; here it might have
taken out the big beasts and left behind their smaller, smarter, more
agile cousins. The Rectangles creatures were remotely descended from
raptors, perhaps.

But, much later, they had evidently suffered their own extinction event.
Maybe there had been war, or plague, or another asteroid fell unluckily
. . . In the aftermath, a community of survivors, or their descendants,
their technology lost, their civilization smashed, had been drawn here
by the strange phenomena surrounding a nuclear pile, possibly natural, a
chance concentration of uranium ore under that building. It had been a
god, a temple that had slowly killed them.

That was one theory, at any rate: a _chance concentration_ of the ore.
But from the beginning there had also been speculation that this pile
was not some natural phenomenon but the ruined and still toxic remnant
of a much older and higher technology. The remnant radioactivity came
from an abandoned core, or maybe a waste dump. This hypothesis was the
subject of much debate, but it fitted Sally’s own first impressions when
she’d come upon this place.

It was kind of satisfying that the answers weren’t simple or clear. Like
all worlds, this one was no neat, finite theoretical model but the
product of its own long and unique evolutionary history. Sally,
moreover, had been through college herself in Madison; she understood
enough science to know when a house of theorizing started to totter on
foundations of inadequate data, and ignored most of the guesswork.

She was pleased that Joshua had never revealed the existence of the one
tangible souvenir they had brought back from this place: the exquisite
ring – it could almost have been crafted by a human jeweller – that they
had found on the fleshless finger of one post-dinosaur. Pleased that
Joshua had kept it all these years.

Well, the research money had run out, the Long Earth was always full of
other study targets of various kinds, and the archaeologists had long
since sealed up their digs and gone away. And Sally, now, in hunting
mode, was glad of it. Glad of the solitude. Nobody here but us shadows
on the rock . . .

A hot breath on her neck. _The hunter hunted_, she thought immediately.
She hadn’t been paying attention. She whirled, reaching for the knife at
her belt.

A wolf: that was her first impression. Huge, fur bristling, mouth open,
tongue hanging, eyes like windows into Arctic waste. It looked as heavy
as she was, more. And it had got close enough to _taste_ her,
practically, before she’d even noticed.

She forced herself not to just step out of here, her first reaction. She
wasn’t alone on this trip; she had to think of Jansson. She wondered if
she had time to shout a warning to Jansson, and whether it would do any
good.

But the animal didn’t attack.

It stepped back, one pace, two, raised itself up – and _stood_, on its
hind legs, not balancing like a dog doing a circus trick, but standing
easily, naturally, as if it were designed to stand like that. Now she
saw it had a kind of belt around its waist, from which tools hung –
including a very technologically advanced-looking pistol made of some
kind of metal, that looked like nothing so much as a Buck Rogers sci-fi
ray gun, and was totally out of place. When the wolf spread its empty
paws to her, she saw that the digits were long, flexible, the paws
almost like thumbless hands encased in some leathery glove. Surprise
heaped on surprise.

And then it spoke.

‘Sally Linsss-ay.’ Its voice was a growl, a rasp, a kind of crudely
shaped whisper, but understandable, and the human words were backed up
by subtle posture changes: a raise of the head, a twitch of the snout.
‘Coming he-rrhe, we knew. Kobolds-ss say. Welcome.’ And it lifted its
magnificent head and howled.


40

IN THE WEEKS since they’d left behind the Low Chinas, the airships
_Zheng He_ and _Liu Yang_ had forged steadily East, their stepping pace
gradually increasing, though, Roberta learned, still far short of their
design maximum. Worlds washed below the twains’ bows in great bands,
cold or temperate, moist or arid, this Eastern stepwise geography
roughly matching the mapping made by American explorers to the West,
punctuated by Jokers of various kinds, like random flashbulbs.

They made periodic stops, and members of the crew went down to the
surface, suitably protected, to observe, measure, retrieve samples of
the geology, flora, fauna, even exotic atmospheric traces. They followed
the Long Earth exploration strategy established by Joshua Valienté a
decade earlier, with surface pioneers supervised by controllers on
airships above. Roberta, watching from above, made methodical notes.

They passed the milestone of two million steps from the Datum.

And now they approached a particular world where, it was planned,
Roberta herself was to descend to the surface, with Lieutenant Wu
Yue-Sai.

The Chinese had reached this world before, and it had been studied at
least to some extent. This first descent was intended as a learning
experience for Roberta, she was told, and she accepted that. She had
already spent a lot of time in a kind of training chamber with
Lieutenant Wu Yue-Sai, who showed her how to don her jumpsuit, and use
her individual Stepper box, and the small monitor sets they would wear
on their shoulders: how the Captain would speak to them through
unobtrusive earpieces, how to use the med packs and emergency rations
and silvery blankets in the event they got stranded – how to use the
ceramic-and-bronze handguns they were issued. Roberta took each piece of
equipment, each procedure, asked relevant questions, and practised over
and over.

Yue-Sai tried to lighten up the process. She cracked jokes in her
imperfect English, and tried to invent games and contests to help the
practice go by. Roberta would simply wait until these moments had
passed, and then would carry on with her own patient exercises.

With time she felt Yue-Sai give up on her, in a sense, and withdraw.
Roberta had observed this many times before. It was not that Roberta
Golding did not understand people; rather, she understood them too well.
Yue-Sai’s attempts at fun had been transparent exercises in motivation,
which Roberta saw through immediately. Besides, with her own sense of
inner purpose she needed no external motivation. Yet that was not enough
of a response for Wu Yue-Sai, and Roberta saw that too.

Aged fifteen, Roberta was a person who _saw_ things. That is, she saw
them more clearly than those around her. She certainly saw her own
limitations, for instance now, as she prepared to face a remote stepwise
world for the first time. She could be killed by her own ignorance, or
by sheer mischance, in the blink of an eye. She saw this, and accepted
it with a calm that seemed to chill others around her. But what was the
purpose of self-delusion?

The career towards which she was heading was entirely a matter of
stripping away delusion, she sometimes thought. What was the nature of
the universe into which she had been born? Why did it exist at all? If
it had a purpose, what was it? These seemed to her the only questions
worth exploring. And the only valid technique evolved by humans for
exploring such questions was the scientific method, a robust and
self-correcting search for the truth. Yet it had become obvious to her
since about the age of twelve that science as it had progressed so far –
physics, chemistry, biology, all the rest – had only inched towards
grappling with the true questions, the fundamentals. _Those_ questions
had only been addressed by theologians and philosophers, it seemed to
her. Unfortunately, _their_ answers were a mush of doubt, self-delusion
and flummery that had probably done more harm than good. And yet that
was all there was.

For now she had devoted herself, nominally at least, to theology and
philosophy, as well as to explorations of the natural sciences, such as
on this expedition. She had even received grants to help support this
mission to the stepwise East from the Vatican, the Mormons, from Muslim
orders, and various philosophical foundations. Dealing with such bodies,
she had quickly learned when _not_ to share her view that organized
religion was a kind of mass delusion.

She had to work with what was available. She sometimes imagined she was
like the scholars of the European Middle Ages who had worked their way
through the ranks of the Church because there was no other organized
scholarship around. Or, perhaps, as if she had been dropped even further
into the past – as if she were trying to use stone blades and lumps of
ochre to build a radio telescope. Still, she persevered, for there was
no choice.

Despite her unsatisfactory education, Roberta Golding saw the world
clearly. And she saw people clearly, more clearly than they could see
themselves. Humanity, she once said in an answer in a philosophy exam
taken when she was eleven years old, was nothing but the thin residue
left when you subtracted the baffled chimp. Responses like that made her
a promising scholar, and in Happy Landings, where there were many bright
children like her, she had never had any trouble getting picked for the
netball team. But here her lack of response, her habit of speaking in
brief lectures, her corrections of simple errors, didn’t make the crew
warm to her. Not even the forgiving Yue-Sai.

The airships settled over a suitable location, and in a methodical
fashion sent up sounding-rockets and weather balloons to gain a broader
picture of this world. Then Yue-Sai took Roberta down to the elevator
deck, they checked over their equipment one last time, and descended to
the surface of Earth East 2,201,749.

They were standing at the fringe of a forest, close to a sprawling river
estuary. From the cover of the trees Roberta was able to look out over
the open plain of the estuary and the wetlands that fringed it, to a
sharp ocean horizon. She was distracted by huge flying creatures that
swept low over the ocean water, a flock of them, each with filmy wings
outspread – the largest flyers Roberta had ever seen. Something like
pterosaurs? Something like bats? Something evolved from a different root
altogether? Silhouetted in the sparkling light off the sea they swooped
lower, graceful necks dipping, and huge fish, or fish-like creatures,
were plucked from the water and gulped down into long beaks.

This was a warm, watery world, a world of high sea levels, of shallow
oceans that washed far into the hearts of the continents. A world that
could support such fantastic visions. And a world, Roberta understood
from her studies, with dangers of its own, unknown on drier Earths like
the Datum: not least exotic climatic catastrophes, such as the hypercane
already brewing out on the local copy of the Pacific Ocean . . .

Shadows shifted across the forest.

Yue-Sai waved her hand. Roberta made sure the speaker feed from the
monitor on her shoulder was off, and stood stock still and silent in the
cover of the trees.

Immense forms moved through the forest, heading for the estuary and the
fresh water. Roberta glimpsed compact, muscular bodies, on all fours but
with massively powerful hind legs – they were something like kangaroos,
she thought, but beefed-up – and with their ears flaring into tremendous
coloured crests, stiffened with cartilage. There were several of these
animals, the adults taller at the shoulder than Roberta, calves running
alongside, and one infant being carried in a pouch at its mother’s
belly.

Silent as a cat, Yue-Sai slid through the forest, tracking the herd.

Roberta followed as best she could. She wasn’t as quiet as Yue-Sai, but
the whirring lenses of the shoulder monitor pack were noisier than her
footsteps, and she took some pride in that.

They came to the edge of the forest, by a braid of fresh water. Across
the estuary’s damp plain huge flocks of birds, or bird-like creatures,
strutted, squabbled and fed. With marsh flowers in abundance it was a
mass of colour, under a deep blue sky. Roberta thought she saw the
characteristic ridged backs of crocodilians sliding through the deeper
water.

And, by the water’s edge, the creatures of the forest came to drink.

The most obvious, the most spectacular, were those big bulky roos with
their colourful sail-like ear-crests. The creatures were so huge and
heavy, they moved so slowly and patiently, they looked as if they were
carved from living rock. And they were so massive that those great hind
legs must surely be evolved for kicking, not for jumping like a Datum
kangaroo. But their ear-crests were oddly fragile-looking, almost
translucent in the light of the sun, evidently just skin and tissue
stretched over frames of cartilage. The crests were alight with brightly
coloured patterns that shifted and dissolved as Roberta watched.

Yue-Sai murmured, ‘Are you getting this, Captain Chen, Mr. Montecute?’

‘Yes, Lieutenant,’ replied the Captain in their ears. ‘Try to keep these
crests in view. Why so complex a display? I’ll have our scholars try
passing them through pattern analyser suites . . .’

Yue-Sai touched Roberta’s shoulder and pointed again, further along the
river bank.

More beasts drinking. These were like big flightless featherless birds,
Roberta thought, walking almost daintily, balanced on two big back limbs
but with two small grasping arms in front. Their heads were long, almost
snake-like, but with wide duck-like beaks. When they dipped to the
water, sucking noisily, long muscular tails waved behind them.

Roberta asked, ‘Birds, or dinosaurs?’

Yue-Sai shrugged. ‘They’re all the same big family. Don’t expect
anything, Roberta. Don’t be surprised by anything . . .’

Roberta understood the principle. The histories of the parallel worlds
of the Long Earth had been shaped by similar processes, but differed in
the detail. You had to imagine you were travelling across a kind of
probability tree, where you found worlds on which some long-past event
had turned out differently, thus reshaping life’s subsequent history and
providing novel raw material for natural selection to mold . . .

‘For example,’ Yue-Sai said, ‘those duckbills look bird-like, or
dinosaurid. But those big crested beasts are mammals. Some kind of
marsupial, it seems. And _there_’_s_ something you’d never have seen
back in the Cretaceous.’ She pointed.

Elves.

Stepping humanoids. There was a pack of them, maybe twenty, including
children and nursing infants. They had found a spot away from the big
herbivores, and far enough back from the deep water to be safe from the
crocodiles and any other threats. They were scooping up water with their
hands, and digging into the mud for roots and worms and molluscs. A few
of the younger males were bickering; with irritable pant-hoots they
flickered between the worlds, so that to watch them was like trying to
follow a badly edited movie.

‘There are other sorts here too,’ Yue-Sai said softly. ‘I spotted them
in the deeper forest—’

The conversation was cut short by a sound of thunder.

Yue-Sai and Roberta shrank back into deeper cover. Some of the duckbills
kept drinking, but the big adults looked up suspiciously. The crest-roos
dipped their great heads and backed into a rough circle.

There was a crash, the splintering of wood, a groan as a young tree was
felled, and the forest parted like a flimsy stage set as a tremendous
animal burst into the open. Its body must have been fifteen yards long,
balanced exquisitely on two striding legs. Its arms were small,
comparatively, but longer and more muscular than Roberta’s own legs, and
the right arm had some kind of creeper wrapped around it. Its skin was
covered with feathers, brilliantly coloured, like the costume of an
Aztec priest. The head was a gaping nightmare of teeth and blood, and
when it opened its mouth to roar Roberta imagined she could smell raw
meat.

It strode forward, huge, purposeful. It seemed more mechanical than
animal, a killer robot, an automaton, and yet it breathed and pawed the
earth. The herbivores were already fleeing, following the water’s edge,
galloping and bellowing.

But the elves did not run, not immediately. They scattered into a loose
arc, facing the creature, the adults to the fore with stone blades in
their hands, the young behind them, but even the young were snarling
defiance. It was like another movie scene, Roberta thought.
Stone-tool-wielding man-apes against the dinosaur.

Yue-Sai was staring, as if unwilling to miss a second of the spectacle.
‘A dinosaur, all right. Or its sixty-five-million-years-later
descendant. Tyrannosaur-like, or something else evolved to fit the same
niche.’

‘Of course China had its own magnificent dinosaur lineages,’ Captain
Chen reminded them sternly. ‘There are other comparisons to be used,
Lieutenant.’

‘Yes, sir,’ Yue-Sai said absently. ‘It could even be a flightless bird.
If it is like a tyrannosaur, the odds are this is a female. They had
ranges a few miles across; the males were sparser, one every few tens of
miles. But what’s that on its arm? . . .’

The predator’s roars and the humanoids’ responding snarls and gestures
were reaching a climax. Abruptly the predator charged, right into the
middle of the elf group.

The young with their parents scattered. The adult elves started
flickering in and out of existence, faster than the predator could catch
them, though she ducked her head, snapped her huge teeth, and swept
empty space with her arms and tail. One elf materialized in mid-jump
right beside the predator’s head, and took a swipe at her right eye with
his blade before stepping away again, without ever touching the ground.
The precision was remarkable, and the predator’s eye was saved only by a
chance duck of the head.

Bloodied, enraged, the predator stood at the centre of the band of
humanoids, unable to land a killing blow on any of them. She roared
again, sweeping her huge tail, snapping her teeth.

But the humanoids had had enough. They stepped away now, mothers
carrying their children, as far as Roberta could see leaving nobody
behind.

‘You have to hand it to those little guys,’ Jacques said in their ears.
‘They stood up to their Grendel.’

Yue-Sai shrugged. ‘Eventually the beast will learn not to tangle with
humanoids, especially steppers. And anyhow they were never her main
target. Look.’

Now the predator was heading down the beach after the big crest-roos.
They had a head start; the roos, alarmed, tons of flesh and bone on the
move, were like a retreating tank division. But one mother hung back to
shepherd her calf.

‘They’ve got too much of a start,’ Jacques said.

‘Are you sure?’ Captain Chen murmured. ‘Look at what she is doing with
her arm.’

Roberta could see that the predator was using one agile hand to unwrap
the vine from her arm. The vine was maybe six feet long, and was
weighted at either end by something like a coconut. And now, even as she
ran, her legs pounding the beach and her spine and tail almost
horizontal, the predator whirled the vine and released it. It flew
across the intervening space and wrapped itself around the big back legs
of the lagging mother crest-roo. The vine snapped immediately, but it
was enough for the mother to be brought crashing to the ground. Her calf
slowed beside her, lowing mournfully, clearly afraid.

And it had a right to be, for the predator was on the mother
immediately. It ran by and ducked its head to rip a huge chunk out of
the crest-roo’s rear right leg, then almost casually swiped its head
against one magnificent flaring ear, crushing the cartilage so the crest
folded like a fallen kite. The mother bellowed in pain.

But she was able to stand, though blood dripped from the gaping wound.
She even nudged her infant to move on, as they shambled up the beach
after the rest of the herd, which had already cut into the forest.

The predator stood and watched them go, by the water’s edge, breathing
hard. The crest-roo’s blood stained her mouth. Then she ducked to the
water, took a mighty drink, shook her head, and trotted after the mother
and calf. It was a pursuit that could have only one outcome.

‘That predator used a bolas,’ said Roberta.

Yue-Sai said, ‘Yes . . . It looked as though it could have been a
natural object. A vine-like growth with fruit. But there was nothing
“natural” in the way she used it.’ Yue-Sai looked delighted, in her
quiet way, to have made this staggering discovery. ‘I told you, Roberta.
We’re far away from home now. Have no preconceptions.’

‘I’ll second that,’ Captain Chen said. ‘And I should tell you that our
signal-processing experts here inform me that there was data content in
the patterns that flared across the crests of those roo-like beasts.
_They were talking_, through the visual means of their crests!
Sentience! Our onboard scholars must make all this clear when they
joint-author their paper: “A mammal–reptile assemblage of tool-making
intelligences beyond Earth East two million”. How marvellous! What a
great discovery for China!’

They began to walk back to the pick-up point.

Chen, evidently enthused, went on, ‘We Chinese, you know, Roberta, have
a utopian legend of our own. There is a story that dates back to the
fifth century after your Christ, of how a fisherman found his way
through a narrow cave to the Land of Peach Blossom, where descendants of
soldiers lost from the age of the Qin dynasty lived in a land sheltered
by mountains, in peace with each other, in peace with nature. But when
the fisherman tried to reach it a second time, he could not find the
way. So it is with all utopias, whose legends proliferate around the
world. Even in North America, where the natives’ dream of the Happy
Hunting Ground was displaced by the European settlers’ fables of the Big
Rock Candy Mountain. Do you think if we travel far enough we will find
such a land, Roberta? Are such legends a relic of some early perception
of the Long Earth itself?’

‘There is no sensible content in this discussion,’ Roberta murmured in
reply. ‘And as to the papers you’re planning – none of this matters.’

Yue-Sai turned to her.

‘How’s that?’ Jacques asked.

Roberta gestured at the landscape around her. ‘The coming hypercane will
destroy all this. I’ve been studying the climatic theory of these
worlds, with their high sea levels. They are prone to tremendous
hurricanes, extracting heat from the shallow oceans. Storms that can
span continents, with thousand-miles-per-hour winds; water vapour is
thrown up into the stratosphere, and the ozone layer is wrecked . . .
I’ve also been studying the records of the weather balloons you launched
from the twains. There’s such a storm forming right now. Ask your
meteorologists. It’s unmistakable. It will take a few more weeks to
reach full strength, but when it does this complicated little community
will be right in its path. It’s been an interesting experiment, a
stepwise mixing of different species. But it will soon be terminated.’

There was silence.

‘“Terminated”,’ said Captain Chen at last.

Roberta was used to this kind of reaction to her choice of words, and
found it irritating. As if a child were covering its ears to avoid
hearing bad news. ‘All life is terminated, ultimately. I’m only telling
the truth. It’s trivially obvious.’

Again, nobody spoke.

Yue-Sai looked away. ‘Captain, I think it’s time we returned.’

‘Agreed.’


41

THE _ZHENG HE_ and _Liu Yang_ lingered for some days in the vicinity of
Earth East 2,201,749. The scientists catalogued their observations and
specimens, while the engineers crawled over the airships, testing their
systems, carrying out routine maintenance.

Then they moved on, into realms of the Eastern Long Earth never before
explored by Chinese crews, or any other. Into the unknown.

Shortly afterwards the ships made a longer stop, next to Earth East
2,217,643. Here they found a Gap: a break in the chain of stepwise
worlds that made up the Long Earth, where the relevant Earth had been
removed. Roberta quietly pointed out to Jacques that the first Western
Gap discovered, by Joshua Valienté, had been at around Earth West two
million. No doubt, from the similarity of those numbers, there was some
conclusion to be drawn about the nature of the great tree of
probabilities that was the Long Earth.

Valienté’s airship had been wrecked by the step into vacuum that was the
Gap. The Chinese ships were better prepared. Their crews had their ships
hop back and forth across the Gap, dropping off hardened automatic
probes, which, given the momentum of the spin of the neighbouring
Earths, went sailing off into the Gap world’s empty black sky. Jacques
stared without much interest at the images returned – stars that looked
much like the stars as seen from any world, planets that seemed to
circle in their usual orbits with smug indifference to the absence of an
Earth. The crew, though, were fascinated, as they had not been by
humanoids and dinosaur descendants. Jacques reminded himself that this
mission had been mounted by a space agency; no wonder the crew were
intrigued by glimpses of the wider universe.

And Roberta, too, seemed to be interested. She requested that the probes
be made to study the neighbouring planets, Mars and Venus, to look for
any difference in their atmospheres, their surfaces.

With this initial investigation of the new Gap complete, Captain Chen,
with a rather boyish and excited grin, came to his passengers and urged
them to be at the observation deck the next morning. ‘That’s when the
real journey will begin . . .’

When morning came Jacques and Roberta joined Lieutenant Wu before the
big prow windows, Jacques cradling a coffee, Roberta a glass of water.
The airships hung in the sky of this latest world, two sleek fish of the
sky over a sprawling blanket of forest. There was a river in the middle
distance, a glassy stripe, and further away the extensive shallow sea
typical of these warm worlds, blue to the horizon.

The stepping began without warning, and worlds flapped by, slowly at
first, then ever faster. Soon they were travelling at a step a second, a
rate they were all used to by now, and weather systems came and went to
the beat of Jacques’s pulse: sun, cloud, rain, storms, even some snow.
The detail of the forest flickered – once a tremendous, evidently recent
crater appeared right under the prow of the _Zheng He_, before being
whipped away like a stage prop – and occasionally a world flared, or
darkened, and Jacques knew that the ships’ systems would be recording
yet another Joker.

Chen joined them, and grasped the polished wooden rail that ran before
the window. ‘You might want to hold on.’

Behind them, the trolls began to sing ‘Eight Miles High’.

The stepping rate increased. To Jacques the passage of the worlds was
suddenly visually uncomfortable, as if a strobe light were flashing in
his face at increasing frequency. He tried to focus on the position of
the morning sun, which remained constant in the multiple skies, but
masks of cloud flashed across its face, and the sky flickered white,
grey, blue. They all grabbed the rail now, even Roberta. Jacques thought
he heard a thrumming of engines, and he sensed the airships driving
forward even as they stepped. He could see the silvery hulk of the _Liu
Yang_ flex, a mighty plastic fish swimming through the flickering light
of world after world.

Behind them, a crew member threw up.

‘It will pass,’ Yue-Sai said. ‘We have all been tested for a tendency to
epilepsy, and the nausea medication has been carefully applied. The
discomfort will pass in a moment . . .’

Faster and faster the stepping came, faster and faster the weather
systems flickered past their view. Jacques forced himself to keep
watching, and focused on the rail in his hands, the vibrations of the
ship’s engines transmitted through the floor under his feet.

And then the flickering seemed to fade away, the worlds merging into a
kind of continuous blur. The sun, paler than usual, hung in its patient
station, in an apparently cloudless sky that took on a deep blue colour,
like early twilight. The landscape below was misty and vague, the shapes
of the hills grey and dim, littered with patches of forest that seemed
to grow, shiver, pass away. The river that had been writhing jerkily
across the landscape now spread out, as if flooding a wide band of
ground with a silvery grey, and the ocean coast too became a broad blur,
the boundary between land and sea uncertain.

‘We have passed the flicker fusion threshold,’ Roberta murmured.

‘Yes!’ Chen cried. ‘We are now travelling at our peak rate, an
astounding _fifty worlds per second_ – worlds passing faster than the
refresh frames in a digital screen, faster than your eye can follow. At
such a rate we could traverse the great treks of the first pioneers of
the Long Earth in little more than half an hour. At such a rate, if we
kept it up, we could traverse more than four million worlds per _day_.’

Jacques asked, ‘But we’re moving laterally too, right? Why’s that?’

‘Continental drift,’ Roberta said immediately.

Chen nodded approvingly. ‘Correct. On Datum Earth the continents drift
with time. The rate is something like an inch per year. Thanks to those
cumulative effects there is also some drift as you move stepwise. So we
move laterally, the great engines working to keep us over the heart of
the tectonic plate on which South China rides. Sooner that than get lost
altogether.’ He winked at Jacques. ‘Our Chinese airship technology has,
incidentally, also set airspeed records.’ He checked his watch. ‘Now if
you will excuse me I have engineers who need praising, or calming down,
or both. Duty calls . . .’

Jacques noticed that the lower digits on the Earth counter mounted on
the wall of the deck had become a blur, like the worlds they were
tracking, while higher, grander, slower-changing digits marked the
tremendous strides they were making, off into the unknown.

The trolls, meanwhile, sang on.


42

VIGNETTES FROM THE continuing mission of Captain Maggie Kauffman, as the
summer wore on across the Long Earth:

The voyage of the USS _Benjamin Franklin_ progressed in a rather
disorderly, zigzagging way. The colonists of the Long Earth didn’t
organize themselves consciously, either geographically or stepwise, and
yet a kind of organization was emerging nevertheless, Maggie noticed,
with clusters of homesteads growing up in neighbouring worlds. Gerry
Hemingway of Science was developing a mathematical model of this, of a
percolation of mankind into the Long Earth which resulted in a
distribution that he described as ‘on the edge of chaos’. Maggie,
wearily, thought that summed it up pretty well.

Once, on the Atlantic coast in a temperate Corn Belt sky, they
encountered a British dirigible called the _Sir George Cayley_,
returning from a mission to Iceland. At such locations as Iceland,
incoming steppers rummaged through the parallel worlds looking for
beneficent weather. If you got the choice, you would go to a world with
the local climatic optima – change your world, change your weather. In
Iceland’s case, you sought out analogues of the relatively benign
first-millennium country first discovered and colonized by the Dark Age
Vikings. (Dressing up to play the part was apparently optional.)

Parties from each ship visited the other. British ships always had the
best booze, in Maggie’s experience, including gin-and-tonics raised in
toasts to His Majesty – and the Brit crews, charmingly, always stayed
seated for the loyal toast, a tradition going back to Nelson’s day, when
there had been no room on those crowded wooden ships to stand.

However, such pleasing adventures, for the _Franklin_ crew, were not the
norm.

More typical was a call to a world some seven hundred thousand steps
from the Datum where a hopeful silver miner, who seemed to have got his
ideas about excavation techniques solely from the movies, had turned his
wannabe mine shaft into a death trap. Getting him out was a technical
challenge, but luckily one of the crew, Midshipman Jason Santorini, had
misspent some of his early years caving; he just _loved_ worming his way
into the rubble heaps.

When the dispiriting rescue was over, Maggie gave the crew a couple of
days’ shore leave before moving on.

On the second day, as Maggie sat eating lunch with her senior officers,
on the ground in the shadow of the _Franklin_ – with Midshipman
Santorini being rewarded for his efforts with lunch at the Captain’s
table – another twain, a small commercial vessel, drifted in from the
horizon. It lowered a stairway a little way away in the scrub, and two
people alighted stiffly: an elderly woman, a middle-aged man.

And a cat, that followed them down the ramp.

Maggie and her officers stood to greet the couple. Joe Mackenzie eyed
the cat suspiciously.

The man said, ‘Captain Maggie Kauffman? I’m pleased to meet you in the
flesh, having heard so much about you! It took us some time to arrange a
rendezvous, as you can imagine . . .’

‘And you are?’

‘My name is George Abrahams. This is my wife, Agnes. My title is Doctor,
though that need not concern us.’ His accent sounded vaguely Bostonian,
the name naggingly familiar to Maggie. He was tall, slim, a little
stooped, and wore a heavy black overcoat, and a homburg over silver
hair. His face was oddly neutral, expressionless – unmemorable, Maggie
thought.

The cat, slim, white, looked around, sniffed, and set off in the general
direction of the _Franklin_.

Mac nudged Santorini. ‘Keep an eye on that damn flea bucket.’

‘Yes, sir.’

Maggie invited them to sit, courteously enough, and Mac, evidently
acting out of a kind of reflexive politeness, even poured them coffee.

Then Maggie said more sternly, ‘Tell me how you found us, Dr. Abrahams.
This is after all a military vessel. And what do you want of me?’

How he had been following her seemed innocent enough: through outernet
accounts posted by civilians, of the _Franklin_’s various interventions.
All of this was public. As to the what, that concerned the troll-call.

Maggie snapped her fingers. ‘Of course. Yours is the name on the
instruction sheet.’

‘I _am_ its designer,’ he said, not particularly modestly, and his wife
rolled her eyes. ‘From all accounts you got the measure of it very
quickly – amazingly so, if you don’t mind my saying it. Well, I come
bearing gifts. I have fifteen more translators for you and your crew. Of
course, they are still only prototypes, though refined versions. As we
develop them further both parties are learning to use the gadgets –
trolls and humans, I mean. As I’m sure you’ve found out, trolls are
patient and they learn just as fast as humans, oh my goodness how they
learn, and of course they remember; they remember everything.’

‘Well – thank you,’ Maggie said, nonplussed. ‘We’ll happily take
possession of the troll-calls, after security checks . . . You know
Sally Linsay, I take it. And – I have to ask – are you associated with
the Black Corporation?’

‘Oh my dear lady, two interrogations in one sentence! Of course I know
Sally – a remarkable judge of people. And as harsh as a hanging judge
when she’s in the mood! As for the Black Corporation—’ He sighed. ‘Yes,
of course they are involved. Captain, I am independent, I have my own
workshop – yes, I am in partnership with the Black Corporation, but they
don’t own me. They did fund my work, and arranged delivery of the
prototype to you.’

‘Once again Douglas Black is giving away technological treasures for
free?’

‘My impression is that Douglas Black believes that to release such a
technology should in the long term have a beneficial effect on
humanity’s career in the Long Earth. And in the short term it may heal
our fractured relationship with the trolls. I of course have worked
closely with the trolls in the course of my studies. What wonderful
beasts they are! Don’t you think? And so soulful! Anybody who has ever
owned pets _knows_ that animals have something which equates to a soul
. . .’

The wife nudged him. ‘You’re preaching, George. And what’s more, to the
converted. We’ve done what we came to do. Now it’s time to wave goodbye
and let these good people get about their duties.’

That seemed to be that. Slightly bewildered, Maggie and her officers
arranged to collect the troll-calls, and rose to wish the couple
goodbye. The wife, who seemed oddly elderly compared with the husband,
fussed as they retreated to their ship: ‘Do get on, dear. Remember your
prostate!’

‘Don’t ham it up too much, Agnes . . .’

It was only after they had gone that Mac looked around and said, ‘What
happened to that damn cat?’

Their next assignment was in a stepwise Nebraska, on the way back to the
Corn Belt, where the hunter-gatherer-type wandering inhabitants of
nearby parallel Americas periodically got together for what they
described as a ‘hootenanny’. A mixture of marriage market, farmers’
auction, rock concert and Hell’s Angels gathering, these events were
magnets for trouble. But for the _Franklin_ the assignment was routine,
the ship’s very presence a deterrent to disorder.

Maggie took the opportunity to have her chief engineer, Harry Ryan, run
a comprehensive overhaul of the ship’s systems; it had been a while
since the last maintenance break. Among other small issues, he quickly
reported problems with the _Franklin_’s two remaining winged aircraft,
microlites capable of air launches for fast response; they had already
cannibalized a third craft for spares . . .

As she was scanning Harry’s report in her sea cabin, Maggie became aware
of a steady gaze.

It was a cat. _The_ cat, George Abrahams’s cat, standing patiently on
the carpet, gazing at her. Slim, white, healthy-looking, she was a breed
indeterminate to Maggie, who was no cat person. Her eyes were eerie
green sparks. Sparks like LED displays, Maggie saw, looking closer.

And the cat spoke, a liquid string of syllables in a female human voice,
quite incomprehensible.

‘What? _What?_’

‘I apologize,’ the cat said. ‘George and Agnes Abrahams used me to
practise their Swahili; it became my default setting. I am aware that
you are running a systems check . . .’

Maggie, floundering, found a memory floating to the surface of her mind.
‘Joshua Valienté. He had a talking cat, didn’t he? So the story goes.’
Then she realized that not only was the cat talking, she was _engaging
the cat in conversation_.

‘I am fully equipped to support your current activity. The systems
analysis, I mean. Turbine number two is developing metal fatigue. Also
the flush in the aft crew bathroom is malfunctioning. Rodent infestation
is negligible but not zero, by the way.’

Maggie stared at the cat. Then she came around her desk, grabbed the
cat, and set her on the desktop. The beast was heavier than she had
thought, but she felt comfortably warm.

She thought over what the cat had said. Then she slapped a comms panel.
‘Hey, Harry.’

‘Here, Captain,’ the engineer replied promptly.

‘How’s the rear crew head?’

‘What? . . . Umm, let me check my roster. A faulty flush, as it happens.
Why do you ask, Captain?’

‘How about turbine number two?’

‘No faults reported.’

‘Would you check it over again? Call me back.’ She stared at the cat.
‘So – what the hell _are_ you?’

‘An artificial life form. Well, evidently. Including top-of-the-line
artificial intelligence. The nice thing about artificial intelligence is
that at least it’s better than artificial stupidity. Don’t you think?
Ha, ha.’ Her voice was fully human, but diminished, as if issuing from a
small loudspeaker.

Maggie stayed stony-faced. ‘That couple, Dr. and Mrs. Abrahams, left you
behind.’

‘I am another gift, Captain. Forgive the subterfuge. It was thought that
you would refuse me reflexively. Yet I am capable of supporting your
mission in a variety of ways. A mission to which I am fully committed,
by the way.’

‘You have a name?’

‘Shi-mi. Which is Tibetan for cat. I am an upgrade of previous models
. . .’

Maggie’s comms unit blipped: Harry Ryan. ‘Don’t know how you guessed it,
Captain, but there _is_ a flaw in number two turbine. Metal fatigue in
the bearings. We’ll need to strip it down within seven weeks max – best
to do that in dry dock. It’s a very fine imbalance; it wouldn’t have
shown up for a few more days’ running, but there is a rising chance of
failure. Captain, I’m embarrassed we didn’t spot it.’

‘Forget it, Harry. Ask Nathan to put together an itinerary to take us
home.’

‘Yes, Captain.’

Shi-mi said modestly, ‘The turbine didn’t sound true. Easy to spot. It
was however only one cat’s opinion.’

‘But you’re not just a cat, are you?’

‘No, Captain. _I_ was built to the finest standard specifications of the
Black Corporation’s robotics, prosthetics and artificial intelligence
divisions. Whereas your turbine was built for the government on a
low-bid contract. Thank you very much, and I hope I have passed the
audition. Incidentally – would you be offended if I brought you an
occasional mouse? It is rather traditional . . .’

‘No.’

‘Yes, Captain.’

‘And stay out of Joe Mackenzie’s way.’

‘Yes, Captain. Does that mean I can stay aboard?’

‘Just get out of here.’

‘Yes, Captain.’


43

LOBSANG PULLED STRINGS at the Black Corporation and secured Joshua and
Bill the use of an airship, for the purposes of their quest in search of
Sally Linsay, and the trolls. It was a relatively small, nimble craft,
with a translucent solar-capture envelope a couple of hundred feet long,
and a gondola the size of a truck trailer, with walls of ceramic panels
and big viewing windows. Primarily used as a scout to accompany the
great stepwise convoys on the Valhalla run, the ship had no name, only a
corporate registration number. Bill promptly named it the _Shillelagh_.

Bill, for reasons he’d yet to share with Joshua, said he wanted to fly,
not out of the usual Mississippi ports, but from the Seattle area in the
Pacific north-west. The quickest way to transport the airship from its
base at a Low Earth Hannibal to Seattle was to break it down, ship it by
rail across the Datum, and then reassemble it on an apron at SeaTac
airport. That took a week. The travellers used the time to prepare, to
gather supplies and kit for the journey.

Regarding the trolls, Lobsang provided them with what he called a ‘troll
translation kit’, downloaded into a neat jet-black slab, small enough to
fit into a backpack.

As for Sally, Joshua did some snooping as Bill had requested, visited
the hotels she’d stayed at, even Jansson’s home, looking fruitlessly for
leads as to where she’d gone.

And he had to face the family he was leaving behind, as he disappeared
on yet another jaunt into the remote Earths – once again leaving at
Lobsang’s behest, once again pulled sideways by Sally, Helen’s enigmatic
rival. Little Dan was jealous, pure and simple; he wanted to go
exploring too. Helen, who was struggling to get permission to visit her
Madison-bomber brother in prison, was ominously silent. It wasn’t a
happy family that Joshua left behind, and not for the first time, and it
tore his heart in two.

But off he went anyhow.

And on an impulse he took the sapphire ring, his one souvenir of his
first Long Earth quest a decade ago: took it from where it had been
hanging on Jansson’s wall, and hung it up in the gondola lounge. He
wondered if Sally would expect him to do that.

Thus, on a bright June morning at Datum SeaTac, Joshua found himself
sitting in this compact gondola, laid out just like a travel trailer
with a tiny galley area and lounge, foldaway bunks and tables – in fact,
he learned, it had been designed by Airstream – while Bill took his
place in the small wheelhouse at the gondola’s prow.

The _Shillelagh_ lifted easily. Soon Joshua had a fine view of the
airport and the crowded development around it, and of Puget Sound.

All of which was whipped away as they began to step, to be replaced by
the increasingly sparse facilities of SeaTac West 1 and 2 and 3, with
their ribbons of road and rail tracks and small settlements cut into the
enduring forest, each world glimpsed in the space of a heartbeat – until
soon, after only a very few worlds, there was barely a sign of mankind
at all, only the forest and the Sound, and the Cascades piled up in the
distance. The ship rose steadily as it stepped, and Bill directed it
laterally towards the mountains, which persisted more or less unchanged
as they passed through the worlds. The sky flickered, though; the
weather was never unchanging from Earth to Earth, and on this June day
they passed from sun to cloud to showers.

In the first few worlds there was nothing much to see but tree tops.
Joshua knew there were bears down there in those forests, and beavers,
and wolves. And people too, although further out than the Low Earths
there was only a long but thinning tail of colonization. More rats than
people, probably, now that the twains with their roomy holds and cargoes
of foodstuffs flew so thick. What else was down there was guesswork.
There was a programme to map the Low Earths from orbit, with small
fleets of pole-to-pole satellites that would fly over a turning world,
inspecting its continents, oceans and icecaps with cameras,
ground-penetrating radar, infrared and other sensors, before stepping on
to the next world, and the next . . . Even such coarse imagery, which
would show few details smaller than a reasonably sized car, was only
available for a hundred or so of the lowest worlds. Further out than
that, save for particular worlds which had been subject to closer study,
nobody knew, really.

They were climbing the flank of Mount Rainier itself by the time they
hit the first Ice Age world. For a few seconds they rode high over the
crumpled white sheets that coated the ground. And then back to the
endless forest green.

Joshua sat back, watching the scenery blankly. Already he missed his
family. He wondered how he was going to pass the time.

‘Bill?’

‘Yes?’

‘Just checking. How is everything?’

‘Cracker.’

‘Good.’

‘I just need to concentrate on the piloting. Not my usual occupation,
but the Black Corporation lads gave me a decent run-through. It’s simple
enough . . . But not like driving a car, I’ll tell you that. Or even
riding a horse. After all the ship has to be sapient, to a degree, and
it’s smarter than a damn horse in fact. It’s like you have this constant
dialogue with the thing. Y’know, I once rode an elephant on this farm in
the African bush, a rescue sanctuary. An African elephant isn’t tamed
like the Indian sort; he’s a big strong smart animal that knows where he
wants to go, and if you’re lucky that might happen to be the same way
you want to go. Otherwise you just have to kind of hang on. This is the
same. All a bit mad, isn’t it? But we’ll get there. Wherever “there”
is.’

‘Fair enough.’

And that was that. It was just like the journey of the _Mark Twain_ all
those years ago – but at least this time Joshua got on better with his
crewmate.

By sunset they had sailed out of the Ice Belt, as it was called, the
sheaf of sporadically glaciated worlds around the Datum, and were
passing over the more arid worlds of the Mine Belt. The view got even
more dull. Joshua made a meal – of field rations warmed on a single gas
ring, no gourmet kitchen on _this_ ship – and took a portion to Bill,
who was camping out in the wheelhouse.

Then he turned in, looking out through the gondola’s windows as the
dying rays of midsummer sunsets glowed on the gasbag.

The dawn brought more of the same.

By mid-morning of the second day they had crossed into the Corn Belt, a
hundred thousand steps from Datum Earth, a thick band of warmer worlds
lush with forests and prairie, and now studded with human farming
communities – including Reboot, at Earth West 101,754, founded by Helen
and her family of trekkers, and the place where she and Joshua had
married.

Then, in the late afternoon, Joshua sensed the airship slowing. The
strobing of the skies slowed, and the more or less identical landscapes
below flickered gently, coming to a standstill.

And an angry buzzing filled the air. Suddenly the gondola was dark, the
light excluded by a swarm of dark heavy insectile bodies that slammed
continually against the clear windows, chitinous wings clattering.
Joshua glanced at the gondola’s compact earthometer: this was West
110,719.

He had to yell over the noise. ‘Hey, Bill!’

‘Here.’

‘I recognize this place.’

‘You should. Classic Joker. In fact you discovered it, during The
Journey with Lobsang.’

‘Yeah, and we passed straight on through. What are we doing here, Bill?
Those bugs are going to choke us if they get in the air vents.’

‘Patience, grasshopper.’

The airship lifted now, Joshua could feel it, though the world remained
hidden by the swarming, angry bodies of the flying insects – they were
like huge locusts, perhaps, an impression he remembered from that first
visit.

Abruptly the _Shillelagh_ rose into sunlight. Joshua saw he was still
hovering over the flanks of Rainier, or this world’s copy of it.
Evidently this world was warmer than the average, for forest rose up
almost all the way to an eroded summit – it was oak woodland, mature
trees rearing out of a luxuriant tumble of fallen trunks and thickets.
He spotted a stream down there, bubbling down the steep slope of the
mountain. As he watched, something blundered through the undergrowth and
crashed away east, and a few roosting creatures took fright and rose up
– they weren’t birds, they were like huge, fat dragonflies – and
fluttered noisily away to safety.

When Joshua looked away from the mountain summit, he saw a landscape
cloaked by swarming insects, a pulsing, gleaming carpet of them that
seemed to extend all the way to the ocean shore, visible in the
distance. The land crawled with them, like black rivers coursing between
sparse patches of green, and clouds of flyers rose up everywhere. But
nothing flew as high as this summit, and not as high as some of the
other mountains of the Cascades, whose flanks rose out of the swarms
like green-clad islands in an insectile sea.

‘They’re altitude limited,’ Joshua observed. ‘The insects.’

‘Yeah, most of the larger species. Not all. Enough to make the summits
survivable.’

‘Survivable by who?’

‘By us, Joshua. Well, specifically, by you.’

‘We’re stopping here?’

‘Yeah. Not long, maybe overnight.’

‘Why?’

‘We’ve an appointment to keep up here. This is why I wanted to start us
off in the Cascades. I’ll drop an anchor, deploy the ladder. The grassy
stretch by that stream down there looks a good place to camp. Take the
tape. The cassette, you know.’

Somewhat reluctantly Joshua began to pull his kit together: a sleeping
bag, food packets, fire-making gear. Bug repellent spray! ‘I’m going
down alone, am I?’

Bill sounded embarrassed. ‘Look, Joshua, I don’t want to sound like a
fan-boy here. Your Journey’s famous – and of course I know the inside
story. The idea of you going down into all them unknown worlds all
alone, while Lobsang stayed tucked up in the airship. Comedy gold.’

‘Well, that’s a consolation for all the scars.’

‘But the strategy actually makes sense. You go down, do the exploring
thing, make contact.’

And Joshua wondered, contact with what?

‘Meanwhile I’ll stay aloft, ready to help out when it all goes tits-up.’

‘_When?_’

‘If, mate. If. Slip of the tongue.’

Not for the first time in the course of his adventures in the Long
Earth, and against his own better judgement, Joshua went with the flow.

Bill insisted that he carry a two-way radio, and a small shoulder unit
with TV and sensor links. Joshua agreed, despite unpleasant memories of
Lobsang’s shoulder-riding parrots, and for his part packed a handgun.

The climb down into the undergrowth was easy. Immediately he was on the
ground the ship rose, taking the ladder with it.

Alone, Joshua turned around slowly. In this open space that the stream
had carved between the trees, it was pleasant enough. The air smelled of
damp wood and the leaf mould of millennia, and he heard the remote buzz
of the lapping ocean of insect swarms below this summit. Over his head
squadrons of some insectile equivalent of bats hurtled after things like
flies.

He had nothing much to do but wait. He began to make his camp, spreading
out his blanket roll and sleeping bag. He thought about a fire, but the
air was warm and moist enough without it. With his travel rations he
didn’t need to cook. He began to relax. It was almost like he was on
sabbatical. He toyed with the idea of doing some fishing, just for fun,
if the streams on this summit supported any fish . . .

The radio clicked into life. ‘Josh, can you hear me, mate?’

‘No.’

‘Ha ha. How you doing down there?’

‘Making a restaurant reservation.’

‘Funny you should say that. If it does all go tits up and you need
supplies quickly there’s a cache, only a mile or so downstream.’

‘A cache? Of what?’

‘Survival stuff. A little shelter, a bit of food, knives, tools. Spare
laces for your boots. Left by combers, for combers.’

Joshua sat on his sleeping bag. ‘Bill, what is this place? Why did we
stop here? I mean, in a _Joker_? Who the hell stops in Jokers?’

‘Combers do. That’s the point, really. You want to know the story of
this world? How Earth West 110,719 got its locusts? Our best guess is
that pterosaurs never evolved on this world.’

‘Pterosaurs?’

‘And other flying dinosaurs. Back on the Datum, before the pterosaurs,
big insects ruled the skies. Got as big as they could, in fact,
exploiting the high oxygenation of the air. Then when the pterosaurs
came along the big insects got hunted down, and only the little ones
survived, and they never got so big again. After that the skies belonged
to the pterosaurs, and later the birds. Here – no pterosaurs, for
whatever reason. And later, the birds didn’t have a chance to grow large
either. So here it’s not swallows chasing flies; here huge rapacious
dragonflies hunt down birds the size of big moths . . .’

‘Not a world for humans, then.’

‘No chance.’

‘But the combers come here.’

‘Of course. And to survivable refuges in other Jokers. Joshua, a Joker
is a whole world, and it isn’t going to be the same all over; there are
always going to be safe places, refuges like this. You get to know
them.’

‘How?’

‘Through other combers. There’s a whole subculture that people like you,
and even Lobsang, know nothing about. And we like it that way.

‘_You_ think the story of the Long Earth is about colonies like
Hell-Knows-Where, or Helen’s Reboot, or cities like Valhalla, and wars
of independence and whatnot. All the mad old stuff from Datum history
projected into the new worlds. Well, that _isn’t_ the story, Joshua.
It’s about a new way of living – or maybe a very old one. The combers
haven’t _colonized_ the Long Earth, Joshua. Nor have they _adapted_ it
to suit themselves. They just live in it, as it is.’

This lecture surprised Joshua, who had grown up with Bill, and now
shared a town with him, and thought he knew him. ‘How do _you_ know?’

‘Oh, you know, you have your sabbaticals. I take off for a bit of an old
stroll meself from time to time. I always come back. Too fond of my home
comforts, that’s my problem. And of the odd drink. But it’s always a
grand vacation. Anyhow I know how these fellas think.’

Joshua thought that over. ‘And we need comber thinking now to find the
trolls, right?’

‘Because trolls live in the Long Earth too. And they know the secret
places, the places to hide out, like combers are learning . . . It’s
getting dark.’

‘I noticed.’

‘Joshua, you’re happy down there for the night? There are various exotic
horrors lurking, needless to say.’

‘But you’ve got infrared sensors, sonar motion sensors. You’ll spot any
moving bodies, hot-blooded or cold-blooded. Right? Wake me if you need
to.’

‘No worries. Sleep tight, buddy.’

‘And you.’

He woke up in a grey, moist dawn.

Even before he opened his eyes he was aware of an uneasy prickling at
the back of the neck, the product of a million years of animal
sensitivity trying to kick its way past the doorkeeper of the cerebrum.

He was being watched.

And he heard words: ‘_Path-less-ss one_ . . .’

Still in his sleeping bag, he sat up.

The elf was leaning against a tree trunk a few yards away, blending into
the shadows so perfectly that Joshua might never have noticed it if it
hadn’t turned its head and grinned. Low dawn sunlight fell on two rows
of perfectly triangular teeth.

Then the elf stepped out into the open light, reaching the sleeping bag
in a couple of strides.

It was no more than four feet tall, and was squat and strong, with a
face that owed something to a solemn baboon and a punk-rock hairstyle
that owed everything to a cockatoo. It wore a sort of leather loincloth,
and carried a leather pouch at its waist. It was bootless, showing feet
that were quite human except for the talon-like toenails. Joshua looked
for other weapons and couldn’t see any.

He was oddly reminded of a mole, its paws equipped for digging. This was
like nothing so much as an overgrown, vaguely human-shaped, upright,
clothes-wearing mole. An upright mole _wearing sunglasses_. The lenses
were cracked and scarred, and the creature’s ears, folded flat against
its blunt skull, didn’t look up to the job of support, so the shades
were fixed in place with a band of grubby elastic.

The elf grinned again. Joshua could smell its breath from here.

His gun was inside the sleeping bag. Joshua got a distinct impression
that attempting to reach it would be the single most stupid thing he
could possibly do.

At such times, thought Joshua, there had to be a more useful opening
than: ‘A star shines on the hour of our meeting.’ But that was what
crackled out of the radio on the ground by the sleeping bag. Bill was
evidently watching.

The elf grinned again and said, ‘I wish-sh you a good death-th.’

English. It spoke English! It _was_ an elf, obviously, a member of one
of the many slim, gracile species of humanoids that had come to be known
as elves across the Long Earth. But though he’d never seen one before,
Joshua immediately knew what subspecies this must be.

‘He’s a kobold.’

‘Evidently,’ murmured Bill from the radio. ‘Some folks call them
ringtails. Or “urban foxes”, according to the fecking English.’

‘I thought they were a comber legend.’

‘Don’t tell him that, he might get the hump. I have him on infrared,’
said Bill. ‘I see his weaponry. He won’t harm you. Well, probably not.
Tell me how you’d describe him.’

‘Can you imagine Gandhi meets Peter Pan?’

‘No . . .’

The kobold grinned, showing those sharp teeth. ‘Not worry, little mann.
I protect. Be ss-safe. Be friend.’

‘Great. My name’s Joshua.’

He nodded gravely. ‘Know. Lobsang ss-send you.’

‘Lobsang? You know about Lobsang? . . . Why aren’t I surprised?’

Bill said, ‘You’re all over the kobold grapevine, Joshua. Especially
since I started putting out feelers about Sally on your behalf.’

‘You got ss-tone that sing-ss?’

‘The stone that sings?’

‘Yah. Stone that eats soul of mann, sings. The holy music. Menn that
ss-sing after death.’ The kobold paused, moving his lips as he thought
hard, and added, ‘Like Buddy Holly.’

‘Say yes,’ said Bill.

‘Yes.’

‘Flip, Joshua, do I have to spell it out to ye? Give him the cassette.’

‘Oh – the “stone that sings”. I get it.’ Joshua reached for his jacket,
which he had been using as a pillow, found the battered old cassette
tape in the pocket, and handed it over.

The kobold reached across and took it like a devout worshipper handling
a relic. He sniffed at it, held it to his ear and shook it gently. ‘Bill
was-ss here before. We talk. He give me mus-ssic. He give cof-ffee. He
give machine that drinks-ss sunlight and plays-ss holy mu-ssic.’

‘You mean a cassette machine?’

The kobold turned the tape over in his long fingers. ‘Kinks-ss? . . .’

‘It’s the album you wanted,’ Bill said from the radio. ‘_The Kinks Are
the Village Green Preservation Society_.’

‘Good . . .’ The kobold dug a battered old tape-drive walkman from the
pouch at his waist, held up a glittering solar-cell surface to face the
sunlight, pulled ancient-looking headphones around his neck, and pushed
the tape into a slot. ‘Extra-ss?’

‘You’ve got the twelve-track mono version released in Europe, and then
the fifteen-track UK edition in stereo and mono, and some rarities. An
alternate mix of “Animal Farm”. An unreleased track called “Mick Avory’s
Underpants” . . .’

But the kobold was no longer listening. He backed up against a tree, the
worn foam of the headphones pressed against his ears.

Bill said softly, ‘That’s it. He’s out of it for a couple of hours while
he checks that out. Joshua, if you need breakfast, now’s a good time.’

‘The Kinks, Bill?’

‘A great 1960s band from the UK, who made it big in the US with—’

‘I don’t care. No disrespect to the Kinks. What’s with the tape?’

‘Trade goods, Joshua. Kobolds like human culture. Some of ’em are big on
music. This one was hooked when he first heard “Waterloo Sunset”. He’s a
kind of snitch. An informant. I get him the music he wants; he gives me
– information.’

‘Yeah, but who uses a cassette machine?’

‘Well, he’s older than he looks, Joshua. He’s been doing trades like
this for years. And he’s a humanoid with an evolutionary path that split
off from mankind’s millions of years ago. He’s not likely to be a
technology early adopter, is he?’

Joshua pushed his way out of his sleeping bag. ‘I need a coffee.’


44

THE FIRST STEPPERS, exploring the Long Earth, had found no trace of
modern man away from the Datum.

Oh, they had found a few stone tools. They had found fossil hearths in
the depths of caves. They had even found a few bones. But no great leap
forward – no cave paintings, no flower-adorned burials, no cities, no
high technology. (Well, none that was human.) The spark of higher
intellect must have been lit behind beetling pre-human brows on a
million worlds, just as on Datum Earth – but it hadn’t caught anywhere
other than on the Datum. Whatever the reason, the alternate universes
into which Earth’s pioneers poured out were mostly dark, quiet worlds.
Worlds of trees, many of them, Earths like great tumbled forests. The
Datum itself was just a clearing in the trees, a spark of civilization,
one circle of firelight beyond which the shadows spread to infinity.
There were humanoids out there, descendants of lost cousins of humanity,
but people knew they would never encounter a humanoid that was anything
like as smart as they were. Never a humanoid that could speak English,
for example.

The only thing wrong with this generally accepted picture was that it
was totally incorrect.

Professor Wotan Ulm of Oxford University, author of the bestselling if
controversial book _Moon-Watcher’s Cousins: The Humanoid Radiation
Across the Long Earth_, gave the context for the species known as
‘kobolds’ in an interview for the BBC.

‘Of course, such is the patchiness of our exploration of the Long Earth
so far that we can come to only tentative conclusions. The evidence for
kobolds themselves is little more than legend and anecdote. Nevertheless
DNA analysis of samples returned by early expeditions, including a tooth
found embedded in the boot of Joshua Valienté, confirms that the
humanoids of Long Earth diverged from Datum Earth stock several million
years ago, probably at the time of the rise of _Homo habilis_, the first
tool-making hominid. This supports my own hypothesis that it was the
increased cognitive skills of _H. habilis_ that enabled some members of
that species to step sideways into the other Earths: the ability to
imagine the tool in the stone, perhaps, is related to the ability to
imagine another world entirely. And then to reach out for it . . .

‘After this divergence – the departure of the steppers, with the Datum
inhabited by the descendants of the residuum who could not step –
humanoids radiated into the Long Earth, evolving in a variety of niches.
And across four million years natural selection has proved remarkably
inventive.

‘One fundamental boundary among the humanoid species is whether they
retained their ability to step, or not. Some did, as we know, like the
form known as the trolls. Others did not. Having found an Earth of
suitable habitability, these groups settled down, _lost_ their ability
to step, in some cases also lost the intelligence that underpinned that
stepping ability, and began to populate their single Earth. This should
not surprise us. The juvenile sea squirt is mobile, with a central
nervous system and a brain. Once it has found a suitable rock, it
settles down, opens its mouth to begin a life of sedentary feeding,
_absorbs its brain_, and turns on the TV. Similarly birds having
colonized an island free of predators will lose their ability to fly.
Flight, like intelligence, is energetically expensive and may be
selected out if not used, if no longer necessary for survival.
Similarly, presumably, with stepping.

‘A second evolutionary boundary among the nomadic species is whether
they have had extended contact with humanity on Datum Earth, or not. If
they have _not_ had contact they may have evolved into forms quite
unfamiliar from experience on the Datum, such as the trolls.

‘If they _have_ had contact with mankind, you might think we would know
about it. Well, in a sense, we do. It’s remarkable how much human
folklore can be explained away if you postulate humanoid races that can
move stepwise at will.

‘As for the human-contact humanoids themselves, their subsequent
evolution must have been affected. They may grow to look like us, for
cover. They may look threatening or cute, to disarm us. Or, most
interestingly, they may have evolved speech mechanisms like ours in
order to deal with us, in some way. Even intelligence might have been
promoted, in competition with us.

‘And so we come to the kobolds. These creatures may indeed be the
“kobolds” of myth, the source of German legends of mine spirits, which
are also known as types of gnome or dwarf, or _Bergmännlein_, “little
mountain men”. They would infest metal mines, and would be heard rather
than seen. They could be helpful: their knocking could guide human
miners to rich ore seams, or warn them of danger. In Cornwall, England,
they became known as “tommy-knockers”. And they would sometimes steal
human artefacts, gewgaws like mirrors, combs; they were evidently
fascinated by human material culture, though they could not emulate it.

‘It has to be said that the observed kobolds’ robust anatomy, their
aversion to bright light, their hands and feet evidently adapted for
digging into the earth, are all features consistent with an underground
origin. Perhaps they evolved in the subterranean Datum, or at least
adapted to it, their ancestors having stepped away and returned. And
perhaps in recent centuries the rising human population finally drove
them away, leaving them separated from humanity until our own stepping
diffusion began. The word “kobold” incidentally is the source of the
name “cobalt” . . .

‘Oddly enough, though these creatures are in many ways the most
human-like of the humanoid species, and in some ways the most
cognitively advanced, they are among the most secretive. Perhaps that’s
because of the derogatory names humans tend to give them. Or perhaps
it’s just because they know humans.

‘It may be surprising to a layman that there are any _sedentary_ Long
Earth humanoids who have been shaped over evolutionary timescales by
contact with humans. This can only come about, of course, if that
species returned to Datum Earth and _then_ lost its stepping ability.
Well, there is one Datum species that may fit this category, though the
genetic evidence is controversial: the bonobo chimps. In retrospect, who
could ever have imagined that these gentle creatures belong on the same
planet as the likes of us? Not to mention their cousins the common
chimps, who are almost as unpleasant as we are. No wonder the bonobos’
ancestors got out of here as soon as they could steal a car. And bad
luck for the present-day bonobos that their more recent ancestors came
wandering back.

‘Is that enough, Jocasta? Then perhaps you could tell the long-haired
kobold lookalike in the production booth that eating a burger all the
way through my interview was _even_ more off-putting than you might
expect . . .’


45

‘YOU HAVE MORE Kinks-ss?’

‘Some,’ whispered Bill through the radio.

‘Give.’

‘No.’

‘What is your name?’ Joshua asked at last.

The kobold grinned. At least, his teeth grinned. ‘My name to menn is
Finn McCool.’

‘I thought of that,’ Bill said. ‘Seemed to fit.’

‘I give no name for menn. Not _my_ name.’

‘Finn McCool will do,’ Joshua said.

‘People of the pathless-ss world stranger than trollen,’ Finn McCool
said, studying Joshua and his bits of kit. ‘How live? No weaponn?’

‘Oh, I have a weapon.’

‘But one only. You are pathless-ss. We are many.’

‘Many? Where? Where are the rest of you?’

The kobold held out his hand. ‘You give. This-ss the way, as all know.
You give, I talk.’

‘Ignore him,’ Bill said. ‘We’ve given already. He’s just trying to drive
a hard bargain.’

Joshua studied the kobold. ‘You trade, right? You trade with other
humans?’

‘Other humans-ss. And with other, not-humann, not kobold-ss . . .’

‘With other types of humanoid? Other races?’

‘And _they_ trade with others-ss. Others-ss, ff-rom far world-ss.’

‘How far?’

‘Worlds-ss where there iss no moon. S-ssun different colour . . .’

‘Horse shit,’ said Bill. ‘No such worlds. He’s just trying to wheedle
more out of you, Joshua. Aren’t you, Finn McCool? You can’t shit a
shitter, you little shit. Listen, Joshua, you have to understand what
we’re dealing with here. These are slippery little buggers. They get
around quick, they seem to be able to use soft places, they talk all the
time, and they trade, with us and each other. But _they’re not human_.
They don’t do business the way we do, grubbing for wealth, making as
much profit as we can. They’re more like—’

‘Collectors?’

‘Something like that, yeah. Like nerds who collect comic books. Or like
magpies, fascinated by human stuff, shiny gewgaws that they can steal
and stare at but they never understand. There’s no logic to it, Joshua.
It’s just about the stuff they want, that’s all. Once you understand
that they’re not hard to handle. Big fecking ugly magpies with trousers
on. That’s you, Finn McCool.’

The kobold just grinned.

‘Well, I guess you know why we’re here, Finn McCool,’ Joshua said. ‘What
we want. _Where are the trolls?_’

‘You give—’

‘Cough up, you little gobshite,’ Bill snapped.

Finn McCool hissed, and said grudgingly, ‘Trollen in _here_. But not
_here_.’

Joshua sighed. ‘Textbook enigmatic. Any time you want to jump in, Bill—’

‘Finn McCool. Are you saying the trolls are hiding out in a Joker?’

‘Not _here_.’

‘A Joker, but not this Joker. As I guessed. But which one?’

Finn McCool seemed to Joshua to have no intention of answering.

‘That’s it?’ Joshua said. ‘That’s all we get out of you in return for
that magnificent, umm, old tape?’

Suddenly McCool stood straight. He sniffed the air with his flat,
chimp-like muzzle, and laughed.

‘Joshua,’ Bill said urgently. ‘I detect nine, correction ten – no,
eleven hotspots converging on you. I now have visual confirmation. Hmm.’

Joshua spun around. A morning mist swirled now between the trees, and
the stream was lost to view. Anything could be out there. Water dripped
off the leaves of the trees. ‘What do you mean, _hmm_? What do they look
like?’

‘Well . . . Purposeful.’

There was a flash of teeth, Finn McCool faded for an instant, and was
gone. Joshua could have been wrong, but it seemed that McCool’s grin was
the last bit of him to go.

And out of the mists . . .

The rising sun sent spears of reddish light across the grassland, and
the altitude of this summit lent a faint chill to the breeze. A few
shreds of mist stirred down among the trees that marked the stream.

And there were shapes among the trees.

They began as mere suggestions of motion in the mist, and then
solidified. The general effect was of a wheel slowing from turbine
speeds to stillness. When they were still—

They were not much taller than a man, but the beanpole thinness gave an
exaggerated impression of height. Their skin was greyish, and they wore
their ash-blonde hair Afro-style. They could have passed muster in some
of the badly lit discos Joshua had, if rarely, attended in his youth
back in Madison.

Except for the ears. Which were large and pointed, and constantly
flicking back and forth as though seeking the faintest sounds. And
except for the eyes, that glowed a very faint green. They carried long
thin double-bladed weapons of wood – swords, for want of a better word.
They weren’t yelling, or waving their weapons. They just looked quietly
determined.

Any child could have put a name to them. _Elves_. Not relatively
friendly music-loving conversationalists like Finn McCool. The elves of
nightmare.

And they were closing on Joshua, from every direction.

Joshua had nowhere to run. He had encountered various species of elves
before. He knew that stepping wouldn’t help, not when faced with an
enemy that was a _better_ stepper than he was. His gun was somewhere in
the scuffed-up sleeping bag. Only the radio was in reach, a plastic
block the size of his fist. Not much of a weapon . . .

The first elf to reach him brought back its sword for a killing arc –
and hesitated, as if relishing the moment.

Joshua, frozen to the spot, stared back. Close to, the creature looked
like something out of a book on prehistory, though a Neanderthal would
have considered it ugly. Its face was a network of wrinkles. It wore a
short fur tunic, some sort of knapsack, and an expression of
calculation. Maybe it was hesitating as it tried to work out which way
he was going to step, so it could follow him and kill him anyway.

All this in a heartbeat. Then Joshua’s reflexes took over.

He ducked, grabbed the radio, and brought it around in a rapid swing
that was interrupted by the elf’s jaw. Bits of glass and plastic erupted
in a shower of golden sparks. As the elf staggered back, Joshua’s leg
came up for the classic strike favoured by women’s self-defence teachers
everywhere, and a high-pitched squeal of agony added to mankind’s tiny
stock of anatomical knowledge of Long Earth humanoids.

And suddenly there was action all around Joshua.

McCool was back, he had brought more kobolds, and they were already
fighting. The cavalry, Joshua thought with a rush of gratitude. But this
was a cavalry that _stepped_, like its opponents. Suddenly figures from
both subspecies were flashing past Joshua’s view, like fragments of
nightmare.

Joshua got out of there. He ran head-down for the ladder which came
dangling from the descending ship. He had to knock one fighter out of
the way; he couldn’t tell if it was a good guy or a bad guy.

Only when he got to the ladder, and, with the security of an alloy rung
in his hand, was already rising in the air and out of the battle, did he
look back down.

The elves favoured swords, while the kobolds tended to fight barehanded
– which showed rather more intelligence in Joshua’s view, because if you
were grappling with your opponent he couldn’t step without taking you
with him. Besides, the kobolds seemed to have elevated unarmed combat to
the point where weapons would merely get in the way. He saw one kobold
vanish momentarily as a blade nearly beheaded him, then reappear, grab
the sword arm and with balletic grace send a kick into the elf’s chest
that must have killed immediately. As usual with a humanoid fight, it
wasn’t a battle so much as a series of private duels. If a fighter was
victorious he sought out another opponent, but would be quite oblivious
to the fact that a colleague was being backed into a corner by
overwhelming odds.

And then Joshua saw Finn McCool downed by a wooden sword thrust through
his arm. Maybe he tried to step, but he was stunned, confused. His elf
opponent dodged a disembowelling swipe from McCool’s horny toes, and
withdrew the sword for a second thrust.

Again this elf paused before the moment of the kill. His back was to
Joshua.

And Joshua had a chance to intervene.

‘Damn it!’ Joshua let go of the ladder and his chance of safety, dropped
heavily to the ground, picked up a fallen branch, and ran across. It
wasn’t that Finn McCool had endeared himself to Joshua. But if Joshua
had to choose, he’d take the side of someone who hadn’t actually tried
to kill him. Had, indeed, come back to fight on his side.

Still running, he hit the elf across the neck as hard as he could.
Joshua had anticipated a satisfying thunk of timber on flesh. Instead
there was a soft necrotic splat, as the rotten branch disintegrated in
an explosion of fungus spores and angry beetles. The elf, totally
unharmed, turned slowly, its face puckered in astonishment.

Finn McCool’s good hand flashed out once, twice, and where it hit there
was a sharp crack of bone. The elf folded up on itself, and stepped away
before it died.

Blood was dripping from McCool’s arm, but he wasn’t paying it any
attention. McCool stood up, face-to-face with Joshua – and Joshua
realized that something had gone very wrong. ‘Pathless-ss one! I kill
you many!’

The war around them was ceasing. Elves and kobolds alike had paused in
mid-slaughter to watch them. ‘Now look—’

Finn McCool flung back his head and screamed. The flying kick he
launched could have killed Joshua in a second.

But Joshua had already set off running, heading for that ladder again.
He threw himself into the air and grabbed a rung, and to his credit,
Bill raised the ship immediately. Joshua looked down from a few yards
up, to see Finn McCool sprawled cursing under a tree, his injured arm
leaking blood.

Then Joshua was rising up through the sparse canopy and into the
sunlight, and the montane forest, the messy, sprawling battleground,
receded from view.

He climbed up the rest of the ladder, through the hatch and into the
sanity of the gondola, stood up, and cracked his head on the ceiling. He
started pulling up the ladder in great tangled armfuls.

‘That is you, isn’t it, Joshua?’ Bill asked anxiously. ‘I’ve been out of
touch since you used the radio to bust that elf’s jaw—’

‘Just go, go!’

Only when the ladder was up did he let himself sag down on to a couch,
fighting for breath. There was no sound up here but the squeaks and
groans from the gasbag as it warmed up in the morning’s heat. Below him
the _Shillelagh_’s shadow drifted peacefully across the forest roof, as
if all sorts of hell weren’t going on down there in the gloom.

He kept seeing Finn McCool’s face, a contorted Noh mask of fury and
hatred. ‘I saved his life. McCool. Somehow that made me a deadly enemy.
Where was the logic in that?’

‘It’s kobold logic, Joshua. Like human honour, but in a distorting
mirror. You shamed him by saving him, when he was supposed to be saving
_you_. You want to go down and have a bit of an old chat about it?’

‘Just get us out of here.’

The forest below blinked away.


46

NELSON’S FIRST STOP in Wyoming, where he had driven in his rental
Winnebago on the trail of the Lobsang Project, was at Dubois, cowboy
country.

Alas there was a shortage of cowboys nowadays, Wyoming folk having been
particularly quick to head for the new stepwise worlds where land was
free and government interference infrequent. It was almost reassuring
for Nelson to read on a truck bumper sticker, ‘In This Neighbourhood We
Don’t Just Watch.’

He found a LongHorn, and ordered a beer and a burger. The TV in an upper
corner, largely ignored, was showing images of continuing geological
problems in Yellowstone, in another part of the state. Swarms of minor
earthquakes, an evacuation of some small community, landslips, roads
cut. Dead fish in Yellowstone Lake. Bubbles, rising languidly in some
pool of hot mud. But many of these incidents, Nelson slowly gathered,
were in fact occurring in stepwise versions of Yellowstone in the worlds
next door. The geologists, scattered over a band of worlds with
instruments stripped from long-standing stations on the Datum, claimed
to be learning a huge amount from comparative studies of the differing
behaviours of the stepwise calderas. The newsreaders, vacant and pretty,
mimed exaggerated relief that the still-overcrowded Datum itself didn’t
seem to be seriously affected, and cracked silly jokes.

Nelson looked away, retreating into his own thoughts. It had taken him a
month to get here from Chicago, a slow, rambling journey, and a very
pleasurable one. He had needed the time to shed his past, the very
intense experience of his years as a priest in St. John on the Water. He
had been like a deep sea diver decompressing, he imagined. In the
meantime, the world’s mysteries could wait . . .

To his mild irritation, just outside Nelson’s window was an animated
billboard fixed to an iron rail fence. It cycled through various
distracting messages, which he did his best to ignore. Distractions
everywhere: that was the modern world, on the Datum anyhow. Then one
message caught his eye: ‘Can you see the humour of this iron railing?’

He nearly dropped his burger, which would have been a wicked waste. ‘A
G. K. Chesterton quote? _Here?_ . . . Good afternoon to you, Lobsang. So
I’m on the right track.’

The Winnebago wasn’t the fastest machine on the road, but once out of
Dubois Nelson floored it.

He said aloud, to anybody listening, ‘Strictly speaking I am doing an
amazingly dumb thing. I might be dealing with a madman. Well, I’ve met
one or two of those, but very few of them quoted me the works of one of
the best writers Britain ever produced . . .’ Gazing down the empty
road, Nelson wondered how long it was since anyone other than a scholar
had read the works of G. K. Chesterton. He’d not even read much himself
since he’d devoured the best of them in his teens, after a chance
discovery in a public library in Joburg.

Devil’s Tower was visible on the horizon ahead when a motorcycle cop
pulled him over.

The cop wore a dark visor, carried a massive gun in a holster at his
hip, and, as he sauntered over, he had an all-round air of menacing
dominance. ‘Mr. Nelson A-zi-ki-we?’ He took a lot of care with the name.
‘I’ve been expecting you. Show some ID, please.’

Nelson drew breath. ‘No, sir! Show me your ID . . . Here we are, two
strangers on an empty road, both uncertain of the other’s identity – and
allegiance. A quintessentially Chestertonian moment, don’t you think?’

The cop’s eyes were invisible behind the visor. But he grinned and said,
‘In the breaking of bridges—’

More Chesterton. Automatically, the words coming straight up from the
obsessive reading of his adolescence, Nelson said, ‘Is the end of the
world.’

‘Good enough, friend. No further credentials necessary. Unfortunately a
genuine patrol officer is on the horizon, so excuse me for running.
You’ll find coordinates in your sat-nav.’

Thirty seconds later his motorbike was lost on the horizon.

Of course the kosher cop, when he arrived, was inquisitive. Nelson went
into innocent-and-mildly-disorientated-tourist mode, and managed to
stall him until _three_ Winnebagos, all with _California_ plates, zoomed
past doing somewhere over eighty, low-hanging fruit that couldn’t be
ignored by any Wyoming cop.

Nelson drove on.

It was the middle of the following day when he drove the Winnebago into
the forecourt of an electronics factory, and faced locked, unmanned
gates, marked with the logo of the transEarth Institute. A small speaker
on a pole by his driver-side door demanded, ‘Identify yourself, please.’

Nelson thought it over. He leaned out and said, ‘I am Thursday.’

‘Of course you are. Come right inside.’

The gate swung open silently. Nelson took a moment to run an online
search on that name: _transEarth_. Then he drove through the gate.


47

HE FOUND A door, which revealed a short corridor, which led to an
elevator.

‘Please walk forward,’ said the voice – Lobsang’s voice? ‘Take the lift;
it will operate automatically.’

Of course it could be some kind of trap. But had the voice purposefully
called the elevator a ‘lift’, British style, to put him at his ease? If
so, cute, but strange.

He walked ahead willingly. The elevator sealed up around him and
descended.

Even now that disembodied voice spoke to him. ‘This facility used to
belong to the US government. Since being bought by trans-Earth, somehow
it’s slipped off the map. Governments can be so clumsy . . .’

The elevator door opened to reveal a kind of study, perhaps a rather
English design, complete with fireplace and dancing flames – obviously
artificial, but crackling fairly realistically. He might almost have
been back in one of the grander of his parishioners’ houses in St. John
on the Water.

A chair shifted, set beside a low table. A man of indeterminate age
stood to meet him, wearing a monk’s orange robe, head shaven, smiling –
and holding a pipe. Somehow, like the fire, he had an air of
artificiality.

‘Welcome, Nelson Azikiwe!’

Nelson stepped forward. ‘You are Lobsang?’

‘Guilty as charged.’ The man waved the pipe vaguely towards another
chair. ‘Please sit.’

They sat, Nelson taking an upright chair opposite Lobsang.

‘First things first,’ Lobsang said. ‘We are safe and discreet in this
place, which is one of several such support facilities I own across the
world – indeed, the worlds. Nelson, you are free to walk out of here any
time you wish, but I would prefer it if you never spoke about this
meeting – well, I believe a fellow Chestertonian will be discreet. Grant
me the liberty of confirming your favourite novel – _The Napoleon of
Notting Hill_, was it not?’

‘The source of the railings quote.’

‘Exactly. Personally my pick is _The Man Who Was Thursday_, still an
excellent read and the precursor of many spy romances over the years. A
curious man, Chesterton. Embraced Catholicism like a security blanket,
don’t you think?’

‘I found him as a kid, when I was digging around in a Joburg library. A
stash of ancient books, a relic of the days of the British presence.
Probably not been read since apartheid . . .’ Nelson ran out of steam.
He supposed the idea of a _bongani_ like him sitting in a dusty library
absorbing the adventures of Father Brown had been surreal enough, but
this situation took the biscuit, as his parishioners might have said.
What to ask? Where to begin? He essayed, ‘Are you part of the Lobsang
Project?’

‘My dear sir, I _am_ the whole of the project.’

Nelson reflected on various searches he’d run. ‘You know, I recall
gossip about a supercomputer that endeavoured to get its owners to
accept that it was human, a soul having been reincarnated into the
machine at the moment it was booted . . . Something like that. The
nerdosphere consensus was that it was a red herring.’ Nelson hesitated.
‘It was, wasn’t it?’

Lobsang dismissed the question. ‘By the way, would you like a drink? I
understand you’re a beer man.’ He stood and crossed to a walnut drinks
cabinet.

Nelson accepted the drink, half a glass of a heavy, flavoursome brew,
and persisted with his questions. ‘And are you somehow connected to the
_Mark Twain_ expedition?’

‘You have me there. That was the second time I found myself close to the
glare of public scrutiny, after the circumstances of my miraculous
birth, and it was rather harder to escape. I’m afraid poor Joshua
Valienté ended up taking more of the resulting attention than he wanted.
Or deserved, actually. While I receded to the comfort of the shadows.’

‘And isn’t transEarth some kind of subsidiary of the Black Corporation?’

Lobsang smiled. ‘Yes, transEarth is partly owned by Black.’

‘Tell me why I’m here.’

‘Actually you came to me, remember. You’re here because you solved the
puzzle. Followed the clues.’

‘The link between you and the _Mark Twain_?’

‘Quite. But of course you have your own underlying personal connection
to Black, since your scholarship days. You won’t be surprised to find
that the Black Corporation has been watching you for some time. You’re
one of Douglas Black’s longer-term investments, in fact.’

Lobsang leaned over his table, tapped its surface so that a screen
flipped up, and Nelson watched disturbingly familiar images of himself,
his family, his life slide past one by one, beginning with his own
smiling face as a two-year-old.

‘Born in a Johannesburg township, of course. You first came to our
attention when your mother put you forward for Black’s “Searching for
the Future” programme. Scholarships and various other contracts
followed, though you were never directly employed by Black. Then came
your rise to modest prominence as a palaeontologist of the Long Earth.
Exploring the stepwise past, yes? It was something of a surprise when
you took your own sideways step into the Church of England, but Douglas
Black believes in allowing those he values to find their own way. He
trusts them, you see. And now here you are, well spoken of by Douglas’s
good friend the Archbishop of Canterbury – yet seeking new directions.’
He smiled. ‘Did I miss anything significant?’

Nelson felt needled at the idea he was being manipulated. ‘And what are
_you_, sir? Are you anything more than another “long-term investment” of
a rich and powerful man?’

Lobsang was oddly hesitant. Nelson was reminded, surprisingly, of some
of his more theologically doubting parishioners. ‘In a way. In fact,
literally, _yes_. Technologically speaking, I am a product of Black
technologies, beginning with the gel that supports my consciousness.
Legally speaking, I am a business partner, a co-owner of a Black
Corporation subsidiary. Yet beyond that Douglas gives me great – well,
untrammelled freedom. What _am_ I? I _believe_ that I am a reincarnated
Tibetan motorbike repairman. I have clear if somewhat erratic memories
of my former life . . . Some call me a deranged if highly intelligent
supercomputer. But I _know_ I have a soul. It’s the bit talking to you,
correct? And I have dreams – do you believe that?’

‘That’s all rather muddled. Are you in need of counselling?’

Lobsang smiled ruefully. ‘Probably. But more specifically, I need –
companions – in my quest.’

‘What quest?’

‘Simply put, I am researching the Long Earth phenomenon and all its
implications for mankind, and I have come to understand I cannot do it
by myself. I need different perspectives – such as yours, Reverend
Azikiwe. Your unusual mix of the rational with the mystic . . . You
can’t disguise that you too have always searched for truth. One only has
to glance at your online activities to perceive that.’

Nelson grunted. ‘I suppose there’s no point in discussing my right to
privacy.’

‘I have a mission for you. A quest, a journey across the Long Earth –
and indeed across this one. We will be travelling to New Zealand, on
Earth West number – well, the numbers scarcely matter, do they?’

‘_New Zealand?_ And what will we be travelling to see?’

‘You saw the records of the _Mark Twain_ expedition, I believe. Those
that were made public at least.’

‘Yes . . .’

‘Did you come across references to the entity known as First Person
Singular?’

Nelson stayed silent. But his curiosity was like a fish-hook in his
flesh.

Lobsang shifted in his chair. ‘What do you say?’

‘It’s all a bit sudden, isn’t it? I need to think about it.’

‘The twain will be here tomorrow.’

‘Fine.’ He stood. ‘I’ll sleep in my vehicle overnight. That will give me
time to consider.’

Lobsang stood too, smiling. ‘Take all the time you need.’

That night there was a thunderstorm, a real humdinger coming in from the
west, and rain that made the Winnebago sound as if it were a target on a
firing range.

Nelson lay in his bed listening to the barrage, and considering the
world in general and his current situation in particular – including a
sidebar on the nature of souls. It was strange how many people he’d met
who had no use for orthodox Christianity yet nevertheless unthinkingly
believed that they had a soul.

It was stranger still to think that perhaps you could _create_ a soul.
Or at least, create a body that could store a soul . . . Suddenly he was
eager to begin this journey with Lobsang – if only to get to know
Lobsang himself.

And yet there was residual suspicion. He remembered what Lobsang had
said, somewhat enigmatically: _Actually you came to me, remember. You’re
here because you solved the puzzle. Followed the clues_ . . . True, but
who had planted those clues in the first place?

The next morning he called to arrange pickup for the rental Winnebago.

At noon, the promised twain dropped soundlessly out of the sky. Nelson
had travelled on twains many times before, but this one seemed rather
spartan, a two-hundred-foot envelope over a compact, streamlined
gondola.

The twain lowered a safety harness and pulled him up into the air. He
was deposited in an area near the stern.

Once out of the harness he made his way through a cramped interior to a
lounge cum galley that evidently doubled as an observation deck. He felt
rather than heard motors start up.

And suddenly, through big picture windows, he saw he was in storm
clouds, with rain battering the windows – and then hot sunshine that
caused the hull to steam. Stepping already, then. He had taken
anti-nausea pills, recommended by Lobsang, and despite his usual
aversion to stepping felt little discomfort.

A short staircase led him to a door to a wheelhouse above the lounge – a
door which appeared to be locked. As he tried the door handle a screen
on the wall lit up, showing a smiling, shaven-headed visage. ‘Glad to
have you aboard, Nelson!’

‘Glad to be here, Lobsang.’

‘I am, as you may guess, the pilot of this craft—’

‘_Which_ Lobsang am I talking to?’

‘I invite you to understand that Lobsang is not simply a single
presence. To call me ubiquitous doesn’t do the trick. Remember the movie
_Spartacus_? Well, all of me are Spartacus. It does require regular
downtime to synch us all, _me_ all . . . You’re alone on the ship, but
should you require a physical presence, for instance for medical
reasons, I can activate an ambulant unit. We will make for New Zealand,
stepping more or less continuously to find the most auspicious winds,
world by world. Believe it or not, on a twain I like to do it the gentle
way.’

‘I’ll try to relax and enjoy the ride, then.’

‘Do that. Relaxing was one thing Joshua Valienté never managed . . .’

‘Valienté certainly didn’t look very relaxed on the clip I found of him
returning to Madison. A clip that led me to this point, in fact, to you.
A clip you probably sent me yourself, right?’ He’d committed himself to
this peculiar quest, but his resentment at the idea that he had been
controlled, drawn into this situation, started to morph to anger. ‘How
far back does your influence extend? I don’t suppose you had anything to
do with establishing a chat group called the Quizmasters? . . . Were
you, in fact, behind the entire trail of breadcrumbs that led me to
you?’

Lobsang smiled. ‘From now on, no more tricks.’

‘I hope not. Nobody likes being manipulated, Lobsang.’

‘I don’t think of it as manipulation. I think of it as the setting out
of an opportunity. It’s up to you whether you take that opportunity or
not.’

‘Yesterday you called me an investment.’

‘That’s Douglas Black’s language, not mine. And remember, Nelson, as I
pointed out, _you_ came to _me_, in the end. Look, whether we end up
working together or not, welcome aboard, and enjoy the ride. If nothing
else, think of it as a vacation, if you like.’

‘Or an audition.’

‘If you will.’

Nelson smiled back. ‘But, Lobsang, who is auditioning whom?’


48

THE BEAGLE AND the kobold approached, walking out of the dusty distance.

In their rough camp, Jansson and Sally stood, wary. As the creatures
drew near, Jansson was very aware of an emptiness at her belt where her
cop-issue Stepper box ought to be. The beagle, the dog-man, had
confiscated it on the day they’d arrived. And so she, at least, without
Sally’s aid, had been stuck here ever since, on this peculiar world with
its strange inhabitants.

It was the first time they’d been visited in the week or so that they’d
been here, since they’d been met in the Rectangles world and brought to
this Earth a couple of dozen steps further West – to a world full of
trolls, as Sally said she could feel, hear, as soon as they arrived. The
beagles were waiting, they were told, for the return of some kind of
ruler from . . . someplace else. It would be this ruler who would deal
with the humans.

Jansson supposed it gave them time to get their bearings, for her to
recover somewhat from the journey so far. Even that first jaunt, from
Rectangles to here, had been a grotesque experience, because the beagle
who had met them couldn’t step; it had had to be carried on the back of
the squat, ugly humanoid Sally had called a ‘kobold’.

It had all been a rush of strangeness for them both. Even Sally, Jansson
had learned, the great explorer of the Long Earth, had known nothing of
this place before being brought here, lured by the gossip of the
kobolds. To Sally this world had been just another Joker, just another
desert world in a band of such worlds which, apparently, had lost much
of their water through some calamity during the turbulent epoch of
planetary formation. On such a world geological activity was going to be
reduced, life restricted . . . That was the theory. In fact, as Jansson
was learning, on many Jokers there were habitable refuges.

On this world there was an island of green, of moisture – from what the
kobold had said, Sally had guessed it could be the size of Europe.
Unnoticed by dismissive previous explorers, including Joshua and Sally,
who had come rushing through this world too hastily. Unnoticed by the
teams of researchers who had followed that first expedition to
Rectangles: they had been Datum-raised workers with Datum-trained
expectations, who thought in terms of one world thick, and never looked
stepwise.

Well, here they were, in a world that hosted these dogs, these strange
sapients – and, evidently, the trolls, in great concentrations.

For a long interval there was silence. The dog beasts seemed to like to
stare, to study, to think before speaking; the grammar of their
interactions was not like the human. Jansson and Sally just stood there,
waiting. The kobold had a wounded arm, Jansson noticed now, roughly
bandaged with a soiled rag. He cackled, evidently enjoying the moment.

The trolls who’d travelled with them didn’t seem bothered in the
slightest. Mary sat on a knoll, humming a tune that was naggingly
familiar to Jansson, while Ham happily raked the ground with his strong
fingers, periodically popping grubs into his mouth. As if, Jansson
thought, being approached by a bipedal dog wearing a ray gun happened
every day.

The beagle stood before the women, eyes unblinking, that mobile wet nose
quivering as, evidently, he _smelled_ them. He must have been nearly
seven feet tall, and he towered over both Jansson and Sally. But that,
and the ray gun, weren’t the only reasons he was so intimidating,
Jansson realized. There was something fluidly _animal_ about him, a
sense of honed perfection, right down to the way his fine fur coated his
flesh in smooth streamlined layers. And there was intelligence in his
eyes, a bright hard directed intelligence.

His teeth, eyes, ears, muzzle, nose were all very dog-like, even though,
Jansson saw, the overall shape of his skull, with a bulging brow, might
have been humanoid. His face sometimes looked human, sometimes
wolf-like, like a shifting hologram. His ears were too sharp, his eyes
too far apart, his grin too wide, his nose too flat with that blackened
tip . . . And his eyes, yes, it was like looking into the eyes of a
wolf. He made Jansson feel shabby, incomplete. But there was also
something unreal about him, as if he were a movie CGI special effect. He
just didn’t fit into Jansson’s cosy, parochial, Datum-nurtured
consciousness.

He couldn’t step. And presumably none of his kind could, either. Jansson
had to cling to that thought, that she could do something he couldn’t—

She coughed, and shivered, a wave of weakness passing over her.

The beagle turned on her. ‘Your name?’

His language was distorted, a mix of dog-like growls and whines.
_Hrr-your-rrh ne-rr-mmhh?_ Yet he clearly spoke English, his words
understandable. Another astonishing conceptual leap for an ex-cop like
Jansson to absorb.

Jansson tried to stand straight. ‘Monica Jansson. Formerly Lieutenant,
Madison PD.’

The beagle cocked his head on one side, evidently puzzled. He turned to
Sally. ‘You?’

‘Sally Linsay.’

The beagle raised his fore-limb, his arm, and pointed at his chest.
Jansson saw that his paw, his hand, had four extended finger-like
appendages, nothing like a thumb, and he wore a kind of leathery glove
over his palm. Protection for when he went on all fours, perhaps. ‘My
name,’ he said now. ‘Snowy.’

Sally clearly tried not to, but burst out laughing.

Jansson turned to the kobold. ‘_Snowy?_’

The kobold grinned nervously. ‘Other pathless-ss ones came befo-rre
. . . Gave na-mme.’

Sally said, ‘And I know your name. Finn McCool, right?’ She glanced at
Jansson. ‘One of the smarter of his breed. Good with humans. I might
have known you’d be involved in this, chasing some angle.’

The kobold just grinned. ‘Josh-shua.’

Sally scowled. ‘What about Joshua?’

But the kobold would not reply.

Snowy studied them. ‘You,’ he said to Sally, ‘crotch-stink human-nn.’

‘Thanks.’

‘Smell same as befor-rre. Like othe-hhrs of your kind. But-tt _you_
. . .’

He came closer to Jansson. She tried not to flinch as, his eyes
half-closed, he sniffed her breath. He smelled of wet fur and a kind of
musk.

‘St-hhrange. Sick. You smell sick-hrr.’

‘Very perceptive,’ murmured Jansson.

He stepped back, raised his head and howled, a sharp, supremely loud
noise that made Jansson wince, and Sally cover her ears. It was answered
within a few seconds by another howl coming from the east.

Snowy turned and pointed that way. ‘My Den. Smell of my litter-hrr.
Name, Eye of Hunter-rrh. Cart coming, ca-rrhy you. Granddaughter of Den,
name Petra. Sh-she see you. Granddaughter back from Den of Mother,
fa-hhr from here.’

Sally asked, ‘Does this Granddaughter know about us?’

‘Not yet. Surp-hhrrise by Snowy.’ He pulled back his lips to reveal very
canine teeth in a kind of smile. ‘Rewar-rrd for Snowy, for gi-ffft.’ He
sounded breathless, agitated.

Sally murmured to Jansson, ‘Don’t look down.’

‘Why not?’

‘If you do you’ll see how he’s already anticipating the reward he’s
going to get from this Granddaughter, whoever she is.’

Snowy walked away, to Jansson’s relief, a big priapic animal backing off
and looking out for the cart.

The kobold was still here, grinning at them.

Jansson said wearily, ‘So am I allowed to ask questions?’

Sally laughed. ‘If you can figure out where to begin.’

Jansson jabbed a finger at McCool. ‘I know of your kind. The police
agencies across the Low Earths keep records of you. Partial sightings,
fragmentary reports, scratchy CCTV images . . . What are you doing
here?’

McCool shrugged. ‘Hel-pp you. For price.’ _Prei-sss_.

‘Of course, for a price,’ Sally said. ‘I knew that the kobolds were
always going to know where the trolls are hiding out, Monica.’

‘So you went to them and asked—’

‘They all know each other. They swap information. The trolls have their
long call. With the kobolds it’s more like the long snitch. Anything
they know is swapped around and sold to the highest bidder. So I
followed the rumour trail, one scrawny kobold to the next. At last I
found one who told me to bring Mary to the Rectangles. And then – well,
you know the rest. From there we were brought here, to this arid world,
this Joker, full of these dog-like sapients.’

‘Beagles,’ McCool said. ‘Called beagles-ss.’

Jansson asked, ‘Who by? Why beagles?’

‘Who? Other pathless-ss ones, here before. They call them beagles-ss.’

Sally said, ‘Somebody’s having a joke. I bet we can blame Charles Darwin
for _that_.’

Finn McCool shrugged. It was an unnatural motion, Jansson thought, less
like a human gesture than a monkey performing a circus trick.

Jansson asked, ‘And is that how he got his “name”? Snowy?’

Another shrug. ‘Human na-mme. Not true name. Beagles-ss not speak true
na-mme to human-nn. Kobolds not ss-peak true name to pathless-ss ones.’

‘How is it he speaks English at all? Learned from humans?’

‘No. Kobolds here first. Kobolds sell beagles ss-tuff.’

Jansson nodded. ‘You already spoke English. So the beagles were the
first to learn your language rather than the other way around.’

‘Beagles are smarter than kobolds, then,’ Sally said with a satisfied
grin.

McCool looked away, edgy, nervous.

There was a plume of dust, coming from the east. Snowy spotted it,
sniffed the air, howled again. There was an answering howl from off in
the distance, and what sounded like a throaty caw to Jansson, like the
cry of some tremendous bird. Jansson shivered again, having no real idea
what she was getting into.

She turned back to McCool. ‘Tell me one more thing. That beagle, Snowy,
was carrying a stone-tipped spear – and a ray gun.’

Sally grunted. ‘Actually it looked like a compact laser projector.’

‘We just got here. But I don’t see any cities, any planes in the sky.
How did some kind of Stone Age warrior get a laser gun?’

Sally said to McCool, ‘From some other world, stepwise. From you
kobolds. Right? So is that your angle here?’

The kobold grinned again. ‘Beagles not ss-tep. Smart but no toolss. Only
ss-tone. Buy tool-ss from us-ss, all kinda stuff.’

‘Including a weapon,’ Sally murmured, ‘that looked like it came from a
society more advanced even than Datum Earth. Where _did_ you get it,
monkey boy?’

‘Dug up,’ Finn McCool said simply, and he grinned, and would say no
more.

That approaching dust plume resolved into a cart, a heavy frame of wood
running on four solid wooden wheels that seemed to be rimmed with rusty
iron. Another beagle, perhaps slighter than Snowy, stood on the cart’s
bed, wielding reins. Taller than Jansson, taller even than Snowy, the
bird things had fat feathered bodies with stubby wings, muscular legs,
feet tipped with claws like sickles, long pillar-like necks, and heads
that looked all beak. Yet they were harnessed up and appeared obedient.

‘That would be an astonishing sight,’ Jansson murmured. ‘A dog riding a
cart. Even if it wasn’t being drawn by two huge birds. If you filmed
that and put it on the outernet it would be a comedy sensation.’

Sally touched Jansson’s arm, surprisingly sympathetic. ‘Just let the
strangeness wash over you, Lieutenant Jansson. Come on . . .’

Hastily they packed up their few bits of gear.

The cart slowed to a stop. The beagle driver jumped to the ground, and
she – nude save for a kind of belt of pockets, you could see she was
female – greeted Snowy. They ran around each other briefly, and Snowy
even dropped for a moment to all fours, wagging a stub of tail.

‘The females are dominant,’ Sally murmured.

‘What?’

‘Look at the two of them. He’s more pleased to see her than the other
way around. Something worth noting.’

‘Hmm. Maybe you’re jumping to conclusions.’

Sally snorted. ‘You could learn all you need to know about _human_ males
from one miserable specimen. Why not the same here? Listen, we need to
find an angle of our own.’

‘We came here to help Mary. We came for the trolls.’

‘Yeah. But we weren’t expecting all this complication. We’ll play for
time – and stay alive in the process. Just remember, we can always step
out, if it gets bad enough. I can carry you. These dogs can’t follow, we
know that now.’

With the greeting done, the female beagle approached the humans. She
pointed to her own chest. ‘Li-Li. Call me Li-Li.’ She turned to the
cart. ‘Ride to Eye of Hunte-hhr.’

Sally nodded. ‘Thank you. We need to bring the trolls we came with
. . .’

But Li-Li had already turned away, and was beckoning to the trolls,
singing a kind of warbled melody. Without any fuss Mary stood, picked up
Ham and set him on her shoulder, and clambered aboard the cart.

The humans followed, with Finn McCool. Snowy snapped the reins, the bird
beasts cawed like pigeons on steroids, and the cart jolted into motion,
nearly knocking Jansson over. There were no seats. Jansson held on to
the rough-finished wall of the cart, wondering how far it was to this
city, and if she could make it all the way without collapsing.

Li-Li approached Jansson. Again Jansson had to endure a wet dog-like
nose sniffing at her mouth, armpits, crotch. ‘Sick,’ Li-Li said without
ceremony.

Jansson forced a smile. ‘My body’s going wrong, and I’m full of drugs.
No wonder I smell strange to you.’

Li-Li took Jansson’s hands in hers. Li-Li wore no gloves, unlike Snowy.
Her fingers were long, human-like in that regard, but her palms had
leathery pads on the underside, like canine paws. ‘My jj-rrh-_ob_. Care
for sick and injured. You lucky.’

‘How?’ Sally asked sharply. ‘How were we lucky?’

‘Snowy found-dd you.’ She glanced up at the big beagle at the reins.
‘Not ve-hhry clever but big spir-rrit. Always truth-tells. B-hhrave.
Good hunter, but kind. Takes you back to city, see Granddaughter Petra.
Some hunter-hhrs, just take back head. Or ear-rrs.’

Sally and Jansson exchanged a glance. Jansson said, ‘So we’re lucky we
got found by a beagle that didn’t just kill us outright.’

‘There’s no higher morality,’ Sally said. ‘By the way,’ she added more
softly, ‘I just jumped to another conclusion.’

‘What?’

‘She said Snowy’s truthful. That implies that others aren’t. These
super-dogs know how to lie.’

Jansson nodded. ‘Noted.’


49

SOON THEY MADE out a smear of smoke on the eastern horizon.

The trail they followed turned to bare mud scored by the ruts of
traffic. The land seemed greener too, away from the open sward of
scrubland into which they had stepped. They even passed by a few forest
clumps. To Jansson, no naturalist, many of the trees looked like ferns,
with squat, stubby trunks and sprawling, parasol-like leaves.

In one place she could see through a screen of trees to a shimmer of
open water, a lake, and by its bank creatures had gathered to drink.
They were rather like small deer, Jansson thought, but their bodies were
a little too heavy, their legs a bit too stubby. Deer with a dash of
pig, perhaps.

Li-Li was on the alert as the cart rolled through its closest approach
to the lake. At his reins, Snowy stared fixedly at the deer things, his
ears erect. Li-Li growled a phrase to him, over and over.

Finn McCool the kobold grinned his anxious, nervy grin at Sally and
Jansson. ‘She says, “Snowy. Remember wh-hho you a-are . . .” These dog
fellows-ss run off four-legged after prey if they get chance. Sh-should
be on leash-shsh . . .’

‘Nothing would surprise me,’ Jansson said, as the cart rolled on away
from the water.

Sally said, ‘We ought to remember that our hosts might look like dogs,
but they’re _not dogs_. That might lead us astray. Their ancestors never
were dogs, because dogs probably never evolved here, not as we know
them. These are sapient creatures carved from some dog-like clay. Just
as we are sapients made from heavily modified apes . . .’

Jansson found herself longing for the concrete and glass of the Datum,
the reassuringly grubby crimes of lowlife humanity. Perhaps all this,
natural selection’s arbitrary shaping of living things, was something
you got used to out in the Long Earth. Not her, not yet. ‘The plasticity
of living forms.’

‘What’s that?’

‘Nothing. A line from a book.’

Her reaction merely seemed to puzzle Sally.

Now they passed through farmland, a belt of it that evidently surrounded
the beagle city. A scrawl of dry stone walls, none of them straight,
divided the land into rough fields crowded with beasts browsing or
grazing. Some of these looked like fatter, stupider versions of the deer
things Jansson had spotted by the lake in the forest. Others were more
like cattle, goats, pigs, even what looked like some kind of rhinoceros
with lopped-off horns, and a few fat, feathery versions of the bird
creatures that drew this truck. Dogs could be seen patrolling the herds.
In one field, deer-like animals were being driven into an enclosure,
perhaps for milking.

And here Jansson saw trolls, the first since they’d arrived in this
world, save for Mary and Ham. A party of a couple of dozen, perhaps,
were working their way along a dry stone wall, evidently making repairs.
They sang as they worked, the usual beautiful multi-part harmony applied
to a lively, jumping melody. Ham, who had been napping on Mary’s lap,
woke up now, and climbed up on his mother’s shoulder to see. In his
immature piping voice he sang back phrases, echoing the song.

Sally listened hard. ‘I’d swear they’re singing “Johnny B Goode”. My
father would have known.’

Jansson said, ‘These are the farms of smart carnivores. Right? Nothing
arable, no crops. Nothing but meat on the hoof.’

‘Right. There’ll be plenty of peptides in the arteries after they’ve fed
us up a few times here, Monica.’

‘The trolls seem happy, judging by that party we saw.’

‘Yes.’ Sally seemed oddly uneasy with that observation. ‘These dogs are
evidently sapient. We know trolls like to be around sapients. I guess
that’s why they’re coming here, to this world, for refuge. Sapients, but
non-human. So they’re comfortable here.’

‘You’re jealous!’

‘Am not.’

‘Come on. Everybody knows you like trolls, Sally Linsay. You championed
their cause even before this latest blow-up, even before we absconded
from the Gap with Mary.’

‘What about it?’

‘Well, now you’re finding out that, no matter how special trolls are to
you, humans aren’t all that special to trolls.’

Sally just glared back.

Suddenly Snowy stood bolt upright, staring out to the north, ears
pricked again, the hairs on the back of his neck rising. Again Li-Li
murmured words, or growled commands, and Snowy stayed in control of his
reins.

‘You can see why he’s distracted,’ said Sally. ‘Take a look.’

When Jansson twisted to see, she saw small compact brown-furred forms
bounding across the fields away from the cart, white tails bobbing.
‘They look like rabbits,’ she said.

‘I think they are rabbits. Authentic Datum pedigree. I wonder how they
got here.’ And Sally turned to glare at Finn McCool.

He grinned, showing too many triangular teeth. ‘Beagles-ss love them.
Fun to chase. Good to eat.’

‘What else have you sold these creatures?’

‘As-side from rabbits?’

‘Aside from rabbits.’

He shrugged. ‘Not juss-st me. The wheels-ss. The iron . . .’

‘You sold them _iron-making_?’

‘Brought blacksmith-th. Humann.’

Jansson asked, ‘And the fee you negotiated for all this—’

‘The litters-ss of their litters will be paying in ins-sstallmentss.’

And, Jansson thought, paying for this ‘gift’ of the rabbits. Ask an
Australian about rabbits . . .

The kobold had been leaning towards them, apparently keen to join the
conversation. Distracted, the women abandoned their talk, and he shrank
back. Jansson wondered if Finn McCool picked up some undertone of
contempt, of dismissal. Now he dug his elderly walkman out of his pouch,
lifted his headphones over his ears, and played his music, swaying to a
beat Jansson could hear, tinnily. He smiled again, watching the faces of
Sally and Jansson, making sure they were noticing him. The kobold was
like a poor imitation of a human, and a needy one, Jansson thought:
needing the regard of humans, whatever animal dignity his distant
ancestors had once possessed long bred out by corrosive contact with
mankind. Jansson turned away with a peculiar disgust.

And she saw, to her horror, that while Li-Li and Snowy were distracted,
Sally had slipped the ray gun from its loose holster at Snowy’s waist.
She inspected it briefly, then put it back. ‘Dead,’ she whispered to
Jansson. ‘I thought it looked kind of inert. Another useful fact, Monica
. . .’


50

THE TRAIL GREW wider as they approached the city. There was more traffic
now, carts laden with butchered carcasses and cut leather and heaps of
bones. Live animals on the hoof were driven forward too, things like
bears, some even a little like apes, controlled in rough herds by beagle
shepherds with sticks and whips that cracked. There was even a party of
trolls being led by a beagle but under no apparent duress, singing what
sounded like rockabilly to Jansson.

And there were many pedestrians: beagles, adults and pups alike, all
sparsely dressed, with belts or jackets replete with pockets. Jansson
saw no sign of adornment, nothing like jewellery, no hats or fancy
clothing. But as the crowds thickened Jansson started to _smell_ them,
the sharp stink of wet fur and piss or dung, and she wondered if that
was how these dog-like people decorated themselves: not with visual
embellishment but with fancy scents.

The adults all walked upright. Maybe dropping to all fours was frowned
on in the city, something you only did out in the country or in private
– like a human going naked, maybe. But the young would get down and hop
and gambol around their parents’ legs like puppies around a new owner.
Jansson was no anatomist, but she watched the beagles curiously, trying
to see how a presumably dog-like four-legged body plan had been adapted
to a natural-looking upright stance – and how it had been arranged that
slipping back to all fours was so easy. That was a difference with
humans, she thought; even as a kid she wouldn’t have lasted five minutes
if she’d tried to knuckle-walk like her remote chimp-like ancestors. But
she couldn’t make out the detail.

She clung on in the rattling cart, letting the sights and scents wash
over her. The gathering crowd might almost have been human, if you
looked at it through half-closed eyes. The beagles’ bodies, upright,
were taller than human, and with the pelvis slung oddly low, so the
torso was long, the back legs, short. Not impossibly far from the human.
But then she would see ears prick up, and cold wolf-like eyes stare back
at her, and the pack scent of the dogs would wash over her, and she felt
as if these creatures could not have been more alien.

Finn McCool was watching her. ‘You strange to them-mm, but not that
ss-strange. They think you kobolds-ss.’ He laughed at that. ‘We’re all
the ss-same to them, we human-nn f-folk. Ss-ame to stupid puppies-ss.’

‘You and I,’ Sally said with cold contempt, ‘are _not_ the same.’

It was a relief when the cart at last reached the city itself. The Eye
of the Hunter was a wide brownish smear of wooden buildings set in a
muddy plain, under a pall of smoke. The central development was bounded
by a wide moat spanned by solid-looking bridges of wood and stone. The
moat was evidently for defence, but there was no city wall that Jansson
could discern, just a low, irregular dry stone barrier that looked as if
it was intended to keep out beasts wandering from the fields rather than
purposeful invaders.

Just before they reached the moat, they passed stockades into which farm
animals were being driven for slaughter. Jansson, in a quick glance, saw
the beagles working, polished stone blades flashing, blood spurting, and
the animals fell one by one. Death and blood: universals on every world,
it seemed, no matter how far you travelled. Jansson felt her queasy
stomach churn.

In the city, the buildings, none more than a couple of storeys high,
were robust but unadorned, wooden boxes with walls of stone or packed
mud and roofs of timber or a kind of coarse thatch: irregular shapes,
nothing of the squareness or roundness you’d associate with a human
town. There seemed to be only a couple of traffic arteries, long,
straight avenues running north–south, east–west through the heart of the
city; the other tracks were winding, irregular. Whatever these dogs
were, they weren’t geometers – not in the style of human geometry,
anyhow. Now the dominant smell was of wood smoke and a lingering
raw-meat stench, overlying the rich dog-like scent of the beagles
themselves. And this was a noisy place as well as a smelly one, with an
unending chorus of barks and yaps and howls.

They didn’t get much further before they were held up by a small pack of
tough-looking male dogs. They surrounded the cart, and began to
interrogate Snowy and Li-Li with rapid-fire yelps and growls.

‘Cops,’ Sally said. ‘Or royal guards. We must be heading straight for
the palace . . . Some palace, however. Not exactly Paris, France, is
it?’

‘It’s not even Paris, Texas.’

‘But it’s not built to impress _us_.’

Li-Li gave them a wolfish grin, and sniffed, with short chuffing sounds.
‘Know this from rrh-kobolds. Humans can’t smell. But city, city full of
wo-rrds. Scent over there. _I he-hre, half day ago, seeking you_. And
distant, distant – hear howls? _I, I have fine f-hhrresh meat from
count-hrry, buy now, buy now_ . . .’

Sally grinned. ‘Think of that, Jansson. Imagine if you had the nose of a
police dog. The city’s full of information. There are scent markers
everywhere, just like posters or graffiti on the walls, and the howls
must be more long-range, like some kind of internet.’

They came at last to a building bigger than most, wider, but no taller,
and no more elaborately constructed than the rest. Here the human party
was told to wait with Snowy, while Li-Li jogged inside.

The strongest smell just here was wood smoke. ‘Dogs discover fire,’
Jansson murmured.

‘Maybe that’s how it started,’ Sally mused. ‘Dogs are smart animals.
Intensely social, adaptable, easy to train. Here, maybe us clever
monkeys never evolved to keep them in their place. And one day, in some
starving pack out on the prairie, one bright young female comes home
with a burning branch in her jaws, taken from some lightning-struck
forest . . .’

‘Or some bright young male.’

Sally grinned. ‘Be serious.’

Li-Li returned, to say they would be taken in to see the Granddaughter
immediately.


51

THEY WERE LED through narrow, twisting, confusing corridors – confusing
unless you could follow scents, probably – to a large chamber, with long
curving walls of stone and mud, a high ceiling, windows, and a
fireplace, unlit.

The basics of the room might have been laid out by a human, Jansson
thought, down to the detail of the fireplace built under what was
evidently a chimney stack. Some things were universal. But the room,
while well constructed, was drab to human eyes; there was no paint, no
wallpaper, no tapestries, no art on the walls. What there was, however,
was a rich melange of scents, which even Jansson’s battered old cop’s
schnozzle could detect.

The princess of the beagles had no throne; she sat easily on the ground,
on what looked like a patch of natural turf growing in the middle of the
room. The princess was flanked by guards, who had stone-tipped spears
and space-age blasters to hand. Jansson wondered how the grass got the
light to grow.

The Granddaughter’s title was not ‘Granddaughter’. Her name was not
‘Petra’. The adviser beside her, an ageing male with a glum posture, was
not called ‘Brian’. But these were the best labels Sally and Jansson
were given, courtesy of the kobold. The Granddaughter wore only a
practical-looking pocket belt – that, and, Jansson saw, some kind of
pendant on a loop of leather at her neck, what looked like handsome blue
stones set in a ring of gold. It was an artefact that caught Jansson’s
eye; it looked naggingly familiar.

And there was a dog by her side! A _real_ dog, an authentic dog, a Datum
dog, a big Alsatian if Jansson was any judge. It sat up, watching the
newcomers, its tongue lolling; it looked healthy, well fed, well
groomed. Somehow it looked the most natural presence in the world, here
in this room full of dog-people, and yet the strangest too.

All the beagles watched stonily as Jansson and Sally, hastily instructed
by Finn McCool, showed submission to the Granddaughter by getting down
on the ground and lying on their backs, arms and legs up in the air.

‘God, how humiliating,’ Sally murmured.

‘You should worry. I’m going to need help getting up again.’

The kindly nurse type Li-Li came over to assist when the gesture was
finished. Then Sally and Jansson, with McCool, had to sit as best they
could on the hard-packed earth of the floor, while the Granddaughter
murmured to her advisers.

‘That dog,’ murmured Sally, ‘is a Datum dog. Something to do with you,
McCool?’

‘Not me . . . anoth-ther kobold seller-rr. Popular here. They lik-ke big
males. Sex-ss toys.’

Sally snorted, but kept from laughing.

Jansson leaned over and whispered, ‘Sally. That pendant she’s wearing.’

‘Yes. Shut up about it.’

‘But it looks like—’

‘I know what it looks like. Shut up.’

At length the Granddaughter deigned to consider them. She said, with the
usual rough approximation of English, ‘You. What you call hhrr-uman.
From worr-ld you call Datum-mm.’

‘That’s correct,’ Sally said. ‘Umm – ma’am.’

‘Wh-hrr-at you want her-hhre?’

Sally and Jansson went through a halting explanation of why they had
come: the problems with the trolls across the human Earths, how Sally
had learned from the kobolds that many of the trolls had fled to this
world, how they hoped that the trolls they had brought here, Mary and
Ham, would be safe . . .

The Granddaughter considered this. ‘Trolls hrr-appy here. Trolls like
beagrr-les. Beagles like trolls. Troll music fine. H-rruman music arse
shit.’ She perked her own ears. ‘Beagle ears better-hhr than human.
Human music ar-hhrse shit.’

‘That’s what my father kept telling me,’ Sally said. ‘All downhill since
Simon and Garfunkel broke up, he said.’

Petra stared at her. ‘I know noth-thing of this Simon and Garr-hrr—’

‘It doesn’t matter.’

‘Beagles despise human music. Beagles despise h-hrr-umans.’

That blunt statement shocked Jansson. ‘Why?’

The Granddaughter stood upright now and walked over to her, towering
over the sitting women. Jansson did her best not to flinch, and to
return that wintry stare. ‘Why? You-hhr stink. _You_ especially . . .’

But it seemed to Jansson that the Granddaughter’s own scent was odd,
unnatural, overlaid by some kind of perfume perhaps. Maybe, for a
species to whom scent was so important, to mask your smell was to mask
your thoughts.

‘And,’ said Petra, ‘you-hhr dogs.’ She pointed at the patient Alsatian.
‘Once wolf. Now toy, like sc-hhrap of bone in mouth. _No mind-dd_.
Hrr-umans did this.’

Jansson supposed that was true: dogs were wolves reduced to submissive
pets. She imagined seeing a small-brained humanoid in a collar, on a
lead . . . Still, she protested. ‘But we love our dogs.’

Sally said, ‘In fact we co-evolved with them—’

‘They have no rrh-ights. He-rre, walk on two legs, not four-rr. Except
pups at play. And except hunt. We have cr-hrr-ime. Those who do
wr-hrr-ong. We catch, we turn out of city. We hunt.’

Jansson returned her gaze. ‘On all fours? You hunt down criminals, on
all fours?’

The adviser, Brian, spoke up for the first time. ‘We have many pups. Big
litte-hhrs. Life cheap. Like to hunt . . .’

Petra seemed to smile. Jansson smelled meat on her breath. ‘Like to
hunt. Good for wolf-ff within.’

Sally snapped, ‘So you despise humans for how we domesticated your
cousins on our world. Fine. But _we’ve_ done nothing to harm you, any of
you. We didn’t even know you existed before Snowy there showed up on
Rectangles.’

‘You offen-nnd me. Stinking elves gone w-hhrong. You, no hrr-ights here.
Why should I not th-hhrrow you out for the hunt?’

Sally glanced at Jansson, and said desperately, ‘Because we can get you
more ray guns.’ She pointed to the nearest guard. ‘Like those.’

Jansson, astonished by this claim, turned and stared at her.

Sally wouldn’t meet her eyes. ‘Those weapons look old to me. Run down,
are they? We haven’t seen one fired . . . I know they’re dead. _We can
get you more_.’

Petra looked over at the kobold, who in turn looked – angry? Alarmed? If
he had been supplying the weapons, he was being cut out of the deal,
Jansson reflected. But she couldn’t read his expression, if he had one.

Petra leaned forward, her great head thrust at Sally’s face. Her nose
wrinkled, wet, probing. ‘You l-lie.’

‘That’s for you to decide.’

The moment of judgement hung in the air. Jansson sat still, feeling
every ache of her treacherous body. Sally did not yield before Petra’s
glare.

At last Petra withdrew with a frustrated growl, and loped from the
chamber, her sex-slave dog at her heels.

Sally delivered a noisy mock sigh. ‘We live to fight another day . . .’

As the guards milled around, talking among themselves in growls and
yaps, Jansson leaned over to Sally. ‘What are you playing at?’ But even
as she asked she was thinking it through. She was a cop; there were
clues here; connections formed in her mind. ‘Has this got something to
do with that pendant she wore, that was the spitting image of Joshua’s
Rectangles ring—’

Sally pressed a forefinger to her lips, but she smiled.

They were taken to a kind of suite at one end of the palace, with a
communal area and a central hearth, and small rooms that could be shut
off behind flaps of leather.

Finn McCool was put in here with the women. Sally brusquely pushed him
inside one of the rooms and told him to stay put. The kobold cringingly
deferred, as he tended to when close up and personal with a human. But
Jansson wondered what resentment burned in that strange soul, resentment
at the treatment he received from these superior creatures that
evidently fascinated and repelled him at the same time.

Jansson picked a room at random. A pallet of straw had been set out on
the floor, with blankets laid over it. There was no lavatory or wash
basin, but a kind of well in the floor contained water that seemed
clean. Jansson dumped her travel pack and fingered the blankets
curiously. They seemed to be of woven bark. How were they made? She
imagined beagles stripping and weaving bark with hands and teeth.

She went back out to the communal area, where beagles were laying out
bowls of food on the ground around the hearth.

Sally sat on the floor, comfortably enough, studying the food. She
glanced up at Jansson. ‘How’s your en suite?’

‘I’ve been in worse flophouses. Right now I feel like I could sleep on
concrete.’

Sally leaned closer and spoke more softly. ‘Listen, Jansson, while we
have a minute alone. We need a plan. To get ourselves out of this.’

‘We could always just step away. As you said you could carry me out—’

‘Of course. They’ve been casual about that, haven’t they? They did take
your Stepper box. Maybe they think we’re like trolls, who won’t step
away if they leave a cub behind. But I suspect they’re imposing their
different way of thinking on us. _They don’t use prisons_; that’s not in
their mind-set. They spoke about this tradition of the hunt. They’re
happy for wrong-doers to escape, right? To run for their lives, rather
than be confined. That’s the way they think. So their instinct isn’t to
lock us up. I guess they think that even if we do step, they’ll come and
hunt us down anyhow, carried on the back of kobolds. We’ll see, if they
try.

‘But we’re not going anywhere. Our business isn’t done here. We need to
normalize relations between humanity and these sapient dogs. We can’t
have the likes of the kobolds playing us off one against the other.’

Janssen glanced over at Finn McCool’s cubbyhole. ‘I agree,’ she said
fervently.

‘Also there’s still the issue of the trolls. If they’re all congregating
here, everything is—’ Uncharacteristically she seemed to struggle for
words. ‘Out of balance, across the Long Earth. Somehow we have to
resolve that. First things first, however. We need to cut that kobold
out of his grubby trade, and we need some leverage.’

‘You’re talking about the rings. The one the Granddaughter wore, the one
you and Joshua brought back from Rectangles.’

‘Right. That’s significant somehow. It all has to be connected, doesn’t
it? A ring from a world next door – a world the kobold can reach, but
the beagles can’t – high-tech weapons similarly retrieved from a
stepwise world . . .’

Jansson tried to think it through. ‘We only know one possible source of
non-human high tech around here. The world called Rectangles, that
nuclear pile. Right? And that’s where you found the ring, identical to
the Granddaughter’s. The simplest theory is that _that_ is the source of
the weapons.’

‘I agree,’ Sally said. ‘Occam’s razor.’

‘And a cop’s instinct. OK. But for some reason the kobold can’t access
more guns right now. If he could, he’d be handing them over already,
wouldn’t he?’

‘It must be something to do with the rings. Why else would the
Granddaughter have that one on display, around her neck? Maybe McCool
needs rings to gain access, for some reason. He can’t use the
Granddaughter’s any more—’

Jansson smiled. ‘I see what you’re thinking. Maybe Joshua’s ring would
work for him.’

‘This is all guesswork, but it fits together. My own kobold contact did
send me to Rectangles, not straight here. I always thought there might
be some more old high tech on that dusty planet – damn it. We need that
ring if we’re to make anything of this. I’m going to have to go get it,
the ring, off of Valiente’s living room wall.’

‘Go get it? Oh. You mean, step out of here.’

‘I’ll have to leave you here for a while. You’re too ill – you’d only
slow me down – I’m sorry. Anyhow one of us at least ought to stay, to
prove we’re not escaping.’

Jansson grimaced, trying to hide her alarm at the thought of being left
here alone. ‘I’ll cover for you. They won’t even notice you’re gone.’

‘Sure. And I’m hoping that Valienté also won’t even notice when the damn
ring has gone. The last thing we want is _him_ showing up here . . .’

‘He will come, if he can,’ Jansson said firmly.

Sally seemed to think that over. ‘If he does, maybe we can use him.’

But there was no more time to talk, for in walked the beagle Jansson
remembered as the Granddaughter’s adviser, with the human-language name
Brian.

‘Pleas-se.’ Brian waved his hand-like paw in a very human gesture of
welcome. ‘Dine with me. I hrr-ave selected meal-ss which hrr-kobolds
chose befor-rre.’

‘We’re not kobolds,’ Sally snapped.

Jansson went and fetched a blanket, folded it up, and painfully lowered
herself down on to it. She glanced over the bowls that had been already
laid out. They appeared to be of carved wood. No pottery here?

‘Nothing but meat to eat,’ Sally said brusquely, inspecting the bowls’
contents. ‘Don’t ask where the cuts come from. At least it’s all cooked,
more heavily than the beagles prefer, I suspect.’

‘Bur-hhrned,’ growled Brian. ‘Free of all taste . . .’

‘All except that one.’ Sally pointed to a central bowl, filled with fat,
pinkish morsels.

‘Those cannot be cooked,’ Brian said.

Jansson summoned up the energy to deal with more strangeness. ‘Thanks
for your hospitality.’

‘Thank _you_,’ Brian said.

‘For what?’

‘For being he-hhre. I, I have strange r-hhrole. Fits my st-hhrange mind.
My nose follows, hhr, unusual scents. Granddaughter Petra toler-hhrates
me, for my sometimes-useful nose. And I, I a slave to he-hhrr scent,
just like handsome fool Snowy . . . Females hhr-ule males. Same with
hu-manss?’

‘Yes,’ said Sally. ‘Some human males know it too.’

‘I, I am st-rrange for beagle. Fo-rrever grow bo-hhred, the same old
scents. Same old talk. I hhr-elish strangers and strangeness. Other,
other’ – he searched for the phrase – ‘other _points of view_. What more
differ-hrrent than beagle and kobold?’

‘We aren’t kobolds,’ snapped Sally again.

‘Sorry, so-hhry. Wrong term. What a shame we have not found each other
before. Two types of mind, two ways of scenting the wo-hrrld. How much
hhr-icher.

‘Ex-ssample. This city named for our goddess, who is Hunter-rrh. We
believe She is the Mother of Mothers. Her pack the Pack of Packs. As-ss
Petra is Granddaughter, and there are Daughters over he-hhr, and
Mother-hhr of Pack above them. Pack Mother-hrr lives far from here,
rules many Dens. Hunter, Mother of Mothers, gave bi-hhrth to world,
rules all, even Mother-hhrs. And when we die, our spi-hhrits flee our
bodies, to be hunted by the Mother of Mothers, and taken back. What
a-hhre your gods?’

Jansson said, ‘We have many gods. Some of us have no god at all.’

‘You see us as ba-hhrbaric. One step f-hhrom the wolf. Is our religion
c-hhrude to you?’

Sally looked blank. ‘I have no opinion.’

‘Some of us despise wolf in us. As you pe-hrrhaps despise your ancestor
animal, its ma-hrrk in you. We hunt. Kill. Big litters. Life cheap,
wa-hrr common. Great slaughters. Cities empty, Dens fall. Then more
litters, more little soldie-hhrs.’

‘A cycle,’ Sally said to Jansson, evidently fascinated. ‘Boom and crash.
They have big litters, lots of unloved warrior pups running around, lots
of Daughters and Granddaughters competing to become this Mother, head of
the nation. They fight, they have wars – they kill each other off, and
when the population collapses the cycle begins again.’

‘Like inner-city gangs,’ Jansson said.

‘Maybe. It’s got to impede their progress. Technological, social. Maybe
it’s no wonder they’re stuck at the Stone Age. And why they’re easy
marks for weapons dealers, like the kobold.’

‘L-look-khh.’ Brian leaned forward and picked out a pink blob from the
central bowl. ‘Unborn hrr-rabbit. Cut from the womb of its mother,
f-hhresh. Deli . . . _delicacy_.’ He rested the embryo between his
teeth, bit down, and sluiced the blood into his mouth, like a
connoisseur savouring a fine wine. ‘Some of us despise wolf in us-ss.
But the tass-te, oh, the tass-te . . .’

Suddenly the stink of the meat disgusted Jansson. She stood, stiffly. ‘I
must rest.’

‘You a-hhre ill. Scent on you.’

‘I apologize. Goodnight, sir. And you, Sally.’

‘I’ll look in later.’

‘Not necessary.’

The few paces to her room seemed a long way. She thought she could feel
the gaze of the kobold Finn McCool on her, watching from behind his
curtain.

She slept badly.

Her head ached, her gut, her very bones. She took an extra dose of the
painkillers in her pack, but it did no good.

She dozed.

She woke to find a wolfish face over her, in a dark barely alleviated by
the starlight from the window above her pallet. Oddly she felt no fear.

‘I am Li-Li.’ The beagle pressed a finger to her lips. ‘You a-hhre ill.
I saw it. In pain?’

Jansson nodded. She saw no point in denying it.

‘Please, let me . . .’

So Li-Li helped her. She arranged bundles of warm cloth around Jansson’s
body, and applied poultices of what looked like moss and lichen chewed
to softness, to her belly, her back, her head. And Li-Li licked her face
with her rough tongue, her neck, her forehead.

Gradually the pain receded, and Jansson slipped into a deeper sleep.


52

ABOUT A WEEK after Maggie’s meeting with George and Agnes Abrahams, the
_Benjamin Franklin_ approached the Low Earths, heading for the Datum.

Maggie detected relief in the crew of the _Franklin_ that, thanks to
their wonky turbine, they were heading for some unscheduled home leave.
Their tour of the Westward Long Earth was wearying. Day after day they
crossed world after world of numbing emptiness – numbing at least for
the city kids who made up most of the dirigible’s crew – punctuated by
calls to resolve one idiotic situation after another.

And _the trolls were gone_: how strange it continued to be to
experience, even as seen from within the walls of a military vessel, a
peculiar existential shift that cast a shadow over every world they
visited.

Still, as the _Franklin_ swam through the increasingly murky skies of
the industrializing Low Earths, Maggie – even though she herself was a
country girl – felt a warm tug of recognition, and wondered whether city
living had some merit after all. The news as they approached home,
however, was extraordinary. There was some kind of geological
disturbance going on in stepwise versions of Yellowstone, across most of
the Low Americas. Maggie found herself staring at images from East 2, of
a herd of cattle choked by carbon dioxide emissions, and from West 3, of
people being evacuated from threatened townships by twains. Isolated in
the reaches of the Long Earth, Maggie and her crew had heard only the
vaguest outernet hints that all this was going on.

Strange times, she thought, times of unbalance in the natural world and
the human, on Datum Earth itself and far beyond.

Back at the Navy dirigible service’s graving yard at Datum Detroit, the
technicians were soon swarming all over the _Franklin_, along with
gleaming diagnostics platforms with robot arms like a waltz of praying
mantises. XO Nathan Boss and Chief Engineer Harry Ryan watched all this
like hawks – along with Carl. The young troll wasn’t allowed off the
ship, the presence of trolls being problematic anywhere on the Datum,
and the trolls being uncomfortable in this human-crowded world anyhow,
but Carl was taking considerable interest in every spanner, wrench and
robot test pod.

Even now, looking at Carl, it was hard for Maggie to remember that he
wasn’t some kind of chimp or gorilla. He was smarter than that, even if
you left out the long call and the trolls’ strange group intelligence.
His own communication was more complex than any chimp’s, and he could
make and handle tools that would have been beyond the imagination of
Cheetah. It was more useful, Mac had advised her, to think of trolls as
more like human ancestors. Something between chimp and human. But these
beasts, Mac reminded her, weren’t living fossils, but had enjoyed
millions of years of natural selection since splitting off from the line
that led to humans. They weren’t primitive humans; they were fully
evolved trolls. Maggie was just gratified that _her_ trolls, for now,
had chosen to stick around.

The cat too, Shi-mi, took to stalking around the flayed-open carcass of
the dirigible with every air of ownership and inspection. Maggie never
_saw_ Shi-mi communicating with a worker, or even one of the robots
. . . She wasn’t sure whether to be reassured or appalled by the cat’s
presence.

What she _was_ faintly appalled by was the omnipresence of the Black
Corporation. Every one of those spanners and wrenches that so fascinated
Carl was marked with the logo of Black, or one of its subsidiaries.

Black seemed to have moved into the support of the dirigible fleet, and
the US military infrastructure in general, in a much bigger and more
visible way than she remembered from even before the _Franklin_’s
mission began a couple of months back. Or maybe it was just that much
more in her face, now she had a ship of her own. Black’s relationship
with the military was long-standing. He had after all donated the twain
technology in the first place by making it open source, and was a prime
contractor for all the armed services. Since abortive attempts to
militarize his operations under eminent domain arguments some years
before, his relationship with the military high command and
purse-holders seemed to Maggie to have become, not just contractually
unbreakable, but institutionalized.

Even so, now she thought about it, now she was so blatantly immersed in
it, the situation made her uncomfortable.

That feeling got sharper when the job was done, and the yard boss sought
Maggie out to tell her that the offending turbine two had been replaced,
gratis, by a more modern Black Corporation model. She instinctively
protested, but got no support from her chain of command.

And she remained suspicious when the _Franklin_ was released from dock
and made trial runs in the murky Datum sky. The ship was purring along
like a sewing machine, running overall distinctly better than before.
But she had Nathan Boss and Harry Ryan run a fresh systems and security
check, stem to stern, just to make sure the Black people hadn’t left any
little surprises aboard, such as tracking devices or control cut-outs or
overrides. Nothing showed up.

Not unless you counted the cat, Maggie thought. The damn thing had taken
to sleeping, or at least simulating sleep, in a basket in Maggie’s sea
cabin. Somehow Maggie didn’t have the heart to kick her out.

Harry Ryan’s scan came through clean. Still Maggie remained suspicious.

That night, the _Franklin’_s last on the Datum before resuming its
mission, Maggie was woken at three a.m. by an urgent message. According
to patchy outernet reports leaking down from the High Meggers and
beyond, the _Neil Armstrong_ was lost.


53

MORNING, ON EARTH East 8,616,289:

Following Yue-Sai, her monitor pack on her shoulder, Roberta stepped
gingerly over ground coated with a kind of green moss. They crossed a
more or less open plain, under a cloudy sky, with the Chinese airships
hanging silent above. There was no tall tree cover; the only significant
vegetation was something like a fern, no more than waist height, with
broad leaves spread low over the ground. The morning was bright, but the
air was cold. Roberta was wrapped up in a quilted one-piece coverall and
boots lined with wool, but the chill air stung her exposed skin, her
cheeks, her forehead. Already Yue-Sai had nearly turned her ankle when
she fell into the burrow of some subterranean animal. The animals turned
out to be squirrel-like, although Roberta suspected they had features
more like primitive primates than true squirrels. Well, primates or
squirrels or something else entirely, they were everywhere, and you had
to watch your step. It was not a very welcoming world. The navigators
said that on this Earth the tectonic raft that carried South China was
at a high latitude, halfway to the north pole. The geographers,
straining for glimpses of the rest of the world from the
sounding-rockets they sent up, said they suspected that there was a
supercontinent on the equator: South and North America and Africa jammed
together, the interior desiccated, the global climate distorted.

Roberta had endured the boredom of the preparation for this latest
jaunt, the training, the suiting-up, and had written off the dull,
relatively data-poor hours of exploration that lay ahead. She knew it
was important to apprehend these worlds physically. The first space
engineers, whose biographies she had studied closely when seeking role
models for her own career, had spoken of the need for ‘ground truth’, a
sampling of conditions down on the ground of some planet or moon, to
confirm or refute hypotheses drawn up from orbital inspection, or
through telescopic observations. Ground truth, yes. She saw the need for
it. And this was a very remote world, an exotic world, despite the
brevity of the journey here. They had crossed the six million worlds
since the planet of the crest-roos in no more than a week, with the
airships’ powerful drives propelling them forward in bursts of
acceleration.

Even so she longed to be in her room on the ship, with her books and
slates. Safe inside her head. But she was not there, not for now. She
was here. She focused on the real, physical world around her.

They climbed a bluff, beyond which, they knew from a hasty aerial
survey, was a dry valley, and the spectacle they had come to witness.
The shallow climb, the effort of lifting her feet safely over the lumpy
ground, soon made Roberta pant.

Jacques, monitoring her progress from the _Zheng He_, noticed. ‘I hope
you haven’t been skimping your exercise routines.’

Roberta took a deep lungful of air. ‘I suspect the oxygen content is
low.’ She could hear the trolls singing in the background, a murmur in
her earpiece.

Jacques said, ‘The ship has atmospheric scientists who monitor the air
quality before they crack the hatch. Turns out they’ve been watching the
oxygen content fluctuate increasingly, the further out we’ve travelled.
But here it’s well within breathable limits.’

Wu Yue-Sai said sternly, ‘But it did not occur to them to factor in the
effects of physical exercise. That’s unfortunately typical:
overspecialization of departments and insufficient communication.’

‘I believe the Captain is having words,’ Jacques said dryly. ‘If you’d
rather come back in—’

‘No, we’re nearly there,’ Yue-Sai said. She glanced back at Roberta, who
nodded.

And as she approached the summit of the rising ground, Roberta could
hear a kind of orchestra of disparate sounds: a bass rumbling as of
heavy traffic, even like tanks, mixed in with a chorus of mournful
bellows, and a percussion section of impacts, of clanks and clunks.
Excitement built in Roberta, and she grinned at Yue-Sai. They both ran
up the remaining slope and threw themselves flat on the mossy ground, so
they could see down into the valley.

Where the tortoises walked.

This was what they had landed to see. A two-way flow of the animals was
packed into the valley, all lumbering along, those to the right heading
north, those to the left heading south. The biggest of them were _huge_,
like tanks indeed, or even bigger, with shells the size of small houses
that were battered, scarred – some had birds’ nests built into folds and
cracks on the shells, and Roberta wondered if those passengers had some
kind of symbiotic relationship with their hosts. But she could
immediately see that the tortoises came in a spectrum of all sizes
scaling down from the big monsters, to ‘giants’ that wouldn’t have
looked out of place on the Galapagos Islands, to miniature sorts like
the pets Roberta had seen people keep, even dwarf kinds she could have
held in her hand. The smaller ones ran around the tree-trunk legs of the
big lumbering monsters. The noise was cacophonous, from the squeaks of
the smallest to great blasts from the titans, like the fog horns of
supertankers.

Yue-Sai pointed out the little ones, and laughed. ‘The babies are so
cute.’

Roberta shook her head. ‘They may not be infants at all. There are
probably many species mixed up in there.’

‘I suppose you are right. And I suppose we will never know what is
what.’ She sighed. ‘So many worlds. So few scholars to study them. If
only we had laboratories to produce self-replicating scientists, to
explore all the worlds. Ah, but we do! They’re called university
campuses.’

Roberta smiled uncertainly.

Yue-Sai said, ‘You don’t get the joke? I suppose it was a little
laborious. But is my English so bad?’

‘It’s not that. It’s just that, Jacques and other teachers tell me, I am
too smart for most jokes.’

‘Really,’ Yue-Sai said, straight-faced.

‘There is an element of deception in many jokes, and then a reveal, of a
truth which is surprising. I spot the deception too early. Which is why
the comedy I prefer is—’

‘Slapstick. Anarchic humour. Those Buster Keaton films you watch. I
understand now. Anyhow, all these worlds—’

‘And all these tortoises . . .!’

They had discovered a whole sheaf of worlds of this kind. The further
they got from the Datum, the stranger the worlds they encountered, the
stranger the ecologies. In a way, tortoise worlds might have been
anticipated. On the Datum the tortoise-turtle body plan was an ancient,
ubiquitous and very successful one. Why _shouldn’t_ there have been
worlds where tortoise lineages dominated?

‘In many worlds,’ Yue-Sai said, ‘even on the Datum, you’ll find
tortoises behaving like this. Forming lines to get to waterholes, like
the lake higher up this valley. Drinking their fill, enough to last
months.’

‘But not a line a hundred miles long.’

‘No,’ said Yue-Sai. ‘And not a line running on what looks like a road,
with a metalled surface.’ Not that they’d been able to get close enough
to check that out. ‘And not a line with traffic police . . .’

These were individuals about the size of Galapagos giants. They stood on
raised islands in the middle of the two-way flow, or in bays cut into
the valley walls. Some of them had belts wrapped around their shells,
with pockets, pouches. They even had tools, like whips that cracked
occasionally, and things that looked like simple horns to Roberta, to
amplify their calls. The function of these individuals was clear: to
keep the tremendous flow moving peaceably. They would dive in, horns
blaring, if there was a clash, or the two-way lanes got mixed up, or a
little one fell under the feet of the giants. Somehow, amid a chaotic
clatter of shells, everything got sorted out.

‘We might have expected intelligence,’ said Yue-Sai. ‘I have been
studying. On the Datum, people learned that tortoises could solve mazes.
At least, that was when people gave tortoises a _chance_ to solve mazes,
as opposed to eating them, or stifling them in “hibernation boxes”.
Perhaps there are great cities elsewhere on this world. Tortoise armies.
Tortoise colleges . . . That thought makes me want to laugh, but I’m not
sure why.’

‘I don’t believe we’ll find anything too advanced,’ Roberta said. ‘Not
locally.’

‘Why not?’

‘Look at the wardens’ tools. They have similar functions, obviously, but
differ in detail. See? The stone _here_ is shaped differently from
_there_. The braiding on the whip handle—’

‘So what?’

‘Tortoise culture must be different from ours,’ Roberta said. ‘Their
reproduction patterns are different. If you are a tortoise you emerged
from one of hundreds of eggs; you don’t know your parents; you received
no parental care. Their young may not be guided through family
backgrounds and formal education as we are. Perhaps they compete for a
right to live, and part of that competition is learning how to make
tools. But that means every generation must more or less reinvent the
culture from scratch.’

‘Hmm. Thus limiting their overall progress, generation to generation.
Maybe. That is a lot of supposition based on just a little data.’

Roberta had learned not to say things like _It’s too beautiful a theory
not to be true_. Once Jacques Montecute, overstressed, had told her that
she should have the slogan ‘Nobody Likes a Smart Alec’ tattooed to her
forehead in reverse, so she could be reminded of it every morning in the
bathroom mirror. She contented herself with saying, ‘It does fit with
the likely physiology, and the evidence of the non-uniformity of the
tools. But, yes, the theory needs more testing. It would be interesting
to know what’s going on nearer the equator in this world.’

Yue-Sai did a double take. ‘Why so?’

‘Because those tortoises that solved the mazes back on the Datum were
allowed to do so in warm conditions. Tortoises are cold-blooded; they
shut down in the cold, to some extent.’

‘Oh. So maybe the behaviour we’re witnessing here, in the cold, is—’

‘Limited by temperature. They may be achieving much more in warmer
latitudes. Do you think Captain Chen would sanction a journey south,
towards the equator?’

‘And risk getting shot down by some super-tortoise? I do not think so.’
Yue-Sai packed away her equipment. ‘Time to get back to the ship.’

Before they left, Roberta glanced across the valley, to the far wall
where erosion had exposed the strata of the local sedimentary rocks. She
could clearly see a marine deposit, a chalky layer embedded with flints,
below a bed of gravel, and then above that a few yards of peat, under
the mossy ground surface. She could read the geology. This region, now
elevated, had once been under the sea. Later, ice had come and gone,
leaving behind the gravel, and then the peat had been laid down over
millennia of temperate climates . . . This world, like all other worlds,
had a story of its own, a story billions of years deep and probably not
quite like any other in the Long Earth ensemble. A story that probably
nobody would ever get around to unravelling, and all she would take away
from this place was a few snapshots of tortoises.

She could only turn away.

Back at the airship Captain Chen was excited, and not about tortoises.
‘Finally – finally! – we have the results back from the probes we sent
into the Eastern Gap. You remember, more than six million worlds back.’

‘Of course I remember.’

‘You asked us to inspect the planets, Venus and Mars. And the scientists
found—’

‘Life.’

He seemed crestfallen. ‘You knew? Of course you would know . . .’

On the Mars of the missing Earth East 2,217,643, there was oxygen and
methane in the air, chemically unstable gases that must have been
injected by the processes of life. There seemed to be some kind of
vegetative covering on the lower ground of the northern hemisphere. And
in the clouds of that copy of Venus, high, cool, full of water,
chlorophyll had been observed. Earth-like plants, drifting in the
Venusian sky.

No, Roberta wasn’t surprised. Any Gap that could be reached by a
stepping animal, even the most foolish of humanoids, was going to be a
place where bacteria and other living organisms were regularly injected
into space, if only accidentally, through the hole where Earth should
be. Most such reluctant pioneers would die quickly, including the
hapless humanoids if they couldn’t step straight back – but some hardy
bacterial spores, having hitched a ride on the stepping humanoids, might
survive the radiation, the vacuum. And of those spores, some might
ultimately drift into the skies of other worlds, and seed them. This was
panspermia, the transfer by natural processes of life between the
worlds. It was thought to be possible even in the Datum universe. How
much easier panspermia must be in a Gap cosmos, with a way for life to
reach space so much more easily than being blasted off by an asteroid
impact.

No, Roberta wasn’t surprised. She filed the confirmation away in the
back of her mind, where a kind of model of the Long Earth, and all its
facets, was slowly being assembled, fact by fact, deduction by
deduction.


54

UNDER THE PROW of the airship _Shillelagh_ as it ploughed West, the
worlds ticked by, one every second, with hypnotic regularity. Bill
paused the journey at recognized Jokers: at the anomalous worlds, flaws
in the fabric of the Long Earth, where on a conventional journey
travellers would hurry past, unseeing, eyes averted.

Even in the relatively generous, relatively settled worlds of the Corn
Belt, in which could be found Reboot, Helen’s family’s home, there were
Jokers. Early in the journey Bill stopped briefly at Earth West 141,759,
where the multi-channel radio receiver he kept running constantly blared
out warnings in a multitude of languages and code formats. _Quarantine_,
Joshua gathered through blistered eardrums: because it was the source of
some particularly virulent pathogen, this whole world was under a
quarantine administered by the UN, along with staff from the US’s Plum
Island Animal Disease Center. Any travellers should keep away from
designated areas; otherwise they would be arrested, any materials
impounded and destroyed, and they would be kept in confinement until
decontamination procedures had been completed . . . It was a relief to
move on and leave it behind.

‘Are they serious, Bill? Can you really quarantine a whole Earth?’

‘You can try. But _how_ serious they are is another question. We have
come across a few nasty viruses out in the Long Earth. Populations of
birds and pigs, or birdy creatures and piggy creatures, are always
reservoirs of bugs likely to be able to cross over and infect humanity,
just as it’s always been on the Datum. And you’d expect humans to have
no immunity to such a disease coming from a stepwise world. The greatest
threat is to the Datum and the Low Earths, of course, with their dense
populations and travel networks. But Cowley and his gang of eejits use
fears like this to whip up hostility to combers and trolls, like each
one of us is a Typhoid Mary. You know, on worlds like this, they get
doctors to volunteer to go in there and support trapped travellers, only
to have their Stepper boxes confiscated, and they find they’re not
allowed out again . . .’

On they swept, with regular stuttering pauses.

Jokers weren’t a lot of fun. Many were scenes of devastation one way or
another: usually a lifeless ground under a sky that might be either
obscured by ash or dust, or else glaring and empty, ozone-free,
cloudless, a fierce blue. Bill had Just-So back-stories for many of
these shattered worlds, pieced together from travellers’ tales, comber
legends, and occasionally some actual science field work.

The most common cause of such collapses, Joshua started to learn, was an
asteroid impact. On long enough timescales, it was as if Earth drifted
around inside a cosmic pinball machine. Bill lingered briefly at one
heavily damaged world, West 191,248. The impact, only a couple of years
back in this case, in central Asia, had been far from here; life close
to ground zero was devastated, but the world as a whole was suffering
under an asteroid winter.

But there were other types of calamity waiting to pounce. Earth West
485,671: a world locked in an Ice Age that had turned into a runaway
glaciation, perhaps caused by the solar system drifting through a dense
interstellar cloud that blocked the sun’s light. Here the oceans were
frozen down to the equator; the ice-shrouded landscapes glared brilliant
white in sunlight that poured down from a blue sky empty of clouds, save
for wisps that Bill said were probably carbon dioxide snow crystals. But
the depths of the ocean, warmed by the Earth’s inner heat, would stay
liquid, and life would survive in dark underwater refuges until the
volcanoes warmed the world again.

Earth West 831,264: here Joshua looked down on a rust-coloured,
Mars-like landscape evidently bare of life, save for occasional streaks
of purple slime. The air itself was stained red by the dust raised by
incessant windstorms.

‘What the hell happened here?’

‘A gamma-ray burster. Well, that’s our best guess. Probably caused by a
kind of massive supernova, the collapse of a supermassive star into a
black hole. Could have happened anywhere within thousands of light
years. A storm of gamma rays would have stripped away the ozone layers
and then fried the surface life.’

‘_Boundless and bare, the lone and level sands stretch far away_.’

‘What’s that, Josh?’

‘Just a stray memory of Sister Georgina.’

‘In the long term life always bounces back one way or another. But
there’s always the chance,’ Bill said with gruesome relish, ‘that we
might step over on to some world just at the moment the big rock falls,
or whatever. What’s that in the sky? Is it a bird, is it a plane –
d’oh!’

Joshua, oppressed by these charnel-house worlds, didn’t feel much like
laughing. ‘We’re still searching for Sally, right?’

‘We’re doing our best,’ Bill said. ‘That kobold did say he believed the
trolls were hiding out in some Joker or other. The bad news is there are
a _lot_ of Jokers. The good news is there are a _lot_ of combers out in
those Jokers already.’

‘Hiding from the man. Just like Sally.’

‘That’s the idea. Before we set off I sent word on ahead. I’m still
hoping that if she’s spotted, somebody will put the word out. There are
a lot of radio hams out here; it’s a good way to keep in touch across an
undeveloped world. We’d hear them as we pass through. Of course some
worlds are so badly beat up there is no ionosphere, and _that_ theory
breaks down.

‘You really can’t plan too definitely when it comes to combers. It’s the
nature of the beast. Combers! Some call them ridge runners or jackpine
savages or mountain men, or hoboes or okies. In Oz they call ’em
bushwhackers, the Brits say travellers. Once, in some parts, they were
called wanderers. And you were _the_ Wanderer, back then. Though not any
more, buddy, you betrayed your own legend when you settled down to bake
bread with the missus.’

That irritated Joshua. He had never wanted a legend of any kind. All he
had ever wanted was to live his own life, on his own terms. Was he
supposed to pander to some fan base? He felt like poking back at Bill,
but he resisted the temptation. ‘I get the idea. I appreciate you’re
doing your best.’

‘I’m doing all there is to do. Unless you can figure out where she’s
gone after all . . . Anyhow, enough gabbing, I’m out of me head with the
thirst up here. You want to crack a tube? Bring up another six-pack and
I’ll tell you the stories of a few more Jokers. Unless you want to watch
a fillum. Just like back in the day with yer man Lobsang! Ah, go on,
let’s see a fillum . . .’

Joshua was mostly sceptical about Bill’s Joker stories.

Such as what Bill told him of a Joker he called the Cueball. Joshua had
actually glimpsed this one; they’d discovered it on his first journey
out with Lobsang, nestling in the relatively domesticated Corn Belt. A
world like a pool ball, utterly smooth, under a cloudless deep blue sky.

‘I know a fella who knew a fella—’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘Who camped out on the Cueball for a bet. Just for a night. All alone.
As you would. In the nip too, that was part of the bet.’

‘Sure.’

‘In the morning he woke up with a hangover from hell. Drinking alone,
never wise. Now this fella was a natural stepper. So he got his stuff
together in a blind daze, and stepped, but he says he sort of stumbled
as he stepped.’

‘Stumbled?’

‘He didn’t feel as if he’d stepped the right way.’

‘What? How’s that possible? What do you mean?’

‘Well, we step East, or we step West, don’t we? You have the soft
places, the short cuts, if you can find them, but that’s pretty much it.
Anyhow this fella felt like he’d stepped a different way. Perpendicular.
Like he’d stepped _North_.’

‘And?’

‘And he emerged on to some kind of other world. It was night, not day.
No stars in the clear sky. No stars, _sort of_. Instead . . .’

‘Your storytelling style really grates sometimes, Bill.’

Bill grinned. ‘But I’ve got ye hooked, haven’t I?’

‘Get on with it. What did he see?’

‘He saw all the stars. All of them. He saw the whole fecking Galaxy,
man, the Milky Way. _From outside_ . . . Still in the nip he was, too.’

That was the trouble with combers, Joshua was concluding. They were just
expert bullshitters. Maybe they spent too much time alone.

And the search for the trolls, Jansson and Sally went on and on . . .

_Sally_. Once, when they were tethered for the night at some equable
world, he thought he _smelled_ her. As if she had come and gone while he
slept. In the light he searched the gondola, and the area on the ground
around the twain, but found no sign of her presence. Just a dream, he
thought. He resolved never to tell Helen about it.


55

‘ONE OF THOSE troll creatures really messed up a couple of guys here,
and folks really don’t like that, but you know what? When it saw me the
damn thing rushed up to me, and danced around me like it was a friend!
. . .’

So the _Benjamin Franklin_ had got yet another call, to yet another dumb
incident concerning trolls. As Mac remarked, ‘You wouldn’t think there’d
be enough trolls left around to trigger all this trouble.’

The place was called Cracked Rock. Judging from the transmitted report,
there was a mayor, but he was resident at some stepwise companion
community, leaving the local sheriff, a Long Earth tyro, in charge. The
unfortunately named Charles Kafka was new to the job, a refugee from the
big city – hoping for a nice easy ride to pension age, by the sound of
it, in some Old-West-nostalgia type small town. Now it had all gone
wrong, and he was panicking.

Cracked Rock was a speck on an unprepossessing world some distance
beyond the Corn Belt. Not many steps for the _Franklin_ to travel from
its last destination, but it seemed to take an age to cross a
barren-looking copy of America before coming on the township’s lights,
bright in the dusk, by the bank of a river. Now Maggie looked down on a
tent city – there was no shame in that, many a flourishing city had
started out as tents and shacks – with a church, unfinished by the look
of it, dirt roads scraped across the surrounding landscape of sparse
scrub. The sheriff’s office looked like the best-finished building in
town.

As the twain descended, the sheriff himself came out to meet it,
accompanied by a cocky-looking younger man – and a juvenile troll, in
chains. Maggie wondered if they’d done something to the troll to stop it
stepping away. A few more folk drifted in from the township for a
look-see.

With Nathan Boss and a couple of midshipmen at her side, Maggie cut
short the introductions and asked Sheriff Kafka to sum up what had
happened.

‘Well, Captain, some trolls were walking past the township, a band of
’em – they know enough not to go too close – but there were some boys
who intercepted them, including Wayne here, just looking for some fun,
you know how good ol’ boys are, but they picked on a little one and the
trolls fought back, and _this_ one,’ he indicated the beast in the
chains, ‘laid out Wayne’s brother. And then—’

Maggie had heard the same dumb story twenty times on this mission.
Impatient, infuriated, she held up a hand. ‘You know what? I’ve had
enough of this. Midshipman Santorini.’

‘Captain?’

‘Go back to the ship. Bring out Carl.’

Santorini wasn’t the type to argue. ‘Yes, Captain.’

They waited in silence in the gathering dusk, the five minutes it took
Santorini to comply. When Carl arrived, accompanied by Santorini, he
hooted softly at the young troll in the chains.

Maggie faced the cub. ‘Carl, I hereby appoint you to the crew of the
_Benjamin Franklin_. For now, you’ve the rank of acting ensign.
Santorini, make a note. XO, when we get back aboard, make it so.’

‘Yes, Captain.’

‘And, Nathan – give me your mission patch.’

The emblem of Operation Prodigal Son was an astronaut-type shield
showing the dirigible hovering over a stylized chain of worlds. Nathan
ripped the patch off his uniform, and Maggie used her own dog-tag chain
to fix it to the troll’s arm. Carl hooted, apparently in pleasure.

‘Nathan, try to tell him what we’ve done here. Although I think he knows
already.’

Nathan deployed his troll-call – the townsfolk stared curiously at the
instrument – and started murmuring to the troll about being part of the
_Franklin_ family.

Maggie stared around at the gawking hicks with distaste. ‘That,
citizens, is what _we_ think of trolls.’

Sheriff Kafka looked utterly out of his depth. ‘So what now? You want
Wayne to give his testimony?’

‘Hell, no. I want to hear the testimony of the troll.’

The hicks goggled as Nathan used the troll-call to converse carefully
with the captive.

‘He remembers the incident. Well, of course he does. They know to avoid
cultivated fields. They weren’t _in_ the fields. But a couple of the
young were lagging, and the band scattered. Then these boys found them.
Throwing stones. Trying to trip up the young. The trolls didn’t fight
back . . . You understand, Captain, you don’t really get a linear
narrative out of a troll. It’s more impressions, bits of emotion. I’m
having to interpolate—’

‘That’s OK, Nathan. The picture is clear enough.’

Wayne snorted. ‘What the heck is this? It’s a joke. It’s only a talking
animal.’

That got roughly translated through the troll-call. And the speed with
which Carl moved, grabbing Wayne’s leg and holding him upside down by
one hand, was remarkable.

Maggie smiled. ‘Your point is refuted, I think. And your testimony.
Sheriff, it’s not your people who deserve respect from the trolls but
the other way around.’ She tilted her head to look at the inverted
Wayne. ‘As for you, I’ll leave you in the hands of your parents, in the
hope of a better future.’

The boy wriggled in the grasp of the placid troll, all but scraping his
scalp on the ground. ‘Screw you. Everybody knows about you and your damn
ship. It’s all over the outernet. Captain Troll Lover.’

She felt her blood rise. But she said calmly, ‘Drop him, Carl.’

And she turned away, heading back to the ship, before the boy hit the
ground with a cry of pain.


56

THE _BENJAMIN FRANKLIN_ hovered over the township of Cracked Rock
through the night.

Still fuming from the sideswipe from that kid Wayne – how could a
slimeball like him in some dump world like this know so much about her?
– Maggie called her chief engineer. ‘Harry, who’s the nerdiest geek you
have down there? You know the kind—’

‘Ensign Fox,’ Ryan said without hesitation.

‘Fox. Toby, right? Listen – send him up.’

As she waited for Fox she scanned his personnel file. He really was a
geek, of the barely tamed variety: a wretched sailor, but an IQ of a
zillion. Just what she needed.

When he arrived, Maggie demanded, ‘Ensign Fox. How often do you guys do
a serious systems scan? I mean, sweep for bugs, Trojans, all that hacker
shit?’

Fox seemed distracted by the presence of Shi-mi, who was watching from a
basket on the floor. But he looked hurt to be asked the question. ‘Well,
Captain, we in Tech run sweeps more or less all the time. Of course
we’re mostly running Black Corporation software; it’s self-policing,
though we do have some independent firewalls which—’

‘Black Corporation software. I bet we uploaded even more of it back in
Detroit, right? System upgrades, replacements.’

‘Well, yes, Captain. That’s routine.’

‘And I know I had Harry scan the ship from stem to stern after the
refit. But still – how much control does Black software have of this
ship? Give me a non-technical answer.’

Fox thought for a minute, his small face crumpled. ‘Well, Black is the
principal contractor. Their software – it suffuses the _Franklin_,
Captain.’

Maggie said, ‘The ghost in the machine. Seems to me we leak like a damn
sieve, Ensign. Even if it is under our level of detection.’

He didn’t seem too perturbed, as if that were known and accepted. ‘Yes,
Captain.’

‘Thank you, Fox. By the way, how’s the Aegis census going?’

Fox’s small face worked as he sought a concise answer. She imagined
Harry Ryan beating that kind of verbal skill into the head of a boy who
must once have suffered from the hyper-volubility of the typical nerd.
In the end he said simply, ‘Frustratingly incomplete, Captain.’

‘Well, keep at it. Dismissed, Ensign.’

‘Captain.’

When he’d gone she came around the desk, grabbed the cat, and set her on
the desk. ‘That guy George Abrahams and his damn troll-calls.’

‘Captain?’

‘This is supposed to be a military mission. _This is my command_. I bet
every communication we attempt with the trolls is relayed back to him.’

‘I couldn’t say—’

‘You’re probably riddled with bugs too, aren’t you? Listen, kitty
litter. I want you to set me up another meeting with Abrahams.
Understand? I’ve no doubt you can do it.’

The cat only mewed softly.

The next day, she got through her business at the township as quickly as
possible. That mayor from a couple of worlds over, summoned at last,
seemed totally in awe of Maggie, promised to do his best to learn the
lessons of the event, and offered the _Benjamin Franklin_ crew the
freedom of the local stepwise cities, which Maggie politely declined.

She had one more meeting with Sheriff Kafka outside his office. When he
tried to apologize for his screw-up, she slapped him on the back. ‘You
did your best last night. You’ve got a lot to learn – but then, who
hasn’t?’

He nodded gratefully. ‘Godspeed, Captain.’

And now for George Abrahams.

She couldn’t keep her intention to meet him again a secret from her
senior officers. So she wasn’t very surprised when Joe Mackenzie showed
up in her sea cabin with a couple of coffees, and sat, watching her like
an X-ray machine. ‘Patient confidentiality guaranteed.’

Maggie said, ‘You know what the issue is, Mac. Do _you_ trust the Black
Corporation? . . .’

‘What’s to trust?’

‘I think someone is up to something.’

Mac grinned. ‘Well, _everybody_ is up to _something_. And the military
have been in bed with Black for years. Which is why he was on the podium
with Cowley when our mission was launched.’

‘Yeah, but does that give Black the right to monitor us routinely? This
is a military expedition, Mac. I get the impression that everybody from
the Pentagon on down is turning a blind eye.’

Mac shrugged. ‘So Black has a lot of power. So have military contractors
had all the way back to World War Two. That’s the reality of life, I
guess. I mean, there’s no evidence of malice on the part of Black, is
there? Or a lack of patriotism.’

‘No, but . . . Now it’s personal, Mac. This is my ship, my mission.
_Me_. It’s just a feeling – but it’s like I have a searchlight on me. Do
you think I’m losing my way?’

‘No. I think you’re following your instinct, and it’s never failed you
in the past.’

‘What, even about keeping the cat?’

‘Except for that,’ said Mac.


57

THE AIRSHIPS _ZHENG He_ and _Liu Yang_ steadily forged towards their
target of twenty million worlds East of the Datum.

They passed more unprecedented milestones: ten million, twelve, fifteen
million steps. Now they were crossing an extraordinary span of the Long
Earth, of this great probability tree whose twigs and leaves were whole
clusters of worlds; now they were reaching branches of that tree with a
very deep divergence from those that led to an Earth anything like the
Datum. It became impossible for the crews of the airships _Zheng He_ and
_Liu Yang_ even to rely on breathable atmospheres in the worlds they
visited. The oxygen levels fluctuated significantly, from, rarely,
concentrations so high that spontaneous combustion, even of wet
vegetation, must have been a hazard to unwary visitors, to, more often,
worlds where the oxygen level was no more than a trace, and the land on
the backs of the dancing continents was much less green. A more subtle
danger, Roberta learned, was too high a concentration of carbon dioxide,
ultimately lethal for humans.

And life had less of a grip on many of these Earths. They found whole
bands of worlds where the land was bare altogether, where its
colonization by plants from the sea had apparently never happened, let
alone its later ‘conquest’ by wheezing lungfish. All but featureless,
all but identical, these drab worlds passed, day after day, unchanging
even at the airships’ tremendous stepwise speed.

Drab or not, Roberta for one was fascinated by the evolving panoramas of
land, sea and sky she glimpsed through the windows of the observation
deck, and intrigued by the closer-up glimpses of the worlds they stopped
at to sample in more detail – not that she was allowed down to the
surface on these hazardous worlds. Yet something in her, something weak
and to be despised, recoiled from the bombardment of strangeness. After
all, from here, even the whole of the Ice Belt, the band of periodically
glaciated worlds of which the Datum seemed to be a reasonably typical
member, seemed very small, very narrow, and very far away, spanning much
less than one per cent of the monumental distance they had already
travelled.

She spent more time alone in her cabin, trying to integrate the sheer
flood of data hitting her. Or she would sit with the trolls on the
observation deck, listening to their crooning, even though this kept the
rest of the crew away from her – even Lieutenant Wu Yue-Sai, though not
the loyal Jacques Montecute.

For his part, Jacques watched Roberta uncomfortably. He even felt a stab
of guilt; this expedition might be too much for her after all. The
horror of the Long Earth, in the end: Roberta was just fifteen years
old, and the very scale of it might overwhelm one so young, no matter
how smart.

On July 6, 2040, the Chinese ships reached their nominal target of Earth
East 20,000,000 – a world which turned out to be unprepossessing,
barren, ordinary. They planted a stone cairn with a plaque, took a few
photographs, and prepared to turn back.

Captain Chen assembled his senior crew and guests on the observation
deck of the _Zheng He_, for a party to celebrate the moment. The trolls
sang a new song, playfully taught them by Jacques – ‘China Girl’. Chen
even broke out the alcohol, for once. But Jacques advised Roberta not to
make this the day she first tried champagne. Without regret, she stuck
to her orange juice.

Lieutenant Wu Yue-Sai, in full dress uniform, neat and pretty, linked
arms with Roberta. ‘I am so happy to have achieved so much, with you, my
partner in discovery.’

Captain Chen strutted over. ‘Indeed. And no doubt we will learn even
more during our long return journey to the Datum. So many worlds to
revisit and sample. Twenty million of them!’

Roberta considered that carefully. ‘I feel my time would be better spent
integrating the data I have already accumulated.’

‘“Integrating the accumulated data”! Is that all you wish to do?’
Captain Chen walked up to Roberta, looked up into her face.

He was an impulsive, somewhat childish man, Jacques judged, and
evidently he was angered by Roberta’s humourlessness, her failure to
laugh at his jokes, perceiving that his moment of triumph had been
spoiled.

‘Clever child, clever child. But what a pompous creature you are.
Clever, yes. But do you believe you are better than us mere mortals?
_Homo superior_ – is that what you understand yourself to be? Must we
make way for you?’

She did not reply.

Chen reached up and wiped a thumb over her cheek; it came away moist.
‘And if it is so, why are you crying?’

Roberta fled.

She didn’t come down to the observation deck the whole of the next day.

A little before midnight, as he was preparing for sleep himself, Jacques
went to her cabin door and knocked. ‘Roberta?’

No reply. He listened for a while, and heard the sound of sobbing.
Captain Chen had discreetly given Jacques a pass key in case of
emergency. Now he swiped the card and opened the door.

The room itself was as orderly as ever, the single lamp burning over her
workstation, her little heap of tablets and a few precious printed
books, her notes. Charts on the wall, showing their progress across the
Long Earth. No photographs, paintings, toys, no souvenirs save for
science samples – none of that for Roberta Golding.

Barefoot, wearing T-shirt and sports slacks, Roberta was curled up on
her bed, face away from the door.

‘Roberta?’ Jacques went over. She was surrounded by scrunched-up
tissues; she had been weeping for a while, evidently. And she had
bruises on her temple. He’d seen this in her before; she would hit
herself, as if trying to drive out the part of her that wept at night.
He’d thought she’d grown out of it, however. ‘What’s wrong? Is it what
Captain Chen said to you?’

‘That fool? No.’

‘Then what? What are you thinking about?’

‘The crest-roos.’

‘The what?’

‘The reptilian-mammalian assemblage we found on East two million, two
hundred thousand—’

‘I remember.’

‘All doomed to be eradicated by a hypercane. An accident of weather.
Probably gone already. Scrubbed away like a stain.’

He imagined that dreadful perception building up in her head, all these
long days. He sat on the bed and touched her shoulder. At least she
didn’t flinch away. ‘Remember Bob Johansen’s English class?’

She sniffled, but at least she stopped crying. ‘I know what quote you
mean.’

‘Go on, then.’

‘_Oh God, I could be bounded in a nutshell_—’

He continued, ‘_And count myself a king of infinite space_—’

‘_Were it not that I have bad dreams_,’ she whispered.

He knew how she felt. It was the way he felt himself, sometimes, if he
woke in the small hours, at three a.m., a time when the world seemed
empty and stripped of comforting illusion. A time when you _knew_ you
were a mote, transient and fragile in a vast universe, a candle flame in
an empty hall. Luckily the sun always came up, people stirred, and you
got on with stuff that distracted you from the reality.

The problem for Roberta Golding was that she was too smart to be
distracted. For her, it was three a.m. all the time.

‘Do you want to watch your Buster Keaton movies?’

‘No.’

‘How about the trolls? Nobody can be unhappy around a troll. Shall we go
see them?’

There was no reply.

‘Come on,’ he said. He got her up, draped a blanket over her shoulders,
and led her to the observation deck.

There was a single crewman on watch here, reading a book; she nodded to
Jacques and looked away. The trolls were slumbering in a big heap near
the prow. The infants were asleep, and most of the adults. Three or four
were murmuring their way through a song about not wearing red tonight,
because red was the colour that my baby wore . . . Silly, but with easy,
pretty multi-part harmonies. The Chinese crew tended to keep their
distance from the beasts. Or, perhaps, the trolls kept them away,
subtly. But they welcomed Jacques and Roberta.

So Jacques sat on the carpeted floor with Roberta, and they snuggled up
to the warmth of the big creatures’ furry bellies. Immersed in the
trolls’ strong musk, they might have been at home in Happy Landings, if
not for the strange skyscapes that swept past the windows.

‘This is no consolation,’ Roberta murmured, hiding her face. ‘Just
mindless animal warmth.’

‘I know,’ Jacques said. ‘But it’s all we have. Try to sleep now.’


58

CAPTAIN MAGGIE KAUFFMAN’S requested meeting with George Abrahams came to
pass only a few days after her request of the cat, not particularly to
her surprise. They arranged to rendezvous at a community further West,
in a stepwise Texas, a town called Redemption – a location conveniently
on the _Franklin_’s route to Valhalla, where all the Operation Prodigal
Son dirigibles were now being summoned for the showdown with the
Declaration-of-Independence ‘rebels’.

Redemption turned out to be quite a large settlement, and one of the
more grown-up ones – the kind with a sawmill boasting a zero-fatality
record on a billboard. Maggie was sure the locals would already have
registered their township’s existence with the appropriate bureaux, and
certainly would never have troubled the likes of the _Benjamin
Franklin_. She happily ordered an R&R break for the crew, but made sure
Nathan Boss had the MPs on the watch for trouble.

And then she waited. She even interrogated the cat: ‘OK, where’s
Abrahams?’

The cat said softly, ‘You don’t find George Abrahams. Dr. Abrahams finds
you.’

After a couple of hours there came a ping from the duty officer. A car
was waiting for her by the access ramp.

It looked like a British Rolls-Royce, though curls of steam seemed to be
seeping from under the hood. A man in black was standing beside an open
door, with the air of a driver to the wealthy classes.

And in the car, when she climbed in, was George Abrahams. Somehow he
looked bigger than she remembered, more imposing – no, _younger_, she
thought.

He smiled as the car pulled away. ‘The car’s operated by the
restaurant.’

‘What restaurant?’

‘You’ll see. Nice sense of style, don’t you think? Even if it is a
steampunk limousine . . . Are you all right, Captain?’

‘I’m sorry. It’s just that you seem . . . younger.’

Abrahams smiled, and whispered, ‘Well, it is all a façade, as we both
know very well.’

Maggie found that faintly sinister, and it triggered something of the
paranoia she seemed to be developing. Before disembarking, she’d slipped
a locator into her uniform pocket, and now she was glad of it. ‘I can’t
believe that you intend anything like a kidnap. I must tell you that my
ship—’

‘Don’t be melodramatic, Captain. Look, we’re nearly there. It really
isn’t a very big town, is it? Well, most Long Earth communities aren’t,
yet. Sometimes we forget how new all this is – that Step Day was just a
generation ago.’

She was relieved to find they were indeed pulling up at a restaurant.
Inside, she was impressed by the decor: heavy on stone and massive
timbers in the usual colony-world style, but still elegant. Obviously
some budding entrepreneur had realized that even in the reaches of the
Long Earth people sometimes wanted a touch of class.

And the Chardonnay was excellent.

As they sat together in a booth for two, she raised a glass, ironically.
‘So who should I be drinking to? Who are you, Mr. Abrahams? Am I having
dinner with the Black Corporation?’

‘Actually, Captain Kauffman, the answer to your question is _no_ –
essentially. Though I do work with them and through them, I suppose –
well, I told you that. I like to think of myself as working on behalf of
humanity. And indeed on behalf of the troll nation, two fine species
kept apart by stupidity. And that is why, Captain Kauffman, you have
come to my attention, mine and that of a few others.’

She felt angry, exposed. ‘What others? Douglas Black?’

‘Certainly Douglas Black. Captain, you must think of yourself as a
valued long-term investment. One of several, in fact.’

Fuming, she didn’t reply.

Abrahams said now, ‘You’ve certainly fulfilled the promise _I_ saw in
you.’

‘What promise? When?’

‘When they gave you command of the snazzy new _Benjamin Franklin_ –
despite a rather patchy official career record up to that point. Now,
please don’t be offended when I tell you that I had a hidden hand in
that. I can tell you now that one of the selection panel disliked your
outspokenness over your family’s atheism, another even today has an
antiquated view about women in senior positions . . .’

‘I can’t believe you had any influence over Admiral Davidson.’

‘Not at all. But he needed support from the panel. Well. All I can say
is that, even in the depths of the Pentagon, levers can be pulled. Would
you like another drink?’

‘So I’ve been manipulated.’

‘As for your handling of the trolls – did you know that you are actually
featured in the long call now? “The woman who let trolls fly”. . .’

‘Manipulated,’ she repeated. ‘My whole life, my whole career, it sounds
like. How am I supposed to feel about that? Grateful?’

‘Oh, not manipulated. Just – moved into the right position. It is up to
you to take the opportunity offered, or not. After all, even within the
parameters of your military mission, as a twain Captain you have had a
great deal of autonomy. Your decisions are your own; your character is
your own. You are who you are. Black, and I, and indeed Admiral
Davidson, believe in giving the brightest and the best full freedom to
operate. Anything else would be a betrayal.

‘Of course you are _watched_. We are all watched, in this
technology-soaked age. What of that? But as to perceived “manipulation”
– we, all of us, all of mankind, face enormous challenges, an unknown
and unknowable future. Isn’t it better that we of good heart should work
together, than not? Look, Captain Kauffman, all of this need make no
difference to how you approach your work, when you go back to the ship
after our conversation is over. Indeed, I would not expect it to.’

‘I can’t quit, can I?’

‘Would you, if you could?’

She left that hanging. ‘And are you going to tell me who you are?’

He seemed to think that over. ‘The question has no real meaning, my
dear. Now – shall we order?’

When the limo returned her, dropping her a short distance from the
_Benjamin Franklin_, she saw the reassuring outline of Carl, standing by
the access ramp. As she approached he actually saluted – quite
professionally, too. She was careful to acknowledge.

It was late, and there was no alarm in evidence, so after a brief
diversion to the bridge she made for her cabin. The cat was curled up
beside the bunk. She was actually purring in her sleep – if indeed she
was sleeping at all.

_George Abrahams_ – not that Maggie remotely imagined that was his
authentic identity. _Douglas Black_. Levers being pulled. No, strings
being jerked, and Maggie Kauffman was the puppet. Well, there was little
to do but accept it. That, she thought, or find a way to leverage her
new ‘partnerships’ to her own advantage.

She got into bed without disturbing the cat.


59

LOBSANG LOVED TO talk – and indeed, to listen too, if you could keep up
with him. In the weeks they spent crossing stepwise copies of the
Pacific Ocean together, en route to New Zealand, Nelson came to
understand fully that Lobsang was in a position to know _everything_
that was worth knowing. He tried to imagine how the periodic synching of
Lobsang’s various iterations must feel – as if, metaphorically, they all
met up in some big hall somewhere, all talking at once, communicating
their disparate experiences with frantic urgency.

As a result the twain ride to a stepwise New Zealand passed pleasantly
enough for Nelson. He even found he was able to put aside the idea that
Lobsang, and the shadowy entities behind him, saw him as a ‘valuable
long-term investment’ – along with many others, he supposed, a shadowy
community of tentative allies, whose very names, he imagined, he might
never learn.

Still, like all journeys, this one came to an end, sixteen days after
their departure from Wyoming.

Nelson had visited Datum New Zealand many times. In this remote world,
some seven hundred thousand steps West of the Datum, the Land of the
Long White Cloud was evidently sparsely inhabited if at all, and its
green mountains, its crystal skies, were unspoiled, and a magnificent
sight from the air.

Heading west, the twain drifted away from the coastline and out to sea.
Finally it slowed over a small island, a shield of green and yellow on
the breast of this version of the Tasman Sea.

‘So?’ Nelson asked. ‘What are we here to see?’

‘Look down,’ Lobsang’s disembodied voice advised him.

‘Something on that island?’

‘It’s not an island . . .’

Through the twain’s excellent telescopes Nelson saw forest clumps, and a
fringe of what looked like beach, and animals moving – what looked like
horses – _elephants_ – even a dwarf giraffe? An eclectic mix . . . And,
more excitingly, people, on that strange beach. The seawater near by was
turbid, mildly turbulent, and evidently full of life.

And this ‘island’ had a wake.

‘It’s not an island,’ Nelson said at last. ‘It looks _alive_.’

‘You have it. A complex, compound, cooperative organism, a multiplex
creature travelling north-east, as if determined to cross the Pacific
. . .’

‘A living island!’ Nelson laughed, unreasonably delighted. ‘An old
legend, come to pass, if it’s so. Saint Brendan, you know, crossing the
Atlantic, is supposed to have landed on the back of a whale. That was
the sixth century, I believe. There are similar tales in a Greek
bestiary of the second century, and later in the _Arabian Nights_—’

‘And now the reality. Nelson, meet Second Person Singular.’

The grammar made Nelson wince, although he picked up the reference to
the notorious discovery of the _Mark Twain_. ‘So what now?’

‘We go visit.’

‘We?’

The door to the gondola lounge deck opened, and in walked Lobsang,
shaven head, orange robe – at first glance the Lobsang Nelson had met in
Wyoming.

Nelson asked, ‘This is your “ambulant unit”?’

‘And fully waterproof. Come . . .’

They made their way to the stern of the ship, and the hatch through
which Nelson had been winched aboard at the start of the voyage.

‘We will be perfectly safe down there by the way,’ Lobsang said now.
‘Even should you choose to go scuba diving around the rim of the
carapace.’

‘Are you crazy? I’ve been in these waters before. Sharks, box
jellyfish—’

‘You’d come to no harm.’ Lobsang pressed a button, and a dinghy folded
itself out of a compartment, inflated, and dangled over the open hatch
from a winch. ‘I’ve visited this assemblage of life many times before,
and I can assure you of that. Now, come make some new friends.’

Inside five minutes they were both clambering out of the dinghy, and on
to the carapace of Second Person Singular.

Not that it felt like that. It felt as if they were climbing up a sandy
beach. The ‘ground’ was solid under Nelson’s feet, as if rooted deep in
the rocky fabric of the Earth, like any island.

He looked around at a beach littered with sand and broken shells, clumps
of forest. There was a fresh breeze; this hemisphere was emerging from
its winter. He smelled salt and sand and seaweed, and a warmer, wetter
scent of vegetation from the interior. The scents, the colours, the blue
of the sky and sea, the green of the trees, were overwhelming, vivid.
‘It’s like Crusoe’s island.’

‘Exactly. But mobile. And – look there.’

A flap in the ground, earth underpinned by some kind of shell – yes,
part of a tremendous carapace – opened up gently, like a yawning hatch,
and a dozen or so humans emerged, grinning, climbing some kind of stair.
Of all ages, they were naked and bronzed like athletes. A couple of
children stared at Nelson.

One woman stepped forward, a red flower in her hair, still smiling, and
said in good if oddly accented English, ‘Welcome. What news of home?
Please mister please, if you have any tobacco, please please . . .’

Lobsang was smiling indulgently.

Nelson managed to ask, ‘Who the hell are these people?’

‘Well,’ said Lobsang, ‘since this lost beast has evidently wandered into
the oceans of the Datum itself, at least several, I suspect, are
descendants of the crew of the _Mary Celeste_ . . .’

Whether Nelson was supposed to take that literally or not, he got the
idea.

Soon he found himself sitting awkwardly in a circle of very interested,
very naked people, anxious to know about what was happening back on the
Datum Earth. They sat close to what looked like a hearth – the fire was
set on slabs of stone, no doubt in deference to the pain receptors of
the back of their host, and Nelson quietly reminded Lobsang that Saint
Brendan had caused his whale-island to submerge with the sting of a
carelessly lit fire . . .

The inhabitants’ language seemed to be a Creole made up of mostly
European tongues, but dominated by English, and not difficult to
understand. Nelson told them what he could think of about recent
developments on the Datum. They smiled and listened, bland,
clean-shaven, well-fed, stark naked.

For a break they were served halved coconut shells, brimming with milk.

Lobsang told Nelson that in the course of previous visits he had been
able to make some direct contact with the island beast itself, it being
similar in many respects to the original First Person Singular. _How_ he
achieved this contact he wouldn’t say. The beast carried about a hundred
human passengers. Some arrived as a result of a shipwreck or similar
accident – and left by dying, or waiting until the end of the beast’s
‘cycle’, as Lobsang called it, the length of time this apparently
benevolent kraken took to do its rounds, when the people could disembark
on some shore they might turn into a home.

But of course, as Nelson could see from the infants who sat before him
staring with open curiosity, this little community was a living one.
People were born here – and, presumably, some lived out their lives and
died, all without ever setting foot, perhaps, off the back of this
patient creature. They saw nothing strange about their itinerant home,
or their way of life; it was only in discussions with Lobsang that he
began to understand himself.

‘These people are nurtured,’ Lobsang said. ‘Cherished. Every creature in
the vicinity of Second Person Singular is docile in the extreme. It is
as if this creature of close cooperation is surrounded by a looser cloud
of mutual trust. Oh, one must eat, the occasional small fish might be
snapped up, but Second Person Singular will not harm, or allow to be
harmed unnecessarily, any higher creature. And in particular, no human.’

‘If something this size ever got into major transport routes, especially
on the Datum, there’d be trouble.’

‘Oh, true. These beasts – I’ve called them _Traversers_ – generally know
enough to keep away from the Datum. As far as I can tell this particular
specimen has got lost; it has strayed too close to the Datum, perhaps
even passing into the Datum itself. At the moment it is trying to get to
a place which I translate as “sanctuary” which, curiously enough, is
close to Puget Sound. When we leave I intend to leave behind an
iteration of myself, to navigate it to a place of safety. Most of its
brethren, like First Person Singular, appear to dwell much further out
from the Datum. Perhaps there is some – centre – in the remote Long
Earth.’

‘In the digests that were circulated about the beast that the _Mark
Twain_ travellers – well, _you_, I suppose – called First Person
Singular, you suggested that the creature travels the Long Earth making
a sort of audit. A stocktaking!’

‘It’s as good a first guess as any. There seem to be various different
subspecies, none as large or as threatening as the original First Person
Singular, however. Not all of them have this kind of shell-like carapace
for example. All of them are themselves colony organisms, like
Portuguese men o’ war writ large – but they _grow_, they add to
themselves by collecting specimens from the land and sea, some taking
passengers as you see here, some incorporating them into the greater
organism, like First Person Singular. And they are sapient, to some
degree. Of course sapience implies purpose.’

‘What purpose?’

Lobsang shrugged, a little artificially. ‘Perhaps they are indeed
collectors. Latter-day Darwins, or their agents, scooping up interesting
creatures for – well, for science? To populate some tremendous zoo?
Simply for their aesthetic appeal? You’ll observe that most of the
animals gathered here are of a similar body weight, within an order of
magnitude or two – no blue whales, of course, and very few mice or rats.
As if selectively sampled. But that may be too narrow a perspective. It
seemed to me that the only goal of First Person Singular was to learn,
to grow – goals shared with all minded creatures. But perhaps _she_ was
a special case . . .’

Whatever the purpose of all this, the human population considered it not
a bad deal, as far as Nelson could tell. According to Lobsang, their
living home looked after them even when it found it necessary to
submerge: it took its animal and human passengers into air-filled
chambers inside its carapace.

‘Not that it submerges too often,’ Lobsang said. ‘Bad for the vegetation
on its back, not to mention the layer of topsoil it accumulates . . .
It’s like an unending cruise, don’t you think?

‘Hmm. The _Titanic_ without the iceberg.’

‘Lots of good company, plenty of seafood and occasionally other maritime
fare including oysters and the occasional seal – but never dolphins,
Nelson – oh, and plenty of sex.’

Nelson had guessed that, given the embarrassing attention he himself was
getting from a number of young women. ‘And the people?’

‘Nelson, there are billions in the suffering worlds of mankind who would
think themselves blessed if they found themselves on this living shore.’

Nelson grunted.

Lobsang inspected him. ‘Ah, you don’t approve, do you? My dear Nelson, I
see it in your eyes and in every expression. You, my friend, are a
Puritan, privately aghast at the situation; you are thinking that
mankind shouldn’t live like this – there is a lack of striving which you
find distasteful, yes? This is at the root of your unease about the Long
Earth itself, I suspect. It’s too easy. Mankind, you believe, should be
always looking towards the stars, ever striving, learning, growing,
_bettering_ itself, challenging the infinite.’

Nelson stared at Lobsang’s face, which showed deadpan with just a hint,
a tiny scintilla, of humour. What was the human and what was the
computer? ‘You are disturbingly perceptive.’

‘I’ll take that as a compliment.’


60

THEY STAYED ABOARD Second Person Singular for some days.

It was a pleasurable enough interval, but Nelson did find it hard to
relax into a lotus-eating lifestyle – maybe Lobsang was right that he
had the soul of a Puritan – and the innocence of the beast’s human
passengers brought out something of the teacher, or the shepherd, in
him.

The islanders were short on raw materials; they had a few handfuls of
flint shards, bits of obsidian, metals, evidently garnered from the
pockets of shipwrecked ancestors. They treated these as toys, tokens,
ornaments. So, with scraps from the twain, Nelson taught them a certain
amount of Metalwork 101. How to draw wire, among other things, allowing
them to augment their meagre stock of treasured fish-hooks. He even left
them instructions in the basics of crystal-set radios. Maybe some day
they could use that technology to reconnect with the rest of mankind,
whatever fraction of it passed through this world.

The islanders smiled and nodded, applauded when he assembled some
intricate component, and used his bits of wire to adorn their hair.

Nelson spent some time too strolling in what he called the jungle, the
scrap of forest on the carapace. It flourished pretty well, despite
periodic dunkings in the sea, but was an eclectic mix of species that
reminded him more of a botanic garden collection than anything natural:
from ferns to eucalyptus, and many species Nelson failed to recognize.
As for the animals, Lobsang was right about there being a rough
selection operating for size, in terms of body mass. The elephant types
seemed to be a kind of mammoth, with curling tusks and ragged
orange-brown fur. But they were dwarfed, no taller than a pony in St.
John on the Water, and very shy.

Another question that occurred to Nelson was how _old_ this beast was.
How long had it been sailing these stepwise seas? If he dug around in
the forest, or in the dark spaces within its carapace, would he find the
bones of antique beasts – the skeleton of a stegosaur?

Even Lobsang had no answer to such questions.

It was in the jungle, on the fourth day, with Nelson deep in thought,
that Cassie trapped him. She was the woman who habitually wore a red
flower in her hair, who had asked for tobacco when he’d landed.

He knew by now what she wanted. He tried to avoid eye contact with her,
but, with the susurration of the sea all around them, he was cornered in
her stare.

‘Mister Lobsang say you are tight and sad and needing loving . . .’

The statement hung there, and Nelson could practically hear two value
systems colliding in his head with a scream of stripped cogs. All right,
he _was_ a Puritan type; any male child brought up by Nelson’s mother on
the one hand and her version of God on the other would have turned out
that way. He had had relationships, including a long-term girlfriend
with whom he’d had an ‘understanding’, a very old-fashioned term, but
. . .

But then there were the islanders. He’d seen evidence of long-term
relationships, like marriages, but among the young especially things
were pretty relaxed. After all, everybody here knew everybody else – it
was just like St. John on the Water in that regard – and there was a
kind of protective communal tolerance.

Besides, as Lobsang had told him, it was good for the islanders to have
their gene pool replenished by passing travellers. Nelson almost had a
duty to accept this invitation.

‘Only a little wiggle, Mister Nelson!’ She smiled, and laughed, and
walked up to him.

And suddenly he was immersed in the moment, the analytical part of his
mind seemed to dissolve and his forty-eight years fell away. The world
was alive with light and colour, the blue and the green, he could smell
the sea and the vegetation and the animals of this place, he could smell
the seawater-salt on the flesh of this woman as she approached him, and
when she touched his lips with a fingertip he could _taste_ her . . .

Nobody saw them. Well, save for Lobsang, probably.

Afterwards he stayed away from the jungle, and was _never_ alone with
Cassie, ever again.

On the fifth day, for a shower and a change of clothes, they returned to
the twain, which shadowed the wake of Second Person Singular.

They sat together in the gondola, in formal western clothing that now
felt stiff and confining. The living island drifted beneath them,
complex, beautiful, fecund. It might almost have been designed to be
viewed from the air.

‘We haven’t yet spoken of why you summoned me to your company in the
first place, Lobsang.’

‘Summoned?’

‘You said we’d play no more games – that breadcrumb trail I followed was
effectively a summons. Now you show me this Traverser . . .’

‘An example of the remarkable fecundity, or inventiveness, of life in
the Long Earth.’

‘Why? Why bring me here, why show me this?’

‘Because I believe you have a mind of a quality to appreciate a theory I
have been nurturing since the opening up of the Long Earth.’

‘A theory about what?’

‘About the universe – mankind – the purpose of the Long Earth . . . This
is all very tentative, yet crucially important. Would you like to hear
it?’

‘Is it conceivable that I won’t? Or that I could stop you?’

‘Reverend Azikiwe, I am impervious to sarcasm. Call it a feature of my
self-programming . . .

‘Consider this. _The Long Earth will save mankind_. Now that we’re
spread across the stepwise worlds, even the destruction of a whole
planet, the creation of a new Gap, would not destroy us all. And indeed
the Long Earth opened up just in time, some would argue. Otherwise we
might have finished ourselves off. Soon we would surely have been
scrabbling like chimpanzees in the ruins of our civilization, fighting
over the last of the resources. Instead, we undeserving apes suddenly
have the key to multiple worlds, and we are gobbling them up as fast as
we can.’

‘Not all of us. Your islanders on the Traverser are pretty relaxed, and
don’t seem to be doing anybody any harm. And out in the Long Earth there
seem to be plenty of drifters, “combers” they call them, who don’t
trouble anybody.’

‘But look at this current situation with the trolls – pleasant, helpful
and trusting creatures – of course we _must_ dominate them, enslave
them, kill them. Look at the tension over Valhalla and its quiet
rebellion. I can’t leave you to get on with your life, even a million
steps away. I must tax you, control you!’

Nelson said carefully, ‘Well, Lobsang, do you intend to do something
about this? Of all the entities I know of in the human worlds, surely
you alone have the power—’

Lobsang snapped, ‘Indeed. In fact you may have some difficulty in
understanding what you might call the range of my talents. My soul is
the soul of a man, but I’m hugely enhanced beyond that, and distributed
– not to put too fine a point on it, practically ubiquitous. By now one
of my iterations should be heading out into the comets on the edge of
the solar system. Nelson, I’m in with the Oort cloud!’

‘Oh, good grief.’

‘It made Agnes laugh . . . Maybe you had to be there. Look, Nelson, I am
everywhere. But I’m not God, and _I don’t interfere_. I don’t believe in
_your_ God; I rather suspect that you don’t either. But I also suspect
you need to feel that there is some plan in the universe – something
that makes sense, and gives meaning.’

‘What kind of plan?’

‘I may be no god but perhaps I have a god-like perspective. The Long
Earth has made mankind immune to terrestrial catastrophes. But it has
not made mankind immune to time. _I_ consider long timescales, Nelson. I
consider future ages, when our sun – all the suns of the Long Earth –
have died, and beyond that the dark energy expansion, the Big Rip when
the very atom will be torn apart, creating a new Ginnungagap . . .’

‘Ah. The primeval void before creation. _There was not sand nor sea nor
cool waves / Earth did not exist, nor heaven above_—’

‘_Ginnungagap existed, but no grass at all_ . . .’ Lobsang nodded.
‘_Völuspá_: well remembered.’

‘Norse mythology and Tibetan metaphysics – a heady brew!’

Lobsang ignored that. ‘Humanity _must_ progress. This is the logic of
our finite cosmos; ultimately we must rise up to meet its challenges if
we are not to expire with it. You can see that. But, despite the Long
Earth, we _aren’t_ progressing; in this comfortable cradle we’re just
becoming more numerous. Mainly because we have no real idea what to do
with all this room. Maybe others will come who _will_ know what to do.’

‘“Others”?’

‘Others. Consider. We call ourselves the wise ones, but what would a
true _Homo sapiens_ be like? What would it do? Surely it would first of
all treasure its world, or worlds. It would look to the skies for other
sapient life forms. And it would look to the universe as a whole, and
consider its cultivation.’

Nelson thought that over. ‘So you believe that the logic of the universe
is that we _must_ evolve beyond our present state, in order to be
capable of such great programmes. Seriously? Do you really believe a
brave new species can be expected sometime soon?’

‘Well, isn’t it at least possible? At least logical? Nelson, there is
much to learn – much to discover, much to do. We’ve discussed all this.
You have left your parish. You are looking for a new direction, a new
focus. I know you are seeking the same answers as me. What better than
to work with me? I do need support, Nelson. I can see the whole world
turning. But I can’t look into a human soul.

‘How do you feel? Have you seen enough here?’

Nelson smiled. ‘Let’s wait a little while longer. You should always
leave enough time to say goodbye.’


61

AS JOSHUA AND Bill’s journey wore on fruitlessly, just for a break, Bill
lingered more often in what he said the comber community called
‘Diamond’ worlds – the opposite of Jokers, worlds with some unique
attraction.

Earth West 1,176,865: this world came before they reached the Valhallan
Belt, the American-Sea worlds, but here the Grand Canyon was drowned by
a risen river: a truly spectacular sight, as Joshua saw from above,
which drew tourists who camped along the canyon’s elevated rim.

Earth West 1,349,877: a world dominated by a strange, even unearthly
ecology, in which familiar terrestrial creatures were surrounded by
groves of green, twisted living things that crawled and spread, defying
classification, neither animal nor plant – like slime moulds grown huge,
perhaps, of many diverse forms. No biologist had studied this world.
Visiting combers whispered of a Huge God, a hypothetical alien monster
that had crash-landed here hundreds of millennia ago, leaving layers of
flesh, bones and fat from which these organisms, descendants of
parasites or some equivalent of stomach bacteria perhaps, had evolved.
Joshua found the crowded variety of strange life on this world startling
and in some way satisfying. As if something had been missing and he’d
never even known it.

And somehow that train of thought led him to the answer.

It came to him while he was asleep. He sat bolt upright, in the dark, in
his cabin in the gondola.

Then he ran out to the galley cum lounge observation deck, and stared at
a blank piece of wall.

‘I’ve got it.’ When there was no reply he hammered on the thin partition
that separated this room from Bill’s cabin. ‘I said, I’ve got it!’

‘Got what, yer mad eejit?’

‘I know where Sally has to be. She’s left me a clue, whether she meant
to or not. It wasn’t what she left behind, but what she took away.’

He heard Bill’s muffled yawn. ‘And that is?’

‘_The ring_, Bill. The ring. Gold, set with sapphires. The one I brought
with me and hung on this wall. It’s gone, Bill. When and how she sneaked
on board to get it I don’t know. And how long it’s been gone – Sally
will be laughing her head off.’

‘A ring. Ring-a-ding-ding. It’s only taken you three weeks to figure it
out, Joshua. So where do we need to head?’

‘To Earth West 1,617,498 . . . To the Rectangles.’

‘Fine. We’ll start in the morning. Be there in three days. Now can I go
back to sleep?’


62

IN PREPARATION FOR the approach to Valhalla, the Operation Prodigal Son
airships assembled a hundred worlds to the East of the target, hovering
like low clouds over the empty shore of this version of the American
Sea, the best part of a million and a half steps from the Datum.

When the _Benjamin Franklin_ took its place, Maggie was immediately
hailed by the _Abraham Lincoln_, visible on the horizon. The _Lincoln_’s
Captain told her that Admiral Davidson, commander of USLONGCOM, was
aboard, and wanted to see her in person. The two ships closed, and
touched down. Maggie changed her uniform, and waited for the Admiral in
her sea cabin.

But then she got a summons from Nathan. ‘You’d better get down to the
access ramp, Captain. We’ve got a situation.’

When she got there, she found that Acting Ensign Carl the troll, wearing
the armband that comprised his ‘uniform’, had been included in the party
that had greeted the Admiral. Or maybe he’d included himself; that would
be like Carl, always interested, always wanting to make new friends.
Only now, Captain Edward Cutler, aide to the Admiral, was holding a gun
to his head.

The Admiral himself, a spruce sixty-year-old, looked on with amusement.

Maggie made her way to Cutler and whispered in his ear. ‘What are you
doing, Captain?’

‘Containing a dangerous animal. What does it look like?’

‘Captain Cutler, this troll isn’t dangerous. In fact—’ Before this
steely, intense man, she found herself embarrassed. ‘Carl is a member of
the crew.’

Cutler stared at her. ‘Is this some joke?’

‘No, Captain.’ Maggie showed him Carl’s armband insignia. ‘I deposited
the appropriate forms with the fleet.’ That was true enough, though
she’d done her best to keep the bureaucracy from focusing its attention
on the situation. ‘An experiment in cross-sapient cooperation.’

Admiral Davidson was openly grinning now. ‘Call it symbolic, Ed.’

Cutler looked at Davidson, Maggie, the troll. Then he called, ‘Adkins.’

A lieutenant trotted up. ‘Sir?’

‘Send a message to the White House, by the fastest means possible. Tell
President Cowley that we are hereby surrendering to the hobo and okie
types who infest the Long Earth. And in the process we are handing over
control of our vessels to trolls, raccoons, prairie dogs, and any other
dumb animals we happen to come across.’

‘Right away, sir.’

‘But just before I resign my own commission I think I’ll put a bullet in
the head of this little one—’

Maggie approached him again. ‘Cutler. Are you a parent?’

‘What? No, not yet.’

‘Well, Captain Cutler, Ensign Carl won’t hurt you whatever you do. But
if you don’t lower that weapon I will kick you so hard that your chances
of _ever_ fathering a child will be pathetically slim . . .’

It was a relief to get the Admiral into the relative sanity of her sea
cabin. An ensign – not Carl – served coffee, and closed the door,
leaving them alone.

Davidson leaned forward. ‘So, Captain Kauffman.’

‘Sir.’

‘I’ve never been one to waste my time. You know that.’

‘No, sir.’

‘Let’s get to it, then. In the short time you have commanded the
_Benjamin Franklin_ you have treated the ship as if it were your
personal property, going well beyond the already loose parameters of
your orders – to put it bluntly, making up the rules of engagement as
you went along. Not only that, you have allowed possibly dangerous
creatures to run free in the ship.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Resulting in such incidents as the humiliation of poor Ed Cutler, out
there, over a troll.’

‘Yes, sir.’

He grinned. ‘Well done, Maggie.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘Personally, I particularly liked the way you handled the situation at
New Purity. Having the dead of the trolls placed in the same cemetery as
those poor pioneers. That went down well most every place that saw the
record. You’ve done a great deal, and very visibly, to promote the kind
of ideals that I, and others in the military – hell, even some in
President Cowley’s administration – believe should be guiding our
behaviour in the Long Earth. I wanted you, all of you captains, to reach
out your hand to these scattered new cultures. Not to wield an iron
fist. Ours is not to police our people, or to moralize; our duty is to
protect our own from external threat. But for us to do that we have to
know who and what we are protecting, in this strange new landscape we
face today. And for you to achieve those goals you had to be open; you
had to listen, to learn. Which is what you’ve done. I could never have
ordered you to do all this, Captain; you had to learn your way, which
you have done, and I’m glad you did.’

‘Thank you again, sir,’ she said, uncertain.

‘As to the future – well, somebody with your experience and particular
skills should not be utilized simply to babysit every colonial group
that hasn’t read the manual. Captain, once this business at Valhalla is
concluded, I’d like you to consider a new command: the USS _Neil
Armstrong II_.’

Maggie caught her breath. The second _Armstrong_ was a new dirigible
marque, semi-secret, designed to explore the Long Earth far beyond the
limits reached so far, even by the Valienté expedition, even by the
rumoured Chinese venture.

‘Your primary mission, as you’ll understand, will be to seek out
whatever became of the _Armstrong I_ and her crew. We haven’t even been
able to send a ship out to search. Well, now we can. After that—’ He
gestured. ‘_Out there_. Of course you can select your own crew.’

She thought of Mac, and Nathan, and Harry – even Toby Fox. ‘That won’t
be a problem, sir.’

‘I thought not.’ He glanced at his watch. ‘Well, we have a heavy duty to
fulfil when we get to Valhalla. I think we’re done here.’ He stood. ‘But
while I’m aboard, I think I would enjoy meeting your Ensign Carl, in a
less confrontational situation . . .’

That night, Maggie lay half asleep in her bunk, lulled by the
micro-sounds of the ship: every little click and creak and groan, so
familiar after the voyage. Every sailor knew that a ship had a life of
its own, an identity, idiosyncrasies – even moods.

She felt paws on the bed. She turned over. The cat’s face loomed in the
dark, green eyes glowing bright.

‘You aren’t asleep,’ said Shi-mi.

‘You really are a genius of perception, aren’t you?’

‘What are you thinking, Captain?’

‘That I’ll miss this battered old tub.’

‘Yes. I hear congratulations are in order.’

‘You would hear that, wouldn’t you? And through you the whole of the
Black Corporation, probably. In any event I haven’t decided. You hear
that, Abrahams, whoever you are?’

‘You’ll need a cat.’

‘Oh, will I?’

‘Personally I like the _Benjamin Franklin_. But I wouldn’t mind roughing
it with you. Think it over.’

‘I will. I promise. Now get some sleep.’

‘Yes, Captain.’


63

THREE DAYS AFTER his discovery that the ring was gone, when they got to
the world they had informally called the Rectangles, there was only one
obvious location for Joshua to make for.

He sat silently as Bill guided the airship over an arid, crumpled
landscape to a dry valley, its walls honeycombed with caves, its floor
marked with those familiar rectangular formations, like field boundaries
or the foundations of vanished buildings – and that one monumental stone
structure, like a sawn-off pyramid.

Even from the air the place oppressed Joshua. Here, ten years ago, with
Lobsang and Sally, he had found sapient life, some reptilian form. How
did they know it was sapient? Only because, in a jumble of dried
skeletons in a cave, a relic of some last spasm of dying, Joshua had
found a finger-bone wearing that ring he’d taken away: clean gold with
sapphires. So these creatures had evidently been sapients, and were just
as evidently long dead, and Joshua still felt the odd, existential ache
of that near miss, as if he were stranded on some island watching a ship
pass, oblivious.

And, oddly, he felt an echo of that strange experience in this new time,
the Long Earth without the trolls. More worlds with something missing.

‘Well, this is the site,’ he called up to Bill. ‘I kind of expected it
to be swarming with trolls.’

He could almost hear Bill’s shrug. ‘And I never expected it to be that
easy.’

‘I guess not.’

‘The world’s a classic arid Joker,’ Bill said. ‘According to my
instruments. Drier than my gob in Lent.’

‘Take us down well away from that pile. It’s hot.’

‘Actually I thought I might make for the person on the ground down there
waving to us.’

When Joshua looked away from the monument, it was obvious. Silvery
emergency blankets had been spread over a rock bluff, positioned to be
visible from the sky but not from the ground. And somebody was standing
there in olive-green coveralls, waving both arms.

‘Good plan,’ Joshua said.

The _Shillelagh_ descended smoothly. They both disembarked this time,
with their boots on and packs on their backs – Bill was laden with a
Stepper box, and Lobsang’s troll translation kit – ready to explore.

Joshua wasn’t particularly surprised at the identity of the person who
had summoned them from the sky. ‘Lieutenant Jansson.’

‘Joshua.’ Jansson was thin, pale, sweating, evidently a lot more unwell
than when he’d last seen her. As they walked up she sat down on an
outcrop of rock, clearly exhausted from all the waving.

‘We came to the right world, then. We guessed correctly.’

‘About Ms. Linsay taking the ring? What it signified, where you were to
come? Oh, yes. She complained about it being hard for her to find – the
ring. “Trust that idiot to take it with him on his holidays,” was her
phrase, I’m afraid. Then she _hoped_ you wouldn’t notice its absence.
And even if you did, you wouldn’t follow her here. She hoped that, she
said, but she did plan for you showing up . . . You took your time to
work it out, Joshua.’

Joshua shook his head. ‘You’re still a cop, retired or not. Only a cop
would call Sally “Ms. Linsay”. We need to be here, Monica. We have our
own mission, from Lobsang. About the trolls.’

Jansson smiled. ‘I think Sally anticipated that too. “That meddler
Lobsang’s bound to get involved in this”—’

‘I know, I know.’

‘I said she planned for you to come, Joshua. Whether she wanted it or
not. That’s why I’m here. She brought me over to wait for you. Call me a
stalking horse. She did a complicated deal with the beagles over that.’

Joshua stared. ‘_Beagles?_’

‘I know. Long story. Truth be told I think they were glad to have me
stashed out of their sight, I smell bad to them . . . You know, it’s
been a month since we’ve been here, most of it playing for time, hoping
something would turn up. Sally’s patient. The instincts of a hunter, I
suppose. It’s been harder for me.

He inspected her. ‘I’m guessing you’re self-medicating.’

‘Yes, and I’m doing fine, so don’t fuss. Now, just listen, Joshua . . .’

Jansson quickly told them that Sally was twenty-six worlds further over,
and what the situation was: about the kobold, about the sapient canines.

‘Finn McCool,’ Bill growled. ‘Playing both ends against the middle, I’ll
be bound. The little gobshite.’

For now, Joshua took in very little of this. ‘Kind of complicated.’

‘So it is,’ said Jansson.

‘That’s what happens when Sally Linsay gets into your life . . . But, as
I said, we have our own mission here. OK. Well, we’re going to leave the
airship here and walk over.’

‘Fine. There’s a certain time of day when they wait for me, stepwise, to
meet me when I’m ready to come back . . . Listen, do you have any coffee
while we wait? I ran out days ago.’

The final step into Earth West 1,617,524 was a jolt. Though he was
warned by Jansson, Joshua had expected another arid Joker, like
Rectangles. But it wasn’t arid, not just here anyhow. Joshua had an
immediate impression of green, of moisture, of freshness; he couldn’t
help taking a deep breath.

Then he observed that the green wasn’t the usual riff on forest or
prairie, but, evidently, _fields_, being grazed by creatures that might
have been cattle but weren’t, and tended by upright figures that might
have been human farmhands, but weren’t.

And then he took in the most important aspect of the landscape. The
creatures standing before him, that might have been dogs, but weren’t.

There were perhaps a dozen of the upright dogs, standing in neat ranks.
The central two seemed the most significant, judging by the quality of
the belts they wore at their waists – belts, on dogs. From which tools
of some kind hung. And weapons. A thing like a crossbow.

And a ray gun! A gaudy toy, like a prop from some old TV show. Just as
Jansson had described.

Their gender was very obvious; of the central couple, one was female,
the other male. The male was taller, towering, a magnificent – _animal_.
Yet not an animal. Even as he computed the peril they were all in, part
of Joshua rejoiced. Sapients – an entirely new kind – and one _not_
extinct for millennia, like over in Rectangles.

Bill gaped. ‘I’m dreaming. I know you told us about this, Lieutenant
Jansson.’ He shook his head. ‘But this is mad.’

The male turned to Bill, and pulled back his lips from a very wolf-like
face, and Joshua was astonished anew when he spoke. ‘No. You a-hhre not
in d-hrream.’ A dog-like growl, yet the English words were clear.

Jansson said, ‘Joshua, Bill. Let me present Li-Li. And Snowy.’

Despite Jansson’s briefing about all this, Joshua felt he was dreaming
too. ‘_Snowy?_’

Jansson pointed to the humans. ‘Joshua Valienté. Bill Chambers, his
companion. Joshua is the one Sally promised.’

‘ “Promised”?’

‘One of her schemes. Given you were bound to be coming anyhow, she spun
it for her advantage. She bigged you up as an ambassador of a greater
power . . .’

‘Nice of her.’

Snowy studied Joshua. ‘You are emissar-hrry of human Granddaughter-hrr.’

‘Granddaughter?’

‘He means ruler,’ Jansson said.

‘OK. Well, we don’t have a Granddaughter – umm, Snowy. Not the way you
mean. But – an emissary. I guess that’s the right idea. I’m here to put
things right with the trolls—’

Before he could say any more Snowy, without moving a muscle, emitted a
soft growl, and two of the dogs behind him moved forward in a blur. They
were on Joshua before he could react, and they pinned his arms to his
sides.

Joshua fought an instinct to step away. ‘Hey. What are you doing?’

Snowy nodded.

And Joshua was thrown forward to the ground, his face pressed to the
rutted dirt of the track.

His injured shoulder ached like hell. He made himself _not step out of
this_, not yet.

He tried to lift his head. He found himself staring into the face of the
female dog. Li-Li? She was unfolding a bundle of cloth that contained
small wooden pots, blades of stone and iron, needles, thread. Like a
crude field medicine kit. Her eyes were wolf-like, yet oddly tender.

He asked, ‘Why – what—’

‘Sorr-hrry.’ She reached behind him, and he felt his shirt being ripped
open.

Even now he forced himself not to step.

He heard Jansson, evidently distressed. ‘Joshua? I’m sorry. Sally did
talk about you as an emissary. They must have planned this. We never
suspected they’d treat you like this—’

He heard no more, as what felt like a very heavy fist slammed into the
back of his head, smashing his face into the dirt, and the option to
step vanished anyhow.

And the pain began, slicing, piercing, and he fell into oblivion.


64

WHEN HE WOKE, he was sitting on some kind of hard chair, slumped
forward. The pain in his back was exquisite, a tapestry.

A face floated before him. A dog, a wolf . . . It showed tenderness.

It was the one called Li-Li. She peered at him, lifted one eyelid with a
leathery finger-like extension of one paw. Then she growled,
‘Sorr-hrry.’ She backed away.

Now Sally was here, standing before him.

Beyond her he could make out a room, a big chamber, stone walls and
floor, well-built, roomy, drab, undecorated. The air was full of the
scent of dog. There were other people here. And dogs. His head was
clearing, slowly; he felt like he’d been drugged.

‘Joshua. Don’t step.’

He focused on her with difficulty. ‘Sally?’

‘Don’t step. Whatever you do, _don’t step_. Well, you’re here at last.
You took some tracking down, you and the professional Irishman here, in
your travel-trailer in the sky. But I see the clue I had to leave
finally percolated through your brain.’

‘The ring . . .’

‘Yes, the ring.’

‘Why’s it so important, suddenly?’

‘You’ll see. Sorry.’

‘Sorry? Why? And why the hell not step?’ He was mumbling, he discovered.

She took his cheeks in her hands, making him face her. He tried to
remember the last time she had touched him, save by the scruff of the
neck to rescue him from some calamity or other, such as from the wreck
of the _Pennsylvania_. ‘Because if you do, you’ll die.’

He guessed, ‘My back?’

‘It’s a kind of staple, Joshua.’

That was Jansson. He looked around, blearily. He saw Jansson sitting on
the ground by the wall, a beefy-looking dog standing over her.

He said, ‘A staple? Like the North Koreans. An iron staple through the
hearts of prisoners. So if they step away—’

‘Yeah. In your case it’s a cruder variant, of a type used by some
warlords in central Asia, we think. Joshua, don’t sit back. There’s a
kind of crossbow fixed to your back. It’s just wood and stone and sinew,
but it has an iron pin. You can walk around, you understand? But if you
step away—’

‘The pin stays behind, and _boing_. The bow fires, and the bolt goes
straight through the heart, right? I get it.’ He began to drum the
message into his own head. _Don’t step. Don’t step_. He felt at his
chest. Under the ruin of his shirt he found a stout leather band.
‘What’s to stop me just cutting this off?’

‘First, that would set it off,’ Sally said. ‘And, second, they sewed the
weapon to your skin. I mean it’s supported by the strap around your
chest, but . . .’

‘They _sewed_ it?’

‘Sorr-hrry, sorr-hrry,’ Li-Li said. ‘Order-hrrs . . . here.’ She brought
Joshua a carved wooden mug, plain but smoothly shaped.

It contained a lukewarm, meaty broth. He drank gratefully. He found he
was hungry, thirsty. He couldn’t be that badly hurt. ‘Orders, eh?’

‘It’s not her fault,’ Jansson said. ‘She’s a kind of doctor, I think.
She tried to do the work cleanly, competently. Gave you some kind of
painkillers. If it had been left to others – Joshua, I’m sorry. I didn’t
know they were going to jump you like that.’

‘Nothing you could have done, I suspect, Lieutenant Jansson.’

‘We have a plan, of sorts. Or had one before you showed up. We’ve been
trying to adapt . . .’

Sally said, ‘We’re second-guessing the motivation of non-human sapients.
We weren’t expecting them to treat you like this. Maybe this is what
passes for diplomacy, among beagles. Just attack the ambassador when he
shows up. However the staple is our technology, after all. Humans
invented this stuff to control other humans.’

Joshua grunted, ‘So I’m learning a moral lesson. But somebody brought it
here, right? And somebody had to show these dogs—’

‘Beagles,’ Sally said.

‘How to manufacture the iron components.’

‘That would-ss be me. Hell-llo, pathless-ss one . . .’

Joshua looked around, more carefully, systematically. There was a row of
dogs – beagles? – standing as if to attention over one of their number
lying on a kind of scrap of lawn, green growing grass, like a carpet.
Sally was standing before him, Jansson and Bill sitting on the floor,
against one wall. And, in another corner, with a dog guard hovering over
him—

‘Finn McCool. I’ve seen you looking better.’

The kobold had evidently been worked over. He could barely sit up
straight. His sunglasses were gone. One eye was closed, bruises showed
down one side of his bare torso, and one of his ears had been _bitten
off_; Joshua could see the marks of teeth, a crude stitching. Still,
McCool grinned. ‘It was all busines-ss. We told the beagles-ss of you,
pathless-ss ones. Your ships flicker in the ss-ky of this world. You
would notice beagles-ss soon. We told them, be ready. We taught them how
to ss-taple the ss-teppers. We got good price-ss.’

‘Did you have this done to me?’

The kobold managed to laugh. ‘Not me. But I would hav-ve, pathless-ss
one.’

Bill Chambers snarled. ‘_Pogue mahone_, gobshite.’

Joshua said, ‘So what the hell happened to you, McCool? Contractual
dispute, was it?’

‘Or-hrrders again,’ came another voice, canine, but with a more liquid
quality than the rest. Female. ‘My or-hhrders. Always my orders . . .’

Joshua turned to the group of dogs by the podium. He recognized the tall
warrior – Snowy. He still had that ray gun dangling from his Batman-type
utility belt, like a prop from one of Lobsang’s old 1950s sci-fi movies,
alongside crude blades of metal and stone. He stood at ease, but with an
air of constant, competent alertness.

He was watching over another, a female, the one who lounged, very
dog-like, on the grass. It was she who had spoken about orders.

Sally was studying Joshua with some sympathy, leavened by amusement at
his probably obvious disorientation. ‘Classic Long Earth set-up, isn’t
it, Joshua? A mash-up of three disparate sapient species – four if you
count the Rectangles builders, off-stage – nurtured on separate Earths
and now all mixed up together like this.’ She nodded at the reclining
female dog. ‘Joshua, meet Petra. Granddaughter, ruler of this city –
this Den, whatever – which is called the Eye of the Hunter.’

‘Granddaughter?’

‘Two down in the hierarchy from the Mother, I think. The big boss of
this doggy nation is the Mother, then you get Daughters,
Granddaughters—’

‘_Petra?_’

‘A human nickname, apparently. You’d probably ruin your epiglottis if
you tried for their true names. Not that we mere humans are told them
anyhow.’

‘We’re not the first to pass through here, then.’

‘Evidently not. Those damn combers get everywhere, don’t they? . . . Now
pay attention. Petra’s in charge, and she knows it.’

Joshua faced Petra. ‘It was your orders to staple me?’

‘Let me make it plain, Josh-shua. What is it we each-shh wann-t? You,
the tr-hrrollss. Yes? Make peace.’

‘That’s why I came here.’

‘Me too,’ Sally said.

‘Ve-hrry good. But I care not for you, or tr-hrrolls. Though t-hrroll
music pleases. I care for _these_.’ And she plucked the ray gun from
Snowy’s belt, hefted it in her graceful fingers, pointed it straight at
Joshua’s head – and pulled what was obviously the trigger.

He didn’t flinch, though from the corner of his eye he saw Jansson and
Bill shrink back. Of course nothing happened. It wasn’t the moment in
the game for him to die, though he suspected that would come later.

The Granddaughter said, ‘Weapons. Come from _him_.’ She gestured at the
cringing, grinning kobold. ‘Where from? From scentless wo-hhrlds.’

Sally murmured, ‘She means, stepwise. These canine conquerors can’t
step. Which is why they needed to staple you.’

‘Weapons make Eye of Hunter-rhh strong Den. Stronger than foe dens.’

_Granddaughter_, Joshua thought blearily. Dogs had big litters. This
granddaughter of the queen must have a lot of rivals.

Sally said, ‘Joshua, you need to understand. As far as I can make out
these canines don’t care about us, or about stepping, the parallel
worlds. All they care about is their own wars, their own agendas, their
conflicts. We’re just a means to an end.’

‘We’d be the same, probably.’

‘Right. And all they really want, right now, is weapons to fight their
wars.’

‘The ray guns?’

‘But weapons die.’ The Granddaughter threw the weapon, a kind of laser
pistol, Joshua saw, contemptuously on the floor. ‘That-tt one knows.’
She pointed at the kobold. ‘Whe-hrre weapons a-hhre. How to get. They
dhrr-ibble into my hands, for ho-hrrible price, then die. Enough. We
have per-hrrsuaded him to help.’ She fingered something at her neck, a
scrap of flesh dangling on a thong. It was an ear, Joshua saw. A kobold
ear. And beside it, on a second thong, now he looked more closely – a
ring, like his own, a Rectangles ring. ‘But kobold has no weapons-ss
fo-hhr us.’

‘Prob-lemm for me,’ hissed the kobold, his anxious grin showing bloody
teeth, his gaze flickering over the humans’ faces.

‘I’ll bet it is,’ Joshua said.

Joshua couldn’t figure it all out yet, not quite. But these rings, from
the world a few steps away, were evidently crucial. As Sally had seen.
And by retrieving their own ring she had sought some kind of advantage.

‘Here’s the deal,’ Sally said quickly. ‘The beagles want more ray guns.
They are in caches, over in Rectangles.’

‘They are _where_? In _what_?’

Sally gritted her teeth. ‘Is this really the time for an archaeology
lesson, Valienté? Just listen . . .’ She spoke very rapidly, and he
realized she was hoping the beagles, and the kobold, wouldn’t be able to
follow fully. ‘The caches the kobold raided before are all exhausted.
Locked up. To get at fresh ones he needs another key.’

Joshua’s mind, unusually flexible for once – maybe it was the goad of
the lingering pain – made the connection. ‘_The key is the ring we found
in the cave of bones_. The ring I kept, the ring you took from the
airship—’

‘The ring I now have secreted on my person,’ Sally murmured. ‘But they
don’t know I have it.’

‘I’m not surprised. And the ring the Granddaughter is wearing—’

‘Opened a weapons cache that’s now exhausted.’

‘He needs a new key. He, or his buddies, must have combed Rectangles for
the keys. How come he didn’t find the one we did?’

‘On the finger of a long-dead corpse? Some taboo, maybe. Or instinct.
He’s not human, Joshua. He’s not going to seek stuff out the way a human
would.’

‘OK. What now?’

‘So here’s the deal we made. The beagles can’t step, right? So we go
over to Rectangles – that is me, Jansson, the kobold. He shows us where
the cache is, we open it with the ring, we come back with more ray guns,
nicely charged up. That _was_ the plan. But I’ve been playing for time,
Joshua. For a month now. Time before I had to give away our only
advantage. Time before I had to hand over high-energy weapons to these
sapients we’ve only just met. I just hoped something would turn up, that
we’d find some other way out. _You_ were a wild card, Joshua. Once you
got here – if you got here at all – I hoped I could use you to force a
bluff, somehow. Get out of here, get to the trolls. Instead of which—’

‘Here I am with a crossbow stitched to my back. Sorry to let you down.’

‘Don’t apologize,’ Sally said without a hint of irony. ‘Not your fault.
Once again I didn’t guess the non-human motivation right.’ She sighed.
‘Look. While you were out we talked, came up with a deal. I think we’ll
have to hand over the damn weapons. _If_ they exist, _if_ we can bring
them back. The deal is that if we do make it back with the weapons, you
get to speak to the trolls. But you’ve also become a kind of hostage, to
make sure we won’t just step away out of here.’

‘Maybe you should do just that. Step away. Take Jansson, Bill with you—’

She sighed, irritated. ‘You’ve always been an idiot, Valienté. If I left
you here I wouldn’t care, but Helen would kill me. Besides, it wouldn’t
do any good in the long run. We have to handle this situation with the
trolls here somehow. And resolve humanity’s relationship with the
beagles. We _come back_, and then, when everybody’s got what they want—’

Joshua, his back twinging every time he moved, turned to the
Granddaughter. ‘Yes, what then, uh, Granddaughter Petra? Are we free to
go?’

She _smiled_. Her lips pulled back over gleaming teeth. It was an almost
human expression, if a chilling one. ‘You will still be alivve. And
perhaps you will live on, if you display honour-rhh . . .’

Joshua tried to make sense of that.

Bill spoke up. ‘Joshua. Remember, they’re not human. “Honour” meant
something different to that gobshite kobold, didn’t it? I wonder what
“honour” means to a sentient species descended from pack-hunting
carnivores.’

‘I have a feeling I’m going to find out,’ Joshua said with dread. ‘First
things first.’ He stood carefully, but his back flared with pain and he
staggered, until Sally grabbed his arms. ‘Where are the trolls?’


65

SO, FULFILLING THEIR part of the deal, Jansson, Sally and the kobold
stepped back to the Rectangles world.

Despite a strong dose of anti-nausea pills, the steps still felt like
the usual punches in the gut to Jansson. When she got at last to the
Rectangles, she folded over, groaning.

Sally stood over her, rubbing her back. ‘Are you OK?’

‘Never gets any easier. Not since the very first time I stepped.’

‘On Step Day. I know. Out of my father’s living room, with a Stepper he
made, and left behind.’

Jansson, doubled over, thumped the ground, frustrated. ‘It’s not just
the stepping. This damn illness, it gets in the way of doing stuff. You
know?’

‘I can imagine.’

The others waited the few minutes it took her to recover enough to stand
straight. Sally was grave, patient. The kobold stood alongside her,
restless, his own injuries obviously paining him. But he oddly aped
Sally’s stance, and he cocked his head as if in mock-sympathy, his gaze
flickering from one face to the other, as if seeking approval. Jansson
turned away from him, repelled.

She managed to stand up and look around. There was the airship hovering
overhead, Joshua’s _Shillelagh_, a massive, competent-looking,
reassuring presence. Jansson took a deep breath. This world smelled of
dryness, of baked, rusty stone. But it didn’t smell of _dog_, and that
was a huge relief.

Sally touched her shoulder. ‘Look. I have to go back, with these reptile
ray-guns, whatever, for the sake of Joshua. Always assuming we find the
guns at all. But the beagles can’t reach you here; they can’t step. You
could just go, Jansson. Get into that airship and—’

Jansson smiled tiredly. ‘And leave Joshua behind? Sally, I’ve known him
since he was a boy. He is what he is, he’s _where_ he is, partly because
I was in his life from the start. You know? Pushing him. Like you, I’m
not about to leave him now.’ She looked at the kobold. ‘Though I have to
admit I don’t know why this one hasn’t scarpered already. Why did you
hang around to let them beat you up?’

‘Drugs-ss,’ the kobold said simply. ‘They drugged poor Finn McCool.
Could not ss-step.’

Jansson said, ‘But you just stepped with us. The drugs have worn off
now. Yet you’re still here.’

Sally grinned, an expression that reminded Jansson uncomfortably of the
beagles, the wolf-people. ‘Oh, he knows that if he runs I will track him
down. You won’t be able to hide. Will you, you little prick? Wherever
you go I will find you, and kill you.’

The kobold shrugged; he had already seemed nervous enough. ‘Poor Finn
McCool,’ he repeated.

The heat, the dryness, were sucking at Jansson’s strength. ‘Shall we get
on with this?’

‘Good idea.’ Sally glanced down the dry valley, at the looming stone
mass of the building there. ‘Not too healthy for any of us, hanging
around that thing.’ Suddenly she had a ring in her hand. ‘This what you
need, Finn McCool?’

On the beagle world, the trolls had gathered by a river bank. Joshua and
Bill walked towards them. Bill was carrying a backpack containing
Lobsang’s patent translation device.

Every step caused Joshua precise, relentless agonies. His lower back
felt hot and damp, and he wondered if his stitches were ripping open as
he carried the weight of the crossbow gadget. If so, the blood loss
might kill him slow, even if he didn’t step to give the weapon the
chance to kill him quick. Even his dodgy shoulder was hurting, a grace
note added to the symphony of agony from his back.

He tried to concentrate on his surroundings. The river was wide, strong,
placid, and its banks were dominated by green fields and forest clumps.
From the fields, the beagles’ strange herd beasts had come to drink,
sipping at the lapping water, lowering their misshapen heads.

And the trolls were here, by the water. A band of them had gathered at
the closest point of the river to the Eye of the Hunter, where
irrigation channels and open sewers cut across the ground to the town.
As always the troll group, though sedentary in this world, was mobile in
the Long Earth; at the fringe of the pack, scouts and hunters
continually flicked away and returned, like ghosts.

There were hundreds of trolls, in this one band. Joshua could see they
had been here for some time; the ground was scuffed and muddy, and there
was a strong, unmistakable troll musk in the air. There were more bands
like this, Joshua could see, spread along the river bank, and on the far
side, and deeper into the country. The long call, unending, seemed to
hang above them, a cloud of elusive memory.

Surely there were still trolls out there across the Long Earth; nobody
had any real idea how many trolls there were in total. But this really
did look to be where they were concentrating, he could see that. The
centre of gravity of the troll population.

And the band before him was the very pivot of it all, as far as he was
concerned. For there was Mary, the runaway from the Gap, and her cub
Ham, unmistakable in the remnant of the silvery spacesuit the nerds at
the Gap had dressed him up in.

As Joshua and Bill approached the trolls did not quite fall silent, but
the volume of their song diminished. Ham sucked his thumb as he watched
them, wide-eyed, apparently curious, like all young mammals.

Bill slipped the pack off his shoulders and unloaded it. It contained a
tablet, blank and black, a couple of feet square, with a fold-out stand.
Bill set this up, and placed the tablet to face the trolls.

Joshua glanced down. ‘That’s it? No on-switch, no boot-up?’

Bill shrugged. ‘Black Corporation shit. It’s not like the troll-call
translators that Sally described, by the way, those trumpet things. Some
kind of _new_ Black Corporation shit. You figured what you’re going to
say here? How you’re going to convince them that humanity loves them
after all?’

Joshua had purposefully not thought this far ahead. He was no public
speaker, and even preparing for town meetings back at Hell-Knows-Where
tended to make him freeze up. ‘I figured I’d wing it.’

Bill patted him on the shoulder, gingerly. ‘Good luck with that.’ He
stepped back.

Joshua faced the trolls, standing straight, trying to ignore the liquid
pain of his back. He was aware of them watching him, hundreds of pairs
of those dark, unreadable eyes – backed up, he reminded himself, by
hundreds of pairs of hairy arms, and fists like steam hammers. And he
was the representative of a humanity that was probably still treating
their kind as brute beasts across a million worlds. What the hell was he
going to say?

He spread his hands. ‘Good afternoon.’

‘Actually it’s still morning,’ muttered Bill.

‘I suppose you’re wondering why I’ve gathered you all here today.’

‘That’s it. Start with a gag.’

The trolls were motionless.

‘Whew. Tough crowd.’

‘Shut up, Bill—’

‘I didn’t say that, Joshua.’

Joshua turned. A figure stood beside him, tall, erect, still, with
shaven head, in an orange robe, and with a broom in his right hand.
‘Lobsang.’

‘I don’t mean to steal your thunder, Joshua. But I figured you could use
a little backup.’

‘You can never have too much backup,’ Joshua muttered.

Lobsang smiled, and for an instant he flickered, shuddering into a cloud
of boxy pixels – Joshua could see the green prairie through his
substance – before congealing again. A hologram, then, projected from
the box. Lobsang took a step forward, glancing back at the translator
box. ‘Hit it, boys.’

The thrilling sound of a mass choir burst from the translator box and
filled the air, a pounding, repetitive chant, a thousand voices. To
Joshua’s ears it was not quite human, not quite troll, but a blend of
the two.

The trolls looked astonished. They stopped grooming, stood up, all their
faces turned towards Lobsang. And already, Joshua could hear, the song
of the trolls was echoing the translator’s riffs.

Lobsang raised his arms, brandishing his broom. ‘My friends! You know
me. I am Lobsang, who you know as the Wise One. This is Joshua. They
call him the Wanderer. Yea, the Wanderer! And we have travelled far to
speak to you . . .’ As he spoke he backed up his words with rudimentary
sign language, and his own voice sounded over the chorus from the
translator box, thin, high, distinctive, like a Bach trumpet.

‘Just when I thought my life couldn’t possibly get any weirder,’ Joshua
muttered.

Bill said, ‘I guess he can take this off around this world. Speak to as
many trolls as he can get to. A hologram’s not going to grow tired. The
Lobsang world tour, 2040. The good thing is _we_ haven’t got to listen
to it every time he does it . . .’

Sally handed Finn McCool the ring. ‘Show us.’

‘Eass-y,’ said the kobold. He took the ring between his supple finger
and thumb, set it on his upturned palm, spun it –

The ring blurred into the air, still spinning, shot past Jansson’s face
like a bright blue hornet, and made straight for the big stone building.
It burrowed into the dirt at the base of the building’s face, whirring
like a drill bit, throwing up a spray of sand, until it had disappeared.

There was stillness, silence.

Sally seemed irritated. She glanced at the kobold. ‘Now what?’

‘Juss-t wait.’

Jansson smiled at Sally. ‘You OK?’

Sally shook her head. ‘I just get annoyed by stuff like that. Magic-ring
crap. What a stunt. I mean, _I_ could imagine how that could work:
miniature accelerometers to detect the spinning that activates it, some
equivalent of GPS to figure out where it has got to go, some kind of
propulsion – magnetic? Even micro-rockets of some kind? Just a dumb
trick, to impress the credulous, easily distinguishable from magic
. . .’

The ground shuddered under their feet.

Jansson, queasy, stepped back quickly. Sand, thrown up from the foot of
the building, settled back quickly in the dry air. What looked like a
kind of lizard shot across the valley floor, seeking the shelter of a
heap of rocks. Above them creatures like buzzards rose up, alarmed,
cawing.

There was a grinding rumble.

And, to Jansson’s blank astonishment, a whole section of the flat valley
floor sank out of sight, down into the ground, revealing—

A ladder. Rungs cut into a stone wall.

‘Ha!’ Sally clapped her hands together. ‘I knew it. Natural
concentration of uranium my butt.’

The kobold came to Jansson. ‘Watch.’

‘Watch what?’

‘No.’ He tapped his wrist. ‘Watch-ssh.’

Bemused, she handed over her old police-issue timepiece.

He held it up to the sunlight, trying to read its face. ‘Eight
minutes-ss.’

‘I _knew_ it,’ Sally repeated, staring at the hole in the ground. ‘The
first time we came here I said so. There’s a nuclear pile in that
pyramid, or under it. It’s _old_, old and abandoned technology, yet
still hot. So old that later generations, who’d long forgotten the
accomplishments of their ancestors, were attracted by the strange
phenomena of the ancient waste. And were slowly killed off by it. Of
course, this is the way the story was _supposed_ to turn out. All
ancient civilizations leave behind underground vaults of secret weapons.
And each key works only once, I’m guessing . . .’

Jansson’s cop instinct told her there must be more to this situation
than that old movie cliché. This was all supposed to be millions of
years old. What possible technology could endure such a time? And why
would you set up such long-duration caches anyhow? For whose benefit?
The only alternative was that these caches were somehow being
_replenished_. But who by, how, why?

The kobold was still glaring at her watch, a caricature of a timekeeper,
and now wasn’t the moment for speculation.

Jansson turned on the kobold. ‘Eight minutes until _what_, monkey boy?’

‘Until tomb seals-ss again.’ He studied the watch face, but numbers were
evidently a mystery to him. ‘Less-ss now . . .’

Sally turned. ‘I’ll go.’

‘No.’ Jansson grabbed her arm with all the strength she could muster.
‘You said it’s radioactive in there.’

‘Yes, but—’

‘I already bought the farm, Sally. Let me.’

‘Monica—’

‘I mean it. I feel like I owe Joshua.’ She put on her determined face.
‘What do I have to do, flash my badge?’

‘Go, then. Go, go!’ She actually pushed Jansson away.

It seemed to wear Jansson out just crossing the dry river bed to the
hole in the ground. Was she going to be capable of doing this? What if
she just got stuck down there, when the kobold’s eight minutes were
done? No help for that, if so. Get on with it.

To her relief the ladder cut into the wall was easy to climb down, with
fat hand- and footholds. Getting back out might be more problematic
. . .

‘Sally, how much time?’

‘Seven minutes. Less. I don’t know . . . Shift it, Jansson!’

‘I’m doing my best.’

At the base of the shaft she stood in a puddle of light from above. A
kind of corridor, too low for her to stand upright, led off into the
blackness. Only one way to go.

She carried a flashlight in her pocket, smaller than her thumb, with no
iron parts so it worked when she stepped. She was an ex-cop; she always
carried a flashlight. She flicked it on now, and followed a splash of
light into the deeper dark. Joshua had always carried a flashlight, she
recalled. Even as a thirteen-year-old, on Step Day. That was Joshua.
This is for you, Joshua, she told herself as she drove herself on. To
hell with trolls and beagles. For you.

The walls seemed to be of unpainted stone, no markings, no signs. Yet
they weren’t smooth; they were ridged, in uncertain, uneven patterns.
Tentatively she touched the markings, let her palm run over them as she
hurried deeper into the corridor. She got the sense of meaning in the
markings, like the time she’d attended a cop’s familiarization class on
Braille. Was this the writing of the reptile-folk who had built this
place? Tactile, not visual?

‘Jansson! You might want to move your ass . . .’

She came to a T-junction. Unbelievable. Maybe the markings gave definite
directions, one way or another: THIS WAY TO THE MAGIC RAY GUNS. But they
were useless to her.

She turned left at random, hurried down a corridor, hunching to avoid
the low ceiling. Another junction! She took another left, what the hell.
But remember the way back, remember the way . . . The walls were broken
here by what looked like storage shelves. She saw pots, boxes, heaps of
what looked like clay tablets, engraved. More records? Other kinds of
stuff, equipment she couldn’t even recognize . . .

‘Jansson!’ Sally’s voice was very faint now.

Another T-junction. She went right, again at random. And now her
flashlight picked up a ruby glint.

Rack upon rack of ray guns.

Lobsang apologized for the way humans, some humans, had treated trolls.
He spoke of lobbies pressing the US government to grant trolls human
rights, at least within the US Aegis, the long footprint of America
across the Earths. It was only a start, there was no way to ensure that
every human everywhere would behave as decently as they should, but it
_was_ a start . . .

‘Maybe it’s the best we can offer them,’ Bill said to Joshua, speaking
loudly to make himself heard. ‘Kind of symbolic, but real nevertheless.
Like the British Empire formally abolishing slavery in the early
nineteenth century. Didn’t get rid of slavery overnight, but it was a
sea change.’

‘He sounds like Martin Luther King with a heavenly choir. Typical
Lobsang.’

‘I wonder how much of this abstract stuff they can understand,’ Bill
said.

Joshua shrugged. ‘Their collective intelligence is different from ours.
If they get the basic message – _give us another chance_ – that might be
enough.’

‘And what about giving these beagle beasts Dan Dare ray guns? Where’s
the morality in that?’

‘Well, they’re not our guns,’ Joshua said. ‘And we didn’t provide them
in the first place. If we live through this there’ll be other parties to
follow, proper contact. We can talk to the beagles then about peace,
love and understanding.’

‘Sure we can. After we’ve all had rabies shots. So you think this is
going to work? This whole mad stunt of Lobsang’s? And what then?’

To Joshua, all his life, the future had been nothing but a continual
surprise. ‘Tomorrow never knows.’

There was a soft tap on his shoulder. He turned, to look up into the
cold eyes of Snowy.

‘Talk to t-hrrollss. Going well?’

‘I think so.’

‘Good. Your work-k done?’

‘I guess.’

‘Josh-shua?’

‘Yes?’

‘Hrr-run.’

The rock hatchway had slid back into place, and save for a patch of
disturbed earth there was no sign of the passageway into the ground.

Only a heap of toy-like sci-fi blasters, retrieved from the cache.

Oh, and the ring, which had somehow been spat back out, to lie on the
ground.

Jansson sat in the dirt, shivering despite the heat.

Finn McCool hissed, ‘Have guns-ss. Now back to beagles-ss. And ss-ay
goodbye to Josh-ssua.’

Sally snatched up the ring and harangued him. ‘What did you mean by
that, you piece of garbage?’

He backed off, hands raised defensively. ‘Deal nearly finish-ss,’ he
said. ‘Ray guns. Trollen. Now payback. Granddaughter honour Joshua. You
say goodbye to him-mm . . .’

Sally glanced over at Jansson. ‘You any idea what he’s talking about?
I’m guessing, nothing good.’

‘Gang culture,’ Jansson murmured, exhausted. ‘Like that, maybe. The
honour of the warrior. She’s going to grant him a good death. Maybe
that’s what he means.’

‘Shit. Then we have to help him.’ Sally glanced around. ‘What have we
got? Think, think.’ She pocketed the ring, and a ray gun that she
slipped inside her sleeveless traveller’s jacket. ‘What else? You.
Little Joe.’

The kobold cringed. ‘What, what?’

‘You got your walkman?’

‘Stone that sings-ss?’

‘Give it to me.’

‘But, but, but, mm-mine!’ He sounded like a child.

She grabbed his wrist so he couldn’t step away without her. ‘It’s that
or your left bollock. Hand it over. Now we go back. Get ready to step,
Jansson . . .’


66

JOSHUA BACKED AWAY from Snowy, and from Bill, who scrambled to pack up
the translation gear. Some instinct guided Joshua towards the river
bank, the flowing water.

How the hell was he supposed to handle this? He was barely conscious as
it was. The device on his back felt like a huge malevolent crab now,
digging its claws deeper into his flesh with every pace. Maybe the
painkillers were wearing off.

And Snowy followed. He wasn’t moving as quickly as Joshua, so the gap
between them opened up, yet there was a steady, purposeful, relentless
quality to his gait. Then he dropped to all fours, becoming even more
wolf-like. A huge, big-brained, weapon-carrying wolf.

Joshua was aware of the trolls watching, apparently curious, but none
intervened. Other dogs watched too: Li-Li, the mordant Brian. More
warrior types followed, it seemed, come to see the show.

Suddenly all the beagles howled, a pack in full cry.

‘Come, Joshua-aahh,’ Snowy growled. ‘This fun-nn.’

‘Get stuffed, Krypto.’

‘And honour-hrr for you. Gift of Granddaughter. Life he-hhre, cheap.’

‘Big litters?’

‘Many born. All die. To die well is-s to have lived well-ll.’

‘That’s your culture. Not mine.’

‘Head high on her wall. Honour-hhr of place.’

‘Whose head?’

‘Yours-ss.’

‘Thanks.’ Joshua, succumbing to the inevitable, turned and started to
jog, parallel to the river. ‘How can I win?’

‘Die well-ll—’

‘Any options aside from that?’

‘_My_ head on wall-ll . . . Play fair-hrr.’

‘What?’

‘I play fair.’ The beagle stopped, stock still, and closed its eyes.
‘R-run, human-nn.’

Joshua didn’t hesitate further. He ran. He tried to think like a wolf,
like a dog. Or rather, cliché scenes from every bad wolf-chases-man
movie flashed through his head.

What the hell. He dived into the river.

Given this was generally such a hot, arid world, the water was
surprisingly cold, the current strong, and it swept him downstream fast.
Heavy in his clothes, he struggled to keep his head above the water. He
considered kicking off his boots, then thought about running over open
ground barefoot, and kept the boots.

As long as he didn’t drown, this was a good plan, right? Throw the dog
off the scent, like in the movies. But the pain from the lethal gadget
on his back seemed even sharper in the cold water. And he felt like it
was talking to him. _You could always just step away. End it in a
second. A bolt through the heart – how bad can it be? Better than
getting your throat bitten out by Deputy Dawg back there_. But he wasn’t
dead yet.

The river soon swept him away from the cultivated country, the fields,
and into rougher terrain. He’d been brought into this place unconscious,
and hadn’t had a chance to scope it out. Evidently the Eye of the
Hunter, the city of Granddaughter Petra’s Den, really wasn’t so large.
He’d need to find a place to hide before Snowy caught up with him—

‘Watch out-hrr.’

The voice came from downstream. He struggled to get his head out of the
water. There was Snowy, sitting on a rock as if waiting to be fed by his
owner, calmly watching Joshua get washed by.

He yelled back, ‘Watch out for what?’

Snowy glanced farther downstream. ‘The hrr-rapids.’

And in a heartbeat Joshua had been swept past Snowy’s rock, and over a
low waterfall, and into the rapids. He was buffeted from one worn
boulder to the next, a punch to the kidneys here, a slam in the chest
there, as he tumbled through the rocks like a piece of lumber. He forced
himself to give in to the surging, turbulent flow, to keep his limbs
loose, to protect his head. But every time the pack on his back caught
on some projection the pain was agonizing.

Then he was through, squirted out like an orange pip from a child’s
lips, and he was hurled even further downstream. When he glanced back,
he could see no sign of Snowy. At least he might have gained some
distance.

A fallen tree lay across the stream. With a mighty effort he plunged
that way, grabbed the tree as he went past, and pulled himself out of
the water on to a bank of gravel. He sat up to protect his back,
panting, one breath, two, three.

There was nobody about. No Snowy. But now he had stopped moving he had
time to concentrate on the pain in his back, a raking, ripping, tearing
anguish. Worse, his lower back felt slippery again, and the damp gravel
under him was stained red with blood.

Joshua Valienté had been travelling alone in the Long Earth since he was
thirteen years old. He had been in some tight spots before, and he was
still around. There was no reason why he couldn’t get out of this one.
_And you can always step, just step into a different sunlight, and it
will be over in a flash_ . . .

Not yet. _Think ahead_. Dogs and scent, right?

He pulled at his clothing. His shirt was a ruin anyhow; it fell apart
easily. He threw one half into the water and let it wash downstream.
Then he draped the other half over the tree that had saved his life. He
stood, glancing around, and stared to paddle down the river, sticking
close to the bank, staying in the water.

‘Nice t-hrry.’ Snowy was right in front of him.

Joshua lunged to his left, away from the river, and ran across broken
turf-like ground, not grass, something similar. The fallen tree that had
saved him from the river was part of a shattered copse that looked as if
it had been smashed apart by a lightning strike. He dived that way,
rolled into the shadow of a big fallen trunk.

The huge form of the beagle padded silently across his vision.

Then he heard a human voice calling from far away, a male voice singing:
a thin, wailing song, something about remembering Walter . . . The sound
seemed to trigger a reflex in Snowy, and he bounded away.

Joshua knew he had been granted seconds, no more. No point running. He
clambered out of his cover, his back aching, and he could feel blood
trickling down his bare flesh. He cast around the clearing, picking up
fallen branches, testing them. Here was one, thick and solid, too long –
he smashed it in two on a lichen-covered trunk. He had a weapon.

A soft growl.

He turned. Snowy had the chewed-up remains of Finn McCool’s walkman in
his mouth. He spat the junk to the ground.

Without hesitating Joshua whirled, swinging the branch as hard as he
could. It slammed into the beagle’s heavy skull. It felt as if he’d
tried to brain a marble statue. The impact shuddered up his arms, his
aching back and even his bad shoulder hurt like hell.

But the beagle stumbled, almost fell.

Joshua glimpsed knives of stone and iron in the belt at Snowy’s waist.
One chance. He leapt forward, his fingers grasping for a blade.

But Snowy stood straight, almost gracefully, almost kindly, and simply
shouldered Joshua to the ground.

Now Joshua was flat on his back, with the crossbow gadget digging
painfully into his spine. The man-wolf was on top of him, standing
easily on all fours, his paws pinning Joshua’s limbs, his heavy head
above him, staring down.

A scent of meat on his breath. A glimpse of a wagging tail. Snowy
actually licked his face.

‘This won’t hu-hrrt.’

No, it damn well wouldn’t. Joshua braced to step, to put a clean end to
this.

But that hadn’t been Snowy’s voice. He glanced sideways, in sudden hope.

Not a human. Another dog: Li-Li. She said, ‘Granddaughter wants
t-hrrophy. You want life. All can win-nnh.’

Snowy panted. ‘I tell G-hrranddaughte-hhr I chewed your-hrr face off.
Trophy head useless-ss.’

Joshua gasped, ‘She won’t be happy with that.’

‘So I give he-hhr another-hhr trophy.’

‘_What_ other trophy?’

‘Hold still . . .’ Li-Li bent, and closed her mouth over Joshua’s left
wrist.

As the great jaws closed, severing skin and tendon and muscle and bone,
Joshua screamed.

But he did not step.


67

GEOGRAPHICALLY VALHALLA was near the coastline of the inland ocean of
this distant America, on Earth West One Point Four Million Plus Thirteen
(stoner miscount correction applied, as Ensign Toby Fox solemnly told
Maggie). The dirigibles of Operation Prodigal Son arrived in this world
about midday of a sparkling late July day, and hovered in a blue sky as
pure as a special effect in a computer game.

Admiral Davidson briefed his captains. They were here to assert the
authority of the United States over these rebels, he said, but he wanted
a show of goodwill, not a shooting match. His strategy was that a
detachment of marines would accompany a group of senior officers, to be
nominated by the respective captains, in a march on city hall. It was to
be a good-natured, hearts-and-minds kind of event. However, he added,
the marines would be armed.

And when Maggie heard that Captain Cutler from the _Lincoln_, the idiot
who’d pulled a gun on Carl, was to be put in charge of this bizarre
parade, she decided to nominate herself for the march.

At the drop point they formed up, fifty personnel in all, and walked
through the streets of Valhalla – through this city of Earth West
one-million-plus-change, this symbolic stronghold of the rebels of the
Long Earth. At Admiral Davidson’s orders the marines kept their weapons
in sight but with safeties on. Meanwhile the silent dirigibles floated
overhead, a menacing presence, full of watchful eyes, ready to act in a
C2 role, as nodes of command and control – but, it was hoped, not as
weapons platforms, not today.

And, this hot, humid noon, Valhalla was empty.

That was what they found as they walked on steadily from their mustering
point. The marines stuck to the middle of wide, empty roads, with the
officers walking behind, the only sounds their footsteps, and the calls
of birds. There were a few abandoned vehicles in the empty streets,
small hand-drawn carts. A couple of horses were tied up at a rail
outside a Wild West-type saloon. There were even a couple of
steam-powered cars, neatly parked up. No sign of people anywhere.

The dirigible crews reported that the picture was much the same as far
as they could see from the air. Nobody at home.

Maggie walked beside Joe Mackenzie. ‘Is it just me, Mac, or do you feel
kind of ridiculous?’

The doctor said cynically, ‘Well, we are military. You said it yourself;
this operation can’t all be about kittens stuck up trees. We have to do
some soldier-type stuff from time to time.’

‘True enough.’

At least Maggie felt relatively at home in this place, which unlike most
stepwise communities felt like an authentic American city, with its
scale, its streetlights, a few elements of traffic control, even posters
for concerts and dances and lectures and such, although these were
mostly hand-lettered in a small-town kind of way. It was definitely a
Long Earth settlement, though, with the buildings massive blocks of
timber and sandstone and concrete, the roadways crude lanes of tar, the
sidewalks compressed river-bed gravel.

Then she heard the singing.

They came to a kind of square, really just the intersection of two main
drags. Here, in the shade of a shop awning, were a dozen trolls, singing
some kind of song about Mohawks and tea and taxes, as far as Maggie
could tell. The marines, in the van of the party, slowed to a halt and
stared.

Admiral Davidson and Captain Cutler had a quick conference.

Then Cutler gave the order that they were to take a break. It was a
reasonable position from the point of view of security. They were in the
open here, but were overlooked by no tall buildings, and had a clear
view in four directions down these empty streets. As the rest dumped
their packs and fished out water bottles, Cutler posted sentries to each
of the square’s four corners, and guys with Steppers were sent a world
or two to either side also. It was a classic Long Earth security drill.

Maggie stood on the tarmac with Mac and Nathan. Nathan dug an Mr.E out
of his pack, a meal ready to eat, popped it, and dug into a hot beef
pie.

Mac looked on, seeming faintly appalled. ‘Don’t know how you eat like
that at a moment like this, man.’

Around a mouthful of pie Nathan said, ‘Takes years of dedicated
training, Doctor. You got any salt?’

‘No, I don’t have any salt.’ Mac dug a handheld computer out of his own
pack, and held it up to the trolls. ‘I’m trying to identify that song
they’re singing . . . Aha. _Bring in your axes, and tell King George
we’ll pay no taxes on his foreign tea_ . . . It’s a Revolutionary War
ballad. The Boston Tea Party. Whoever taught the trolls that is sending
us a message. And has a sense of humour.’

Nathan said, finishing up his Mr.E, ‘But where the hell is everybody
else?’

Mac said, ‘I’m guessing, in other parts of the city.’

‘_What_ other parts? . . . Oh.’

Mac was pointing at random, his fingers cocked at funny angles.

‘Stepwise,’ Maggie said. ‘They’ve all gone stepwise?’

‘Kind of. I visited, once. This city actually extends stepwise, in a
way. I mean, it’s not like a Low Earth footprint of a Datum town, like
New York West 1 or East 5, or whatever. Here, the other worlds are more
or less unspoiled, and therefore full of stuff to hunt and gather and
eat. People live out there, at least some of the time. Together they
support the city at the centre. It is kind of quiet today, isn’t it?
Usually there’s some sort of critical mass of people actually _here_.’

‘But not today.’

‘Not today. Well, I guess they knew this invasion force was on the way.
Who wants trouble? But not much of a war, is it, if nobody’s interested
in fighting? Not much _fun_.’

Captain Cutler heard that and turned, glowering. ‘Fun, officer?’

‘Sure, sir,’ Mac said with a grin. ‘War is fun. That’s the terrible
secret, why we’ve been doing it back to the Bronze Age, if not before.
Well, now we have the Long Earth, everybody can have as much as they
possibly want, there’s always room to just walk away. No more need for
war, right? Maybe it’s a phase we need to grow out of.’

Nathan raised his eyebrows. ‘Good luck with that as a guide to your
career progression in the Navy, Doctor.’

A whistle blew. The break was over; time to continue their march. The
marines began to pack up their kit, and sentries flicked away to summon
back their buddies from their stepwise posts.

The city hall, according to the maps they had, was only a couple of
blocks north of here.

Soon Maggie could see it, up ahead, over the shoulders of her officers.
It was a squat colonial-era-mansion kind of structure, sitting on a
bluff, a scrap of high ground. An open square sprawled before it,
another road intersection. Two big flags fluttered from poles high above
the building’s frontage. One was the Stars and Stripes; the other was a
blue field covered with a string of cloud-blue discs.

Mac grunted. ‘I wondered when we’d get to see that new flag. There’s a
bunch of rebel colonies scattered across the Earths, starting with New
Scarsdale back around West 100,000 and working their way all the way up
to Valhalla, and beyond. They’re the ones who backed the Footprint
Congress here at Valhalla, where they composed their Declaration of
Independence. And that’s their flag. Multiple worlds, see? . . .’

Maggie heard a series of soft pops, like bubbles bursting: people
stepping in. At last they had company.

Cutler started barking orders, relayed by the marine commanders. The
marching formation broke up into a line. Maggie took her own position.

And she glimpsed people, men, women, children, most dressed either like
farmers or beach bums or a combination of the two, just popping into the
world, all over the square before the city hall. They arrived sitting
down, and when one landed on top of another the newcomer would fall
away, laughing and apologizing. A babble of conversation started up,
like a country fair.

All these people were filling in the space between the marines and the
city hall. The dirigibles patrolled overhead, observing, impotent, their
turbines growling.

Captain Cutler, red-faced, surveyed this scene. ‘Bayonets,’ he snapped.

‘Belay that,’ said Admiral Davidson mildly, but clearly enough for all
to hear. ‘We’re here to _win_ hearts, Captain, not to cut them out of
warm bodies. And there’ll be no firing either, except on my direct
order. Is that clear?’

And still the people kept coming, filling in the square, like human
raindrops covering the ground. Some brought picnic baskets, Maggie saw,
bemused. Cake, bottles of beer, lemonade for the kids. Others carried
gifts: baskets of apples, even strings of big, plump-looking fish that
they tried to hand to the marines, and dumped at their feet when they
refused.

Captain Cutler pressed Admiral Davidson. ‘Our mission is to take that
city hall and raise the US flag, sir.’

‘Well, it rather looks as if Old Glory is already flying.’

‘But it’s the symbolism of the act . . . Let me try at least to clear a
path across this square, Admiral.’

‘Oh – very well, Cutler. But play nice, will you?’

At Cutler’s barked orders, marines were sent into the crowd. Meanwhile
the dirigibles began gliding over the square, loudhailers broadcasting
orders. ‘You are asked to disperse! Disperse immediately!’

Maggie watched marine Jennifer Wang, from the detail that had travelled
on board the _Franklin_, wade in with her colleagues. Surrounded by
these people in their country-work type clothes, encased in her K-pot
and turtle-shell body armour plates, she looked like some kind of alien
invader beamed down from the sky.

Wang chose her target at random. ‘Move, please, ma’am,’ she said to one
fortyish woman with a gaggle of kids.

‘I will not,’ the woman said clearly.

Her kids took it up like a playground chant. ‘I will not! I will not!’

Wang just stood there, baffled.

They tried lifting people bodily out of the way, grabbing wrists and
ankles and just lifting. But others, especially little kids, would come
and sit on the person you were trying to shift. And even if you got a
clean lift the person would just go limp, like a floppy mannequin,
making him or her almost impossible to handle. Cutler, without referring
back to Davidson, tried getting his marines to soft-cuff a few of the
protestors. But the people involved would just flick away into another
world, and come tumbling back where you couldn’t reach them. Maggie
found herself impressed with the coordination of this flash mob blocking
the square, with the training they’d evidently had in this
passive-resistance stuff – with their determination and discipline,
almost military class, though with different techniques and objectives.

And gradually the chanting was breaking out all over: ‘_I will not! I
will not!_’

Cutler stormed back to Davidson, frustrated, angry. Maggie thought his
right hand hovered a little dangerously near his pistol. He said to
Davidson, ‘If we could identify the leaders, sir—’

‘With a mob like this there may not be any leaders, Captain.’

‘Then a couple of rounds above their heads. Just to scatter them.’

Without replying, the Admiral removed his cap, closed his eyes, and
raised his lined face to the late-summer sun.

Cutler snapped, ‘_No?_ Then how the hell are we going to fulfil our
mission here? _Sir_.’ That last syllable was almost a snarl, and Maggie
thought Cutler had to be close to insubordination – if not to breaking
down altogether. ‘We cannot let these people mock us, sir. They do not
understand us.’

‘Understand us, Captain?’

‘Admiral, they have never met anybody like us. Sir – you and I have
served, we have been to the front line. We have taken fire, we have
followed orders, and we have not yielded. And because of that these
people were able to raise their kids, and come out to these dumb
log-cabin type of worlds, and play at being brave pioneers . . .’

Admiral Davidson sighed. ‘Well, the world has evidently changed around
the two of us, son. In my view, the best kind of war is one that’s
resolved without a shot being fired. Keep your weapon holstered,
Captain.’

‘Sir—’

‘I said, keep it holstered.’

And now a man stood up in the heart of the crowd, and walked towards the
officers. He was maybe sixty, portly, dressed as a farm labourer like
the rest.

Nathan murmured, ‘I recognize that guy.’

So did Maggie. He was the guy with the favours, from a community called
Reboot. Maybe now wasn’t the time to wave and say ‘Hi,’ she suspected.

The man faced Davidson confidently. ‘Fulfilling your mission all depends
what that mission is, doesn’t it, Admiral Davidson? If you’re here to
talk – well, that’s fine. I very much doubt if you’re going to achieve
anything else today. Don’t you?’

Davidson eyed him. ‘And you are?’

‘Green. Jack Green. I helped found a town called Reboot. Now I work for
Benjamin Keyes, Mayor of Valhalla.’ He held out his hand; Davidson shook
it, to an ironic cheer from the crowd. ‘If you want to talk, why don’t
you and your staff come to the mayor’s office? I’m sure your marines
will be looked after out here; you can see the picnickers have brought
plenty for everyone . . .’ He led Davidson away.

Captain Cutler, visibly livid, just stomped away, off into a side
street.

Nathan glanced at Maggie. ‘With your permission, Captain, I’ll go keep
an eye on Captain Cutler. Make sure he doesn’t do anything stupid.’

‘Good idea.’

Nathan hurried away.

Mac stood with Maggie. ‘Ed Cutler needs therapy.’

Maggie thought that over. ‘So will a lot of us, if you’re right that war
has suddenly become obsolete.’

‘I’m right, though, aren’t I?’

‘You usually are, Mac. You usually are.’

The shadow of a military-specification airship passed over the crowd.
People looked up, shielding their eyes against the sun. ‘Ooh,’ they
said, as though it were an advertising stunt at a football match. ‘Aah.’

That was when Maggie knew the mission of the _Benjamin Franklin_ was
complete. That her own future was to fly the _Neil Armstrong II_, into
stepwise worlds unknown.

That, for better or worse, without a shot being fired, the Long War was
over.


68

AT THE BEGINNING of September 2040, with the military mission against
Valhalla formally abandoned, and the trolls starting to show up in
numbers again across the Long Earth, Lobsang and Agnes announced they
would be hosting a garden party in the transEarth facility that Lobsang
had turned into his reserve for studying trolls: a park spread several
West worlds deep around Madison.

At first Monica Jansson demurred, but Agnes came to see her in person in
Jansson’s West 5 convalescent facility. ‘Oh, you must come,’ Agnes said.
‘Wouldn’t be the same without you. You were involved in the great
adventure with those dog people, weren’t you? And after all, you are
Joshua’s oldest friend from outside the Home.’

Jansson laughed at that. ‘Really? I was a gay junior cop busily making
screwed-up career choices. Poor kid, if _I’m_ all he had . . . Look,
Sister, the journey’s finished me off, with all that stepping, and the
drugs.’

‘_And_ the dose of radiation you took in that dinosaur temple, or
whatever it was, to spare Sally Linsay,’ Agnes said sternly. ‘She told
me all about _that_. Look, Monica, you won’t have to step anywhere. Not
once we’ve got you to West 11 anyhow. I’ve had Lobsang set up a nice
little summer house there, and it’s yours as long as you need it.’ She
leaned forward, confidentially, and Jansson saw how her skin, supposedly
of a thirty-year-old according to Lobsang, was just a little too
youthful, a little too free of blemishes, to be convincing. The young
engineers who created such receptacles were never good at getting the
flaws of age just right, she reflected. Agnes went on, ‘I never could
see the appeal of stepping myself, you know. Tried it once. Well, with
the famous Joshua Valienté rattling around the Home, I could hardly not,
could I? All _I_ saw was a bunch of trees, and my own shoes that I was
trying not to puke up all over, and no people, and where’s the fun in
that? And now, when I step – well, I don’t feel anything at all. Lobsang
designed me that way, the idiot. Anyway I can’t see the point. Give me
my Harley and an open road any day. Lieutenant Jansson, you must come,
you’re a guest of honour. That’s an order.’

So, came the day: Saturday, September 8, 2040.

About two in the afternoon, and thankfully it was a bright, sunny, early
autumn day here in Madison West 11, Jansson emerged somewhat shyly from
the summer house Agnes had promised, which had turned out to be a decent
little cabin with all mod cons. This location was on a height, and she
had a fine view of grassy swards, dense clumps of trees, and patches of
prairie flowers rolling down to the lake water. Agnes’s barbecue party
was scattered over this landscape, a few dozen people walking to and
fro, kids and dogs playing noisily, and a knot of folk centred around a
plume of rising white smoke over what was presumably the barbecue grill.
A wash of music rose up from a knot of trolls down by the water, an
elusive melody she couldn’t quite place . . .

Just for a moment Jansson had a flash of disorientation. As if she saw
the people as naked as the trolls, just a bunch of humanoids rolling
around on this big lawn, empty-headed as young chimps. _Trolls. Elves.
Kobolds_. She remembered the kobold who had called himself a human name:
Finn McCool. Wearing bits of clothing, like a human, a man. And
sunglasses! And how he’d gabble when Sally and Jansson were trying to
sleep: just nonsense, but he tried to copy the rhythms of their talk
. . . Now, sometimes, when she listened to some politician speechify on
TV, or a priest yakking about God, all she saw was a kobold up on his
hind legs, prattling nonsense just the way McCool used to.

Elves gone wrong – that was what Petra called humans.

She shook her head. Put it aside, she told herself. She walked forward
determinedly, her exposed skin slopped with protective cream, a hat
covering the increasingly patchy hair on her head, her gait as ramrod
straight as she could make it.

She hadn’t gone a dozen yards before Sister Agnes herself caught up with
her, trailed by a couple of other nuns, one elderly, one maybe in her
late thirties. ‘Monica! Thank you for joining us. These are my
colleagues, Sister Georgina, Sister John . . .’

‘Sister John’ looked faintly familiar to Jansson. ‘Don’t I know you?’

The nun smiled. ‘My birth name is Sarah Ann Coates. I was at the Home, I
mean a resident. When I grew up – well, I came back.’

Sarah Ann Coates: now Jansson remembered the face of a twelve- or
thirteen-year-old, scared, self-conscious, staring out of the file she
had assembled on the incidents of Step Day in Madison. Sarah, one of the
Home children Joshua Valienté had rescued in those frantic hours when
the doors of the Long Earth had first creaked open. ‘It’s nice to see
you again, Sister.’

‘Come this way.’ Sister Agnes linked her arm through Jansson’s, and they
started walking slowly towards the smoke from the grill.

‘You’re a great hostess, Agnes,’ Jansson said, only slightly
sarcastically. ‘All these people here and you swoop down on me as soon
as I show my face.’

‘Call it a gift. But don’t repeat that to Lobsang. He keeps badgering me
to have avatars made. Iterations, like _him_. Copies of myself running
around. Imagine how much I’d get done! So _he_ says. Imagine the
arguments I’d have, me, myself and I! So _I_ say. I don’t think so. Now
then, Monica, I’ve assigned Georgina and John to look after you today,
anything you need you just ask them – and any time you feel like
disappearing, that’s fine too.’

Jansson suppressed a sigh. Deny it as she might, she knew she needed the
help. ‘Thank you. I appreciate that very much.’ The song of the trolls
carried on the shifting, gentle breeze: the usual troll music, a human
tune simply harmonized and turned into a round, with the melody line
repeated and overlapping. ‘What _is_ that?’

‘“The Wearing of the Green”,’ Agnes said. ‘An old Jacobite marching
song. Scottish rebels, you know. You can blame Sister Simplicity for
that one. She always was one for her Scottish roots. That and prize
fights on TV. It is good to have the trolls back, though, isn’t it? Of
course we had to restrict the guest list today to make sure there
weren’t too many people for the trolls to cope with. And Senator
Starling has promised to put in an appearance later on. Suddenly a
supporter of the troll cause, and suddenly he always was, if you know
what I mean. Says he sings in a Sunday choir and wants to sing along
with the trolls, if he can. Going to bring along a squad of Operation
Prodigal Son sailors too, the USS _Benjamin Franklin_ choir, just as a
gesture of peace and harmony. Now then, let’s find Joshua for you. It
won’t be hard, he’ll be close to little Dan, and Dan will be close to
the food . . .’

Agnes had appointed Lobsang as head chef. Jansson stared, bemused, at a
Tibetan monk with a greasy apron over his orange robe and a chef’s hat
on his shaven head. A man she didn’t know stood beside him, tall,
fifty-ish, black, in a sober charcoal suit, wearing a cleric’s collar.

Lobsang raised a greasy spatula. ‘Lieutenant Jansson! Good to see you.’

Agnes more or less snarled at him. ‘_That_ soya burger is raw, and
_that_ quorn sausage is on fire. Less blue-skyin’ and more fat fryin’,
Lobsang.’

‘Yes, dear,’ he said wearily.

‘Don’t worry, Lobsang,’ said the cleric beside Lobsang. ‘I’ll help. I’m
a dab hand at chopping onions.’

‘Thank you, Nelson . . .’

‘Lieutenant Jansson.’

Jansson turned. Joshua Valienté stood before her, looking uncomfortable
in a kind of smart-casual get-up: clean shirt, pressed jeans, leather
shoes. He held his left arm to his chest, his clenched fist concealed by
his shirt cuff. At his side was Helen, his wife, sturdy, pretty,
cheerful. And little Dan ran past, dressed in a cut-down twain-pilot
uniform, engaged in some noisy game with other kids, as oblivious of the
adults and their society as if they were nothing but tall trees.

Jansson and Joshua stood there, facing each other awkwardly. Jansson
felt an uncomfortable surge of emotion, having witnessed the dangers to
which Joshua had exposed himself so far from home – and now seeing him
like this, with his family. With Helen, looking as if she belonged
nowhere but at his side. After all she’d been through with this man,
Jansson didn’t know what to say.

Joshua smiled, gently. ‘It’s OK, Lieutenant.’

‘For heaven’s sake,’ Helen snapped. ‘Give each other a hug!’

They leaned together, and she held him tight. ‘With them, you’re
healed,’ she murmured in his ear. ‘Don’t leave them again. Whoever comes
calling.’

‘Understood, Jansson.’

And yet she knew that was a promise he could never keep. She felt a stab
of heartache for Joshua, the lonely boy she had known, the lonely man he
would always be.

She pulled away. ‘Enough. Squeeze too hard and I might break.’

‘Me too.’ Joshua reached forward with his left arm, revealing his
artificial hand. It was a clunky, oversized creation with unconvincing
pinkish skin; it whirred and whined like a movie prop when he unclenched
his fingers. ‘Bill Chambers calls it Thing. Like the Addams Family, you
know? Funny guy. He’s around somewhere, incidentally. Getting smashed
with Thomas Kyangu.’

Jansson tried not to laugh. ‘Joshua, surely they could have done better
for you than that. Prosthetics these days—’

Helen said, ‘He insists on wearing that horrible old antique.’

‘Sooner this than one of the Black Corporation gadgets Lobsang offered
me.’

‘Ah,’ Jansson said. ‘With Lobsang inside.’

‘You see the problem. I don’t want to walk around with Lobsang in
control of _any_ of my extremities. I’d rather wait, thanks. Anyhow it
doesn’t bother Dan, so that’s the main thing.’

Jansson said, ‘Strange to think your own hand is nailed to the wall of
that beagle princess’s palace, a million worlds away.’

‘Yeah.’ Joshua glanced around, making sure Dan wasn’t close by. ‘You
never got to see that, did you, Monica? There’s a bit of the story you
never heard.’

‘He likes bragging about this,’ Helen said wearily.

‘You know those two beagles had got me pinned down, Snowy and Li-Li. I
saw they were trying to save my life, in their way. But I wasn’t exactly
happy at losing a hand, even so. And, as Li-Li got her teeth into my
wrist, I made a gesture . . .’ He held up his robot hand, clenching a
fist, and the middle finger extended with a whirr of hydraulics. ‘And
_that_ is what is up on Petra’s wall right now.’

Jansson snorted laughter.

‘And _that_,’ Helen said wearily, ‘is what I can’t stop Dan running
around doing to all his little friends, every time his father tells that
story.’

Joshua winked at Jansson. ‘He’ll grow out of it. Price worth paying,
right?’

Jansson just smiled neutrally. An experienced cop knew better than to
get involved in family arguments.

They were distracted by the approach of a short, slim, wiry-looking man
in his fifties. He looked vaguely familiar to Jansson. Somewhat shyly,
he all but stood to attention as he addressed Joshua. ‘Excuse me, sir.
You’re Joshua Valienté, right?’

‘Guilty as charged.’

‘Sorry to trouble you . . . I don’t know anybody here and I know her.’

‘Sure. And you are?’

The man offered his hand. ‘Wood. Frank Wood. USAF, long retired, once of
NASA . . .’ There was a comedy moment; Wood had put forward his left
hand to shake, but recoiled when Joshua’s elderly cybernetic claw was
produced in response.

Jansson snapped her fingers. ‘I thought I recognized you, Mr. Wood. I
met you at the Gap. I was up there with Sally myself.’

He seemed startled to see her, then pleased. Evidently he hadn’t
recognized her through the increased decrepitude of her illness.
‘Lieutenant Jansson? Good to see you again . . .’

More handshakes; Wood’s hand was dry, firm. Jansson remembered,
awkwardly, how she’d suspected this poor guy had had a crush on her out
at the Gap.

Helen said, a tad reluctantly, ‘I think Sally is down there, near the
big group of trolls. With some Happy Landings types.’ She led the way.

Jansson followed, accompanied by Frank Wood. When he saw how slowly and
stiffly she walked now, he discreetly offered her his arm.

Just as discreetly she smiled her thanks. She said, ‘Frank, just so you
know—’

‘I heard you were ill.’

‘It’s not that. I’m gay, Frank. And ill. Ill and gay.’

He took that with a self-deprecating grin. ‘So our budding romance is
doomed, huh? My radar never was too reliable. Probably why I never
married.’

‘Sorry about that.’

‘Does being ill and gay preclude your being bought dinner, however?’

‘It will be a pleasure.’

They found Sally with a bunch of trolls, and a few people dressed in
what struck Jansson as a peculiar style even for colonial folk, kind of
alternate eighteenth-century. Sally herself wore her usual sleeveless
travel jacket, as if she were about to leave any second for another
urgent stepwise jaunt.

More introductions followed, and Jansson was able to match more names to
faces. The oddly dressed types were from Happy Landings. A slim,
shy-looking, youngish man turned out to be Jacques Montecute, headmaster
of a school at Valhalla. A teenage girl, sober and serious, standing
quietly at Montecute’s side, was Roberta Golding, a student at the
Valhalla high school who had made the news, along with Montecute, by
travelling with the Chinese expedition to Earth East Twenty Million.
They were here as guests of Joshua, it turned out; Dan Valienté would be
starting at Montecute’s school from next year. The Happy Landings folk
seemed to stand a little way away from the rest, as if not quite part of
the crowd.

And there was something particularly odd about Roberta Golding. A
watchfulness, a stillness, that Jansson hadn’t seen in such a young
person since Joshua himself was that age. But she didn’t detect Joshua’s
eerie calm about Roberta, nor his irreducible survival instinct. She had
a look that Jansson, in her duty days, had associated with kids from
damaged families. She had _seen_ too much, too young. Jansson wondered
uneasily what this flawed child might become, in future.

The trolls included Mary the runaway, and there was no mistaking the
cub, Ham, who even now still wore bits of his silvery spacesuit. As soon
as Ham saw Jansson he ran straight at her, making to hug her legs, and
would have knocked Jansson clean over if Joshua hadn’t intercepted him
first.

Sally, being Sally, immediately homed in on Frank Wood. ‘Well, well.
Buzz Aldrin. What do you want?’

Wood nodded, graciously enough. ‘I was hoping for a burger and a beer.’

Sally spat, ‘Enough with the Right Stuff crap; you don’t charm me. More
trouble at the Gap, right?’

‘Not at all. I came to thank you, Ms. Linsay. And you, Lieutenant
Jansson. For dealing with that business with the trolls the way you did.
My colleagues up there are not bad people, but they are somewhat driven.
I think we’d lost our moral bearings. Your actions helped us find them
again.’ He grinned. ‘And now, on to the stars! We’re already talking
about probes to Mars, even a manned jaunt. And some neat visuals . . .’

He began to speak of something called a planetary alignment, occurring
this very day: lots of Earth’s sister worlds were lining up in one part
of the sky, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, even the crescent
moon. ‘Of course it’s visible from all the worlds of the Long Earth. But
we’re taking the opportunity to throw over probes, to get decent images
– to showcase the possibilities of the Gap, you see.’

Joshua said, ‘You’ll probably scare everybody to death. Aren’t they
saying this line-up is astrologically ominous?’

Helen pulled his sleeve. ‘Don’t tease the man.’

Sally snorted. ‘But it’s not as good from the Gap. You haven’t got a
moon!’

‘_In the way_,’ Frank said smoothly, good humoured. ‘We don’t have a
moon in the way. All the better for seeing the real spectacle . . .’

The noise, the clamour, became too much for Jansson, all at once. The
words being spoken around her seemed to dissolve into a jabber. She
dropped her head and put her hands to her ears.

Frank Wood put an arm around her shoulders. ‘Here, let’s get you out of
this.’

Agnes was immediately at her side too. She smiled into Jansson’s face,
took her arm, nodded to Sisters Georgina and John, and walked her and
Frank away from the clamour. ‘Come on,’ Agnes said. ‘Let’s get some air.
Then I’ll call you a buggy – we have golf carts here – and get you back
to your summer house for a break. How’s that?’

‘You’re very kind.’

‘I remember how it was to be ill, frankly. Lobsang didn’t clean that out
of my head, at least.’

They were heading towards the greater band of trolls down by the river.
As they went about their business, eating, grooming, splashing in the
water, flickering between the worlds, the trolls sang another gentle
melody. A few humans stood by, clapping along, trying to join in.

Despite all the people present, Jansson felt a kind of peace emanating
from the contented troll band. ‘That’s another lovely song.’

Agnes squeezed her arm. ‘“All My Trials”. Outside of the Steinman canon,
one of my own favourites since childhood.’

‘Oh, yes. And how appropriate for me. _Soon be over_ . . .’

Agnes squeezed her arm. ‘That’s enough of that.’

They had come to a bluff of higher ground, a shallow rise which Jansson
climbed painfully, and here they paused. They looked out over the
unspoiled lakes of this world, the sun hanging calmly in the blue sky,
the young, still-small city rising on the isthmus – a ghost of Datum
Madison.

Agnes said, ‘I used to come up here when I was ill. Look at all this.
The wider world that frames us all. The heavens, governed by their own
eternal laws, the same on every world. Like Frank’s alignment of
planets, right? And the simple things, the play of sunlight on water, a
universal across the Long Earth. That’s where I found solace, Monica.’

‘But when you’ve been out _there_, it all seems so fragile,’ Jansson
said. ‘Contingent. It might not have been this way. It might not be this
way tomorrow.’

‘Yes,’ Agnes said thoughtfully. ‘And being close to Lobsang – well, I
feel I see the world through his eyes, to some extent. The way he
regards people – even his closest associates and friends, Joshua, Sally,
that nice cleric Nelson Azikiwe, no doubt others – even me . . . He
calls us “valuable long-term investments”. I sometimes think he, or
maybe his paymaster Douglas Black, is positioning us all like pieces on
a chessboard, ready for the game to begin.’

‘But what is the game?’

‘No doubt we’ll find out. Now, where’s that buggy?’

There was a commotion behind them, raised voices. Reluctantly, Jansson,
Agnes and Frank turned to look.

An airship had materialized, right above Lobsang’s position. Lobsang
himself seemed to freeze – no, Jansson thought, _he had gone_ from his
ambulant unit, gone in an instant, she could tell from his posture.

All around the grassy sward people’s phones started to chime, and were
pulled from pockets and purses. Soon the stepping started, people being
simply deleted from the scene.

And Jansson heard two words on all their lips. The first, _Yellowstone_.
The second, _Datum_.

Frank said grimly, ‘Maybe Joshua was right about the planet alignment.’


69

JANSSON INSISTED ON being taken back to Madison West 5, no matter what
pills she had to force down her throat to withstand the nausea. And once
back at 5, she demanded to be taken, not to the convalescent home where
she’d been staying, but to the new city’s central police station.

The current chief, Mike Christopher, had been a junior officer in
Jansson’s time; he recognized her, let her in, and told her to sit tight
in a corner of one of the offices. ‘We’re on alert, Spooky. There are
already trickles of refugees showing up _here_, I mean in the Datum
city.’

Jansson gripped Frank’s hand. ‘Refugees, Mike? In _Madison_? How far is
Madison from Yellowstone?’

Mike shrugged. ‘Over a thousand miles, I guess.’

‘We’re talking about an eruption. It must be an eruption, right? Will
the effects of this really reach that far?’

He had no reply.

As she sat with Sister John, and Frank went to find coffee, Jansson
tried to take in the images unfolding across the screens that plastered
the walls of this office. Images taken from civilian news, police,
military sources; images gathered on the ground, and from planes and
twains, copters and satellites – all of them images from Datum Earth,
downloaded on to memory chips and then hastily transferred by hand
through the walls between the worlds, and retransmitted with only a
slight delay.

After false alarms across the Low Earths, there had indeed been a
significant eruption in the Yellowstone footprint – and it had been at
_Datum Yellowstone itself_, she soon learned.

It had begun about one in the afternoon, Madison time. The evacuation of
the Park had been going on since just before the eruption. About an hour
later the great tower of ash and gas had started to collapse, all around
the vent, a mass of superheated rock fragments and gases washing across
the Yellowstone ground as fast as a jet airliner, smashing,
flash-burning, crushing . . . As excited geologists talked, unwelcome
records started to tumble: this was already a worse eruption than
Pinatubo, Krakatoa, Tambora.

Sleep seemed to be rising in Jansson’s head, like her own pod of deep
hot magma. She couldn’t take in the words any more, the images. And
those damn pills didn’t seem to be helping with the pain.

She quickly lost track of time.

At one point she was faintly aware of a kind of conference going on over
her head, involving Mike, the Sisters, Frank Wood, and somebody who had
the air of a doctor, though she didn’t know him. She gathered that
they’d decided to move her, over her feeble protests, into a room at
Agnes’s Home for a couple of days.

Mike Christopher organized this briskly, a wheelchair, an ambulance. He
winked at her. ‘You get an astronaut to hold your hand, Spooky.’

She pulled her tongue at him.

And still the bad news came. Even before she was taken out of the police
station new images were filling the wall screens, the tablets, the
glowing smartphones.

A second eruption vent had opened up.

And then a third.

By the time they got her out of there, Yellowstone, imaged by brave USAF
pilots in fast aircraft, looked like Dante’s hell.

The next time she woke she was in a cosy but unfamiliar room, attended
by Sister John. With brisk compassion the Sister helped her to the
bathroom, and brought her breakfast in bed. She was in an adjustable
bed, she discovered, like the one she’d been using in her convalescent
home, there was a drip stand alongside, and her medications on a shelf
by the door. Everything looked to have been moved over from the
convalescent home. She felt a warm surge of gratitude for this kindness.

Then Sister John showed in yet another doctor. He tried to talk to her
about the nature of her care: palliative only, and so forth. She waved
that away and asked him about the news. ‘No TV before meds,’ he said
sternly, as he began to treat her.

Only after he’d gone was Frank Wood allowed in, who looked like he’d
been sleeping in his suit. Then, at last, they turned on the TV.

The whole caldera was opened up now. The towering cloud it produced was
tall enough to be seen from as far away as Denver or Salt Lake City, as
evidenced by shaky handheld camera footage from those places. But the
images were strange, a yellow-brown light, a shrunken sun. Like daylight
on Mars, Frank Wood suggested.

By now that cloud of ash and gas and lumps of pumice was spreading fast
and far through the high air. Cars wouldn’t drive far before their
filters clogged, and so there were eerie shots of freeways full of
shuffling people, their faces and eyes swathed in cloth, tramping
through the grey snow-like fall like starving Russian peasants, all
heading away from Yellowstone.

But of course most people, whoever could, were heeding the systematic
calls to step away. And shots from the air, taken from Earth West and
East 1, 2, 3, showed the new communities in the footprints of the
threatened Datum cities being swamped by a mass of people stepping over,
people unconsciously forming up in blocks and streets, in the forms of
the schools and hospitals and shopping malls and churches from which
they had come, a human map of the doomed communities just a step or two
away.

All this was horribly familiar to Jansson. She murmured, clutching
Frank’s strong hand, ‘I remember trying to persuade my chief.’

‘Who, dear?’

‘Old Jack Clichy . . .’

_‘We have to get people to step, sir. Anywhere, East or West, just away
from Madison Zero_.’

_‘You know as well as I do that not everybody can step. Aside from the
phobics there are the old, kids, bedridden, hospital patients—’_

_‘So people help each other. If you can step, do it. But take someone
with you, someone who can’t step_ . . .’

Frank just held her hand.

She heard the Sisters talking of Joshua Valienté, Sally Linsay, others,
rushing to the Datum to help with the relief effort. The names snagged
her attention, before she sank back into deeper sleep.

When she woke again, Sister John was quietly weeping.

‘They’re saying it’s our fault. Humanity’s. The scientists. All the
local versions of Yellowstone have been unstable recently, but it’s only
on the Datum that this has happened. Humans disturbing the Earth, like
we did the climate. Others are saying it’s a punishment from God. Well,
it’s not that,’ she said fiercely. ‘Not _my_ God. But, how will we cope
with this? . . .’

By now Jansson was too feeble to get up. Damn morphine, she thought.
Sister John had to help her with the bedpans. She was peripherally aware
of a nurse in the background, from the convalescent home; Jansson didn’t
know his name. But he let Sister John take the lead. That struck her as
polite.

And when she woke with a little more clarity, here was Frank Wood, still
sitting at her side.

‘Hey,’ she said.

‘Hey.’

‘What time is it?’

‘The time?’ He checked his watch, a big astronaut-type Rolex, then did a
double-take. ‘Three days since the first eruption started. It’s morning,
Monica.’

‘You need a clean shirt.’

He grinned and rubbed his chin. ‘This is an all-female establishment, as
far as adults are concerned. Don’t ask me what I used to shave today.’

Of course there was a TV on, the sound soft, in a corner of the room.
The projections were fast changing. As the tremendous cloud of ash and
dust spread, across the continental US, even into Canada and Mexico,
people were stepping away in their millions, an emigration greater than
any in human history, before or after Step Day. Meanwhile the effects of
the cloud were already global. Shots of towering sunsets, over London
and Tokyo.

It was very strange to watch this, Monica thought, from a world five
steps removed, in West 5, where the sun was shining – or not, she
realized vaguely: once again it was night. As if she was watching a snow
globe, roughly shaken. Or an ash globe.

She felt too weak to move. Only her head. She had an oxygen tube in her
nose now. An automated meds dispenser by her bed, like a prop from _ER_.
She drifted helplessly back towards sleep.

_‘Carry them in your arms, on your back_,’ she’d told Clichy. ‘_Then go
back and step again. And again and again_ . . .’

_‘You’ve thought about this, haven’t you, Spooky?’_

She murmured, ‘It’s why you gave me the job all those years ago, Jack
. . .’

Frank leaned close. ‘What was that, honey?’

But Monica seemed to be sleeping again.

On the seventh day, at last, the eruption finished. No more fresh ash,
to global relief.

But it ended with a clash of cymbals, as Frank Wood, sleepless, grimy,
watched on the room’s wall TV. The caldera, fifty miles wide, emptied of
magma, just collapsed. It was as if a chunk of real estate the size of a
small _state_ had just been dropped a thousand feet.

Some of the younger Sisters, excited, went stepping over into ash-coated
Datum Madison to witness the consequences first hand. After just five
minutes the quakes came, a ground-shaking pulse of energy travelling
around the planet – though in the ruins of Madison there was only rubble
to disturb. Then, after an hour or more, the _sound_, like a tremendous
artillery barrage just over the horizon, or like the launch of a space
shuttle, Frank Wood thought, digging back into his boyhood memories.

‘My God,’ Frank said, and he felt for Jansson’s hand. ‘What is to become
of us, Monica? . . . Monica?’

Her hand was very cold.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We’re very grateful to Jacqueline Simpson, co-author of the invaluable
_The Folklore of Discworld_, for advice on kobolds, theology, and other
generous and wise contributions. It was Jacqueline who brought to our
attention the poem ‘Unwelcome’ by Mary Elizabeth Coleridge. We’re also
beholden once again to our good friends Dr. Christopher Pagel, owner of
the Companion Animal Hospital in Madison, and his wife, Juliet Pagel,
for their assistance with research, and for another very helpful draft
read-through.

All errors and inaccuracies are of course our sole responsibility.

T.P.

S.B.

December 2012, Datum Earth


ABOUT THE AUTHORS

TERRY PRATCHETT is one of the world’s most popular authors. He is the
winner of numerous literary prizes, including the Carnegie Medal, and he
was awarded a knighthood in recognition of his services to literature.
Pratchett lives in England.

STEPHEN BAXTER is an acclaimed, multiple-award-winning author whose many
books include the Xeelee sequence, the Time Odyssey trilogy (written
with Arthur C. Clarke), and _The Time Ships_, a sequel to H. G. Wells’s
classic _The Time Machine_. He lives in England.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.


Also by Terry Pratchett and Stephen Baxter

BOOKS BY TERRY PRATCHETT

_The Dark Side of the Sun_

_Strata_

_The Unadulterated Cat_ (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

_Good Omens_ (with Neil Gaiman)

FOR YOUNG ADULTS

_The Carpet People_

_Nation_

_THE BROMILEAD TRILOGY_

_Truckers_

_Diggers_

_Wings_

_THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY_

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

THE DISCWORLD® BOOKS

_The Color of Magic_

_The Light Fantastic_

_Equal Rites_

_Mort_

_Sourcery_

_Wyrd Sisters_

_Pyramids_

_Guards! Guards!_

_Eric_ (illustrated by Josh Kirby)

_Moving Pictures_

_Reaper Man_

_Witches Abroad_

_Small Gods_

_Lords and Ladies_

_Men at Arms_

_Soul Music_

_Feet of Clay_

_Interesting Times_

_Maskerade_

_Hogfather_

_Jingo_

_The Last Continent_

_Carpe Jugulum_

_The Fifth Elephant_

_The Truth_

_Thief of Time_

_Night Watch_

_Monstrous Regiment_

_Going Postal_

_Thud_

_Where’s My Cow?_ (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

_Making Money_

_Unseen Academicals_

_Snuff_

_The Last Hero_ (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

_The Art of Discworld_ (with Paul Kidby)

_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_ (with Stephen Briggs)

_The Discworld Companion_ (with Stephen Briggs)

_The Discworld Mapp_ (with Stephen Briggs)

_The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld_ (with by Stephen Briggs)

_THE DISCWORLD GRAPHIC NOVELS_

_The Color of Magic_

_The Light Fantastic_

DISCWORLD FOR YOUNG ADULTS

_The Amazing Maurice & His Educated Rodents_

_The Wee Free Men_

_A Hat Full of Sky_

_Wintersmith_

_I Shall Wear Midnight_

_The Illustrated Wee Free Men_ (illustrated by Stephen Player)

BOOKS BY STEPHEN BAXTER

_Anti-Ice_

_The Time Ships_

_Traces_

_The Light of Other Days_ (with Arthur C. Clarke)

_Evolution_

_The H-Bomb Girl_

NORTHLAND

_Stone Spring_

_Bronze Summer_

_Iron Winter_

FLOOD

_Flood_

_Ark_

TIME’S TAPESTRY

_Emperor_

_Conqueror_

_Navigator_

_Weaver_

DESTINY’S CHILDREN

_Coalescent_

_Exultant_

_Transcendent_

_Resplendent_

A TIME ODYSSEY (WITH ARTHUR C. CLARKE)

_Time’s Eye_

_Sunstorm_

_Firstborn_

MANIFOLD

_Manifold 1: Time_

_Manifold 2: Space_

_Manifold 3: Origin_

_Phase Space_

MAMMOTH

_Silverhair_

_Longtusk_

_Icebones_

_Behemoth_

THE NASA TRILOGY

_Voyage_

_Titan_

_Moonseed_

THE XEELEE SEQUENCE

_Raft_

_Timelike Infinity_

_Flux_

_Ring_

_Xeelee: An Omnibus: Raft, Timelike Infinity, Flux, Ring_

_Vacuum Diagrams_

THE WEB

_The Web: Gulliverzone_

_The Web: Webcrash_

NONFICTION

_Deep Future_

_Omegatropic_

_Revolutions in the Earth: James Hutton and the True Age of the World_

BY TERRY PRATCHETT AND STEPHEN BAXTER

_The Long Earth_


Credits

COVER DESIGN BY R. SHAI LER, TW


Copyright

THE LONG WAR. Copyright © 2013 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett and Stephen
Baxter. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been
granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the
text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

Terry Pratchett® and Discworld® are registered trademarks.

This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue
are drawn from the authors’ imagination and are not to be construed as
real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.

Published simultaneously in Great Britain by Doubleday, an imprint of
Transworld Publishers, a division of Random House Group, Ltd.

FIRST U.S. EDITION

_Art by Richard Shailer_

ISBN 978-0-06-206777-7

Epub Edition June 2013 ISBN 9780062067784

13 14 15 16 17 ID/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


About the Publisher

AUSTRALIA

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au

CANADA

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

NEW ZEALAND

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

UNITED KINGDOM

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

UNITED STATES

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com
