
JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

 

TERRY PRATCHETT

 

[]


Contents

 

 

Author’s Note

 

ONE

Johnny never knew for certain why he started seeing the…

 

TWO

Johnny raised the subject of the cemetery after tea.

 

THREE

There was the Alderman, and William Stickers, and an old…

 

FOUR

It was later that morning.

 

FIVE

Johnny went home. He didn’t dare go back to the…

 

SIX

The Pals swung up the road, keeping perfectly in step.

 

SEVEN

The Frank W. Arnold Civic Center meeting room was about half…

 

EIGHT

There is a night that never comes to an end.…

 

NINE

“This fuss over the cemetery’s certainly breathed a bit of…

 

TEN

Bigmac bounded over the rubble, an enraged skinhead skeleton.

 

ELEVEN

As Tommy Atkins had once said, things aren’t necessarily over…

 

About the Author

 

Other Books by Terry Pratchett

 

Credits

 

Cover

 

Copyright

 

About the Publisher


AUTHOR’S NOTE

 

I’ve bent history a little bit. There really were such things as Pals’
Battalions, just as described here, and they really were a horribly
innocent device for wiping out a whole generation of young men from one
particular area with one cannon shell. But the practice died out by the
summer of 1916, when the first Battle of the Somme took place. Nineteen
thousand British soldiers died on the first day of the battle.

“Thomas Atkins” really was the name used on documents in the British
Army in the way that people would now use “A.N. Other,” and “Tommy
Atkins” did become a nickname for the British soldier.

There were certainly a number of real Tommy Atkinses in the war. This
book is dedicated to them—wherever they are.


ONE

 

Johnny never knew for certain why he started seeing the dead.

The Alderman said it was probably because he was too lazy not to.

Most people’s minds don’t let them see things that might upset them, he
said. The Alderman said he should know if anyone did, because he’d spent
his whole life (1822–1906) not seeing things.

Wobbler Johnson, who was technically Johnny’s best friend, said it was
because he was nuts.

But Yo-less, who read medical books, said it was probably because he
couldn’t focus his mind like normal people. Normal people just ignored
almost everything that was going on around them, so that they could
concentrate on important things like, well, getting up, going to the
lavatory, and getting on with their lives. Whereas Johnny just opened
his eyes in the morning and the whole universe hit him in the face.

Wobbler said this sounded like “nuts” to him.

Whatever it was called, what it meant was this: Johnny saw things other
people didn’t.

Like the dead people hanging around in the cemetery.

The Alderman—at least the old Alderman—was a bit snobby about most of
the rest of the dead, even about Mr. Vicenti, who had a huge black
marble grave with angels and a photograph of Mr. Vicenti (1897–1958)
looking not at all dead behind a little window. The Alderman said Mr.
Vicenti had been a Capo di Monte in the Mafia. Mr. Vicenti told Johnny
that, on the contrary, he had spent his entire life being a wholesale
novelty salesman, amateur escapologist, and children’s entertainer,
which in a number of important respects was as exactly like not being in
the Mafia as it was possible to get.

But all this was later. After he’d gotten to know the dead a lot better.
After the raising of the ghost of the Ford Capri.

 

 

 

Johnny really discovered the cemetery after he’d started living at
Granddad’s. This was Phase Three of Trying Times, after the shouting,
which had been bad, and the Being Sensible About Things (which had been
worse; people are better at shouting). Now his dad was getting a new job
somewhere on the other side of the country. There was a vague feeling
that it might all work out, now that people had stopped trying to be
sensible. On the whole, he tried not to think about it.

He’d started using the path along the canal instead of going home on the
bus, and had found that if you climbed over the place where the wall had
fallen down, and then went around behind the crematorium, you could cut
off half the journey.

The graves went right up to the canal’s edge.

It was one of those old cemeteries you got owls and foxes in and
sometimes, in the Sunday papers, people going on about Our Victorian
Heritage, although they didn’t go on about this one because it was the
wrong kind of heritage, being too far from London.

Wobbler said it was spooky and sometimes went home the long way, but
Johnny was disappointed that it wasn’t spookier. Once you sort of put
out of your mind what it was—once you forgot about all the skeletons
underground, grinning away in the dark—it was quite friendly. Birds
sang. All the traffic sounded a long way off. It was peaceful.

He’d had to check a few things, though. Some of the older graves had big
stone boxes on top of them, and in the wilder parts these had cracked
and even fallen open. He’d had a look inside, just in case.

It had been sort of disappointing to find nothing there.

And then there were the mausoleums. These were much bigger and had doors
in them, like little houses. They looked a bit like garden sheds with
extra angels. The angels were generally more lifelike than you’d expect,
especially one near the entrance who looked as though he’d just
remembered that he should have gone to the toilet before he left heaven.

The two boys walked through the cemetery now, kicking up the drifts of
fallen leaves.

“It’s Halloween next week,” said Wobbler. “I’m having a party. You have
to come as something horrible. Don’t bother to find a disguise.”

“Thanks,” said Johnny.

“You notice how there’s a lot more Halloween stuff in the shops these
days?” said Wobbler.

“It’s because of Bonfire Night,” said Johnny. “Too many people were
blowing themselves up with fireworks, so they invented Halloween, where
you just wear masks and stuff.”

“Mrs. Nugent says all that sort of thing is tampering with the occult,”
said Wobbler. Mrs. Nugent was the Johnsons’ next-door neighbor, and
known to be unreasonable on subjects like Madonna played at full volume
at three A.M.

“Probably it is,” said Johnny.

“She says witches are abroad on Halloween,” said Wobbler.

“What?” Johnny’s forehead wrinkled. “Like…Marjorca and places?”

“Suppose so,” said Wobbler.

“Makes…sense, I suppose. They probably get special out-of-season
bargains, being old ladies,” said Johnny. “My aunt can go anywhere on
the buses for almost nothing, and she’s not even a witch.”

“Don’t see why Mrs. Nugent is worried, then,” said Wobbler. “It ought to
be a lot safer around here, with all the witches on vacation.”

They passed a very ornate mausoleum, which even had little stained-glass
windows. It was hard to imagine who’d want to see in, but then, it was
even harder to imagine who’d want to look out.

“Shouldn’t like to be on the same plane as ’em,” said Wobbler, who’d
been thinking hard. “Just think, p’raps you can only afford to go on
vacation in the autumn, and you get on the plane, and there’s all these
old witches going abroad.”

“Singing ‘Here we go, here we go, here we go’?” said Johnny. “But I bet
you’d get really good service in the hotel.”

“Yeah.”

“Funny, really,” said Johnny.

“What?”

“I saw a thing in a book once,” said Johnny, “about these people in
Mexico or somewhere, where they all go down to the cemetery for a big
fiesta at Halloween every year. Like they don’t see why people should be
left out of things just because they’re dead.”

“Yuck. A picnic? In the actual cemetery?”

“Yes.”

“Reckon you’d get green glowing hands pushing up through the earth and
swiping the sandwiches?”

“Don’t think so. Anyway…they don’t eat sandwiches in Mexico. They eat
tort…something.”

“Tortoises.”

“Yeah?”

“I bet,” said Wobbler, looking around, “I bet…I bet you wouldn’t dare
knock on one of those doors. I bet you’d hear dead people lurchin’ about
inside.”

“Why do they lurch?”

Wobbler thought about this.

“They always lurch,” he said. “Dunno why. I’ve seen them in videos. And
they can push their way through walls.”

“Why?” said Johnny.

“Why what?”

“Why push their way through walls? I mean…living people can’t do that.
Why should dead people do it?”

Wobbler’s mother was very easygoing in the matter of videos. According
to him, he was allowed to watch ones that even people aged a hundred had
to watch with their parents.

“Don’t know,” he said. “They’re usually very angry about something.”

“Being dead, you mean?”

“Probably,” said Wobbler. “It can’t be much of a life.”

Johnny thought about this that evening, after meeting the Alderman. The
only dead people he had known had been Mr. Page, who’d died in the
hospital of something, and his great-grandmother, who’d been ninety-six
and had just generally died. Neither of them had been particularly angry
people. His great-grandmother had been a bit confused about things, but
never angry. He’d visited her in Sunshine Acres, where she watched a lot
of television and waited for the next meal to turn up. And Mr. Page had
walked around quietly, the only man on the street still at home in the
middle of the day.

They didn’t seem the sort of people who would get up after being dead
just to dance with Michael Jackson like in that old movie. And the only
thing his great-grand-mother would have pushed her way through walls for
would be a television that she could watch without having to fight
fifteen other old ladies for the remote control.

It seemed to Johnny that a lot of people were getting things all wrong.
He said this to Wobbler. Wobbler disagreed.

“It’s prob’ly all different from a dead point of view,” he said.

Now they were walking along West Avenue. The cemetery was laid out like
a town, with streets. They weren’t named very originally—North Drive and
South Walk joined West Avenue, for example, at a little graveled area
with seats in it. A kind of city center. But the silence of the big
Victorian mausoleums made the place look as though it was having the
longest early-closing day in the world.

“My dad says this is all going to be built on,” said Wobbler. “He said
the Council sold it to some big company for just fivepence because it
was costing so much to keep it going.”

“What, all of it?” said Johnny.

“That’s what he said,” said Wobbler. Even he looked a bit uncertain. “He
said it was a scandal.”

“Even the bit with the poplar trees?”

“All of it,” said Wobbler. “It’s going to be offices or something.”

Johnny looked at the cemetery. It was the only open space for miles.

“I’d have given them at least a pound,” he said.

“Yes, but you wouldn’t have been able to build things on it,” said
Wobbler. “That’s the important thing.”

“I wouldn’t want to build anything on it. I’d have given them a pound
just to leave it as it is.”

“Yes,” said Wobbler, the voice of reason, “but people have got to work
somewhere. We Need Jobs.”

“I bet the people here won’t be very happy about it,” said Johnny. “If
they knew.”

“I think they get moved somewhere else,” said Wobbler. “It’s got to be
something like that. Otherwise you’d never dare dig your garden.”

Johnny looked up at the nearest tomb. It was one of the ones that looked
like a shed built of marble. Bronze lettering over the door said:

 

ALDERMAN THOMAS BOWLER
1822–1906
PRO BONO PUBLICO

 

There was a stone carving of—presumably—the Alderman himself, looking
seriously into the distance as if he, too, was wondering what Pro Bono
Publico meant.

“I bet he’d be pretty angry,” said Johnny.

He hesitated for a moment, then walked up the couple of broken steps to
the metal door and knocked on it. He never did know why he’d done that.

“Here, you mustn’t!” hissed Wobbler. “Supposing he comes lurchin’ out!
Anyway,” he said, lowering his voice even more, “it’s wrong to try to
talk to the dead. It can lead to satanic practices; it said on
television.”

“Don’t see why,” said Johnny.

He knocked again.

And the door opened.

Alderman Thomas Bowler blinked in the sunlight and then glared at
Johnny.

“Yes?” he said.

Johnny turned and ran for it.

Wobbler caught up to him halfway along North Drive. Wobbler wasn’t
normally the athletic type, and his speed would have surprised quite a
lot of people who knew him.

“What happened? What happened?” he panted.

“Didn’t you see?” said Johnny.

“I didn’t see anything!”

“The door opened!”

“It never!”

“It did!”

Wobbler slowed down.

“No, it didn’t,” he muttered. “No one of ’em can open. I’ve looked at
’em. They’ve all got padlocks on.”

“To keep people out or keep people in?” asked Johnny.

A look of panic crossed Wobbler’s face. Since he had a big face, this
took some time. He started to run again.

“You’re just trying to get a rise out of me!” he yelled. “I’m not going
to hang around practicing being satanic! I’m going home!”

He turned the corner into East Way and sprinted toward the main gate.

Johnny slowed down.

He thought: padlocks.

It was true, actually. He’d noticed it in the past.

All the mausoleums had locks on them, to stop vandals from getting in.

And yet…and yet…

If he shut his eyes, he could see Alderman Thomas Bowler. Not one of the
lurchin’ dead from out of Wobbler’s videos, but a huge fat man in a
fur-trimmed robe and a gold chain and a hat with corners.

He stopped running and then, slowly, walked back the way he had come.

There was a padlock on the door of the Alderman’s tomb. It had a rusty
look.

It was the talking to Wobbler that did it, Johnny decided. It had given
him silly ideas.

He knocked again, anyway.

“Yes?” said Alderman Thomas Bowler.

“Er…hah…sorry…”

“What do you want?”

“Are you dead?”

The Alderman raised his eyes to the bronze letters over the door.

“See what it says up there?” he said.

“Er…”

“Nineteen hundred and six, it says. It was a very good funeral, I
understand. I didn’t attend, myself.” The Alderman gave this some
thought. “Rather, I did, but not in any position where I could observe
events. I believe the vicar gave a very moving sermon. What was it you
were wanting?”

“Er…” Johnny looked around desperately. “What…er…what does Pro Bono
Publico mean?”

“For the Public Good,” said the Alderman.

“Oh. Well…thank you.” Johnny backed away. “Thank you very much.”

“Was that all?”

“Er…yes.”

The Alderman nodded sadly. “I didn’t think it’d be anything important,”
he said. “I haven’t had a visitor since nineteen twenty-three. And then
they’d got the name wrong. They weren’t even relatives. And they were
American. Oh, well. Good-bye, then.”

Johnny hesitated. I could turn around now, he thought, and go home.

And if I turn around, I’ll never find out what happens next. I’ll go
away and I’ll never know why it happened now and what would have
happened next. I’ll go away and grow up and get a job and get married
and have children and become a granddad and retire and take up bowling
and go into Sunshine Acres and watch daytime television until I die, and
I’ll never know.

And he thought: Perhaps I did. Perhaps that all happened and then, just
when I was dying, some kind of angel turned up and said would you like a
wish? And I said, yes, I’d like to know what would have happened if I
hadn’t run away, and the angel said, Okay, you can go back. And here I
am, back again. I can’t let myself down.

The world waited.

Johnny took a step forward.

“You’re dead, right?” he said slowly.

“Oh, yes. It’s one of those things one is pretty certain about.”

“You don’t look dead. I mean, I thought…you know…coffins and things…”

“Oh, there’s all that,” said the Alderman airily, “and then there’s
this, too.”

“You’re a ghost?” Johnny was rather relieved. He could come to terms
with a ghost.

“I should hope I’ve got more pride than that,” said the Alderman.

“My friend Wobbler’ll be really amazed to meet you,” said Johnny. A
thought crossed his mind. “You’re no good at dancing, are you?” he said.

“I used to be able to waltz quite well,” said the Alderman.

“I meant…sort of…like this,” said Johnny. He gave the best impression he
could remember of Michael Jackson dancing. “Sort of with your feet,” he
said apologetically.

“That looks grand,” said Alderman Tom Bowler.

“Yes, and you have to have a glittery glove on one hand—”

“That’s important, is it?”

“Yes, and you have to say ‘Ow!’”

“I should think anyone would, dancing like that,” said the Alderman.

“No, I mean like ‘Oooowwwwwwweeeeeah!’ with—”

Johnny stopped. He realized that he was getting a bit carried away.

“But look,” he said, stopping at the end of a groove in the gravel. “I
don’t see how you can be dead and walking and talking at the same
time….”

“That’s probably all because of relativity,” said the Alderman. He
moonwalked stiffly across the path. “Like this, was it? Ouch!”

“A bit,” said Johnny kindly. “Um. What do you mean about relativity?”

“Einstein explains all that quite well,” said the Alderman.

“What, Albert Einstein?” said Johnny.

“Who?”

“He was a famous scientist. He…invented the speed of light and things.”

“Did he? I meant Solomon Einstein. He was a famous taxidermist in Cable
Street. Stuffing dead animals, you know. I think he invented some kind
of machine for making glass eyes. Got knocked down by a motorcar in
nineteen thirty-two. But a very keen thinker, all the same.”

“I never knew that,” said Johnny. He looked around.

It was getting darker.

“I think I’d better be getting home,” he said, and began to back away.

“I think I’m getting the hang of this,” said the Alderman, moonwalking
back across the path.

“I’ll…er…I’ll see you again. Perhaps,” said Johnny.

“Drop by any time you like,” said the Alderman, as Johnny walked away as
quickly yet politely as possible. “I’m always in.

“Always in,” he added. “That’s something you learn to be good at, when
you’re dead. Er. Eeeeeeyooooowh, was it?”


TWO

 

Johnny raised the subject of the cemetery after tea.

“It’s disgusting, what the Council are doing,” said his grandfather.

“But the cemetery costs a lot to keep up,” said his mother. “No one
visits most of the graves now, except old Mrs. Tachyon, and she’s
crazy.”

“Not visiting graves has nothing to do with it, girl. Anyway, there’s
history in there.”

“Alderman Thomas Bowler,” said Johnny.

“Never heard of him. I was referring,” said his grandfather, “to William
Stickers. There was very nearly a monument to him. There would have been
a monument to him. Everyone around here donated money, only someone ran
off with it. And I’d given sixpence.”

“Was he famous?”

“Nearly famous. Nearly famous. You’ve heard of Karl Marx?”

“He invented communism, didn’t he?” said Johnny.

“Right. Well, William Stickers didn’t. But he’d have been Karl Marx if
Karl Marx hadn’t beaten him to it. Tell you what…tomorrow I’ll show
you.”

 

 

 

It was tomorrow.

It was raining softly out of a dark-gray sky.

Granddad and Johnny stood in front of a large gravestone that read:

 

WILLIAM STICKERS
1897–1949
WORKERS OF THE WORLD UNIT

 

“A great man,” said Granddad. He had taken his cap off.

“What was the World Unit?” said Johnny.

“It should have been unite,” said Granddad. “They ran out of money
before they did the ‘E.’ It was a scandal. He was a hero of the working
class. He would have fought in the Spanish Civil War, except he got on
the wrong boat and ended up in Liverpool.”

Johnny looked around.

“Um,” he said. “What sort of a man was he?”

“A hero of the proletariat, like I said.”

“I mean, what did he look like?” said Johnny. “Was he quite big with a
huge black beard and gold-rimmed spectacles?”

“That’s right. Seen pictures, have you?”

“No,” said Johnny. “Not exactly.”

Granddad put his cap back on.

“I’m going down to the shops,” he said. “Want to come?”

“No, thanks. Er…I’m going around to Wobbler’s house.”

“Righto.”

Granddad wandered off toward the main gate.

Johnny took a deep breath.

“Hello,” he said.

“It was a scandal, them not giving me the ‘E,’” said William Stickers.

He stopped leaning against his memorial.

“What’s your name, comrade?”

“John Maxwell,” said Johnny.

“I knew you could see me,” said William Stickers. “I could see you
looking right at me while the old man was talking.”

“I could tell you were you,” said Johnny. “You look…um…thinner.”

He wanted to say: not thin like in thick. Just…not all there.
Transparent.

He said, “Um.” And then he said, “I don’t understand this. You are dead,
right? Some kind of…ghost?”

“Ghost?” said dead William Stickers angrily.

“Well…spirit, then.”

“There’s no such thing. A relic of an outmoded belief system.”

“Um, only…you’re talking to me…”

“It’s a perfectly understandable scientific phenomenon,” said William
Stickers. “Never let superstition get in the way of rational thought,
boy. It’s time for Mankind to put old cultural shibboleths aside and
step into the bright socialist dawn. What year is it?”

“Nineteen ninety-three,” said Johnny.

“Ah! And have the downtrodden masses risen up to overthrow the
capitalist oppressors in the glorious name of communism?”

“Um. Sorry?” Johnny hesitated, and then a few vague memories slid into
place. “You mean like…Russia and stuff? When they shot the tsar? There
was something on television about that.”

“Oh, I know that. That was just the start. What’s been happening since
nineteen forty-nine? I expect the global revolution is well established,
yes? No one tells us anything in here.”

“Well…there’s been a lot of revolutions, I think,” said Johnny. “All
over the place…”

“Capital!”

“Um.” It occurred to Johnny that people doing quite a lot of the more
recent revolutions had said they were overthrowing communist oppressors,
but William Stickers looked so eager, he didn’t quite know how to say
this. “Tell you what…can you read a newspaper if I bring you one?”

“Of course. But it’s hard to turn the pages.”

“Um. Are there a lot of you in here?”

“Hah! Most of them don’t bother. They just aren’t prepared to make the
effort.”

“Can you…you know…walk around? You could get into things for free.”

William Stickers looked slightly panicky.

“It’s hard to go far,” he mumbled. “It’s not really allowed.”

“I read in a book once that ghosts can’t move much,” said Johnny.

“Ghost? I’m just…dead.” He waved a transparent finger in the air. “Hah!
But they’re not getting me that way,” he snapped. “Just because it turns
out that I’m still…here after I’m dead, doesn’t mean I’m prepared to
believe in the whole stupid nonsense, you know. Oh, no. Logical,
rational thought, boy. And don’t forget the newspaper.”

William Stickers faded away a bit at a time. The last thing to go was
the finger, still demonstrating its total disbelief in life after death.

Johnny waited around a bit, but no other dead people seemed to be ready
to make an appearance.

He felt he was being watched in some way that had nothing to do with
eyes. It wasn’t exactly creepy, but it was uncomfortable. You didn’t
dare scratch your bottom or pick your nose.

For the first time, he really began to notice the cemetery. It had a
leftover look, really.

Behind it there was the canal, which wasn’t used anymore, except as a
rubbish dump; old prams and busted televisions and erupting settees
lined its banks like monsters from the Garbage Age. Then on one side
there was the crematorium and its Garden of Remembrance, which was all
right in a gravel-pathed, keep-off-the-grass sort of way. In front was
Cemetery Road, which had once had houses on the other side of it; now
there was the back wall of the Bonanza Carpet (Save £££££!!) Warehouse.
There was still an old phone booth and a letter box, which suggested
that once upon a time this had been a place that people thought of as
home. But now it was just a road you cut through to get to the bypass
from the industrial estate.

On the fourth side was nothing much except a waste-land of fallen brick
and one tall chimney—all that remained of the Blackbury Rubber Boot
Company. (“If It’s a Boot, It’s a Blackbury” had been one of the most
famously stupid slogans in the world.)

Johnny vaguely remembered there’d been some thing in the papers. People
had been protesting about something—but then, they always were. There
was always so much news going on, you never had time to find out
anything important.

He walked round to the old factory site. Bulldozers were parked around
it now, although they were all empty. There was a wire fence that had
been broken down here and there despite the notices about Guard Dogs on
Patrol. Perhaps the guard dogs had broken out.

And there was a big sign, showing the office building that was going to
be built on the site. It was beautiful. There were fountains in front of
it, and quite old trees carefully placed here and there, and neat people
standing chatting outside it. And the sky above it was a glorious blue,
which was pretty unusual for Blackbury, where most of the time the sky
was that odd, soapy color you’d get if you lived in a Tupperware box.

Johnny stared at it for some time, while the rain fell in the real world
and the blue sky glittered on the sign.

It was pretty obvious that the building was going to take up more room
than the site of the old boot factory.

The words above the picture said, “An Exciting Development for United
Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings: Forward to the Future!”

Johnny didn’t feel very excited, but he did feel that “Forward to the
Future” was even dumber than “If It’s a Boot, It’s a Blackbury.”

 

 

 

Before school the next day he swiped the newspaper and tucked it out of
sight behind William Stickers’s grave.

He felt more silly than afraid. He wished he could talk to someone about
it.

He didn’t have anyone to talk to. But he did have three people to talk
with.

There were various gangs and alliances in the school, such as the sporty
group, and the bright kids, and the Computer Club Nerds.

And then there was Johnny, and Wobbler, and Bigmac, who said he was the
last of the well hard skin-heads but was actually a skinny kid with
short hair and flat feet and asthma who had difficulty even walking in
Doc Martens, and there was Yo-less, who was technically black.

But at least they listened, during break, on the bit of wall between the
school kitchen and the library. It was where they normally hung out—or
at least, hung around.

“Ghosts,” said Yo-less, when he’d finished.

“No-oo,” said Johnny uncertainly. “They don’t like being called ghosts.
It upsets them, for some reason. They’re just…dead. I suppose it’s like
not calling people handicapped or backward.”

“Politically incorrect,” said Yo-less. “I read about that.”

“You mean they want to be called”—Wobbler paused for
thought—“post-senior citizens.”

“Breathily challenged,” said Yo-less.

“Vertically disadvantaged,” said Wobbler.

“What? You mean they’re short?” said Yo-less.

“Buried,” said Wobbler.

“How about zombies?” said Bigmac.

“No, you’ve got to have a body to be a zombie,” said Yo-less. “You’re
not really dead, you just get fed this secret voodoo mixture of fish and
roots and you turn into a zombie.”

“Wow. What mixture?”

“I don’t know. How should I know? Just some kind of fish and some kind
of root.”

“I bet it’s a real adventure getting fish and chips in voodoo country,”
said Wobbler.

“Well, you ought to know about voodoo,” said Bigmac.

“Why?” said Yo-less.

“’Cause you’re West Indian, right?”

“Do you know all about Druids?”

“No.”

“There you are, then.”

“I ’spect your mum knows about it, though,” said Bigmac.

“Shouldn’t think so. My mum spends more time in church than the pope,”
said Yo-less. “My mum spends more time in church than God.”

“You’re not taking this seriously,” said Johnny severely. “I really saw
them.”

“It might be something wrong with your eyes,” said Yo-less. “Perhaps
there’s a—”

“I saw this old film once, about a man with X-ray eyes,” said Bigmac.
“He could use ’em to see right through things.”

“Women’s clothes and stuff?” enquired Wobbler.

“There wasn’t much of that,” said Bigmac.

They discussed this waste of a useful talent.

“I don’t see through anything,” said Johnny eventually. “I just see
people who aren’t ther—I mean, people other people don’t see.”

“My uncle used to see things other people couldn’t see,” said Wobbler.
“Especially on a Saturday night.”

“Don’t be stupid. I’m trying to be serious.”

“Yeah, but once you said you’d seen a Loch Ness monster in your goldfish
pond,” said Bigmac.

“All right, but—”

“Probably just a plesiosaur,” said Yo-less. “Just some old dinosaur that
ought to’ve been extinct seventy million years ago. Nothing special at
all.”

“Yes, but—”

“And then there was the Lost City of the Incas,” said Wobbler.

“Well, I found it, didn’t I?”

“Yes, but it wasn’t that lost,” said Yo-less. “Behind Tesco’s isn’t
exactly lost.”

Bigmac sighed.

“You’re all weird,” he said.

“All right,” said Johnny. “You all come down there after school, right?”

“Well—” Wobbler began, and shifted uneasily.

“Not scared, are you?” said Johnny. He knew that was unfair, but he was
annoyed. “You ran away before,” he said, “when the Alderman came out.”

“I never saw no Alderman,” said Wobbler. “Anyway, I wasn’t scared. I ran
away to get a rise out of you.”

“You certainly had me fooled,” said Johnny.

“Me? Scared? I watched Night of the Killer Zombies three times—with
freeze frame,” said Wobbler.

“All right, then. You come. All three of you come. After school.”

“After Cobbers,” said Bigmac.

“Look, this is a lot more important than—”

“Yes, but today Janine is going to tell Mick that Doraleen took Ron’s
surfboard—”

Johnny hesitated.

“All right, then,” he said. “After Cobbers.”

“And then I promised to help my brother load up his van,” said Bigmac.
“Well, not exactly promised…he said he’d rip my arms off if I didn’t.”

“And I’ve got to do some geography homework,” said Yo-less.

“We haven’t got any,” said Johnny.

“No, but I thought if I did an extra essay on rainforests, I could pull
up my grade average,” said Yo-less.

There was nothing odd about this, if you were used to Yo-less. Yo-less
wore the school uniform. Except that it wasn’t really the school
uniform. Well, all right, technically it was the school uniform, because
everyone got these bits of paper at the start of every year saying what
the school uniform was, but no one ever wore it much, except for
Yo-less, and so if hardly anyone else was wearing it, Wobbler said, how
could it be a uniform? Whereas, said Wobbler, since at any one time
nearly everyone was wearing jeans and a T-shirt, then really jeans and a
T-shirt were the real school uniform and Yo-less should be sent home for
not wearing it.

“Tell you what,” said Johnny. “Let’s meet up later, then. Six o’clock.
We can meet at Bigmac’s place. That’s right near the cemetery, anyway.”

“But it’ll be getting dark,” said Wobbler.

“Well?” said Johnny. “You’re not scared, are you?”

“Me? Scared? Huh! Me? Scared? Me? Scared?”

 

 

 

If you had to be somewhere frightening when it got dark, Johnny thought,
the Joshua N’Clement block rated a lot higher on the Aaargh scale than
any cemetery. At least the dead didn’t mug you.

It was originally going to be the Sir Alec Douglas-Home block, and then
it became the Harold Wilson block, and then finally the new Council
named it the Joshua Che N’Clement block after a famous freedom fighter,
who then became president of his country, and who was now being an
ex-freedom fighter and ex-president somewhere in Switzerland while some
of his countrymen tried to find him and ask him questions like: What
happened to the two hundred million dollars we thought we had, and how
come your wife owned seven hundred hats?

The block had been described in 1965 as “an overwhelming and dynamic
relationship of voids and solids, majestic in its uncompromising
simplicity.”

Often the Blackbury Guardian had pictures of people complaining about
the damp, or the cold, or the way the windows fell out in high winds (it
was always windy around the block, even on a calm day everywhere else),
or the way gangs roamed its dank passageways and pushed shopping carts
off the roof into the Great Lost Shopping Cart Graveyard. The elevators
hadn’t worked properly since 1966. They lurked in the basement, too
scared to go anywhere else.

The passages and walkways (“an excitingly brutal brushed concrete
finish”) had two smells, depending on whether or not the Council’s ninja
caretaker had been around in his van. The other one was disinfectant.

No one liked the Joshua N’Clement block. There were two schools of
thought about what should be done with it. The people who lived there
thought everyone should be taken out and then the block should be blown
up, and the people who lived near the block just wanted it blown up.

The odd thing was that although the block was cramped and fourteen
stories high, it had been built in the middle of a huge area of what was
theoretically grass (“environmental open space”), but which was now the
home of the Common Potato Chip Packet and Hardy Perennial Burned-Out
Car.

“Horrible place,” said Wobbler.

“People’ve got to live somewhere,” said Yo-less.

“Reckon the man who designed it lives here?” said Johnny.

“Shouldn’t think so.”

“I’m not going too near Bigmac’s brother,” said Wobbler. “He’s a nutter.
He’s got tattoos and everything. And everyone knows he steals stuff.
Videos and things. Out of factories. And he killed Bigmac’s hamster when
he was little. And he chucks his stuff out of the window when he’s
angry. And if Clint’s been let out—”

Clint was Bigmac’s brother’s dog, which had reputedly been banned from
the Rottweiler/Pit Bull Terrier Crossbreed Club for being too nasty.

“Poor old Bigmac,” said Johnny. “No wonder he’s always sending off for
martial arts stuff.”

“I reckon he wants to join the army so’s he can bring his gun home one
weekend,” said Yo-less.

Wobbler looked up apprehensively at the huge towering bulk of the block.

“Huh! Bringing his tank home’d be more like it,” he said.

Bigmac’s brother’s van was parked in what had been designed as the
washing-drying area. Both of the doors and the front fender were
different colors. Clint was in the front seat, chained to the steering
wheel. The van was the one vehicle that could be left unlocked anywhere
near Joshua N’Clement.

“Weird, really,” said Johnny. “When you think about it, I mean.”

“What is?” said Yo-less.

“Well, there’s a huge cemetery for dead people, and all the living
people are crammed up in that thing,” said Johnny. “I mean, it sounds
like someone got something wrong…”

Bigmac emerged from the block, carrying a stack of cardboard boxes. He
nodded hopelessly at Johnny, and put the boxes in the back of the van.

“Yo, duds,” he said.

“Where’s your brother?”

“He’s upstairs. Come on, let’s go.”

“Before he comes down, you mean,” said Wobbler.

“Shut up.”

 

 

 

The breeze moved in the poplar trees, and whispered around the antique
urns and broken stones.

“I don’t know as this is right,” said Wobbler, when the four of them had
gathered by the gate.

“There’s crosses all over the place,” said Yo-less.

“Yes, but I’m an atheist,” said Wobbler.

“Then you shouldn’t believe in ghosts—”

“Post-living citizens,” Bigmac corrected him.

“Bigmac?” said Johnny.

“Yeah?”

“What’re you holding behind your back?”

“Nothing.”

Wobbler craned to see.

“It’s a bit of sharpened wood,” he reported. “And a hammer.”

“Bigmac!”

“Well, you never know—”

“Leave them here!”

“Oh, all right.”

“Anyway, it’s not stakes for ghosts. That’s for vampires,” said Yo-less.

“Oh, thank you,” said Wobbler.

“Look, this is just the cemetery,” said Johnny. “It’s got bylaws and
things! It’s not Transylvania! There’s just dead people here! That
doesn’t make it scary, does it? Dead people are people who were living
once! You wouldn’t be so worked up if there were living people buried
here, would you?”

They set off along North Drive.

It was amazing how sounds died away in the cemetery. There was only a
set of overgrown iron railings and some unpruned trees between them and
the road, but noises were suddenly cut right down, as if they were being
heard through a blanket. Instead, silence seemed to pour in—pour up,
Johnny thought—like breathable water. It hissed. In the cemetery,
silence made a noise.

The gravel crunched underfoot. Some of the more recent graves had a
raised area in front of them that someone had thought would be a good
idea to cover with little green stones. Now, tiny rockery plants were
flourishing.

A crow cawed in one of the trees, unless it was a rook. It didn’t really
break the silence. It just underlined it.

“Peaceful, isn’t it,” said Yo-less.

“Quiet as the grave,” said Bigmac. “Ha, ha.”

“A lot of people come for walks here,” said Johnny. “I mean, the park’s
miles away, and all there is there is grass. But this place has got tons
of bushes and plants and trees and, and—”

“Environment,” said Yo-less.

“And probably some ecology as well,” said Johnny.

“Hey, look at this grave,” said Wobbler.

They looked. It had a huge raised archway made of carved black marble,
and a lot of angels wound around it, and a Madonna, and a faded
photograph in a little glass window under the name: Antonio Vicenti
(1897–1958). It looked like a kind of Rolls-Royce of a grave.

“Yeah. Dead impressive,” said Bigmac.

“Why bother with such a big stone arch?” said Yo-less.

“It’s just showing off,” said Yo-less. “There’s probably a sticker on
the back saying ‘My Other Grave Is a Porch.’”

“Yo-less!” said Johnny.

“Actually, I think that was very funny,” said Mr. Vicenti. “He is a very
funny boy.”

Johnny turned, very slowly.

There was a man in black clothes leaning on the grave. He had neat black
hair, plastered down, and a carnation in his buttonhole, and a slightly
gray look, as if the light wasn’t quite right.

“Oh,” said Johnny. “Hello.”

“And what is the joke, exactly?” said Mr. Vicenti, in a solemn voice. He
stood very politely with his hands clasped in front of him, like an
old-fashioned shop assistant.

“Well, you can get these stickers for cars, you see, and they say ‘My
Other Car Is a Porsche,’” said Johnny. “It’s not a very good joke,” he
added quickly.

“A Porsche is a kind of car?” said dead Mr. Vicenti.

“Yes. Sorry. I didn’t think he should joke about things like that.”

“Back in the old country I used to do magical entertainment for
kiddies,” said Mr. Vicenti. “With doves and similar items. On Saturdays.
At parties. The Great Vicenti and Ethel. I like to laugh.”

“The old country?” said Johnny.

“The alive country.”

The three boys were watching Johnny carefully.

“You don’t fool us,” said Wobbler. “There’s—there’s no one there.”

“And I did escapology, too,” said Mr. Vicenti, absentmindedly pulling an
egg from Yo-less’s ear.

“You’re just talking to the air,” said Yo-less.

“Escapology?” said Johnny. Here we go again, he thought. The dead always
want to talk about themselves….

“What?” said Bigmac.

“Escaping from things.” Mr. Vicenti cracked the egg. The ghost of a dove
flew away, and vanished as it reached the trees. “Sacks and chains and
handcuffs and so on. Like the Great Houdini? Only in a semiprofessional
way, of course. My greatest trick involved getting out of a locked sack
underwater while wearing twenty feet of chain and three pairs of
handcuffs.”

“Gosh, how often did you do that?” said Johnny.

“Nearly once,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“Come on,” said Wobbler. “Joke’s over. No one’s taken in. Come on.
Time’s getting on.”

“Shut up—this is interesting,” said Johnny.

He was aware of a rustling noise around him, like someone walking very
slowly through dead leaves.

“And you’re John Maxwell,” said Mr. Vicenti. “The Alderman told us about
you.”

“Us?”

The rustling grew louder.

Johnny turned.

“He’s not joking,” said Yo-less. “Look at his face!”

I mustn’t be frightened, Johnny told himself.

I mustn’t be frightened!

Why should I be frightened? These are just…post-life citizens. A few
years ago they were mowing lawns and putting up Christmas decorations
and being grandparents and things. They’re nothing to be frightened of.

The sun was well behind the poplar trees. There was a bit of mist on the
ground.

And walking slowly toward him, through its coils, were the dead.


THREE

 

There was the Alderman, and William Stickers, and an old woman in a long
dress and a hat covered in fruit, and some small children running on
ahead, and dozens, hundreds of others. They didn’t lurch. They didn’t
ooze any green. They just looked gray, and very slightly out of focus.

You notice things when you’re terrified. Little details grow bigger.

He realized there were differences among the dead. Mr. Vicenti had
looked almost…well, alive. William Stickers was slightly more colorless.
The Alderman was definitely transparent around the edges. But many of
the others, in Victorian clothes and odd assortments of coats and
breeches from earlier ages, were almost completely without color and
almost without substance, so they were little more than shaped air, but
air that walked.

It wasn’t that they had faded. It was just that they were farther away,
in some strange direction that had nothing much to do with the normal
three.

Wobbler and the other two were still staring at him.

“Johnny? You all right?” said Wobbler.

Johnny remembered a piece about overpopulation in a school geography
book. For everyone who was alive today, it said, there were twenty
historical people, all the way back to when people had only just become
people.

Or, to put it another way, behind every living person were twenty dead
ones.

Quite a lot of them were behind Wobbler. Johnny didn’t feel it would be
a good idea to point this out, though.

“It’s gone all cold,” said Bigmac.

“We ought to be getting back,” said Wobbler, his voice shaking. “I ought
to be doing my homework.”

Which showed he was frightened. It’d take zombies to make Wobbler prefer
to do homework.

“You can’t see them, can you?” said Johnny. “They’re all around us, but
you can’t see them.”

“The living can’t generally see the dead,” said Mr. Vicenti. “It’s for
their own good, I expect.”

The three boys had drawn closer together.

“Come on, stop mucking about,” said Bigmac.

“Huh,” said Wobbler. “He’s just trying to spook us. Huh. Like Dead Man’s
Hand at parties. Huh. Well, it’s not working. I’m off home. Come on, you
lot.”

He turned and walked a few steps.

“Hang on,” said Yo-less. “There’s something odd—”

He looked around at the empty cemetery. The rook had flown away, unless
it was a crow.

“Something odd,” he mumbled.

“Look,” said Johnny. “They’re here! They’re all around us!”

“I’ll tell my mum on you!” said Wobbler. “This is practicing bein’
satanic again!”

“John Maxwell!” boomed the Alderman. “We must talk to you!”

“That’s right!” shouted William Stickers. “This is important!”

“What about?” said Johnny. He was balancing on his fear, and he felt
oddly calm. The funny thing was, when you were on top of your fear, you
were a little bit taller.

“This!” said William Stickers, waving the newspaper.

Wobbler gasped. There was a rolled-up newspaper floating in the air.

“Poltergeist activity!” he said. He waved a shaking finger at Johnny.
“You get that around adolescents! I read something in a magazine!
Saucepans flying through the air and stuff! His head’ll spin around in a
minute!”

“What is the fat boy talking about?” said the Alderman.

“And what is Dead Man’s Hand?” said Mr. Vicenti.

“There’s probably a scientific explanation,” said Yo-less, as the
newspaper fluttered through the air.

“What?” said Bigmac.

“I’m trying to think of one!”

“It’s holding itself open!”

William Stickers opened the paper.

“It’s probably just a freak wind!” said Yo-less, backing away.

“I can’t feel any wind!”

“That’s why it’s freaky!”

“What are you going to do about this?” the Alderman demanded.

“Excuse me, but this Dead Man’s Hand. What is it?”

“Will everyone SHUT UP?” said Johnny.

Even the dead obeyed.

“Right,” he said, settling down a bit. “Um. Look, um, you lot,
these…people…want to talk to us. Me, anyway—”

Yo-less, Wobbler, and Bigmac were staring intently at the newspaper. It
hung, motionless, more than three feet above the ground.

“Are they…the breath-impaired?” asked Wobbler.

“Don’t be an idiot! That sounds like asthma,” said Yo-less. “Come on. If
you mean it, say it. Come right out with it. Are they…” He looked around
at the darkening landscape, and hesitated. “Er…post-senior citizens?”

“Are they lurching?” asked Wobbler. Now he and the other two were so
close that they looked like one very wide person with six legs.

“You didn’t tell us about this,” said the Alderman.

“This what?” said Johnny.

“In the newspaper. Well, it is called a newspaper. But it has pictures
of women in the altogether! Which may well be seen by respectable
married women and young children!”

William Stickers was, with great effort, holding the paper open at the
Entertainment Section. Johnny craned to read it. There was a rather poor
photo of a couple of girls at Blackbury Swimming Pool and Leisure
Center.

“They’ve got swimsuits on,” he said.

“Swimsuits? But I can see almost all of their legs!” the Alderman
roared.

“Nothing wrong with that at all,” snapped the elderly woman in the huge
fruity hat. “Healthy bodies enjoying calisthenics in the God-given
sunlight. And very practical clothing, I may say.”

“Practical, madam? I dread to think for what!”

Mr. Vicenti leaned toward Johnny.

“The lady in the hat is Mrs. Sylvia Liberty,” he whispered. “Died
nineteen fourteen. Tireless suffragette.”

“Suffragette?” said Johnny.

“Don’t they teach you that sort of thing now? They campaigned for votes
for women. They used to chain themselves to railings and chuck eggs at
policemen and throw themselves under the Prince of Wales’s horse on
Derby days.”

“Wow.”

“But Mrs. Liberty got the instructions wrong and threw herself under the
Prince of Wales.”

“What?”

“Killed outright,” said Mr. Vicenti. He clicked his disapproval. “He was
a very heavy man, I believe.”

“When you two have ceased this bourgeois arguing,” shouted William
Stickers, “perhaps we can get back to important matters?” He rustled the
paper. Wobbler blinked.

“It says in this newspaper,” said William Stickers, “that the cemetery
is going to be closed. Going to be built on. Do you know about it?”

“Um. Yes. Yes. Um. Didn’t you know?”

“Was anyone supposed to tell us?”

“What’re they saying?” said Bigmac.

“They’re annoyed about the cemetery being sold. There’s a story in the
paper.”

“Hurry up!” said William Stickers. “I can’t hold it much longer….”

The newspaper sagged. Then it fell through his hands and landed on the
path.

“Not as alive as I was,” he said.

“Definitely a freak whirlwind,” said Yo-less. “I’ve heard about them.
Nothing supernat—”

“This is our home,” boomed the Alderman. “What will happen to us, young
man?”

“Just a minute,” said Johnny. “Hold on. Yo-less?”

“Yes?”

“They want to know what happens to people in graveyards if they get
built on.”

“The…dead want to know that?”

“Yes,” said the Alderman and Johnny at the same time.

“I bet Michael Jackson didn’t do this,” said Bigmac. “He—”

“I saw this film,” gabbled Wobbler, “where these houses were built on an
old graveyard and someone dug a swimming pool and all these skeletons
came out and tried to strangle people—”

“Why?” said the Alderman.

“He wants to know why,” said Johnny.

“Search me,” said Wobbler.

“I think,” said Yo-less uncertainly, “that the…coffins, and all that,
get dug up and put somewhere else. I think there’s special places.”

“I’m not standing for that!” said dead Mrs. Sylvia Liberty. “I paid five
pounds, seven shillings, and sixpence for my plot! I remember the
document Distinctly. Last Resting Place, it said. It didn’t say After
Eighty Years You’ll Be Dug Up and Moved just so the living can
build…what did it say?”

“Modern Purpose-Designed Offices,” said William Stickers. “Whatever they
are.”

“I think it means they were designed on purpose,” said Johnny.

“And how shameful to be sold for fivepence!” said dead Mrs. Liberty.

“That’s the living for you,” said William Stickers. “No thought for the
downtrodden masses.”

“Well, you see,” said Johnny wretchedly, “the council says it costs too
much to keep up and the land was worth—”

“And what’s this here about Blackbury Municipal Authority?” said the
Alderman. “What happened to Blackbury City Council?”

“I don’t know,” said Johnny. “I’ve never heard of it. Look, it’s not my
fault. I like this place, too. I told Wobbler I didn’t like what’s
happening.”

“So what are you going to do about it?” asked the Alderman.

Johnny backed away but came up against Mr. Vicenti’s Rolls-Royce of a
grave.

“Oh, no,” he said. “Not me. It’s not up to me!”

“I don’t see why not,” said dead Mrs. Sylvia Liberty. “After all, you
can see and hear us.”

“No one else takes any notice,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“We’ve been trying all day,” said the Alderman.

“People walking their dogs. Hah! They just hurry away,” said William
Stickers.

“Not even old Mrs. Tachyon,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“And she’s mad,” said the Alderman. “Poor soul.”

“So there’s only you,” said William Stickers. “So you must go and tell
this Municipal whateveritis that we aren’t…going…to…move!”

“They won’t listen to me! I’m twelve! I can’t even vote!”

“Yes, but we can,” said the Alderman.

“Can we?” said Mr. Vicenti.

The dead clustered around him, like an American football team.

“We’re still over twenty-one, aren’t we? I mean, technically.”

“Yes, but we’re dead,” said Mr. Vicenti, in a reasonable tone of voice.

“You can vote at eighteen now,” said Johnny.

“No wonder people have no respect,” said the Alderman. “I said the rot’d
set in if they gave the vote to women—”

Mrs. Liberty glared at him.

“Anyway, you can’t use a dead person’s vote,” said William Stickers.
“It’s called Personation. I stood as Revolutionary Solidarity Fraternal
Workers’ Party Candidate. I know about this sort of thing.”

“I’m not proposing to let anyone use my vote,” said the Alderman. “I
want to use it myself. No law against that.”

“Good point.”

“I served this city faithfully for more than fifty years,” said the
Alderman. “I do not see why I should lose my vote just because I’m dead.
Democracy. That’s the point.”

“People’s democracy,” said William Stickers.

The dead fell silent.

“Well…” said Johnny miserably. “I’ll see what I can do.”

“Good man,” said the Alderman. “And we’d also like a paper delivered
every day.”

“No, no.” Mr. Vicenti shook his head. “It’s so hard to turn the pages.”

“Well, we must know what is happening,” said Mrs. Liberty. “There’s no
telling what the living are getting up to out there while our backs are
turned.”

“I’ll…think of something,” said Johnny. “Something better than
newspapers.”

“Right,” said William Stickers. “And then you get along to these Council
people and tell them—”

“Tell them we’re not going to take this lying down!” shouted the
Alderman.

“Yes, right,” said Johnny.

And the dead faded. Again there was the sensation of traveling, as if
the dead people were going back into a different world….

“Have they gone?” said Wobbler.

“Not that they were here,” said Yo-less, the scientific thinker.

“They were here, and they’ve gone,” said Johnny.

“It definitely felt a bit weird,” said Bigmac. “Very cold.”

“Let’s get out of here,” said Johnny. “I need to think. They want me to
stop this place being built on.”

“How?”

Johnny led the way quickly toward the gates.

“Huh! They’ve left it up to me.”

“We’ll help,” said Yo-less promptly.

“Will we?” said Wobbler. “I mean, Johnny’s okay, but…I mean…it’s
meddlin’ with the occult. And your mum’ll go ballistic.”

“Yes, but if it’s true, then it’s helping Christian souls,” said
Yo-less. “That’s all right. They are Christian souls, aren’t they?”

“I think there’s a Jewish part of the cemetery,” said Johnny.

“That’s all right. Jewish is the same as Christian,” said Bigmac.

“Not exactly,” said Yo-less very carefully. “But similar.”

“Yeah, but…” said Wobbler awkwardly. “I mean…dead people and that…. I
mean…he can see ’em, so it’s up to him…I mean…”

“We all supported Bigmac when he was in juvenile court, didn’t we?” said
Yo-less.

“You said he was going to get hung,” said Wobbler. “And I spent all
morning doing that ‘Free the Blackbury One’ poster.”

“It was a political crime,” said Bigmac.

“You stole the Minister of Education’s car when he was opening the
school,” said Yo-less.

“It wasn’t stealing. I meant to give it back,” said Bigmac.

“You drove it into a wall. You couldn’t even give it back on a shovel.”

“Oh, so it was my fault the brakes were faulty? I could have got badly
hurt, right? I notice no one worried about that. It was basically his
fault, leaving cars around with crummy locks and bad brakes—”

“I bet he doesn’t have to repair his own brakes.”

“It’s society’s fault, then—”

“Anyway,” said Yo-less, “we were behind you that time, right?”

“Wouldn’t like to have been in front of him,” said Wobbler.

“And we were right behind Wobbler when he got into trouble for
complaining to the record shop about the messages from God he heard when
he played Pat Boone records backward—”

“You said you heard it too,” said Wobbler. “Hey, you said you heard it!”

“Only after you told me what it was,” said Yo-less. “Before you told me
what I was listening for, it just sounded like someone going
ayip-ayeep-mwerpayeep.”*

“They shouldn’t do that sort of thing on records,” said Wobbler
defensively. “Gettin’ at impressionable minds.”

“The point I’m making,” said Yo-less, “is that you’ve got to help your
friends, right?” He turned to Johnny. “Now, personally, I think you’re
very nearly totally disturbed and suffering from psychosomatica and
hearing voices and seeing delusions,” he said, “and probably ought to be
locked up in one of those white jackets with the stylish long sleeves.
But that doesn’t matter, ’cause we’re friends.”

“I’m touched,” said Johnny.

“Probably,” said Wobbler, “but we don’t care, do we, guys?”

 

 

 

His mother was out, at her second job. Granddad was watching Video
Whoopsy.

“Granddad?”

“Yes?”

“How famous was William Stickers?”

“Very famous. Very famous man,” said the old man, without looking
around.

“I can’t find him in the encyclopedia.”

“Very famous man, was William Stickers. Haha! Look, the man’s just
fallen off his bicycle! Right into the bush!”

Johnny took down the volume L-MIN and was silent for a few minutes.
Granddad had a complete set of huge encyclopedias. No one really knew
why. Somewhere in 1950 or something, Granddad had said to himself “Get
educated,” and had bought the massive books on the installment plan.
He’d never opened them. He’d just built a bookcase for them. Granddad
was superstitious about books. He thought that if you had enough of them
around, education leaked out, like radioactivity.

“How about Mrs. Sylvia Liberty?”

“Who’s she?”

“She was a suffragette, I think. Votes for women and things.”

“Never heard of her.”

“She’s not in here under ‘Liberty’ or ‘Suffragette.’”

“Never heard of her. Whoa, look here, the cat’s fallen in the pond!”

“All right…how about Mr. Antonio Vicenti?”

“What? Old Tony Vicenti? What’s he up to now?”

“Was he famous for anything?”

For a moment, Granddad’s eyes left the TV screen and focused on the past
instead.

“He ran a joke shop in Alma Street where the multistory parking garage
is now. You could buy stink bombs and itching powder. And he used to do
conjuring tricks at kids’ parties when your mum was a girl.”

“Was he a famous man?”

“All the kids knew him. Only children’s entertainer in these parts, see.
They all knew his tricks. They used to shout out: ‘It’s in your pocket!’
And things like that. Alma Street. And Paradise Street, that was there,
too. And Balaclava Terrace. That’s where I was born. Number Twelve,
Balaclava Terrace. All under the garage now. Oh, dear…he’s going to fall
off that building….”

“So he wasn’t really famous. Not like really famous.”

“All the kids knew him. Prisoner of war in Germany, he was. But he
escaped. And he married…Ethel Plover, that’s right. Never had any kids.
Used to do conjuring tricks and escaping from things. Always escaping
from things, he was.”

“He wore a carnation pinned to his coat,” said Johnny.

“That’s right! Every day. Never saw him without one. Always very smart,
he was. He used to be a conjuror. Haven’t seen him around for years.”

“Granddad?”

“It’s all changed around here now. I hardly see anywhere I recognize
when I go into town these days. Someone told me they’ve pulled down the
old boot factory.”

“You know that little transistor radio?” said Johnny.

“What little transistor radio?”

“The one you’ve got.”

“What about it?”

“You said it’s too fiddly and not loud enough?”

“That’s right.”

“Can I have it?”

“I thought you’d got one of those ghettoblowers.”

“This is…for some friends.” Johnny hesitated. He was by nature an honest
person, because apart from anything else, lying was always too
complicated.

“They’re quite old,” he added. “And a bit shut in.”

“Oh, all right. You’ll have to put some new batteries in—the old ones
have gone all wonky.”

“I’ve got some batteries.”

“You don’t get proper wireless anymore. We used to get oscillation when
I was a boy. You never get it now. Hehe! There he goes—look, right
through the ice!”

 

 

 

Johnny went down to the cemetery before breakfast. The gates had been
locked, but since there were holes all along the walls, this didn’t make
a lot of difference.

He’d bought a plastic bag for the radio and had sorted out some new
batteries, after scraping out the chemical porridge that was all that
was left of the old ones.

The cemetery was deserted. There wasn’t a soul there, living or dead.
But there was the silence, the big empty silence. If ears could make a
noise, they’d sound like that silence.

Johnny tried to fill it.

“Um,” he said. “Anyone there?”

A fox leaped up from behind one of the stones and scurried away into the
undergrowth.

“Hello? It’s me?”

The absence of the dead was scarier than seeing them in the flesh—or at
least, not in the flesh.

“I brought this radio. It’s probably easier for you than newspapers. Um.
I looked up radio in the encyclopedia and most of you ought to know what
it is. Um. You twiddle the knobs and radio comes out. Um. So I’ll just
tuck it down behind Mr. Vicenti’s slab, all right? Then you can find out
what’s going on.”

He coughed.

“I…I did some thinking last night, and…and I thought maybe if people
knew about all the…famous…people here, they’d be bound to leave it
alone. I know it’s not a very good idea,” he said hopelessly, “but it’s
the best I could come up with. I’m going to make a list of names. If you
don’t mind?”

He’d hoped Mr. Vicenti would be about. He quite liked him. Perhaps it
was because he hadn’t been dead as long as the others. He seemed
friendlier. Less stiff.

Johnny walked from gravestone to gravestone, noting down names. Some of
the older stones were quite ornate, with fat cherubs on them. But one
had a pair of football boots carved on it. He made a special note of the
name:

 

STANLEY “WRONG WAY” ROUNDWAY
1892–1936
THE LAST WHISTLE

 

He nearly missed the one under the trees. It had a flat stone in the
grass, without even one of the ugly flower vases, and all it declared
was that this was the last resting place of Eric Grimm (1885–1927). No
“Just Resting,” no “Deeply Missed,” not even “Died,” although probably
he had. Johnny wrote the name down, anyway.

Mr. Grimm waited until after Johnny had gone before he emerged and
glared after him.


FOUR

 

It was later that morning.

There was a new library in the Civic Center. It was so new, it didn’t
even have librarians. It had Assistant Information Officers. And it had
computers. Wobbler was banned from the computers because of an incident
involving a library terminal, the telephone connection to the main
computer, another telephone line to the computer at East Slate Air Base
ten miles away, another telephone line to a much bigger computer under a
mountain somewhere in America, and almost World War Three.

At least that’s what Wobbler said. The Assistant Information Officers
said it was because he got chocolate in the keyboard.

But he was allowed to use the microfiche readers. They couldn’t think of
a good reason to stop him.

“What’re we looking for, anyway?” said Bigmac.

“Nearly everyone who died here used to get buried in that cemetery,”
said Johnny. “So if we can find someone famous who lived here, and then
we can find them in the cemetery, then it’s a famous place. There’s a
cemetery in London with Karl Marx in it. It’s famous for him being dead
in it.”

“Karl Marx?” said Bigmac. “What was he famous for?”

“You’re ignorant, you are,” said Wobbler. “He was the one who played the
harp.”

“No, Karl was the one who usedta talka lika dis,” said Yo-less.

“Actually, he was the one with the cigar,” said Wobbler.

“That’s a very old joke,” said Johnny severely. “The Marx Brothers. Ha,
ha. Look, I’ve got the old newspaper files. The Blackbury Guardian. They
go back nearly a hundred years. All we’ve got to do is look at the front
pages. That’s where famous people’d be.”

“And the back pages,” said Bigmac.

“Why the back pages?”

“Sports. Famous footballers and that.”

“Yeah, right. Hadn’t thought of that. All right, then. Let’s get
started…”

“Yeah, but…” said Bigmac.

“What?” said Johnny.

“So this Karl Marx, then,” said Bigmac. “What films was he in?”

Johnny sighed. “Listen, he wasn’t in any films. He was…he led the
Russian Revolution.”

“No he didn’t,” said Wobbler. “He just wrote a book called, oh,
something like It’s About Time There Was a Revolution, and the Russians
just followed the instructions. The actual leaders were a lot of people
with names ending in ski.”

“Like Stalin,” said Yo-less.

“Right.”

“Stalin means Man of Steel,” said Yo-less. “I read where he didn’t like
his real name, so he changed it. It’s Man of Steel in English.”

“What was his real name?”

“His secret identity, you mean,” said Yo-less.

“What are you talking about now?” said Bigmac.

“No, I get it. Man of Steel? Yo-less means he could leap Kremlins in a
single bound,” said Johnny.

“Don’t see why not,” said Wobbler. “I always thought it was unfair, the
way the Americans got Superman. They’ve got all the superheroes. I don’t
see why we couldn’t have had Superman around here.”

They thought about it. Wobbler then spoke for them all. “Mind you,” he
said, “around here he would have had trouble even being Clark Kent.”

They disappeared under the hoods.

“What did you say the Alderman was called?” asked Wobbler after a while.

“Alderman Thomas Bowler,” said Johnny. “Why?”

“It says he got the Council to build a memorial horse trough in the
square in nineteen hundred and five,” said Wobbler. “It came in useful
very quickly, too, it says here.”

“Why?”

“Well…it says here, the next day the first motorcar ever to arrive in
Blackbury crashed into it and caught fire. They used the water to put
the fire out. Says here the Council praised Alderman Bowler for his
forward thinking.”

They looked at the microfilm viewer.

“What’s a horse trough?” said Bigmac.

“It’s that big stone trough thing that’s outside Loggitt and Burnett’s
Building Society,” said Johnny. “The one that’s been filled with soil
for a tasteful display of dead flowers and beer cans. They used to put
water in those things for coach horses to drink out of.”

“But if cars were just coming in,” said Bigmac slowly, “then building
things for horses to drink out of was a bit—”

“Yes,” said Johnny. “I know. Come on. Let’s keep going.”

 

 

 

…WHEEEsssh…we built this city on…ssshshhh…on the phone right
now…wheeesshhh…that was at Number Two…ssshwupwup…told a meeting in
Kiev…wsswssshsss…Prime Minister…shsss…today…shhssss…scaramouche, can
you…shsssss…

The tuning knob of the little radio behind Mr. Vicenti’s grave turned
back and forth very slowly, as if it was being moved with great effort.
Occasionally it would stop on a program, then move again.

…ssshhhwwwss…and the next caller…shhwwsss…Babylon…

And around it, for quite some distance, the air was cold.

 

 

 

In the library, the boys read on. Silence surrounded them. The Assistant
Information Officers grew worried, and one of them went to find the
cleaning fluid and the bent paper clip for getting chocolate out of
keyboards.

“Let’s face it,” said Wobbler eventually, “this is a town where famous
people don’t come from. It’s famous for it.”

“It says here,” said Yo-less from his viewer, “that Addison Vincent
Fletcher of Alma Terrace invented a form of telephone in nineteen
twenty-two.”

“Oh, great,” said Wobbler. “Telephones had been invented years before
that.”

“It says he said this one was better.”

“Oh, yes,” said Wobbler. He dialed an imaginary number. “Hello, is
that—Who invented the real telephone, anyone?”

“Thomas Edison,” said Yo-less.

“Sir Humphrey Telephone,” said Bigmac.

“Alexander Graham Bell,” said Johnny. “Sir Humphrey Telephone?”

“Hello, Mr. Bell,” said Wobbler, speaking into an imaginary mouthpiece.
“You know that telephone you invented years ago? Well, mine’s better.
And I’m just off to discover America. Yes, I know Christopher Columbus
discovered it first, but I’m discovering it better.”

“It makes sense,” said Bigmac. “If you’re going to discover somewhere,
you might as well wait until there’s proper hotels and stuff.”

“When did Columbus discover America, anyway?” said Wobbler.

“Fourteen ninety-two,” said Johnny. “There’s a rhyme: In fourteen
hundred and ninety-two, Columbus sailed the ocean blue.”

Wobbler and Bigmac looked at him.

“Actually, he could have got there in fourteen ninety-one,” said
Yo-less, without looking up, “but he had to sail around a bit because no
one could think up a rhyme for ‘one.’”

“It could have been Sir Humphrey Telephone,” said Bigmac. “Stuff gets
named after inventors.”

“They didn’t name the telephone after Bell,” said Wobbler.

“They named the bell after Bell, though,” said Bigmac. “Telephone bells.
Proves my point.”

“Telephones haven’t had bells on for years,” said Wobbler.

“That,” said Yo-less, “is due to the famous invention by Fred Buzzer.”

“I think it’s impossible for anyone famous to come from here,” said
Wobbler, “because everyone around here is insane.”

“Got one,” said Bigmac, turning the microfiche knob.

“Who? Which one?”

“The footballer. Stanley ‘Wrong Way’ Roundway. He played for the
Blackbury Wanderers. There’s his obituary here. Amost half a page.”

“Any good?”

“Says he scored a record number of goals.”

“Sounds good,” said Wobbler.

“Own goals.”

“What?”

“Greatest number of own goals in the history of any sport, it says. It
says he kept getting overexcited and losing his sense of direction.”

“Oh.”

“But he was a good footballer, it says. Apart from that. Not exactly a
Hall of Fame, though—”

“Here, look at this,” said Yo-less.

They clustered around his viewer. He’d found an ancient group photograph
of about thirty soldiers, all beaming at the camera.

“Well?” said Wobbler.

“This is from nineteen sixteen,” said Yo-less. “They’re all going off to
war.”

“Which one?” said Wobbler.

“The first one, you nerd. World War One.”

“I always wondered why they numbered it,” said Bigmac. “Like they
expected to have a few more. You know. Like Buy Two, Get One Free.”

“Says here,” Yo-less squinted—“it’s the Blackbury Old Pals Battalion.
They’re just going off to fight. They all joined up at the same time….”

Johnny stared. He could hear people’s voices, and the background noises
of the library. But the picture looked as if it was at the bottom of a
dark, square tunnel. And he was falling down it.

Things outside the picture were inky and slow. The picture was the
center of the world.

Johnny looked at the grinning faces, the terrible haircuts, the
jug-handle ears, the thumbs all up.

Even today nearly everyone in the Blackbury Guardian had their photo
taken with their thumb up, unless they’d won Super Bingo, in which case
they were shown doing what the photographer thought was a high kick. The
newspaper’s one photographer was known as Jeremy the Thumb.

The people in the picture didn’t look much older than Bigmac. Well, a
couple of them did. There was a sergeant with a mustache like a
scrubbing brush, and an officer in jodhpurs, but the rest of them looked
like a school photo.

And now he was coming back from wherever he’d been. The picture dropped
away again, became just an oblong on a page on a screen. He blinked.

There was a feeling, like—

—like on an airplane when it’s about to land, and his ears went “pop.”
But it was happening with his brain, instead.

“Anyone know what the Somme is?” said Yo-less.

“No.”

“That’s where they went, anyway. Some place in France.”

“Any of them win any medals?” said Johnny, struggling back into the real
world. “That’d be famous. If there’s someone in the cemetery with a lot
of medals.”

Yo-less spun the wheels of the viewer.

“I’ll look ahead a few issues,” he said. “There’s bound to be something
if—Hey…look at this….”

They all tried to get under the hood at once. Silence came back as they
realized what he’d found.

I knew it was important, Johnny thought. What’s happening to me?

“Wow,” said Wobbler. “I mean—all those names…everyone killed in this big
battle…”

Without saying anything, Johnny ducked into the other reader and wound
it backward until he found the cheery photograph.

“Are they listed in alphabetical order?” he said.

“Yes,” said Yo-less.

“I’ll read out the names under the photo, then. Um…Armitage, K…Atkins,
T…”

“Yes…no…” said Yo-less.

“Sergeant Atterbury, F…”

“Yes.”

“Hey, there’s three from Canal Street,” said Wobbler. “That’s where my
gran lives!”

“Blazer…Constantine…Fraser…Frobisher…”

“Yes…yes…yes…yes…”

They went on to the end of the caption.

“They all died,” said Johnny eventually. “Four weeks after the picture
was taken. All of them.”

“Except for Atkins, T.,” said Yo-less. “It says here what a Pals’
Battalion was. It says people all from one town or even one street could
all join the army together if they wanted, and all get sent to…the same
place.”

“I wonder if they all got there?” said Yo-less. “Eventually,” he added.

“That’s dreadful,” said Bigmac.

“It probably sounded like a good idea at the time. Sort of…jolly.”

“Yes, but…four weeks…” said Bigmac. “I mean…”

“You’re always saying you can’t wait to join the army,” said Wobbler.
“You said you were sorry the Gulf War was over. And all the legs of your
bed are off the ground because of all them copies of Guns and Ammo
underneath it.”

“Well…yeah…war, yeah,” said Bigmac. “Proper fighting, with M16s and
stuff. Not just all going off grinning and getting shot.”

“They all marched off together because they were friends, and got
killed,” said Yo-less.

They stared at the little square of light with the names on it, and the
long, long line of cheery thumbs.

“Except for Atkins, T.,” said Johnny. “I wonder what happened to him.”

“It was nineteen sixteen,” said Yo-less. “If he’s still alive, he’ll be
dead.”

“Any of them on your list?” asked Wobbler.

Johnny checked.

“No-oo,” he said, eventually. “There’s one or two people with the same
name but the wrong initial. Everyone around here used to get buried up
there.”

“Perhaps he came back from the war and moved away somewhere else,” said
Yo-less.

“It’d be a bit lonely around here, after all,” said Bigmac.

They looked at him.

“Sorry,” he said.

“I’m fed up with this,” said Wobbler, pushing his chair back. “It’s not
real. There’s no one special in there. “It’s just people. And it’s
creepy. Come on—let’s go down to the mall.”

“I’ve found out what happens to dead bodies when old graveyards are
built on,” said Yo-less, as they stepped out into the Tupperware
daylight. “My mum knows. They get taken to some kind of storage place
called a necropolis. That’s Latin for City of the Dead.”

“Yuck,” said Wobbler.

“Sounds like where Superman lives,” said Bigmac. “Necropolis!” said
Wobbler, zooming his hands through the air. “By day, mild-mannered
corpse—by night…duh duh duhduh DAH…ZombieMan!”

Johnny remembered the grinning young faces, not much older than Wobbler.

“Wobbler,” he said, “if you make another joke like that—”

“What?”

“…well…just don’t. Right? I mean it.”

 

 

 

…ssshhhh…mean, yo, youknowhatI’msayin’?…sipsipsip…told the government
that…sswwwsss…fact the whales enjoy being hunted, Bob, and…whh–wwwhhhhh…

Click!

“So that’s wireless telegraphy, is it? Hah! So much for Countess Alice
Radioni!”

“I was an Ovalteenie when I was a little boy. That was during the war.
The one against the Germans. Did I ever tell you? We used to sing along
with the people on the wireless: ‘We are the Ov—’ WHAT? Who was Countess
Alice Radioni?”

“Which war against the Germans?”

“What? How many have we had?”

“Two so far.”

“Now, come ON! Radioni? It was Marconi who invented the radio!”

“Hah! And do you know who he stole the idea from?”

“Who cares who invented the wretched thing? Will you listen to what the
living are doing?”

“Plotting to steal our cemetery, that is what they are doing!”

“Yes, but…I didn’t know that all this was going on, did you? All this
music and…the things they were talking about! Who is Shakespeare’s
Sister and why is she singing on the wireless? What is a Batman? And
they said the last prime minister was a woman! That can’t be possible.
Women can’t even vote.”

“Yes, they can.”

“Hurrah!”

“Well, they couldn’t in MY time!”

“There’s so much we don’t know!”

“So why don’t we find out?”

The dead fell silent—or rather, more silent than usual.

“How?”

“The man on the wireless said you can ring the wireless station on the
telephone to Discuss Problems That Affect Us All Today. A Phone-Ing
Program, he said.”

“Well?”

“There’s a phone booth out in the street.”

“Yes, but…that’s…outside…”

“Not far outside.”

“Yes, but…”

“The little boy stood in front of us and talked to us. And he was so
frightened. And we can’t walk six feet?”

The speaker was Mr. Vicenti. He looked through the crumbling railings to
the street outside with the eye of a man who’d spent much of his life
escaping.

“But this is our PLACE! This is where we BELONG!”

“It’s only a few steps….”

 

 

 

It wasn’t really much of a mall. But it was all there was to hang out
in.

Johnny had seen films of American shopping malls. They must have
different sorts of people in America, he’d thought. They all looked
cool, all the girls were beautiful, and the place wasn’t crowded with
little kamikaze grandmothers. Or mothers with seven children. Or
Blackbury United football fans walking ten abreast singing the famous
football song, “URRRurrrUH!” (clap-clapclap). You couldn’t hang out
properly in a place like that. All you could do was hang on.

The four of them hung on in the burger bar. Yo-less carefully read the
pamphlet about how no rainforests were chopped down to make beefburgers.
Bigmac had his favorite Megajumbo Fries with fifteen packets of relish.

“Wonder if I could get a job here,” said Wobbler.

“No chance,” said Bigmac. “The manager’d take one look at you and see
where the profits would go.”

“You saying I’m fat?” said Wobbler.

“Gravitationally challenged,” said Yo-less, without looking up.

“Enhanced,” said Bigmac.

Wobbler’s lips moved as he tried these out. “I’d rather be fat,” he
said. “Can I finish up your onion rings?”

“Anyway, there’s loads of people who want jobs here,” said Bigmac. “You
have to have a degree.”

“What, just to make burgers?”

“No other jobs around,” said Bigmac. “They’re shutting all the factories
around here. Nothing to do. No one’s making anything anymore.”

“Someone’s making something,” said Wobbler. “What about all the stuff in
the shops?”

“That’s all made in Taiwanaland or somewhere. Hah! What sort of future
are we going to have, eh? That’s right, eh? Johnny?”

“What?”

“You’ve just been staring at nothing the whole time, you know that?”

“Yeah, what’s happened?” said Wobbler. “Some dead people come in for
takeout?”

“No,” said Johnny.

“What’re you thinking about, then?”

“Thumbs,” said Johnny, still staring at the wall.

“What?”

“What?” said Johnny, waking up.

“What about thumbs?”

“Oh…nothing.”

“My mother said last night that there’s a lot of people angry about the
cemetery being sold,” said Yo-less. “Everyone’s moaning about it. And
Pastor William says anyone who builds on there will be cursed unto the
seventh generation.”

“Yes, but he always says that kind of thing,” said Wobbler. “Anyway,
United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings probably don’t worry about that
sort of thing. They’ve probably got a Vice-President in Charge of Being
Cursed.”

“And he probably gets his secretary to deal with it,” said Bigmac.

“It won’t stop anything, anyway,” said Yo-less. “There’s bulldozers just
the other side of the fence.”

“Anyone know what does United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings do?”
said Wobbler.

“It said in the paper that they’re a multinational information-retrieval
and enhancement facility,” said Yo-less. “It said on the news it’ll
provide three hundred jobs.”

“For all the people who used to work at the old rubber boot factory?”
said Bigmac.

Yo-less shrugged. “That’s how it goes,” he said. “You all right,
Johnny?”

“What?”

“You okay? You’re staring at the wall.”

“What? Oh. Yeah. I’m okay.”

“He’s upset about the dead soldiers,” said Wobbler.

Yo-less leaned across the table.

“Look…that’s all in the past, right? It’s just gone. It’s a shame they
died but…well…they’d be dead anyway, wouldn’t they? It’s just history.
It has nothing to do with…well, with now.”

 

 

 

Mrs. Ivy Witherslade was talking to her sister in the phone booth on
Cemetery Road when someone knocked impatiently on the glass, and that
was odd, because there was no one there. But she felt very cold and
suddenly uneasy, as though she was walking on someone’s grave. She
stopped telling her sister about her legs and what the doctor said about
them, and went home quickly.

If Johnny had been there, he would have heard what happened next. But he
wasn’t, so everyone else would have just heard the wind, and perhaps,
just perhaps, the faintest of arguments:

“You should know, Mr. Fletcher. YOU invented it.”

“Actually, that was Alexander Graham Bell, Mrs. Liberty. I just improved
upon it.”

“Well…make it work. Let me speak to the man on the wireless machine.”

“Was it really Alexander Graham Bell?”

“Yes, Alderman.”

“I thought it was Sir Humphrey Telephone.”

The telephone stayed on its hook, but there were a few electric crackles
and pops from somewhere in the machinery.

“I think I have mastered the intricacies, Mrs. Liberty—”

“Let ME do the talking. The people’s voice must be heard!”

Frost was forming on the inside of the telephone booth.

“Certainly not. You are a Bolshevik!”

“What did Sir Humphrey Telephone invent, then?”

“Mr. Fletcher! Be so good as to expedite the electric communication!”

 

 

 

When there wasn’t the burger bar to hang out in, and when they weren’t
allowed in J& J Software because of whatever Wobbler’s latest crime was,
there was only the fountain area with the sad, dying trees in it or the
Groovy Sounds record store, which was pretty much like any record store
would be if it was called Groovy Sounds.

Anyway, Yo-less wanted to buy a tape for his collection.

“Famous British Brass Bands,” said Wobbler, looking over his shoulder.

“Yes, but this is a good one,” said Yo-less. “It’s got the old Blackbury
Rubber Boot Factory Band playing ‘The Floral Dance.’ Very famous piece.”

“You’re just basically not black, are you?” said Wobbler. “I’m going to
report you to the Rastafarians.”

“You like reggae and blues,” said Yo-less.

“That’s different.”

Johnny listlessly shuffled through the tapes.

And froze.

There was a voice he recognized. It was crackly with static, but it
sounded a lot like Mrs. Sylvia Liberty, and it was coming over the
radio.

The radio was on the counter, tuned to Wonderful Radio Blackbury’s Mike
Mikes Radio Show, which was as excellent and totally bodacious as two
hours of phone-ins and traffic reports from the Blackbury bypass could
be.

This time it was different. The phone-in had been about the Council’s
proposal to knock down the old Fish Market, which was going to happen no
matter what anyone said, but it was a good subject for people to moan
about.

“Well, what I say is Hello? Hello? This is Mrs. Sylvia Liberty speaking
on the electric telephone! Hello? not to be allowed, er, in my opinion,
er, it is totally Hello? (click…fizz…crackle) I demand to be heard this
INSTANT! The Fish Market is of NO importance whatsoever! er…er…and…”

In his little studio on top of the Blackbury and Slate Insurance
Society, Mike Mikes stared at his engineer, who stared at his
switchboard. There was no way of cutting off the intrusive voice. It was
coming in on all telephone lines at once.

“Er, hi,” he said. “The caller on…er…all the lines…”

“Here, someone’s You listen to me, young man! And don’t cut me off to
start playing any more of your phonograph cylinders! crossed line here,
Mike, I Do you realize that innocent citizens are being EVICTED
(click…garble…whirr…fizz) many years of VALUED service to the community
(wheeeowwwwwh…crackle) merely because of an ACCIDENT of birth
(fizzle…whipwhip-whip…crackle) you listen to young Johnn (snap…fizz…)
The People’s Shroud Is Deepest Black (wheeeyooowwww…pop) We’re Coming
BACK…stop that this minute, William, you are nothing but a Bolshevik
agit—”

But no one heard the rest of the sentence because the engineer had
pulled all the plugs and hit the switchboard with a hammer.

Johnny and his friends had gathered around the radio.

“You get some real loonies on these phone-ins,” said Wobbler. “You ever
listen to Mad Jim’s Late-Night Explosion?”

“He’s not mad,” said Yo-less. “He just says he is. And all he does is
play old records and go ‘yeah!’ and ‘yowzahyowzah!’ a lot. That’s not
mad. That’s just pathetic.”

“Yes,” said Wobbler.

“Yes,” said Bigmac.

“Yes,” said Yo-less.

They all looked at Johnny. They all looked like people with something on
their minds.

“Ahem,” said Wobbler.

“Er,” said Bigmac.

“That was them, was it?” said Yo-less.

“Yes,” said Johnny. “It was them.”

“It didn’t sound like normal radio. How can they use the phone?”

“I don’t know. I suppose some of them knew how to use the phone when
they were alive. And maybe being dead’s a bit like…electricity or
something.”

“They nearly said your name,” said Wobbler.

“Yes.”

“Who was that one singing?”

“I think it was William Stickers. He’s a bit of a communist.”

“I didn’t think there were any communists left these days,” said
Yo-less.

“There aren’t. And he’s one of them.”

“You know, any minute now Rod Serling is going to come walking in here
with a big book,” said Bigmac. “You know. Like in The Twilight Zone.”

“How come they know what’s on the radio?” said Yo-less.

“I lent them Granddad’s transistor.”

“You know what I think?” said Yo-less. “I think you’ve started
something.”

“That’s what I think, too.”

“Nah!” said Wobbler. “Come on! Voices on the radio? I mean! That’s just
mucking about. Could be anything. Kids ringing up and messing about. Oh,
come on! Ghosts don’t phone up radio stations!”

“I saw this film once where they came out of the telephone,” said
Bigmac, winner of the All-Blackbury Mr. Tactful Championship.

“Just you shut up! I don’t believe you!”

 

 

 

It was very, very chilly inside the phone box.

“I must say, electricity is very easy to master when you’re dead.”

“What are you doing, Mr. Fletcher?”

“Very easy indeed. Who shall we talk to next?”

“We must speak to the Town Hall!”

“But it is a Saturday, Mrs. Liberty. There will be no one there.”

“Then try to find young Johnny. I don’t know what he means about trying
to find famous people buried in the cemetery. WE’RE here, after all.”

“I’ll keep trying. It’s amazingly easy to understand.”

“Where’s Mr. Stickers gone?”

“He’s trying to listen to Radio Moscow, whatever that is. On the
wireless telegraphy apparatus.”

“I say, this is rather invigorating, you know. I’ve never been out of
the cemetery before.”

“Yes. It’s a new lease on life.”

“You can escape from almost anything,” said Mr. Vicenti.

There was a faint cough. They looked around. Mr. Grimm was watching them
through the railings.

The dead seemed to sober up. They always became more serious in front of
Mr. Grimm.

They shuffled their spectral feet.

“You’re outside,” said Mr. Grimm. “You know that’s wrong.”

“Only a little way, Eric,” said the Alderman. “That can’t do any harm.
It’s for the good of the—”

“It’s WRONG.”

“We don’t have to listen to him,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“You’ll get into terrible trouble,” said Mr. Grimm.

“No we won’t,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“It’s dabbling with the Known,” said Mr. Grimm. “You’ll get into
dreadful trouble and it won’t be my fault. You are bad people.”

He turned, and walked back to his grave.

“Dial the number,” said Mr. Vicenti. The others seemed to wake up.

“You know,” said Mrs. Liberty, “he may have a point—”

“Forget about Mr. Grimm,” said Mr. Vicenti. He opened his hands. A white
dove shot out of his sleeve and perched on the phone booth, blinking.
“Dial the number, Mr. Fletcher.”

 

 

 

“Hello, directory inquiries, what name please?”

“He’s called Johnny Maxwell and he lives in Blackbury.”

“I’m afraid that is not sufficient information—”

“That’s all we—” (Listen, I can see how it works, there’s a connection—)
(How many of us are there in here?) (Can I try, please?) (This is a lot
better than those séances.)

The operator rubbed her headset. For some reason, her ear had gone cold.

“Ow!”

She ripped the headset off.

The operator on her right leaned over.

“What’s up, Dawn?”

“It went—it felt—”

They looked at the switchboard. Lights were coming on everywhere, and it
was beginning to be covered in frost.

The point is—

—that all through history there have been people who couldn’t invent
things because the rest of the world wasn’t ready. Leonardo da Vinci
didn’t have the motors or materials to make his helicopter. Sir George
Cayley invented the internal combustion engine before anyone else had
invented gasoline. *

And in his life Addison Vincent Fletcher had spent long hours with
motors and relays and glowing valves and bits of wire, pursuing a dream
the world didn’t even have a name for yet.

In his phone booth, dead Mr. Fletcher laughed. It had a name now. He
knew exactly what a computer was when he saw one.


FIVE

 

Johnny went home. He didn’t dare go back to the cemetery.

It was Saturday evening. He’d forgotten about the Visit.

“You’ve got to come,” said his mother. “You know she likes to see you.”

“No she doesn’t,” said Johnny. “She forgets who I am. She calls me
Peter. I mean, that’s my dad’s name. And the place smells of old ladies.
Anyway, why doesn’t Granddad ever come? She’s his wife.”

“He says he likes to remember her as she was,” said his mother.
“Besides, it’s Markie and Mo’s Saturday Spectacular. You know he doesn’t
like to miss it.”

“Oh…all right.”

“We don’t have to stay long.”

 

 

 

About ten minutes after Johnny had gone, the phone rang. Granddad dealt
with it in his normal way, which was to shout “Phone!” while not taking
his eyes off the screen. But it went on ringing. Eventually, grumbling
and losing the remote control down the side of the cushion, where it
wouldn’t be found for two days, he got up and shuffled out into the
hall.

“Yes? He’s not here. Gone out. Who? Well, I’ll…is it? Never! Still doing
the conjuring tricks, are you? Haven’t seen you about the town much
lately. No. Right. That’s right. I don’t get out much myself these days.
How are you, yourself? Dead. I see. But you’ve got out to use the
telephone. It’s wonderful, what they can do with science. You sound a
long way off. Right. You are a long way off. I remember that trick you
used to do with the handcuffs and the chains and—well, nearly did. Yes.
Yes. Right. I’ll tell him. Nice to hear from you. Good-bye.”

He went back and settled down in front of the TV again.

After a few minutes a small worried frown crossed his face. He got up
and went and glared at the telephone for a while.

 

 

 

It wasn’t that Sunshine Acres was a bad place. As far as Johnny could
see, it was clean enough and the staff seemed okay. There were bright
murals on the walls and a big tank of goldfish in the TV room.

But it was more gloomy than the cemetery. It was the way everyone
shuffled around quietly, and sat waiting at the table for the next meal
hours before it was due, because there wasn’t anything else to do. It
was as if life had stopped and being dead hadn’t started, so all there
was to do was hang around.

His grandmother spent a lot of time watching TV in the main lounge, or
watching her begonias in her room. At least, his grandmother’s body did.

He was never certain where her mind was, except that it was often far
away and long ago.

After a while he got even more depressed at the conversation between his
mother and his grandmother, which was exactly the same as the one last
week and the week before that, and did what he always did, which was
wander out into the corridor.

He mooched toward the door that led out into the garden, staring vaguely
at nothing.

They never told you about this ghost stuff at school. Sometimes the
world was so weird, you didn’t know where to start, and social studies
and general math weren’t a lot of help.

Why didn’t this sort of thing happen to anyone else? It wasn’t as if he
went looking for it. He just tried to keep his head down, just tried to
be someone at the back of the crowd. But somehow everything was more
complicated than it was for anyone else.

The thing was…

Mr. T. Atkins.

He probably wouldn’t have noticed it, except that the name was in the
back of his mind.

It was written on a little curling piece of paper stuck in a frame on
one of the doors.

He stared at it.

It filled the whole world, just for a second or two.

Well, there could be lots of Atkinses….

He’d never find out unless he knocked, though…would he?…

“Open the door, will you, love? M’hands are full.”

There was a large black woman behind him, her arms full of sheets.
Johnny nodded mutely and turned the handle.

The room was more or less bare. There was certainly no one else there.

“I see you come up here every week to see your gran,” said the nurse,
dumping the sheets on the bare bed. “You’re a good boy to come see her.”

“Uh. Yes.”

“What was it you were wanting?”

“Uh. I thought I’d…you know…drop in to have a chat with Mr. Atkins? Uh.”
Inspiration seized him. “I’m doing a project at school. About the
Blackbury Pals.”

A project! You could get away with anything if you said you were doing a
project.

“Who were they then, dear?”

“Oh…some soldiers. Mr. Atkins was one of them, I think. Uh…where…?”

“Well, he passed away yesterday, dear. Nearly ninety-seven, I think he
was. Did you know him?”

“Not…really.”

“He was here for years. He was a nice old man. He used to say that when
he died, the war’d be over. It was his joke. He used to show us his old
army pay book. ‘Tommy Atkins,’ he’d say. ‘I’m the one, I’m the boy, when
I’m gone it’s all over.’ He used to laugh about that.”

“What did he mean?”

“Don’t know, dear. I just used to smile. You know how it is.”

The nurse smoothed out the new sheets and pulled a cardboard box from
under the bed.

“This was his stuff,” she said. She gave him an odd look. “I expect it’s
all right for you to see. No one ever visited him, except a man from the
British Legion regular as clockwork every Christmas, God bless them.
They’ve asked for his medals, you know. But I expect it’s all right for
you to have a look. If it’s a project.”

Johnny peered into the box while the nurse bustled around the room.

There were a few odds and ends—a pipe, a tobacco tin, a huge old
penknife. There was a scrapbook full of sepia postcards of flowers and
fields of cabbages and simpering French ladies dressed in what someone
must once have thought was a very daring way. Yellowing newspaper
cuttings were stuck between the pages. And there was a small wooden box
lined with toilet paper and containing several medals.

And there was a photograph of the Blackbury Pals, just like the one in
the old newspaper.

Johnny lifted it out very carefully and turned it over. It crackled.

Someone had written, in violet ink, a long time ago, the words: Old
Comrades!!! We’re the Boys, Kaiser Bill! If You Know a Better ’ole, Go
to IT!!

And there were thirty signatures underneath.

Beside twenty-nine of the signatures, in pencil, someone had made a
small cross.

“They all signed it,” he said quietly. “He must have got a copy from the
paper, and they all signed it.”

“What was that, dear?”

“This photo.”

“Oh, yes. He showed it to me once. That was him in the war, you know.”

Johnny turned it over again and found Atkins, T. He looked a bit like
Bigmac, with jug-handle ears and a secondhand haircut. He was grinning.
They all were. All the same kind of grin.

“He used to talk about them a lot,” said the nurse.

“Yes.”

“His funeral’s on Monday. At the crem. One of us always goes, you know.
Well, you have to, don’t you? It’s only right.”

 

 

 

He dreamed, on Saturday night…

He dreamed of Rod Serling walking along Blackbury High Street, but as he
was trying to speak impressively to the camera, Bigmac, Yo-less, and
Wobbler started to peer over his shoulder and say things like, “What’s
this book about, then?” and “Turn over the page, I’ve read this bit….”

He dreamed of thumbs…

And woke up and stared at the ceiling. He still hadn’t replaced the bits
of string that held up the plastic model of the Space Shuttle. It was
forever doing a nosedive.

He was pretty sure other kids didn’t have lives like this. It just kept
on happening. Just when he thought he’d got a grip on the world, and saw
how it all worked, it sprang something new on him, and what he thought
was the whole thing, ticking away nicely, turned out to be just some
kind of joke.

His granddad had mumbled a very odd message when Johnny had arrived
home. As far as he could understand, Wobbler or someone had been making
odd phone calls. His granddad had also muttered something about
conjuring tricks.

He looked at his clock radio. It said 2:45. There was no chance of going
back to sleep. He tried Radio Blackbury.

“—yowzahyowzahyowzah! And the next caller on Uncle Mad Jim’s bodaaacious
Problem Corner iiisss—”

Johnny froze. He had a feeling…

“William Stickers, Mad Jim.”

“Hi, Bill. You sound a bit depressed, to me.”

“It’s worse than that. I’m dead, Jim.”

“Wow! I can see that could be a real downer, Bill. Care to tell us about
it?”

“You sound very understanding, comrade. Well…”

Of course he’s understanding, thought Johnny as he struggled into his
dressing gown. Everyone phones up Mad Jim in the middle of the night.
Last week he talked for twenty minutes to a lady who thought she was a
roll of wallpaper. You sound totally sane compared to most of them.

He snatched up his Walkman and switched on its radio so that he could go
on listening as he ran down the stairs and out into the night.

“—and now I just heard there isn’t even ANY Soviet Union anymore. What
happened?”

“Seems to me you haven’t been keeping up with current events, Bill.”

“I thought I explained about that”.

“Oh, sure. You said. You’ve been dead. But you’re alive again, right?”
Mad Jim’s voice had that little chuckle in it that it always got when
he’d found a real dingdong on the line and could picture all his
insomniac listeners turning up the volume.

“No. Still dead. It’s not something you get better from, Jim. Now—”

Johnny pattered around the corner and sped along John Lennon Avenue.

Mad Jim was saying, in his special dealing-withloonies velvet voice: “So
tell us all out here in the land of the living, Bill—what’s it like,
being dead?”

“Like? LIKE? It is extremely DULL.”

“I’m sure everyone out there would like to know, Bill…are there angels?”

Johnny groaned as he turned the corner into Eden Road.

“Angels? Certainly not!”

Johnny scurried past the silent houses and dodged between the bollards
into Woodville Road.

“Oh, dear,” said Mad Jim in his headset. “I hope there aren’t any
naughty men with pitchforks, then?”

“What on earth are you blathering about, man? There’s just me and old
Tom Bowler and Sylvia Liberty and all the rest of them—”

Johnny lost the thread of things when a sticking-out piece of laurel
hedge knocked his earphones off. When he managed to put them back on, it
turned out that William Stickers had been invited to request a record.

“Don’t think I know ‘The Red Flag,’ Bill. Who’s it by?”

“It’s ‘The Internationale’! The song of the downtrodden masses!”

“Doesn’t fire a neuron, Bill. But for you and all the other dead people
out there everywhere, tonight”—the change in Mad Jim’s tone suggested
that William Stickers had been cut off—“and we’re all dead sooner or
later, ain’t that the truth, here’s one from the vaults by Michael
Jackson…‘Thriller.’”

The streetlamp by the phone booth was alight.

And the little pool of light was all there was to see, unless you were
Johnny….

The dead had spilled out onto the road. They’d managed to drag the radio
with them. Quite a few of them were watching the Alderman.

“This is how you have to do it, apparently,” he said, moonwalking
backward across the frosty street. “Johnny showed me.”

“It is certainly a very interesting syncopated rhythm,” said Mrs.
Liberty. “Like this, you say?”

The ghostly wax cherries on her hat bounced up and down as she twirled.

“That’s right. And apparently you spin around with your arms out and
shout ‘Ow!’” said the Alderman, demonstrating.

Oh no, thought Johnny, hurrying toward them. On top of everything else,
Michael Jackson’s going to sue me—

“Get down and—what was it the man on the wireless said?” said the
Alderman.

“Boogey, I believe.”

They weren’t actually very good at it, but they made up for being eighty
years behind the times by sheer enthusiasm.

In fact, it was a party.

Johnny stuck his hands on his hips.

“You shouldn’t be doing this!”

“Why not?” said a dancing dead.

“It’s the middle of the night!”

“Well? We don’t sleep!”

“I mean, what would your…your descendants think if they could see you
acting like this?”

“Serve them right for not visiting us!”

“We’re making carpets!” shouted Mrs. Liberty.

“Cutting a rung,” corrected one of the dead.

“A rug,” said the Alderman, slowing down a bit. “A rug. Cutting a rug.
That’s what Mr. Benbow, who died in nineteen thirty-one, says it is
called. Getting down and boogeying.”

“It’s been like this all evening,” said Mr. Vicenti. He was sitting on
the pavement. In fact, he was sitting about a foot above the pavement.
“We’ve found some very interesting stations. What exactly is a DJ?”

“A disk jockey,” said Johnny, giving up and sitting down. “He plays the
disks and stuff.”

“Is it some kind of punishment?”

“Quite a lot of people like to do it.”

“How very strange. They are not mentally ill, or anything?”

The song finished. The dancers stopped twirling, but slowly and with
great reluctance.

Mrs. Liberty pushed her hat back. It had tipped over her eyes.

“That was extremely enjoyable,” she said. “Mr. Fletcher! Be so good as
to instruct the man on the wireless to play something more!”

Interested despite himself, Johnny padded over to the phone booth. Mr.
Fletcher was actually kneeling down with his hands inside the telephone.
A couple of other dead people were watching him. One of them was William
Stickers, who didn’t look very happy. The other was an old man with a
mass of white hair in that dandelion-clock style known as Mad Scientist
Afro.

“Oh, it’s you,” said William Stickers. “Call this a world, do you?”

“Me?” said Johnny. “I don’t call it anything.”

“Was that man on the radio making fun of me, do you think?”

“Oh, no,” said Johnny, crossing his fingers.

“Mr. Sticker iz annoyed because he telephoned Moscow,” said the
white-haired man. “They said they’ve had enough revolutions to be going
on viz, but vould like some soap.”

“They’re nothing but dirty capitalists!” said William Stickers.

“But at least they want to be clean capitalists,” said Mr. Fletcher.
“Where shall we try next?”

“Don’t you have to put money in?” said Johnny.

Mr. Fletcher laughed.

“I don’t sink ve’ve met,” said the white-haired man, extending a
slightly transparent hand. “Solomon Einstein (1861–1932).”

“Like Albert Einstein?” said Johnny.

“He vas my distant cousin,” said Solomon Einstein.

“Relatively speaking. Ha ha.”

Johnny got the impression Mr. Einstein had said that line a million
times and still wasn’t tired of it.

“Who’re you ringing up?” said Johnny.

“We’re just having a look at the world,” said Mr. Fletcher. “What are
those things that go around and around in the sky?”

“I don’t know. Frisbees?”

“Mr. Vicenti just remembers them. They go around and around the world.”

“Oh. You mean satellites?”

“Whee!”

“But how do you know how to—”

“I can’t explain. Things are a lot simpler, I think. I can see it all
laid out.”

“All of what?”

“All the cables, all the…the satellites…Not having a body makes them a
lot easier to use, too.”

“What do you mean?”

“For one thing, you don’t have to stay in one place.”

“But I thought you—”

Mr. Fletcher vanished. He reappeared a few seconds later.

“Amazing things,” he said. “My word, but we shall have fun.”

“I don’t underst—”

“Johnny?”

It was Mr. Vicenti.

Someone living had managed to get through to Mad Jim. The dead, with
much laughter, were trying to dance to a country-and-western number.

“What’s going on?” said Johnny. “You said you couldn’t leave the
cemetery!”

“No one has explained this to you? They do not teach you in schools?”

“Well, we don’t get lessons in dealing with ghos—Sorry. Sorry. With dead
people, I mean.”

“We’re not ghosts, Johnny. A ghost is a very sad thing. Oh, dear. It’s
hard to explain things to the living. I was alive once, and I know what
I’m talking about.”

Dead Mr. Vicenti looked at Johnny’s blank face. “We’re…something else,”
he said. “But now that you see us and hear us, you’re making us free.
You’re giving us what we don’t have.”

“What’s that?”

“I can’t explain. But while you’re thinking of us, we’re free.”

“My head doesn’t have to spin around and around, does it?”

“That sounds like a good trick. Can you make it do that?”

“No.”

“Then it won’t.”

“Only I’m a bit worried I’m dabblin’ with the occult.”

It seemed silly to say it, to Mr. Vicenti in his pin-stripe trousers and
little black tie and fresh ghostly carnation every day. Or Mrs. Liberty.
Or the big bearded shape of William Stickers, who would have been Karl
Marx if Karl Marx hadn’t been Karl Marx first.

“Dear me, I hope you’re not dabbling with the occult,” said Mr. Vicenti.
“Father Kearny (1891–1949) wouldn’t like that at all.”

“Who’s Father Kearny?”

“A few moments ago he was dancing with Mrs. Liberty. Oh dear. We do mix
things up, don’t we?”

“Send him away.”

Johnny turned.

One of the dead was still in the cemetery. He was standing right up
against the railings, clasping them like a prisoner might hold the bars
of his cell. He didn’t look a lot different from Mr. Vicenti, except
that he had a pair of glasses. It was amazing that they weren’t melting;
he had the strongest stare Johnny had ever seen. He seemed to be glaring
at Johnny’s left ear.

“Who’s that?” he said.

“Mr. Grimm,” said Mr. Vicenti without looking around.

“Oh, yes. I couldn’t find anything about him in the paper.”

“I’m not surprised,” said Mr. Vicenti in a low and level voice. “In
those days, there were things they didn’t put in.”

“You go away, boy. You’re meddling with things you don’t understand,”
said Mr. Grimm. “You’re imperiling your immortal soul. And theirs. You
go away, you bad boy.”

Johnny stared. Then he looked back at the street, at the dancers and the
scientists around the telephone booth. A bit farther along there was
Stanley Roundway, in shorts that came down to his knees, showing a group
of somewhat older dead how to play football. He had “L” and “R”
stenciled on his football boots.

Mr. Vicenti was staring straight ahead.

“Um—” said Johnny.

“I can’t help you there,” said Mr. Vicenti. “That sort of thing is up to
you.”

He must have walked home. He didn’t really remember. But he woke up in
bed.

 

 

 

Johnny wondered what the dead did on Sundays. Blackbury on Sundays went
through some sort of boredom barrier and out the other side.

Most people did what people traditionally do on Sundays, which was dress
up neatly and get in the car and go for family worship at the
MegasuperSaver Garden Center, just outside the town. There was a kind of
tide of potted plants that were brought back to get killed off by the
central heating in time for next week’s visit.

And the mall was locked up. There wasn’t even anywhere to hang around.

“The point about being dead in this town,” said Wobbler, as they mooched
along the towpath, “is that it’s probably hard to tell the difference.”

“Did anyone hear the radio last night?” said Johnny.

No one had. He felt a bit relieved.

“When I grow up,” said Wobbler, “I’m going to be out of here like a
shot. Just you watch. That’s what this place is. It’s a place to come
from. It’s not a place to stay.”

“Where’re you going to go, then?” said Johnny.

“There’s a huge big world out there!” said Wobbler. “Mountains! America!
Australia! Tons of places!”

“You told me the other day you’d probably get a job working at your
uncle’s place,” said Bigmac.

“Yes…well…I mean, all those places’ll be there, won’t they, for when I
get time to go,” said Wobbler.

“I thought you were going to be a big man in computers,” said Yo-less.

“I could be. I could be. If I wanted.”

“If there’s a miracle and you pass math and English, you mean,” said
Bigmac.

“I’m just more practically gifted,” said Wobbler.

“You mean you just press keys until something happens.”

“Well? Often things do happen.”

“I’m going to join the army,” said Bigmac. “The Marines.”

“Huh. The flat feet and the asthma will be a big help there, then,” said
Wobbler. “I can just see they’ll want you to limp out and wheeze on
terrorists.”

“I’m pretty certain I want to get a law degree and a medical degree,”
said Yo-less, to keep the peace.

“That’s good. That way they won’t be able to sue you if you chop the
wrong bits off,” said Bigmac.

No one really lost their temper. This was all part of hanging around.

“What about you?” said Wobbler. “What do you want to be?”

“Dunno,” said Johnny.

“Didn’t you go to the careers evening last week?”

Johnny nodded. It had been full of Great Futures. There was a Great
Future in retail marketing. There was a Great Future in wholesale
distribution. There was a Great Future in the armed forces, a l t h o u
g h probably not for Bigmac, who’d been allowed to hold a machine gun
and had dropped it on his foot. But Johnny couldn’t find a Great Future
with any future in it. “What I want to be,” he said, “is something they
haven’t got a name for yet.”

“Oh, yeah?” said Wobbler. “Like, in two years’ time someone’s going to
invent the Vurglesplat, and when they start looking around for
Vurglesplat operators, you’re going to be first in line, right?”

They went through the cemetery. The others, without saying anything,
bunched up slightly. But there were no dead people around.

“You can’t just hang around waiting for Great Futures—that’s the point,”
Johnny murmured.

“Hey,” said Yo-less in a dismally jolly voice, “my mum says why don’t
you guys come to church tonight?”

“It won’t work,” said Wobbler after a while. “You say that every week.”

“She says it’d be good for you. Especially Simon.”

“Simon?” said Wobbler.

“Me,” said Bigmac.

“She says you need looking after,” said Yo-less.

“I didn’t know you were called Simon,” said Wobbler.

Bigmac sighed. He had “Blackbury Skins” on his T-shirt, a suede haircut,
great big boots, great big suspenders, and LOVE and HAT in ink on his
knuckles, * but for some reason Yo-less’s mum thought he needed a proper
home. Bigmac lived in dread that Bazza and Skazz, the only other Skins
in Blackbury, would find out and confiscate his official suspenders.

“She said you’re all growing up heathens,” said Yo-less.

“Well, I’m going to a funeral at the crem tomorrow,” said Johnny.
“That’s almost church.”

“Anyone important?” said Wobbler.

“I’m not sure,” said Johnny.

 

 

 

Johnny was amazed that so many people had come to Thomas Atkins’s
funeral, but that was because they’d really come to the one before it.
All there was for Atkins’s was himself and a stiff-looking old man in a
blazer from the British Legion and the nurse from Sunshine Acres. And
the vicar, who did his best but had never met Tommy Atkins so had to put
together his sermon out of a sort of kit of Proper Things to Say. And
then some recorded organ music. And that was it.

The chapel smelled of new wood and floor polish.

The three others kept looking at Johnny in an embarrassed way, as if
they felt he shouldn’t be there but didn’t know exactly how to put it.

He heard a faint sound behind him, just as the recorded music started
up.

He turned around, and there were the dead, seated in rows. The Alderman
had taken his hat off and was sitting stiffly at attention. Even William
Stickers had tried to look respectable. Solomon Einstein’s hair stood
out like a halo.

The nurse was talking to the man in the blazer. Johnny leaned back so
that he could speak to Mr. Fletcher.

“Why are you here?” he whispered.

“It’s allowed,” said Mr. Fletcher. “We used to go to all the funerals in
the cemetery. Help them settle in. Make them welcome. It’s always a bit
of a shock.”

“Oh.”

“And…seeing as you were here…we thought we’d see if we could make it.
Mr. Vicenti said it was worth a try. We’re getting better at it!”

The nurse handed Tommy Atkins’s box to the British Legion man and walked
out, waving at Johnny uncertainly as she went past. And then the vicar
ushered the man through another door, giving Johnny another funny look.

Outside, the October sun was shining weakly, but it was managing to
shine. Johnny went outside and waited.

Eventually the man came out, holding two boxes this time.

“Uh,” said Johnny, standing up. “Um.”

“Yes, lad? The lady from the Home said you’re doing a project for
school.”

Doing a project. It was amazing. If Saddam Hussein had said he was doing
a school project, he’d have found life a lot easier….

“Um, yes. Uh. Can I ask you some stuff?”

“Of course, yes.” The man sat down heavily on one of the benches. He
walked with a limp and sat with one leg stretched out straight in front
of him. Johnny was surprised to see that he was probably as old as
Granddad, but he had that dried-out, suntanned look of a man who keeps
himself fit and is probably still going to be captain of the bowling
club when he’s eighty.

“Well…when Mr. Atkins said…” Johnny began. “I mean, he used to say that
he was ‘the one.’ I know about the Blackbury Pals. I know they all got
killed except him. But I don’t think that’s what he meant….”

“You know about the Pals, do you? How?”

“Read it in an old newspaper.”

“Oh. But you don’t know about Tommy Atkins?”

“Well, yes, he—”

“No, I mean Tommy Atkins. I meant, why he was so proud of the name. What
the name meant?”

“I don’t understand that,” said Johnny.

“What do they teach you in school these days?”

Johnny didn’t answer. He could tell it wasn’t really a question.

“You see—in the Great War, the First World War…when a new recruit joined
the army, he had to fill in his pay book, yes? You know? Name and
address and that sort of thing? And to help them do it, the army did a
kind of guide to how to fill it in, and on the guide, where it said
name, they put: Thomas Atkins. It was just a name. Just to show them
that’s where their name should be. Like: John Smith. But it…well, it
became a sort of joke. Tommy Atkins came to mean the average soldier—”

“Like the man in the street?”

“Yes…very much like that. It was a nickname for a soldier, I do know
that. Tommy Atkins—the British Tommy.”

“So…in a way…all soldiers were Tommy Atkins?”

“Yes. I suppose you could put it like that. Of course, that’s a rather
fanciful way of—”

“But he was a real person. He smoked a pipe and everything.”

“Well, I suppose the army used it because they thought it was a common
sort of name. So there was bound to be a real Tommy Atkins somewhere. I
know he was very proud of his name. I do know that.”

“Was he the last man alive who fought in the war?”

“Oh, no. Good heavens, no. But he was the last one from around here,
that’s for certain. The last of the Pals.”

Johnny felt a change in the air.

“He was a strange old boy. I used to go and see him every year at—”

There was a noise that might be made if a handful of silence was
stretched thin and then plucked, like a guitar string.

Johnny looked around. Now there were three people sitting on the bench.

Tommy Atkins had his peaked hat on his knees. The uniform didn’t really
fit. He was still an old man, so his skinny neck stuck out of his collar
like a tortoise’s. He had an old-fashioned sort of face—one designed to
wear a cloth cap and work in the rubber boot factory. He saw Johnny
staring at him, and winked, and gave him the thumbs-up sign. Then he
went back to gazing intently at the road leading into the parking lot.

Behind Johnny the dead filed quietly out of the building, the older ones
coming through the wall, the younger ones still using the door out of
habit. They didn’t say anything. They just stood and looked expectantly
toward the main road.

Where, marching through the cars, were the Blackbury Pals.


SIX

 

The Pals swung up the road, keeping perfectly in step.

None of them were old. They all looked like their photograph.

But then, Tommy Atkins didn’t look old anymore. It was a young man who
got to his feet, marched out into the parking lot, turned, and saluted
Johnny and the dead.

Then, as the Pals strode past, he stepped neatly into the gap they’d
left for him. All thirty men wheeled about and marched away.

The dead streamed after them. They appeared to walk slowly while at the
same time moving very fast, so that, in a few seconds, the parking lot
was empty even of its ghosts.

“He’s going back to France,” said Johnny. Suddenly he felt quite
cheerful, even though he could feel the tears running down his face.

The British Legion man, who had been talking, stopped.

“What?” he said.

“Tommy Atkins. He’s going back.”

“How did you know that?”

Johnny realized he’d been talking aloud.

“Uh—”

The British Legion man relaxed.

“I expect the lady from the Home told you, did she? He mentioned it in
his will. Would you like a handkerchief?”

“Uh. No. I’m all right,” said Johnny. “Yes. She told me.”

“Yes, we’re taking him back this week. He gave us a map reference. Very
precise, too.” The man patted the second box he’d been given, which,
Johnny suddenly realized, probably contained all that was left in this
world of Atkins, T., apart from a few medals and some faded photographs.

“What will you have to do?” he said.

“Just scatter his ashes. We’ll have a little ceremony.”

“Where…the Pals died?”

“That’s right. He was always talking about them, I do know that.”

“Sir?”

The man looked up.

“Yes?”

“My name’s John Maxwell. What’s yours?”

“Atterbury. Ronald Atterbury.”

He extended a hand. They shook hands, solemnly.

“Are you Arthur Maxwell’s grandson? He used to work for me at the boot
factory.”

“Yes. Sir?”

“Yes?”

Johnny knew what the answer was going to be. He could feel it looming
ahead of him. But you had to ask the question, so that the answer could
exist. He took a deep breath.

“Are you related to Sergeant Atterbury? He was one of the Pals.”

“He was my father.”

“Oh.”

“I never saw him. He married my mother before he went off to the war.
There was a lot of that sort of thing. There always is. Excuse me, young
man, but shouldn’t you be in school?”

“No,” said Johnny.

“Really?”

“I should be here. I’m absolutely sure about that,” said Johnny. “But
I’d better be getting to school, anyway. Thanks for talking to me.”

“I hope you haven’t missed any important lessons.”

“History.”

“That’s very important.”

“Can I ask you one more question?”

“Yes?”

“Tommy Atkins’s medals. Were they for anything special?”

“They were campaign medals. Soldiers got them, really, for just staying
alive. And for being there. He went all the way through the war, you
know. Right to the end. Didn’t even get wounded.”

Johnny walked back down the drive barely noticing the world around him.
Something important had happened, and he alone of all the living had
seen it, and it was right.

Getting medals for being there was right, too. Sometimes being there was
all you could do.

He looked back when he reached the road. Mr. Atterbury was still sitting
on the bench with the two boxes beside him, staring at the trees as if
he’d never seen them before. Just staring, as if he could see right
through them, all the way to France.

Johnny hesitated and then started back.

“No,” said Mr. Vicenti, right behind him.

He’d been waiting by the bus shelter. Haunting it, almost.

“I was only going to—”

“Yes, you were,” said Mr. Vicenti. “And what would you say? That you’d
seen them? What good would that do? Perhaps he’s seeing them too, inside
his head.”

“Well—”

“It wouldn’t work.”

“But if I—”

“If you did something like that a few hundred years ago, you’d probably
be hanged for witchcraft. Last century they’d have locked you up. I
don’t know what they’d do now.”

Johnny relaxed a little. The urge to run back up the driveway had faded.

“Put me on television, I expect,” he said, walking along the road.

“Well, we don’t want that,” said Mr. Vicenti. He walked too, although
his feet didn’t always meet the ground.

“It’s just that if I could make people see that—”

“Maybe,” said Mr. Vicenti. “But making people see anything is a long,
hard job—excuse me….”

He jerked his shoulder a bit, like a man trying to find a difficult
itch, and then pulled a pair of doves from inside his jacket.

“They breed in there, I’m sure,” he said, watching them fly away and
disappear. “What are you going to do now?”

“School. And don’t say it’s very important.”

“I said nothing.”

They reached the entrance to the cemetery. Johnny could just see the big
sign on the old factory site next door, its blue sky glowing against the
dustier blue-gray of the real sky.

“They’ll start taking us out the day after tomorrow,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“I’m sorry. Like I said, I wish there was something I could do.”

“You may have done it already.”

Johnny sighed.

“If I ask you what you mean, you’ll say it’s hard to explain, right?”

“I think so. Come. You might enjoy this.”

There wasn’t even a dead soul in the cemetery. Even the rook had gone,
unless it was a crow.

But there was a lot of noise coming from the canal.

 

 

 

The dead were swimming. Well, some of them were. Mrs. Liberty was. She
was wearing a long swimming costume that reached from neck to knees, but
she still kept her hat on.

The Alderman had stripped off his long robe and chain, and was sitting
on the canal bank in his shirt-sleeves and some suspenders that could
have moored a ship. Johnny wondered how the dead changed clothes, or
felt the heat, but he supposed it was all habit. If you thought your
shirt was off, there it was…off.

As for swimming…there was no splash when they dived, just the faintest
of shimmers, that spread out like ripples and vanished very quickly. And
when they surfaced, they didn’t look wet. It dawned on Johnny that when
a ghost (he had to use that word in his head) jumped into the water, the
ghost didn’t get wet, the water got ghostly.

Not all of them were having fun, though. At least not the usual sort.
Mr. Fletcher and Solomon Einstein and a few others were clustered around
one of the dumped televisions.

“What are they doing?” said Johnny.

“Trying to make it work,” said Mr. Vicenti.

Johnny laughed. The screen had been smashed. Rain had dripped into the
case for years. There was even grass growing out of it.

“That’ll never—” he began.

There was a crackle. A picture formed in the air, on a screen that
wasn’t there anymore.

Mr. Fletcher stood up and solemnly shook Solomon Einstein’s hand.

“Another successful marriage of advanced theoretics and practical
know-how, Mr. Einstein.”

“A shtep in the right direction, Mr. Fletcher.”

Johnny stared at the flickering images. The picture was in beautiful
color.

Enlightenment dawned.

“It’s the ghost of the television?” he said.

“Vot a clever boy!” said Solomon Einstein.

“But with improvements,” said Mr. Fletcher.

Johnny peered inside the case. It was full of old leaves and stained,
twisted metal. But over the top of it, shimmering gently, was the pearly
outline of the ghost of the machine, purring away without electricity.
At least, apparently without electricity. Who knew where the electricity
went when the light was switched off?

“Oh, wow.”

He stood up and pointed to the scummy green surface of the canal.

“Somewhere down there there’s an old Ford Capri,” he said. “Wobbler said
he saw some men dump it in there once.”

“I shall see to it directly,” said Mr. Fletcher. “The internal
combustion engine certainly could do with some improvements.”

“But…look…machines aren’t alive, so how can they have ghosts?”

“But zey have existence,” said Einstein. “From moment to moment. Zo, we
find the right moment, yes?”

“Sounds a bit occult,” said Johnny.

“No! It is physics! It is beyond physics. It is”—he waved both hands
excitedly—“meta physics. From the Greek meta, meaning ‘beyond,’ and
physika, meaning…er…”

“Physics,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“Exactly!”

“Nothing ever finishes. Nothing’s ever really over.”

It was Johnny who said that. He was surprised at himself.

“Correct! Are you a physicist?”

“Me?” said Johnny. “I don’t know anything about science!”

“Marvelous! Ideal qualification!” said Einstein.

“What?”

“Ignorance is very important! It is an absolutely essential step in the
learning process!”

Mr. Fletcher twiddled the ghost of a tuning knob.

“Well, we’re all right now,” he said, watching a program in what sounded
like Spanish. “Over here, everyone!”

“How very interesting,” said Mrs. Liberty, dressing herself in the blink
of an eye. “Miniature cinematography?”

When Johnny left, they were all in front of the busted television,
arguing over what to watch….

Except for Mr. Grimm. He stood a little apart, hands folded obediently,
watching them.

“There will be trouble because of this,” he said. “This is disobedience.
Meddling with the physical.”

He had a small mustache as well as glasses, and in daylight Johnny saw
that the lenses were those thick ones that seem to hide the person’s
eyes.

“There’ll be trouble,” he said again. “And it will be your fault, John
Maxwell. You’re getting them excited. Is this any way for the dead to
behave?”

Two invisible eyes followed him.

“Mr. Grimm?” said Johnny.

“Yes?”

“Who are you?”

“That’s none of your business.”

“No, but it’s just that everyone else always talks about—”

“I happen to believe in decency. I believe life should be taken
seriously. There is a proper way to conduct oneself. I certainly don’t
intend to indulge in this foolish behavior.”

“I didn’t mean to—”

Mr. Grimm turned around and walked stiffly to his little stone under the
trees. He sat down with his arms folded and glared at Johnny.

“No good will come of it,” he said.

 

 

 

He said he’d been to see a specialist. That was always a good one.
Teachers generally didn’t ask any more questions.

At break, Wobbler had News.

“My mum said there’s going to be a big meeting about it in the Civic
Center tonight, with television there and everything.”

“It won’t do any good,” said Yo-less. “It’s been going on for ages. It’s
too late. There’s been all kinds of inquiries and stuff.”

“I asked my mum about building things on old graveyards, and she says
they have to get a vicar in to desecrate the site first,” said Wobbler.
“That should be worth seeing.”

“It’s de-consecrate,” said Yo-less. “Desecrate is all to do with
sacrificing goats and things.”

Wobbler looked wistful.

“I suppose there’s no chance—”

“None!”

“I’m going to go tonight,” said Johnny. “And you lot ought to come.”

“It won’t do any good,” said Yo-less.

“Yes it will,” said Johnny.

“Look, the place has still been sold,” said Yo-less. “I know you’re sort
of wound up about it, but it’s all over.”

“Going will still do some good.” He knew it, in the same way he’d known
the Pals were important. Not for reasons. Just because it was.

“Will there be any…freak winds?” said Bigmac.

“How do I know? Shouldn’t think so. They’re all watching television.”

The other three exchanged glances.

“The dead are watching television?” said Wobbler.

“That’s right. And I know you’re all trying to think of funny things to
say. Just don’t say them. They’re watching television. They’ve made an
old TV set work.”

“Well, I suppose it passes the time,” said Wobbler.

“I don’t think they experience time like we do,” said Johnny.

Yo-less slid down off the wall.

“Talking of time,” he said, “I’m not sure tomorrow would be a good time
to go hanging around cemeteries.”

“Why not?” said Bigmac.

“You know what day it is?”

“Tuesday,” said Johnny.

“Halloween,” said Wobbler. “You’re all coming to my party, remember?”

“Whoops,” said Bigmac.

 

 

 

“The principle is astonishingly simple,” said Mr. Fletcher. “A tiny
point of light! That’s all it is! Whizzing backward and forward inside a
glass bottle. Basically it’s a thermionic valve. Much easier to control
than sound waves—”

“Excuse me,” said Mrs. Liberty. “When you stand in front of the screen,
you make the picture go blurred.”

“Sorry.” Mr. Fletcher went back and sat down. “What’s happening now?”

The dead were ranged in rows, fascinated.

“Mr. McKenzie has told Dawn that Janine can’t go to Doraleen’s party,”
said William Stickers, without taking his eyes off the screen.

“I must say,” said the Alderman, “I thought Australia was a bit
different. More kangaroos and fewer young women in unsuitable clothing.”

“I’m quite happy with the young women,” said William Stickers.

“Mr. Stickers! For shame! You’re dead!”

“But I have a very good memory, Mrs. Liberty.”

“Oh. Is it over?” said Solomon Einstein, as the credits rolled up the
screen and the Cobbers theme music rolled over the canal. “But there iss
the mystery of who took the money from Mick’s coat!”

“The man in the television just said there will be another performance
tomorrow,” said Mrs. Liberty. “We must be sure not to miss it.”

“It is getting dark,” said Mr. Vicenti from the back of the group. “Time
we were getting back.”

The dead looked across at the cemetery.

“If we want to go, that is,” he added. He was smiling faintly.

The dead were silent. Then the Alderman said, “Well, I’m blowed if I’m
going back in there.”

“Thomas Bowler!” snapped Mrs. Liberty.

“Well, if a man can’t swear when he’s dead, it’s a poor state of
affairs. Blowed, blowed, blowed. And damn,” said the Alderman. “I mean,
look, will you? There’s radio and television and all sorts. There’s
things going on! I don’t see why we should go back in there. It’s dull.
No way.”

“No way?”

William Stickers nudged Mrs. Liberty. “That’s Australian for ‘certainly
not,’” he whispered.

“But staying where we’re put is proper,” said Mrs. Liberty. “We have to
stay where we’ve been put—”

“Ahem.”

It was Mr. Grimm. The dead looked at their feet.

“I entirely agree,” he said.

“Oh. Hello, Eric,” said the Alderman coldly.

Eric Grimm folded his hands on his chest and beamed at them. This
worried even the dead. The thickness of his glasses somehow made his
eyes get lost, so all that was on the other side of them was pinkness.

“Will you listen to what you are saying?” he said. “You’re dead. Act
your age. It’s over.” He waved a finger. “You know what will happen if
you leave. You know what will happen if you’re too long away. It’s
dreadful to think about, isn’t it? You’re letting this idiot child get
you all upset.”

The dead tried not to meet his gaze. When you were dead, there were some
things that you knew, in the same way that when you were alive you knew
about breathing. It was that a day would come. And you had to be
prepared. There’d be a final sunrise, and you had to face it, and be
ready.

A final sunrise. The day of judgment. It could be any day. You had to be
ready.

“Not gallivanting off aping your juniors,” said Mr. Grimm, who seemed to
read their thoughts. “We’re dead. So we wait here, like decent people.
Not go dabbling in the Ordinary.”

The dead shuffled their feet.

“Well, I’ve waited eighty years,” said the Alderman at last. “If it
happens tonight, it happens. I’m going to go and have a look around.
Anyone else coming?”

“Yes. Me,” said William Stickers, standing up.

“Anyone else?”

About half the dead stood up. A few more looked around and decided to
join them. There was something about Mr. Grimm that made you want to be
on the other side.

“You will get lost!” warned Mr. Grimm. “Something will go wrong, you
know! And then you’ll be wandering around forever, and you’ll…forget.”

“I’ve got descendants out there,” said the Alderman.

“We’ve all got descendants,” said Mrs. Liberty. “And we know what the
rules are. And so do you.” She looked embarrassed.

There were rules. You were never told them, any more than you were told
that things dropped when you let go of them. They were just there.

But the Alderman was unbudgeable in a sullen kind of way.

“At least I’m going to have a look around. Check out my old haunts,” he
muttered.

“Haunts?” said William Stickers.

“Check out?” said Mrs. Liberty.

“That’s modern talk for—” William Stickers began.

“I’m sure I don’t want to know!” Mrs. Liberty stood up. “The very idea!”

“There’s a world out there, and we helped to make it, and now I want to
find out what it’s like,” said the Alderman sulkily.

“Besides,” said Mr. Vicenti, “if we stick together, no one will forget
who they are, and we’ll all go farther.”

Mrs. Liberty shook her head.

“Well, if you insist on going, then I suppose someone with some Sense
should accompany you,” she said.

The dead marched off in, as it were, a body, down the canal path and
toward the town center. That left only Mr. Einstein and Mr. Fletcher,
still sitting happily beside their television.

“What’s got into them?” said Mr. Fletcher. “They’re acting almost
alive.”

“It is disgusting,” said Mr. Grimm, but somehow in a triumphant tone of
voice, as if seeing people acting badly was very satisfying.

“Solomon here says that space is a delusion,” said Mr. Fletcher.
“Therefore, it is impossible to go anywhere. Or to be anywhere, either.”

Einstein spat on his hands and tried to smooth down his hair.

“On ze other hand—” he said, “there vas a nice little pub in Cable
Street.”

“You wouldn’t get a drink, Solly,” said Mr. Fletcher. “They don’t serve
spirits.”

“I used to like it in there,” said Einstein wistfully. “After a hard day
stuffing foxes, it vass nice to relax of an evenink.”

“You did say space was a delusion,” said Mr. Fletcher. “Anyway, I
thought we were going to do some more work on the television. You said
there was no theoretical reason why we shouldn’t be able to make—”

“I zink,” said Mr. Einstein carefully, “I would like to fool myself a
little.”

And then there was only Mr. Grimm.

He turned back, still smiling in a glassy kind of way, and settled down
and waited for them to return.


SEVEN

 

The Frank W. Arnold Civic Center meeting room was about half full.

It smelled of chlorine from the swimming pool, and of dust, and floor
polish, and wooden chairs. Occasionally people would wander in thinking
the meeting was the AGM of the bowling club, and then try to wander out
again, pushing on the bar on the door marked “Pull” and then glaring at
it as if only an idiot would put “Pull” on a door you pulled. The
speakers spent a lot of the time asking people at the back if they could
hear, and then holding the microphone too close to the loudspeakers, and
then someone tried to make the PA system work properly, and blew a fuse,
and went to find the caretaker, pushing on the door for a while like a
hamster trying to find the way out of its treadmill.

In fact, it was like every other public meeting Johnny had ever
attended. Probably on Jupiter seven-legged aliens had meetings in icy
halls smelling of chlorine, he thought, with the microphones howling,
and creatures frantically []ing at doors clearly marked []

There were one or two of his teachers in the audience. That was amazing.
You never really thought of them doing anything after school. You never
knew about people, like you never knew how deep a pond was because all
you saw was the top. And he recognized one or two people he’d seen in
the cemetery walking their dogs or just sitting on the seats. They
looked out of place.

There were a couple of people from United Amalgamated Consolidated
Holdings, and a man from the Council planning office, and the chairman
of Blackbury Municipal Authority, who looked a lot like Mrs. Liberty and
turned out to be a Miss Liberty. (Johnny wondered if Mrs. Liberty was
her great-grandmother or something, but it would be hard to ask; you
couldn’t very well say, “Hey, you look like this dead lady, are you
related?”)

They didn’t look out of place. They looked as though they were used to
platforms.

Johnny found he couldn’t listen to them properly. The pock-pock from the
squash court on the other side of the wall punctuated the sentences like
a rain of periods, and the rattling of the door bar was a semicolon.

“—better. Future. For the young; people of our city—”

Most of the people in the audience were middle-aged. They listened to
all the speakers very intently.

“—assure the good. People, of Blackbury; that. We. At United Amalgamated
Consolidated; Holdings value. Public. Opinion most highly; and have no
intention. Of—”

Words poured out. He could feel them filling up the hall.

And afterward—he told himself, in the privacy of his own head—afterward,
the day after tomorrow, the cemetery would be shut, no matter what
anyone said. It’d vanish into the past just like the old boot factory.
And then the past would be rolled up and tucked away in old newspapers,
just like the Pals. Unless someone did something.

Life was difficult enough already. Let someone else say something.

“—not even a particularly fine example. Of Edwardian funereal sculpture.
With—”

The words would fill up the hall until they were higher than people’s
heads. They were smooth, soothing words. Soon they’d close over the top
of all the trilbies and woolly hats, and everyone would be sitting there
like sea anemones.

They’d come here with things to say, even if they didn’t know how to say
them.

The thing was to keep your head down.

But if you did keep your head down, you’d drown in other people’s words.

“—fully taken into. Account; at every stage of the planning process—”

Johnny stood up, because it was that or drowning. He felt his head break
through the tide of words, and he breathed in. And then out.

“Excuse me, please?” he said.

 

 

 

The White Swan in Cable Street, known for years as The Dirty Duck, was a
traditional English pub, with a Space Invaders video machine that
Shakespeare himself might have played. It was crowded, and noisy with
electronic explosions and the jukebox.

In one corner, wedged between the video quiz game and the wall, in a
black felt hat, nursing half a pint of Guinness, was mad old Mrs.
Tachyon.

Mad is a word used about people who’ve either got no senses or several
more than most other people.

Mrs. Tachyon was the only one who noticed the drop in temperature. She
looked up and grinned a one-toothed grin.

The patch of chilly air drifted across the crowded room until it came up
against the jukebox. Frost steamed off it for a second.

The tune changed.

“‘Roses are blooming in Picardy,’” said Mrs. Tachyon happily. “Yes!”

She watched carefully as people clustered around the machine and started
to thump it. Then they pulled the plug, which made no difference.

The barmaid screamed and dropped a tray of drinks when the game machine
exploded and caught fire.

Then the lights went out.

A minute or two later, Mrs. Tachyon was left in the dark, listening to
the barman cursing somewhere in a back room as fuses kept blowing.

It was quite pleasant, sitting in the warm glow of the melted machinery.

From the wreckage on the floor, the ghosts of two pints of beer detached
themselves and floated across to the table.

“Cheers!” said Mrs. Tachyon.

 

 

 

The chairman of the Council looked over her glasses.

“Questions at the end, please.”

Johnny wavered. But if he sat down, the words would close over his head
again.

“When is the end, please?” he said.

Johnny felt everyone looking at him.

The chairman glanced at the other speakers. She had a habit, Johnny
noticed, of closing her eyes when she started a sentence and opening
them suddenly at the end, so that they’d leap out and surprise you.

“When [close] we’ve fully. Discussed. The situation. And then I will
call for [open!] questions.”

Johnny decided to swim for the shore.

“But I’ll have to leave before the end,” he said. “I have to be in bed
by ten.”

There was a general murmur of approval from the audience. It was clear
that most of them approved of the idea of anyone under thirty being in
bed by ten. It was almost true, anyway. He was generally in his room
around ten, although there was no telling when the lights actually went
off.

“Let the lad ask his question,” said a voice from near the front.

“He’s doing a project,” said another voice. Johnny recognized Mr.
Atterbury, sitting bolt upright.

“Oh…very well. What was it, young man?”

“Um.” Johnny felt them all looking at him. “Well, the thing is…the thing
I want to know is…is there anything that anyone can say here, tonight,
that’s going to make any difference?”

“That [close] hardly seems an appropriate sort of [open!] question,”
said the chairman severely.

“Seems damned good to me,” said Mr. Atterbury. “Why doesn’t the man from
United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings answer the boy? Just a simple
answer would do.”

The United man gave Johnny a frank, open smile.

“We shall, of course, take all views very deeply into consideration,” he
said. “And—”

“But there’s a sign up saying that you’re going to build anyway,” said
Johnny. “Only I don’t think many people want the old cemetery built on.
So you’ll take the sign down, will you?”

“We have in fact bought the—”

“You paid fivepence,” said Johnny. “I’ll give you a pound.”

People started to laugh.

“I’ve got a question too,” said Yo-less, standing up.

The chairman, who had her mouth open, hesitated. Yo-less was beaming at
her, defying her to tell him to sit down.

“We’ll take the question from the other young man, the one in the
shirt—no, not you, the—” she began.

“The black one,” said Yo-less helpfully. “Why did the Council sell the
cemetery in the first place?”

The chairman brightened up at this one.

“I [close] think we have covered that very fully [open!],” she said.
“The cost of upkeep—”

Bigmac nudged Johnny, pointed at a sheet of figures everyone had been
given, and whispered in his ear.

“But I don’t see how there’s much upkeep in a cemetery,” said Yo-less.
“Sending someone in once or twice a year to cut the brambles down
doesn’t sound like much of a cost to me.”

“We’d do it for nothing,” said Johnny.

“Would we?” whispered Wobbler, who liked fresh air to be something that
happened to other people, preferably a long way off.

People were turning around in their seats.

The chairman gave a loud sigh, to make it clear that Johnny was being
just too stupid but that she was putting up with him nevertheless.

“The fact, young man, as I have explained time and again, is that it is
simply too expensive to maintain a cemetery that is—”

As he listened, red with embarrassment, Johnny remembered about the
chance to have another go. He could just put up with it and shut up, and
forever after he’d wonder what would have happened, and then when he
died that angel—although, as things were going at the moment, angels
were in short supply even after you were dead—would say, Hey, would you
have liked to have found out what happened? And he’d say Yes, really,
and the angel would send him back and maybe this was—

He pulled himself together.

“No,” he said, “it isn’t simply too expensive.”

The woman stopped in mid sentence.

“How dare you interrupt me!” she snapped.

Johnny plowed on. “It says in your papers here that the cemetery makes a
loss. But a cemetery can’t make a loss. It’s not like a business or
something. It just is. My friend Bigmac here says what you’re calling a
loss is just the value of the land for building offices. It’s the rates
and taxes you’d get from United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings. But
the dead can’t pay taxes, so they’re not worth anything.”

The man from United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings opened his mouth
to say something, but the chairman stopped him.

“A democratically elected Council—” she began.

“I’d like to raise a few points concerning that,” said Mr. Atterbury.
“There are certain things about this sale that I should like to see more
clearly explained in a democratic way.”

“I’ve had a good look around the cemetery,” said Johnny, plunging on.
“I’ve been…doing a project. I’ve walked around it a lot. It’s full of
stuff. It doesn’t matter that no one in there is really famous. They
were famous here. They lived and got on with things and died. They were
people. It’s wrong to think that the past is something that’s just gone.
It’s still there. It’s just that you’ve gone past. If you drive through
a town, it’s still there in the rearview mirror. Time is a road, but it
doesn’t roll up behind you. Things aren’t over just because they’re
past. Do you see that?”

 

 

 

People told one another that it was getting chilly for the time of year.
Little points of coldness drifted around the town.

Screen K at the Blackbury Odeon was showing a twenty-four-hour, nonstop
Halloween Special, but people kept coming out. It was too cold in there,
they said. And it was creepy. Armpit, the manager, who was one of
Wobbler’s mortal enemies, and who looked like two men in one dinner
jacket, said it was supposed to be creepy. They said not that creepy.
There were voices that you didn’t exactly hear, and they—well, you kept
getting the impression that people were sitting right beh—Well, let’s go
and get a burger. Somewhere brightly lit.

Pretty soon there was hardly anyone in there at all except Mrs. Tachyon,
who’d bought a ticket because it was somewhere in the warm, and spent
most of the time asleep.

“Elm Street? Elm Street? Wasn’t there an Elm Street down by Beech Lane?”

“I don’t think it was this one. I don’t remember this sort of thing
going on.”

She didn’t mind the voices at all.

“Freddie. Now that’s a NICE name.”

They were company, in a way.

“And that’s a nice sweater.”

And a lot of people had left popcorn and things behind in their hurry to
get out.

“But I don’t think THAT’S very nice.”

The next film was Ghostbusters, which was followed by Wednesday of the
Living Dead.

It seemed to Mrs. Tachyon that the voices, which didn’t exist anyway,
had gone very quiet.

 

 

 

Everyone was staring at Johnny now.

“And…and,” said Johnny, “…if we forget about them, we’re just a lot of
people living in…in buildings. We need them to tell us who we are. They
built this city. They did all the crazy human things that turn a lot of
buildings into a place for people. It’s wrong to throw all that away.”

The chairman shuffled the papers in front of her.

“Nevertheless [close], we have to deal with the [open!] present day,”
she said brusquely. “The dead are no longer here, and I am afraid they
do not vote.”

“You’re wrong. They are here and they have got a vote,” said Johnny.
“I’ve been working it out. In my head. It’s called tradition. And they
outvote us twenty to one.”

Everyone went quiet. Nearly as quiet as the unseen audience in Screen K.

Then Mr. Atterbury started to clap. Someone else joined in—Johnny saw it
was the nurse from Sunshine Acres. Pretty soon everyone was clapping, in
a polite yet firm way.

Mr. Atterbury stood up again.

“Mr. Atterbury, sit down,” said the chairman. “I am running this
meeting, you know.”

“I am afraid this does not appear to be the case,” said Mr. Atterbury.
“I’m standing up and I’m going to speak. The boy is right. Too much has
been taken away, I do know that. You dug up the High Street. It had a
lot of small shops. People lived there. Now it’s all walkways and
plastic signs, and people are afraid of it at night. Afraid of the town
where they live! I’d be ashamed of that, if I was you. And we had a coat
of arms for the town, up on the Town Hall. Now we’ve got some kind of
plastic logo thing. And you took the old allotment gardens and built the
Neil Armstrong Shopping Mall, and all the little shops went out of
business. And they were beautiful, those allotments.”

“They were a mess!”

“Oh, yes. A beautiful mess. Homemade greenhouses made of old window
frames nailed together. Old men sitting out in front of their sheds in
old chairs. Vegetables and dogs and children all over the place. I don’t
know where all those people went—do you? And then you knocked down a lot
of houses and built the big tower block where no one wants to live and
named it after a crook.”

“I didn’t even live here in those days,” said the chairman. “Besides,
it’s generally agreed that the Joshua N’Clement block was a…misplaced
idea.”

“A bad idea, you mean.”

“Yes, if you must put it like that.”

“So mistakes can be made, can they?”

“Nevertheless, the plain fact is that we have to build for the future—”

“I’m very glad to hear you say that, madam chairman, because I’m sure
you’ll agree that the most successful buildings have got very deep
foundations.”

There was another round of applause. The people on the platform looked
at one another.

“I feel I have no alternative but to close the meeting,” said the
chairman stiffly. “This was supposed to be an informative occasion.”

“I think it has been,” said Mr. Atterbury.

“But you can’t close the meeting,” said Johnny.

“Indeed, I can!”

“You can’t,” said Johnny, “because this is a public hall, and we’re all
public, and no one’s done anything wrong.”

“Then we shall leave, and there will really be no point in the meeting!”
said the chairman. She swept up her papers and stalked across the
platform, down the steps, and across the hall. The rest of the platform
party, with one or two helpless glances at the audience, followed her.

She led the way to the door.

Johnny offered up a silent prayer.

Someone, somewhere, heard it.

She pushed when she should have pulled. The rattling was the only noise,
and it grew frantic as she began to lose her temper. Finally, one of the
men from United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings yanked the bar and the
door jolted open.

Johnny risked looking behind him. He couldn’t see anyone who looked
dead.

A week ago that would have sounded really odd.

It didn’t sound much better now.

“I thought I felt a draft,” he said. “Just now?”

“They’ve left the windows open at the back,” said Yo-less.

They’re not here, Johnny thought. I’m going to have to do this by
myself. Oh, well…

“Are we going to get into trouble?” said Wobbler. “This was supposed to
be a public meeting.”

“Well, we’re public, aren’t we?” said Johnny.

“Are we?”

“Why not?”

Everyone sat for a while looking at the empty platform. Then Mr.
Atterbury got up and limped up the steps.

“Shall we have a meeting?” he said.

 

 

 

Cold air swirled out of the cinema.

“Well, THAT was an education.”

“Some of those tricks must have been done with mirrors, if you want MY
opinion.”

“What shall we do now?”

“We should be getting back.”

“Back where?”

“Back to the cemetery, of course.”

“Madam, the night is young!”

“That’s right! We’ve only just started enjoying ourselves.”

“Yes! Anyway, you’re a long time dead, that’s what I always say.”

“I want to get out there and enjoy life. I never enjoyed it much when I
WAS alive.”

“Thomas Bowler! That’s no way for a respectable man to behave!”

The crowd lining up outside the burger bar drew closer together as the
chilly wind drove past.

“Thomas Bowler? Do you know…I never really enjoyed being Thomas Bowler.”

 

 

 

The audience in the Frank W. Arnold Civic Center looked a bit sheepish,
like a class after the teacher has stormed out. Democracy works very
well only if people are told how to do it.

Someone raised a hand.

“Can we actually stop it happening?” she asked. “It all sounded
very…official.”

“Officially, I don’t think we can,” said Mr. Atterbury. “There was a
proper sale. United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings could get
unpleasant.”

“There’s plenty of other sites,” said someone else. “There’s the old jam
works in Slate Road, and all that area where the old railroad yard used
to be.”

“And we could give them their money back.”

“We could give them double their money back,” said Johnny.

There was more laughter at this.

“It seems to me,” said Mr. Atterbury, “that a company like United
Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings has to take notice of people. The boot
factory never took any notice of people, I do know that. It didn’t have
to. It made boots. That was all there was to it. But no one’s quite
certain about what UACH does, so they have to be nice about it.” He
rubbed his chin. “Big companies like that don’t like fuss. And they
don’t like being laughed at. If there was another site…and if they
thought we were serious…and if we threaten to offer them, yes, double
their money back…”

“And then we ought to do something about the High Street,” said someone.

“And get some decent playgrounds and things again, instead of all these
Amenities all over the place.”

“And blow up Joshua N’Clement and get some proper houses built—”

“Yo!” said Bigmac.

“Hear hear,” said Yo-less.

Mr. Atterbury waved his hands calmly.

“One thing at a time,” he said. “Let’s rebuild Blackbury first. We can
see about Jerusalem tomorrow.”

“And we ought to find a name for ourselves!”

“The Blackbury Preservation Society?”

“Sounds like something you put in a jar.”

“All right, the Blackbury Conservation Society.”

“Still sounds like jam to me.”

“The Blackbury Pals,” said Johnny.

Mr. Atterbury hesitated.

“It’s a good name,” he said eventually, while lots of people in the hall
started asking one another who the Blackbury Pals were. “But…no. Not
now. But they were officially the Blackbury Volunteers. That’s a good
name.”

“But that doesn’t say what we’re going to do, does it?”

“If we start off not knowing what we’re going to do, we could do
anything,” said Johnny. “Einstein said that,” he added proudly.

“What, Albert Einstein?” said Yo-less.

“No, Solomon Einstein,” said Mr. Atterbury. “Hah! Know about him too, do
you?”

“Er…yes.”

“I remember him. He used to keep a taxidermist and fishing tackle shop
in Cable Street when I was a lad. He was always saying that sort of
thing. A bit of a philosopher, was Solomon Einstein.”

“And all he did was stuff things?” said Yo-less.

“And think,” said Johnny.

“Well, that kind of cogitation runs in the family, you might say,” said
Mr. Atterbury. “Besides, you’ve got a lot of time for abstract thought
when you’ve got your hand stuck up a dead badger.”

“Yes, you certainly wouldn’t want to think about what you were doing,”
said Wobbler.

“Blackbury Volunteers it is, then,” said Mr. Atterbury.

 

 

 

Frost formed on the receiver of the public phone in The White Swan.

“Ready, Mr. Einstein?”

“Let’s go, Mr. Fletcher!”

The telephone clicked and was silent. The air warmed up again.

Thirty seconds later the air grew cold in the little wooden hut twenty
miles away that housed the controls of Blackbury University’s radio
telescope.

“It works!”

“Of course. Of all the forces in the universe, the hardest to overcome
is the force of habit. Gravity is easy-peasy by comparison.”

“When did you think of that?”

“It came to me ven I was working on a particularly large trout.”

“Really? Well…let’s see what we can do….”

Mr. Fletcher looked around the little room. It was currently occupied
only by Adrian “Nozzer” Miller, who’d wanted to be an astronomer because
he thought it was all to do with staying up late looking through
telescopes, and hadn’t bargained on it being basically about adding
columns of figures in a little shed in the middle of a windy field.

The figures the telescope was producing were all that was left of an
exploding star twenty million years ago. A billion small rubbery things
on two planets who had been getting on with life in a quiet sort of way
had been totally destroyed, but they were certainly helping Adrian get
his Ph.D., and who knows, they might have thought it all worthwhile if
anyone had asked them.

He looked up as the telescope motors ground into action. Lights
flickered on the control panel.

He stared at the main switches and then reached out for them. They were
so cold they hurt.

“Ow!”

The big dish turned toward the moon, which was just over Blackbury.

There was a clattering from the printer beside him, and the endless
stream of paper it was producing now read:

 

 

 

0101010010101010001000010000110011001010

HEREGOESNOTHINGGGG0000000011101111

WELLIMBACK000010001…

 

 

 

Mr. Fletcher had just bounced off the moon.

“Vot was it like?”

“I didn’t have time to see much, but I don’t think I’d like to live
there. It worked, though. The sky’s the limit, Mr. Einstein!”

“Exactly, Mr. Fletcher! By the vay, where did that young man go?”

“I think he had to rush off somewhere.”

“Oh. Well…we should go and tell the others, don’t you think?”

 

 

 

It was a quiet night in Blackbury’s central police station. Sergeant
Comely had time to sit back and watch the little lights on the radio.

He’d never really been happy about the radio, even when he was younger.
It was the bane of his life. He suffered from education, and he’d never
been able to remember all that “Foxtrot Tango Piper” business—at least
when he was, e.g., pelting down the street at 2 A.M. in pursuit of
miscreants. He’d end up sending messages about “Photograph Teapot
Psychological.” It had definitely blighted his promotion chances.

He especially hated the radio on nights like this, when he was in
charge. He hadn’t joined the police to be good at technology.

Then the phones started to ring. There was the manager of the Odeon.
Sergeant Comely couldn’t quite make out what he was saying.

“Yes, yes, all right, Halloween Spectacular,” he said. “What do you
mean, it’s all gone cold? What do you want me to do? Arrest a theater
for being cold? I’m a police officer, not a central heating specialist!
I don’t repair video machines, either!”

The phone rang again as soon as he put it down, but this time one of the
young constables answered it.

“It’s someone from the university,” he said, putting his hand over the
mouthpiece. “He says a strange alien force has invaded the radio
telescope. You know, that big satellite dish thing over toward Slate?”

Sergeant Comely sighed. “Can you get a description?” he said.

“I saw a film about this, Sarge,” said another policeman. “These aliens
landed and replaced everyone in the town with giant vegetables.”

“Really? Around here it’d be days before anyone noticed,” said the
sergeant.

The constable put the phone down.

“He just said it was like a strange alien force,” he said. “Very cold,
too.”

“Oh, a cold strange alien force,” said Sergeant Comely.

“And it was invisible, too.”

“Right. Would he recognize it if he didn’t see it again?”

The young policemen looked puzzled. I’m too good for this, the sergeant
thought.

“All right,” he said. “So we know the following. Strange invisible
aliens have invaded Blackbury. They dropped in at The Dirty Duck, where
they blew up the Space Invaders machine, which makes sense. And then
they went to the pictures. Well, that makes sense too. It’s probably
years before new films get as far as Alfred Centuri…”

The phone rang again. The constable answered it.

“And what, we ask ourselves, is their next course of action?”

“It’s the manager of Pizza Surprise, Sarge,” said the constable. “He
says—”

“Right!” said the sergeant. “That’s right! They drop in for a Number
Three with Extra Pepperoni! It probably looks like a friend of theirs.”

“Wouldn’t do any harm to go and chat with him,” said the constable. It
had been a long time since dinner. “You know, just to show a bit of—”

“I’ll go,” said Sergeant Comely, picking up his hat. “But if I come back
as a giant cucumber, there’s going to be trouble.”

“No anchovies on mine, Sarge,” said the constable, as Sergeant Comely
stepped out into the night.

There was something strange in the air. Sergeant Comely had lived in
Blackbury all his life, and it had never felt like this. There was an
electrical tingle to things, and the air tasted of tin.

It suddenly struck him.

What if it was real? Just because they made silly films about aliens and
things didn’t actually mean, did it, that it couldn’t ever happen? He
watched them on late-night television. They always picked small towns to
land near.

He shook his head. Nah…

William Stickers walked through him.

“You know, you really shouldn’t have done that, William,” said the
Alderman, as Sergeant Comely hurried away.

“He’s nothing but a symbol of the oppression of the proletariat,” said
William Stickers.

“You’ve got to have policemen,” said Mrs. Liberty. “Otherwise people
would simply do as they liked.”

“Well, we can’t have that, can we?” said Mr. Vicenti.

 

 

 

The Alderman looked around at the brightly lit street as they strolled
along it. There weren’t many living people around, but there were quite
a lot of dead ones, looking in shop windows or, in the case of some of
the older ones, looking at shop windows and wondering what they were.

“I certainly don’t remember all these shopkeepers from my time,” he
said. “They must have moved in recently. Mr. Boots and Mr. Mothercare
and Mr. Spudjulicay.”

“Whom?” said Mrs. Liberty.

The Alderman pointed to the sign on the other side of the street.

“Spud-u-like,” said Mr. Vicenti. “Hmm.”

“Is that how you pronounce it?” said the Alderman. “I thought perhaps he
was French. My word. And electric light all over the place. And no
horse…manure in the streets at all.”

“Really!” snapped Mrs. Liberty. “Please remember you are in company with
a Lady.”

“That’s why he said manure,” said William Stickers happily.

“And the food!” said the Alderman. “Hindoo and Chinese! Chicken from
Kentucky! And what did you say the stuff was that the clothes are made
of?”

“Plastic, I think,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“Very colorful and long-lasting,” said Mrs. Liberty. “And many of the
girls wear bloomers, too. Extremely practical and emancipated.”

“And many of them are extremely handsome,” said William Stickers.

“And everyone’s taller and I haven’t seen anyone on crutches,” said the
Alderman.

“It wasn’t always like this,” said Mr. Vicenti. “The nineteen thirties
were rather gloomy.”

“Yes, but now…” The Alderman spread his arms and turned around. “Shops
full of cinematography televisions! Bright colors everywhere! Tall
people with their own teeth! An age of miracles and wonders!”

“The people don’t look very happy,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“That’s just a trick of the light,” said the Alderman.

 

 

 

It was almost midnight. The dead met in the abandoned arcades of the
shopping mall. The grilles were up and locked, but that doesn’t matter
when you’re dead.

“Well, that was fun,” said the Alderman.

“I have to agree,” said Mrs. Sylvia Liberty. “I haven’t enjoyed myself
so much since I was alive. It’s a shame we have to go back.”

The Alderman crossed his arms.

“Go back?” he said.

“Now, then, Thomas,” said Mrs. Liberty, but in a rather softer voice
than she’d used earlier that evening, “I don’t want to sound like Eric
Grimm, but you know the rules. We have to return. A day will come.”

“I’m not going back. I’ve really enjoyed myself. I’m not going back!”

“Me neither,” said William Stickers. “Down with tyranny!”

“We must be ready for Judgment Day,” said Mrs. Liberty. “You never can
tell. It could be tomorrow. Supposing it happened, and we missed it?”

“Hah!” said William Stickers.

“More than eighty years I’ve been sitting there,” said Alderman Bowler.
“You know, I wasn’t expecting that. I thought things went dark for a
moment and then there was a man handing out harps.”

“For shame!”

“Well, isn’t that what you expected?” he demanded.

“Not me,” said William Stickers. “Belief in the survival of what is
laughably called the soul after death is a primitive superstition which
has no place in a dynamic socialist society!”

They looked at him.

“You don’t think,” said Solomon Einstein carefully, “that it is worth
reconsidering your opinions in the light of experiental evidence?”

“Don’t think you can get around me just because you’re accidentally
right! Just because I happen to find myself still…basically here,” said
William Stickers, “does not invalidate the general theory!”

Mrs. Liberty banged her phantom umbrella on the floor.

“I won’t say it hasn’t been enjoyable,” she said, “but the rules are
that we must be back in our places at dawn.

Supposing we stayed away too long and forgot who we were? Supposing
tomorrow was Judgment Day?”

Thomas Bowler sighed.

“Well, supposing it is?” he said. “You know what I’d say? I’d say: I did
the best I could for eighty-four years. And no one ever told me that
afterward I’d still be this fat old man who gets out of breath. Why do I
get out of breath? I don’t breathe. I passed away, and next thing I knew
I was sitting in a marble hut like a man waiting an extremely long time
for an appointment with the doctor. For nearly ninety years! I’d say:
You call this justice? Why are we waiting? A day will come. We
all…arrive knowing it, but no one says when! Just when I was beginning
to enjoy life,” he said. “I wish this night would never end.”

Mr. Fletcher nudged Solomon Einstein.

“Shall we tell them?” he said.

“Tell us what?” said William Stickers.

“Vell, you see—” Einstein began.

“Times have changed,” said Mr. Fletcher. “All that stuff about being
home at dawn and not hearing the cock crow and stuff like that. That was
all very well once upon a time, when people thought the Earth was flat.
But no one believes that now—”

“Er—” One of the dead raised a hand.

“Oh, yes,” said Mr. Fletcher. “Thank you, Mr. Ronald Newton (1878–1934),
former chairman of the Blackbury Flat Earth Society. I know you have
Views. But the point I’m trying to make is—”

“—dawn is a place as well as a time,” said Einstein, spreading his
hands.

“What on earth do you mean?” said Mrs. Liberty.

“On Earth, and around Earth,” said Einstein, getting excited. “One night
and one day, forever chasing one another.”

“There is a night that never comes to an end,” said Mr. Fletcher. “All
you need is speed…”

“Relatively speaking,” said Einstein.


EIGHT

 

There is a night that never comes to an end….

The clock of the world turns under its own shadow. Midnight is a moving
place, hurtling around the planet at a thousand miles an hour like a
dark knife, cutting slices of daily bread off the endless loaf of Time.

Time passes everywhere. But days and nights are little local things that
happen only to people who stay in one place. If you go fast enough, you
can overtake the clock….

“How many of us are in this phone booth?” asked Mr. Fletcher.

“Seventy-three,” said the Alderman.

“Very well. Where shall we go? Iceland? It’s not even midnight yet in
Iceland.”

“Can we have fun in Iceland?” asked the Alderman.

“How do you feel about fish?”

“Can’t abide fish.”

“Not Iceland, then. I believe it’s very hard to have fun in Iceland
without fish being involved in some way. Well, now…it’ll be early
evening in New York.”

“America?” said Mrs. Liberty. “Won’t we get scalped?”

“Good grief; no!” said William Stickers, who was a bit more up to date
about the world.

“Probably not,” said Mr. Fletcher, who had been watching the news lately
and was even more up to date than William Stickers.

“Look, we’re dead,” said the Alderman. “What else have we got to worry
about?”

“Now, this may strike you as an unusual means of travel,” said Mr.
Fletcher, as something in the telephone began to click, “but all you
have to do, really, is follow me. Incidentally, is Stanley Roundway
here?”

The footballer raised his hand.

“We’re going west, Stanley. For once in your death, try to get the
directions right. And now…”

One by one, they vanished.

 

 

 

Johnny lay in bed, watching the stricken shuttle turning gently in the
moonlight.

It had been quite busy after the meeting. Someone from the Blackbury
Guardian had talked to him, and then Mid-Midlands TV had filmed him, and
people had shaken his hand, and he hadn’t got home until nearly eleven.

There hadn’t been any trouble over that, at least. His mum hadn’t come
in yet, and Granddad was watching a program about bicycle racing in
Germany.

He kept thinking about the Pals. They’d come all the way from France.
Yet the dead in the cemetery were so frightened of moving. But they were
all the same type of people, really. There had to be a reason for that.

The dead in the cemetery just hung around. Why? The Pals had marched
from France because it was the right thing to do. You didn’t have to
stay where you were put.

 

 

 

“New York, New York.”

“Why did they name it twice?”

“Well, they ARE Americans. I suppose they wanted to be sure.”

“The lights are extremely plentiful. What’s that?”

“The Statue of Liberty.”

“Looks a bit like you, Sylvia.”

“Saucy!”

“Is everyone keeping a look out for those ghost breakers?”

“I think that was just cinematography, William.”

“How long to morning?”

“Hours, yet! Follow me, everyone! Let’s get a better view!”

No one ever did work out why all the elevators in the Empire State
Building went up and down all by themselves for almost an hour….

 

 

 

October the 31st dawned foggy. Johnny wondered about having a one-day
illness in preparation for what he suspected was going to be a busy
evening, but decided to go to school instead. They always felt happier
if you dropped in sometimes.

He went via the cemetery.

There wasn’t a living soul. He hated it when it was like this. It was
like the bits in the film when you were waiting for the aliens to jump
out.

Somehow, they were always more dreadful than the bits with the fangs in
them.

Then he found Mr. Grimm. Anyone else walking along the towpath would
have just seen the busted set. But Johnny saw the little man in his neat
suit, watching the ghost of the television.

“Ah, boy,” he said. “You have been causing trouble, have you?” He
pointed to the screen.

Johnny gasped. There was Mr. Atterbury, very calmly talking to a lady on
a sofa. There was also one of the people from United Amalgamated
Consolidated Holdings. And he was having some difficulty, was the
Consolidated man. He’d come along with some prepared things to say and
he was having problems getting his mind around the idea that they
weren’t working anymore.

Mr. Grimm turned up the volume control.

“—at every stage, fully sensitive to public opinion in this matter, I
can assure you, but there is no doubt that we entered into a proper and
legal contract with the relevant authority.”

“But the Blackbury Volunteers say too much was decided behind closed
doors,” said the lady, who looked as though she was enjoying herself.
“They say things were never fully discussed and that no one listened to
the local people.”

“Of course, this is not the fault of United Amalgamated Consolidated
Holdings,” said Mr. Atterbury, smiling benevolently. “They have an
enviable record of civic service and cooperation with the public. I
think what we have here is a mistake rather than any near-criminal
activity, and we in the Volunteers would be more than happy to assist
them in any constructive way and, indeed, possibly even compensate
them.”

Probably no one else but Johnny and the Consolidated man noticed Mr.
Atterbury take a tenpence piece out of his pocket. He turned it over and
over in his fingers. The man from the company watched it like a mouse
might watch a cat.

He’s going to offer him double his money back, Johnny thought. Right
there on television.

He didn’t. He just kept turning the coin over and over, so that the man
could see it.

“That seems a very diplomatic offer,” said the interviewer. “Tell me,
Mr—er—”

“A spokesman,” said the Consolidated man. He looked quite ill. There was
a glint as light flashed off the coin.

“Tell me, Mr. Spokesman…what is it that United Amalgamated Consolidated
Holdings actually does?”

Mr. Atterbury would probably have been a good man in the Spanish
Inquisition, Johnny told himself.

Mr. Grimm turned the sound down again.

“Where’s everyone else?” said Johnny.

“Haven’t come back,” said Mr. Grimm, with horrible satisfaction. “Their
graves haven’t been slept in. That’s what happens when people don’t
listen. And do you know what’s going to happen to them?”

“No.”

“They’re going to fade away. Oh, yes. You’ve put ideas in their heads.
They think they can go gadding about. But people who go gadding about
and not staying where they’re put…they don’t come back. And that’s an
end to it. It could be Judgment Day tomorrow, and they won’t be here.
Hah! Serves them right.”

There was something about Mr. Grimm that made Johnny want to hit him,
except that it wouldn’t work anyway and, besides, hitting him would be
like hitting mud. You’d get dirtier for doing it.

“I don’t know where they’ve gone,” he said, “but I don’t think anything
bad’s happened to them.”

“Think what you like,” said Mr. Grimm, turning back to the television.

“Did you know it’s Halloween?” said Johnny.

“Is it?” said Mr. Grimm, watching an ad for chocolate. “I shall have to
be careful tonight, then.”

When Johnny reached the bridge, he looked back. Mr. Grimm was still
there, all alone.

 

 

 

The dead rode a radio signal over Wyoming….

They were already changing. They were still recognizable, but only when
they thought about it.

“You see, I told you it was possible,” said the person who was
occasionally Mr. Fletcher. “We don’t need wires!”

They ran into an electric storm high over the Rocky Mountains. That was
fun.

And then they surfed down the radio waves to California.

“What time is it?”

“Midnight!”

 

 

 

Johnny was a sort of hero in school. The Blackbury Guardian had a
front-page story headed: COUNCIL SLAMMED IN CEMETERY SALE RUMPUS. The
Guardian often used words like ‘slammed’ and ‘rumpus’; you wondered how
the editor talked at home.

Johnny was in the story with his name spelled wrong, and there was a
quote that ran: “War hero Arthur Atterbury, president of the newly
formed ‘Blackbury Volunteers,’ told the Guardian: ‘There are young
people in this town with more sense of history in their little fingers
than some adults have in their entire committee-bound bodies.’ This is
thought to be a reference to Councilwoman Miss Ethel Liberty, who was
not available for comment last night.”

Even one or two of the teachers mentioned it; it was unusual for people
from the school to appear in the paper except very close to headlines
like TWO FINED AFTER JOYRIDE ESCAPADE.

Even the history teacher asked him about the Blackbury Pals. And then
Johnny found himself telling the class about the Alderman and William
Stickers and Mrs. Sylvia Liberty, although he said he’d got the
information out of the library. One of the girls said she was definitely
going to do a project on Mrs. Liberty, Champion of Women’s Rights, and
Wobbler said, yes, champion of women’s right to get things wrong, and
that started a good argument that lasted until the end of the lesson.

Even the headmaster took an interest—probably out of aforesaid relief
that Johnny wasn’t involved in one of those YOUTH GANG FINED FOR
SHOPLIFTING stories. Johnny had to find his way to his office. The
recommended method was to tie one end of a piece of string to somewhere
you knew and get your friends to come and look for you if you were away
more than two days. He got a short speech about “social awareness” and
was out again a minute later.

He met the other three in the lunch break.

“Come on,” he said.

“Where to?”

“The cemetery. I think something’s gone wrong.”

“I haven’t had my lunch yet,” said Wobbler. “It’s very important for me
to have regular meals. Otherwise my stomach acid plays up.”

“Oh, shut up.”

 

 

 

By the time they raced one another across the heart of Australia, they
didn’t even need the radio.

The dawn dragged its slow way across the Pacific after them, but they
were running free.

“Do we ever need to stop?”

“No!”

“I always wanted to see the world before I died!”

“Well, then, it was just a matter of timing.”

“What time is it?”

“Midnight!”

 

 

 

The cemetery wasn’t empty now. There were a couple of photographers
there, for one thing, including one from a Sunday newspaper. There was a
film crew from Mid-Midlands Television. And the dog-walking people had
been joined by others, just walking around and looking.

In a neglected corner Mrs. Tachyon was industriously polishing a
gravestone.

“Never seen so many people here,” said Johnny. He added, “At least, ones
who’re breathing.”

Yo-less wandered over from where he’d been talking to a couple of
enthusiastic people in woolly bobble hats, who were peering through the
huge thicket behind Mrs. Liberty’s grave.

“They say we’ve not only got environment and ecology, but some habitat
as well,” he said. “They think they’ve seen a rare Scandinavian thrush.”

“Yeah, full of life, this place,” said Bigmac.

A Council truck had driven a little way up the towpath. Some men in
weatherproof jackets were harvesting the old mattresses. The zombie
television had already gone. Mr. Grimm was nowhere to be seen, even by
Johnny.

And a police car was parked just outside the gates. Sergeant Comely was
working on the general assumption that where you got lots of people
gathered together, something illegal was bound to happen sooner or
later.

The cemetery was alive.

“They’ve gone,” said Johnny. “I can feel them…not here.”

The other three found that, quite by accident, they’d all moved closer
together.

A rare Scandinavian thrush, unless it was a rook, cawed in the elms.

“Gone where?” said Wobbler.

“I don’t know!”

“I knew it! I knew it!” said Wobbler. “His eyes’ll start to glow any
minute, you watch. You’ve let ’em out! There’ll be lurchin’ goin’ on
before this day’s over, you wait and see!”

“Mr. Grimm said that if they’re away too long, they…they forget who they
were…” said Johnny uncertainly.

“See? See?” said Wobbler. “You laughed at me! Maybe they’re okay when
they’re remembering who they were, but once they forget…”

“Night of the Killer Zombies?” said Bigmac.

“We’ve been through all that,” said Johnny. “They’re not zombies!”

“Yeah, but maybe they’ve been eating voodoo fish and chips,” said
Bigmac.

“They’re just not here.”

“Then where are they?”

“I don’t know!”

“And it’s Halloween, too,” moaned Wobbler.

Johnny walked over to the fence around the old boot works. There were
quite a few cars parked there. He could see the tall, thin figure of Mr.
Atterbury, talking to a group of men in gray suits.

“I wanted to tell them,” he said. “I mean, we might win. Now. People are
here. There’s TV and everything. Last week it looked hopeless and now
there’s just a chance, and last night I wanted to tell them and now
they’ve gone! And this was their home!”

“Perhaps all these people have frightened them away,” said Yo-less.

“Day of the Living,” said Bigmac.

“I should have had my lunch!” said Wobbler. “My stomach’s definitely
playing up!”

“They’re probably waiting under your bed,” said Bigmac.

“I’m not scared,” said Wobbler. “I’ve just got a stomach upset.”

“We ought to be getting back,” said Yo-less. “I’ve got to do a project
on projects.”

“What?” said Johnny.

“It’s for math,” said Yo-less. “How many people in the school are doing
projects. That kind of stuff. Statistics.”

“I’m going to look for them,” said Johnny.

“You’ll get into trouble when they do the roll.”

“I’ll say I’ve been doing something…social. That’ll probably work.
Anyone coming with me?”

Wobbler looked at his feet, or where his feet would be if Wobbler wasn’t
in the way.

“What about you, Bigmac? You’ve got your Everlasting Note, haven’t you?”

“Yeah, but it’s going a bit yellow now….”

No one knew when it had been written. Rumor had it that it had been
handed down through the generations in Bigmac’s family. It was in three
pieces. But it generally worked. Although Bigmac kept tropical fish and
generally out of trouble, there was something about the way he looked
and the way he lived in the Joshua N’Clement block that saw to it no
teacher ever questioned the Note, which excused him from doing
everything.

“Anyway, they could be anywhere,” he said. “Anyway, I can’t look for
’em, can I? Anyway, they’re probably just inside your head.”

“You heard them on the radio!”

“I heard voices. That’s what radio’s for, innit?”

It occurred to Johnny, not for the first time, that the human mind, of
which each of his friends was in possession of one almost standard
sample, was like a compass. No matter how much you shook it up, no
matter what happened to it, sooner or later it’d go on pointing the same
way. If nine-foot-tall green Martians landed on the shopping mall,
bought some greeting cards and a bag of sugar cookies, and then took off
again, within a day or two people would believe it never happened.

“Not even Mr. Grimm’s here, and he’s always here,” said Johnny.

He looked at Mr. Vicenti’s ornate grave. Some people were taking
photographs of it.

“Always here,” he said.

“He’s gone weird again,” said Wobbler.

“You all go back,” said Johnny quietly. “I just thought of something.”

They all looked around. Their brains don’t believe in the dead, Johnny
thought, but they keep getting outvoted by all the rest of them.

“I’m okay,” said Johnny. “You go on back. I’ll see you at Wobbler’s
party tonight, all right?”

“Remember not to bring any…you know…friends,” said Wobbler, as the three
of them left.

Johnny wandered down North Drive.

He’d never tried to talk to the dead. He’d said things when he knew they
were listening, and sometimes they’d been clearly visible, but apart
from that first time, when he’d knocked on the door of the Alderman’s
mausoleum for a joke…

“Will you look at this?”

One of the people who’d been examining the grave had picked up the
radio, which had been lodged behind a tuft of grass.

“Honestly, people have no respect.”

“Does it work?”

It didn’t. A couple of days of damp grass had done for the batteries.

“No.”

“Give it to the men dumping the rubbish on the truck, then.”

“I’ll do it,” said Johnny.

He hurried off with it, keeping a lookout, trying to find one dead
person among the living.

“Ah, Johnny.”

It was Mr. Atterbury, leaning over the wall of the old boot works.
“Exciting day, isn’t it? You started something, eh?”

“Didn’t mean to,” said Johnny automatically. Things were generally his
fault.

“It could go either way,” said Mr. Atterbury. “The old railway site
isn’t so good, but…things look promising, I do know that. People have
woken up.”

“That’s true. A lot of people.”

“United Consolidated don’t like fuss. The District Auditor is here, and
a man from the Development Commission. It could go very well.”

“Good. Um.”

“Yes?”

“I saw you on television,” said Johnny. “You called United Consolidated
public spirited and cooperative.”

“Well, they might be. If they’ve got no choice. They’re a bit shifty,
but we might win through. It’s amazing what you can do with a kind
word.”

“Oh. Right. Well, then…I’ve got to go and find someone, if you don’t
mind….”

There was no sign of Mr. Grimm anywhere. Or any of the others. Johnny
hung around for hours, with the birdwatchers and the people from the
Blackbury Wildlife Trust, who’d found a fox’s den behind William
Stickers’s memorial, and some Japanese tourists. No one quite knew why
the Japanese tourists were there, but Mrs. Liberty’s grave was getting
very well photographed.

Eventually, though, even Japanese tourists run out of film. They took
one last shot of themselves in front of William Stickers’s monument and
headed back toward their bus.

The cemetery emptied. The sun began to set over the carpet warehouse.

Mrs. Tachyon went past with her loaded shopping cart to wherever it was
she spent her nights.

The cars left the old boot works, and only the bulldozers were left,
like prehistoric monsters surprised by a sudden cold snap.

Johnny sidled up to the forlorn little stone under the trees.

“I know you’re here,” he whispered. “You can’t leave like the others.
You have to stay. Because you’re a ghost. A real ghost. You’re still
here, Mr. Grimm. You’re not just hanging around like the rest of them.
You’re haunting.”

There was no sound.

“What did you do? Were you a murderer or something?”

There was still no sound. In fact, there was even more silence than
before.

“Sorry about the television,” said Johnny nervously.

More silence, so heavy and deep, it could have stuffed mattresses.

He walked away, as fast as he dared.


NINE

 

“This fuss over the cemetery’s certainly breathed a bit of life into
this town,” said his mother. “Go and give your granddad his tray, will
you? And tell him about it. You know he takes an interest.”

Granddad was watching the news in Hindi. He didn’t want to. But the
thingy for controlling the set had got lost, and everyone had forgotten
how to change channels without it.

“Brought you your tray, Granddad.”

“Right.”

“You know the old cemetery? Where you showed me William Stickers’s
grave?”

“Right.”

“Well, maybe it won’t be built on now. There was a meeting last night.”

“Right?”

“I spoke up at the meeting.”

“Right.”

“So it might be all right.”

“Right.”

Johnny sighed. He went back into the kitchen.

“Can I have an old sheet, Mum?”

“What on earth for?”

“Wobbler’s Halloween party. I can’t think of anything else.”

“There’s the one I used as a dust cover, if you’re going to cut holes in
it.”

“Thanks, Mum.”

“It’s pink.”

“Aaaaooow, Mum!”

“It’s practically washed out. No one’ll notice.” It also, as it turned
out, had the remains of some flowers embroidered on one end. Johnny did
his best with a pair of scissors.

He’d promised he’d go. But he went the long way around, with the sheet
in a bag, just in case the dead had come back and might see him. And
there was Mr. Grimm to think about now.

After he’d been gone a few minutes, the TV started showing the news in
English, which looked less interesting than the Hindi news.

Granddad watched it for a while and then sat up. “Hey, girl, it says
they’re trying to save the old cemetery.”

“Yes, Dad.”

“It looked like our Johnny on the stage there.”

“Yes, Dad.”

“No one tells me anything around here. What’s this?”

“Chicken, Dad.”

“Right.”

 

 

 

They were somewhere in the high plateaus of Asia, where once camel
trains had traded silk across five thousand miles and now madmen with
guns shot one another in the various names of God.

“How far to morning?”

“Nearly there….”

“What?”

The dead slowed down in a mountain pass full of driving snow.

“We owe the boy something. He took an interest. He remembered us.”

“Zat’s absolutely correct. Conservation of energy. Besides, he’ll be
worrying.”

“Yes, but…if we go back now…we’ll become like we were, won’t we? I can
feel the weight of that gravestone now.”

“Sylvia Liberty! You said we shouldn’t leave!”

“I’ve changed my mind, William.”

“Yes. I spent half my life being frightened of dying, and now that I’m
dead, I’m going to stop being frightened,” said the Alderman.
“Besides…I’m remembering things….”

There was a murmur from the rest of the dead.

“I zink ve all are,” said Solomon Einstein. “All ze zings ve forgot ven
ve vere alive…”

“That’s the trouble with life,” said the Alderman. “It takes up your
whole time. I mean, I won’t say it wasn’t fun. Bits of it. Quite a lot
of it, really. In its own way. But it wasn’t what you’d call living.…”

“We don’t have to be frightened of the morning,” said Mr. Vicenti. “We
don’t have to be frightened of anything.”

 

 

 

A skeleton opened the door.

“It’s me, Johnny.”

“It’s me, Bigmac. What’re you, a gay ghost?”

“It’s not that pink.”

“The flowers are good.”

“Come on, let me in, it’s freezing out here.”

“Can you float and mince at the same time?”

“Bigmac!”

“Come on, then.”

Somehow, it looked as if Wobbler hadn’t really put his heart into the
decorations. There were a few streamers and some rubber spiders around
the place, and a bowl of the dreadful punch you always get in these
circumstances (the one with the brownish bits of orange in it) and bowls
full of nibbles with names like Curly-Wigglies. And a zucchini that
looked as though it had walked into a combine harvester.

“It was s’posed to be a jack-o’-lantern,” Wobbler kept telling everyone,
“but I couldn’t find a pumpkin.”

“Met Hannibal Lecter in a dark alley, did it?” said Yo-less.

“The plastic bats are good, aren’t they?” said Wobbler. “They cost fifty
pence each. Have some more punch?”

There were other people there too, although in the semidarkness it was
hard to make out who they thought they were. There was someone with a
lot of stitches and a bolt through his neck, but that was only Nodj, who
looked like that anyway. There were a bunch from Wobbler’s computer
group, who could get drunk on non-alcoholic alcohol and would then
stagger around saying things like “I’m totally mad!” There were a couple
of girls Wobbler vaguely knew. It was that sort of party. You just knew
someone would put something in the punch, and everyone would talk about
school, and one of the girls’ dads’d turn up at eleven o’clock and hang
around looking determined and put a damper on things, as if they weren’t
soaking wet already.

“We could play a game,” said Bigmac.

“Not Dead Man’s Hand,” said Wobbler. “Not after last year. You’re
supposed to pass around grapes and stuff, not just anything you find in
the fridge.”

“It wasn’t what it was,” said one of the girls. “It was what he said it
was.”

“All right,” said Johnny to Yo-less, “I’ve been trying to work it out.
Who are you?”

Yo-less had covered half his face with white make-up. He wasn’t wearing
a shirt, just his ordinary undershirt, but he’d found a piece of fake
leopard-skin-pattern material which he’d draped over his shoulders. And
he had a black hat.

“Baron Samedi, the voodoo god,” said Yo-less. “I got the idea out of
James Bond.”

“That’s racial stereotyping,” someone said.

“No, it’s not,” said Yo-less. “Not if I’m doing it.”

“I’m pretty sure Baron Samedi didn’t wear a bowler hat,” said Johnny.
“I’m pretty sure it was a top hat. A bowler hat makes you look a bit
like you’re going to an office somewhere.”

“I can’t help it—it was all I could get.”

“Maybe he’s Baron Samedi, the voodoo god of accountants,” said Wobbler.

For a moment Johnny thought of Mr. Grimm; his face was all one color,
but he looked like a voodoo god of accountants if ever there was one.

“In the film he was all mixed up with tarot cards and stuff,” said
Bigmac.

“Not really,” said Johnny, waking up. “Tarot cards are European occult.
Voodoo is African occult.”

“Don’t be stupid, it’s American,” said Wobbler.

“No, American occult is Elvis Presley not being dead and that sort of
thing,” said Yo-less. “Voodoo is basically West African with a bit of
Christian influence. I looked it up.”

“I’ve got some ordinary cards,” said Wobbler.

“No messing around with cards,” said Baron Yo-less severely. “My mum’d
go ballistic.”

“What about the thing with the letters and glasses?”

“The postman?”

“You know what I mean.”

“No. That could lead to dark forces taking over,” said Baron Yo-less.
“It’s as bad as Ouija boards.”

Someone put on a tape and started to dance. Johnny stared into his glass
of horrible punch. There was an orange seed floating in it.

Cards and boards, he thought. And the dead. That’s not dark forces.
Making a fuss about cards and heavy metal and going on about Dungeons
and Dragons stuff because it’s got demon gods in it is like guarding the
door when it is really coming up through the floorboards. Real dark
forces…aren’t dark. They’re sort of gray, like Mr. Grimm. They take all
the color out of life; they take a town like Blackbury and turn it into
frightened streets and plastic signs and Bright New Futures and towers
where no one wants to live and no one really does live. The dead seem
more alive than us. And everyone becomes gray and turns into numbers and
then, somewhere, someone starts to do arithmetic….

The Demon God Yoth-Ziggurat might want to chop your soul up into little
pieces, but at least he doesn’t tell you that you haven’t got one.

And at least you’ve got half a chance of finding a magic sword.

He kept thinking about Mr. Grimm. Even the dead kept away from him.

He woke up to hear Wobbler say, “We could go trick-or-treating.”

“My mother says that’s no better than begging,” said Yo-less.

“Hah, it’s worse than that around Joshua N’Clement,” said Bigmac. “It’s
called, ‘Give us a buck or kiss your tires night-night.’”

“We could do it around here,” said Wobbler. “Or we could go down the
mall.”

“That’ll just be full of kids in costume running around screaming.”

“A few more won’t hurt, then,” said Johnny.

“All right, then, everybody,” Wobbler said. “Come on….”

 

 

 

In fact Neil Armstrong Mall was full of all the other people who’d run
out of ideas at Halloween parties. They wandered around in groups
looking at one another’s clothes and talking, which was pretty much what
people did normally in any case, except that tonight the mall looked
like Transylvania on late-shopping night.

Zombies lurched under the sodium lights. Witches walked around in groups
and giggled at the boys. Grinning pumpkins bobbed on the escalators.
Vampires gibbered among the sad indoor trees, and kept fumbling their
false fangs back in. Mrs. Tachyon rummaged for cans in the litter bins.

Johnny’s pink ghost outfit caused a lot of interest.

“Seen any dead around lately?” said Baron Yo-less, when Wobbler and
Bigmac had gone off to buy some snacks.

“Hundreds,” said Johnny.

“You know what I mean.”

“No. Not them. I’m worried something may have happened to them.”

“They’re dead. If they exist, that is,” said Yo-less. “It’s not as
though they could get run over or something. If you’ve saved their
cemetery for them, they probably just aren’t bothering to talk to you
anymore. That’s probably what it is. I think—”

“Anyone want a raspberry snake?” said Wobbler, rustling a large paper
bag. “The skulls are good, too.”

“I’m going home,” said Johnny. “There’s something wrong, and I don’t
know what it is.”

A ten-year-old Bride of Dracula flapped past.

“I’ve got to admit this isn’t big fun,” said Wobbler. “Tell you
what…there’s Night of the Vampire Nerds on TV. We could go and watch
that.”

“What about everyone else?” said Bigmac. The rest of the party had
drifted off.

“Oh, well, they know where I live,” said Wobbler philosophically, as a
blood-streaked ghoul went by eating an ice cream.

“I don’t believe in vampire nerds,” said Bigmac, as they stepped into
the night air. It was a lot colder now, and the mist was coming back.

“Oh, I dunno,” said Wobbler. “It’s the sort we’d have around here.”

“They’d suck fruit juice,” said Yo-less.

“Their mum’d make them go to bed late,” said Bigmac, but they had to
think about that.

“Why are we going this way?” said Wobbler. “This isn’t the way back.”

“It’s foggy, too,” said Bigmac.

“It’s just the mist off the canal,” said Johnny.

Wobbler stopped.

“Oh, no,” he said.

“It’s quicker this way,” said Johnny.

“Oh, yes. Quicker. Oh, yes. Because I’m gonna run!”

“Don’t be stupid.”

“It’s Halloween!”

“So what? You’re dressed up as Dracula—what’re you worried about!”

“I’m not going past there tonight!”

“It’s no different than going past during the day.”

“All right, it’s the same, but I’m different!”

“Scared?” said Bigmac.

“What? Me? Scared? Huh? Me? I’m not scared.”

“Actually, it is a bit risky,” said Baron Yo-less.

“Yes, risky,” said Wobbler hurriedly.

“I mean, you never know,” said Yo-less.

“Never know,” Wobbler echoed.

“Look, it’s a street in our town. There’s lights and a phone booth and
everything,” said Johnny. “I just…I won’t be happy until I’ve checked,
okay? Anyway, there’s four of us, after all.”

“That just means something bad can happen four times,” said Wobbler.

But they’d been walking as they talked; now the little light in the
phone booth loomed in the fog like a blurred star.

The other three went quiet. The fog hushed all sounds.

Johnny listened. There wasn’t even that blotting-paper silence that the
dead made.

“See?” he whispered. “I said—”

Someone coughed, a long way off. All four boys suddenly tried to occupy
the same spot.

“Dead people don’t cough!” hissed Johnny.

“Then someone’s in the cemetery!” said Yo-less.

“Body snatchers!” said Wobbler.

“I’ve read about this in the papers!” whispered Wobbler. “People digging
up graves for satanic rites!”

“Shut up!” said Johnny. They sagged. “Sounded to me like it came from
the old boot factory,” he said.

“But it’s the middle of the night,” said Yo-less.

They crept forward. There was a dim shape pulled onto the pavement where
the streetlights barely shone.

“It’s a van,” said Johnny. “There. Count Dracula never drove a van.”

Bigmac tried to grin. “Unless he was a Vanpire—”

There was a metallic clink somewhere in the fog.

“Wobbler?” said Johnny, in what he hoped was a calm voice.

“Yes?”

“You said you were going to run. Go around to Mr. Atterbury’s house
right now and tell him to come here.”

“What? By myself?”

“You’ll run faster if you’re by yourself.”

“Right!”

Wobbler gave them a frightened look and vanished.

“What, exactly, are we doing?” asked Yo-less, as the other two peered
into the fog.

There was no mistaking the noise this time. It was wrapped about with
fog, but it was definitely the sound of a big diesel engine starting up.

“Someone’s swiping a bulldozer!” said Bigmac.

“I wish that’s what they were doing,” said Johnny, “but I don’t think
they are. Come on, will you?”

“Listen, if someone’s driving a bulldozer without lights in the fog, I’m
not hanging around!” said Yo-less.

Lights came on, fifty yards away. They didn’t show much. They just lit
up two cones of fog.

“Is that better?” said Johnny.

“No.”

The lights ground forward. The machine was bumping toward the cemetery
railings. Old buddleia bushes and dead stinging nettles smashed under
the treads, and there was a clang as the blade hit the low wall.

Johnny ran alongside the machine and shouted, “Oi!”

The engine stopped.

“Run away!” hissed Johnny to Yo-less. “Go on! Tell someone what’s
happening!”

A man unfolded himself from the cab and jumped down. He advanced toward
the boys, waving a finger.

“You kids,” he said, “are in real trouble.”

Johnny backed away, and someone grabbed his shoulders.

“You heard the man,” said a voice by his ear. “It’s your fault, this. So
you’d better not have seen anything, right? Because we know where you
live—Oh, no you don’t.” A hand shot out and grabbed Yo-less as he tried
to back away.

“Know what I think?” said the man who had been driving the bulldozer. “I
think it’s lucky we happened to be passing and found ’em messing around,
eh? Shame they’d driven it right through the place already, eh? Kids
today, eh?”

A half brick sailed past Johnny’s face and hit the man beside him on the
shoulder.

“What the—”

“I’ll smash your **** head in! I’ll smash your **** head in!”

Bigmac emerged from the fog. He looked terrifying. He reached beside
him, yanked a railing from the broken wall, and started to whirl it
round his head as he advanced.

“You what? You what? You what? I’m BONKERS, me!”

Then he started to run forward.

“Aaaaaaarrrrrr—”

And it dawned on all four people at once that he wasn’t going to stop.


TEN

 

Bigmac bounded over the rubble, an enraged skinhead skeleton.

“Get him!”

“You get him!”

The railing smacked into the side of the bulldozer, and Bigmac leaped.

Even fighting mad, he was still Bigmac, and the driver was a large man.
But what Bigmac had going for him was that he was, just for a few
seconds, unstoppable. If the man had managed to get one good punch in,
that would have been it, but there seemed to be too many arms and legs
in the way, and also Bigmac was trying to bite his ear.

Even so—

But a pair of headlights appeared near the gate and started to bounce up
and down in a way that suggested a car being driven at high speed across
rough ground.

The man holding Johnny let go and vanished into the fog. The other one
thumped Bigmac hard in the stomach and followed him.

The car skidded to a halt, and a fat vampire leaped out, shouting “Make
my night, make my night!”

Mr. Atterbury unfolded himself a little more sedately from the driver’s
seat.

“It’s all right, they’re gone,” said Johnny. “We’ll never find them in
this fog.”

There was the sound of an engine starting somewhere in the distance, and
then wheels skidded out onto the unseen road.

“But I got the number!” shouted Wobbler, hopping from foot to foot. “I
din’t have a pen, so I huffed on the window and wrote it in the huff!”

“They were going to drive the bulldozer into the cemetery!” said
Yo-less.

“Right in the huff, look!”

“Dear me, I expect a bit more than this of United Consolidated,” said
Mr. Atterbury. “Hadn’t we better see to your friend?”

Bigmac was kneeling on the ground, making small “oof, oof” noises.

“I’ll have to keep huffing on it to keep them there, mind!”

“You all right, Bigmac?”

They knelt down beside him. He was wheezing with his asthma.

“I…I really frightened him…yeah?” he managed.

“Right, right,” said Johnny. “Come on, we’ll give you a hand up….”

“I jus’ saw them there—”

“How do you feel?”

“Jus’ winded.”

“Hang on, I’ve got to go and huff on it again—”

“Help him into the car.”

“’S all right—”

“I’ll drive him to the hospital, just in case.”

“No!”

Bigmac pushed them away and rose unsteadily to his feet.

“’M all right,” he said. “Tough as old boots, me.”

Red and blue lights bloomed in the fog and a police siren dee-dah ed
once or twice and then stopped out of embarrassment.

“Ah,” said Mr. Atterbury. “I rather think my wife got a bit excited
about things and phoned the police. Er…Bigmac, isn’t it? Would you
recognize those men if you saw them again?”

“Sure. One of ’em’s got teethmarks in his ear.” Bigmac suddenly had the
hunted look of one who has never quite seen eye to eye with the
constabulary. “But I ain’t going in any police station. No way.”

Mr. Atterbury straightened up as the police car crunched to a halt.

“I think it might be a good idea if I do most of the talking,” he said
when Sergeant Comely stepped out into the night. “Ah, Ray,” he said.
“Glad you could drop by. Can I have a word?”

The boys stood in a huddle, watching as the men walked over to the
bulldozer and then inspected the remains of the wall.

“We’re going to be in trouble,” said Bigmac. “Old Comely’s probably
going to do me for ear biting. Or stealing the bulldozer. You wait.”

Wobbler tapped Johnny on the shoulder.

“You knew something was going to happen,” he said.

“Yes. Don’t know how.”

They watched the policemen peer into Mr. Atterbury’s car for a moment.

“He’s reading my huff,” said Wobbler. “That was lateral thinking, that
was.”

Then Comely went back to the police car. They heard him speaking into
the radio.

“No! I say again. That’s H for hirsute, W for Wagner—Wagner! Wagner! No!
W as in Westphalia, A for aardvark—”

Mr. Atterbury appeared from the direction of the bulldozer, waving a
pair of pliers.

“I don’t think it’s going to move again tonight,” he said.

“What’s going to happen?” said Johnny.

“Not sure. We can probably trace the van. I think I’ve persuaded
Sergeant Comely that we ought to deal with this quietly, for now. He’ll
take statements from you, though. That might be enough.”

“Were they from United Consolidated?”

The old man shrugged.

“Perhaps someone thought everything might be a lot simpler if the
cemetery wasn’t worth saving,” he said. “Perhaps a couple of likely lads
were slipped a handful of cash to do…er…a Halloween prank—”

There was a burst of noise from the police radio.

“We’ve stopped a van on the East Slate Road,” the sergeant called out.
“Sounds like our lads.”

“Well Done, Said PC Plonk,” said Yo-less, in a hollow voice. “You Have
Captured the Whole Gang! Good Work, Fumbling Four! And They All Went
Home for Tea And Cakes.”

“It would help if you’d come along to the police station, Bigmac,” said
Mr. Atterbury.

“No way!”

“I’ll come along with you. And one of your friends could come, too.”

“It’d really help,” said Johnny.

“I’ll go with you,” said Yo-less.

“And then,” said Mr. Atterbury, “I’m going to take considerable pleasure
in ringing up the chairman of United Consolidated. Considerable
pleasure.”

 

 

 

It was ten minutes later. Bigmac had gone to the police station,
accompanied by Yo-less and Mr. Atterbury and an assurance that he wasn’t
going to be asked any questions about certain other minor matters
relating to things like cars not being where the owners had expected
them to be, and other things of that nature.

The sodium lights of Blackbury glowed in the fog, which was thinning out
a bit now. They made the darkness beyond the carpet warehouse a lot
deeper and much darker.

“Well, that’s it, then,” said Wobbler. “Game over. Let’s go home.”

The fog was being torn apart by the wind. It was even possible to see
the moon through the flying streamers.

“Come on,” he repeated.

“It’s still not right,” said Johnny. “It can’t end like this.”

“Best ending,” said Wobbler. “Just like Yo-less said. Nasty men foiled.
Kids save the day. Everyone gets a bun.”

The abandoned bulldozer seemed a lot bigger in this pale light.

The air had a fizz to it.

“Something’s going to happen,” said Johnny, running toward the cemetery.

“Now, look—”

“Come on!”

“No! Not in there!”

Johnny turned around.

“And you’re pretending to be a vampire?”

“But—”

“Come on, the railings have been knocked down.”

“But it’s nearly midnight! And there’s dead people in there!”

“Well? We’re all dead, sooner or later.”

“Yeah, but me, I’d like it to be later, thank you!”

Johnny could feel it all around him—a squashed feel to things, like the
air gets before a thunderstorm. It cracked off the buckled gravestones
and tingled on the dusty shrubberies.

The fog was pouring away now, as if it was trying to escape from
something. The moon shone out of a damp blue-black sky casting darker
shadows on the ground.

North Drive and East Way…they were still there, but they didn’t look the
same now. They belonged somewhere else—somewhere where people didn’t
take the roads of the dead and give them the names of the streets of the
living…

“Wobbler?” said Johnny, without looking around.

“Yeah?”

“You there?”

“Yeah.”

“Thanks.”

He could feel something lifting off him, like a heavy blanket. He was
amazed his feet still touched the ground.

He ran along North Drive, to the little area where all the dead roads
met.

There was someone already there.

She spun around with her arms out and her eyes blissfully shut, the
gravel crunching under her feet, the moonlight glinting off her ancient
hat. All alone, twirling and twirling, Mrs. Tachyon danced in the night.

Not all alone…

The air sparkled. Glowing lines, blue as electricity, thin as smoke,
poured out of the clear sky. Where they touched the fingers of the
dancing woman, they stretched out and broke, then re-formed.

They crawled over the grass. They whirred through the air. The whole
cemetery was alive with pale-blue comets.

Alive…

Mrs. Tachyon’s feet were off the ground.

Johnny looked at his own fingers. There was a blue glow crackling over
his right hand, like Saint Elmo’s fire. It sparkled as he waved it
toward the stars and felt his feet leave the gravel path.

“Ooowwwwwah!”

The lights spun him around and let him drift gently back down.

“Who are you?”

A line of fire screamed across the night and then exploded. Sparks flew
out and traced lines in the air, which took on, as though it was
outlined in neon, a familiar shape.

“Well, until tonight,” it said, blue fire sizzling in his beard, “I
thought I was William Stickers. Watch this!”

Blue glows arched over the gravestones again and clustered around the
dark bulk of the bulldozer, flowing across it so that it glowed.

The engine started.

There was a clash of gears.

It moved forward. The railings clanged and cart-wheeled away. The brick
wall crumbled.

Lights orbited around the bulldozer as it plowed onward.

“Hey! Stop!”

Metal groaned. The engine note dropped to a dull, insistent throbbing.

The lights turned to look at Johnny. He could feel their attention.

“What are you doing?”

A light burst into a glittering diagram of the Alderman.

“Isn’t this what people wanted?” he said. “We don’t need it anymore. So
if anyone’s going to do it, it should be us. That’s only right.”

“But you said this was your place!” said Johnny.

Mrs. Sylvia Liberty outlined herself in the air.

“We have left Nothing there,” she said, “of any Importance.”

“Force of habit,” said William Stickers, “is what has subjugated the
working man for too long. I was right about that, anyway.”

“The disgusting Bolshevik, although he needs a shave, is Quite correct,”
said Mrs. Liberty. And then she laughed. “It seems to me we’ve spent Far
too long moping around because of what we’re not, without any
Consideration of what we might be.”

“Chronologically gifted,” said Mr. Einstein, crackling into existence.

“Dimensionally advantaged,” said Mr. Fletcher, sparkling like a
flashbulb.

“Bodily unencumbered,” said the Alderman.

“Into Overtime,” said Stanley Roundway.

“Enhanced,” said Mr. Vicenti.

“We had to find it out,” said Mr. Fletcher. “You have to find it out.
You have to forget who you were. That’s the first step. And stop being
frightened of old ghosts. Then you’ve got room to find out what you are.
What you can be.”

“So we’re off,” said the Alderman.

“Where to?”

“We don’t know. It is going to be very interesting to find out,” said
Solomon Einstein.

“But…but…we’ve saved the cemetery!” said Johnny. “We had a meeting! And
Bigmac…and I spoke up and…there’s been things on the television and
people have really been talking about this place! No one’s going to
build anything on it! There’s been birdwatchers here and everything!
Turn the machine off! We’ve saved the cemetery.”

“But we don’t need it anymore,” said the Alderman.

“We do!”

The dead looked at him.

“We do,” Johnny repeated. “We…need it to be there.”

The diesel engine chugged. The machine vibrated. The dead, if that’s
what they still were, seemed to be thinking.

Then Solomon Einstein nodded.

“This iss of course very true,” he said in his excited squeaky voice.
“It all balances, you see. The living have to remember, the dead have to
forget. Conservation of energy.”

The bulldozer’s engine stuttered into silence.

Mr. Vicenti held up a hand. It glowed like a firework.

“We came back to say good-bye. And thank you,” he said.

“I hardly did anything.”

“You listened. You tried. You were there. You can get medals just for
being there. People forget the people who were just there.”

“Yes. I know.”

“But now…we must be somewhere else.”

“No…don’t go yet,” said Johnny. “I have to ask you—”

Mr. Vicenti turned.

“Yes?”

“Um…”

“Yes?”

“Are there…angels involved? You know? Or…devils and things? A lot of
people would like to know.”

“Oh, no. I don’t think so. That sort of thing…no. That’s for the living.
No.”

The Alderman rubbed his spectral hands. “I rather think it’s going to be
a lot more interesting than that.”

The dead were walking away, some of them fading back into shining smoke
as they moved.

Some were heading for the canal. There was a boat there. It looked
vaguely like a gondola. A dark figure stood at one end, leaning on a
pole that vanished into the water.

“This is my lift,” said William Stickers.

“It looks a bit…spooky. No offense meant,” said Johnny.

“Well, I thought I’d give it a try. If I don’t like it, I’ll go
somewhere else,” said William Stickers, stepping aboard. “Off we go,
comrade.”

RIGHT, said the ferryman.

The boat moved away from the bank. The canal was only a few yards wide,
but the boat seemed to be drifting off a long, long way….

Voices came back over the waters.

“You know, an outboard motor on this and it’d go like a bird.”

I LIKE IT THE WAY IT IS, MR. STICKERS.

“What’s the pay like?”

SHOCKING.

“I wouldn’t stand for it, if I was you—”

“I’m not sure where he’s going,” said the Alderman, “but he’s certainly
going to reorganize things when he gets there. Bit of a traditional
thinker, our William.”

There was a click and hum from farther along the bank. Einstein and
Fletcher were sitting proudly in some sort of—well, it looked partly
like an electronic circuit diagram, and partly like a machine, and
partly like mathematics would look if it was solid. It glowed and
fizzled.

“Good, isn’t it?” said Mr. Fletcher. “You’ve heard of a train of
thought?”

“This is a flight of the imagination,” said Solomon Einstein.

“We’re going to have a good look at some things.”

“That’s right. Starting with everything.”

Mr. Fletcher thumped the machine happily.

“Right! The sky’s the limit, Mr. Einstein!”

“Not even that, Mr. Fletcher!”

The lines grew bright, drew together, became more like a diagram. And
vanished. Just before they vanished, though, they seemed to be
accelerating.

And then there were three.

“Did I see them waving?” said Mrs. Liberty.

“And particling, I shouldn’t wonder,” said the Alderman. “Come, Sylvia.
I feel a more down-to-earth mode of transport would be suitable for us.”

He took her hand. They ignored Johnny and stepped onto the black waters
of the canal.

And sank, slowly, leaving a pearly sheen on the water that gradually
faded away.

Then there was the sound of a motor starting up.

Out of the water, transparent as a bubble, the spirit of the dead Ford
Capri rose gently toward the sky.

The Alderman wound down an invisible window.

“Mrs. Liberty thinks we ought to tell you something,” he said. “But…it’s
hard to explain, you know.”

“What is?” said Johnny.

“By the way, why are you wearing a pink sheet?”

“Um—”

“I expect it’s not important.”

“Yes.”

“Well…” The car turned slowly; Johnny could see the moon through it.
“You know those games where this ball runs up and bounces around and
ends up in a slot at the bottom?”

“Pinball machines?”

“Is that what they’re called now?”

“I think so.”

“Oh. Right.” The Alderman nodded. “Well…when you’re bouncing around from
pin to pin, it is probably very difficult to know that outside the game
there’s a room and outside the room there’s a town and outside the town
there’s a country and outside the country there’s a world and outside
the world there’s a billion trillion stars and that’s only the start of
it…but it’s there, d’you see? Once you know about it, you can stop
worrying about the slot at the bottom. And you might bounce around a
good deal longer.”

“I’ll…try to remember it.”

“Good man. Well, we’d better be going….”

Ghostly gears went crunch. The car juddered.

“Drat the thing. Ah…Be seeing you…”

It rose gently, turned toward the east, and sped away and up….

And then there was one.

“Well, I think I might as well be off,” said Mr. Vicenti. He produced a
top hat and an old-fashioned walking cane out of thin air.

“Why are you all leaving?” said Johnny.

“Oh, yes. It’s Judgment Day,” said Mr. Vicenti. “We decided.”

“I thought that was chariots and things.”

“I think you’ll have to use your own judgment on that one. No point in
waiting for what you’ve already got. It’s different for everybody, you
see. Enjoy looking after the cemetery. They’re places for the living,
after all.”

Mr. Vicenti pulled on a pair of white gloves and pressed an invisible
elevator button. He began to rise. White feathers cascaded out of his
sleeves.

“Dear me,” he said, and opened his jacket. “Go on, away with you! All of
you! Shoo!”

Half a dozen ghostly pigeons untangled themselves and rocketed off into
the dawn.

“There. That proves it. You can escape from anything, eventually,” he
called down. Johnny just managed to hear him add, “…although I will
admit that three sets of manacles, twenty feet of chain, and a canvas
sack can present a considerable amount of difficulty in certain
circumstances….”

The light glinted off his hat.

And then there was…one.

Johnny turned around.

Mr. Grimm was standing neatly in the middle of the path, with his neat
hands neatly folded. Darkness surrounded him like a fog. He was watching
the sky. Johnny had never seen such an expression….

He remembered the time, many years ago, when Bigmac had had a party and
hadn’t invited him. He’d said afterward, “Well, of course not. I knew
you’d come, you didn’t have to be asked, you didn’t need to be asked,
you could just have turned up.” But everyone else was going to go, and
was talking about going, and he’d felt like a pit had opened up in his
life. That sort of thing was pretty awful when you were seven.

It looked much, much worse when you were dead.

Mr. Grimm saw Johnny staring at him.

“Huh,” he said, pulling himself together. “They’ll be sorry.”

“I’m going to find out about you, Mr. Grimm,” said Johnny.

“Nothing to find out,” snapped the ghost.

Johnny walked through him. There was a chilly moment, and then Mr. Grimm
was gone.

And then there were none.

Real night flowed back in. The sounds of the town, the distant hum of
the traffic, filled the space taken up by the silence.

Johnny walked back along the gravel path.

“Wobbler?” he whispered. “Wobbler?”

He found him crouched behind a gravestone with his eyes shut.

“Come on,” said Johnny.

“Look, I—”

“Everything’s okay.”

“It was fireworks, right?” said Wobbler. His Count Dracula make-up was
streaked and smudged, and he’d lost his fangs. “Someone was letting some
fireworks off, yes?”

“That’s right.”

“Of course, I wasn’t scared.”

“No.”

“But those things can be dangerous….”

“Oh, that’s right.”

They turned as a rattling sound started up behind them. Mrs. Tachyon
appeared, pushing her shopping cart; the wheels bounced and skidded on
the gravel.

She ignored both of them. They stepped aside hurriedly as the cart, one
wheel squeaking, vanished into the gloom.

Then they walked home through the morning mists.


ELEVEN

 

As Tommy Atkins had once said, things aren’t necessarily over just
because they’ve stopped.

There was Bigmac, for a start. Yo-less had gone home with him, and
Bigmac’s brother had been waiting up and had started on at him and
Bigmac had looked at him strangely for a few seconds and then hit him so
hard that he knocked him out. Yo-less said, with awe in his voice, that
it’d been so hard that the word “TAH” was printed in pen on the
brother’s chin. And then he’d growled at Clint and the dog had hidden
under the sofa. So Yo-less had to get his mother out of bed to bring her
car around to carry Bigmac’s suitcase, three tropical fish tanks, and
two hundred copies of Guns and Ammo back to her spare room.

And there was the generous donation to the Blackbury Volunteers by
United Amalgamated Consolidated Holdings. As Mr. Atterbury said, it’s
amazing what you can do with a kind word, provided you’ve also got a big
stick.

The cemetery was already looking more lived-in. There were endless
arguments among the Volunteers who wanted it to be habitat and the ones
who wanted it to be ecology and a middle group who just wanted it to be
clean and tidy, but at least it was wanted, which seemed to Johnny to be
the most important thing.

It took Johnny a week to find what he wanted, and when he found it, he
took it along to the cemetery after school, when no one was about. There
was frost on the ground.

“Mr. Grimm?”

He found him by the canal, sitting staring at the water.

“Mr. Grimm?”

“Go away. You’re dangerous.”

“I thought you’d be a bit…lonely. So I bought you this.”

He opened the bag.

“Mr. Atterbury helped,” he said. “He phoned around to some of his
friends who’ve got electrical shops. It’s been repaired. It’ll work
until the batteries die, and then I thought maybe it’d work on ghost
batteries.”

“What is it?”

“A very small television,” said Johnny. “I thought I could put it right
in a bush or somewhere and no one’ll know it’s there except you.”

“What are you doing this for?” said Mr. Grimm suspiciously.

“Because I looked you up in the newspaper. May the twenty-first,
nineteen twenty-seven. There wasn’t very much. Just the bit about them
finding…you in the canal, and the coroner’s inquest.”

“Oh? Poking around, eh? And what do you think you know about anything?”

“Nothing.”

“I don’t have to explain.”

“Is that why you couldn’t leave with the others?”

“What? I can leave whenever I like,” said the ghost of Mr. Grimm very
quickly. “If I’m staying here, it’s because I want to be here. I know my
place. I know how to do the right thing. I could leave whenever I want.
But I’ve got more pride than that. People like you don’t understand
that. You don’t take life seriously.”

It hadn’t been a long report in the paper. Mr. Vicenti was right. In
those days, some things didn’t get a lot of reporting. Mr. Grimm had
been a respectable citizen, keeping his head down, a man at the back of
the crowd, and then his business had failed and there’d been some other
trouble involving money, and then there’d been the canal. Mr. Grimm had
taken life very seriously, starting with his own.

People didn’t talk much about that sort of thing in those days. Suicide
was against the law. Johnny had wondered why. It meant that if you
missed, or the gas ran out, or the rope broke, you could get locked up
in prison to show you that life was really very jolly and thoroughly
worth living.

Mr. Grimm sat with his hands clasped around his knees.

Johnny realized that he could think of nothing to say, so he said
nothing.

Instead, he wedged the little pocket television deep in a bush, where no
one, not even the keenest bird-watcher, would find it.

“Can you turn it on with your mind?” he said.

“Who says I shall want to?”

The picture came on, and there was the faint tinkly sound of the
familiar signature tune.

“Let’s see,” said Johnny. “You’ve missed a week…. Mrs. Swede has just
found but Janine didn’t go to the party…. Mr. Hatt has fired Jason from
the shop because he thinks he took the money…and…”

“I see.”

“So…I’ll be off, then, shall I?”

“Right.”

Johnny backed away.

“I’m sure the hours’ll just fly by.”

“Right.”

“So…cheerio, then.”

“Right.”

“Mr. Grimm?” Johnny wanted to say: You can leave anytime you want. But
there seemed to be no point.

“Right.”

Johnny watched for a while, and then turned and walked away. The other
three were waiting for him by the phone booth.

“Was he there?” said Yo-less.

“Yes.”

“What’s he doing now?”

“Watching television,” said Johnny.

“I expect ghosts do that a lot,” said Wobbler.

“’Spect so.”

“You all right?”

“Just thinking about the difference between heaven and hell.”

“That doesn’t sound like ‘all right’ to me.”

Johnny blinked. And looked around at the world. It was, not to put too
fine a point on it, wonderful. Which wasn’t the same as nice. It wasn’t
even the same as good. But it was full of…stuff. You’d never get to the
end of it. It was always springing new things on you….

“Yeah,” he said. “All right. What shall we do now?”


About the Author

 

 

TERRY PRATCHETT’s novels have been translated into more than two dozen
languages and have sold over 45 million copies. In addition to his
bestselling series about the fantastical flat planet Discworld, he has
also written books for young readers, including The Bromeliad Trilogy:
TRUCKERS, DIGGERS, and WINGS, as well as two other books in the Johnny
Maxwell Trilogy: ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND and JOHNNY AND THE BOMB. He
has also written three books about the young witch Tiffany Aching: THE
WEE FREE MEN, A HAT FULL OF SKY, and WINTERSMITH.
      Mr. Pratchett received the Carnegie Medal, Britain’s highest honor
for a children’s novel, for THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED
RODENTS. He lives in England.

 

You can visit Mr. Pratchett online at www.terrypratchettbooks.com.

 

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.


Also by TERRY PRATCHETT

 

The Carpet People

The Dark Side of the Sun

Strata

 

THE BROMELIAD TRILOGY:

Truckers • Diggers • Wings

 

THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY:

Only You Can Save Mankind • Johnny and the Dead

Johnny and the Bomb

 

The Unadulterated Cat
(illustrated by Gray Jollife)

 

Good Omens (with Neil Gaiman)

 

 

THE DISCWORLD SERIES

 

The Color of Magic

The Light Fantastic

Equal Rites • Mort • Sourcery

Wyrd Sisters • Pyramids • Guards! Guards!

Eric • Moving Pictures • Reaper Man

Witches Abroad • Small Gods • Lords and Ladies

Men at Arms • Soul Music • Feet of Clay

Interesting Times • Maskerade

Hogfather • Jingo • The Last Continent

Carpe Jugulum • The Fifth Elephant

The Truth • The Thief of Time • Night Watch

The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents

The Wee Free Men • Monstrous Regiment

A Hat Full of Sky • Going Postal • Thud!

Wintersmith • Making Money

The Last Hero: A Discworld Fable
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

The Art of Discworld (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

Where’s My Cow? (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)


Credits

 

Cover art © 2006 by Bill Mayer

Cover design by Joel Tippie


Copyright

 

 

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD. 

Copyright © 1993 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett. 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions.

 By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

 

Mobipocket Reader 

March 2007 

ISBN 978-0-06-137671-9

 

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

[]

 


About the Publisher

 

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900

Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

*But according to Wobbler it was really: “Hey, kids! Go to school and
get a good education! Listen to your parents! It’s cool to go to
church!”

 

 

*So he ran it on pellets of gunpowder. Really. It was nearly the
external combustion engine.

 

 

*The “E” kept rubbing off.

 

 
