[Image]



TERRY PRATCHETT


[Image]

WINGS

[image]


DEDICATION

To Lyn and Rhianna
and the sandwich-eating alligator
at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida


Contents

Cover

Title Page

Dedication

Prologue

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

About the Author

Author’s Note

Other Works

Credits

Copyright

Back Ad

About the Publisher


PROLOGUE

IN THE BEGINNING . . .

. . . was Arnold Bros (est. 1905), the great department store.

It was the home of several thousand nomes—as they called
themselves—who’d long ago given up life in the countryside and settled
down under the floorboards of mankind.

Not that they had anything to do with humans. Humans were big and slow
and stupid.

Nomes live fast. To them, ten years is like a century. Since they’d been
living in the Store for more than eighty years, they’d long ago
forgotten that there were things like Sun and Rain and Wind. All there
was was the Store—created by the legendary Arnold Bros (est. 1905) as a
Proper Place for nomes to live.

And then, into the Store from an Outside the nomes didn’t believe
existed, came Masklin and his little tribe. They knew what Rain and Wind
were, all right. That’s why they’d tried to get away from them.

With them they brought the Thing. For years they had thought of the
Thing as a sort of talisman or lucky charm. Only in the Store, near
electricity, did it wake up and tell a few selected nomes things they
hardly understood. . . .

They learned that they had originally come from the stars, in some sort
of Ship, and that somewhere up in the sky that Ship had been waiting for
thousands of years to take them HOME. . . .

And they learned that the Store was going to be demolished in three
weeks.

How Masklin tricked, bullied, and persuaded the nomes into leaving the
Store by stealing one of its huge trucks is recounted in _Truckers_.

They made it to an old quarry, and for a little while things went well
enough.

But when you’re four inches high in a world full of giant people, things
never go very well for very long.

They found that humans were going to reopen the quarry.

At the same time, they also found a scrap of newspaper which had a
picture of Richard Arnold, grandson of one of the Brothers who founded
Arnold Bros. The company that owned the Store was now a big
international concern, and Richard Arnold—said the newspaper—was going
to Florida to watch the launch of its first communications satellite.

The Thing admitted to Masklin that, if it could get into space, it could
call the Ship. He decided to take a few nomes and go to the airport and
find some way of getting to Florida to get the Thing into the sky. Which
of course was ridiculous, as well as impossible. But he didn’t know
this, so he tried to do it anyway.

Thinking that Florida was five miles away and that there were perhaps
several hundred human beings in the world, and not knowing where exactly
to go or what to do when they got there, but determined to get there and
do it _anyway_, Masklin and his companions set out.

The nomes that stayed behind fought the humans in _Diggers_. They
defended their quarry as long as they could and fled on Big John, the
great yellow digging machine.

But this is Masklin’s story. . . .

[image]


1

_AIRPORT: A place where people hurry up and wait_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

LET THE EYE of your imagination be a camera. . . .

This is the universe, a glittering ball of galaxies like the ornament on
some unimaginable Christmas tree.

Find a galaxy. . . .

_Focus_

This is a galaxy, swirled like the cream in a cup of coffee, every
pinpoint of light a star.

Find a star. . . .

_Focus_

This is a solar system, where planets barrel through the darkness around
the central fires of the sun. Some planets hug close, hot enough to melt
lead. Some drift far out, where the comets are born.

Find a blue planet. . . .

_Focus_

This is a planet. Most of it is covered in water. It’s called Earth.

Find a country. . . .

_Focus_

. . . blues and greens and browns under the sun, and here’s a pale
oblong which is . . .

_Focus_

. . . an airport, a concrete hive for silver bees, and there’s a . . .

_Focus_

. . . building full of people and noise and . . .

_Focus_

. . . a hall of lights and bustle and . . .

_Focus_

. . . a bin full of rubbish and . . .

_Focus_

. . . a pair of tiny eyes . . .

_Focus_

_Focus_

_Focus_

Click!

Masklin slid cautiously down an old burger carton.

He’d been watching humans. Hundreds and hundreds of humans. It was
beginning to dawn on him that getting on a jet plane wasn’t like
stealing a truck.

Angalo and Gurder had nestled deep into the rubbish and were gloomily
eating the remains of a cold, greasy french fry.

This has come as a shock to all of us, Masklin thought.

I mean, take Gurder. Back in the Store he was the Abbot. He believed
that Arnold Bros made the Store for nomes. And he still thinks there’s
some sort of Arnold Bros somewhere, watching over us, because we are
important. And now we’re out here, and all we’ve found is that nomes
aren’t important at all. . . .

And there’s Angalo. He doesn’t believe in Arnold Bros, but he likes to
think Arnold Bros exists just so that he can go on not believing in him.

And there’s me.

I never thought it would be this hard.

I thought jet planes were just trucks with more wings and less wheels.

There’s more humans in this place than I’ve ever seen before. How can we
find Grandson Richard, 39, in a place like this?

I hope they’re going to save me some of that potato. . . .

Angalo looked up.

“Seen him?” he said, sarcastically.

Masklin shrugged. “There’s lots of humans with beards,” he said. “They
all look the same to me.”

“I _told_ you,” said Angalo. “Blind faith never works.” He glared at
Gurder.

“He could have gone already,” said Masklin. “He could have walked right
past me.”

“So let’s get back,” said Angalo. “People will be missing us. We’ve made
the effort, we’ve seen the airport, we’ve nearly got trodden on _dozens_
of times. Now let’s get back to the real world.”

“What do you think, Gurder?” said Masklin.

The Abbot gave him a long, despairing look.

“I don’t know,” he said. “I really don’t know. I’d hoped . . .”

His voice trailed off. He looked so downcast that even Angalo patted him
on the shoulder.

“Don’t take it so hard,” he said. “You didn’t _really_ think some sort
of Grandson Richard, 39, was going to swoop down out of the sky and
carry us off to Florida, did you? Look, we’ve given it a try. It hasn’t
worked. Let’s go home.”

“Of course I didn’t think _that_,” said Gurder irritably. “I just
thought that . . . maybe in some way . . . there’d be a way.”

“The world belongs to humans. They built everything. They run
everything. We might as well accept it,” said Angalo.

Masklin looked at the Thing. He knew it was listening. Even though it
was just a small black cube, it somehow always looked more alert when it
was listening.

The trouble was, it spoke only when it felt like it. It’d always give
you just enough help, and no more. It seemed to be testing him the whole
time.

Somehow, asking the Thing for help was like admitting that you’d run out
of ideas. But . . .

“Thing,” he said, “I know you can hear me, because there must be loads
of electricity in this building. We’re at the airport. We can’t find
Grandson Richard, 39. We don’t know how to _start_ looking. Please help
us.”

The Thing stayed silent.

“If you _don’t_ help us,” said Masklin quietly, “we’ll go back to the
quarry and face the humans, but that won’t matter to you because we’ll
leave you here. We really will. And no nomes will ever find you again.
There will never be another chance. We’ll die out, there will be no more
nomes anywhere, and it will be because of you. And in years and years to
come you’ll be all alone and useless and you’ll think, Perhaps I should
have helped Masklin when he asked me, and then you’ll think, If I had my
time all over again, I _would_ have helped him. Well, Thing, imagine all
that has happened and you’ve magically got your wish. Help us.”

“It’s a machine!” snapped Angalo. “You can’t blackmail a machine—!”

One small red light lit up on the Thing’s black surface.

“I know you can tell what other machines are thinking,” said Masklin.
“But can you tell what nomes are thinking? Read my mind, Thing, if you
don’t think I’m serious. You want nomes to act intelligently. Well, I
_am_ acting intelligently. I’m intelligent enough to know when I need
help. I need help now. And you can help. I know you can. If you don’t
help us, we’ll leave right now and forget you ever existed.”

A second light came on, very faintly.

Masklin stood up and nodded to the others.

“All right,” he said. “Let’s go.”

The Thing made the little electronic noise that was the machine’s
equivalent of a nome clearing his throat.

_“How can I be of assistance?”_ it said.

Angalo grinned at Gurder.

Masklin sat down again.

“Find Grandson Richard Arnold, 39,” he said.

_“This will take a long time,”_ said the Thing.

“Oh.”

A few lights moved on the Thing’s surface. Then it said, _“I have
located a Richard Arnold, aged thirty-nine. He has just gone into the
first-class departure lounge for flight 205 to Miami, Florida.”_

“That didn’t take a very long time,” said Masklin.

_“It was three hundred microseconds,”_ said the Thing. _“That’s long.”_

“I don’t think I understood all of it, either,” Masklin added.

_“Which parts didn’t you understand?”_

“Nearly all of them,” said Masklin. “All the bits after ‘gone into.’”

_“Someone with the right name is here and waiting in a special room to
get on a big silver bird that flies in the sky to go to a place called
Florida,”_ said the Thing.

“What big silver bird?” said Angalo.

“It means jet plane. It’s being sarcastic,” said Masklin.

“Yeah? How does it know all this stuff?” said Angalo suspiciously.

_“This building is full of computers,”_ said the Thing.

“What, like you?”

The Thing managed to looked offended. _“They are very, very primitive,”_
it said. _“But I can understand them. If I think slowly enough. Their
job is to know where humans are going.”_

“That’s more than most humans do,” said Angalo.

“Can you find out how we can get to him?” said Gurder, his face alight.

“Hold on, hold on,” said Angalo, quickly. “Let’s not rush into things
here.”

“We came here to find him, didn’t we?” said Gurder.

“Yes! But what do we actually _do_?”

“Well, of course, we . . . we . . . that is, we’ll . . .”

“We don’t even know what a departure lounge is.”

“The Thing said it’s a room where humans wait to get on an airplane,”
said Masklin.

Gurder prodded Angalo with an accusing finger.

“You’re frightened, aren’t you,” he said. “You’re frightened that if we
see Grandson Richard, 39, it’ll mean there really _is_ an Arnold Bros
and you’ll have been _wrong_! You’re just like your father. He could
never stand being wrong either!”

“I’m frightened about _you_,” said Angalo. “Because you’ll see that
Grandson Richard is just a human. Arnold Bros was just a human, too. Or
two humans. They just built the Store for humans. They didn’t even know
about nomes! And you can leave my father out of this, too.”

The Thing opened a small hatch on its top. It did that sometimes. When
the hatches were shut, you couldn’t see where they were, but whenever
the Thing was really interested in something, it opened up and extended
a small silver dish on a pole, or a complicated arrangement of pipes.

This time it was a piece of wire mesh on a metal rod. It started to turn
slowly.

Masklin picked up the box.

While the other two argued, he asked, quietly, “Do you know where this
lounge thing is?”

_“Yes,”_ said the Thing.

“Let’s go, then.”

Angalo looked round.

“Hey, what are you doing?” he said.

Masklin ignored him. He said to the Thing: “And do you know how much
time we have before he starts going to Florida?”

_“About half an hour.”_

Nomes live ten times faster than humans. They’re harder to see than a
high-speed mouse.

That’s one reason why most humans hardly ever see them.

The other is that humans are very good at not seeing things they know
aren’t there. And since sensible humans know that there are no such
things as people four inches high, a nome who doesn’t want to be seen
probably _won’t_ be seen.

So no one noticed three tiny blurs darting across the floor of the
airport building. They dodged the rumbling wheels of luggage trolleys.
They shot between the legs of slow-moving humans. They skidded around
chairs. They became nearly invisible as they crossed a huge, echoing
corridor.

And they disappeared behind a potted plant.

It has been said that everything everywhere affects everything else.
This may be true.

Or perhaps the world is just full of patterns.

For example, in a tree nine thousand miles away from Masklin, high on a
cloudy mountainside, was a plant that looked like one large flower. It
grew wedged in a fork of the trees, its roots dangling in the air to
trap what nourishment they could from the mists. Technically, it was an
epiphytic bromeliad, although not knowing this made very little
difference to the plant.

Water condensed into a tiny pool in the center of the bloom.

And there were the frogs.

Very, very small frogs.

They had such a tiny life cycle, it still had training wheels on it.

They hunted insects among the petals. They laid their eggs in the
central pool. Tadpoles grew up and became more frogs. And made more
tadpoles. Eventually they died and sank down and joined the compost at
the base of the leaves, which, in fact, helped nourish the plant.

And this had been the way things were for as far back as the frogs could
remember.*

Except that on this day, while it hunted for flies, one frog lost its
way and crawled around the side of one of the outermost petals, or
possibly leaves, and saw something it had never seen before.

It saw the universe.

More precisely, it saw the branch stretching away into the mists.

And several yards away, glistening with droplets of moisture in a
solitary shaft of sunlight, was another flower.

The frog sat and stared.

“Hngh! Hngh! Hngh!”

Gurder leaned against the wall and panted like a hot dog on a sunny day.

Angalo was almost as badly out of breath but was going red in the face
trying not to show it.

“Why didn’t you _tell_ us!” he demanded.

“You were too busy arguing,” said Masklin. “So I knew the only way to
get you running was to start moving.”

“Thank . . . you . . . very much,” Gurder heaved.

“Why aren’t you puffed out?” said Angalo.

“I’m used to running fast,” said Masklin, peering around the plant.
“Okay, Thing. Now what?”

_“Along this corridor,”_ said the Thing.

“It’s full of humans!” squeaked Gurder.

“Everywhere’s full of humans. That’s why we’re doing this,” said
Masklin. He paused, and then added, “Look, Thing, isn’t there any other
way we can go? Gurder nearly got squashed just now.”

Colored lights moved in complicated patterns across the Thing. Then it
said, _“What is it you want to achieve?”_

“We must find Grandson Richard, 39,” panted Gurder.

“No. Going to the Florida place is the important thing,” said Masklin.

“It isn’t!” said Gurder. “I don’t want to go to any Florida!”

Masklin hesitated. Then he said, “This probably isn’t the right time to
say this, but I haven’t been totally honest with you. . . .”

He told them about the Thing, and space, and the Ship in the sky. Around
them there was the endless thundering noise of a building full of busy
humans.

Eventually Gurder said, “You’re not trying to find Grandson Richard at
all?”

“I think he’s probably very important,” said Masklin hurriedly. “But
you’re right. At Florida there’s a place where they have the sort of jet
planes that go straight up to put kind of bleeping radio things in the
sky.”

“Oh, come _on_,” said Angalo. “You can’t just put things in the sky!
They’d fall down.”

“I don’t really understand it myself,” Masklin admitted. “But if you go
up high enough, there is _no_ down. I think. Anyway, all we have to do
is to go to Florida and put the Thing on one of these going-up jets and
it can do the rest, it says.”

“All?” said Angalo.

“It can’t be harder than stealing a truck,” said Masklin.

“You’re not suggesting we _steal_ a plane?” said Gurder, by this time
totally horrified.

“Wow!” said Angalo, his eyes lighting up as if by some internal power
source. He loved vehicles of all sorts—especially when they were
traveling fast.

“You would, too, wouldn’t you,” said Gurder accusingly.

“Wow!” said Angalo again. He seemed to be looking at a picture only he
could see.

“You’re crazy,” said Gurder.

“No one said anything about stealing a plane,” said Masklin quickly. “We
aren’t going to steal a plane. We’re just going for a ride on one, I
hope.”

“Wow!”

“And we’re _not_ going to try to drive it, Angalo!”

Angalo shrugged.

“All right,” he said. “But suppose I’m on it, and the driver becomes
ill, then I expect I’ll have to take over. I mean, I drove the Truck
pretty well—”

“You kept running _into_ things!” said Gurder.

“I was learning. Anyway, there’s nothing to run into in the sky except
clouds, and they look pretty soft,” said Angalo.

“There’s the _ground!_”

“Oh, the ground wouldn’t be a problem. It’d be too far away.”

Masklin tapped the Thing. “Do you know where the jet plane is that’s
going to Florida?”

_“Yes.”_

“Lead us there, then. Avoiding too many humans, if you can.”

It was raining softly, and because it was early evening, lights were
coming on around the airport.

Absolutely no one heard the faint tinkle as a little ventilation grille
dropped off an outside wall.

Three blurred shapes lowered themselves down onto the concrete and sped
away.

Toward the planes.

Angalo looked up. And up some more. And there was still more up to come.
He ended up with his head craned all the way back.

He was nearly in tears. “Oh, wow!” he kept saying.

“It’s too big,” muttered Gurder, trying not to look. Like most of the
nomes who had been born in the Store, he hated looking up and not seeing
a ceiling. Angalo was the same, but more than being Outside he hated not
going fast.

“I’ve seen them go up in the sky,” said Masklin. “They really do fly.
Honestly.”

“Wow!”

It loomed over them, so big that you had to keep on stepping back and
back to see how big it was. Rain glistened on it. The airport lights
made smears of green and white bloom on its flanks. It wasn’t a _thing_,
it was a bit of shaped sky.

“Of course, they look smaller when they’re a long way off,” Masklin
muttered.

He stared up at the plane. He’d never felt smaller in his life.

“I _want_ one,” moaned Angalo, clenching his fists. “_Look_ at it. It
looks as though it’s going too fast even when it’s standing still!”

“How do we get on it, then?” said Gurder.

“Can’t you just see their faces back home if we turned up with this?”
said Angalo.

“Yes. I can. Horribly clearly,” said Gurder. “But how do we get on it?”

“We could—” Angalo began. He hesitated. “Why did you have to say that?”
he snapped.

“There’s the holes where the wheels stick through,” said Masklin. “I
think we could climb up there.”

_“No,”_ said the Thing, which was tucked under his arm. _“You would not
be able to breathe. You must be properly inside. Where the planes go,
the air is thin.”_

“I should hope so,” said Gurder stoutly. “That’s why it’s air.”

_“You would not be able to breathe,”_ said the Thing patiently.

“Yes I would,” said Gurder. “I’ve always been able to breathe.”

“You get more air close to the ground,” said Angalo. “I read that in a
book. You get lots of air low down, and not much when you go up.”

“Why not?” said Gurder.

“Dunno. It’s frightened of heights, I guess.”

Masklin waded through the puddles on the concrete so that he could see
down the far side of the aircraft. Some way away a couple of humans were
using some sort of machines to load boxes into a hole in the side of the
plane. He walked back, around the huge tires, and squinted up at a long,
high tube that stretched from the building.

He pointed.

“I think that’s how humans are loaded onto it,” he said.

“What, through a pipe? Like water?” said Angalo.

“It’s better than standing out here getting wet, anyway,” said Gurder.
“I’m soaked through already.”

“There’s stairs and wires and things,” said Masklin. “It shouldn’t be
too difficult to climb up there. There’s bound to be a gap we can slip
in by.” He sniffed. “There always is,” he added, “when humans build
things.”

“Let’s do it!” said Angalo. “Oh, wow!”

“But you’re not to try to steal it,” said Masklin as they helped the
slightly plump Gurder lumber into a run. “It’s going where we want to go
anyway—”

“Not where I want to go,” moaned Gurder. “I want to go home!”

“—and you’re not to try to drive it. There’s not enough of us. Anyway, I
expect it’s a lot more complicated than a truck. It’s a—do you know what
it’s called, Thing?”

_“A Concorde.”_

“There,” said Masklin. “It’s a Concorde. Whatever that is. And you’ve
got to promise not to steal it.”

[image]


2

_CONCORDE: It goes twice as fast as a bullet and you get smoked salmon_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

SQUEEZING THROUGH A gap in the humans-walking-onto-planes pipe wasn’t as
hard as coming to terms with what was on the other side.

The floors of the sheds in the quarry had been bare boards or stamped
earth. In the airport building it was squares of a sort of shiny stone.
But here—

Gurder flung himself facedown and buried his nose in it.

“Carpet!” he said, almost in tears. “Carpet! I never thought I’d see you
again!”

“Oh, get up,” said Angalo, embarrassed at the Abbot acting like that in
front of someone who, however much of a friend he was, hadn’t been born
a Store nome.

Gurder stood up awkwardly. “Sorry,” he mumbled, brushing himself off.
“Don’t know what possessed me there. It just took me back, that’s all.
Real carpet. Haven’t seen real carpet for _months.”_

He blew his nose noisily. “We had some beautiful carpets in the Store,
you know. Beautiful. Some of them had patterns on them.”

Masklin looked up the pipe. It was like one of the Store’s corridors,
and quite brightly lit.

“Let’s move on,” he said. “It’s too exposed here. Where are all the
humans, Thing?”

_“They will be arriving shortly.”_

“How does it _know_?” Gurder complained.

“It listens to other machines,” said Masklin.

_“There are also many computers on this plane,”_ said the Thing.

“Well, that’s nice,” said Masklin vaguely. “You’ll have someone to talk
to, then.”

_“They are quite stupid,”_ said the Thing, and managed to express
disdain without actually having anything to express it with.

A few feet away the corridor opened into a new space. Masklin could see
a curtain, and what looked like the edge of a chair.

“All right, Angalo,” he said. “Lead the way. I know you want to.”

It was two minutes later.

The three of them were sitting under a seat.

Masklin had never really thought about the insides of aircraft. He’d
spent days up on the cliff behind the quarry, watching them take off. Of
course, he’d assumed there were humans inside. Humans got everywhere.
But he’d never really thought about the insides. If ever there was
anything that looked made up of outsides, it was a plane flying.

But it had been too much for Gurder. He was in tears.

“Electric light,” he moaned. “And more carpets! And big soft seats!
They’ve even got napkins on them! And there isn’t any mud _anywhere_!
There’s even _signs_!”

“There, there,” said Angalo helplessly, patting him on the shoulder. “It
was a _good_ Store, I know.” He looked up at Masklin. “You’ve got to
admit it’s unsettling,” he said. “I was expecting . . . well, wires and
pipes and exciting levers and things. Not something like the Arnold Bros
Furnishing Department!”

“We shouldn’t stay here,” said Masklin. “There’ll be humans all over the
place pretty soon. Remember what the Thing said.”

They helped Gurder up and trotted under the rows of seats with him
between them. But it wasn’t like the Store in one important way, Masklin
realized. There weren’t many places to hide. In the Store there was
always something to get behind or under or wriggle through. . . .

He could already hear distant sounds. In the end they found a gap behind
a curtain, in a part of the aircraft where there were no seats. Masklin
crawled inside, pushing the Thing in front of him.

They weren’t distant sounds now. They were very close. He turned his
head and saw a human foot a few inches away.

At the back of the gap there was a hole in the metal wall where some
thick wires passed through. It was just big enough for Angalo and
Masklin, and big enough for a terrified Gurder with the two of them
pulling on his arms. There wasn’t too much room, but at least they
couldn’t be seen.

They couldn’t see, either. They lay packed together in the gloom, trying
to make themselves comfortable on the wires.

After a while Gurder said, “I feel a bit better now.”

Masklin nodded.

There were noises all around them. From somewhere far below came a
series of metallic clonks. There was the mournful sound of human voices,
and then a jolt.

“Thing?” he whispered.

_“Yes?”_

“What’s happening?”

_“The plane is getting ready to become airborne.”_

“Oh.”

_“Do you know what that means?”_

“No. Not really.”

_“It is going to fly in the air. Borne means to be carried, and air
means air. To be borne in the air. Airborne.”_

Masklin could hear Angalo’s breathing.

He settled himself as best he could between the metal wall and a heavy
bundle of wires, and stared into the darkness.

The nomes didn’t speak. After a while there was a faint jerk and a
sensation of movement.

Nothing else happened. It went on not happening.

Eventually Gurder, his voice trembling with terror, said, “Is it too
late to get off, if we—?”

A sudden distant thundering noise finished the sentence for him. A dull
rumbling shook everything around them very gently but very firmly.

Then there was a heavy pause, like the moment a ball must feel between
the time it’s thrown up and the time it starts to come down, and
something picked up all three of them and slid them into a struggling
heap. The floor tried to become the wall.

The nomes hung on to one another, stared into one another’s faces, and
screamed.

After a while, they stopped. There didn’t seem much point in continuing.
Besides, they were out of breath.

The floor, very gradually, became a proper floor again and didn’t show
any further ambitions to become a wall.

Masklin pushed Angalo’s foot off his neck.

“I think we’re flying,” he said.

“Is that what it was?” said Angalo weakly. “It looks kind of more
graceful when you see it from the ground.”

“Is anyone hurt?”

Gurder pulled himself upright.

“I’m all bruises,” he said. He brushed himself down. And then, because
there is no changing nomish nature, he added, “Is there any food
around?”

They hadn’t thought about food.

Masklin stared behind him into the tunnel of wires.

“Maybe we won’t need any,” he said, uncertainly. “How long will it take
to get to Florida, Thing?”

_“The captain has just said it will be six hours and forty-five
minutes,”_ said the Thing.*

“We’ll starve to death!” said Gurder.

“Maybe there’s something to hunt?” said Angalo hopefully.

“I shouldn’t think so,” Masklin said. “This doesn’t look like a mouse
kind of place.”

“The humans’ll have food,” said Gurder. “Humans always have food.”

“I _knew_ you were going to say that,” said Angalo.

“It’s just common sense.”

“I wonder if we can see out of a window?” said Angalo. “I’d like to see
how fast we’re going. All the trees and things whizzing past, and so
on?”

“Look,” said Masklin, before things got out of hand. “Let’s just wait
for a while, eh? Everyone calm down. Have a bit of a rest. _Then_ maybe
we can look for some food.”

They settled down again. At least it was warm and dry. Back in the days
when he’d lived in a hole in a bank, Masklin had spent far too much time
cold and wet to turn up his nose at a chance to sleep warm and dry.

He dozed. . . .

Airborne.

Air . . . born . . .

Perhaps there were hundreds of nomes who lived in the airplanes in the
same way that nomes had lived in the Store. Perhaps they got on with
their lives under the carpeted floor somewhere, while they were whisked
to all the places Masklin had seen on the only map the nomes had ever
found. It had been in a pocket diary, and the names of the faraway
places written on it were like magic—Africa, Australia, China, Equator,
Printed in Hong Kong, Iceland . . .

Perhaps they’d never looked out of the windows. Perhaps they’d never
known that they were moving at all.

He wondered if this was what Grimma had meant by all the stuff about the
frogs in the flower. She’d read it in a book. You could live your whole
life in some tiny place and think it was the whole world. The trouble
was, he’d been angry. He hadn’t wanted to listen.

Well, he was out of the flower now, and no mistake. . . .

The frog had brought some other young frogs to its spot among the leaves
at the edge of the world of the flower.

They stared at the branch. There wasn’t just one flower out there, there
were dozens, although the frogs weren’t able to think like this because
frogs can’t count beyond one.

They saw lots of ones.

They stared at them. Staring is one of the few things frogs are good at.

Thinking isn’t. It would be nice to say that the tiny frogs thought long
and hard about the new flower, about life in the old flower, about the
need to explore, about the possibility that the world was bigger than a
pool with petals around the edge.

In fact, what they thought was: .–.–.mipmip.–.–. mipmip.–.–. mipmip.

But what they _felt_ was too big for one flower to contain.

Carefully, slowly, not at all certain why, they plopped down onto the
branch.

There was a polite beeping from the Thing.

_“You may be interested to know,”_ it said, _“that we’ve broken the
sound barrier.”_

Masklin turned wearily to the others.

“All right, own up,” he said. “Who broke it?”

“Don’t look at me,” said Angalo. “I didn’t touch anything.”

Masklin crawled to the edge of the hole and peered out.

There were human feet out there. Female human feet, by the look of it.
They usually were the ones with the less practical shoes.

You could learn a lot about humans by looking at their shoes. It was
about all a nome had to look at, most of the time. The rest of the human
was normally little more than the wrong end of a pair of nostrils, a
long way up.

Masklin sniffed.

“There’s food somewhere,” he said.

“What kind?” said Angalo.

“Never mind what kind,” said Gurder, pushing him out of the way.
“Whatever it is, I’m going to _eat_ it.”

“Get back!” Masklin snapped, pushing the Thing into Angalo’s arms. “I’ll
go! Angalo, don’t let him move!”

He darted out, ran for the curtain, and slid behind it. After a few
seconds, he moved just enough to let one eye and a frowning eyebrow
show.

The room was some sort of food place. The human females were taking
trays of food out of the wall. Nomish sense of smell is sharper than a
fox’s; it was all Masklin could do not to drool. He had to admit it—it
was all very well hunting and growing things, but what you got wasn’t
half as good as the food you found around humans.

One of the females put the last tray on a trolley and wheeled it past
Masklin. The wheels were almost as tall as he was.

As it squeaked past, he darted out of his hiding place and leaped onto
it, squeezing himself among the bottles. It was a stupid thing to do, he
knew. It was just better than being stuck in a hole with a couple of
idiots.

Rows and rows of shoes. Some black, some brown. Some with laces, some
without. Quite a few of them without feet in them, because the humans
had taken them off.

Masklin looked up as the trolley inched forward.

Rows and rows of legs. Some in skirts, but most in trousers.

Masklin looked up farther. Nomes rarely saw humans sitting down.

Rows and rows of bodies, topped with rows and rows of heads with faces
at the front. Rows and rows of—

Masklin crouched back among the bottles.

Grandson Richard was watching him.

It was the face in the newspaper. It had to be. There was the little
beard, and the smiling mouth with lots of teeth in it. And the hair that
looked as though it had been dramatically carved out of something shiny
rather than been grown in the normal way.

Grandson Richard, 39.

The face stared at him for a moment and then looked away.

He can’t have seen me, Masklin told himself. I’m hidden away here.

What will Gurder say when I tell him?

He’ll go mad, that’s what.

I think I’ll keep it to myself for a while. That might be an amazingly
good idea. We’ve got enough to worry about as it is.

39. Either there’ve been thirty-eight other Grandson Richards, and I
don’t think that’s what it means, or it’s a newspaper human way of
saying he’s thirty-nine years old. Nearly half as old as the Store. And
the Store nomes say the Store is as old as the world. I know that can’t
be true, but—

I wonder what it feels like to live nearly _forever_?

He burrowed farther into the things on the shelf. Mostly they were
bottles, but there were a few bags containing knobbly things a bit
smaller than Masklin’s fist. He stabbed at the paper with his knife
until he’d cut a hole big enough, and pulled one of them out.

It was a salted peanut. Well, it was a start.

He grabbed the packet just as a hand reached past.

It was close enough to touch.

It was close enough to touch _him_.

He could see the red of its fingernails as they slid by him, closed
slowly over another packet of nuts, and withdrew.

It dawned on Masklin later that the giving-out-food woman wouldn’t have
been able to see him. She just reached down and into the tray for what
she knew would be there, and this almost certainly didn’t include
Masklin.

That’s what he decided later. At the time, with a human hand almost
brushing his head, it all looked a lot different. He took a running dive
off the trolley, rolled when he hit the carpet, and scurried under the
nearest seat.

He didn’t even wait to catch his breath. Experience had taught him that
it was when you stopped to catch your breath that things caught you. He
charged from seat to seat, dodging giant feet, discarded shoes, dropped
newspapers and bags. By the time he crossed the bit of aisle to the food
place, he was a blur even by nome standards. He didn’t stop even when he
reached the hole. He just leaped, and went through it without touching
the sides.

“A peanut?” said Angalo. “Between three? That’s not a mouthful each!”

“What do you suggest?” said Masklin, bitterly. “Do you want to go to the
giving-out-food-woman and say there’s three small hungry people down
here?”

Angalo stared at him. Masklin had got his breath back now but was still
very red in the face.

“You know, that could be worth a try,” he said.

“What?”

“Well, if you were a human, would you expect to see nomes on a plane?”
said Angalo.

“Of course I wouldn’t—”

“I bet you’d be amazed if you _did_ see one, eh?”

“Are you suggesting we deliberately show ourselves to a human?” Gurder
said suspiciously. “We’ve never done that, you know.”

“I nearly did just now,” said Masklin. “I won’t do it again in a hurry!”

“We’ve always preferred to starve to death on one peanut, you mean?”

Gurder looked longingly at the piece of nut in his hand. They’d eaten
peanuts in the Store, of course. Around Christmas Fayre, when the Food
Hall was crammed with food you didn’t normally see in the other seasons,
they made a nice end to a meal. Probably they made a nice start to a
meal, too. What they didn’t make was a meal.

“What’s the plan?” he asked wearily.

One of the giving-out-food humans was pulling trays off a shelf when a
movement made it look up. Its head turned very slowly.

Something small and black was being lowered down right by its ear.

It stuck tiny thumbs in small ears, wagged its fingers, and put out its
tongue.

“Thrrrrrrrrp,” said Gurder.

The tray in the human’s hands crashed onto the floor in front of it. It
made a long-drawn-out noise which sounded like a high-pitched foghorn
and backed away, raising its hands to its mouth. Finally it turned, very
slowly, like a tree about to fall, and fled between the curtains.

When it came back, with another human being, the little figure had gone.

So had most of the food.

“I don’t know when I last had smoked salmon,” said Gurder happily.

“Mmmph,” said Angalo.

“You’re not supposed to eat it like that,” said Gurder severely. “You’re
not supposed to shove it all in your mouth and then cut off whatever
won’t fit. Whatever will people think?”

“’S no people here,” said Angalo, but indistinctly. “’S just you an’
Masklin.”

Masklin cut the lid off a container of milk. It was practically
nome-sized.

“This is more like it, eh?” said Gurder. “Proper food the natural way,
out of tins and things. None of this having to clean the dirt off it,
like in the quarry. And it’s nice and warm in here, too. It’s the only
way to travel. Anyone want some of this”—he prodded a dish vaguely, not
sure of what was in it—“stuff?”

The others shook their heads. The dish contained something shiny and
wobbly and pink with a cherry on it, and in some strange way it managed
to look like something you wouldn’t eat even if it were pushed onto your
plate after a week’s starvation diet.

“What does it taste of?” said Masklin, after Gurder had chewed a
mouthful.

“Tastes of pink,” said Gurder.*

“Anyone fancy the peanut to finish with?” said Angalo. He grinned. “No?
I’ll chuck it away, shall I?”

“No!” said Masklin. They looked at him. “Sorry,” he said. “I mean, you
shouldn’t. It’s wrong to waste good food.”

“It’s _wicked_,” said Gurder primly.

“Mmm. Don’t know about wicked,” said Masklin. “But it’s stupid. Put it
in your pack. You never know when you might need it.”

Angalo stretched his arms and yawned.

“A wash would be nice,” he said.

“Didn’t see any water,” Masklin said. “There’s probably a sink or a
lavatory somewhere, but I wouldn’t know where to start looking.”

“Talking of lavatories—” said Angalo.

“Right down the other end of the pipe, please,” said Gurder.

_“And keep away from any wiring,”_ volunteered the Thing. Angalo nodded
in a puzzled fashion, and crawled away into the darkness.

Gurder yawned and stretched his arms.

“Won’t the giving-out-food humans look for us?” he said.

“I don’t think so,” said Masklin. “Back when we used to live Outside,
before we found the Store, I’m sure humans saw us sometimes. I don’t
think they really believe their eyes. They wouldn’t make those weird
garden ornaments if they’d ever seen a _real_ nome.”

Gurder reached into his robe and pulled out the picture of Grandson
Richard. Even in the dim light of the pipe, Masklin recognized it as the
human in the seat. He hadn’t got creases on his face from being folded
up, and he wasn’t made up of hundreds of tiny dots, but apart from that
. . .

“Do you think he’s here somewhere?” said Gurder wistfully.

“Could be. Could be,” said Masklin, feeling wretched. “But, look, Gurder
. . . maybe Angalo goes a bit too far, but he could be right. Maybe
Grandson Richard is just another human being, you know. Probably humans
_did_ build the Store just for humans. Your ancestors just moved in
because, well, it was warm and dry. And—”

“I’m not listening, you know,” said Gurder. “I’m not going to be told
that we’re just things like rats and mice. We’re special.”

“The Thing is quite definite about us coming from somewhere else,
Gurder,” said Masklin meekly.

The Abbot folded up the picture. “Maybe we did. Maybe we didn’t,” he
said. “That doesn’t matter.”

“Angalo thinks it matters if it’s true.”

“Don’t see why. There’s more than one kind of truth.” Gurder shrugged.
“I might say: You’re just a lot of dust and juices and bones and hair,
and that’s true. And I might say: You’ve got something inside your head
that goes away when you die. That’s true, too. Ask the Thing.”

Colored lights flickered across the Thing’s surface.

Masklin looked shocked. “I’ve _never_ asked it that sort of question,”
he said.

“Why not? It’s the first question _I’d_ ask.”

“It’ll probably say something like ‘Does not compute’ or ‘Inoperative
parameters.’ That’s what it says when it doesn’t know and doesn’t want
to admit it. Thing?”

The Thing didn’t reply. Its lights changed their pattern.

“Thing?” Masklin repeated.

_“I am monitoring communications.”_

“It often does that when it’s feeling bored,” said Masklin to Gurder.
“It just sits there listening to invisible messages in the air. Pay
attention, Thing. This is important. We want—”

The lights moved. A lot of them went red.

“Thing! We—”

The Thing made the little clicking noise that was its equivalent of
clearing its throat.

_“A nome has been seen in the pilot’s cabin.”_

“Listen, Thing, we—what?”

_“I repeat: a nome has been seen in the pilot’s cabin.”_

Masklin looked around wildly.

“Angalo?”

_“That is an extreme probability,”_ said the Thing.

[image]


3

_TRAVELING HUMANS: Large, nomelike creatures. Many humans spend a lot of
time traveling from place to place, which is odd because there are
usually too many humans at the place they’re going to anyway. Also see
under ANIMALS, INTELLIGENCE, EVOLUTION, and CUSTARD_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

THE SOUND OF Masklin’s and Gurder’s voices echoed up and down the pipe
as they scrambled over the wires.

“I _thought_ he was taking too long!”

“You shouldn’t have let him go off by himself! You know what he’s like
about driving things!”

_“I_ shouldn’t have let him?”

“He’s just got no sense of—which way now?”

Angalo had said he thought the inside of a plane would be a mass of
wires and pipes. He was nearly right. The nomes squeezed their way
through a narrow, cable-hung world under the floor.

“I’m too old for this! There comes a time in a nome’s life when he
shouldn’t crawl around the inside of terrible flying machines!”

“How many times have you done it?”

“Once too often!”

_“We are getting closer,”_ said the Thing.

“This is what comes of showing ourselves! It’s a Judgment,” declared
Gurder.

“Whose?” said Masklin grimly, helping him up.

“What do you mean?”

“There has to be someone to make a judgment!”

“I meant just a judgment in general!”

Masklin stopped.

“Where now, Thing?”

_“The message told the giving-out-food people that a strange little
creature was on the flight deck,”_ said the Thing. _“That is where we
are. There are many computers here.”_

“They’re talking to you, are they?”

_“A little. They are like children. Mostly they listen,”_ said the Thing
smugly. _“They are not very intelligent.”_

“What are we going to _do?_” said Gurder.

“We’re going to—” Masklin hesitated. The word “rescue” was looming up
somewhere in the sentence ahead.

It was a good, dramatic word. He longed to say it. The trouble was that
there was another, simpler, nastier word a little further beyond.

It was “How?”

“I don’t think they’d try to hurt him,” he said, hoping it was true.
“Maybe they’ll put him somewhere. We ought to find a place where we can
see what’s happening.” He looked helplessly at the wires and intricate
bits of metal in front of them.

“You’d better let me lead, then,” said Gurder in a matter-of-fact voice.

“Why?”

“You might be very good in wide-open spaces,” said the Abbot, pushing
past him. “But in the Store we knew all about getting around inside
things.”

He rubbed his hands together.

“Right,” he said, then grabbed a cable and slid through a gap Masklin
hadn’t even noticed was there.

“Used to do this sort of thing when I was a boy,” he said. “We used to
get up to all sorts of tricks.”

“Yes?” said Masklin.

“Down this way, I think. Mind the wires. Oh, yes. Up and down the lift
shafts, in and out of the telephone switchboard . . .”

“I thought you always said kids spent far too much time running around
and getting into mischief these days?”

“Ah. Yes. Well, _that’s_ juvenile delinquency,” said Gurder sternly.
“It’s quite different from our youthful high spirits. Let’s try up
here.”

They crawled between two warm metal walls. There was daylight ahead.

Masklin and Gurder lay down and pulled themselves forward.

There was an odd-shaped room, not a lot bigger than the cab of the truck
itself. Like the cab, it was really just a space where the human drivers
fitted into the machinery.

There was a _lot_ of that.

It covered the walls and ceiling. Lights and switches, dials and levers.
Masklin thought: If Dorcas were here, we’d never get him to leave.
Angalo’s here somewhere, and we want _him_ to leave.

There were two humans kneeling on the floor. One of the giving-out-food
females was standing by them. There was a lot of mooing and growling
going on.

“Human talking,” muttered Masklin. “I wish we could understand it.”

_“Very well,”_ said the Thing. _“Stand by.”_

“You can understand human noises?”

_“Certainly. They’re only nome noises slowed down.”_

“What? _What?_ You never told us that! You never told us that before!”

_“There are many billions of things I have not told you. Where would you
like me to start?”_

“You can start by telling me what they’re saying now,” said Masklin.
“Please?”

_“One of the humans has just said, ‘It must have been a mouse or
something,’ and the other one said, ‘You show me a mouse wearing clothes
and I’ll admit it was a mouse.’ And the giving-out-food woman said, ‘It
was no mouse I saw. It blew a raspberry at me (exclamation).’”_

“What’s a raspberry?”

_“The small red fruit of the plant_ Rubus idaeus._”_

Masklin turned to Gurder.

“Did you?”

“Me? What fruit? Listen, if there’d been any fruit around I’d have eaten
it. I just went ‘thrrrrp.’”

_“One of the humans has just said, ‘I looked round and there it was,
staring out of the window.’”_

“That’s Angalo, all right,” said Gurder.

_“Now the other kneeling-down human has said, ‘Well, whatever it is,
it’s behind this panel and it can’t go anywhere.’”_

“It’s taking off a bit of the wall!” said Masklin. “Oh, no! It’s
reaching inside!”

The human mooed.

_“The human said, ‘It bit me! The little devil bit me!’”_ said the
Thing, conversationally.

“Yep. That’s Angalo,” said Gurder. “His father was like that, too. A
fighter in a tight corner.”

“But they don’t know what they’ve got!” said Masklin urgently. “They’ve
seen him but he ran away! They’re arguing about it! They don’t really
believe in nomes! If we can get him out before he’s caught, they’re
bound to think it was a mouse or something!”

“I suppose we could get round there inside the walls,” said Gurder. “But
it’d take too long.”

Masklin looked desperately around the cabin. Besides the three people
trying to catch Angalo, there were two humans up at the front. They must
be the drivers, he thought.

“I’m right out of ideas,” he said. “Can you think of anything, Thing?”

_“There is practically no limit to what I can think of.”_

“I _mean_, is there anything you can do to help us rescue Gurder?”

_“Yes.”_

“You’d better do it, then.”

_“Yes.”_

A moment later they heard the low clanging of alarms. Lights began to
flash. The drivers shouted and leaned forward and started doing things
to switches.

“What’s going on?” said Masklin.

_“It is possible that the humans are startled that they are no longer
flying this machine,”_ said the Thing.

“They’re not? Who is, then?”

The lights rippled smoothly across the Thing.

_“I am.”_

One of the frogs fell off the branch and disappeared quietly into the
leafy canopy far below. Since very small, light animals can fall a long
way without being hurt, it’s quite likely that it survived in the forest
world under the tree and had the second most interesting experience any
tree frog has ever had.

The rest of them crawled onward.

Masklin helped Gurder along another metal channel full of wires.
Overhead they could hear human feet and the growling of humans in
trouble.

“I don’t think they’re very happy about it,” said Gurder.

“But they haven’t got time to look for something that was probably a
mouse,” said Masklin.

“It’s not a mouse, it’s Angalo!”

“But afterward they’ll _think_ it was a mouse. I don’t think humans want
to know things that disturb them.”

“Sound just like nomes to me,” said Gurder.

Masklin looked at the Thing under his arm.

“Are you really driving the Concorde?” he said.

_“Yes.”_

“I thought to drive things you had to turn wheels and change gears and
things?” said Masklin.

_“That is all done by machines. The humans press buttons and turn wheels
just to tell machines what to do.”_

“So what are you doing, then?”

_“I,”_ said the Thing, _“am being in charge.”_

Masklin listened to the muted thunder of the engines.

“Is that hard?” he said.

_“Not in itself. However, the humans keep trying to interfere.”_

“I think we’d better find Angalo quickly, then,” said Gurder. “Come on.”

They inched their way along another cable tunnel.

“They ought to thank us for letting our Thing do their job for them,”
said Gurder solemnly.

“I don’t think they see it like that, exactly,” said Masklin.

_“We are flying at a height of 55,000 feet at 1,352 miles per hour,”_
said the Thing.

When they didn’t comment, it added, _“That’s very high and very fast.”_

“That’s good,” said Masklin, who realized that some sort of remark was
expected.

_“Very, very fast.”_

The two nomes squeezed through the gap between a couple of metal plates.

_“Faster than a bullet, in fact.”_

“Amazing,” said Masklin.

“_Twice the speed of sound in this atmosphere,”_ the Thing went on.

“Wow.”

_“I wonder if I can put it another way,”_ said the Thing, and it managed
to sound slightly annoyed. _“It could get from the Store to the quarry
in under fifteen seconds.”_

“Good thing we didn’t meet it coming the other way, then,” said Masklin.

“Oh, stop teasing it,” said Gurder. “It wants you to tell it it’s a good
boy . . . Thing,” he corrected himself.

_“I do not,”_ said the Thing, rather more quickly than usual. _“I was
merely pointing out that this is a very specialized machine and requires
skillful control.”_

“Perhaps you shouldn’t talk so much, then,” said Masklin.

The Thing rippled its lights at him.

“That was nasty,” said Gurder.

“Well, I’ve spent a year doing what the Thing’s told me and I’ve never
had so much as a ‘thank you,’” said Masklin. “How high are fifty-five
thousand feet, anyway?”

_“Ten point forty-two miles. Twice as far as the distance from the Store
to the quarry.”_

Gurder stopped.

“Up?” he said. “We’re that far _up_?”

He looked down at the floor.

“Oh,” he said.

“Now don’t _you_ start,” said Masklin quickly. “We’ve got enough
problems with Angalo. Stop holding on to the wall like that!”

Gurder had gone white.

“We must be as high as all those fluffy white cloud things,” he
breathed.

_“No,”_ said the Thing.

“That’s some comfort, then,” said Gurder.

_“They’re all a long way below us.”_

“Oh.”

Masklin grabbed the Abbot’s arm.

“Angalo, remember?” he said.

Gurder nodded slowly and inched his way forward, holding on to things
with his eyes closed.

“We mustn’t lose our heads,” said Masklin. “Even if we _are_ up so
high.” He looked down. The metal below him was quite solid. You needed
to use imagination to see through it to the ground below.

The trouble was that he had a very good imagination.

“Ugh,” he said. “Come on, Gurder. Give me your hand.”

“It’s right in front of you.”

“Sorry. Didn’t see it with my eyes shut.”

They spent ages cautiously moving up and down among the wiring, until
eventually Gurder said, “It’s no good. There isn’t a hole big enough to
get through. He’d have found it, if there was.”

“Then we’ve got to find a way into the cab and get him out like that,”
said Masklin.

“With all those humans in there?”

“They’ll be too busy to notice us. Right, Thing?”

_“Right.”_

There is a place so far up there is no down.

A little lower, a white dart seared across the top of the sky,
outrunning the night, overtaking the sun, crossing in a few hours an
ocean that was once the edge of the world. . . .

Masklin lowered himself carefully to the floor and crept forward. The
humans weren’t even looking in his direction.

I hope the Thing really knows how to drive this plane, he thought.

He sidled along toward the panels where, with any luck, Angalo was
hiding.

This wasn’t right. He hated being exposed like this. Of course, it had
probably been worse in the days when he used to have to hunt alone. If
anything had caught him then, he would never have known it. He’d have
been a mouthful. Whereas no one knew what humans would do to a nome if
they caught one. . . .

He darted into the blessed shadows.

“Angalo!” he hissed.

After a while a voice from behind the wiring said, “Who is it?”

Masklin straightened up. “How many guesses do you want?” he said in his
normal voice.

Angalo dropped down. “They chased me!” he said.

“And one of them stuck its arm—”

“I know. Come on, while they’re busy.”

“What’s happening?” said Angalo, as they hurried out into the light.

“The Thing is flying us.”

“How? It’s got no arms. It can’t change gear or anything—”

“Apparently it’s being bossy to the computers that do all that. Come
on.”

“I looked out of the window,” bubbled Angalo. “There’s sky all over the
place!”

“Don’t remind me,” said Masklin.

“Let me just have one more look—” Angalo began.

“Listen, Gurder’s waiting for us and we don’t want any more trouble—”

“But this is better than any truck—”

There was a strangled kind of noise.

The nomes looked up.

One of the humans was watching them. Its mouth was open, and it had an
expression on its face of someone who is going to have a lot of
difficulty explaining what he has just seen, especially to himself.

The human was already getting to its feet.

Angalo and Masklin looked at each other.

“Run!” they shouted.

Gurder was lurking suspiciously in a patch of shadow by the door when
they came past, arms and legs going like pistons. He caught up the
skirts of his robe and scurried after them.

“What’s happening? What’s happening?”

“There’s a human after us!”

“Don’t leave me behind! Don’t leave me behind!”

Masklin was just ahead of the other two as they raced up the aisle
between the rows of humans, who paid no attention at all to three tiny
blurs running between the seats.

“We shouldn’t have . . . stood around . . . looking!” Masklin gasped.

“We might . . . never . . . have a chance . . . like that again!” panted
Angalo.

“You’re _right_!”

The floor tilted slightly.

“_Thing!_ What are you doing!”

_“Creating a distraction.”_

“Don’t! Everyone this way!”

Masklin darted between two seats, around a pair of giant shoes, and
threw himself flat on the carpet. The others hurled themselves down
behind him.

Two huge human feet were a few inches away from them.

Masklin pulled the Thing up close to his face.

“Let them have their airplane back!” he hissed.

_“I was hoping to be allowed to land it,”_ said the Thing. Even though
its voice was always flat and expressionless, Masklin still thought that
it sounded wistful.

“Do you know how to land one of these things?” said Masklin.

_“I should like the opportunity to learn—”_

“Let them have it back right now!”

There was a faint lurch and a change in the pattern of the lights on the
Thing’s surface. Masklin breathed out.

“Now, will everyone act sensibly for five minutes?” he said.

“Sorry, Masklin,” said Angalo. He tried to look apologetic, but it
didn’t work. Masklin recognized the wide-eyed, slightly mad smile of
someone very nearly in his own personal heaven. “It was just that . . .
do you know it’s even blue below us? It’s like there’s no ground down
there at all! And—”

“If the Thing tries any more flying lessons, we might all find out if
that’s true,” said Masklin gloomily. “So let’s just sit down and be
quiet, shall we?”

They sat in silence for a while, under the seat.

Then Gurder said, “That human has got a hole in his sock.”

“What about it?” said Angalo.

“Dunno, really. It’s just that you never think of humans as having holes
in their socks.”

“Where you get socks, holes aren’t far behind,” said Masklin.

“They’re good socks, though,” said Angalo.

Masklin stared at them. They just looked like basic socks to him. Nomes
in the Store used them as sleeping bags.

“How can you tell?” he said.

“They’re Histyle Odorprufe,” said Angalo. “Guaranteed eighty-five
percent Polyputheketlon. We used to sell them in the Store. They cost a
lot more than other socks. Look, you can see the label.”

Gurder sighed.

“It was a good Store,” he muttered.

“And those shoes,” said Angalo, pointing to the great white shapes like
beached boats a little way away. “See them? Crucial Street Drifters with
Real Rubber Sole Pat’d. Very expensive.”

“Never approved of them, myself,” said Gurder. “Too flashy. I preferred
Men’s, Brown, Laced. A nome could get a good night’s sleep in one of
those.”

“Those Drifter things are Store shoes too, are they?” said Masklin,
carefully.

“Oh, yes. Special Range.”

“Hmm.”

Masklin got up and walked over to a large leather bag half wedged under
the seat. The others watched him scramble up it and then pull himself up
until he could, very quickly, glance over the armrest. He slid back
down.

“Well, well,” he said, in a mad, cheerful voice. “That’s a Store bag,
isn’t it?”

Gurder and Angalo gave it a critical look.

“Never spent much time in Travel Accessories,” said Angalo. “But now
that you mention it, it could be the Special Calf-Skin Carry-On Bag.”

“For The Discerning Executive?” Gurder added. “Yes. Could be.”

“Have you wondered how we’re going to get off?” said Masklin.

“Same way as we got on?” said Angalo, who hadn’t.

“I think that could be difficult. I think the humans might have other
ideas,” Masklin said. “I think, in fact, they might start looking for
us. Even if they think we’re mice. I wouldn’t put up with mice on
something like this if I was them. You know what mice are like for
widdling on wires. Could be dangerous when you’re ten miles high, a
mouse going to the lavatory inside your computer. I think the humans
will take it very seriously. So we ought to get off when the humans do.”

“We’d get stamped on!” said Angalo.

“I was thinking maybe we could sort of . . . get in this bag, sort of
thing,” said Masklin.

“Ridiculous!” said Gurder.

Masklin took a deep breath.

“It belongs to Grandson Richard, you see,” he said.

“I checked,” he added, watching the expressions on their faces. “I saw
him before, and he’s in the seat up there. Grandson Richard,” he went
on, “39. He’s up there right now. Reading a paper. Up there. Him.”

Gurder had gone red. He prodded Masklin with a finger. “Do you expect me
to believe,” he said, “that Richard Arnold, the grandson of Arnold Bros
(est. 1905), has _holes_ in his _socks_?”

“That’d make them holy socks,” said Angalo. “Sorry. Sorry. Just trying
to lighten the mood a bit. You didn’t have to glare at me like that.”

“Climb up and see for yourself,” said Masklin. “I’ll help you. Only be
careful.”

They hoisted Gurder up.

He came down quietly.

“Well?” said Angalo.

“It’s got ‘R.A.’ in gold letters on the bag, too,” said Masklin.

He made frantic signs to Angalo. Gurder was looking as though he had
seen a ghost.

“Yes, you can get that,” said Angalo hurriedly. “_Gold Monogram at Only
Five Ninety-Nine Extra_, it used to say on the sign.”

_“Speak_ to us, Gurder,” said Masklin. “Don’t just sit there looking
like that.”

“This is a very solemn moment for me,” said Gurder.

“I thought I could cut through some of the stitching and we could get in
at the bottom,” said Masklin.

“I am not worthy,” said Gurder.

“Probably not,” said Angalo cheerfully. “But we won’t tell anyone.”

“And Grandson Richard will be helping us, you see,” said Masklin, hoping
that Gurder was in a state to take all this in. “He won’t know it, but
he’ll be helping us. So it’ll be all right. Probably it’s _meant.”_

Not meant _by_ anyone, he told himself conscientiously. Just meant in
general.

Gurder considered this.

“Well, all right,” he said. “But no cutting the bag. We can get in
through the zipper.”

They did. It stuck a bit halfway, since zippers always do, but it didn’t
take long to get an opening big enough for the nomes to climb down
inside.

“What shall we do if he looks in?” said Angalo.

“Nothing,” said Masklin. “Just smile, I suppose.”

The tree frogs were far out on the branch now. What had looked like a
smooth expanse of gray-green wood was, close to, a maze of rough bark,
roots, and clumps of moss. It was unbearably frightening for frogs who
had spent their life in a world with petals round the edge.

But they crawled onward. They didn’t know the meaning of the word
“retreat.” Or any other word.

[image]


4

_HOTEL: A place where TRAVELING HUMANS are parked at night. Other humans
bring them food, including the famous BACON, LETTUCE, AND TOMATO
SANDWICH. There are beds and towels and special things that rain on
people to get them clean_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

BLACKNESS.

“It’s very dark in here, Masklin.”

“Yes, and I can’t get comfortable.”

“Well, you’ll have to make the best of it.”

“A hairbrush! I’ve just sat down on a hairbrush!”

_“We will be landing shortly.”_

“Good.”

“And there’s a tube of something—”

“I’m hungry. Isn’t there anything to eat?”

“I’ve still got that peanut.”

“Where? Where?”

“Now you’ve made me drop it.”

“Gurder?”

“Yes?”

_“What_ are you _doing?_ Are you cutting something?”

“He’s cutting a hole in his sock.”

Silence.

“Well? What of it? I can if I want to. It’s my sock.”

More silence.

“I shall just feel better for doing it.”

Still more silence.

“It’s just a human, Gurder. There’s nothing special about it.”

“We’re in its bag, aren’t we?”

“Yes, but you said yourself that Arnold Bros is something in our heads.
Didn’t you?”

“Yes.”

“Well, then?”

“This just makes me feel better, that’s all. Subject closed.”

_“We’re about to land.”_

“How will we know when—”

_“I am sure I could have done it better. Eventually.”_

“Is this the Florida place? Angalo, get your foot out of my face.”

_“Yes. This country traditionally welcomes immigrants.”_

“Is that what we are?”

_“Technically you are en route to another destination.”_

“Which?”

_“The stars.”_

“Oh. Thing?”

_“Yes?”_

“Is there any record of nomes being here before?”

“What do you mean? _We’re_ the nomes!”

“Yes, but there may have been others.”

“We’re all that there is! Aren’t we?”

Tiny colored lights flickered in the darkness of the bag.

“Thing?” Masklin repeated.

_“I am searching available data. Conclusion: no reliable sighting of
nomes. All recorded immigrants have been in excess of four inches
high.”_

“Oh. I just wondered. I wondered if we were all that there was.”

“You heard the Thing. No reliable sightings, it said.”

“No one saw _us_ until today.”

“Thing, do you know what happens next?”

_“We will pass through Immigration and Customs. Are you now, or have you
ever been, a member of a subversive organization?”_

Silence.

“What, us? Why are you asking us that?”

_“It is the sort of question that gets asked. I am monitoring
communications.”_

“Oh. Well, I don’t think we have. Have we?”

“No.”

“No.”

“No. I didn’t think we had been. What does subversive mean?”

_“The question seeks to establish whether you’ve come here to overthrow
the government of the United States.”_

“I don’t think we want to do that. Do we?”

“No.”

“No.”

“No, we don’t. They don’t have to worry about us.”

“Very clever idea, though.”

“What is?”

“Asking the questions when people arrive. If anyone was coming here to
do some subversive overthrowing, everyone’d be down on him like a pound
of bricks as soon as he answered ‘Yes.’”

“It’s a sneaky trick, isn’t it,” said Angalo, in an admiring tone of
voice.

“No, we don’t want to do any overthrowing,” said Masklin to the Thing.
“We just want to steal one of their going-straight-up jets. What are
they called again?”

_“Space shuttles.”_

“Right. And then we’ll be off. We don’t want to cause any trouble.”

The bag bumped around and was put down.

There was a tiny sawing noise, totally unheard amid the noise of the
airport. A very small hole appeared in the leather.

“What’s he doing?” said Gurder.

“Stop pushing,” said Masklin. “I can’t concentrate. Now . . . it looks
like we’re in a line of humans.”

“We’ve been waiting for _ages_,” said Angalo.

“I expect everyone’s being asked if they’re going to do any
overthrowing,” said Gurder wisely.

“I hardly like to bring this up,” said Angalo, “but how are we going to
find this Shuttle?”

“We’ll sort that out when the time comes,” said Masklin uncertainly.

“The time’s come,” said Angalo. “Hasn’t it?”

Masklin shrugged helplessly.

“You didn’t think we’d arrive in this Florida place and there’d be signs
up saying _This Way To Space_, did you?” said Angalo sarcastically.

Masklin hoped his thoughts didn’t show up on his face. “Of course not,”
he said.

“Well, what do we do next?” Angalo insisted.

“We . . . we . . . we ask the Thing,” said Masklin. He looked relieved.
“That’s what we’ll do. Thing?”

_“Yes?”_

Masklin shrugged. “What do we do next?”

“Now that,” said Angalo, “is what I call planning.”

The bag shifted. Grandson Richard, 39, was moving up the line.

“Thing? I said, what do we do—”

_“Nothing.”_

“How can we do nothing?”

_“By performing an absence of activity.”_

“What good is that?”

_“The paper said Richard Arnold was going to Florida for the launch of
the communications satellite. Therefore, he is now going to the place
where the satellite is. Ergo, we will go with him.”_

“Who’s Ergo?” said Gurder, looking around.

The Thing flickered its lights at him.

_“It means ‘Therefore,’”_ it said.

Masklin looked doubtful. “Do you think he’ll take this bag with him?”

_“Uncertain.”_

There wasn’t a lot in the bag, Masklin had to admit. It contained mainly
socks, papers, a few odds and ends like hairbrushes, and a book called
_The Spy With No Trousers_. This last item had caused them some concern
when the bag had been unzipped just after the plane landed, but Grandson
Richard had thrust the book among the papers without glancing inside.
Now that there was a little light to see by, Angalo was trying to read
it. Occasionally he’d mutter under his breath.

“It seems to me,” Masklin said eventually, “that Grandson Richard isn’t
going to go straight off to watch the satellite fly away. I’m sure he’ll
go somewhere and sleep first. Do you know when this Shuttle jet flies,
Thing?”

_“Uncertain. I can only talk to other computers when they are within my
range. The computers here know only about airport matters.”_

“He’s going to have to go to sleep soon, anyway,” said Masklin. “Humans
sleep through most of the night. I think that’s when we’d better leave
the bag.”

“And then we can talk to him,” said Gurder.

The others stared at him.

“Well, that’s why we came, isn’t it?” said the Abbot. “Originally? To
ask him to save the quarry?”

“He’s a _human_!” snapped Angalo. “Even you must realize that by now!
He’s not going to help us! Why should he help us? He’s just a human
whose ancestors built a store! Why do you go on believing he’s some sort
of great big nome in the sky?”

“Because I haven’t got anything else to believe in!” shouted Gurder.
“And if you don’t believe in Grandson Richard, why are you in his bag?”

“That’s just a coincidence—”

“You _always_ say that! You always say it’s just a coincidence!”

The bag moved, so they lost their balance again and fell over.

“We’re moving,” said Masklin, still peering out of the hole and almost
glad of anything that would stop the argument. “We’re walking across the
floor. There’s a lot of humans out there. A _lot_ of humans.”

“There always are,” sighed Gurder.

“Some of them are holding up signs with names on them.”

“That’s just like humans,” Gurder added.

The nomes were used to humans with signs. Some of the humans in the
Store used to wear their names all the time. Humans had strange long
names, like “Mrs. J. E. Williams, Supervisor” and “Hello, My Name Is
Tracy.” No one knew why humans had to wear their names. Perhaps they’d
forget them otherwise.

“Hang on,” said Masklin, “this can’t be right. One of them is holding up
a sign saying ‘Richard Arnold.’ We’re walking toward it! We’re talking
to it!”

The deep muffled rumble of the human voice rolled above the nomes like
thunder.

Hoom-voom-boom?

Foom-hoom-zoom-boom.

Hoom-zoom-_boom_-foom?

Boom!

“Can you understand it, Thing?” said Masklin.

_“Yes. The man with the sign is here to take our human to a hotel. It’s
a place where humans sleep and are fed. All the rest of it was just the
things humans say to each other to make sure that they’re still alive.”_

“What do you mean?” said Masklin.

_“They say things like ‘How are you?’ and ‘Have a nice day’ and ‘What do
you think of this weather, then?’ What these sounds mean is: I am alive
and so are you.”_

“Yes, but nomes say the same sort of things, Thing. It’s called ‘getting
along with people.’ You might find it worth a try.”

The bag swung sideways and hit something. The nomes clung desperately to
the insides. Angalo clung with one hand. He was trying to keep his place
in the book.

“I’m getting hungry again,” said Gurder. “Isn’t there anything to eat in
this bag?”

“There’s some toothpaste in this tube.”

“I’ll pass on the toothpaste, thanks.”

Now there was a rumbling noise. Angalo looked up. “I know _that_ sound,”
he said. “Infernal combustion engine. We’re in a vehicle.”

_“Again?”_ said Gurder.

“We’ll get out as soon as we can,” said Masklin.

“What kind of truck is it, Thing?” said Gurder.

_“It is a helicopter.”_

“It’s certainly noisy,” said Gurder, who had never come across the word.

“It is a ‘plane without wings,’” said Angalo, who had.

Gurder gave this a few moments’ careful and terrified thought.

“Thing?” he said, slowly.

_“Yes?”_

“What keeps it up in the—” Gurder began.

_“Science.”_

“Oh. Well. Science? Good. That’s all right, then.”

The noise went on for a long time. After a while it became part of the
nomes’ world, so when it stopped, the silence came as a shock.

They lay in the bottom of the bag, too discouraged even to talk. They
felt the bag being carried, put down, picked up, carried again, put
down, picked up one more time, and then thrown onto something soft.

And then there was blessed stillness.

Eventually Gurder’s voice said: “All right. What _flavor_ toothpaste?”

Masklin found the Thing among the heap of paper clips, dust, and twisted
bits of paper at the bottom of the bag.

“Any idea where we are, Thing?” he said.

_“Room 103, Cocoa Beach New Horizons Hotel,”_ said the Thing. _“I am
monitoring communications.”_

Gurder pushed past Masklin. “I’ve got to get out,” he said. “I can’t
stand it in here anymore. Give me a leg up, Angalo. I reckon I can just
reach the top of the bag—”

There was the long-drawn-out rumble of the zipper. Light flooded in as
the bag was opened. The nomes dived for whatever cover was available.

Masklin watched a hand taller than he was reach down, close around a
smaller bag with the toothpaste and washcloth in it, and pull it out.

The nomes didn’t move.

After a while there came the distant sound of rushing water.

The nomes still didn’t move.

Boom-boom foom zoom-hoom-hoom, choom zoom hoooom . . .

The human noise rose above the gushing. It echoed even more than normal.

“It . . . sounds like it’s . . . singing?” whispered Angalo.

. . . Hoom . . . hoom-boom-boom hoom . . . zoom-hoom-boom
_HOOO_oooo_OOO_mmm Boom.

“What’s happening, Thing?” Masklin hissed.

_“It has gone into a room to have water showering on it,”_ said the
Thing.

“What does it want to do that for?”

_“I assume it wants to keep clean.”_

“So is it safe to get out of the bag now?”

_“‘Safe’ is a relative word.”_

“What? What? Like ‘uncle,’ you mean?”

_“I mean that nothing is totally safe. But I suggest that the human will
be wetting itself for some time.”_

“Yeah. There’s a lot of human to clean,” said Angalo. “Come on. Let’s do
it.”

The bag was lying on a bed. It was easy enough to climb down the covers
onto the floor.

. . . Hoom-hoom booOOOOM boom . . .

“What do we do now?” said Angalo.

“After we’ve eaten, that is,” said Gurder firmly.

Masklin trotted across the thick carpet. There was a tall glass door in
the nearest wall. It was slightly open, letting in a warm breeze and the
sounds of the night.

A human would have heard the click and buzz of crickets and other small
mysterious creatures whose role in life is to sit in bushes all night
and make noises that are a lot bigger than they are. But nomes hear
sounds slowed down and stretched out and deeper, like a cassette player
with dying batteries. The dark was full of the thud and growl of the
wilderness.

Gurder joined Masklin and squinted anxiously into the blackness.

“Could you go out and see if there is something to eat?” he said.

“I’ve a horrible feeling,” said Masklin, “that if I go out there now,
there _will_ be something to eat, and it’ll be me.”

Behind them the human voice sang on.

. . . Boom-hoom-hoom-BOOOooooMMM womp womp . . .

“What’s the human singing about, Thing?” said Masklin.

_“It is a little difficult to follow. However, it appears that the
singer wishes it to be known that he did something his way.”_

“Did what?”

_“Insufficient data at this point. But whatever it was, he did it at a)
each step along life’s highway and b) not in a shy way. . . .”_

There was a knock at the door. The singing stopped. So did the gushing
of the water. The nomes ran for the shadows.

“Sounds a bit dangerous,” Angalo whispered. “Walking along highways, I
mean. Each step along life’s sidewalk would be better—”

Grandson Richard came out of the shower room with a towel around its
waist. It opened the door. Another human, with all its clothes on, came
in with a tray. There was a brief exchange of hoots, and the clothed
human put down the tray and went out again. Grandson Richard disappeared
into the shower room again.

. . . Buh-buh buh-buh hoom hoOOOmm . . .

“Food!” Gurder whispered. “I can smell it! There’s food on that tray!”

_“A bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich with coleslaw,”_ said the Thing.
_“And coffee.”_

“How did you know?” said all three nomes in unison.

_“He ordered it when he checked in.”_

“Coleslaw!” moaned Gurder ecstatically. “Bacon! _Coffee!”_

Masklin stared upward. The tray had been left on the edge of a table.

There was a lamp near it. Masklin had lived in the Store long enough to
know that where there was a lamp, there was a wire.

He’d never found a wire he couldn’t climb.

Regular meals, that was the problem. He’d never been used to them. When
he’d lived Outside, before the Store, he’d got accustomed to going for
days without food and then, when food _did_ turn up, eating until he was
greasy to the eyebrows. But the Store nomes expected something to eat
several times an hour. The Store nomes ate all the time. They only had
to miss half a dozen meals and they started to complain.

“I think I could get up there,” he said.

“Yes. Yes,” said Gurder.

“But is it all right to eat Grandson Richard’s sandwich?” Masklin added.

Gurder opened his eyes. He blinked.

“That’s an important theological point,” he muttered. “But I’m too
hungry to think about it, so let’s eat it first, and then if it turns
out to be wrong to eat it, I promise to be very sorry.”

. . . Boom-hoom whop whop, foom hoom . . .

_“The human says that the end is now near and he is facing a curtain,”_
the Thing translated. _“This may be a shower curtain.”_

Masklin pulled himself up the wire and onto the table, feeling very
exposed.

It was obvious that the Floridians had a different idea about
sandwiches. Sandwiches had been sold back in the Store’s Food Hall. The
word meant something thin between two slices of damp bread. Floridian
sandwiches, on the other hand, filled up an entire tray, and if there
_was_ any bread, it lurked deep in a jungle of cress and lettuce.

He looked down.

“Hurry up!” hissed Angalo. “The water’s stopped again!”

. . . Boom-hoom hoom whop hoom whop . . .

Masklin pushed aside a drift of green stuff, grabbed the sandwich,
hauled it to the edge of the tray and pushed it down onto the floor.

. . . foom hoom hoom HOOOOooooOOOO mmmmm-WHOP.

The shower room door opened.

“Come on! Come on!” Angalo yelled.

Grandson Richard came out. He took a few steps, and stopped.

He looked at Masklin.

Masklin looked at him.

There are times when Time itself pauses.

Masklin realized that he was standing at one of those points where
History takes a deep breath and decides what to do next.

I can stay here, he thought. I can use the Thing to translate, and I can
try to explain everything to him. I can tell him how important it is for
us to have a home of our own. I can ask him if he can do something to
help the nomes in the quarry. I can tell him how the Store nomes thought
that his grandfather created the world. He’ll probably enjoy knowing
that. He looks friendly, for a human.

He _might_ help us.

Or he’ll trap us somehow, and call other humans, and they’ll all start
milling around and mooing, and we’ll be put in a cage or something, and
prodded. It’ll be just like the Concorde drivers. They probably didn’t
want to hurt us, they just didn’t understand what we were. And we
haven’t got time to let them find out.

It’s their world, not ours.

It’s too risky. No. I never realized it before, but we’ve got to do it
_our_ way. . . .

Grandson Richard slowly reached out a hand and said: “Whoomp?”

Masklin took a running jump.

Nomes can fall quite a long way without being hurt, and in any case a
bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich broke his fall.

There was a blur of activity, and the sandwich rose on three pairs of
legs. It raced across the floor, leaking mayonnaise.

Grandson Richard threw a towel at it. It missed.

The sandwich leaped over the doorsill and vanished into the chirping,
velvety, dangerous night.

There were other dangers besides falling off the branch. One of the
frogs was eaten by a lizard. Several others turned back as soon as they
were out of the shade of their flower because, as they pointed out,
“.–.–.mipmip.–.–.mipmip.–.–.”

The frog in the lead looked back at his dwindling group. There was one .
. . and one . . . and one . . . and one . . . and one, which added up
to—it wrinkled its forehead in the effort of calculation—yes, one.

Some of the one were getting frightened. The leading frog realized that
if they were ever going to get to the new flower and survive there,
there’d need to be a lot more than one frog. They’d need at least one,
or possibly even one. He gave them a croak of encouragement.

“Mipmip,” he said.

[image]


5

_FLORIDA (or FLORIDIA): A place where may be found ALLIGATORS,
LONG-NECKED TURTLES, and SPACE SHUTTLES. An interesting place that is
warm and wet and there are geese. BACON, LETTUCE, AND TOMATO SANDWICHES
may be found here also. A lot more interesting than many other places.
The shape when seen from the air is like a bit stuck on a bigger bit_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

LET THE EYE of your imagination be a camera . . .

This is the globe of the world, a glittering blue-and-white ball like
the ornament on some unimaginable Christmas tree.

Find a continent. . . .

_Focus_

This is a continent, a jigsaw of yellows, greens, and browns.

Find a place. . . .

_Focus_

This is a bit of the continent, sticking out into the warmer sea to the
southeast. Most of its inhabitants call it Florida.

Actually, they don’t. Most of its inhabitants don’t call it anything.
They don’t even know it exists. Most of them have six legs, and buzz. A
lot of them have eight legs and spend a lot of time in webs waiting for
six-legged inhabitants to arrive for lunch. Many of the rest have four
legs, and bark or moo or even lie in swamps pretending to be logs. In
fact, only a tiny proportion of the inhabitants of Florida have two
legs, and even most of _them_ don’t call it Florida. They just go tweet,
and fly around a lot.

Mathematically, an almost insignificant number of living things in
Florida call it Florida. But they’re the ones who matter. At least, in
their opinion. And their opinion is the one that matters. In their
opinion.

_Focus_

Find a highway . . .

_Focus_

. . . traffic swishing quietly through the soft warm rain . . .

_Focus_

. . . high weeds on the bank . . .

_Focus_

. . . grass moving in a way that isn’t quite like grass moving in the
wind . . .

_Focus_

. . . a pair of tiny eyes . . .

_Focus_

_Focus_

_Focus_

Click!

Masklin crept back through the grass to the nomes’ camp, if that’s what
you could call a tiny dry space under a scrap of thrown-away plastic.

It has been hours since they’d _run away_ from Grandson Richard, as
Gurder kept on putting it. The sun was rising behind the rainclouds.

They’d crossed a highway while there was no traffic, they’d blundered
around in damp undergrowth, scurrying away from every chirp and
mysterious croak, and finally they’d found the plastic. And they’d
slept. Masklin had stayed on guard for a while, but he wasn’t certain
what he was guarding against.

There was a positive side. The Thing had been listening to radio and
television and had found the place the going-straight-up shuttles went
from. It was only eighteen miles away. And they’d definitely made
progress. They’d gone—oh, call it half a mile. And at last it was warm.
Even the rain was warm. And the bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwich was
holding up.

But there were still almost eighteen miles to go.

“When did you say the launch is?” said Masklin.

_“Four hours’ time,”_ said the Thing.

“That means we’ll have to travel at more than four miles an hour,” said
Angalo gloomily.

Masklin nodded. A nome, trying hard, could probably cover a mile and a
half in an hour over open ground.

He hadn’t given much thought to how they could get the Thing into space.
If he’d thought about it at all, he’d imagined that they could find the
Shuttle plane and wedge the Thing on it somewhere. If possible maybe
they could go too, although he wasn’t too sure about that. The Thing
said it was cold in space, and there was no air.

“You could have asked Grandson Richard to help us!” said Gurder. “Why
did you run away?”

“I don’t know,” said Masklin. “I suppose I thought we ought to be able
to help ourselves.”

_“But you used the Truck. Nomes lived in the Store. You used the
Concorde. You’re eating human food.”_

Masklin was surprised. The Thing didn’t often argue like that.

“That’s different,” he said.

_“How?”_

“They didn’t know about us. We took what we wanted. We weren’t given it.
They think it’s their world, Thing! They think everything in it belongs
to them! They name everything and own everything! I looked up at him and
I thought, Here’s a human in a human’s room, doing human things. How can
he ever understand about nomes? How can he ever think tiny people are
real people with real thoughts? I can’t just let a human take over. Not
just like that!”

The Thing blinked a few lights at him.

“We’ve come too far not to finish it ourselves,” Masklin mumbled. He
looked up at Gurder.

“Anyway, when it came to it, I didn’t exactly see you rushing up ready
to shake him by the finger,” he said.

“I was embarrassed. It’s always embarrassing, meeting deities,” said
Gurder.

They hadn’t been able to light a fire. Everything was too wet. Not that
they needed a fire, it was just that a fire was more civilized. Someone
had managed to light a fire there at some time, though, because there
were still a few damp ashes.

“I wonder how things are back home,” said Angalo after a while.

“All right, I expect,” said Masklin.

“Do you really?”

“Well, more _hope_ than expect, to tell the truth.”

“I expect your Grimma’s got everyone organized,” said Angalo, trying to
grin.

“She’s not _my_ Grimma,” snapped Masklin.

“Isn’t she? Whose is she, then?”

“She’s—” Masklin hesitated. “Hers, I suppose,” he said lamely.

“Oh. I thought the two of you were set to—” Angalo began.

“We’re not. I told her we were going to get married, and all she could
talk about was frogs,” said Masklin.

“That’s females for you,” said Gurder. “Didn’t I say that letting them
learn to read was a bad idea? It overheats their brains.”

“She said the most important thing in the world was little frogs living
in a flower,” Masklin went on, trying to listen to the voice of his own
memory. He hadn’t been listening very hard at the time. He’d been too
angry.

“Sounds like you could boil a _kettle_ on her head,” said Angalo.

“It was something she’d read in a book, she said.”

“My point exactly,” said Gurder. “You know I never really agreed with
letting everyone learn to read. It unsettles people.”

Masklin looked gloomily at the rain.

“Come to think of it,” he said, “it wasn’t frogs exactly. It was the
_idea_ of frogs. She said there’s these hills where it’s hot and rains
all the time, and in the rainforests there are these very tall trees and
right in the top branches of the trees there are these like great big
flowers called . . . bromeliads, I think, and water gets into the
flowers and makes little pools and there’s a type of frog that lays eggs
in the pools and tadpoles hatch and grow into new frogs and these little
frogs live their whole lives in the flowers right at the top of the
trees and don’t even know about the ground, and once you know the world
is full of things like that your life is never the same.”

He took a deep breath.

“Something like that, anyway,” he said.

Gurder looked at Angalo.

“Didn’t understand _any_ of it,” he said.

_“It’s a metaphor,”_ said the Thing. No one paid it any attention.

Masklin scratched his ear. “It seemed to mean a lot to her,” he said.

_“It’s a metaphor,”_ said the Thing.

“Women always want something,” said Angalo. “My wife is always carrying
on about dresses.”

“I’m sure he would have helped,” said Gurder. “If we’d talked to him.
He’d probably have given us a proper meal and, and—”

“—given us a home in a shoebox,” said Masklin.

“—and given us a home in a shoebox,” said Gurder automatically. “No! I
mean, maybe. I mean, why not? A decent hour’s sleep for a change. And
then we—”

“—we’d be carried around in his pocket,” said Masklin.

“Not necessarily. Not necessarily.”

“We would. Because he’s big and we’re small.”

_“Launch in three hours and fifty-seven minutes,”_ said the Thing.

Their temporary camp overlooked a ditch. There didn’t seem to be any
winter in Florida, and the banks were thick with greenery.

Something like a flat plate with a spoon on the front sculled slowly
past. The spoon stuck out of the water for a moment, looked at the nomes
vaguely, and then dropped down again.

“What was that thing, Thing?” said Masklin.

The Thing extended one of its sensors.

_“A long-necked turtle.”_

“Oh.”

The turtle swam peacefully away.

“Lucky, really,” said Gurder.

“What?” said Angalo.

“It having a long neck like that _and_ being called a long-necked
turtle. It’d be really awkward having a name like that if it had a short
neck.”

_“Launch in three hours and fifty-six minutes.”_

Masklin stood up.

“You know,” said Angalo, “I really wish I could have read more of _The
Spy With No Trousers_. It was getting exciting.”

“Come on,” Masklin said. “Let’s see if we can find a way.”

Angalo, who had been sitting with his chin in his hands, gave him an odd
look.

“What, now?”

“We’ve come too far to just stop, haven’t we?”

They pushed their way through the weeds. After a while a fallen log
helped them across the ditch.

“Much greener here than at home, isn’t it,” said Angalo.

Masklin pushed through a thick stand of leaves.

“Warmer, too,” said Gurder. “They’ve got the heating fixed here.”*

“No one fixes heating Outside, it just happens,” said Angalo.

“If I get old, this is the kind of place I’d like to live, if I had to
live Outside,” Gurder went on, ignoring him.

_“It’s a wildlife preserve,”_ said the Thing.

Gurder looked shocked. “What? Like jam? Made of _animals_?”

_“No. It is a place where animals can live unmolested.”_

“You’re not allowed to hunt them, you mean?”

_“Yes.”_

“You’re not allowed to hunt anything, Masklin,” said Gurder.

Masklin grunted.

There was something nagging at him. He couldn’t quite put his finger on
it. Probably it was to do with the animals after all.

“Apart from turtles with long necks,” he said, “what other animals are
there here, Thing?”

The Thing didn’t answer for a moment. Then it said, _“I find mention of
sea cows and alligators.”_

Masklin tried to imagine what a sea cow looked like. But they didn’t
sound too bad. He’d met cows before. They were big and slow and didn’t
eat nomes, except by accident.

“What’s an alligator?” he said.

The Thing told him.

“What?” said Masklin.

“What?” said Angalo.

_“What?”_ said Gurder. He pulled his robe tightly around his legs.

“You idiot!” shouted Angalo.

“Me?” said Masklin hotly. “How should I know? Is it my fault? Did I miss
a sign at the airport saying _Welcome To Floridia, Home Of Large
Meat-Eating Reptiles Up To Twelve Feet Long_?”

They watched the grasses. A damp warm world inhabited by insects and
turtles was suddenly a disguise for horrible terrors with huge teeth.

Something’s watching us, Masklin thought. I can feel it.

The three nomes stood back to back. Masklin crouched down, slowly, and
picked up a large stone.

The grass moved.

“The Thing did say they don’t all grow to twelve feet,” said Angalo, in
the silence.

“We were blundering around in the darkness!” said Gurder. “With things
like that around!”

The grass moved again. It wasn’t the wind that was moving it.

“Pull yourself together,” muttered Angalo.

“If it _is_ alligators,” said Gurder, trying to look noble, “I shall
show them how a nome can die with dignity.”

“Please yourself,” said Angalo, his eyes scanning the undergrowth. “I’m
planning to show them how a nome can run away with speed.”

The grasses parted.

A nome stepped out.

There was a crackle behind Masklin. His head spun around. Another nome
stepped out.

And another.

And another.

Fifteen of them.

The three travelers swiveled like an animal with six legs and three
heads.

It was the fire that I saw, Masklin told himself. We sat right down by
the ashes of a fire, and I looked at them, and I didn’t wonder who could
have made them.

The strangers wore gray. They seemed to be all sizes. And every single
one of them had a spear.

I wish I had mine, Masklin thought, trying to keep as many of the
strangers as possible in his line of sight.

They weren’t pointing their spears at him. The trouble was, they weren’t
exactly _not_ pointing them, either.

Masklin told himself that it was very rare for a nome to kill another
nome. In the Store it was considered bad manners, while Outside . . .
well, there were so many other things that killed nomes in any case.
Besides, it was wrong. There didn’t have to be any other reasons.

He just had to hope that these nomes felt the same way.

“Do you know these people?” asked Angalo.

“Me?” said Masklin. “Of course not. How could I?”

“They’re Outsiders. I dunno, I suppose I thought all Outsiders would
know each other.”

“Never seen them before in my life,” said Masklin.

“I _think_,” said Angalo, slowly and deliberately, “that the leader is
that old guy with the big nose and the topknot with a feather in it.
What do you think?”

Masklin looked at the tall, thin, old nome who was scowling at the three
of them.

“He doesn’t look as if he likes us very much.”

“I don’t like the look of him at _all_,” said Angalo.

“Have you got any suggestions, Thing?” said Masklin.

_“They are probably as frightened of you as you are of them.”_

“I doubt it,” said Angalo.

_“Tell them you will not harm them.”_

“I’d much rather they told me they’re not going to harm _us_.”

Masklin stepped forward and raised his hands.

“We are peaceful,” he said. “We don’t want anyone to be hurt.”

“Including us,” said Angalo. “We really mean it.”

Several of the strangers backed away and raised their spears.

“I’ve got my hands raised,” said Masklin over his shoulder. “Why should
they be so upset?”

“Because you’re holding a large rock,” said Angalo flatly. “I don’t know
about them, but if you walked toward me holding something like that,
_I’d_ be pretty scared.”

“I’m not sure I want to let go of it,” said Masklin.

“Perhaps they don’t understand us—”

Gurder moved.

The Abbot hadn’t said a word since the arrival of the new nomes. He’d
just gone very pale.

Now some sort of internal timer had gone off. He gave a snort, leaped
forward, and bore down on Topknot like an enraged balloon.

“How _dare_ you accost us, you—you Outsider!” he screamed.

Angalo put his hands over his eyes. Masklin got a firm hold on his rock.

“Er, Gurder—” he began.

Topknot backed away. The other nomes seemed puzzled by the small
explosive figure that was suddenly among them. Gurder was in the grip of
the kind of anger that is almost as good as armor.

Topknot screeched something back at Gurder.

“Don’t you harangue me, you grubby heathen,” said Gurder. “Do you think
all these spears really frighten us?”

“Yes,” whispered Angalo. He sidled closer to Masklin. “What’s got into
him?” he said.

Topknot shouted something at his nomes. A couple of them raised their
spears, uncertainly. Several of the others appeared to argue.

“This is getting worse,” said Angalo.

“Yes,” said Masklin. “I think we should—”

A voice behind them snapped out a command. All the Floridians turned. So
did Masklin.

Two nomes had come out of the grass. One was a boy. The other was a
small, dumpy woman, the sort you’d cheerfully accept an apple pie from.
Her hair was tied in a bun, and like Topknot’s, it had a long gray
feather stuck through it.

The Floridians looked sheepish. Topknot spoke at length. The woman said
a couple of words. Topknot spread his arms above him and muttered
something at the sky.

The woman walked around Masklin and Angalo as if they were items on
display. When she looked Masklin up and down, he caught her eye and
thought: She looks like a little old lady, but she’s in charge. If she
doesn’t like us, we’re in a lot of trouble.

She reached up and took the stone out of his hand. He didn’t resist.

Then she touched the Thing.

It spoke. What it said sounded very much like the words the woman had
just used. She pulled her hand away sharply and looked at the Thing with
her head on one side. Then she stood back.

At another command the Floridians formed, not a line, but a sort of V
shape with the woman at the tip of it and the travelers inside it.

“Are we prisoners?” said Gurder, who had cooled off a bit.

“I don’t think so,” said Masklin. “Not exactly prisoners, yet.”

The meal was some sort of a lizard. Masklin quite enjoyed it; it
reminded him of his days as an Outsider, before they found the Store.
The other two ate it only because not eating it would be impolite, and
it probably wasn’t a good idea to be impolite to people who had spears
when you didn’t.

The Floridians watched them solemnly.

There were at least thirty of them, all wearing identical gray clothes.
They looked quite like the Store nomes, except for being slightly darker
and much skinnier. Many of them had large, impressive noses, which the
Thing said was perfectly okay and all because of genetics.

The Thing was talking to them. Occasionally it would extend one of its
sensors and use it to draw shapes in the dirt.

“Thing’s probably telling ’em
we-come-from-place-belong-far-on-big-bird-that-doesn’t-go-flap,” said
Angalo.

A lot of the time the Thing was simply repeating the woman’s own words
back at her.

Eventually Angalo couldn’t stand it anymore.

“What’s _happening_, Thing?” he said. “Why’s the woman doing all the
talking?”

_“She is the leader of this group,”_ said the Thing.

“A woman? Are you serious?”

_“I am always serious. It’s built in.”_

“Oh.”

Angalo nudged Masklin. “If Grimma ever finds out, we’re in _real_
trouble,” he said.

_“Her name is Very-small-tree, or Shrub,”_ the Thing went on.

“And you can understand her?” said Masklin.

_“Gradually. Their language is very close to original Nomish.”_

“What do you mean, original Nomish?”

_“The language your ancestors spoke.”_

Masklin shrugged. There was no point in trying to understand that now.

“Have you told her about us?” he said.

_“Yes. She says—”_

Topknot, who had been muttering to himself, stood up suddenly and spoke
very sharply at great length, with a lot of pointing to the ground and
to the sky.

The Thing flashed a few lights.

_“He says you are trespassing on the land belonging to the Maker of
Clouds. He says that is very bad. He says the Maker of Clouds will be
very angry.”_

There was a general murmur of agreement from many of the nomes. Shrub
spoke to them sharply. Masklin stuck out a hand to stop Gurder from
getting up.

“What does, er, Shrub think?” he said.

_“I don’t think she is very sympathetic to the topknot person. His name
is Person-who-knows-what-the-Maker-of-Clouds-is-thinking.”_

“And what is the Maker of Clouds?”

_“It’s bad luck to say its true name. It made the ground and it is still
making the sky. It—”_

Topknot spoke again. He sounded angry.

We need to be friends with these people, Masklin thought. There has to
be a way.

“The Maker of Clouds is . . .” Masklin thought hard. “. . . a sort of
Arnold Bros (est. 1905)?”

_“Yes,”_ said the Thing.

“A real thing?”

_“I think so. Are you prepared to take a risk?”_

“What?”

_“I think I know the identity of the Maker of Clouds. I think I know
when it will make some more sky.”_

“What? When?” said Masklin.

_“In three hours and ten minutes.”_

Masklin hesitated.

“Hold on a moment,” he said, slowly. “That sounds like the same sort of
time that—”

_“Yes. All three of you, please get ready to run. I will now write the
name of the Maker of Clouds.”_

“Why will we have to run?”

_“They might get very angry. But we haven’t time to waste.”_

The Thing waved the sensor. It wasn’t intended as a writing implement,
and the shapes it drew were angular and hard to read.

It scrawled four shapes in the dust.

The effect was instantaneous.

Topknot started to shout again. Some of the Floridians leaped to their
feet. Masklin grabbed the other two travelers.

“I’m really going to thump that old nome in a minute,” said Gurder. “How
can anyone be so narrow-minded?”

Shrub sat silently while the row went on around her. Then she spoke,
very loudly but very calmly.

_“She is telling them,”_ said the Thing, _“that it is not wrong to write
the name of the Maker of Clouds. It is often written by the Maker of
Clouds itself. How famous the Maker of Clouds must be, that even these
strangers know its name, she says.”_

That seemed to satisfy most of the nomes. Topknot started to grumble to
himself.

Masklin relaxed a bit and looked down at the figures in the sand.

“N . . . A . . . 8 . . . A?” he said.

_“It’s an ‘S,’”_ said the Thing, _“not an ‘8.’”_

“But you’ve only been talking to them for a little while!” said Angalo.
“How can you know something like this?”

_“Because I know how nomes think,”_ said the Thing. _“You always believe
what you read, and you’ve all got very literal minds. Very literal minds
indeed.”_

[image]


6

_GEESE: A type of bird that is slower than, e.g., CONCORDE, and you
don’t get anything to eat. According to nomes who know them well, a
goose is the most stupid bird there is, except for a duck. Geese spend a
lot of time flying to other places. As a form of transport, the goose
leaves a lot to be desired_.

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

IN THE BEGINNING, said Shrub, there was nothing but ground. NASA saw the
emptiness above the ground and decided to fill it with sky. It built a
place in the middle of the world and sent up towers full of clouds.
Sometimes they also carried stars, because at night, after one of the
cloud towers had gone up, the nomes could sometimes see new stars moving
across the sky.

The land around the cloud towers was NASA’s special country. There were
more animals there, and fewer humans. It was a pretty good place for
nomes. Some of them believed that NASA had arranged it all for precisely
that reason.

Shrub sat back.

“And does _she_ believe that?” said Masklin. He looked across the
clearing to where Gurder and Topknot were arguing. Neither could
understand what the other was saying, but they were still arguing.

The Thing translated.

Shrub laughed.

_“She says, days come, days go, who needs to believe anything? She sees
things happen with her own eyes, and these are things she knows happen.
Belief is a wonderful thing for those who need it, she says. But she
knows this place belongs to NASA, because its name is on signs.”_

Angalo grinned. He was so excited, he was nearly in tears.

“They live right by the place the going-up jets go from and they think
it’s some sort of magic place!” he said.

“Isn’t it?” said Masklin, almost to himself. “Anyway, it’s no more
strange than thinking the Store was the whole world. Thing, how do they
watch the going-up jets? They’re a long way away.”

_“Not far at all. Eighteen miles is not far at all, she says. She says
they can be there in little more than an hour.”_

Shrub nodded at their astonishment and then, without another word, stood
up and walked away through the bushes. She signaled the nomes to follow
her. Half a dozen Floridians trailed after their leader, making the
shape of a V with her at the point.

After a few yards the greenery opened out again beside a small lake.

The nomes were used to large bodies of water. There were reservoirs near
the airport. They were even used to ducks. But the things paddling
enthusiastically toward them were a lot bigger than ducks. Besides,
ducks were like a lot of other animals and recognized in nomes the
shape, if not the size, of humans and kept a safe distance away from
them. They didn’t come tearing toward them as if the mere sight of them
were the best thing that had happened all day.

Some of these creatures were almost flying in their desire to get to the
nomes.

Masklin looked around automatically for a weapon. Shrub grabbed his arm,
shook her head, and said a couple of words.

_“They’re friendly,”_ the Thing translated.

“They don’t look it!”

_“They’re geese,”_ said the Thing. _“Quite harmless, except to grass and
minor organisms. They fly here for the winter.”_

The geese arrived with a bow wave that surged over the nomes’ feet, and
arched their necks down toward Shrub. She patted a couple of
fearsome-looking beaks.

Masklin tried hard not to look like a minor organism.

_“They migrate here from colder climates,”_ the Thing went on. _“They
rely on the Floridians to pick the right course for them.”_

“Oh, good. That’s . . .” Masklin stopped while his brain caught up with
his mouth. “You’re going to tell me these nomes fly on them, right?”

_“Certainly. They travel with the geese. Incidentally, you have two
hours and forty-one minutes to launch.”_

“I want to make it absolutely clear,” said Angalo slowly, as a great
feathery head dabbled in the water a few inches away, “that if you’re
suggesting that we ride on a geese—”

_“A goose. One geese is a goose.”_

“—you can think again. Or compute, or whatever it is you do.”

_“You have a better suggestion, of course,”_ said the Thing. If it had
had a face, it would have been sneering.

“Suggesting we don’t ride on them strikes me as a whole lot better,
yes,” said Angalo.

“I dunno,” said Masklin, who had been watching the geese speculatively.
“I might be prepared to give it a try.”

_“The Floridians have developed a very interesting relationship with the
geese,”_ said the Thing. _“The geese provide the nomes with wings, and
the nomes provide the geese with brains. They fly north to Canada in the
summer, and back here for the winter. It’s almost a symbiotic
relationship, although of course they’re not familiar with the term.”_

“Aren’t they? Silly old them,” Angalo muttered.

“I don’t understand you, Angalo,” said Masklin. “You’re mad for riding
in machines with whirring bits of metal pushing them along, yet you’re
worried about sitting on a perfectly natural bird.”

“That’s because I don’t understand how birds work,” said Angalo. “I’ve
never seen an exploded working diagram of a goose.”

_“The geese are the reason the Floridians have never had much to do with
humans,”_ the Thing continued. _“As I said, their language is almost
original Nomish.”_

Shrub was watching them carefully. There was something about the way she
was treating them that still seemed odd to Masklin. It wasn’t that she
was afraid of them, or aggressive, or unpleasant.

“She’s not surprised,” he said aloud. “She’s interested, but she’s not
surprised. They were upset because we were _here_, not because we
existed. _How many other nomes has she met?_”

The Thing had to translate.

It was a word that Masklin had known for only a year.

Thousands.

The leading tree frog was trying to wrestle with a new idea. It was very
dimly aware that it needed a new type of thought.

There had been the world, with the pool in the middle and the petals
round the edge. One.

But farther along the branch was another world. From here it looked
tantalizingly like the flower they had left. One.

The leading frog sat in a clump of moss and swiveled each eye so that it
could see both worlds at the same time. One there. And one _there_.

One. And one.

The frog’s forehead bulged as it tried to get its mind around a new
idea. One and one were one. But if you had one _here_ and one _there_ .
. .

The other frogs watched in bewilderment as their leader’s eyes whizzed
round and round.

One here and one there couldn’t be one. They were too far apart. You
needed a word that meant both ones. You needed to say . . . you needed
to say . . .

The frog’s mouth widened. It grinned so broadly that both ends almost
met behind its head.

It had worked it out.

“.–.–.mipmip.–.–!” it said.

It meant: one. And one _more_ one.

Gurder was still arguing with Topknot when they got back.

“How do they manage to keep it up? They don’t understand what each
other’s saying!” said Angalo.

“Best way,” said Masklin. “Gurder? We’re ready to go. Come on.”

Gurder looked up. He was very red in the face. He and Topknot were
crouched on either side of a mass of scrawled diagrams in the dirt.

“I need the Thing!” he said. “This idiot refuses to understand
anything!”

“You won’t win any arguments with him,” said Masklin. “Shrub says he
argues with all other nomes they meet. He likes to.”

“What other nomes?” said Gurder.

“There’s nomes everywhere, Gurder. That’s what Shrub says. There’s other
groups even in Floridia. And—and—and in Canadia, where the Floridians go
in the summer. There were probably even other nomes back home! We just
never found them!”

He pulled the Abbot to his feet.

“And we haven’t got a lot of time left,” he added.

“I’m not going up on one of those things!”

The geese gave Gurder a puzzled look, as if he were an unexpected frog
in their waterweed.

“I’m not very happy about it either,” said Masklin, “but Shrub’s people
do it all the time. You just snuggle down in the feathers and hang on.”

_“Snuggle?”_ shouted Gurder. “I’ve never snuggled in my life!”

“You rode on the Concorde,” Angalo pointed out. “And that was built and
driven by humans.”

Gurder glared like someone who wasn’t going to give in easily.

“Well, who built the geese?” he demanded.

Angalo grinned at Masklin, who said: “What? Dunno. Other geese, I
expect.”

“Geese? _Geese?_ And what do _they_ know about designing for air
safety?”

“Listen,” said Masklin. “They can take us all the way across this place.
The Floridians fly thousands of miles on them. Thousands of miles,
without even any smoked salmon or pink wobbly stuff. It’s worth trying
it for eighteen miles, isn’t it?”

Gurder hesitated. Topknot muttered something.

Gurder cleared his throat.

“Very well,” he said haughtily. “I’m sure if this misguided individual
is in the habit of flying on these things, I should have no difficulty
whatsoever.” He stared up at the gray shapes bobbing out in the lagoon.
“Do the Floridians talk to the creatures?”

The Thing tried this on Shrub. She shook her head. No, she said, geese
were quite stupid. Friendly but stupid. Why talk to something that
couldn’t talk back?

“Have you told her what we’re doing?” said Masklin.

_“No. She hasn’t asked.”_

“How do we get on?”

Shrub stuck her fingers in her mouth and whistled.

Half a dozen geese waddled up the bank. Close to, they didn’t look any
smaller.

“I remember reading something about geese once,” said Gurder, in a sort
of dreamy terror. “It said they could break a human’s arm with a blow of
their nose.”

“Wing,” said Angalo, looking up at the feathery gray bodies looming over
him. “It was their wing.”

“And it was swans that do that,” said Masklin weakly. “Geese are the
ones you mustn’t say boo to.”

Gurder watched a long neck weave back and forth above him.

“Wouldn’t dream of it,” he said.

A long time after, when Masklin came to write the story of his life, he
described the flight of the geese as the fastest, highest, and most
terrifying of all.

People said, Hold on, that’s not right. You said, Masklin, that the
plane went so fast it left its sound behind, and so high up there was
blue all around it.

And he said, That’s the point. It went so fast you didn’t know how fast
it was going; it went so high you couldn’t see how high it was. It was
just something that happened. And the Concorde looked as though it was
_meant_ to fly. When it was on the ground, it looked kind of lost.

The geese, on the other hand, looked as aerodynamic as a pillow. They
didn’t roll into the sky and sneer at the clouds like the plane did. No,
they ran across the top of the water and hammered desperately at the air
with their wings and then, just when it was obvious they weren’t going
to achieve anything, they suddenly did; the water dropped away and there
was just the slow creak of wings pulling the goose up into the sky.

Masklin would be the first to admit that he didn’t understand about jets
and engines and machines, so maybe that was why he didn’t worry about
traveling in them. But he thought he knew a thing or two about muscles,
and the knowledge that it was only a couple of big muscles that were
keeping him alive was not comforting.

Each traveler shared a goose with one of the Floridians. They didn’t do
any steering, as far as Masklin could see. That was all done by Shrub,
who sat far out on the neck of the leading goose.

The ones behind it followed their leader in a perfect V shape.

Masklin buried himself in the feathers. It was comfortable, if a bit
cold. Floridians, he learned later, had no difficulty sleeping on a
flying goose. The mere thought gave Masklin nightmares.

He peered out just long enough to see distant trees sweeping by much too
fast, and stuck his head down again.

“How long have we got, Thing?” he said.

_“I estimate arrival in the vicinity of the launch pad one hour from
launch.”_

“I suppose there’s absolutely no possibility that launches have anything
to do with lunches?” said Masklin wistfully.

_“No.”_

“Pity. Well—have you any suggestions about how we get on the machine?”

_“That is almost impossible.”_

“I thought you’d say that.”

_“But you could put ME on,”_ the Thing added.

“Yes, but how? Tie you to the outside?”

_“No. Get me close enough and I will do the rest.”_

“What rest?”

_“Call the Ship.”_

“Yes, where is the Ship? I’m amazed satellites and things haven’t bumped
into it.”

_“It is waiting.”_

“You’re a great help, sometimes.”

_“Thank you.”_

“That was meant to be sarcastic.”

_“I know.”_

There was a rustling beside Masklin, and his Floridian co-rider pushed
aside a feather. It was the boy he had seen with Shrub. He’d said
nothing but had just stared at Masklin and the Thing. Now he grinned and
said a few words.

_“He wants to know if you feel sick.”_

“I feel fine,” Masklin lied. “What’s his name?”

_“His name is Pion. He is Shrub’s oldest son.”_

Pion gave Masklin another encouraging grin.

_“He wants to know what it is like in a jet,”_ said the Thing. _“He says
it sounds exciting. They see them sometimes, but they keep away from
them.”_

The goose canted sideways. Masklin tried to hang on with his toes as
well as his feet.

_“It must be much more exciting than geese, he says,”_ said the Thing.

“Oh, I don’t know,” said Masklin weakly.

Landing was much worse than flying. It would have been better on water,
Masklin was told later, but Shrub had brought them down on land. The
geese didn’t like that much. It meant that they had to almost stand on
the air, flapping furiously, and then drop the last few inches.

Pion helped Masklin down onto the ground, which seemed to him to be
moving from side to side. The other travelers tottered toward him
through the throng of birds.

“The ground!” panted Angalo. “It was so close! No one seemed to mind!”

He sagged to his knees.

“And they make honking noises!” he said. “And keep swinging from side to
side! And they’re all knobbly under the feathers!”

Masklin flexed his arms to let the tension out.

The land around them didn’t seem a lot different from the place they’d
left, except that the vegetation was lower and Masklin couldn’t see any
water.

_“Shrub says that this is as close as the geese can go,”_ the Thing
said. _“It is too dangerous to go any farther.”_

Shrub nodded and pointed to the horizon.

There was a white shape on it.

“That?” said Masklin.

“That’s it?” said Angalo.

_“Yes.”_

“Doesn’t look very big,” said Gurder quietly.

“It’s still quite a long way off,” said Masklin.

“I can see helicopters,” said Angalo. “No wonder Shrub didn’t want to
take the geese any closer.”

“We must be going,” said Masklin. “We’ve got an hour, and I reckon
that’s barely enough. Er. We’d better say good-bye to Shrub. Can you
explain, Thing? Tell her that—that we’ll try and find her again.
Afterward. If everything’s all right. I suppose.”

“If there _is_ any afterward,” Gurder added. He looked like a badly
washed dishcloth.

Shrub nodded when the Thing had finished translating, and then pushed
Pion forward.

The Thing told Masklin what she wanted.

“What? We can’t take him with us!” said Masklin.

_“Young nomes in Shrub’s people are encouraged to travel,”_ said the
Thing. _“Pion is only fourteen months old and already he has been to
Alaska.”_

“Try and explain that we’re not going to a Laska,” said Masklin. “Try
and make her understand that all sorts of things could happen to him!”

The Thing translated.

_“She says that is good. A growing boy should always seek out new
experiences.”_

“What? Are you translating me properly?” said Masklin suspiciously.

_“Yes.”_

“Well, have you told her it’s dangerous?”

_“Yes. She says that danger is what being alive is all about.”_

“But he could be killed!” Masklin shrieked.

_“Then he will go up into the sky and become a star.”_

“Is that what they believe?”

_“Yes. They believe that the operating system of a nome starts off as a
goose. If it is a good goose, it becomes a nome. When a good nome dies,
NASA takes it up into the sky and it becomes a star.”_

“What’s an operating system?” said Masklin. This was religion. He always
felt out of his depth with religion.

_“The thing inside you that tells you what you are,”_ said the Thing.

“It means a soul,” said Gurder wearily.

“Never heard such a lot of nonsense,” said Angalo cheerfully. “At least,
not since we were in the Store and believed we came back as garden
ornaments, eh?” He nudged Gurder in the ribs.

Instead of getting angry about this, Gurder just looked even more
despondent.

“Let the lad come if he likes,” Angalo went on. “He shows the right
spirit. He reminds me of me when I was like him.”

“His mother says that if he gets homesick, he can always find a goose to
bring him back,” said the Thing.

Masklin opened his mouth to speak.

But there were times when you couldn’t say anything because there was
nothing to say. If you had to explain anything to someone else, then
there had to be something you were both sure of, some place to start,
and Masklin wasn’t sure that there was any place like that around Shrub.
He wondered how big the world was to her. Probably bigger than he could
imagine. But it stopped at the sky.

“Oh, all right,” he said. “But we have to go right away. No time for
long tearful—”

Pion nodded to his mother and came and stood by Masklin, who couldn’t
think of anything to say. Even later on, when he understood the geese
nomes better, he never quite got used to the way they cheerfully parted
from one another. Distances didn’t seem to mean much to them.

“Come on then,” he managed.

Gurder glowered at Topknot, who had insisted on coming this far. “I
really wish I could talk to that nome,” he said.

“Shrub told me he’s quite a decent nome, really,” said Masklin. “He’s
just a bit set in his ways.”

“Just like you, Gurder,” said Angalo.

“Me? I’m not—” Gurder began.

“Of course you’re not,” said Masklin soothingly. “Now, let’s go.”

They jogged through scrub two or three times as high as they were.

“We’ll never have time,” Gurder panted.

“Save your breath for running,” said Angalo.

“Do they have smoked salmon on Shuttles?” said Gurder.

“Dunno,” said Masklin, pushing his way through a particularly tough
clump of grass.

“No, they don’t,” said Angalo authoritatively. “I remember reading about
it in a book. They eat out of tubes.”

The nomes ran in silence while they thought about this.

“What, toothpaste?” said Gurder after a while.

“No, not toothpaste. Of course not toothpaste. I’m _sure_ not
toothpaste.”

“Well, what else do you know that comes in tubes?”

Angalo thought about this.

“Glue?” he said, uncertainly.

“Doesn’t sound a good meal to me. Toothpaste and glue?”

“The people who drive the space jets must like it. They were all smiling
in the picture I saw,” said Angalo.

“That wasn’t smiling, that was probably just them trying to get their
teeth apart,” said Gurder.

“No, you’ve got it all wrong,” Angalo decided, thinking fast. “They have
to have their food in tubes because of gravity.”

“What about gravity?”

“There isn’t any.”

“Any what?”

“Gravity. So everything floats around.”

“What, in water?” said Gurder.

“No, in air. Because there’s nothing to hold it on the plate, you see.”

“Oh.” Gurder nodded. “Is that where the glue comes in?”

Masklin knew that they could go on like this for hours. What these
sounds mean, he thought, is: I am alive and so are you. And we’re all
very worried that we might not be alive for much longer, so we’ll just
keep talking, because that’s better than thinking.

It had all looked better when it was days or weeks away, but now when it
was—

“How long, Thing?”

_“Forty minutes.”_

“We’ve got to have another rest! Gurder isn’t running, he’s just falling
upright.”

They collapsed in the shade of a bush. The Shuttle didn’t look much
closer, but they could see plenty of other activity. There were more
helicopters. According to frantic signs from Pion, who climbed up the
bush, there were humans, much farther off.

“I need to sleep,” said Angalo.

“Didn’t you sleep on the goose?” said Masklin.

“Did _you_?”

Angalo stretched out in the shade.

“How are we going to get on the Shuttle?” he said.

Masklin shrugged. “Well, the Thing says we don’t have to get on it, we
just have to put the Thing on it.”

Angalo pushed himself up on his elbows. “You mean we don’t get to ride
on it? I was looking forward to that!”

“I don’t think it’s like the Truck, Angalo. I don’t think they leave a
window open for anyone to sneak in,” said Masklin. “I think it’d take
more than a lot of nomes and some string to fly it, anyway.”

“You know, that was the best time of my life, when I drove the Truck,”
said Angalo dreamily. “When I think of all those months I lived in the
Store, not even knowing about the Outside . . .”

Masklin waited politely. His head felt heavy.

“Well?” he said.

“Well what?”

“What happens when you think of all those months in the Store not
knowing about the Outside?”

“It just seems like a waste. Do you know what I’m going to do if—I mean,
when we get home? I’m going to write down everything we’ve learned. We
should be doing that, you know. Making lots of our own books. Not just
reading human books, which are full of made-up things. And not just
making books like Gurder’s _Book of Nome_. Books of _proper_ stuff, like
Science. . . .”

Masklin glanced at Gurder. The Abbot wasn’t making any comment. He was
asleep already.

Pion curled up and started to snore. Angalo’s voice trailed off. He
yawned.

They hadn’t slept for hours. Nomes slept mainly at night but needed
catnaps to get through the long day. Even Masklin was nodding.

“Thing?” he remembered to say, “wake me up in ten minutes, will you?”

[image]


7

_SATELLITES: They are in SPACE and stay there by going so fast that they
never stay in one place long enough to fall down. TELEVISIONS are
bounced off them. They are part of SCIENCE._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

IT WASN’T THE Thing that woke Masklin up. It was Gurder.

Masklin lay with his eyes half closed, listening. Gurder was talking to
the Thing in a low voice.

“I believed in the Store,” he said, “and then it was just a, a sort of
thing built by humans. And I thought Grandson Richard, 39, was some
special person, and he turned out to be a human who sings when he wets
himself—”

_“—takes a shower—”_

“—and now there’s thousands of nomes in the world! Thousands! Believing
all sorts of things! That stupid Topknot person believes that the
going-up shuttles make the sky. Do you know what I thought when I heard
that? I thought, If he’d been the one arriving in my world instead of
the other way around, he’d have thought I was just as stupid! I _am_
just as stupid! Thing?”

_“I was maintaining a tactful silence.”_

“Angalo believes in silly machinery and Masklin believes in, oh, I don’t
know. Space. Or not believing in things. And it all works for them. I
try and believe in _important_ things and they don’t last for five
minutes. Where’s the fairness in that?”

_“Only another tactful and understanding silence suffices at this
point.”_

“I just wanted to make some sense out of life.”

_“This is a commendable aim.”_

“I mean, what is the truth of everything?”

There was a pause. Then the Thing said: _“I recall your conversation
with Masklin about the origin of nomes. You wanted to ask me. I can
answer now. I was made. I know this is true. I know that I am a thing
made of metal and plastic, but also that I am something that lives
inside that metal and plastic. It is impossible for me not to be
absolutely certain of it. This is a great comfort. As to nomes, I have
data that says nomes originated on another world and came here thousands
of years ago. This may be true. It may not be true. I am not in a
position to judge.”_

“I knew where I was, back in the Store,” said Gurder, half to himself.
“And even in the quarry it wasn’t too bad. I had a proper job. I was
important to people. How can I go back now, knowing that everything I
believed about the Store and Arnold Bros and Grandson Richard is just .
. . is just an _opinion_?”

_“I cannot advise. I am sorry.”_

Masklin decided it was a diplomatic time to wake up. He made a grunting
noise just to be sure that Gurder heard him.

The Abbot was very red in the face.

“I couldn’t sleep,” he said shortly.

Masklin stood up.

“How long, Thing?”

_“Twenty-seven minutes.”_

“Why didn’t you wake me up!”

_“I wished you to be refreshed.”_

“But it’s still a long way off. We’ll never get you onto it in time.
Wake up, you.” Masklin prodded Angalo with his foot. “Come on, we’ll
have to run. Where’s Pion? Oh, there you are. Come _on_, Gurder.”

They jogged on through the scrub. In the distance, there was the low
mournful howl of sirens.

“You’re cutting it really fine, Masklin,” said Angalo.

“Faster! Run faster!”

Now that they were closer, Masklin could see the Shuttle. It was quite
high up. There didn’t seem to be anything useful at ground level.

“I hope you’ve got a good plan, Thing,” he panted, as the four of them
dodged between the bushes, “because I’ll never be able to get you all
the way up there.”

_“Do not worry. We are nearly close enough.”_

“What do you mean? It’s still a long way off!”

_“It is close enough for me to get on.”_

“What is it going to do? Take a flying leap?” said Angalo.

_“Put me down.”_

Masklin obediently put the black box on the ground. It extended a few of
its probes, which swung around slowly for a while and then pointed
toward the going-up jet.

“What are you playing at?” said Masklin. “This is wasting _time_!”

Gurder laughed, although not in a very happy way.

“I know what it’s doing,” he said. “It’s sending itself onto the
Shuttle. Right, Thing?”

_“I am transmitting an instruction subset to the computer on the
communications satellite,”_ said the Thing.

The nomes said nothing.

_“Or, to put it another way . . . yes, I am turning the satellite
computer into a part of me. Although not a very intelligent one.”_

“Can you really do that?” said Angalo.

_“Certainly.”_

“Wow. And you won’t miss the bit you’re sending?”

_“No. Because it will not leave me.”_

“You’re sending it and keeping it at the same time?”

_“Yes.”_

Angalo looked at Masklin.

“Did you understand any of that?” he demanded.

“I did,” said Gurder. “The Thing’s saying it’s not just a machine, it’s
a sort of . . . a sort of collection of electric thoughts that live in a
machine. I think.”

Lights flickered around on top of the Thing.

“Does it take a long time to do?” said Masklin.

_“Yes. Please do not take up vital communication power at this point.”_

“I think he means he doesn’t want us to talk to him,” said Gurder. “He’s
concentrating.”

“It,” said Angalo. “It’s an it. And it made us run all the way here just
so’s we can hurry up and wait.”

“It probably has to be close up to do . . . whatever it is it’s doing,”
said Masklin.

“How long’s it going to take?” said Angalo. “It seems ages since it was
twenty-seven minutes to go.”

“Twenty-seven minutes at least,” said Gurder.

“Yeah. Maybe more.”

Pion pulled at Masklin’s arm, pointed to the looming white shape with
his other hand, and rattled off a long sentence in Floridian or, if the
Thing was right, nearly original Nomish.

“I can’t understand you without the Thing,” said Masklin. “Sorry.”

“No speaka da goose-oh,” said Angalo.

A look of panic spread across the boy’s face. He shouted this time, and
tugged harder.

“I think he doesn’t want to be near the going-up jets when they start
up,” said Angalo. “He’s probably afraid of the noise.
Don’t—like—the—noise, right?” he said.

Pion nodded furiously.

“They didn’t sound too bad at the airport,” said Angalo. “More of a
rumble. I expect they might frighten unsophisticated people.”

“I don’t think Shrub’s people are particularly unsophisticated,” said
Masklin thoughtfully. He looked up at the white tower. It had seemed a
long way away, but in some ways it might be quite close.

Really very close.

“How safe do you think it is here?” he said. “When it goes up, I mean.”

“Oh, come _on_,” said Angalo. “The Thing wouldn’t have let us come right
here if it wasn’t safe for nomes.”

“Sure, sure,” said Masklin. “Right. You’re right. Silly to dwell on it,
really.”

Pion turned and ran.

The other three looked back at the Shuttle. Lights moved in complicated
patterns on the top of the Thing.

Somewhere another siren sounded. There was a sensation of power, as
though the biggest spring in the world were being wound up.

When Masklin spoke, the other two seemed to hear him speak their own
thoughts.

“Exactly how good,” he said, very slowly, “do you think the Thing is at
judging how close nomes can stand to a going-up jet when it goes up? I
mean, how much experience has it got, do you think?”

They looked at one another.

“Maybe we should back off a little bit . . . ?” Gurder began.

They turned and walked away.

Then each one of them couldn’t help noticing that the others seemed to
be walking faster and faster.

Faster and faster.

Then, as one nome, they gave up and ran for it, fighting their way
through the scrub and grass, skidding on stones, elbows going up and
down like pistons. Gurder, who was normally out of breath at anything
above walking pace, bounded along like a balloon.

“Have . . . _you_ . . . any . . . any . . . idea . . . how . . . how . .
. close . . . ?” Angalo panted.

The sound behind them started like a hiss, like the whole world taking a
deep breath. Then it turned into . . .

. . . not noise, but something more like an invisible hammer that
smacked into both ears at once.

[image]


8

_SPACE: There are two types of space: a) something containing nothing
and b) nothing containing everything. It is what you have left when you
haven’t got anything else. There is no air or gravity, which is what
holds people on to things. If there wasn’t space, everything would be in
one place. It is designed to be a place for SATELLITES, SHUTTLES,
PLANETS, and THE SHIP._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

AFTER SOME TIME, when the ground had stopped shaking, the nomes picked
themselves up and stared blearily at one another.

“                      !” said Gurder.

“What?” said Masklin. His own voice sounded a long way away, and
muffled.

“                   ?” said Gurder.

“                                               ?” said Angalo.

“                                 ?”

“What? I can’t hear you! Can you hear _me_?”

“                      ?”

Masklin saw Gurder’s lips move. He pointed to his own ears and shook his
head.

“We’ve gone deaf!”

“                                                          ?”

“                                                                              ?”

“Deaf, I said.” Masklin looked up.

Smoke billowed overhead, and out of it, rising fast even to a nome’s
high-speed senses, was a long, growing cloud tipped with fire. The noise
dropped to something merely very loud and then, very quickly,
disappeared.

Masklin stuck a finger in his ear and wiggled it around.

The absence of sound was replaced by the terrible hiss of silence.

“Anyone listening?” he ventured. “Anyone hearing me?”

“That,” said Angalo, his voice sounding blurred and unnaturally calm,
“was pretty loud. I don’t reckon many things come much louder.”

Masklin nodded. He felt as though he’d been pounded hard by something.

“You know about these things, Angalo,” he said weakly. “Humans ride on
them, do they?”

“Oh, yes. Right at the top.”

“No one makes them do it?”

“Er. I don’t think so,” said Angalo. “I think the book said a lot of
them want to do it.”

“They _want_ to do it?”

Angalo shrugged. “That’s what it said.”

There was only a distant dot now, at the end of a widening white cloud
of smoke.

Masklin watched it.

We must be _insane_, he thought. We’re tiny and it’s a big world, and we
never stop to learn enough about where we are before we go somewhere
else. At least back when I lived in a hole, I knew everything there was
to know about living in a hole, and now it’s a year later and I’m at a
place so far away, I don’t even know how far away it is, watching
something I don’t understand go to a place so far up there is no down.
And I can’t go back. I’ve got to go right on to the end of whatever all
this is, because I can’t go back. I can’t even stop.

So _that’s_ what Grimma meant about the frogs. Once you know things,
you’re a different person. You can’t help it.

He looked back down. Something was missing.

The Thing . . .

He ran back the way they’d come.

The little black box was where he’d left it. The rods had withdrawn into
it, and there weren’t any lights.

“Thing?” he said uncertainly.

One red light came on faintly. Masklin suddenly felt cold, despite the
heat around him.

“Are you all right?” he said.

The light flickered.

_“Too quick. Used too much pow . . .”_ it said.

“Pow?” said Masklin. He tried hard not to wonder why the word hadn’t
been much more than a growl.

The light dimmed.

“Thing? Thing?” He tapped gently on the box. “Did it work? Is the Ship
coming? What do we do now? Wake up! _Thing?_”

The light went out.

Masklin picked the Thing up and turned it over and over in his hands.

“Thing?”

Masklin and Gurder hurried up, with Pion behind them.

“Did it work?” said Angalo. “Can’t see any Ship yet.”

Masklin turned his face toward them.

“The Thing’s stopped,” he said.

“Stopped?”

“All the lights have gone out!”

“Well, what does that mean?” Angalo started to look panicky.

“I don’t know!”

“Is it dead?” said Gurder.

“It _can’t_ die! It’s existed for thousands of years!”

Gurder shook his head. “Sounds like a good reason for dying,” he said.

“But it’s a, a _thing._”

Angalo sat down with his arms around his knees.

“Did it say if it got everything sorted out? When’s the Ship coming?”

“Listen, don’t you care? It’s run out of pow!”

“Pow?”

“It must mean electricity. It kind of sucks it out of wires and stuff. I
think it can store it for a while, too. And now it must have run out.”

They looked at the black box. It had spent thousands of years being
handed down from nome to nome without ever saying a word or lighting a
light. It had woken up again only when it had been brought into the
Store, near electricity.

“It looks creepy, sitting there doing nothing,” said Angalo.

“Can’t we find it some electricity?” said Gurder.

“Around here? There isn’t any!” Angalo snapped. “We’re in the middle of
nowhere!”

Masklin stood up and gazed around. It was just possible to see some
buildings in the distance. There was a movement of vehicles around them.

“What about the Ship?” said Angalo. “Is it on its way?”

“I don’t know!”

“How will it find us?”

“I don’t know!”

“Who’s driving it?”

“I don’t—” Masklin stopped in horror. “No one! I mean, who _could_ be
driving it? There hasn’t been anyone on it for thousands of years!”

“Who was going to bring it here, then?”

“I don’t know! The Thing, maybe?”

“You mean it’s on its way and no one’s driving it?”

“Yes! No! I don’t know!”

Angalo squinted up at the blue sky.

“Oh, wow,” he said, glumly.

“We need to find some electricity for the Thing,” said Masklin. “Even if
it’s managed to summon the Ship, the Ship will still need to be told
where we are.”

“_If_ it summoned the Ship,” said Gurder. “It might have run out of pow
before it had time.”

“We can’t be sure,” said Masklin. “Anyway, we must help the Thing. I
hate to see it like that.”

Pion, who had disappeared into the scrub, came back dragging a lizard.

“Ah,” said Gurder without any enthusiasm. “Here comes lunch.”

“If the Thing was talking, we could tell Pion you can get awfully tired
of lizard, in time,” said Angalo.

“In about two seconds,” said Gurder.

“Come on,” said Masklin, wearily. “Let’s go and find some shade and
think up another plan.”

“Oh, a plan,” Gurder said, as if that were worse than lizard. “I like
plans.”

They ate—not very well—and lay back watching the sky. The brief sleep on
the way hadn’t been enough. It was easy to doze.

“I must say, these Floridians have got it all worked out,” said Gurder
lazily. “It’s cold back home, and here they’ve got the heating turned up
just right.”

“I keep telling you, it’s not the heating,” said Angalo, straining his
eyes for any sign of a descending ship. “And the wind isn’t the air
conditioning, either. It’s the sun that makes you warm.”

“I thought that was just for lighting,” said Gurder.

“And it’s where all the heat comes from,” said Angalo. “I read it in a
book. It’s a great ball of fire bigger than the world.”

Gurder eyed the sun suspiciously.

“Oh, yes?” he said. “What keeps it up?”

“Nothing. It’s just kind of _there._”

Gurder squinted at the sun again.

“Is this generally known?” he said.

“I suppose so. It was in the book.”

“For anyone to read? I call that irresponsible. That’s the sort of thing
that can really upset people.”

“There’s thousands of suns up there, Masklin says.”

Gurder sniffed. “Yes, he’s told me. It’s called the glaxie, or
something. Personally, I’m against it.”

Angalo chuckled.

“I don’t see what’s so funny,” said Gurder coldly.

“Tell him, Masklin,” said Angalo.

“It’s all very well for you,” Gurder muttered. “You just want to drive
things fast. _I_ want to make sense of them. Maybe there _are_ thousands
of suns, but _why_?”

“Can’t see that it matters,” said Angalo lazily.

“It’s the only thing that _does_ matter. Tell him, Masklin.”

They both looked at Masklin.

At least, where Masklin had been sitting.

He’d gone.

Beyond the top of the sky was the place the Thing had called the
universe. It contained—according to the Thing—everything and nothing.
And there was very little everything and more nothing than anyone could
imagine.

For example, it was often said that the sky was full of stars. It was
untrue. The sky was full of sky. There were unlimited amounts of sky and
really, by comparison, very few stars.

It was amazing, therefore, that they made such an impression. . . .

Thousands of them looked down now as something round and shiny drifted
around the Earth.

It had _Arnsat 1_ painted on its side, which was a bit of a waste of
paint since stars can’t read.

It unfolded a silver dish.

It should then have turned to face the planet below it, ready to beam
down old movies and new news.

It didn’t. It had new orders.

Little puffs of gas jetted out as it turned around and searched the sky
for a new target.

By the time it had found it, a lot of people in the old movies and new
news business were shouting very angrily at one another down telephone
lines, and some of them were feverishly trying to give it new
instructions.

But that didn’t matter, because it wasn’t listening anymore.

Masklin galloped through the scrub. They’ll argue and bicker, he
thought. I’ve got to do this quickly. I don’t think we’ve got a lot of
time.

It was the first time he’d been really alone since the days when he’d
lived in a hole and had to go out hunting by himself because there was
no one else.

Had it been better then? At least it had been simpler. You just had to
try to eat without being eaten. Just getting through the day was a
triumph. Everything had been bad, but at least it had been a kind of
understandable, nome-sized badness.

In those days the world had ended at the highway on one side and the
woods beyond the field on the other side. Now it had no kind of
boundaries at all, and more problems than he knew what to do with.

But at least he knew where to find electricity. You found it near
buildings with humans in them.

The scrub ahead of Masklin opened out onto a track. He turned onto it
and ran faster. Go along any track and you’d find humans on it
somewhere. . . .

There were footsteps behind him. He turned around and saw Pion. The
young Floridian gave him a worried smile.

“Go away!” Masklin said. “Go on! Go! Go back! Why are you following me?
Go away!”

Pion looked hurt. He pointed up the track and said something.

“I don’t understand!” shouted Masklin.

Pion stuck a hand high above his head, palm downward.

“Humans?” Masklin guessed. “Yes. I know. I know what I’m doing. Go
back!”

Pion said something else.

Masklin lifted up the Thing. “Talking box no go,” he said helplessly.
“Good grief, why should I have to speak like this? You must be at least
as intelligent as me. Go on, go away. Go back to the others.”

He turned and ran. He looked back briefly and saw Pion watching him.

How _much_ time have I got? he wondered. Thing once told me the Ship
flies very fast. Maybe it could be here any minute. Maybe it’s not
coming at all. . . .

He saw figures loom over the scrub. Yes, follow any track and sooner or
later you find humans. They get everywhere.

Yes, maybe the Ship isn’t coming at all.

If it isn’t, he thought, then what I’m going to do now is probably the
most stupid thing any nome has ever done anywhere in the total history
of nomekind.

He stepped out into a circle of gravel. A small truck was parked in it,
with the name of the Floridian god NASA painted on the side. Close by, a
couple of humans were bent over a piece of machinery on a tripod.

They didn’t notice Masklin. He walked closer, his heart thumping.

He put down the Thing.

He cupped his hands around his mouth.

He tried to shout as clearly and as slowly as possible.

“Hey, there! You! Hum-mans!”

“He did _what?_” shouted Angalo.

Pion ran through his pantomime of gestures again.

_“Talked_ to _humans?”_ said Angalo. “Went in a thing with _wheels?_”

“I thought I heard a truck engine,” said Gurder.

Angalo pounded a fist into his palm.

“He was worried about the Thing,” he said. “He wanted to find it some
electricity!”

“But we must be miles from any buildings!” said Gurder.

“Not the way Masklin’s going!” Angalo snarled.

“I _knew_ it would come to this!” Gurder moaned. “Showing ourselves to
humans! We never used to do that sort of thing in the Store! What are we
going to _do_?”

Masklin thought: Up to now, it’s not too bad.

The humans hadn’t really known what to do about him. They’d even backed
away! And then one of them had rushed to the truck and talked into a
machine on a string. Probably some sort of telephone, Masklin thought
knowledgeably.

When he hadn’t moved, one of the humans had fetched a box out of the
back of the truck and crept toward him as if expecting Masklin to
explode. In fact, when he waved, the human jumped back clumsily.

The other humans said something, and the box was cautiously put down on
the gravel a few feet from Masklin.

Then both humans watched him expectantly.

He kept smiling, to put them at their ease, and climbed into the box.
Then he gave them another wave.

One of the humans reached down gingerly and picked up the box, lifting
it up in the air as though Masklin were something very rare and
delicate. He was carried to the truck. The human got in and, still
holding the box with exaggerated care, placed it on its knees. A radio
crackled with deep human voices.

Well, no going back now. Knowing that, Masklin very nearly relaxed.
Perhaps it was best to look at it as just another step along life’s
sidewalk.

They kept staring at him, as if they didn’t believe what they were
seeing.

The truck lurched off. After a while it turned onto a concrete road,
where another truck was waiting. A human got out, spoke to the driver of
Masklin’s truck, laughed in a slow human way, looked down at Masklin,
and stopped laughing very suddenly.

It almost ran back to its own truck and started speaking into another
telephone.

I knew this would happen, Masklin thought. They don’t know what to do
with a real nome. Amazing.

But just so long as they take me somewhere where there’s the right kind
of electricity . . .

Dorcas, the engineer, had once tried to explain electricity to Masklin,
but without much success because Dorcas wasn’t too certain about it
either. There seemed to be two kinds, straight and wiggly. The straight
kind was very boring and stayed in batteries. The wiggly kind was found
in wires in the walls and things, and somehow the Thing could steal some
of it if it was close enough. Dorcas used to talk about wiggly
electricity in the same tone of voice Gurder used for talking about
Arnold Bros (est. 1905). He’d tried to study it back in the Store. If it
was put into freezers it made things cold, but if the same electricity
went into an oven it made things hot, so how did it _know?_

Dorcas used to talk, Masklin thought. I said “used to.” I hope he
_still_ does.

He felt light-headed and oddly optimistic. Part of him was saying:
That’s because if you for one second think seriously about the position
you’ve put yourself in, you’ll panic.

Keep smiling.

The truck purred along the road, with the other truck following it.
Masklin saw a third truck rattle down a side road and pull in behind
them. There were a lot of humans on it, and most of them were watching
the skies.

They didn’t stop at the nearest building but drove on to a bigger one
with many more vehicles outside. More humans were waiting for them.

One of them opened the truck door, doing it very slowly even for a
human.

The human carrying Masklin got out of the truck.

Masklin looked up at dozens of staring faces. He could see every
eyeball, every nostril. Every one of them looked worried. At least,
every eyeball did. The nostrils just looked like nostrils.

They were worried about _him_.

Keep smiling.

He stared back up at them and, still almost giggling with repressed
panic, said, “Can I help you, gentlemen?”

[image]


9

_SCIENCE: A way of finding things out and then making them work. Science
explains what is happening around us the whole time. So does RELIGION,
but science is better because it comes up with more understandable
excuses when it’s wrong. There is a lot more Science than you think._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

GURDER, ANGALO, AND Pion sat under a bush. It gave them a bit of shade.
The cloud of gloom over them was almost as big.

“We’ll never even get home without the Thing,” said Gurder.

“Then we’ll get Masklin out,” said Angalo.

“That’ll take forever!”

“Yeah? Well, that’s nearly as long as we’ve got here, if we can’t get
home.” Angalo had found a pebble that was almost the right shape to
attach to a twig with strips torn off his coat; he’d never seen a stone
axe in his life, but he had a definite feeling that there were useful
things that could be done with a stone tied to the end of a stick.

“I wish you’d stop fiddling with that thing,” Gurder said. “What’s the
big plan, then? Us against the whole of Floridia?”

“Not necessarily. You needn’t come.”

“Calm down, Mr. To-the-Rescue. One idiot’s enough.”

“I don’t hear you coming up with any better ideas.” Angalo swished the
axe through the air once or twice.

“I haven’t got any.”

A small red light started to flash on the Thing.

After a while, a small square hole opened up and there was a tiny
whirring sound as the Thing extended a little lens on a stick. This
turned around slowly.

Then the Thing spoke.

_“Where,”_ it asked, _“is this place?”_

It tilted the lens up and there was a pause while it surveyed the face
of the human looking down at it.

_“And why?”_ it added.

“I’m not sure,” said Masklin. “We’re in a room in a big building. The
humans haven’t hurt me. I think one of them has been trying to talk to
me.”

_“We appear to be in some sort of glass box,”_ said the Thing.

“They even gave me a little bed,” said Masklin. “And I think the thing
over there is some kind of lavatory—but _look_, what about the Ship?”

_“I expect it is on its way,”_ said the Thing calmly.

“Expect? _Expect?_ You mean you don’t know?”

_“Many things can go wrong. If they have gone right, the Ship will be
here soon.”_

“If they don’t, I’m stuck here for life!” said Masklin bitterly. “I came
here because of you, you know.”

_“Yes, I know. Thank you.”_

Masklin relaxed a bit.

“They’re being quite kind,” he said. He thought about this. “At least I
think so,” he added. “It’s hard to tell.”

He looked through the transparent wall. A lot of humans had been in to
look at him in the last few minutes. He wasn’t quite certain whether he
was an honored visitor or a prisoner or maybe something in between.

“It seemed the only hope at the time,” he said lamely.

_“I am monitoring communications.”_

“You’re always doing that.”

_“A lot of them are about you. All kinds of experts are rushing here to
have a look at you.”_

“What kind of experts? Experts in nomes?”

_“Experts in talking to creatures from other worlds. Humans haven’t met
anyone from another world, but they’ve still got experts in talking to
them.”_

“All this had better work,” said Masklin soberly. “Humans really know
about nomes now.”

_“But not what nomes are. They think you have just arrived.”_

“Well, that’s true.”

_“Not arrived here. Arrived on the planet. Arrived from the stars.”_

“But we’ve been here for thousands of years! We _live_ here!”

_“Humans find it a lot easier to really believe in little people from
the sky than little people from the Earth. They would rather think of
little green men than leprechauns.”_

Masklin’s brow wrinkled. “I didn’t understand any of that,” he said.

_“Don’t worry about it. It doesn’t matter.”_ The Thing let its lens
swivel around to see more of the room.

_“Very nice. Very scientific,”_ it said.

Then it focused on a wide plastic tray by Masklin.

_“What is that?”_

“Oh, fruit and nuts and meat and stuff,” said Masklin. “I think they’ve
been watching me to see what I eat. I think these are quite bright
humans, Thing. I pointed to my mouth and they understood I was hungry.”

_“Ah,”_ said the Thing. _“Take me to your larder.”_

“Pardon?”

_“I will explain. I have told you that I monitor communications?”_

“All the time.”

_“There is a joke. That is, a humorous anecdote or story, known to
humans. It concerns a ship from another world landing on this planet,
and strange creatures get out and say to a gas pump, trash can, slot
machine, or similar mechanical device, ‘Take me to your leader.’ I
surmise this is because they are unaware of the shape of humans. I have
substituted the similar word larder, referring to a place where food is
stored. This is a humorous pun, or play on words for hilarious effect.”_

It paused.

“Oh,” said Masklin. He thought about it. “These would be the little
green men you mentioned?”

_“Very . . . Wait a moment. Wait a moment.”_

“What? What?” said Masklin urgently.

_“I can hear the Ship.”_

Masklin listened as hard as he could.

“I can’t hear a thing,” he said.

_“Not sound. Radio.”_

“Where is it? Where is it, Thing? You’ve always said the Ship’s up
there, but _where?_”

The remaining tree frogs crouched amid the moss to escape the heat of
the afternoon sun.

Low in the eastern sky was a sliver of white.

It would be nice to think that the tree frogs had legends about it. It
would be nice to think that they thought the sun and moon were distant
flowers—a yellow one by day, a white one by night. It would be nice to
think they had legends about them, and said that when a good frog died,
its soul would go to be big flowers in the sky. . . .

The trouble is that it’s _frogs_ we’re talking about here. Their name
for the sun was “.–.–mipmip.–.–.” Their name for the moon was
“.–.–mipmip.–.–.” Their name for _everything_ was “.–.–mipmip.–.–.” And
when you’re stuck with a vocabulary of one word, it’s pretty hard to
have legends about anything at all.

The leading frog, however, was dimly aware that there was something
wrong with the moon.

It was growing brighter.

“We left the Ship on the moon?” said Masklin. “Why?”

_“That’s what your ancestors decided to do,”_ said the Thing. _“So they
could keep an eye on it, I assume.”_

Masklin’s face lit up slowly, like clouds at sunrise.

“You know,” he said, excitedly, “right back before all this, right back
when we used to live in the old hole, I used to sit out at nights and
watch the moon. Perhaps in my blood I really knew that up there—”

_“No, what you were experiencing was probably primitive superstition,”_
said the Thing.

Masklin deflated. “Oh. Sorry.”

_“And now, please be quiet. The Ship is feeling lost and wants to be
told what to do. It has just woken up after fifteen thousand years.”_

“I’m not very good at mornings myself,” Masklin said.

There is no sound on the moon, but this doesn’t matter because there is
no one to hear anything. Sound would just be a waste.

But there is light.

Fine moondust billowed high across the ancient plains of the moon’s dark
crescent, expanding in boiling clouds that went high enough to catch the
rays of the sun. They glittered.

Down below, something was digging itself out.

“We left it in a _hole?_” said Masklin.

Lights rippled back and forth across all the surfaces of the Thing.

_“Don’t say that’s why you always lived in holes,”_ it said. _“Other
nomes don’t live in holes.”_

“No, that’s true,” said Masklin. “I ought to stop thinking only about
the—”

He suddenly went quiet. He stared out of the glass tank, where a human
was trying to interest him in marks on a blackboard.

“You’ve got to stop it,” he said. “Right now. Stop the Ship. We’ve got
it all wrong. Thing, we can’t go! It doesn’t belong to just us! We can’t
take the Ship!”

The three nomes lurking near the Shuttle launching place watched the
sky. As the sun neared the horizon, the moon sparkled like a Christmas
decoration.

“It must be caused by the Ship!” said Angalo. “It must be!” He beamed at
the others. “That’s it, then. It’s on its way!”

“I never thought it would work . . .” Gurder began.

Angalo slapped Pion on the back, and pointed.

“See that, my lad?” he said. “That’s the Ship, that is! Ours!”

Gurder rubbed his chin and nodded thoughtfully at Pion.

“Yes,” he said. “That’s right. Ours.”

“Masklin says there’s all kinds of stuff up there,” said Angalo
dreamily. “And masses of space. That’s what space is well known for,
lots of space. Masklin said the Ship goes faster than light goes, which
is probably wrong, otherwise how’d you see anything? You’d turn the
lights on, and all the light would drop backward out of the room. But
it’s pretty fast—”

Gurder looked back at the sky again. Something at the back of his mind
was pushing its way to the front and giving him a curious gray feeling.

“Our Ship,” he said. “The one that brought nomes here.”

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Angalo, hardly hearing him.

“And it’ll take us all back,” Gurder went on.

“That’s what Masklin said, and—”

“All nomes,” said Gurder. His voice was as flat and heavy as a sheet of
lead.

“Sure. Why not? I expect I’ll soon work out how to drive it back to the
quarry, and we can pick them all up. And Pion here, of course.”

“What about Pion’s people?” said Gurder.

“Oh, they can come too,” said Angalo expansively. “There’s probably even
room for their geese!”

“And the others?”

Angalo looked surprised. “What others?”

“Shrub said there were lots of other groups of nomes. Everywhere.”

Angalo looked blank. “Oh, them. Well, I don’t know about them. But we
_need_ the Ship. You know what it’s been like ever since we left the
Store.”

“But if we take the Ship away, what will _they_ have if they need it?”

Masklin had just asked the same question.

The Thing said, _“01001101010101110101010010 110101110010.”_

“What did you say?”

The Thing sounded tetchy. _“If I lose concentration, there might not be
a Ship for anyone,”_ it said. _“I am sending fifteen thousand
instructions per second.”_

Masklin said nothing.

_“That’s a lot of instructions,”_ the Thing added.

“By rights the Ship must belong to all the nomes in the world,” said
Masklin.

_“010011001010010010 . . .”_

“Oh, shut up and tell me when the Ship is going to get here.”

_“0101011001 . . . Which do you want me to do? . . . 01001100 . . .”_

“What?”

_“I can shut up OR I can tell you when the Ship is going to arrive. I
can’t do both.”_

“Please tell me when the Ship is going to arrive,” said Masklin
patiently, “and then shut up.”

“_Four minutes.”_

“Four minutes!”

_“I could be three seconds off,”_ said the Thing. _“But I calculate it
as four minutes. Only now it’s three minutes thirty-eight seconds. It’ll
be three minutes and thirty-seven seconds any second now. . . .”_

“I can’t hang around in here if it’s coming that soon!” said Masklin,
all thoughts of his duty to the nomes of the world temporarily
forgotten. “How can I get out? This thing’s got a lid on it.”

_“Do you want me to shut up first, or get you out and then shut up?”_
said the Thing.

“Please!”

_“Have the humans seen you move?”_ said the Thing.

“What do you mean?”

_“Do they know how fast you can run?”_

“I don’t know,” said Masklin. “I suppose not.”

_“Get ready to run, then. But first put your hands over your ears.”_

Masklin thought it would be best to obey. The Thing could be
deliberately infuriating at times, but it didn’t pay to ignore its
advice.

Lights on the Thing made a brief star-shaped pattern.

It started to wail. The sound went up and then went beyond Masklin’s
hearing. He could feel it even with his hands over his ears; it seemed
to be making unpleasant bubbles in his head.

He opened his mouth to shout at the Thing, and the walls exploded. One
moment there was glass, and the next there were bits of glass, drifting
out like a jigsaw puzzle where every piece had suddenly decided it
wanted some personal space. The lid slid down, almost hitting him.

“Now pick me up and run,” ordered the Thing, before the shards had
spilled across the table.

Humans around the room were turning to look in that slow, clumsy way
humans had.

Masklin grabbed the Thing and took off across the polished surface.

“Down!” he said. “We’re high up, how do we get down?” He looked around
desperately. There was some sort of machine at the other end of the
table, covered with little dials and lights. He’d watched one of the
humans using it.

“Wires,” he said. “There’s always wires!”

He skidded around, dodged easily around a giant hand as it tried to grab
him, and sped along the table.

“I’ll have to throw you over,” he panted. “I can’t carry you down!”

_“I’ll be all right.”_

Masklin slid to a stop by the table edge and threw the Thing down. There
_were_ wires running down toward the floor. He leaped for one, swung
around madly, and then half fell and half slid down it.

Humans were lurching toward him from everywhere. He picked up the Thing
again, hugging it to his chest, and darted forward. There was a
foot—brown shoe, dark blue sock. He zigged. There were two more
feet—black shoes, black socks. And they were about to trip over the
first foot . . .

He zagged.

There were more feet, and hands reaching vainly down. Masklin was a
blur, dodging and weaving between feet that could flatten him.

And then there was nothing but open floor.

Somewhere an alarm sounded, its shrill note sounding deep and awesome to
Masklin.

_“Head for the door,”_ suggested the Thing.

“But more humans’ll be coming in,” hissed Masklin.

_“That’s good, because we’re going out.”_

Masklin reached the door just as it opened. A gap of a few inches
appeared, with more feet behind it.

There wasn’t any time to think. Masklin ran over the shoe, jumped down
on the other side, and ran on.

“Where now? Where now?”

_“Outside.”_

“Which way is that?”

_“Every way.”_

“Thank you very much!”

Doors were opening all along the corridor. Humans were coming out. The
problem was not evading capture—it would take a very alert human even to
see a nome running at full speed, let alone catch one—but simply
avoiding being trodden on by accident.

“Why don’t they have mouseholes? Every building should have mouseholes!”
Masklin moaned.

A boot stamped down an inch away. He jumped.

The corridor was filling with humans. Another alarm started to sound.

“Why’s all this happening? I can’t be causing all this? There can’t be
all this trouble over just one nome!”

_“It’s the Ship. They have seen the Ship.”_

A shoe almost awarded Masklin the prize for the most perfectly flattened
nome in Florida. As it was, he almost ran into it.

Unlike most shoes, it had a name on it. It was a Crucial Street Drifter
with Real Rubber Sole, Pat’d. The sock above it looked as though it
could be a Histyle Odorprufe, made of Guaranteed eighty-five percent
Polyputheketlon, the most expensive sock in the world.

Masklin looked farther up. Beyond the great sweep of blue trouser and
the distant clouds of sweater was a beard.

It was Grandson Richard, 39.

Just when you thought there was no one watching over nomes, the universe
went and tried to prove you wrong. . . .

Masklin took a standing jump and landed on the trouser leg, just as the
foot moved. It was the safest place. Humans didn’t often tread on other
humans.

The foot took a step and came down again. Masklin swung backward and
forward, trying to pull himself up the rough cloth. There was a seam an
inch away. He managed to grab it; the stitches gave a better handhold.

Grandson Richard, 39, was in a crush of people all heading the same way.
Several other humans banged into him, almost jarring Masklin loose. He
kicked his boots off and tried to grip with his toes.

There was a slow thumping as Grandson Richard’s feet hit the ground.

Masklin reached a pocket, got a decent foothold, and climbed on. A bulky
label helped him up to the belt. Masklin was used to labels in the
Store, but this was pretty big even by big label standards. It was
covered in lettering and had been riveted to the trousers, as if
Grandson Richard were some sort of machine.

“‘Grossbergers Hagglers, the First Name in Jeans,’” he read. “And
there’s lots of stuff about how good they are, and pictures of cows and
things. Why d’you think he wants labels all over him?”

_“Perhaps if he hasn’t got labels, he doesn’t know what his clothes
are,”_ said the Thing.

“Good point. He’d probably put his shoes on his head.”

Masklin glanced back at the label as he grabbed the sweater.

“It says here that these jeans won a gold medal in the Chicago
Exhibition in 1910,” he said. “They’ve certainly lasted well.”

Humans were streaming out of the building.

The sweater was much easier to climb. Masklin hauled himself up quickly.
Grandson Richard had quite long hair, which also helped when it was time
to climb up onto the shoulder.

A doorframe passed briefly overhead, and then the deep blue of the sky.

“How long, Thing?” Masklin hissed. Grandson Richard’s ear was only a few
inches away.

_“Forty-three seconds.”_

The humans spilled out onto the wide concrete space in front of the
building. Some more hurried out of the building, carrying machinery.
They kept running into one another because they were all staring at the
sky.

Another group was clustered around one human, who was looking very
worried.

“What’s going on, Thing?” Masklin whispered.

_“The human in the middle of the group is the most important one here.
It came to watch the Shuttle launch. Now all the others are telling it
that it’s got to be the one to welcome the Ship.”_

“That’s a bit of a nerve. It’s not _their_ Ship.”

_“Yes, but they think it’s coming to talk to them.”_

“Why should they think that?”

_“Because they think they’re the most important creatures on the
planet.”_

“Hah!”

_“Amazing, isn’t it?”_ said the Thing.

“Everyone knows nomes are more important,” said Masklin. “At least . . .
every nome does.” He thought about this for a moment and shook his head.
“So that’s the head human, is it? Is it some sort of extra-wise one, or
something?”

_“I don’t think so. The other humans around it are trying to explain to
it what a planet is.”_

“Doesn’t it know?”

_“Many humans don’t. Mistervicepresident is one of them. 001010011000.”_

“You’re talking to the Ship again?”

_“Yes. Six seconds.”_

“It’s really coming. . . .”

_“Yes.”_

[image]


10

_GRAVITY: This is not properly understood, but it is what makes small
things, like nomes, stick to big things, like planets. Because of
SCIENCE, this happens whether you know about gravity or not. Which goes
to show that Science is happening all the time._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

ANGALO LOOKED AROUND.

“Gurder, come _on._”

Gurder leaned against a tuft of grass and fought to get his breath back.

“It’s no good,” he wheezed. “What are you thinking of? We can’t fight
humans alone!”

“We’ve got Pion. And this is a pretty good axe.”

“Oh, that’s really going to scare them. A stone axe. If you had two
axes, I expect they’d give in right away.”

Angalo swung it backward and forward. It had a comforting feel.

“You’ve got to try,” he said simply. “Come on, Pion. What are you
watching? Geese?”

Pion was staring at the sky.

“There’s a dot up there,” said Gurder, squinting.

“It’s probably a bird,” said Angalo.

“Doesn’t look like a bird.”

“Then it’s a plane.”

“Doesn’t look like a plane.”

Now all three of them were staring upward, their upturned faces forming
a triangle.

There was a black dot up there.

“You don’t think he actually _managed_ it, do you?” said Angalo
uncertainly.

What had been a dot was now a small dark circle.

“It’s not moving, though,” said Gurder.

“It’s not moving sideways, anyway,” said Angalo, still speaking very
slowly. “It’s moving more sort of down.”

What had been a small dark circle was a larger dark circle, with just a
suspicion of smoke or steam around its edges.

“It might be some sort of weather,” said Angalo. “You know. Special
Floridian weather?”

“Oh, yeah? One great big hailstone, right? It’s the Ship! Coming for
us!”

It was a lot bigger now and yet, and yet . . . still a very long way
off.

“If it could come for us just a little way away, I wouldn’t mind,”
Gurder quavered. “I wouldn’t mind walking a little way.”

“Yeah,” said Angalo, beginning to look desperate. “It’s not so much
coming as, as . . .”

_“. . . dropping,”_ said Gurder.

He looked at Angalo.

“Shall we run?” he said.

“It’s got to be worth a try,” said Angalo.

“Where shall we run to?”

“Let’s just follow Pion, shall we? He started running a while ago.”

Masklin would be the first to admit that he wasn’t too familiar with
forms of transport, but what they all seemed to have in common was a
front, which was in front, and a back, which wasn’t. The whole point was
that the front was where they went forward from.

The thing dropping out of the sky was a disk—just a top connected to a
bottom, with edges round the sides. It didn’t make any noise, but it
seemed to be impressing the humans no end.

“That’s it?” he said.

_“Yes.”_

“Oh.”

And then things seemed to come into focus.

The Ship wasn’t big. It needed a new word. It wasn’t _dropping_ through
the thin wisps of cloud up there, it was simply pushing them aside. Just
when you thought you’d got some idea of the size, a cloud would stream
past and the perspective would wind back. There had to be a special word
for something as big as that.

“Is it going to crash?” he whispered.

_“I shall land it on the scrub,”_ said the Thing. _“I don’t want to
frighten the humans.”_

“Run!”

“What do you think I’m doing?”

“It’s still right above us!”

“I’m running! I’m running! I can’t run any faster!”

A shadow fell across the three running nomes.

“All the way to Floridia to be squashed under our own Ship,” moaned
Angalo. “You never really believed in it, did you? Well, now you’re
going to believe in it really hard!”

The shadow deepened. They could see it racing across the ground ahead of
them—gray around the edges, spreading into the darkness of night. Their
own private night.

“The others are still out there somewhere,” said Masklin.

_“Ah,”_ said the Thing. _“I forgot.”_

“You’re not supposed to forget things like that!”

_“I’ve been very busy lately. I can’t think of everything. Just nearly
everything.”_

“Well don’t squash anyone!”

_“I shall stop it before it lands. Don’t worry.”_

The humans were all talking at once. Some of them had started to run
toward the falling ship. Some were running away from it.

Masklin risked a glance at Grandson Richard’s face. It was watching the
ship with a strange, rapt expression.

As Masklin stared, the big eyes swiveled slowly sideways. The head
turned around. Grandson Richard stared down at the nome on his shoulder.

For the second time, the human saw him. And this time, there was nowhere
to run.

Masklin rapped the Thing on its lid.

“Can you slow my voice down?” he said quickly. An amazed expression was
forming on the human’s face.

_“What do you mean?”_

“I mean you just repeat what I say, but slowed down. And louder. So
it—so he can understand it?”

_“You want to communicate? With a human?”_

“Yes! Can you do it?”

_“I strongly advise against it! It could be very dangerous!”_

Masklin clenched his fists. “Compared to what, Thing? Compared to what?
How much more dangerous than not communicating, Thing? Do it! Right now!
Tell him . . . tell him we’re _not_ trying to hurt any humans! Right
now! I can see his hand moving already! Do it!” He held the box right up
to Grandson Richard’s ear.

The Thing started to speak in the low, slow tones of human speech.

It seemed to go on for a long time.

The human’s expression froze.

“What did you say? What did you say?” said Masklin.

_“I said, if he harms you in any way I shall explode and blow his head
off,”_ said the Thing.

“You didn’t!”

_“I did.”_

“You call that communicating?”

_“Yes. I call it very effective communicating.”_

“But it’s a dreadful thing to say! Anyway . . . you never told me you
could explode!”

_“I can’t. But it doesn’t know that. It’s only human,”_ said the Thing.

The Ship slowed its fall and drifted down across the scrublands until it
met its own shadow. Beside it, the tower where the Shuttle had been
launched looked like a pin alongside a very large black plate.

“You landed it on the ground! You said you wouldn’t!” said Masklin.

_“It’s not on the ground. It is floating just above the ground.”_

“It looks as though it’s on the ground to me!”

_“It is floating just above it,”_ repeated the Thing patiently.

Grandson Richard was looking at Masklin down the length of his nose. He
looked puzzled.

“What makes it float?” Masklin demanded.

The Thing told him.

“Auntie who? Who’s she? There’s relatives on board?”

_“Not Auntie. Anti. Antigravity.”_

“But there’s no flames or smoke!”

_“Flames and smoke are not essential.”_

Vehicles were screaming toward the bulk of the Ship.

“Um. Exactly _how_ far off the ground did you stop it?” Masklin
inquired.

_“Four inches seemed adequate—”_

Angalo lay with his face pressed into the sandy soil.

To his amazement, he was still alive. Or at least, if he _was_ dead,
then he was still able to think. Perhaps he was dead, and this was
wherever you went afterward.

It seemed pretty much like where he’d been before.

Let’s see, now. He’d looked up at the great thing dropping out of the
sky right toward his head, and had flung himself down, expecting at any
second to become just a little greasy mark in a great big hole.

No, he probably hadn’t died. He’d have remembered something important
like that.

“Gurder?” he ventured.

“Is that you?” said Gurder’s voice.

“I hope so. Pion?”

“Pion!” said Pion, somewhere in the darkness.

Angalo pushed himself up onto his hands and knees.

“Any idea where we are?” he said.

“In the Ship?” suggested Gurder.

“Don’t think so,” said Angalo. “There’s soil here, and grass and stuff.”

“Then where did the Ship go? Why’s it all dark?”

Angalo brushed the dirt off his coat. “Dunno. Maybe . . . maybe it
missed us. Maybe we were knocked out, and now it’s nighttime?”

“I can see a bit of light around the horizon,” said Gurder. “That’s not
right, is it? That’s not how nights are supposed to be.”

Angalo looked around. There _was_ a line of light in the distance. And
there was also a strange sound, so quiet that you could miss it but
which, once you had noticed it, also seemed to fill up the world.

He stood up to get a better view.

There was a faint thump.

“Ouch!”

Angalo reached up to rub his head. His hand touched metal. Crouching a
little, he risked turning his head to see what it was he’d hit.

He went very thoughtful for a while.

Then he said, “Gurder, you’re going to find this amazingly hard to
believe. . . .”

“_This_ time,” said Masklin to the Thing, “I want you to translate
_exactly_, do you understand? Don’t try to frighten him!”

Humans had surrounded the Ship. At least, they were trying to surround
it, but you’d need an awful lot of humans to surround something the size
of the Ship. So they were just surrounding it in places.

More trucks were arriving, many of them with sirens blaring. Grandson
Richard had been left standing by himself, watching his own shoulder
nervously.

“Besides, we owe him something,” said Masklin. “We used his satellite.
And we stole things.”

_“You said you wanted to do it your way. No help from humans, you
said,”_ said the Thing.

“It’s different now. There is the Ship,” said Masklin. “We’ve made it.
We’re not begging anymore.”

_“May I point out that you’re sitting on his shoulder, not him on
yours,”_ said the Thing.

“Never mind that,” said Masklin. “Tell it—I mean, ask him to walk toward
the Ship. And say please. And say that we don’t want anyone to get hurt.
Including me,” he added.

Grandson Richard’s reply seemed to take a long time. But he did start to
walk toward the crowds around the Ship.

“What did he say?” said Masklin, hanging on tightly to the sweater.

_“I don’t believe it,”_ said the Thing.

“He doesn’t believe me?”

_“He said his grandfather always talked about the little people, but he
never believed it until now. He said: Are you like the ones in the old
Store?”_

Masklin’s mouth dropped open. Grandson Richard was watching him
intently.

“Tell him yes,” Masklin croaked.

_“Very well. But I do not think it’ll be a good idea.”_

The Thing boomed. Grandson Richard rumbled a reply.

_“He says his grandfather made jokes about little people in the Store,”_
said the Thing. _“He used to say they brought him luck.”_

Masklin felt the horrible sensation in his stomach that meant the world
was changing again, just when he thought he understood it.

“Did his grandfather ever see a nome?” he said.

_“He says no. But he says that when his grandfather and his
grandfather’s brother were starting the Store and stayed late every
night to do the office work, they used to hear sounds in the walls, and
they used to tell each other there were little Store people. It was a
sort of joke. He says that when he was small, his grandfather used to
tell him about little people who came out at night to play with the
toys.”_

“But the Store nomes never did things like that!” said Masklin.

_“I didn’t say the stories were true.”_

The Ship was a lot closer now. There didn’t seem to be any doors or
windows anywhere. It was as featureless as an egg.

Masklin’s mind was in turmoil. He’d always believed that humans were
quite intelligent. After all, nomes were very intelligent. Rats were
quite intelligent. And foxes were intelligent, more or less. There ought
to be enough intelligence sloshing around in the world for humans to
have some too. But this was something more than intelligence.

He remembered the book called _Gulliver’s Travels_. It had been a big
surprise to the nomes. There had never been an island of small people.
He was certain of that. It was a, a, a made-up thing. There had been
lots of books in the Store that were like that. They’d caused no end of
problems for the nomes. For some reason, humans needed things that
weren’t true.

They never really thought nomes existed, he thought, but they wanted to
believe that we did.

“Tell him,” he said, “tell him I must get into the Ship.”

Grandson Richard whispered. It was like listening to a gale.

_“He says there are too many people.”_

“Why are all the humans around it?” said Masklin, bewildered. “Why
aren’t they frightened?”

Grandson Richard’s reply was another gale.

_“He says they think some creatures from another world will come out and
talk to them.”_

“Why?”

_“I don’t know,”_ said the Thing. _“Perhaps they don’t want to be
alone.”_

“But there’s no one in it! It’s _our_ Ship—” Masklin began.

There was a wail. The crowd put their hands over their ears.

Lights appeared on the darkness of the Ship. They twinkled all over the
hull in patterns that raced backward and forward and disappeared. There
was another wail.

“There _isn’t_ anyone in it, is there?” said Masklin. “No nomes were
left on it in hibernation or anything?”

High up on the Ship a square hole opened. There was a whiffling noise,
and a beam of red light shot out and set fire to a patch of scrub
several hundred yards away.

People started to run.

The Ship rose a few feet, wobbling alarmingly. It drifted sideways a
little. Then it went straight up so fast that it was just a blur and
jerked to a halt high over the crowd. And then it turned over. And then
it went on its edge for a while.

It floated back down again and landed, more or less. That is, one side
touched the ground and the other rested on the air, on nothing.

The Ship spoke, loudly.

To the humans it must have sounded like a high-pitched chattering.

What it actually said was: “Sorry! Sorry! Is this a microphone? Can’t
find the button that opens the door . . . let’s try this one. . . .”

Another square hole opened. Brilliant blue light flooded out.

The voice boomed out across the country again.

“Got it!” There was the distorted _thud-thud_ of someone who isn’t
certain if their microphone is working and who is tapping it
experimentally. “Masklin, are you out there?”

“That’s Angalo!” said Masklin. “No one else drives like that! Thing,
tell Grandson Richard I must get on the Ship! Please!”

The human nodded.

Humans were milling around the base of the Ship. The doorway was too
high up for them to reach.

With Masklin hanging on grimly, Grandson Richard pushed his way through
the throng.

The Ship wailed again.

“Er,” came Angalo’s hugely amplified voice, apparently talking to
someone else. “I’m not sure about this switch, but maybe it’s . . .
Certainly I’m going to press it, why shouldn’t I press it? It’s next to
the door one—it must be safe. Look, shut up. . . .”

A silver ramp wound out of the doorway. It looked big enough for humans.

“See? See?” said Angalo’s voice.

“Thing, can you speak to Angalo?” said Masklin. “Tell him I’m out here,
trying to get to the Ship?”

_“No. He appears to be randomly pressing buttons. It is to be hoped that
he does not press the wrong ones.”_

“I thought you could tell the Ship what to do!” said Masklin.

The Thing managed to sound shocked. _“Not when a nome is in it,”_ it
said. _“I can’t tell it not to do what a nome tells it to do. That’s
what being a machine is all about.”_

Grandson Richard was shoving his way through the pushing, shouting mass
of humans, but it was hard going.

Masklin sighed.

“Ask Grandson Richard to put me down,” he said. Then he added, “And say
thank you. Say it . . . it would have been nice to talk more.”

The Thing did the translation.

Grandson Richard looked surprised. The Thing spoke again. Then he
reached up a hand toward Masklin.

If he had to make that list of horrible moments, Masklin would have put
this one at the top. He’d faced foxes, he’d helped to drive the Truck,
he’d flown on a goose—but none of them was half so bad as letting a
human being actually touch him. The huge whorled fingers uncurled and
passed on either side of his waist. He shut his eyes.

Angalo’s booming voice said, “Masklin? Masklin? If anything bad’s
happened to you, there’s going to be _trouble._”

Grandson Richard’s fingers gripped Masklin lightly, as though the human
were holding something very fragile. Masklin felt himself being slowly
lowered toward the ground. He opened his eyes. There was a forest of
human legs around him.

He looked up into Grandson Richard’s huge face and, trying to make his
voice as deep and slow as possible, said the only word any nome had said
directly to a human in fifteen thousand years.

“Good-bye.”

Then he ran through the maze of feet.

Several humans with official-looking trousers and big boots were
standing at the bottom of the ramp. Masklin scurried between them and
ran on upward.

Ahead of him blue light shone out of the open hatchway. As he ran, he
saw two dots appear on the lip of the entrance.

The ramp was long. Masklin hadn’t slept for hours. He wished he’d got
some sleep on the bed when the humans were studying him; it had looked
quite comfortable.

Suddenly, all his legs wanted to do was go somewhere close and lie down.

He staggered to the top of the ramp, and the dots became the heads of
Gurder and Pion. They reached out and pulled him into the Ship.

He turned around and looked down into a sea of human faces below him.
He’d never looked down on a human face before.

They probably couldn’t even see him. They’re waiting for the little
green men, he thought.

“Are you all right?” said Gurder urgently. “Did they do anything to
you?”

“I’m fine, I’m fine,” murmured Masklin. “No one hurt me.”

“You look dreadful.”

“We should have talked to them, Gurder,” said Masklin. “They _need_ us.”

“Are you _sure_ you’re all right?” said Gurder, peering anxiously at
him.

Masklin’s head felt full of cotton. “You know you believed in Arnold
Bros (est. 1905)?” he managed to say.

“Yes,” said Gurder.

Masklin gave him a mad, triumphant grin.

“Well, he believed in you, too! How about that?”

And Masklin folded up, very gently.

[image]


11

_THE SHIP: The machine used by nomes to leave Earth. We don’t yet know
everything about it, but since it was built by nomes using SCIENCE, we
will._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

THE RAMP WOUND in. The doorway shut. The Ship rose in the air until it
was high above the buildings.

And it stayed there while the sun set.

The humans below tried shining colored lights at it, and playing tunes
at it, and eventually just speaking to it in every language known to
humans.

It didn’t seem to take any notice.

Masklin woke up.

He was on a very uncomfortable bed. It was all soft. He hated lying on
anything softer than the ground. The Store nomes liked sleeping on fancy
bits of carpet, but Masklin’s bed had been a bit of wood. He’d used a
piece of rag for a cover and thought that was luxury.

He sat up and looked around the room. It was fairly empty. There was
just the bed, a table, and a chair.

A table and a chair.

In the Store, the nomes had made their furniture out of matchboxes and
cotton reels; the nomes living Outside didn’t even know what furniture
_was_.

This looked rather like human furniture, but it was nome sized.

Masklin got up and padded across the metal floor to the door. Nome
sized, again. A doorway made by nomes for nomes to walk through.

It led into a corridor lined with doors. There was an old feel about it.
It wasn’t dirty or dusty. It just felt like somewhere that had been
absolutely clean for a very, very long time.

Something purred toward him. It was a small black box, rather like the
Thing, mounted on little treads. A small revolving brush on the front
was sweeping dust into a slot. At least, if there had been any dust it
would have been sweeping it. Masklin wondered how many times it had
industriously cleaned this corridor, while it waited for nomes to come
back. . . .

It bumped into his foot, beeped at him, and then bustled off in the
opposite direction. Masklin followed it.

After a while he passed another one. It was moving along the ceiling
with a faint clicking noise, cleaning it.

He turned the corner and almost walked into Gurder.

“You’re up!”

“Yes,” said Masklin. “Er. We’re on the Ship, right?”

“It’s amazing—!” Gurder began. He was wild-eyed, and his hair was
sticking up at all angles.

“I’m sure it is,” said Masklin reassuringly.

“But there’s all these . . . and there’s great big . . . and there’s
these _huge_ . . . and you’d never believe how wide . . . and there’s so
much . . .” Gurder’s voice trailed off. He looked like a nome who would
have to learn new words before he could describe things.

“It’s too big!” he blurted out. He grabbed Masklin’s arm. “Come on,” he
said, and half ran along the corridor.

“How did you get on?” said Masklin, trying to keep up.

“It was amazing! Angalo touched this panel thing and it just moved aside
and then we were inside and there was an elevator thing and then we were
in this great big room with a seat and Angalo sat down and all these
lights came on and he started pressing buttons and moving things!”

“Didn’t you try to stop him?”

Gurder rolled his eyes. “You know Angalo and machines,” he said. “But
the Thing is trying to get him to be sensible. Otherwise we’d be
crashing into stars by now,” he added gloomily.

He led the way through another arch into—

Well, it had to be a room. It was inside the Ship. It was just as well
he knew that, Masklin thought, because otherwise he’d think it was
Outside. It stretched away, as big as one of the departments in the
Store.

Vast screens and complicated-looking panels covered the walls. Most of
them were dark. Shadowy gloom stretched away in every direction, except
for a little puddle of light in the very center of the room.

It illuminated Angalo, almost lost in a big padded chair. He had the
Thing in front of him, on a sloping metal board studded with switches.
He had obviously been arguing with it—when Masklin walked up, Angalo
glared at him and said, “It won’t do what I tell it!”

The Thing looked as small and black and square as it could.

_“He wants to drive the Ship,”_ it said.

“You’re a machine! You _have_ to do what you’re told!” snapped Angalo.

_“I’m an_ intelligent _machine, and I don’t want to end up very flat at
the bottom of a deep hole,”_ said the Thing. _“You can’t pilot the Ship
yet.”_

“How do you know? You won’t let me try! I drove the Truck, didn’t I? It
wasn’t my fault all those trees and streetlights and things got in the
way,” he added, after catching Masklin’s eye.

“I expect the Ship is more difficult,” said Masklin diplomatically.

“But I’m learning about it all the time,” said Angalo. “It’s easy. All
the buttons have got little pictures on them. Look . . .”

He pressed a button.

One of the big screens lit up, showing the crowds outside the ship.

“They’ve been waiting there for ages,” said Gurder.

“What do they want?” said Angalo.

“Search me,” said Gurder. “Who knows what humans want?”

Masklin stared at the throng below the Ship.

“They’ve been trying all sorts of stuff,” said Angalo. “Flashing lights
and music and stuff like that. And radio too, the Thing says.”

“Haven’t you tried talking back to them?” said Masklin.

“No. Haven’t got anything to say,” said Angalo. He rapped on the Thing
with his knuckles. “Right, Mr. Clever—if I’m not going to do the
driving, who is?”

_“Me.”_

“How?”

_“There is a slot by the seat.”_

“I see it. It’s the same size as you.”

_“Put me in it.”_

Angalo shrugged and picked up the Thing. It slid smoothly into the floor
until only the top of it was showing.

“Look, er,” said Angalo, “can’t I do something? Operate the windshield
wipers or something? I’d feel like a twerp sitting here doing nothing.”

The Thing didn’t seem to hear him. Its light flickered on and off for a
moment, as if it were making itself comfortable in a mechanical kind of
way. Then it said, in a much deeper voice than it had ever used before:
_“RIGHT.”_

Lights came on all over the Ship. They spread out from the Thing like a
tide; panels lit up like little skies full of stars, big lights in the
ceiling flickered on, there was a distant banging and fizzing as
electricity was woken up, and the air began to smell of thunderstorms.

“It’s like the Store at Christmas Fayre,” said Gurder.

_“ALL SYSTEMS IN WORKING ORDER,”_ boomed the Thing. _“NAME OUR
DESTINATION.”_

“What?” said Masklin. “And don’t shout.”

_“Where are we going?”_ said the Thing. _“You have to name our
destination.”_

“It’s got a name already. It’s called the quarry, isn’t it?” said
Masklin.

_“Where is it?”_ said the Thing.

“It’s—” Masklin waved an arm vaguely. “Well, it’s over that way
somewhere.”

_“Which way?”_

“How should I know? How many ways are there?”

“Thing, are you telling us you don’t know the way back to the quarry?”
said Gurder.

_“That is correct.”_

“We’re lost?”

_“No. I know exactly what planet we’re on,”_ said the Thing.

“We can’t be lost,” said Gurder. “We’re here. We know where we are. We
just don’t know where we aren’t.”

“Can’t you find the quarry if you go up high enough?” said Angalo. “You
ought to be able to see it, if you go up high enough.”

_“Very well.”_

“Can I do it?” said Angalo. “Please?”

_“Press down with your left foot and pull back on the green lever,
then,”_ said the Thing.

There wasn’t so much a noise as a change in the type of silence. Masklin
thought he felt heavy for a moment, but then the sensation passed.

The picture in the screen got smaller.

“Now, this is what I call proper flying,” said Angalo, happily. “No
noise and none of that stupid flapping.”

“Yes, where’s Pion?” said Masklin.

“He wandered off,” said Gurder. “I think he was going to get something
to eat.”

“On a machine that no nome has been on for fifteen thousand years?” said
Masklin.

Gurder shrugged. “Well, maybe there’s something at the back of a
cupboard somewhere,” he said. “I want a word with you, Masklin.”

“Yes?”

Gurder moved closer and glanced over his shoulder at Angalo, who was
lying back in the control seat with a look of dreamy contentment on his
face.

He lowered his voice.

“We shouldn’t be doing this,” he said. “I know it’s a dreadful thing to
say, after all we’ve been through. But this isn’t just _our_ Ship. It
belongs to all nomes, everywhere.”

He looked relieved when Masklin nodded.

“A year ago you didn’t even believe there _were_ any other nomes
anywhere,” Masklin said.

Gurder looked sheepish. “Yes. Well. That was then. This is now. I don’t
know what I believe in anymore, except that there must be thousands of
nomes out there we don’t know about. There might even be other nomes
living in Stores! We’re just the lucky ones who had the Thing. So if we
take the Ship away, there won’t be any hope for them.”

“I know, I know,” said Masklin wretchedly. “But what can we do? _We_
need the Ship right now. Anyway, how could we find these other nomes?”

“We’ve got the Ship!” said Gurder.

Masklin waved a hand at the screen, where the landscape was spreading
out and becoming misty.

“It’d take forever to find nomes down there. You couldn’t do it even
with the Ship. You’d have to be on the ground. Nomes keep hidden! You
nomes in the Store didn’t know about my people, and we lived a few miles
away. We’d never have found Pion’s people except by accident.
Besides”—he couldn’t resist prodding Gurder gently—“there’s a bigger
problem, too. You know what we nomes are like. Those other nomes
probably wouldn’t even _believe_ in the Ship.”

He was immediately sorry he’d said that. Gurder looked more unhappy than
he’d ever seen him.

“That’s true,” the Abbot said. “I wouldn’t have believed it. I’m not
sure I believe it now, and I’m _on_ it.”

“Maybe, when we’ve found somewhere to live, we can send the Ship back
and collect any other nomes we can find,” Masklin hazarded. “I’m sure
Angalo would enjoy that.”

Gurder’s shoulders began to shake. For a moment Masklin thought the nome
was laughing, and then he saw the tears rolling down the Abbot’s face.

“Um,” he said, not knowing what else to say.

Gurder turned away. “I’m sorry,” he muttered. “It’s just that there’s so
much . . . changing. Why can’t things stay the same for five minutes?
Every time I get the hang of an idea, it suddenly turns into something
different and _I_ turn into a fool! All I want is something real to
believe in! Where’s the harm in that?”

“I think you just have to have a flexible mind,” said Masklin, knowing
even as he said the words that this probably wasn’t going to be a lot of
help.

“Flexible? Flexible? My mind’s got so flexible I could pull it out of my
ears and tie it under my chin!” snapped Gurder. “And it hasn’t done me a
whole lot of good, let me tell you! I’d have done better just believing
everything I was taught when I was young! At least I’d only have been
wrong once! This way I’m wrong all the time!”

He stamped away down one of the corridors.

Masklin watched him go. Not for the first time he wished he believed in
something as much as Gurder did so he could complain to it about his
life. He wished he was back—yes, even back in the hole. It hadn’t been
too bad, apart from people being cold and wet and getting eaten all the
time. But at least he had been with Grimma. They would have been cold
and wet and hungry together. He wouldn’t have been so lonely. . . .

There was a movement by him. It turned out to be Pion, holding a tray of
what had to be . . . fruit, Masklin decided. He put aside being lonely
for a moment and realized that hunger had been waiting for an
opportunity to make itself felt. He’d never seen fruit that shape and
color.

He took a slice from the proffered tray. It tasted like a nutty lemon.

“It’s kept well, considering,” he said, weakly. “Where did you get it?”

It turned out to have come from a machine in a nearby corridor. It
looked fairly simple. There were hundreds of pictures of different sorts
of food. If you touched a picture, there was a brief humming noise and
then the food dropped onto a tray in a slot. Masklin tried pictures at
random and got several different sorts of fruit, a squeaky green
vegetable thing, and a piece of meat that tasted rather like smoked
salmon.

“I wonder how it does it,” he said aloud.

A voice from the wall beside him said: _“Would you understand if I told
you about molecular breakdown and reassembly from a wide range of raw
materials?”_

“No,” said Masklin truthfully.

_“Then it’s all done by Science.”_

“Oh. Well, that’s all right, then. That _is_ you, Thing, isn’t it?”

_“Yes.”_

Chewing on the fish meat, Masklin wandered back to the control room and
offered some of the food to Angalo. The big screen was showing nothing
but clouds.

“Won’t see any quarry in all this,” he said.

Angalo pulled one of the levers back a bit. There was that brief feeling
of extra weight again.

They stared at the screen.

“Wow,” said Angalo.

“That looks familiar,” said Masklin. He patted his clothes until he
found the folded, crumpled map they’d brought all the way from the
Store.

He spread it out, and glanced from it to the screen.

The screen showed a disk, made up mainly of different shades of blue and
wispy bits of cloud.

“Any idea what it is?” said Angalo.

“No, but I know what some of the bits are called,” said Masklin. “That
one that’s thick at the top and thin at the bottom is called South
America. Look, it’s just like it is on the map. Only it should have the
words ‘South America’ written on it.”

“Still can’t see the quarry, though,” said Angalo.

Masklin looked at the image in front of them. South America. Grimma had
talked about South America, hadn’t she? That’s where the frogs lived in
flowers. She’d said that once you knew about things like frogs living in
flowers, you weren’t the same person.

He was beginning to see what she meant.

“Never mind about the quarry for now,” he said. “The quarry can wait.”

_“We should get there as soon as possible, for everybody’s sake,”_ said
the Thing.

Masklin thought about this for a while. It was true, he had to admit.
All kinds of things might be happening back home. He had to get the Ship
back quickly, for everybody’s sake.

And then he thought: I’ve spent a long time doing things for everybody’s
sake. Just for once, I’m going to do something for me. I don’t think we
can find other nomes with this Ship, but at least I know where to look
for frogs.

“Thing,” he said, “take us to South America. And don’t argue.”

[image]


12

_FROGS: Some people think that knowing about frogs is important. They
are small and green, or yellow, and have four legs. They croak. Young
frogs are tadpoles. In my opinion, this is all there is to know about
frogs._

_From_ A Scientific Encyclopedia
for the Inquiring Young Nome
_by Angalo de Haberdasheri_

FIND A BLUE planet. . . .

_Focus_

This is a planet. Most of it is covered in water, but it’s still called
Earth.

Find a country . . .

_Focus_

. . . blues and greens and browns under the sun, and long wisps of rain
cloud being torn by the mountains . . .

_Focus_

. . . on a mountain, green and dripping, and there’s a . . .

_Focus_

. . . tree, hung with moss and covered with flowers and . . .

_Focus_

. . . on a flower with a little pool in it. It’s an epiphytic bromeliad.

Its leaves, although they might be petals, hardly quiver at all as three
very small and very golden frogs pull themselves up and gaze in
astonishment at the fresh clear water. Two of them look at their leader,
waiting for it to say something suitable for this historic occasion.

It’s going to be “.–.–.mipmip.–.–.”

And then they slide down the leaf and into the water.

Although the frogs can spot the difference between day and night,
they’re a bit hazy on the whole idea of Time. They know that some things
happen after other things. Really intelligent frogs might wonder if
there is something that prevents everything happening all at once, but
that’s about as close as they can get to it.

So how long it was before a strange night came in the middle of the day
is hard to tell, from a frog’s point of view. . . .

A wide black shadow drifted over the treetops and came to a halt. After
a while there were voices. The frogs could hear them, although they
didn’t know what they meant or even what they were. They didn’t sound
like the kind of voices frogs were used to.

What they heard went like this: “How many mountains are there, anyway? I
mean, it’s ridiculous! Who needs this many mountains? I call it
inefficient. One would have done. I’ll go mad if I see another mountain.
How many more have we got to search?”

“I like them.”

“And some of the trees are the wrong height.”

“I like them too, Gurder.”

“And I don’t trust Angalo doing the driving.”

“I think he’s getting better, Gurder.”

“Well, I just hope no more airplanes come flying around, that’s all.”

Gurder and Masklin swung in a crude basket made out of bits of metal and
wire. It hung from a square hatchway under the Ship.

There were still huge rooms in the Ship that they hadn’t explored yet.
Odd machines were everywhere. The Thing had said the Ship had been used
for exploring.

Masklin hadn’t quite trusted any of it. There were probably machines
that could have lowered and pulled up the basket easily, but he’d
preferred to loop the wire around a pillar inside the Ship and, with
Pion helping inside, to pull themselves up and down by sheer nomish
effort.

The basket bumped gently on the tree branch.

The trouble was that humans wouldn’t leave them alone. No sooner had
they found a likely-looking mountain than airplanes or helicopters would
buzz around, like insects around an eagle. It was distracting.

Masklin looked along the branch. Gurder was right. This would have to be
the last mountain.

But there were certainly flowers here.

He crawled along the branch until he reached the nearest flower. It was
three times as high as he was. He found a foothold and pulled himself
up.

There was a pool in there. Six little yellow eyes peered up at him.

Masklin stared back.

So it was true, after all. . . .

He wondered if there was anything he should say to them, if there was
anything they could possibly understand.

It was quite a long branch, and quite thick. But there were tools and
things in the Ship. They could let down extra wires to hold the branch
and winch it up when it was cut free. It would take some time, but that
didn’t matter. It was important.

The Thing had said there were ways of growing plants under lights the
same color as the sun, in pots full of a sort of weak soup that helped
plants grow. It should be the easiest thing to keep a branch alive. The
easiest thing in . . . the world.

If they did everything carefully and gently, the frogs would never know.

If the world was a bathtub, the progress of the Ship through it would be
like the soap, shooting backward and forward and never being where
anyone was expecting it to be. You could spot where it had just been by
airplanes and helicopters taking off in a hurry.

Or maybe it was like the ball in a roulette wheel, bouncing around and
looking for the right number. . . .

Or maybe it was just lost.

They searched all night. If there _was_ a night. It was hard to tell.
The Thing tried to explain that the Ship went faster than the sun,
although the sun actually stood still. Some parts of the world had night
while other parts had day. This, Gurder said, was bad organization.

“In the Store,” he said, “it was always dark when it should be. Even if
it was _just_ somewhere built by humans.” It was the first time they’d
heard him admit the Store was built by humans.

There didn’t seem to be anywhere familiar.

Masklin scratched his chin.

“The Store was in a place called Blackbury,” he said. “I know that much.
So the quarry couldn’t have been far away.”

Angalo waved his hand irritably at the screens.

“Yes, but it’s not like the map,” he said. “They don’t stick names on
places! It’s ridiculous! How’s anyone supposed to know where anywhere
is?”

“All right,” said Masklin. “But you’re _not_ to fly down low again to
try to read the signposts. Every time you do that, humans rush into the
streets and we get lots of shouting on the radio.”

_“That’s right,”_ said the Thing. _“People are bound to get excited when
they see a ten-million-ton starship trying to fly down the street.”_

“I was very careful last time,” said Angalo stoutly. “I even stopped
when the traffic lights went red. I don’t see why there was such a fuss.
All the trucks and cars started crashing into one another, too. And you
call _me_ a bad driver.”

Gurder turned to Pion, who was learning the language fast. The geese
nomes had a knack for that. They were used to meeting nomes who spoke
other languages.

“Your geese never got lost,” he said. “How did they manage it?”

“They just did not get lost,” said Pion. “They knew always where they
going.”

“It can be like that with animals,” said Masklin. “They’ve got
instincts. It’s like knowing things without knowing you know them.”

“Why doesn’t the Thing know where to go?” said Gurder. “It could find
Floridia, so somewhere important like Blackbury ought to be _no_
trouble.”

_“I can find no radio messages about Blackbury. There are plenty about
Florida,”_ said the Thing.

“At least land somewhere,” said Gurder. Angalo pressed a couple of
buttons.

“There’s just sea under us right now,” he said. “And—what’s that?”

Below the Ship and a long way off, something tiny and white skimmed over
the clouds.

“Could be goose,” said Pion.

“I . . . don’t . . . think . . . so,” said Angalo carefully. He twiddled
a knob. “I’m really learning about this stuff,” he said.

The picture on the screen flickered a bit, and then expanded.

There was a white dart sliding across the sky.

“Is it the Concorde?” said Gurder.

“Yes,” said Angalo.

“It’s going a bit slow, isn’t it?”

“Only compared to us,” said Angalo.

“Follow it,” said Masklin.

“We don’t know where it’s going,” said Angalo in a reasonable tone of
voice.

“I do,” said Masklin. “You looked out of the window when we were on the
Concorde. We were going toward the sun.”

“Yes. It was setting,” said Angalo. “Well?”

“It’s morning now. It’s going toward the sun again,” Masklin pointed
out.

“Well? What about it?”

“It means it’s going home.”

Angalo bit his lip while he worked this out.

“I don’t see why the sun has to rise and set in different places,” said
Gurder, who refused to even try to understand basic astronomy.

“Going home,” said Angalo, ignoring him. “Right. I see it. So we go with
it, yes?”

“Yes.”

Angalo ran his hands over the Ship’s controls.

“Right,” he said. “Here we go. I expect the Concorde drivers will
probably be quite pleased to have some company up here.”

The Ship drew level with the plane.

“It’s moving around a lot,” said Angalo. “And it’s starting to go
faster, too.”

“I think they may be worried about the Ship,” said Masklin.

“Can’t see why,” said Angalo. “Can’t see why at all. We’re not doing
anything except following ’em.”

“I wish we had some proper windows,” said Gurder, wistfully. “We could
wave.”

“Have humans ever seen a ship like this before?” Angalo asked the Thing.

_“No. But they’ve made up stories about ships coming from other
worlds.”_

“Yes, they’d do that,” said Masklin, half to himself. “That’s just the
sort of thing they’d do.”

_“Sometimes they say the ships will contain friendly people—”_

“That’s us,” said Angalo.

_“—and sometimes they say they will contain monsters with wavy tentacles
and big teeth.”_

The nomes looked at one another.

Gurder cast an apprehensive eye over his shoulder. Then they all stared
at the passages that radiated off the control room.

“Like alligators?” said Masklin.

_“Worse.”_

“Er,” Gurder said, “we _did_ look in all the rooms, didn’t we?”

“It’s something they make up, Gurder. It’s not real,” said Masklin.

“Whoever would want to make up something like that?”

“Humans would,” said Masklin.

“Huh,” said Angalo, nonchalantly trying to swivel around in the chair in
case any tentacled things with teeth were trying to creep up on him. “I
can’t see why.”

“I think I can. I’ve been thinking about humans a lot.”

“Can’t the Thing send a message to the Concorde drivers?” said Gurder.
“Something like ‘Don’t worry, we haven’t got any teeth and tentacles,
guaranteed’?”

“They probably wouldn’t believe us,” said Angalo. “If _I_ had teeth and
tentacles all over the place, that’s just the sort of message I’d send.
Cunning.”

The Concorde screamed across the top of the sky, breaking the
transatlantic record. The Ship drifted along behind it.

“I reckon,” said Angalo, looking down, “that humans are just about
intelligent enough to be crazy.”

“I think,” said Masklin, “that maybe they’re intelligent enough to be
lonely.”

The plane touched down with its tires screaming. Fire engines raced
across the airport, and there were other vehicles behind them.

The great black Ship shot over them, turned across the sky like a
Frisbee, and slowed.

“There’s the reservoir!” said Gurder. “Right under us! And that’s the
railway line! And that’s the quarry! It’s still there!”

“Of course it’s still there, idiot,” muttered Angalo, as he headed the
ship toward the hills, which were patchy with melting snow.

“Some of it,” said Masklin.

A pall of black smoke hung over the quarry. As they got closer, they saw
it was rising from a burning truck. There were more trucks around it,
and also several humans who started to run when they saw the shadow of
the Ship.

“Lonely, eh?” snarled Angalo. “If they’ve hurt a single nome, they’ll
wish they’d never been born!”

“If they’ve hurt a single nome, they’ll wish _I’d_ never been born,”
said Masklin. “But I don’t think anyone’s down there. They wouldn’t hang
around if the humans came. And who set fire to the truck?”

“Yay!” said Angalo, waving a fist in the air.

Masklin scanned the landscape below them. Somehow he couldn’t imagine
people like Grimma and Dorcas sitting in holes, waiting for humans to
take over. Trucks didn’t just set fire to themselves. A couple of
buildings looked damaged, too. Humans wouldn’t have done that, would
they?

He stared at the field by the quarry. The gate had been smashed, and a
pair of wide tracks led through the slush and mud.

“I think they got away in another truck,” he said.

“What do you mean, _yay_?” said Gurder, lagging a bit behind the
conversation.

“Across the fields?” said Angalo. “It’d get stuck, wouldn’t it?”

Masklin shook his head. Perhaps even a nome could have instincts.
“Follow the tracks,” he said urgently. “And quickly!”

“Quickly? _Quickly?_ Do you know know difficult it is to make this thing
go _slowly?_” Angalo nudged a lever. The ship lurched up the hillside,
straining at the indignity of restraint.

They’d been up here before, on foot, months ago. It was hard to believe.

The hills were quite flat on the top, forming a kind of plateau
overlooking the airport. There was the field where there had been
potatoes. There was the thicket where they’d hunted, and the wood where
they’d killed a fox for eating nomes.

And there . . . there was something small and yellow, rolling across the
fields.

Angalo craned forward.

“Looks like some kind of a machine,” he admitted, fumbling for levers
without taking his eyes off the screen. “Weird kind of one, though.”

There were other things moving on the roads down there. They had
flashing lights on top.

“Those cars are chasing it, do you think?” said Angalo.

“Maybe they want to talk to it about a burning truck,” said Masklin.
“Can you get to it before they do?”

Angalo narrowed his eyes. “Listen, I think we can get to it before they
do even if we go via Floridia.” He found another lever and gave it a
nudge.

There was the briefest flicker in the landscape, and the truck was now
right in front of them.

“See?” he said.

“Move in more,” said Masklin.

Angalo pressed a button. “See, the screen can show you below—” he began.

“There’s nomes!” said Gurder.

“Yeah, and those cars are running away!” shouted Angalo. “That’s it, run
away! Otherwise it’s teeth-and-tentacles time!”

“So long as the nomes don’t think that too,” said Gurder. “Masklin, do
you think—”

Once again, Masklin wasn’t there.

I should have thought about this before, he thought.

The piece of branch was thirty times longer than a nome. They’d been
keeping it under lights, and it seemed to be growing quite happily with
one end in a pot of special plant water. The nomes who had once flown in
the Ship had obviously grown lots of plants that way.

Pion helped him drag the pot toward the hatch. The frogs watched Masklin
with interest.

When it was positioned as well as the two of them could manage, Masklin
let the hatch open. It wasn’t one that slid aside. The ancient nomes had
used it as a kind of elevator, but it didn’t have wires—it went up and
down by some force as mysterious as auntie’s gravy or whatever it was.

It dropped away. Masklin looked down and saw the yellow truck roll to a
halt. When he straightened up, Pion was giving him a puzzled look.

“Flower is a message?” said the boy.

“Yes. Kind of.”

“Not using words?”

“No,” said Masklin.

“Why not?”

Masklin shrugged.

“Don’t know how to say them.”

It nearly ends there. . . .

But it shouldn’t end there.

Nomes swarmed all over the Ship. If there _were_ any monsters with
tentacles and teeth, they’d have been overwhelmed by sheer force of
nome.

Young nomes filled the control room, where they were industriously
trying to press buttons. Dorcas and his trainee engineers had
disappeared in search of the Ship’s engines. Voices and laughter echoed
along the gray corridors.

Masklin and Grimma sat by themselves, watching the frogs in their
flower.

“I had to see if it was true,” said Masklin.

“The most wonderful thing in the world,” said Grimma.

“No. I think there are probably much more wonderful things in the
world,” said Masklin. “But it’s pretty good, all the same.”

Grimma told him about events in the quarry—the fight with the humans,
and the stealing of Big John the earthmover to escape. Her eyes gleamed
when she talked about fighting humans. Masklin looked at her with his
mouth open in admiration. She was muddy, her dress torn; her hair looked
like it had been combed with a hedge, but she crackled with so much
internal power that she was nearly throwing off sparks. It’s a good
thing we got here in time, he thought. Humans ought to thank me.

“What are we going to do now?” she said.

“I don’t know,” said Masklin. “According to the Thing, there’s worlds
out there with nomes on them. Just nomes, I mean. Or we can find one all
to ourselves.”

“You know,” said Grimma, “I think the Store nomes would be happier just
staying on the Ship. That’s why they like it so much. It’s like being in
the Store. All the Outside is outside.”

“Then I’d better go along to make sure they remember that there _is_ an
Outside. It’s sort of my job, I suppose,” said Masklin. “And when we’ve
found somewhere, I want to bring the Ship back.”

“Why? What’ll be here?” said Grimma.

“Humans,” said Masklin. “We should talk to them.”

“Huh!”

“They really want to believe in . . . I mean, they spend all their time
making up stories about things that don’t exist. They think it’s just
themselves in the world. We never thought like that. We always _knew_
there were humans. They’re terribly lonely and don’t know it.” He waved
his hands vaguely. “It’s just that I think we might get along with
them,” he finished.

“They’d turn us into pixies!”

“Not if we come back in the Ship. If there’s one thing even humans can
tell, it’s that the Ship isn’t very pixieish.”

Grimma reached out and took his hand.

“Well . . . if that’s what you really want to do . . .”

“It is.”

“I’ll come back with you.”

There was a sound behind them. It was Gurder. The Abbot had a bag slung
around his neck and had the drawn, determined look of someone who is
going to See It Through no matter what.

“Er. I’ve come to say good-bye,” he said.

“What do you mean?” said Masklin.

“I heard you say you’re coming back in the Ship?”

“Yes, but—”

“Please don’t argue.” Gurder looked around. “I’ve been thinking about
this ever since we got the Ship. There _are_ other nomes out there.
_Someone_ ought to tell them about the Ship coming back. We can’t take
them now, but someone ought to find all the other nomes in the world and
make sure that they know about the Ship. Someone ought to be telling
them about what’s really true. It should be me, don’t you think? I’ve
got to be useful for _something._”

“All by yourself?” said Masklin.

Gurder rummaged in the bag.

“No, I’m taking the Thing,” he said, producing the black cube.

“Er—” Masklin began.

_“Don’t worry,”_ said the Thing. _“I have copied myself into the Ship’s
own computers. I can be here and there at the same time.”_

“It’s something I really want to do,” said Gurder helplessly.

Masklin thought about arguing and then thought, Why? Gurder will
probably be happier like this. Anyway, it’s true, this Ship belongs to
all nomes. We’re just borrowing it for a while. So Gurder’s right. Maybe
someone ought to find the rest of them, wherever they are in the world,
and tell them the truth about nomes. I can’t think of anyone better for
the job than Gurder. It’s a big world. You need someone really ready to
_believe_.

“Do you want anyone to go with you?” he said.

“No. Maybe I can find some nomes out there to help me.” He leaned
closer. “To tell the truth,” he said, “I’m looking forward to it.”

“Er. Yes. There’s a lot of world, though,” said Masklin.

“I’ve taken that into consideration. I’ve been talking to Pion.”

“Oh? Well . . . if you’re sure . . .”

“Yes. More than I’ve ever been about anything, now,” said Gurder. “And
I’ve been pretty sure of a lot of things in my time, as you know.”

“We’d better find somewhere suitable to set you down.”

“That’s right,” said Gurder. He tried to look brave. “Somewhere with a
lot of geese,” he said.

They left him at sunset, by a lake. It was a brief parting. If the Ship
stayed anywhere for more than a few minutes now, humans would flock
toward it.

The last Masklin saw of him was a small waving figure on the shore. And
then there was just a lake, turning into a green dot on a dwindling
landscape. A world unfolded, with one invisible nome in the middle of
it.

And then there was nothing.

The control room was full of nomes watching the landscape unroll as the
Ship rose.

Grimma stared at it.

“I never realized it looked like that,” she said. “There’s so much of
it!”

“It’s pretty big,” said Masklin.

“You’d think one world would be big enough for all of us,” said Grimma.

“Oh, I don’t know,” said Masklin. “Maybe one world isn’t big enough for
anyone. Where are we heading, Angalo?”

Angalo rubbed his hands and pulled every lever all the way back.

“So far up,” he said, with satisfaction, “that there is no down.”

The Ship curved up, toward the stars. Below, the world stopped unrolling
because it had reached its edges, and became a black disk against the
sun.

Nomes and frogs looked down on it.

And the sunlight caught it and made it glow around the rim, sending rays
up into the darkness, so that it looked exactly like a flower.


ABOUT THE AUTHOR

TERRY PRATCHETT’S novels have sold more than thirty-two million copies
and have inspired a devoted worldwide following. In addition to his
best-selling adult books about Discworld, Mr. Pratchett has also written
several books for young readers, including THE WEE FREE MEN and the
Johnny Maxwell trilogy: ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND, JOHNNY AND THE DEAD,
and JOHNNY AND THE BOMB. Mr. Pratchett was awarded Britain’s highest
honor for a children’s novel, the Carnegie Medal, for THE AMAZING
MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.


AUTHOR’S NOTE

_No character in this book is intended to resemble any living creature
of whatever size on any continent, especially if they’ve got lawyers_.

_I’ve also taken liberties with the Concorde itself, despite British
Airways’ kindness in letting me have a look around one. It really did
look like shaped sky. But it didn’t fly nonstop to Miami; it made a stop
in Washington. But who wants to stop in Washington? Nomes couldn’t do
anything in Washington except cause trouble_.

_It’s also just possible that people on the Concorde didn’t have to eat
special airline-food pink wobbly stuff. But everybody else has to_.


OTHER WORKS

_The Wee Free Men_

_A Hat Full of Sky_

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_

_The Carpet People_

_The Dark Side of the Sun_

_Strata_

THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

_The Unadulterated Cat_ (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

_Good Omens_ (with Neil Gaiman)

THE DISCWORLD SERIES

_The Color of Magic_

_The Light Fantastic_

_Equal Rites_

_Mort_

_Sourcery_

_Wyrd Sisters_

_Pyramids_

_Guards! Guards!_

_Eric_

_Moving Pictures_

_Reaper Man_

_Witches Abroad_

_Small Gods_

_Lords and Ladies_

_Men at Arms_

_Soul Music_

_Feet of Clay_

_Interesting Times_

_Maskerade_

_Hogfather_

_Jingo_

_The Last Continent_

_Carpe Jugulum_

_The Fifth Elephant_

_The Truth_

_The Thief of Time_

_Night Watch_

_Monstrous Regiment_

_The Last Hero: A Discworld Fable_

(illustrated by Paul Kidby)


CREDITS

Cover art © 2004 by S. Saelig Gallagher

Cover design by Bradford Foltz

Cover © 2004 by HarperCollins Publishers Inc.


COPYRIGHT

HarperTrophy® is a registered trademark of HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

“My Way” (Anka/Francis/Revaus) © Barclay Morris Ste. Anonyme/Jeune
Musiques

By permission of Warner Chappell Music Ltd

The Bromeliad Trilogy

Copyright © 1998 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett including

Wings

Copyright © 1990 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

EPub Edition © JANUARY 2012 ISBN: 9780062193834

[Image]

First Harper Trophy edition, 2004

Visit us on the World Wide Web!

www.harperchildrens.com


BACK AD

[Images]


ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

AUSTRALIA

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pvt. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (P.O. Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

www.harpercollins.com.au

CANADA

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

NEW ZEALAND

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

UNITED KINGDOM

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77–85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

UNITED STATES

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com

 

*About three seconds. Frogs don’t have good memories.

 

*About as long as two and a half days, to a nome.

 

*Little dishes of strange wobbly stuff tasting of pink turn up in nearly
every meal on all airplanes. No one knows why. There’s probably some
sort of special religious reason.

 

*For generations the Store nomes had known that temperature was caused
by air conditioning and the heating system; like many of them, Gurder
never quite gave up certain habits of thinking.
