 [image]


About the Book

_A foot on the neck is nine points of the law._

There are many who say that the art of diplomacy is an intricate and
complex dance. There are others who maintain that it’s merely a matter
of who carries the biggest stick. The oldest and most inscrutable (not
to mention heavily fortified) empire on the Discworld is in turmoil,
brought about by the revolutionary treatise WHAT I DID ON MY HOLIDAYS.
Workers are uniting, with nothing to lose but their water buffaloes;
warlords are struggling for power – and what the nation wants, to avoid
terrible doom for everyone, is a wizard. Rincewind is not the Disc’s
premier wizard – in fact, he can’t even spell ‘wizard’ – but no one
specified whether competence was an issue. And they do have a very big
stick . . .

Mighty Battles! Revolution! Death! War! (And his sons Terror and Panic
and daughter Clancy.)


Introducing Discworld

The Discworld Series is a continuous history of a world not totally
unlike our own except that it is a flat disc carried on the backs of
four elephants astride a giant turtle floating through space, and that
it is peopled by, among others, wizards, dwarves, policemen, thieves,
beggars, vampires and witches. Within the history of Discworld there are
many individual stories, which can be read in any order, but reading
them in sequence can increase your enjoyment through the accumulation of
all the fine detail that contributes to the teeming imaginative
complexity of this brilliantly conceived world.


Contents

Cover

About the Book

Introducing Discworld

Title Page

Epigraph

Interesting Times

Footnotes

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright

Terry Pratchett



INTERESTING TIMES


A DISCWORLD® NOVEL

There is a curse.

They say:

May You Live in Interesting Times

THIS IS WHERE the gods play games with the lives of men, on a board
which is _at one and the same time_ a simple playing area and the whole
world.

And Fate always wins.

Fate always wins. Most of the gods throw dice but Fate plays chess, and
you don’t find out until too late that he’s been using two queens all
along.

Fate wins. At least, so it is claimed. Whatever happens, they say
afterwards, it must have been Fate.¹

Gods can take any form, but the one aspect of themselves they cannot
change is their eyes, which show their nature. The eyes of Fate are
hardly eyes at all – just dark holes into an infinity speckled with what
may be stars or, there again, may be other things.

He blinked them, smiled at his fellow players in the smug way winners do
just before they become winners, and said:

‘I accuse the High Priest of the Green Robe in the library with the
double-handed axe.’

And he won.

He beamed at them.

‘No one likesh a poor winner,’ grumbled Offler the Crocodile God,
through his fangs.

‘It seems that I am favouring myself today,’ said Fate. ‘Anyone fancy
something else?’

The gods shrugged.

‘Mad Kings?’ said Fate pleasantly. ‘Star-Crossed Lovers?’

‘I think we’ve lost the rules for that one,’ said Blind Io, chief of the
gods.

‘Or Tempest-Wrecked Mariners?’

‘You always win,’ said Io.

‘Floods and Droughts?’ said Fate. ‘That’s an easy one.’

A shadow fell across the gaming table. The gods looked up.

‘Ah,’ said Fate.

‘Let a game begin,’ said the Lady.

There was always an argument about whether the newcomer was a goddess at
all. Certainly no one ever got anywhere by worshipping her, and she
tended to turn up only where she was least expected, such as now. And
people who trusted in her seldom survived. Any temples built to her
would surely be struck by lightning. Better to juggle axes on a
tightrope than say her name. Just call her the waitress in the Last
Chance saloon.

She was generally referred to as the Lady, and her eyes were green; not
as the eyes of humans are green, but emerald green from edge to edge. It
was said to be her favourite colour.

‘Ah,’ said Fate again. ‘And what game will it be?’

She sat down opposite him. The watching gods looked sidelong at one
another. This looked interesting. These two were ancient enemies.

‘How about . . .’ she paused, ‘. . . Mighty Empires?’

‘Oh, I _hate_ that one,’ said Offler, breaking the sudden silence.
‘Everyone dief at the end.’

‘Yes,’ said Fate, ‘I believe they do.’ He nodded at the Lady, and in
much the same voice as professional gamblers say ‘Aces high?’ said, ‘The
Fall of Great Houses? Destinies of Nations Hanging by a Thread?’

‘Certainly,’ she said.

‘Oh, _good_.’ Fate waved a hand across the board. The Discworld
appeared.

‘And where shall we play?’ he said.

‘The Counterweight Continent,’ said the Lady. ‘Where five noble families
have fought one another for centuries.’

‘Really? Which families are these?’ said Io. He had little involvement
with individual humans. He generally looked after thunder and lightning,
so from his point of view the only purpose of humanity was to get wet
or, in occasional cases, charred.

‘The Hongs, the Sungs, the Tangs, the McSweeneys and the Fangs.’

‘Them? I didn’t know they were noble,’ said Io.

‘They’re all very rich and have had millions of people butchered or
tortured to death merely for reasons of expediency and pride,’ said the
Lady.

The watching gods nodded solemnly. That was certainly noble behaviour.
That was exactly what they would have done.

_‘McFweeneyf?’_ said Offler.

‘Very old established family,’ said Fate.

‘Oh.’

‘And they wrestle one another for the Empire,’ said Fate. ‘Very good.
Which will you be?’

The Lady looked at the history stretched out in front of them.

‘The Hongs are the most powerful. Even as we speak, they have taken yet
more cities,’ she said. ‘I see they are fated to win.’

‘So, no doubt, you’ll pick a weaker family.’

Fate waved his hand again. The playing pieces appeared, and started to
move around the board as if they had a life of their own, which was of
course the case.

‘But,’ he said, ‘we shall play without dice. I don’t trust you with
dice. You throw them where I can’t see them. We will play with steel,
and tactics, and politics, and war.’

The Lady nodded.

Fate looked across at his opponent.

‘And your move?’ he said.

She smiled. ‘I’ve already made it.’

He looked down. ‘But I don’t see your pieces on the board.’

‘They’re not on the board yet,’ she said.

She opened her hand.

There was something black and yellow on her palm. She blew on it, and it
unfolded its wings.

It was a butterfly.

Fate always wins . . .

At least, when people stick to the rules.

According to the philosopher Ly Tin Wheedle, chaos is found in greatest
abundance wherever order is being sought. It always defeats order,
because it is better organized.

This is the butterfly of the storms.

See the wings, slightly more ragged than those of the common fritillary.
In reality, thanks to the fractal nature of the universe, this means
that those ragged edges are infinite – in the same way that the edge of
any rugged coastline, when measured to the ultimate microscopic level,
is infinitely long – or, if not infinite, then at least so close to it
that Infinity can be seen on a clear day.

And therefore, if their edges are infinitely long, the wings must
logically be infinitely big.

They may _look_ about the right size for a butterfly’s wings, but that’s
only because human beings have always preferred common sense to logic.

The Quantum Weather Butterfly (_Papilio tempestae_) is an
undistinguished yellow colour, although the mandelbrot patterns on the
wings are of considerable interest. Its outstanding feature is its
ability to create weather.

This presumably began as a survival trait, since even an extremely
hungry bird would find itself inconvenienced by a nasty localized
tornado.² From there it possibly became a secondary sexual
characteristic, like the plumage of birds or the throat sacs of certain
frogs. Look at _me,_ the male says, flapping his wings lazily in the
canopy of the rain forest. I may be an undistinguished yellow colour but
in a fortnight’s time, a thousand miles away, Freak Gales Cause Road
Chaos.

This is the butterly of the storms.

It flaps its wings . . .

_This_ is the Discworld, which goes through space on the back of a giant
turtle.

Most worlds do, at some time in their perception. It’s a cosmological
view the human brain seems pre-programmed to take.

On veldt and plain, in cloud jungle and silent red desert, in swamp and
reed marsh, in fact in any place where something goes ‘plop’ off a
floating log as you approach, variations on the following take place at
a crucial early point in the development of the tribal mythology . . .

‘You see dat?’

‘What?’

‘It just went plop off dat log.’

‘Yeah? Well?’

‘I reckon . . . I reckon . . . like, I _reckon_ der world is carried on
der back of one of dem.’

A moment of silence while this astrophysical hypothesis is considered,
and then . . .

‘The whole world?’

‘Of course, when I say one of dem, I mean a _big_ one of dem.’

‘It’d have to be, yeah.’

‘Like . . . really big.’

‘’S funny, but . . . I see what you mean.’

‘Makes sense, right?’

‘Makes sense, yeah. Thing is . . .’

‘What?’

‘I just hope it never goes plop.’

But this _is_ the Discworld, which has not only the turtle but also the
four giant elephants on which the wide, slowly turning wheel of the
world revolves.³

_There_ is the Circle Sea, approximately halfway between the Hub and the
Rim. Around it are those countries which, according to History,
constitute the civilized world, i.e., a world that can support
historians: Ephebe, Tsort, Omnia, Klatch and the sprawling city state of
Ankh-Morpork.

This is a story that starts somewhere else, where a man is lying on a
raft in a blue lagoon under a sunny sky. His head is resting on his
arms. He is happy – in his case, a mental state so rare as to be almost
unprecedented. He is whistling an amiable little tune, and dangling his
feet in the crystal clear water.

They’re pink feet with ten toes that look like little piggy-wiggies.

From the point of view of a shark, skimming over the reef, they look
like lunch, dinner and tea.

It was, as always, a matter of protocol. Of discretion. Of careful
etiquette. Of, ultimately, alcohol. Or at least the illusion of alcohol.

Lord Vetinari, as supreme ruler of Ankh-Morpork, could in theory summon
the Archchancellor of Unseen University to his presence and, indeed,
have him executed if he failed to obey.

On the other hand Mustrum Ridcully, as head of the college of wizards,
had made it clear in polite but firm ways that _he_ could turn _him_
into a small amphibian and, indeed, start jumping around the room on a
pogo stick.

Alcohol bridged the diplomatic gap nicely. Sometimes Lord Vetinari
invited the Archchancellor to the palace for a convivial drink. And of
course the Archchancellor went, because it would be _bad manners_ not
to. And everyone understood the position, and everyone was on their best
behaviour, and thus civil unrest and slime on the carpet were averted.

It was a beautiful afternoon. Lord Vetinari was sitting in the palace
gardens, watching the butterflies with an expression of mild annoyance.
He found something very slightly offensive about the way they just
fluttered around enjoying themselves in an unprofitable way.

He looked up.

‘Ah, Archchancellor,’ he said. ‘So good to see you. Do sit down. I trust
you are well?’

‘Yes indeed,’ said Mustrum Ridcully. ‘And yourself? You are in good
health?’

‘Never better. The weather, I see, has turned out nice again.’

‘I thought yesterday was particularly fine, certainly.’

‘Tomorrow, I am told, could well be even better.’

‘We could certainly do with a fine spell.’

‘Yes, indeed.’

‘Yes.’

‘Ah . . .’

‘Certainly.’

They watched the butterflies. A butler brought long, cool drinks.

‘What is it they actually do with the flowers?’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘What?’

The Patrician shrugged. ‘Never mind. It was not at all important. But –
since you are here, Archchancellor, having dropped by on your way to
something infinitely more important, I am sure, most kind – I wonder if
you could tell me: who is the Great Wizard?’

Ridcully considered this.

‘The Dean, possibly,’ he said. ‘He must be all of twenty stone.’

‘Somehow I feel that is not perhaps the right answer,’ said Lord
Vetinari. ‘I suspect from context that “great” means superior.’

‘Not the Dean, then,’ said Ridcully.

Lord Vetinari tried to recollect the faculty of Unseen University. The
mental picture that emerged was of a small range of foothills in pointy
hats.

‘The context does not, I feel, suggest the Dean,’ he said.

‘Er . . . what context would this be?’ said Ridcully.

The Patrician picked up his walking stick.

‘Come this way,’ he said. ‘I suppose you had better see for yourself. It
is very vexing.’

Ridcully looked around with interest as he followed Lord Vetinari. He
did not often have a chance to see the gardens, which had been written
up in the ‘How Not To Do It’ section of gardening manuals everywhere.

They had been laid out, and a truer phrase was never used, by the
renowned or at least notorious landscape gardener and all-round inventor
‘Bloody Stupid’ Johnson, whose absent-mindedness and blindness to
elementary mathematics made every step a walk with danger. His genius .
. . well, as far as Ridcully understood it, his genius was exactly the
opposite of whatever kind of genius it was that built earthworks that
tapped the secret yet beneficent forces of the leylines.

No one was quite certain what forces Bloody Stupid’s designs tapped, but
the chiming sundial frequently exploded, the crazy paving had committed
suicide and the cast iron garden furniture was known to have melted on
three occasions.

The Patrician led the way through a gate and into something like a
dovecot. A creaking wooden stairway led around the inside. A few of
Ankh-Morpork’s indestructible feral pigeons muttered and sniggered in
the shadows.

‘What’s this?’ said Ridcully, as the stairs groaned under him.

The Patrician took a key out of his pocket. ‘I have always understood
that Mr Johnson originally planned this to be a beehive,’ he said.
‘However, in the absence of bees ten feet long we have found . . . other
uses.’

He unlocked a door to a wide, square room with a big unglazed window in
each wall. Each rectangle was surrounded by a wooden arrangement to
which was affixed a bell on a spring. It was apparent that anything
large enough, entering by one of the windows, would cause the bell to
ring.

In the centre of the room, standing on a table, was the largest bird
Ridcully had ever seen. It turned and fixed him with a beady yellow eye.

The Patrician reached into a pocket and took out a jar of anchovies.
‘This one caught us rather unexpectedly,’ he said. ‘It must be almost
ten years since a message last arrived. We used to keep a few fresh
mackerel on ice.’

‘Isn’t that a Pointless Albatross?’ said Ridcully.

‘Indeed,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘And a highly trained one. It will return
this evening. Six thousand miles on one jar of anchovies and a bottle of
fish paste my clerk Drumknott found in the kitchens. Amazing.’

‘I’m sorry?’ said Ridcully. ‘Return to where?’

Lord Vetinari turned to face him.

_‘Not_, let me make it clear, to the Counterweight Continent,’ he said.
‘This is _not_ one of those birds the Agatean Empire uses for its
message services. It is a well-known fact that we have no contact with
that mysterious land. And this bird is _not_ the first to arrive here
for many years, and it did _not_ bring a strange and puzzling message.
Do I make myself clear?’

‘No.’

‘Good.’

‘This is not an albatross?’

The Patrician smiled. ‘Ah, I can see you’re getting the hang of it.’

Mustrum Ridcully, though possessed of a large and efficient brain, was
not at home with duplicity. He looked at the long vicious beak.

‘Looks like a bloody albatross to me,’ he said. ‘And you just said it
was. I said, isn’t that a—’

The Patrician waved a hand irritably. ‘Leaving aside our ornithological
studies,’ he said, ‘the point is that this bird had, in its message
pouch, the following piece of paper—’

‘You mean did _not_ have the following piece of paper?’ said Ridcully,
struggling for a grip.

‘Ah, yes. Of course, that is what I mean. And this isn’t it. Observe.’

He handed a single small sheet to the Archchancellor.

‘Looks like paintin’,’ said Ridcully.

‘Those are Agatean pictograms,’ said the Patrician.

‘You mean they’re _not_ Agatean pictograms?’

‘Yes, yes, certainly,’ sighed the Patrician, ‘I can see you are well
alongside the essential business of diplomacy. Now . . . your views,
please.’

‘Looks like slosh, slosh, slosh, slosh, Wizzard,’ said Ridcully.

‘And from that you deduce . . . ?’

‘He took Art because he wasn’t any good at spelling? I mean, who wrote
it? Painted it, I mean?’

‘I don’t know. The Grand Viziers used to send the occasional message,
but I gather there has been some turmoil in recent years. It is
unsigned, you notice. However, I cannot ignore it.’

‘Wizzard, wizzard,’ said Ridcully, thoughtfully.

‘The pictograms mean “Send Us Instantly The Great”,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘. . . wizzard . . .’ said Ridcully to himself, tapping the paper.

The Patrician tossed an anchovy to the albatross, which swallowed it
greedily.

‘The Empire has a million men under arms,’ he said. ‘Happily, it suits
the rulers to pretend that everywhere outside the Empire is a valueless
howling waste peopled only by vampires and ghosts. They usually have no
interest whatsoever in our affairs. This is fortunate for us, because
they are both cunning, rich and powerful. Frankly, I had hoped they had
forgotten about us altogether. And now this. I was hoping to be able to
dispatch the wretched person and forget about it.’

‘. . . wizzard,’ said Ridcully.

‘Perhaps you would like a holiday?’ said the Patrician, a hint of hope
in his voice.

‘Me? No. Can’t abide foreign food,’ said Ridcully quickly. He repeated,
half to himself, ‘Wizzard . . .’

‘The word seems to fascinate you,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘Seen it spelled like that before,’ said Ridcully. ‘Can’t remember
where.’

‘I’m sure you _will_ remember. And will be in a position to send the
Great Wizard, however he is spelled, to the Empire by teatime.’

Ridcully’s jaw dropped.

‘Six thousand miles? By magic? Do you know how hard that is?’

‘I cherish my ignorance on the subject,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘Besides,’ Ridcully went on, ‘they’re, well . . . foreign over there. I
thought they had enough wizards of their own.’

‘I really couldn’t say.’

‘We don’t know why they want this wizard?’

‘No. But I’m sure there is someone you could spare. There seems to be
such a lot of you down there.’

‘I mean, it could be for some terrible foreign purpose,’ said Ridcully.
For some reason the face of the Dean waddled across his mind, and he
brightened up. ‘They might be happy with _a_ great wizard, do you
think?’ he mused.

‘I leave that entirely to you. But by tonight I would like to be able to
send back a message saying that the Great Wizzard is duly on his way.
And then we can forget about it.’

‘Of course, it would be very hard to bring the chap back,’ said
Ridcully. He thought of the Dean again. ‘Practically impossible,’ he
added, in an inappropriately happy way. ‘I expect we’d try for months
and months without succeeding. I expect we’d attempt everything with no
luck. Damn it.’

‘I can see you are agog to rise to this challenge,’ said the Patrician.
‘Let me not detain you from rushing back to the University and putting
measures in hand.’

‘But . . . “wizzard” . . .’ Ridcully murmured. ‘Rings a faint bell,
that. Think I’ve seen it before, somewhere.’

The shark didn’t think much. Sharks don’t. Their thought processes can
largely be represented by ‘=’. You see it = you eat it.

But, as it arrowed through the waters of the lagoon, its tiny brain
began to receive little packages of selachian existential dread that
could only be called doubts.

It knew it was the biggest shark around. All the challengers had fled,
or run up against good old ‘=’. Yet its body told it that something was
coming up fast behind it.

It turned gracefully, and the first thing it saw was _hundreds_ of legs
and _thousands_ of toes, a whole pork pie factory of piggy-wiggies.

Many things went on at Unseen University and, regrettably, teaching had
to be one of them. The faculty had long ago confronted this fact and had
perfected various devices for avoiding it. But this was perfectly all
right because, to be fair, so had the students.

The system worked quite well and, as happens in such cases, had taken on
the status of a tradition. Lectures clearly took place, because they
were down there on the timetable in black and white. The fact that no
one attended was an irrelevant detail. It was occasionally maintained
that this meant that the lectures did not in fact happen at all, but no
one ever attended them to find out if this was true. Anyway, it was
argued (by the Reader in Woolly Thinking⁴) that lectures had taken place
_in essence,_ so that was all right, too.

And therefore education at the University mostly worked by the age-old
method of putting a lot of young people in the vicinity of a lot of
books and hoping that something would pass from one to the other, while
the actual young people put themselves in the vicinity of inns and
taverns for exactly the same reason.

It was the middle of the afternoon. The Chair of Indefinite Studies was
giving a lecture in room 3B and therefore his presence asleep in front
of the fire in the Uncommon Room was a technicality upon which no
diplomatic man would comment.

Ridcully kicked him on the shins.

‘Ow!’

‘Sorry to interrupt, Chair,’ said Ridcully, in a very perfunctory way.
‘God help me, I need the Council of Wizards. Where is everybody?’

The Chair of Indefinite Studies rubbed his leg. ‘I know the Lecturer in
Recent Runes is giving a lecture in 3B,’⁵ he said. ‘But I don’t know
where he _is._ You know, that really hurt—’

‘Round everyone up. My study. Ten minutes,’ said Ridcully. He was a
great believer in this approach. A less direct Archchancellor would have
wandered around looking for everyone. His policy was to find one person
and make their life difficult until everything happened the way he
wanted it to.⁶

Nothing in nature had that many feet. True, some things had that many
_legs –_ damp, wriggling things that live under rocks – but those
weren’t legs with feet, they were just legs that ended without ceremony.

Something brighter than the shark might have been wary.

But ‘=’ swung treacherously into play and shot it forward.

That was its first mistake.

In these circumstances, one mistake = oblivion.

Ridcully was waiting impatiently when, one by one, the senior wizards
filed in from serious lecturing in room 3B. Senior wizards needed a lot
of lecturing in order to digest their food.

‘Everyone here?’ he said. ‘Right. Sit down. Listen carefully. Now . . .
Vetinari hasn’t had an albatross. It hasn’t come all the way from the
Counterweight Continent, and there isn’t a strange message that we’ve
got to obey, apparently. Follow me so far?’

The senior wizards exchanged glances.

‘I think we may be a shade unclear on the detail,’ said the Dean.

‘I was using diplomatic language.’

‘Could you, perhaps, try to be a little more indiscreet?’

‘We’ve got to send a wizard to the Counterweight Continent,’ said
Ridcully. ‘And we’ve got to do it by teatime. Someone’s asked for a
Great Wizard and it seems we’ve got to send one. Only they spell it
Wizzard—’

‘Oook?’

‘Yes, Librarian?’

Unseen University’s Librarian, who had been dozing with his head on the
table, was suddenly sitting bolt upright. Then he pushed back his chair
and, arms waving wildly for balance, left the room at a bow-legged run.

‘Probably remembered an overdue book,’ said the Dean. He lowered his
voice. ‘Am I alone in thinking, by the way, that it doesn’t add to the
status of this University to have an ape on the faculty?’

‘Yes,’ said Ridcully flatly. ‘You are. We’ve got the only librarian who
can rip off your arm with his leg. People respect that. Only the other
day the head of the Thieves’ Guild was asking me if we could turn
_their_ librarian into an ape and, besides, he’s the only one of you
buggers who stays awake more’n an hour a day. Anyway—’

‘Well, I find it embarrassing,’ said the Dean. ‘Also, he’s not a proper
orang-utan. I’ve been reading a book. It says a dominant male should
have huge cheek pads. Has he got huge cheek pads? I don’t think so.
And—’

‘Shut up, Dean,’ said Ridcully, ‘or I won’t let you go to the
Counterweight Continent.’

‘I don’t see what raising a perfectly valid – What?’

‘They’re asking for the Great Wizzard,’ said Ridcully. ‘And I
immediately thought of you.’ As the only man I know who can sit on two
chairs at the same time, he added silently.

‘The Empire?’ squeaked the Dean. ‘Me? But they hate foreigners!’

‘So do you. You should get on famously.’

‘It’s six thousand miles!’ said the Dean, trying a new tack. ‘Everyone
knows you can’t get that far by magic.’

‘Er. As a matter of fact you can, I think,’ said a voice from the other
end of the table.

They all looked at Ponder Stibbons, the youngest and most depressingly
keen member of the faculty. He was holding a complicated mechanism of
sliding wooden bars and peering at the other wizards over the top of it.

‘Er. Shouldn’t be too much of a problem,’ he added. ‘People used to
think it was, but I’m pretty sure it’s all a matter of energy absorption
and attention to relative velocities.’

The statement was followed with the kind of mystified and suspicious
silence that generally succeeded one of his remarks.

‘Relative velocities,’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, Archchancellor.’ Ponder looked down at his prototype slide rule
and waited. He _knew_ that Ridcully would feel it necessary to add a
comment at this point in order to demonstrate that he’d grasped
something.

‘My mother could move like lightning when—’

‘I mean how fast things are going when compared to other things,’ Ponder
said quickly, but not quite quickly enough. ‘We should be able to work
it out quite easily. Er. On Hex.’

‘Oh, no,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, pushing his chair back.
‘Not that. That’s meddling with things you don’t understand.’

‘Well, we _are_ wizards,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’re supposed to meddle with
things we don’t understand. If we hung around waitin’ till we understood
things we’d never get anything done.’

‘Look, I don’t mind summoning some demon and asking it,’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘That’s normal. But building some mechanical
contrivance to do your thinking for you, that’s . . . against Nature.
Besides,’ he added in slightly less foreboding tones, ‘last time you did
a big problem on it the wretched thing broke and we had ants all over
the place.’

‘We’ve sorted that out,’ said Ponder. ‘We—’

‘I must admit there was a ram’s skull in the middle of it last time I
looked,’ said Ridcully.

‘We had to add that to do occult transformations,’ said Ponder, ‘but—’

‘And cogwheels and springs,’ the Archchancellor went on.

‘Well, the ants aren’t very good at differential analysis, so—’

‘And that strange wobbly thing with the cuckoo?’

‘The unreal time clock,’ said Ponder. ‘Yes, we think that’s essential
for working out—’

‘Anyway, it’s all quite immaterial, because I certainly have no
intention of going anywhere,’ said the Dean. ‘Send a student, if you
must. We’ve got a lot of spare ones.’

‘Good so be would you if, duff plum of helping second A,’ said the
Bursar.

The table fell silent.

‘Anyone understand that?’ said Ridcully.

The Bursar was not technically insane. He had passed through the rapids
of insanity some time previously, and was now sculling around in some
peaceful pool on the other side. He was often quite coherent, although
not by normal human standards.

‘Um, he’s going through yesterday again,’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘Backwards, this time.’

‘We should send the Bursar,’ said the Dean firmly.

‘Certainly not! You probably can’t get dried frog pills there—’

‘Oook!’

The Librarian re-entered the study at a bandy-legged run, waving
something in the air.

It was red, or at least had at some time been red. It might well once
have been a pointy hat, but the point had crumpled and most of the brim
was burned away. A word had been embroidered on it in sequins. Many had
been burned off, but:

WIZZARD

. . . could just be made out as pale letters on the scorched cloth.

‘I _knew_ I’d seen it before,’ said Ridcully. ‘On a shelf in the
Library, right?’

‘Oook.’

The Archchancellor inspected the remnant.

‘Wizzard?’ he said. ‘What kind of sad, hopeless person needs to write
WIZZARD on their hat?’

* * *

A few bubbles broke the surface of the sea, causing the raft to rock a
little. After a while, a couple of pieces of shark skin floated up.

Rincewind sighed and put down his fishing rod. The rest of the shark
would be dragged ashore later, he knew it. He couldn’t imagine why. It
wasn’t as if they were good eating. They tasted like old boots soaked in
urine.

He picked up a makeshift oar and set out for the beach.

It wasn’t a bad little island. Storms seemed to pass it by. So did
ships. But there were coconuts, and breadfruit, and some sort of wild
fig. Even his experiments in alcohol had been quite successful, although
he hadn’t been able to walk properly for two days. The lagoon provided
prawns and shrimps and oysters and crabs and lobsters, and in the deep
green water out beyond the reef big silver fish fought each other for
the privilege of biting a piece of bent wire on the end of a bit of
string. After six months on the island, in fact, there was only one
thing Rincewind lacked. He’d never really thought about it before. Now
he thought about it – or, more correctly, _them_ – all the time.

It was odd. He’d hardly ever thought about them in Ankh-Morpork, because
they were there if ever he wanted them. Now they weren’t, and he
_craved._

His raft bumped the white sand at about the same moment as a large canoe
rounded the reef and entered the lagoon.

Ridcully was sitting at his desk now, surrounded by his senior wizards.
They were trying to tell him things, despite the known danger of trying
to tell Ridcully things, which was that he picked up the facts he liked
and let the others take a running jump.

‘So,’ he said, ‘_not_ a kind of cheese.’

‘_No_, Archchancellor,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Rincewind
is a kind of wizard.’

‘Was,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Not a cheese,’ said Ridcully, unwilling to let go of a fact.

‘No.’

‘Sounds a sort of name you’d associate with cheese. I mean, a pound of
Mature Rincewind, it rolls off the tongue . . .’

‘_Godsdammit_, Rincewind is not a cheese!’ shouted the Dean, his temper
briefly cracking. ‘Rincewind is not a yoghurt or any kind of sour milk
derivative! Rincewind is a bloody nuisance! A complete and utter
disgrace to wizardry! A fool! A failure! Anyway, he hasn’t been seen
here since that . . . unpleasantness with the Sourcerer, years ago.’

‘Really?’ said Ridcully, with a certain kind of nasty politeness. ‘A lot
of wizards behaved very badly then, I understand.’

‘Yes indeed,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, scowling at the Dean,
who bridled.

‘I don’t know anything about that, Runes. I wasn’t Dean at the time.’

‘No, but you were very senior.’

‘Perhaps, but it just so happens that at the time I was visiting my
aunt, for your information.’

‘They nearly blew up the whole city!’

‘She lives in Quirm.’

‘_And_ Quirm was heavily involved, as I recall.’

‘_—near_ Quirm. _Near_ Quirm. Not all that near, actually. Quite a way
along the coast—’

‘Hah!’

‘Anyway, _you_ seem to be very well informed, eh, Runes?’ said the Dean.

‘I – What? – I – was studying hard at the time. Hardly knew what was
going on—’

‘Half the University was blown down!’ The Dean remembered himself and
added, ‘That is, so I heard. Later. After getting back from my aunt’s.’

‘Yes, but I’ve got a very thick door—’

‘And I happen to _know_ the Senior Wrangler was here, because—’

‘—with that heavy green baize stuff you can hardly hear any—’

‘Nap my for time it’s think I.’

‘_Will you all shut up right now this minute!_’

Ridcully glared at his faculty with the clear, innocent glare of someone
who was blessed at birth with no imagination whatsoever, and who had
genuinely been hundreds of miles away during the University’s recent
embarrassing history.

‘Right,’ he said, when they had quietened down. ‘This Rincewind. Bit of
an idiot, yes? You talk, Dean. Everyone else will shut up.’

The Dean looked uncertain.

‘Well, er . . . I mean, it makes no sense, Archchancellor. He couldn’t
even do proper magic. What good would he be to anyone? Besides . . .
where Rincewind went,’ – he lowered his voice – ‘_trouble followed
behind_.’

Ridcully noticed that the wizards drew a little closer together.

‘Sounds all right to me,’ he said. ‘Best place for trouble, behind. You
certainly don’t want it in front.’

‘You don’t understand, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean. ‘It followed
behind on hundreds of little legs.’

The Archchancellor’s smile stayed where it was while the rest of his
face went solid behind it.

‘You been on the Bursar’s pills, Dean?’

‘I assure you, Mustrum—’

‘Then don’t talk rubbish.’

‘Very _well_, Archchancellor. But you do realize, don’t you, that it
might take years to find him?’

‘Er,’ said Ponder, ‘if we can work out his thaumic signature, I think
Hex could probably do it in a day . . .’

The Dean glared.

‘That’s not magic!’ he snapped. ‘That’s just . . . engineering!’

Rincewind trudged through the shallows and used a sharp rock to hack the
top off a coconut that had been cooling in a convenient shady rock pool.
He put it to his lips.

A shadow fell across him.

It said, ‘Er, hello?’

It was possible, if you kept on talking at the Archchancellor for long
enough, that some facts might squeeze through.

‘So what you’re _tellin_’ me,’ said Ridcully, eventually, ‘is that this
Rincewind fella has been chased by just about every army in the world,
has been bounced around life like a pea on a drum, and probably is the
one wizard who knows anything about the Agatean Empire on account of
once being friends with,’ he glanced at his notes, ‘“a strange little
man in glasses” who came from there and gave him this funny thing with
the legs you all keep alluding to. And he can speak the lingo. Am I
right so far?’

‘Exactly, Archchancellor. Call me an idiot if you like,’ said the Dean,
‘but why would anyone want him?’

Ridcully looked down at his notes again. ‘_You’ve_ decided to go, then?’
he said.

‘No, of course not—’

‘What I don’t think you’ve spotted here, Dean,’ he said, breaking into a
determinedly cheery grin, ‘is what I might call the common denominator.
Chap stays alive. Talented. Find him. And bring him here. Wherever he
is. Poor chap could be facing something _dreadful_.’

The coconut stayed where it was, but Rincewind’s eyes swivelled madly
from side to side.

Three figures stepped into his line of vision. They were obviously
female. They were _abundantly_ female. They were not wearing a great
deal of clothing and seemed to be altogether too
fresh-from-the-hairdressers for people who have just been paddling a
large war canoe, but this is often the case with beautiful Amazonian
warriors.

A thin trickle of coconut milk began to dribble off the end of
Rincewind’s beard.

The leading woman brushed aside her long blonde hair and gave him a
bright smile.

‘I know this sounds a little unlikely,’ she said, ‘but I and my sisters
here represent a hitherto undiscovered tribe whose menfolk were recently
destroyed in a deadly but short-lived and highly specific plague. Now we
have been searching these islands for a man to enable us to carry on our
line.’

‘_How much do you think he weighs?_’

Rincewind’s eyebrows raised. The woman looked down shyly.

‘You may be wondering why we are all blonde and white-skinned when
everyone else in the islands around here is dark,’ she said. ‘It just
seems to be one of those genetic things.’

‘_About 120, 125 pounds. Put another pound or two of junk on the heap.
Er. Can you detect . . . you_ know . . . _IT?_’

‘This is all going to go wrong, Mr Stibbons, I just know it.’

_‘He’s only six hundred miles away and we know where_ we _are, and he’s
on the right half of the Disc. Anyway, I’ve worked this out on Hex so
nothing can possibly go wrong_.’

_‘Yes, but can anyone see_ . . . _that_ . . . _you know_ . . . _with the
._ . . _feet?’_

Rincewind’s eyebrows waggled. A sort of choking noise came from his
throat.

_‘Can’t see ._ . . _it. Will you lot stop huffing on my crystal ball?’_

‘And, of course, if you were to come with us we could promise you . . .
earthly and sensual pleasures such as those of which you may have
dreamed . . .’

‘All right. On the count of three—’

The coconut dropped away. Rincewind swallowed. There was a hungry,
dreamy look in his eyes.

‘Can I have them mashed?’ he said.

‘NOW!’

First there was the sensation of pressure. The world opened up in front
of Rincewind and sucked him into it.

Then it stretched out thin and went _twang._

Cloud rushed past him, blurred by speed. When he dared open his eyes
again it was to see, far ahead of him, a tiny black dot.

It got bigger.

It resolved itself into a tight cloud of objects. There were a couple of
heavy saucepans, a large brass candlestick, a few bricks, a chair and a
large brass blancmange mould in the shape of a castle.

They hit him one after the other, the blancmange mould making a humorous
clang as it bounced off his head, and then whirled away behind him.

The next thing ahead of him was an octagon. A chalked one.

He hit it.

Ridcully stared down.

‘A shade less than 125 pounds, I fancy,’ he said. ‘All the same . . .
well done, gentlemen.’

The dishevelled scarecrow in the centre of the circle staggered to its
feet and beat out one or two small fires in its clothing. Then it looked
around blearily and said, ‘Hehehe?’

‘He could be a little disorientated,’ the Archchancellor went on. ‘More
than six hundred miles in two seconds, after all. Don’t give him a nasty
shock.’

‘Like sleepwalkers, you mean?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘What do you mean, sleepwalkers?’

‘If you wake sleepwalkers, their legs drop off. So my grandmother used
to aver.’

‘And are we _sure_ it’s Rincewind?’ said the Dean.

‘Of _course_ it’s Rincewind,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘We spent
_hours_ looking for him.’

‘It could be some dangerous occult creature,’ said the Dean stubbornly.

‘With that hat?’

It was a pointy hat. In a way. A kind of cargo-cult pointy hat, made out
of split bamboo and coconut leaves, in the hope of attracting passing
wizardliness. Picked out on it, in seashells held in place with grass,
was the word WIZZARD.

Its wearer gazed right through the wizards and, as if driven by some
sudden recollection of purpose, lurched abruptly out of the octagon and
headed towards the door of the hall.

The wizards followed cautiously.

‘I’m not sure I believe her. How many times did she see it happen?’

‘I don’t know. She never said.’

‘The Bursar sleepwalks most nights, you know.’

‘Does he? Tempting . . .’

Rincewind, if that was the creature’s name, headed out into Sator
Square.

It was crowded. The air shimmered over the braziers of chestnut sellers
and hot-potato merchants and echoed with the traditional street cries of
Old Ankh-Morpork.⁷

The figure sidled up to a skinny man in a huge overcoat who was frying
something over a little oil-heater in a wide tray around his neck.

The possibly-Rincewind grabbed the edge of the tray.

‘Got . . . any . . . potatoes?’ it growled.

‘Potatoes? No, squire. Got some sausages inna bun.’

The possibly-Rincewind froze. And then it burst into tears.

‘Sausage inna b_uuunnnnn_!’ it bawled. ‘Dear old sausage inna inna inna
buuunnn! Gimme saussaaage inna b_uunnnnn_!’

It grabbed three off the tray and tried to eat them all at once.

‘Good grief!’ said Ridcully.

The figure half ran, half capered away, fragments of bun and
pork-product debris cascading from its unkempt beard.

‘I’ve never seen anyone eat three of Throat Dibbler’s sausages inna bun
and look so happy,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘_I’ve_ never seen someone eat three of Throat Dibbler’s sausages inna
bun and look so upright,’ said the Dean.

‘I’ve never seen anyone eat anything of Dibbler’s and get away without
paying,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

The figure spun happily around the square, tears streaming down its
face. The gyrations took it past an alley mouth, whereupon a smaller
figure stepped out behind it and with some difficulty hit it on the back
of the head.

The sausage-eater fell to his knees, saying, to the world in general,
‘Ow!’

‘No_no_no_no_no_no_no!’

A rather older man stepped out and removed the cosh from the young man’s
hesitant hands, while the victim knelt and moaned.

‘I think you ought to apologize to the poor gentleman,’ said the older
man. ‘I don’t know, what’s he going to think? I mean, look at him, he
made it so easy for you and what does he get? I mean, what did you think
you were doing?’

‘Mumblemumble, Mr Boggis,’ said the boy, looking at his feet.

‘What was that again? Speak up!’

‘Overarm Belter, Mr Boggis.’

‘_That_ was an Overarm Belter? You call that an Overarm Belter? That was
an Overarm Belter, was it? _This –_ excuse me, sir, we’ll just have you
up on your feet for a moment, sorry about this – _this_ is an Overarm
Belter—’

‘Ow!’ shouted the victim and then, to the surprise of all concerned, he
added: ‘Hahahaha!’

‘What _you_ did was – sorry to impose again, sir, this won’t take a
minute – what you did was _this_—’

‘Ow! Hahahaha!’

‘Now, you lot, you saw that? Come on, gather round . . .’

Half a dozen other youths slouched out of the alleyway and formed a
ragged audience around Mr Boggis, the luckless student and the victim,
who was staggering in a circle and making little ‘oomph oomph’ sounds
but still, for some reason, apparently enjoying himself immensely.

‘Now,’ said Mr Boggis, with the air of an old skilled craftsman
imparting his professional expertise to an ungrateful posterity, ‘when
inconveniencing a customer from your basic alley entrance, the correct
procedure is – Oh, hello, Mr Ridcully, didn’t see you there.’

The Archchancellor gave him a friendly nod.

‘Don’t mind us, Mr Boggis. Thieves’ Guild training, is it?’

Boggis rolled his eyes.

‘Dunno what they teaches ’em at school,’ he said. ‘It’s jus’ nothing but
reading and writing all the time. When I was a lad school was where you
learned somethin’ _useful._ Right – you, Wilkins, stop that giggling,
you have a go, excuse us just another moment, sir—’

‘Ow!’

‘No_no_no_no_no_no_! My old granny could do better than that! Now
_look_, you steps up trimly, places one hand on his shoulder here, for
control . . . go on, you do it . . . and then smartly—’

‘Ow!’

‘All right, can anyone tell me what he was doing wrong?’

The figure crawled away unnoticed, except by the wizards, while Mr
Boggis was demonstrating the finer points of head percussion on Wilkins.

It staggered to his feet and plunged on along the road, still moving
like one hypnotized.

‘He’s crying,’ said the Dean.

‘Not surprising,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘But why’s he grinnin’ at the
same time?’

‘Curiouser and curiouser,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

Bruised and possibly poisoned, the figure headed back for the
University, the wizards still trailing behind.

‘_You must mean “curious and more curious”, surely? And even then it
doesn’t make much sense_—’

It entered the gates but, this time, hurried jerkily through the main
hall and into the Library.

The Librarian was waiting, holding – with something of a smirk on his
face, and an orang-utan can really smirk – the battered hat.

‘Amazin’,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s true! A wizard _will_ always come back
for his hat!’

The figure grabbed the hat, evicted some spiders, threw away the sad
affair made of leaves and put the hat on his head.

Rincewind blinked at the puzzled faculty. A light came on behind his
eyes for the first time, as if up to now he’d merely been operating by
reflex action.

‘Er. What have I just eaten?’

‘Er. Three of Mr Dibbler’s finest sausages,’ said Ridcully. ‘Well, when
I say finest, I mean “most typical”, don’tcheknow.’

‘I see. And who just hit me?’

‘Thieves’ Guild apprentices out trainin’.’

Rincewind blinked. ‘This is Ankh-Morpork, isn’t it?’

‘Yes.’

‘I thought so.’ Rincewind blinked, slowly. ‘Well,’ he said, just as he
fell forward, ‘I’m back.’

Lord Hong was flying a kite. It was something he did perfectly.

Lord Hong did everything perfectly. His water-colours were perfect. His
poetry was perfect. When he folded paper, every crease was perfect.
Imaginative, original, and definitely perfect. Lord Hong had long ago
ceased pursuing perfection because he already had it nailed up in a
dungeon somewhere.

Lord Hong was twenty-six, and thin, and handsome. He wore very small,
very circular steel-rimmed spectacles. When asked to describe him,
people often used the word ‘smooth’ or even ‘lacquered’.⁸ And he had
risen to the leadership of one of the most influential families in the
Empire by relentless application, total focusing of his mental powers,
and six well-executed deaths. The last one had been that of his father,
who’d died happy in the knowledge that his son was maintaining an old
family tradition. The senior families venerated their ancestors, and saw
no harm in prematurely adding to their number.

And now his kite, the black kite with the two big eyes, plunged out of
the sky. He’d calculated the angle, needless to say, perfectly. Its
string, coated with glue and ground glass, sawed through those of his
fellow contestants and sent their kites tumbling.

There was genteel applause from the bystanders. People generally found
it advisable to applaud Lord Hong.

He handed the string to a servant, nodded curtly at the fellow flyers,
and strode towards his tent.

Once inside, he sat down and looked at his visitor. ‘Well?’ he said.

‘We sent the message,’ said the visitor. ‘No one saw us.’

‘On the contrary,’ said Lord Hong. ‘Twenty people saw you. Do you know
how hard it is for a guard to look straight ahead and see nothing when
people are creeping around making a noise like an army and whispering to
one another to be quiet? Frankly, your people do not seem to possess
that revolutionary spark. What is the matter with your hand?’

‘The albatross bit it.’

Lord Hong smiled. It occurred to him that it might have mistaken his
visitor for an anchovy, and with some justification. There was the same
fishy look about the eyes.

‘I don’t understand, o lord,’ said the visitor, whose name was Two Fire
Herb.

‘Good.’

‘But they believe in the Great Wizzard and you _want_ him to come here?’

‘Oh, certainly. I have my . . . people in’ – he tried the alien
syllables – ‘Ankh-More-Pork. The one so foolishly called the Great
Wizzard _does_ exist. But, I might tell you, he is renowned for being
incompetent, cowardly and spineless. Quite proverbially so. So I think
the Red Army should have their leader, don’t you? It will . . . raise
their morale.’

He smiled again. ‘This is politics,’ he said.

‘Ah.’

‘Now go.’

Lord Hong picked up a book as his visitor left. But it was hardly a real
book; pieces of paper had simply been fastened together with string, and
the text was handwritten.

He’d read it many times before. It still amused him, mainly because the
author had managed to be wrong about so many things.

Now, every time he finished a page, he ripped it out and, while reading
the next page, carefully folded the paper into the shape of a
chrysanthemum.

‘Great Wizard,’ he said, aloud. ‘Oh, indeed. Very great.’

Rincewind awoke. There were clean sheets and no one was saying ‘Go
through his pockets,’ so he chalked that up as a promising beginning.

He kept his eyes shut, just in case there was anyone around who, once he
was seen to be awake, would make life complicated for him.

Elderly male voices were arguing.

‘You’re all missin’ the point. He survives. You keep on tellin’ me he’s
had all these adventures and he’s _still_ alive.’

‘What do you mean? He’s got scars all over him!’

‘My point exactly, Dean. Most of ’em on his back, too. He leaves trouble
behind. Someone Up There smiles on him.’

Rincewind winced. He had always been aware that Someone Up There was
doing _something_ on him. He’d never considered it was smiling.

‘He’s not even a proper wizard! He never got more than two per cent in
his exams!’

‘I think he’s awake,’ said someone.

Rincewind gave in, and opened his eyes. A variety of bearded, overly
pink faces looked down upon him.

‘How’re you feeling, old chap?’ said one, extending a hand. ‘Name’s
Ridcully. Archchancellor. How’re you feeling?’

‘It’s all going to go wrong,’ said Rincewind flatly.

‘What d’you mean, old fellow?’

‘I just know it. It’s all going to go wrong. Something dreadful’s going
to happen. I thought it was too good to last.’

‘You see?’ said the Dean. ‘Hundreds of little legs. I _told_ you. Would
you listen?’

Rincewind sat up. ‘Don’t start being nice to me,’ he said. ‘Don’t start
offering me grapes. No one ever wants me for something _nice_.’ A
confused memory of his very recent past floated across his mind and he
experienced a brief moment of regret that potatoes, while uppermost in
his mind at that point, had not been similarly positioned in the mind of
the young lady. No one dressed like that, he was coming to realize,
could be thinking of any kind of root vegetable.

He sighed. ‘All right, what happens now?’

‘How do you feel?’

Rincewind shook his head. ‘It’s no good,’ he said. ‘I hate it when
people are nice to me. It means something bad is going to happen. Do you
mind shouting?’

Ridcully had had enough. ‘Get out of that bed you horrible little man
and follow me this minute or it will go very hard for you!’

‘Ah, that’s better. I feel _right_ at home now. _Now_ we’re cooking with
charcoal,’ said Rincewind, glumly. He swung his legs off the bed and
stood up carefully.

Ridcully stopped halfway to the door, where the other wizards had lined
up.

‘Runes?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, his voice
oozing innocence.

‘What is that you’ve got behind your back?’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Looks like some kind of tool,’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, _this_,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, as if he’d only just at
that moment noticed the eight-pound lump hammer he’d been holding. ‘My
word . . . it’s a _hammer,_ isn’t it? My word. A hammer. I suppose I
must just have . . . picked it up somewhere. You know. To keep the place
tidy.’

‘And I can’t help noticing,’ said Ridcully, ‘that the Dean seems to be
tryin’ to conceal a battle-axe about his person.’

There was a musical twang from the rear of the Chair of Indefinite
Studies.

‘And that sounded like a saw to me,’ said Ridcully. ‘Is there anyone
here not concealin’ some kind of implement? Right. Would anyone care to
explain what the hell you think you’re doin’?’

‘Hah, you don’t know what it was like,’ muttered the Dean, not meeting
the Archchancellor’s eye. ‘A man daren’t turn his back for five minutes
in those days. You’d hear the patter of those damn feet and—’

Ridcully ignored him. He put an arm around Rincewind’s bony shoulders
and led the way towards the Great Hall.

‘Well, now, Rincewind,’ he said. ‘They tell me you’re no good at magic.’

‘That’s right.’

‘Never passed any exams or anything?’

‘None, I’m afraid.’

‘But everyone calls you Rincewind the wizard.’

Rincewind looked at his feet. ‘Well, I kind of worked here as sort of
deputy Librarian—’

‘—an ape’s number two—’ said the Dean.

‘—and, you know, did odd jobs and things and kind of, you know, helped
out—’

‘_I say, did anyone notice that? An ape’s number two? Rather clever, I
thought_,’

‘But you have never, in fact, actually been _entitled_ to call yourself
a wizard?’ said Ridcully.

‘Not technically, I suppose . . .’

‘I _see._ That _is_ a problem.’

‘I’ve got this hat with the word “Wizzard” on it,’ said Rincewind
hopefully.

‘Not a great help, I’m afraid. Hmm. This presents us with a bit of a
difficulty, I’m afraid. Let me see . . . How long can you hold your
breath?’

‘_I_ don’t know. A couple of minutes. Is that important?’

‘It is in the context of being nailed upside down to one of the supports
of the Brass Bridge for two high tides and then being beheaded which,
I’m afraid, is the statutory punishment for impersonating a wizard. I
looked it up. No one was more sorry than me, I can tell you. But the
Lore is the Lore.’

‘Oh, no!’

‘Sorry. No alternative. Otherwise we’d be knee-deep in people in pointy
hats they’d no right to. It’s a terrible shame. Can’t do a thing. Wish I
could. Hands tied. The statutes say you can only be a wizard by passing
through the University in the normal way or by performing some great
service of benefit to magic, and I’m afraid that—’

‘Couldn’t you just send me back to my island? I _liked_ it there. It was
dull!’

Ridcully shook his head sadly.

‘No can do, I’m afraid. The offence has been committed over a period of
many years. And since you haven’t passed any exams or performed,’
Ridcully raised his voice slightly, ‘_any service of great benefit to
magic,_ I’m afraid I shall have to instruct the bledlows⁹ to fetch some
rope and—’

‘Er. I think I may have saved the world a couple of times,’ said
Rincewind. ‘Does that help?’

‘Did anyone from the University see you do it?’

‘No, I don’t think so.’

Ridcully shook his head. ‘Probably doesn’t count, then. It’s a shame,
because _if you had performed any service of great benefit to magic_
then I’d be happy to let you keep that hat and, of course, something to
wear it on.’

Rincewind looked crestfallen. Ridcully sighed, and had one last try.

‘So,’ he said, ‘since it seems that you haven’t actually passed your
exams OR PERFORMED A SERVICE OF GREAT BENEFIT TO MAGIC, then—’

‘I suppose . . . I could try to perform some great service?’ said
Rincewind, with the expression of one who knows that the light at the
end of the tunnel is an oncoming train.

‘Really? Hmm? Well, that’s definitely a thought,’ said Ridcully.

‘What sort of services are they?’

‘Oh, typically you’d be expected to, for the sake of example, go on a
quest, or find the answer to some very ancient and important question –
_What the hell is that thing with all the legs?_’

Rincewind didn’t even bother to look round. The expression on Ridcully’s
face, as it stared over his shoulder, was quite familiar.

‘Ah,’ he said, ‘I think I know that one.’

Magic isn’t like maths. Like the Discworld itself, it follows common
sense rather than logic. And nor is it like cookery. A cake’s a cake.
Mix the ingredients up right and cook them at the right temperature and
a cake happens. No casserole requires moonbeams. No soufflé ever
demanded to be mixed by a virgin.

Nevertheless, those afflicted with an enquiring turn of mind have often
wondered whether there are _rules_ of magic. There are more than five
hundred known spells to secure the love of another person, and they
range from messing around with fern seed at midnight to doing something
rather unpleasant with a rhino horn at an unspecified time, but probably
not just after a meal. Was it possible (the enquiring minds enquired)
that an analysis of all these spells might reveal some small powerful
common denominator, some meta-spell, some simple little equation which
would achieve the required end far more simply, and incidentally come as
a great relief to all rhinos?

To answer such questions Hex had been built, although Ponder Stibbons
was a bit uneasy about the word ‘built’ in this context. He and a few
keen students had put it together, certainly, but . . . well . . .
sometimes he thought bits of it, strange though this sounded, _just
turned up._

For example, he was pretty sure no one had designed the Phase of the
Moon Generator, but there it was, clearly a part of the whole thing.
They _had_ built the Unreal Time Clock, although no one seemed to have a
very clear idea how it worked.

What he suspected they were dealing with was a specialized case of
formative causation, always a risk in a place like Unseen University,
where reality was stretched so thin and therefore blown by so many
strange breezes. If that was so, then they weren’t exactly designing
something. They were just putting physical clothes on an idea that was
already there, a shadow of something that had been waiting to exist.

He’d explained at length to the Faculty that Hex didn’t _think._ It was
obvious that it couldn’t think. Part of it was clockwork. A lot of it
was a giant ant farm (the interface, where the ants rode up and down on
a little paternoster that turned a significant cogwheel was a little
masterpiece, he thought) and the intricately controlled rushing of the
ants through their maze of glass tubing was the most important part of
the whole thing.

But a lot of it had just . . . accumulated, like the aquarium and wind
chimes which now seemed to be essential. A mouse had built a nest in the
middle of it all and had been allowed to become a fixture, since the
thing stopped working when they took it out. Nothing in that assemblage
could possibly think, except in fairly limited ways about cheese or
sugar. Nevertheless . . . in the middle of the night, when Hex was
working hard, and the tubes rustled with the toiling ants, and things
suddenly went ‘clonk’ for no obvious reason, and the aquarium had been
lowered on its davits so that the operator would have something to watch
during the long hours . . . nevertheless, _then_ a man might begin to
speculate about what a brain was and what thought was and whether things
that weren’t alive could think and whether a brain was just a more
complicated version of Hex (or, around 4 a.m., when bits of the
clockwork reversed direction suddenly and the mice squeaked, a _less_
complicated version of Hex) and wonder if the whole produced something
not apparently inherent in the parts.

In short, Ponder was just a little bit worried.

He sat down at the keyboard. It was almost as big as the rest of Hex, to
allow for the necessary levers and armatures. The various keys allowed
little boards with holes in them to drop briefly into slots, forcing the
ants into new paths.

It took him some time to compose the problem, but at last he braced one
foot on the structure and tugged on the Enter lever.

The ants scurried on new paths. The clockwork started to move. A small
mechanism which Ponder would be prepared to swear had not been there
yesterday, but which looked like a device for measuring wind speed,
began to spin.

After several minutes a number of blocks with occult symbols on them
dropped into the output hopper.

‘Thank you,’ said Ponder, and then felt extremely silly for saying so.

There was a tension to the thing, a feeling of mute straining and
striving towards some distant and incomprehensible goal. As a wizard, it
was something that Ponder had only before encountered in acorns: a tiny
soundless voice which said, yes, I am but a small, green, simple object
– but I dream about forests.

Only the other day Adrian Turnipseed had typed in ‘Why?’ to see what
happened. Some of the students had forecast that Hex would go mad trying
to work it out; Ponder had expected Hex to produce the message ?????,
which it did with depressing frequency.

Instead, after some unusual activity among the ants, it had laboriously
produced: ‘Because.’

With everyone else watching from behind a hastily overturned desk,
Turnipseed had volunteered: ‘Why anything?’

The reply had finally turned up: ‘Because Everything. ????? Eternal
Domain Error. +++++ Redo From Start +++++.’

No one knew who Redo From Start was, or why he was sending messages. But
there were no more funny questions. No one wanted to risk getting
answers.

It was shortly afterwards that the thing like a broken umbrella with
herrings on it appeared just behind the thing like a beachball that went
‘parp’ every fourteen minutes.

Of course, books of magic developed a certain . . . _personality_,
derived from all that power in their pages. That’s why it was unwise to
go into the Library without a stick. And now Ponder had helped build an
engine for studying magic. Wizards had always known that the act of
observation changed the thing that was observed, and sometimes forgot
that it also changed the observer too.

He was beginning to suspect that Hex was redesigning itself.

And he’d just said ‘Thank you’. To a thing that looked like it had been
made by a glassblower with hiccups.

He looked at the spell it had produced, hastily wrote it down and
hurried out.

Hex clicked to itself in the now empty room. The thing that went ‘parp’
went parp. The Unreal Time Clock ticked sideways.

There was a rattle in the output slot.

‘Don’t mention it. ++?????++ Out of Cheese Error. Redo From Start.’

It was five minutes later.

‘Fascinatin’,’ said Ridcully. ‘Sapient pearwood, eh?’ He knelt down in
an effort to see underneath.

The Luggage backed away. It was used to terror, horror, fear and panic.
It had seldom encountered interest before.

The Archchancellor stood up and brushed himself off.

‘Ah,’ he said, as a dwarfish figure approached. ‘Here’s the gardener
with the stepladder. The Dean’s in the chandelier, Modo.’

‘I’m quite happy up here, I assure you,’ said a voice from the ceiling
regions. ‘Perhaps someone would be kind enough to pass me up my tea?’

‘And I was amazed the Senior Wrangler could ever _fit_ in the
sideboard,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s amazin’ how a man can fold himself up.’

‘I was just – just inspecting the silverware,’ said a voice from the
depths of a drawer.

The Luggage opened its lid. Several wizards jumped back hurriedly.

Ridcully examined the shark teeth stuck here and there in the woodwork.

‘Kills sharks, you say?’ he said.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘Sometimes it drags them ashore and jumps up
and down on them.’

Ridcully was impressed. Sapient pearwood was very rare in the countries
between the Ramtops and the Circle Sea. There were probably no living
trees left. A few wizards were lucky enough to have inherited staffs
made out of it.

Economy of emotion was one of Ridcully’s strong points. He had been
impressed. He had been fascinated. He’d even, when the thing had landed
in the middle of the wizards and caused the Dean’s remarkable feat of
vertical acceleration, been slightly aghast. But he hadn’t been
frightened, because he didn’t have the imagination.

‘My goodness,’ said a wizard.

The Archchancellor looked up.

‘Yes, Bursar?’

‘It’s this book the Dean loaned me, Mustrum. It’s about apes.’

‘Really.’

‘It’s most fascinating,’ said the Bursar, who was on the median part of
his mental cycle and therefore vaguely on the right planet even if
insulated from it by five miles of mental cotton wool. ‘It’s true what
he said. It says here that an adult male orang-utan doesn’t grow the
large flamboyant cheek pads unless he’s the dominant male.’

‘And that’s fascinating, is it?’

‘Well, yes, because he hasn’t got ’em. I wonder why? He certainly
dominates the Library, I should think.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘but he knows he’s a wizard, too.
So it’s not as though he dominates the whole University.’

One by one, as the thought sank in, they grinned at the Archchancellor.

‘Don’t you look at my cheeks like that!’ said Ridcully. ‘I don’t
dominate anybody!’

‘I was only—’

‘So you can all shut up or there will be big trouble!’

‘You should read it,’ said the Bursar, still happily living in the
valley of the dried frogs. ‘It’s amazing what you can learn.’

‘What? Like . . . how to show your bottom to people?’ said the Dean,
from on high.

‘No, Dean. That’s baboons,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I beg your pardon, I think you’ll find it’s gibbons,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies.

‘No, gibbons are the ones that hoot. It’s baboons if you want to see
bottoms.’

‘Well, he’s never shown _me_ one,’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Hah, well, he wouldn’t, would he?’ said a voice from the chandelier.
‘Not with you being dominant male and everything.’

‘Two Chairs, you come down here this minute!’

‘I seem to be entangled, Mustrum. A candle is giving me some
difficulty.’

‘Hah!’

Rincewind shook his head and wandered away. There had certainly been
some changes around the place since he had been there and, if it came to
it, he didn’t know how long ago that had been . . .

He’d never _asked_ for an exciting life. What he really liked, what he
sought on every occasion, was boredom. The trouble was that boredom
tended to explode in your face. Just when he thought he’d found it he’d
be suddenly involved in what he supposed other people – thoughtless,
feckless people – would call an adventure. And he’d be forced to visit
many strange lands and meet exotic and colourful people, although not
for very long because usually he’d be running. He’d seen the creation of
the universe, although not from a good seat, and had visited Hell and
the afterlife. He’d been captured, imprisoned, rescued, lost and
marooned. Sometimes it had all happened on the same day.

Adventure! People talked about the idea as if it was something
worthwhile, rather than a mess of bad food, no sleep and strange people
inexplicably trying to stick pointed objects in bits of you.

The _root_ problem, Rincewind had come to believe, was that he suffered
from pre-emptive karma. If it even _looked_ as though something nice was
going to happen to him in the near future, something bad would happen
right now. And it went on happening to him right through the part where
the good stuff should be happening, so that he never actually
experienced it. It was as if he always got the indigestion _before_ the
meal and felt so dreadful that he never actually managed to eat
anything.

Somewhere in the world, he reasoned, there was someone who was on the
other end of the see-saw, a kind of mirror-Rincewind whose life was a
succession of wonderful events. He hoped to meet him one day, preferably
while holding some sort of weapon.

Now people were babbling about sending him to the Counterweight
Continent. He’d heard that life was dull there. And Rincewind really
craved dullness.

He’d really _liked_ that island. He’d _enjoyed_ Coconut Surprise. You
cracked it open and, hey, there was coconut inside. That was the kind of
surprise he liked.

He pushed open a door.

The place inside _had_ been his room. It was a mess. There was a large
and battered wardrobe, and that was about the end of it as far as proper
furniture was concerned unless you wanted to broaden the term to include
a wicker chair with no bottom and three legs and a mattress so full of
the life that inhabits mattresses that it occasionally moved sluggishly
around the floor, bumping into things. The rest of the room was a litter
of objects dragged in from the street – old crates, bits of planking,
sacks . . .

Rincewind felt a lump in his throat. They’d left his room just as it
was.

He opened the wardrobe and rummaged through the moth-haunted darkness
within, until his questing hand located—

—an ear—

—which was attached to a dwarf.

‘Ow!’

‘What,’ said Rincewind, ‘are you doing in my wardrobe?’

‘Wardrobe? Er . . . Er . . . Isn’t this the Magic Kingdom of
Scrumptiousness?’ said the dwarf, trying not to look guilty.

‘No, and these shoes you’re holding aren’t the Golden Jewels of the
Queen of the Fairies,’ said Rincewind, snatching them out of the thief’s
hands. ‘And _this_ isn’t the Wand of Invisibility and _these_ aren’t
Giant Grumblenose’s Wonderful Socks but _this_ is my boot—’

‘Ow!’

‘And stay out!’

The dwarf ran for the door and paused, but only briefly, to shout: ‘I’ve
got a Thieves’ Guild card! And you shouldn’t hit dwarfs! That’s
speciesism!’

‘Good,’ said Rincewind, retrieving items of clothing.

He found another robe and put it on. Here and there moths had worked
their lacemaking skills and most of the red colour had faded to shades
of orange and brown, but to his relief it was a proper wizard’s robe.
It’s hard to be an impressive magic-user with bare knees.

Gentle footsteps pattered to a halt behind him. He turned.

‘Open.’

The Luggage obediently cracked its lid. In theory it should have been
full of shark; in fact it was half full of coconuts. Rincewind turfed
them out on to the floor and put the rest of the clothes inside.

‘Shut.’

The lid slammed.

‘Now go down to the kitchen and get some potatoes.’

The chest did a complicated, many-legged about-turn and trotted away.
Rincewind followed it out and headed towards the Archchancellor’s study.
Behind him he could hear the wizards still arguing.

He’d become familiar with the study through long years at Unseen.
Generally he was there to answer quite difficult questions, like ‘How
can _anyone_ get a negative mark in Basic Firemaking?’ He’d spent a lot
of time staring at the fixtures while people harangued him.

There had been changes here, too. Gone were the alembics and bubbling
flagons that were the traditional props of wizardry; Ridcully’s study
was dominated by a full-size snooker table, on which he’d piled papers
until there was no room for any more and no sign of green felt. Ridcully
assumed that anything people had time to write down couldn’t be
important.

The stuffed heads of a number of surprised animals stared down at him.
From the antlers of one stag hung a pair of corroded boots Ridcully had
won as a Rowing Brown for the University in his youth.¹⁰

There was a large model of the Discworld on four wooden elephants in a
corner of the room. Rincewind was familiar with it. Every student was .
. .

The Counterweight Continent was a blob. It was a _shaped_ blob; a not
very inviting comma shape. Sailors had brought back news of it. They’d
said that at one point it broke into a pattern of large islands,
stretching around the Disc to the even more mysterious island of
Bhangbhangduc and the completely mythical continent known only on the
charts as ‘XXXX’.

Not that many sailors went near the Counterweight Continent. The Agatean
Empire was known to ignore a very small amount of smuggling; presumably
Ankh-Morpork had some things it wanted. But there was nothing official;
a boat might come back loaded with silk and rare wood and, these days, a
few wild-eyed refugees, or it might come back with its captain riveted
upside down to the mast, or it might not come back.

Rincewind had been very nearly everywhere, but the Counterweight
Continent was an unknown land, or _terror incognita._ He couldn’t
imagine why they’d want any kind of wizard.

Rincewind sighed. He knew what he should do now.

He shouldn’t even wait for the return of the Luggage from its argosy to
the kitchens, from which the sound of yelling and something being
repeatedly hit with a large brass preserving pan suggested it was going
about his business.

He should just gather up what he could carry and get the hell out of
here. He—

‘Ah, Rincewind,’ said the Archchancellor, who had an amazingly silent
walk for such a large man. ‘Keen to leave, I see.’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Rincewind. ‘Oh, yes. Very much so.’

The Red Army met in secret session. They opened their meeting by singing
revolutionary songs and, since disobedience to authority did not come
easily to the Agatean character, these had titles like ‘Steady Progress
And Limited Disobedience While Retaining Well-Formulated Good Manners’.

Then it was time for the news.

‘The Great Wizard _will_ come. We sent the message, at great personal
risk.’

‘How will we know when he arrives?’

‘If he’s the Great Wizard, we’ll hear about it. And then—’

‘Gently Push Over The Forces of Repression!’ they chorused.

Two Fire Herb looked at the rest of the cadre. ‘Exactly,’ he said. ‘And
then, comrades, we must strike at the very heart of the rottenness. We
must storm the Winter Palace!’

There was silence from the cadre. Then someone said, ‘Excuse me, Two
Fire Herb, but it is June.’

‘Then we can storm the Summer Palace!’

* * *

A similar session, although without singing and with rather older
participants, was taking place in Unseen University, although one member
of the College Council had refused to come down from the chandelier.
This was of some considerable annoyance to the Librarian, who usually
occupied it.

‘All right, if you don’t trust my calculations, then what are the
alternatives?’ said Ponder Stibbons hotly.

‘Boat?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘They sink,’ said Rincewind.

‘It’d get you there in no time at all,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘We’re
wizards, after all. We could give you your own bag of wind.’

‘Ah. Forward the Dean,’ said Ridcully, pleasantly.

‘I heard that,’ said a voice from above.

‘Overland,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Up around the Hub? It’s
ice practically all the way.’

‘No,’ said Rincewind.

‘But you don’t sink on ice.’

‘No. You tip up and _then_ you sink and _then_ the ice hits you on the
head. Also killer whales. And great big seals vif teece ike iff.’

‘This is off the wall, I know,’ said the Bursar, brightly.

‘What is?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘A hook for hanging pictures on.’

There was a brief embarrassed silence.

‘Good lord, is it that time already?’ said the Archchancellor, taking
out his watch. ‘Ah, so it is. The bottle’s in your left-hand pocket, old
chap. Take three.’

‘No, magic is the only way,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘It worked when we
brought him here, didn’t it?’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘Just send me thousands of miles with my
pants on fire and you don’t even know where I’ll land? Oh, yes, that’s
ideal, that is.’

‘Good,’ said Ridcully, a man impervious to sarcasm. ‘It’s a big
continent; we can’t possibly miss it even with Mr Stibbons’ precise
calculations.’

‘Supposing I end up crushed in the middle of a mountain?’ said
Rincewind.

‘Can’t. The rock’ll be brought back here when we do the spell,’ said
Ponder, who hadn’t liked the crack about his maths.

‘So I’ll still be in the middle of a mountain but in a me-shaped hole,’
said Rincewind. ‘Oh, good. Instant fossil.’

‘Don’t _worry_,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s just a matter of . . . thingummy,
you know, all that stuff about three right angles making a triangle . .
.’

‘Is it possible you’re talking about geometry?’ said Rincewind, eyeing
the door.

‘That kind of thing, yes. And you’ll have your amazing Luggage item.
Why, it’ll practically be a holiday. It’ll be easy. They probably just
want to . . . to . . . ask you something, or something. And I hear
you’ve got a talent for languages, so no problem there.¹¹ You’ll
probably be away for a couple of hours at the most. Why do you keep
sayin’ “hah” under your breath?’

‘Was I?’

‘And everyone will be so grateful if you come back.’

Rincewind looked around – and, in one case, up – at the Council.

‘How _will_ I get back?’ he said.

‘Same way you went. We’ll find you and bring you out. With surgical
precision.’

Rincewind groaned. He knew what surgical precision meant in
Ankh-Morpork. It meant ‘to within an inch or two, accompanied by a lot
of screaming, and then they pour hot tar on you just where your leg
was’.

But . . . if you put aside for the moment the certainty that something
would definitely go horribly wrong, it looked foolproof. The trouble was
that wizards were such ingenious fools.

‘And then I can have my old job back?’

‘Certainly.’

‘And officially call myself a wizard?’

‘Of course. With any kind of spelling.’

‘And never have to go anywhere again as long as I live?’

‘Fine. We’ll actually ban you leaving the premises, if you like.’

‘And a new hat?’

‘What?’

‘A new hat. This one’s practically had it.’

‘Two new hats.’

‘Sequins?’

‘Of course. And those, you know, like glass chandelier things? Lots of
those all round the brim. As many as you like. And we’ll spell Wizzzard
with three Zs.’

Rincewind sighed. ‘Oh, all right. I’ll do it.’

Ponder’s genius found itself rather cramped when it came to explaining
things to people. And this was the case now, as the wizards forgathered
to kick some serious magic.

‘Yes, but you see, Archchancellor, he’s being sent to the opposite side
of the Disc, you see—’

Ridcully sighed. ‘It’s _spinnin’,_ isn’t it,’ he said. ‘We’re all going
the same way. It stands to reason. If people’re going the other way just
because they’re on the Counterweight Continent we’d crash into them once
a year. I mean twice.’

‘Yes, yes, they’re _spinning_ the same way, of course, but the direction
of motion is entirely opposite. I mean,’ said Ponder, lapsing into
logic, ‘you have to think about vectors, you, you have to ask yourself:
what direction would they go in if the Disc wasn’t here?’

The wizards stared at him.

‘Down,’ said Ridcully.

‘No, no, _no,_ Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘They wouldn’t go down
because there’d be nothing to pull them down, they—’

‘You don’t need anything to _pull_ you down. Down’s where you go if
there’s nothing to keep you up.’

_‘They’d keep on going in the same direction!’_ shouted Ponder.

‘Right. Round and round,’ said Ridcully. He rubbed his hands together.
‘You’ve got to maintain a grip if you want to be a wizard, lad. How’re
we doing, Runes?’

‘I . . . I can make out something,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
squinting into the crystal ball. ‘There’s a _lot_ of interference . . .’

The wizards gathered round. White specks filled the crystal. There
_were_ vague shapes just visible in the mush. Some of them could be
human.

‘Very peaceful place, the Agatean Empire,’ said Ridcully. ‘Very
tranquil. Very cultured. They set great store in politeness.’

‘Well, yes,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, ‘I heard it was because
people who _aren’t_ tranquil and quiet get serious bits cut off, don’t
they? I heard the Empire has a tyrannical and repressive government!’

‘What form of government is that?’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘A tautology,’ said the Dean, from above.

‘How serious are these bits?’ said Rincewind. They ignored him.

‘I heard that gold’s very common there,’ said the Dean. ‘Lying around
like dirt, they say. Rincewind could bring back a sackful.’

‘I’d rather bring back all my bits,’ said Rincewind.

After all, he thought, I’m only the one who’s going to end up in the
middle of it all. So please don’t anyone bother to listen to me.

‘Can’t you stop it blurring like that?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘I’m sorry, Archchancellor—’

‘These bits . . . big bits or small bits?’ said Rincewind, unheard.

‘Just find us an open space with something about the right size and
weight.’

‘It’s very hard to—’

‘Very serious bits? Are we in arms and legs territory here?’

‘They say it’s very boring there. Their biggest curse is “May you live
in interesting times”, apparently.’

‘There’s a thing . . . it’s very blurry. Looks like a wheelbarrow or
something. Quite small, I think.’

‘—or toes, ears, that kind of thing?’

‘Good, let’s get started,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er, I think it’ll help if he’s a bit heavier than the thing we move
here,’ said Ponder. ‘He won’t arrive at any speed, then. I think—’

‘Yes, yes, thank you very much, Mister Stibbons, now get in the circle
and let us see that staff crackle, there’s a good chap.’

‘Fingernails? Hair?’

Rincewind tugged at the robe of Ponder Stibbons, who seemed slightly
more sensible than the others.

‘Er. What’s my next move here?’ he said.

‘Um. About six thousand miles, I hope,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘But . . . I mean . . . Have you got any advice?’

Ponder wondered how to put things. He thought: I’ve done my best with
Hex, but the actual business will be undertaken by a bunch of wizards
whose idea of experimental procedure is to throw it and then sit down
and argue about where it’s going to land. We want to change your
position with that of something six thousand miles away which, whatever
the Archchancellor says, is heading through space in a quite different
direction. The key is _precision._ It’s no good using any old travelling
spell. It’d come apart halfway, and so would you. I’m pretty sure that
we’ll get you there in one or, at worst, two pieces. But we’ve no way of
knowing the weight of the thing we change you with. If it’s pretty much
the same weight as you, then it might just all work out provided you
don’t mind jogging on the spot when you land. But if it’s a _lot_
heavier than you, then my suspicion is that you’ll appear over there
travelling at the sort of speed normally only experienced by
sleepwalkers in clifftop villages in a very terminal way.

‘Er,’ he said. ‘Be afraid. Be very afraid.’

‘Oh, _that_,’ said Rincewind. ‘No problem there. I’m good at that.’

‘We’re going to try to put you in the centre of the continent, where
Hunghung is believed to be,’ said Ponder.

‘The capital city?’

‘Yes. Er.’ Ponder felt guilty. ‘Look, whatever happens I’m sure you’ll
get there alive, which is more than would happen if it’d just been left
to them. And I’m _pretty_ sure you’ll end up on the right continent.’

‘Oh, good.’

‘Come _along_, Mr Stibbons. We’re all agog to hear how you wish us to do
this,’ said Ridcully.

‘Ah, er, yes. Right. Now, you, Mr Rincewind, if you will go and stand in
the centre of the octagon . . . thank you. Um. You see, gentlemen, what
has always been the problem with teleporting over large distances is
Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle,¹³ since the object teleported,
that’s from _tele_, “I see”, and _porte_, “to go”, the whole meaning “I
see it’s gone”, er, the object teleported, er, no matter how large, is
reduced to a thaumic particle and is therefore the subject of an
eventually fatal dichotomy: it can either know what it is or where it is
going, but not both. Er, the tension this creates in the morphic field
eventually causes it to disintegrate, leaving the subject as a randomly
shaped object, er, smeared across up to eleven dimensions. But I’m sure
you all know this.’

There was a snore from the Chair of Indefinite Studies, who was suddenly
giving a lecture in room 3B.

Rincewind was grinning. At least, his mouth had gaped open and his teeth
were showing.

‘Er, excuse me,’ he said. ‘I don’t remember anyone saying anything about
being sm—’

‘Of course,’ said Ponder, ‘the subject would not, er, actually
experience this—’

‘Oh.’

‘—as far as we know—’

‘What?’

‘—although it is theoretically possible for the psyche to remain
present—’

‘Eh?’

‘—to briefly witness the explosive discorporation.’

‘Hey?’

‘Now, we’re all familiar with the use of the spell as a fulcrum, er, so
that one does not actually move _one_ object but simply exchanges the
position of two objects of similar mass. It is my aim tonight, er, to
demonstrate that by imparting exactly the right amount of spin and the
maximum velocity to the object—’

‘Me?’

‘—from the very first moment, it is virtually certain—’

‘Virtually?’

‘—to hold together for distances of up to, er, six thousand miles—’

‘Up to?’

‘—give or take ten per cent—’

‘Give or take?’

‘So if you’d – excuse me, Dean, I’d be obliged if you’d stop dripping
wax – if you’d all take up the positions I’ve marked on the floor . . .’

Rincewind looked longingly towards the door. It was no distance at all
for the experienced coward. He could just trot out of here and they
could . . . they could . . .

What could they do? They could just take his hat away and stop him ever
coming back to the University. Now he came to think about it, they
probably wouldn’t be bothered about the nailing bit if he was too much
bother to find.

And that was the problem. He wouldn’t be dead, but then neither would he
be a wizard. And, he thought, as the wizards shuffled into position and
screwed down the knobs on the end of their staffs, not being able to
think of himself as a wizard _was_ being dead.

The spell began.

Rincewind the shoemaker? Rincewind the beggar? Rincewind the thief? Just
about everything apart from Rincewind the corpse demanded training or
aptitudes that he didn’t have.

He was no good at anything else. Wizardry was the only refuge. Well,
actually he was no good at wizardry either, but at least he was
_definitively_ no good at it. He’d always felt he had a right to exist
as a wizard in the same way that you couldn’t do proper maths without
the number 0, which wasn’t a number at all but, if it went away, would
leave a lot of larger numbers looking bloody stupid. It was a vaguely
noble thought that had kept him warm during those occasional 3 a.m.
awakenings when he had evaluated his life and found it weighed a little
less than a puff of warm hydrogen. And he probably _had_ saved the world
a few times, but it had generally happened accidentally, while he was
trying to do something else. So you almost certainly didn’t actually get
any karmic points for that. It probably only counted if you started out
by thinking in a loud way ‘By criminy, it’s jolly well time to save the
world, and no two ways about it!’ instead of ‘Oh shit, this time I’m
_really_ going to die.’

The spell continued.

It didn’t seem to be going very well.

‘Come on, you chaps,’ said Ridcully. ‘Put some backbone into it!’

‘Are you sure . . . it’s . . . just something small?’ said the Dean,
who’d broken into a sweat.

‘Looks like a . . . wheelbarrow . . .’ muttered the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

The knob on the end of Ridcully’s staff began to smoke.

‘Will you look at the magic I’m using!’ he said. ‘What’s goin’ on, Mr
Stibbons?’

‘Er. Of course, size isn’t the same as mass . . .’

And then, in the same way that it can take considerable effort to push
at a sticking door and no effort at all to fall full length into the
room beyond, the spell caught.

Ponder hoped, afterwards, that what he saw was an optical illusion.
Certainly no one normally was suddenly stretched to about twelve feet
tall and then snapped back into shape so fast that their boots ended up
under their chin.

There was a brief cry of ‘Oooooohhhhshhhhhh—’ which ended abruptly, and
this was probably just as well.

The first thing that struck Rincewind when he appeared on the
Counterweight Continent was a cold sensation.

The next things, in order of the direction of travel, were: a surprised
man with a sword, another man with a sword, a third man who’d dropped
_his_ sword and was trying to run away, two other men who were less
alert and didn’t even see him, a small tree, about fifty yards of
stunted undergrowth, a snowdrift, a bigger snowdrift, a few rocks, and
one more and quite final snowdrift.

Ridcully looked at Ponder Stibbons.

‘Well, he’s gone,’ he said. ‘But aren’t we supposed to get something
back?’

‘I’m not sure the transit time is instantaneous,’ said Ponder.

‘You’ve got to allow for zooming-through-the-occult-dimensions time?’

‘Something like that. According to Hex, we might have to wait several—’

Something appeared in the octagon with a ‘pop’, exactly where Rincewind
had been, and rolled a few inches.

It did, at least, have four small wheels such as might carry a cart. But
these weren’t workmanlike wheels; these were mere discs such as may be
put on something heavy for those rare occasions it needs to be moved.

Above the wheels things became rather more interesting.

There was a large round cylinder, like a barrel on its side. A
considerable amount of effort had been put into its construction; large
amounts of brass had gone into making it look like a very large, fat dog
with its mouth open. A minor feature was a length of string, which was
smoking and hissing because it was on fire.

It didn’t do anything dangerous. It just sat there, while the
smouldering string slowly got shorter.

The wizards gathered round.

‘Looks pretty heavy,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘A statue of a dog with a big mouth,’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies. ‘That’s rather dull.’

‘Bit of a lap-dog, too,’ said Ridcully.

‘Lot of work gone into it,’ said the Dean. ‘Can’t imagine why anyone’d
want to set fire to it.’

Ridcully poked his head into the wide tube.

‘Some kind of big round ball in here,’ he said, his voice echoing a
little. ‘Someone pass me a staff or something. I’ll see if I can wiggle
it out.’

Ponder was staring at the fizzing string.

‘Er,’ he said, ‘I . . . er . . . think we should all just step away from
it, Archchancellor. Er. We should all just step back, yes, step back a
little way. Er.’

‘Hah, yes, really? So much for research,’ said Ridcully. ‘You don’t mind
messing around with cogwheels and ants but when it comes to really
trying to find out how things work and—’

‘Getting your hands dirty,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Yes, getting your hands dirty, you come over all shy.’

‘It’s not that, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘But I believe it may be
dangerous.’

‘I think I’m working it loose,’ said Ridcully, poking in the depths of
the tube. ‘Come on, you fellows, tip the thing up a bit . . .’

Ponder took a few more steps back. ‘Er, I really don’t think—’ he began.

‘Don’t think, eh? Call yourself a wizard and you don’t think? Blast!
I’ve got my staff wedged now! That’s what comes of listening to you when
I should have been paying attention, Mr Stibbons.’

Ponder heard a scuffling behind him. The Librarian, with an animal’s
instinct for danger and a human’s instinct for trouble, had upturned a
table and was peering over the top of it with a small cauldron on his
head, the handle under one of his chins like a strap.

‘Archchancellor, I really _do_ think—’

‘Oh, you think, do you? Did anyone tell you it’s your job to think? Ow!
It’s got my fingers now, thanks to you!’

It needed all Ponder’s courage to say, ‘I think . . . it might perhaps
be some kind of firework, sir.’

The wizards turned their attention to the fizzling string.

‘What . . . coloured lights, stars, that sort of thing?’ said Ridcully.

‘Possibly, sir.’

‘Must be planning a hell of a display. Apparently they’re very keen on
firecrackers, over in the Empire.’ Ridcully spoke in the tone of voice
of a man over whom the thought is slowly stealing that he just might
have done something very silly.

‘Would you like me to extinguish the string, sir?’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, dear boy, why not? Good idea. Good thinking, that man.’

Ponder stepped forward and pinched the string.

‘I do hope we haven’t ruined something,’ he said.

* * *

Rincewind opened his eyes.

This was _not_ cool sheets. It was white, and it was cold, but it lacked
basic sheetness. It made up for this by having vast amounts of
snowosity.

And a groove. A _long_ groove.

Let’s see now . . . He could remember the sensation of movement. And he
vaguely remembered something small but incredibly _heavy_-looking
roaring past in the opposite direction. And then he was here, moving so
fast that his feet left this . . .

. . . groove. Yes, groove, he thought, in the easygoing way of the
mildly concussed. With people lying around it groaning.

But they looked like people who, once they’d stopped crawling around
groaning, were going to draw the swords they had about their persons and
pay detailed attention to serious bits.

He stood up, a little shakily. There didn’t seem to be anywhere to run
to. There was just this wide, snowy waste with a border of mountains.

The soldiers were definitely looking a lot more conscious. Rincewind
sighed. A few hours ago he’d been sitting on a warm beach with young
women about to offer him potatoes,¹⁴ and here he was on a windswept,
chilly plain with some large men about to offer him violence.

The soles of his shoes, he noticed, were steaming.

And then someone said, ‘Hey! Are you . . . you’re not, are you . . . are
you . . . whatsyername . . . Rincewind, isn’t it?’

Rincewind turned.

There was a very old man behind him. Despite the bitter wind he was
wearing nothing except a leather loincloth and a grubby beard so long
that the loincloth wasn’t really necessary, at least from the point of
view of decency. His legs were blue from the cold and his nose was red
from the wind, giving him overall quite a patriotic look if you were
from the right country. He had a patch over one eye but rather more
notable than that were his teeth. They glittered.

‘Don’t stand there gawping like a big gawper! Get these damn things off
me!’

There were heavy shackles around his ankles and wrists; a chain led to a
group of more or less similarly clad men who were huddling in a crowd
and watching Rincewind in terror.

‘Heh! They think you’re some kind of demon,’ cackled the old man. ‘But I
knows a wizard when I sees one! That bastard over there’s got the keys.
Go and give him a good kicking.’

Rincewind took a few hesitant steps towards a recumbent guard and
snatched at his belt.

‘Right,’ said the old man, ‘now chuck ’em over here. And then get out of
the way.’

‘Why?’

‘ ’Cos you don’t want to get blood all over you.’

‘But you haven’t got a weapon and there’s one of you and they’ve got big
swords and there’s five of them!’

‘I know,’ said the old man, wrapping the chain around one of his fists
in a businesslike manner. ‘It’s unfair, but I can’t wait around all
day.’

He grinned.

Gems glittered in the morning light. Every tooth in the man’s head was a
diamond. And Rincewind knew of only one man who had the nerve to wear
troll teeth.

‘Here? Cohen the Barbarian?’

‘Ssh! Ingconitar! Now get out of the way, I said.’ The teeth flashed at
the guards, who were now vertical. ‘Come on, boys. There’s five of you,
after all. An’ I’m an old man. Mumble, mumble, oo me leg, ekcetra . . .’

To their credit, the guards hesitated. It was probably not, to judge
from their faces, because there’s something reprehensible about five
large, heavily beweaponed men attacking a frail old man. It might have
been because there’s something odd about a frail old man who keeps on
grinning in the face of obvious oblivion.

‘Oh, come _on_,’ said Cohen. The men edged closer, each waiting for one
of the others to make the first move.

Cohen took a few steps forward, waving his arms wearily. ‘Oh, _no_,’ he
said. ‘It makes me ashamed, honestly it does. This is _not_ how you
attack someone, all milling around like a lot of millers; when you
attack someone the important thing to remember is the element of . . .
_surprise_—’

Ten seconds later he turned to Rincewind.

‘All right, Mister Wizard. You can open your eyes now.’

One guard was upside down in a tree, one was a pair of feet sticking out
of a snowdrift, two were slumped against rocks, and one was . . .
generally around the place. Here and there. Certainly hanging out.

Cohen sucked his wrist thoughtfully.

‘I reckon that last one came within an inch of getting me,’ he said. ‘I
must be getting old.’

‘Why are you h—’ Rincewind paused. One packet of curiosity overtook the
first one. ‘How old _are_ you, exactly?’

‘Is this still the Century of the Fruitbat?’

‘Yes.’

‘Oh, I dunno. Ninety? Could be ninety. Maybe ninety-five?’ Cohen fished
the keys out of the snow and ambled over to the group of men, who were
cowering even more. He unlocked the first set of manacles and handed the
shocked prisoner the keys.

‘Bugger off, the lot of you,’ he said, not unkindly. ‘And don’t get
caught again.’

He strolled back to Rincewind.

‘What brings you into this dump, then?’

‘Well—’

‘Interestin’,’ said Cohen, and that was that. ‘But can’t stay chatting
all day, got work to do. You coming, or what?’

‘What?’

‘Please yourself,’ Cohen tied the chain around his waist as a makeshift
belt and wedged a couple of swords in it.

‘Incidentally,’ he said, ‘what did you do with the Barking Dog?’

‘What dog?’

‘I expect it doesn’t matter.’

Rincewind scuttled after the retreating figure. It wasn’t that he felt
safe when Cohen the Barbarian was around. _No one_ was safe when Cohen
the Barbarian was around. Something seemed to have gone wrong with the
ageing process there. Cohen had always been a barbarian hero because
barbaric heroing was all he knew how to do. And while he got old he
seemed to get harder, like oak.

But he was a known figure, and therefore comforting. He just wasn’t in
the right place.

‘No future in it, back around the Ramtops,’ said Cohen, as they trudged
through the snow. ‘Fences and farms, fences and farms _everywhere._ You
kill a dragon these days, people _complain._ You know what? You know
what happened?’

‘No. What happened?’

‘Man came up to me, said my teeth were offensive to trolls. What about
that, eh?’

‘Well, they _are_ made of—’

‘I said they never complained to _me_.’

‘Er, did you ever give them a cha—’

‘I said, I see a troll up in the mountains with a necklace o’ human
skulls, I say good luck to him. Silicon Anti-Defamation League, my
bottom. It’s the same all over. So I thought I’d try my luck the other
side of the icecap.’

‘Isn’t it dangerous, going around the Hub?’ said Rincewind.

‘Used to be,’ said Cohen, grinning horribly.

‘Until you left, you mean?’

‘ ’S right. You still got that box on legs?’

‘On and off. It hangs around. You know.’

Cohen chuckled.

‘I’ll get the bloody lid off that thing one day, mark my words. Ah.
Horses.’

There were five, looking depressed in a small depression.

Rincewind looked back at the freed prisoners, who seemed to be milling
around aimlessly.

‘We’re not taking all five horses, are we?’ he said.

‘Sure. We might need ’em.’

‘But . . . one for me, one for you . . . What’s the rest for?’

‘Lunch, dinner and breakfast?’

‘It’s a little . . . unfair, isn’t it? Those people look a bit . . .
bewildered.’

Cohen sneered the sneer of a man who has never been truly imprisoned
even when he’s been locked up.

‘I freed ’em,’ he said. ‘First time they’ve ever been free. Comes as a
bit of a shock, I expect. They’re waiting for someone to tell ’em what
to do next.’

‘Er . . .’

‘I could tell ’em to starve to death, if you like.’

‘Er . . .’

‘Oh, all _right._ You lot! Formee uppee right now toot sweet chop chop!’

The small crowd hurried over to Cohen and stood expectantly behind his
horse.

‘I tell you, I don’t regret it. This is the land of opportunity,’ said
Cohen, urging the horse into a trot. The embarrassed free men jogged
behind. ‘Know what? Swords are banned. No one except the army, the
nobles and the Imperial Guard are allowed to own weapons. Couldn’t
believe it! Gods’ own truth, though. Swords are outlawed, so only
outlaws have swords. And _that_,’ said Cohen, giving the landscape
another glittering grin, ‘suits me fine.’

‘But . . . you were in chains . . .’ Rincewind ventured.

‘Glad you reminded me,’ said Cohen. ‘Yeah. We’ll find the rest of the
lads, then I’d better try and find who did it and talk to them about
that.’

The tone of his voice suggested very clearly that all they were likely
to say would be, ‘Highly enjoyable! Your wife is a big hippo!’

‘Lads?’

‘No future in one-man barbarianing,’ said Cohen. ‘Got myself a . . .
Well, you’ll see.’

Rincewind turned to look at the trailing party, and at the snow, and at
Cohen.

‘Er. Do you know where Hunghung is?’

‘Yeah. It’s the boss city. We’re on our way. Sort of. It’s under siege
right now.’

‘Siege? You mean like . . . lots of armies outside, everyone inside
eating rats, that sort of thing?’

‘Yeah, but this is the Counterweight Continent, see, so it’s a polite
siege. Well, I call it a siege . . . The old Emperor’s dying, so the big
families are all waiting to move in. That’s how it goes in these parts.
There’s five different top nobs and they’re all watching one another,
and no one’s going to be the first to move. You’ve got to think sideways
to understand anything in this place.’

‘Cohen?’

‘Yes, lad?’

‘What the hell’s going on?’

* * *

Lord Hong was watching the tea ceremony. It took three hours, but you
couldn’t hurry a good cuppa.

He was also playing chess, against himself. It was the only way he could
find an opponent of his calibre but, currently, things were stalemated
because both sides were adopting a defensive strategy which was,
admittedly, brilliant.

Lord Hong sometimes wished he could have an enemy as clever as himself.
Or, because Lord Hong was indeed very clever, he sometimes wished for an
enemy _almost_ as clever as himself, one perhaps given to flights of
strategic genius with nevertheless the occasional fatal flaw. As it was,
people were so _stupid._ They seldom thought more than a dozen moves
ahead.

Assassination was meat and drink to the Hunghung court; in fact, meat
and drink were often the means. It was a game that everyone played. It
was just another kind of move. It was not considered good manners to
assassinate the Emperor, of course. The correct move was to put the
Emperor in a position where you had control. But moves at this level
were very dangerous; happy as the warlords were to squabble amongst
themselves, they could be relied upon to unite against any who looked in
danger of rising above the herd. And Lord Hong had risen like bread, by
making everyone else believe that, while _they_ were the obvious
candidate for the Emperorship, Lord Hong would be better than any of the
alternatives.

It amused him to know that they thought he was plotting for the Imperial
pearl . . .

He glanced up from the board and caught the eye of the young woman who
was busy at the tea table. She blushed and looked away.

The door slid back. One of his men entered, on his knees.

‘Yes?’ said Lord Hong.

‘Er . . . O lord . . .’

Lord Hong sighed. People seldom began like this when the news was good.

‘What happened?’ he said.

‘The one they call the Great Wizard arrived, o lord. Up in the
mountains. Riding on a dragon of wind. Or so they say,’ the messenger
added quickly, aware of Lord Hong’s views about superstition.

‘Good. But? I assume there is a but.’

‘Er . . . one of the Barking Dogs has been lost. The new batch? That you
commanded should be tested? We don’t quite . . . that is to say . . . we
think Captain Three High Trees was ambushed, perhaps . . . our
information is somewhat confused . . . the, um, the informant says the
Great Wizard magicked it away . . .’ The messenger crouched lower.

Lord Hong merely sighed again. Magic. It had fallen out of favour in the
Empire, except for the most mundane purposes. It was _uncultured._ It
put power in the hands of people who couldn’t write a decent poem to
save their lives, and sometimes hadn’t.

He believed in coincidence a lot more than he did in magic.

‘This is most vexing,’ said Lord Hong.

He stood up and took his sword off the rack. It was long and curved and
had been made by the finest sword-maker in the Empire, who was Lord
Hong. He’d heard it took twenty years to learn the art, so he had
stretched himself a little. It had taken him three weeks. People never
_concentrated,_ that was their trouble . . .

The messenger grovelled.

‘The officer concerned has been executed?’ he said.

The messenger tried to scrabble through the floor and decided to let
truth stand in for honesty.

‘Yes!’ he piped.

Lord Hong swung. There was a hiss like the fall of silk, a thump and
clatter as of a coconut hitting the ground, and the tinkle of crockery.

The messenger opened his eyes. He concentrated on his neck region,
fearful that the slightest movement might leave him a good deal shorter.
There were dire stories about Lord Hong’s swords.

‘Oh, do get up,’ said Lord Hong. He wiped the blade carefully and
replaced the sword. Then he reached across and pulled a small black
bottle from the robe of the tea girl.

Uncorked, it produced a few drops that hissed when they hit the floor.

‘Really,’ said Lord Hong. ‘I wonder why people bother.’ He looked up.
‘Lord Tang or Lord McSweeney has probably stolen the Dog to vex me. Did
the Wizard escape?’

‘So it seems, o lord.’

‘Good. See that harm almost comes to him. And send me another tea girl.
One with a head.’

There was this to be said about Cohen. If there was no reason for him to
kill you, such as you having any large amount of treasure or being
between him and somewhere he wanted to get to, then he was good company.
Rincewind had met him a few times before, generally while running away
from something.

Cohen didn’t bother overmuch with questions. As far as Cohen was
concerned, people appeared, people disappeared. After a five-year gap
he’d just say, ‘Oh, it’s you.’ He never added, ‘And how are you?’ You
were alive, you were upright, and beyond that he didn’t give a damn.

It was a lot warmer beyond the mountains. To Rincewind’s relief a spare
horse didn’t have to be eaten because a leopardly sort of creature
dropped off a tree branch and tried to disembowel Cohen.

It had a rather strong flavour.

Rincewind _had_ eaten horse. Over the years he’d nerved himself to eat
anything that couldn’t actually wriggle off his fork. But he was feeling
shaken enough without eating something you could call Dobbin.

‘How did they catch you?’ he said, when they were riding again.

‘I was busy.’

‘Cohen the Barbarian? Too busy to _fight_?’

‘I didn’t want to upset the young lady. Couldn’t help meself. Went down
to a village to pick up some news, one thing led to another, next thing
a load of soldiers were all over the place like cheap armour, and I
can’t fight that well with my arms shackled behind my back. Real nasty
bugger in charge, face I won’t forget in a hurry. Half a dozen of us
were rounded up, made to push the Barking Dog thing all the way out
here, then we were chained to that tree and someone lit the bit of
string and they all legged it behind a snowdrift. Except you came along
and vanished it.’

‘I didn’t vanish it. Not exactly, anyway.’

Cohen leaned across towards Rincewind. ‘I reckon I know what it was,’ he
said, and sat back looking pleased with himself.

‘Yes?’

‘I reckon it was some kind of firework. They’re very big on fireworks
here.’

‘You mean the sort of things where you light the blue touch paper and
stick it up your nose?’¹⁵

‘They use ’em to drive evil spirits away. There’s a lot of evil spirits,
see. Because of all the slaughtering.’

‘Slaughtering?’

Rincewind had always understood that the Agatean Empire was a peaceful
place. It was civilized. They _invented_ things. In fact, he recalled,
he’d been instrumental in introducing a few of their devices to
Ankh-Morpork. Simple, innocent things, like clocks worked by demons, and
boxes that painted pictures, and extra glass eyes you could wear over
the top of your own eyes to help you see better, even if it did mean you
made a spectacle of yourself.

It was supposed to be _dull_.

‘Oh, yeah. Slaughtering,’ said Cohen. ‘Like, supposing the population is
being a bit behind with its taxes. You pick some city where people are
being troublesome and kill everyone and set fire to it and pull down the
walls and plough up the ashes. That way you get rid of the trouble and
all the other cities are suddenly really well behaved and polite and all
your back taxes turn up in a big rush, which is handy for governments, I
understand. Then if they ever give trouble you just have to say
“Remember Nangnang?” or whatever, and they say “Where’s Nangnang?” and
you say, “My point exactly.”’

‘Good grief! If that sort of thing was tried back home—’

‘Ah, but this place has been going a long time. People think that’s how
a country is supposed to run. They do what they’re told. The people here
are treated like slaves.’

Cohen scowled. ‘Now, I’ve got nothing against slaves, you know, as
slaves. Owned a few in my time. _Been_ a slave once or twice. But where
there’s slaves, what’ll you expect to find?’

Rincewind thought about this. ‘Whips?’ he said at last.

‘Yeah. Got it in one. Whips. There’s something _honest_ about slaves and
whips. Well . . . they ain’t got whips here. They got something worse
than whips.’

‘What?’ said Rincewind, looking slightly panicky.

‘You’ll find out.’

Rincewind found himself looking around at the half-dozen other
prisoners, who had trailed after them and were watching in awe from a
distance. He’d given them a bit of leopard, which they’d looked at
initially as if it was poison and then eaten as if it was food.

‘They’re still following us,’ he said.

‘Yeah, well . . . you did give ’em meat,’ cackled Cohen, starting to
roll a post-prandial cigarette. ‘Shouldn’t have done that. Should’ve let
’em have the whiskers and the claws and you’d’ve been _amazed_ at what
they’d cook up. You know their big dish down on the coast?’

‘No.’

‘Pig’s ear soup. Now, what’s that tell you about a place, eh?’

Rincewind shrugged. ‘Very provident people?’

‘Some other bugger pinches the pig.’

He turned in the saddle. The group of ex-prisoners shrank back.

‘Now, see here,’ he said. ‘I _told_ you. You’re free. Understand?’

One of the braver men spoke up. ‘Yes, master.’

‘I ain’t your master. You’re _free._ You can go wherever you like,
excepting if you follow me I’ll kill the lot of you. And now – go away!’

‘Where, master?’

‘Anywhere! Somewhere not here!’

The men gave one another some worried looks and then the whole group, as
one man, turned and trotted away along the path.

‘Probably go straight back to their village,’ he said, rolling his eyes.
‘Worse than whips, I tell you.’

He waved a scrawny hand at the landscape as they rode on.

‘Strange bloody country,’ he said. ‘Did you know there’s a wall all
round the Empire?’

‘That’s to keep . . . barbarian invaders . . . out . . .’

‘Oh, yes, very defensive,’ said Cohen sarcastically. ‘Like, oh my
goodness, there’s a twenty-foot wall, dear me, I suppose we’d just
better ride off back over a thousand miles of steppe and not, e.g., take
a look at the ladder possibilities inherent in that pine wood over
there. Nah. It’s to keep the people in. And rules? They’ve got rules for
everything. No one even goes to the privy without a piece of paper.’

‘Well, as a matter of fact I myself—’

‘A piece of paper saying they can go, is what I meant. Can’t leave your
village without a chit. Can’t get married without a chit. Can’t even
have a sh – Ah, we’re here.’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Rincewind.

Cohen glared at him. ‘How did you know?’ he demanded.

Rincewind tried to think. It had been a long day. In fact it had,
because of the thaumic equivalent of jetlag, been several hours longer
than most other days he’d experienced and had contained two lunchtimes,
neither of which had contained anything worth eating.

‘Er . . . I thought you were making a general philosophical point,’ he
hazarded. ‘Er. Like, “We’d better make the best of it”?’

‘I meant we’re here at my hideout,’ said Cohen. Rincewind stared around
them. There were scrubby bushes, a few rocks, and a sheer cliff face.

‘I can’t see anything,’ he said.

‘Yep. That’s how you can tell it’s mine.’

The Art of War was the ultimate basis of diplomacy in the Empire.

Clearly war had to exist. It was a cornerstone of the processes of
government. It was the way the Empire got its leaders. The competitive
examination system was how it got its bureaucrats and public officials,
and warfare was for its leaders, perhaps, only a different kind of
competitive examination. Admittedly, if you lost you probably weren’t
allowed to re-sit next year.

But there had to be rules. Otherwise it was just a barbaric scuffle.

So, hundreds of years ago, the Art of War had been formulated. It was a
book of rules. Some were very specific: there was to be no fighting
within the Forbidden City, the person of the Emperor was sacrosanct . .
. and some were more general guidelines for the good and civilized
conduct of warfare. There were the rules of position, of tactics, of the
enforcement of discipline, of the correct organization of supply lines.
The Art laid down the optimum course to take in every conceivable
eventuality. It meant that warfare in the Empire had become far more
_sensible,_ and generally consisted of short periods of activity
followed by long periods of people trying to find things in the index.

No one remembered the author. Some said it was One Tzu Sung, some
claimed it was Three Sun Sung. Possibly it was even some unsung genius
who had penned, or rather painted, the very first principle: Know the
enemy, and know yourself.

Lord Hong felt that he knew himself very well, and seldom had trouble
knowing his enemies. And he made a point of keeping his enemies alive
and healthy.

Take the Lords Sung, Fang, Tang and McSweeney. He cherished them. He
cherished their _adequacy._ They had adequate military brains, which was
to say that they had memorized the Five Rules and Nine Principles of the
Art of War. They wrote adequate poetry, and were cunning enough to
counter such coups as were attempted in their own ranks. They
occasionally sent against him assassins who were sufficiently competent
to keep Lord Hong interested and observant and entertained.

He even admired their adequate treachery. No one could fail to realize
that Lord Hong would be the next Emperor, but when it came to it they
would nevertheless contest the throne. At least, officially. In fact,
each warlord had privately pledged his personal support to Lord Hong,
being adequately bright to know what was likely to happen if he didn’t.
There would still have to be a battle, of course, for custom’s sake. But
Lord Hong had a place in his heart for any leader who would sell his own
men.

Know your enemy. Lord Hong had decided to find a worthwhile one. So Lord
Hong had seen to it that he got books and news from Ankh-Morpork. There
were ways. He had his spies. At the moment Ankh-Morpork didn’t know it
was the enemy, and that was the best kind of enemy to have.

And he had been amazed, and then intrigued, and finally lost in
admiration for what he saw . . .

I should have been born there, he thought as he watched the other
members of the Serene Council. Oh, for a game of chess with someone like
Lord Vetinari. No doubt he would carefully watch the board for three
hours before he even made his first move . . .

Lord Hong turned to the Serene Council’s minutes eunuch.

‘Can we get on?’ he said.

The man licked his brush nervously. ‘Nearly finished, o lord,’ he said.

Lord Hong sighed.

Damn calligraphy! There would be changes! A written language of seven
thousand letters and it took all day to write a thirteen-syllable poem
about a white pony trotting through wild hyacinths. And that was fine
and beautiful, he had to concede, and no one did it better than Lord
Hong. But Ankh-Morpork had an alphabet of twenty-six unexpressive, ugly,
crude letters, suitable only for peasants and artisans . . . and had
produced poems and plays that left white-hot trails across the soul. And
you could also use it to write the bloody minutes of a five-minute
meeting in less than a day.

‘How far have you got?’ he said.

The eunuch coughed politely.

‘“How softly the bloom of the apric—”’ he began.

‘Yes, yes, yes,’ said Lord Hong. ‘Could we on this occasion dispense
with the poetic framework, please.’

‘Uh. “The minutes of the last meeting were duly signed.”’

‘Is that all?’

‘Uh . . . you see, I have to finish painting the petals on—’

‘I wish this council to be concluded by this evening. Go away.’

The eunuch looked anxiously around the table, grabbed his scrolls and
brushes and scuttled out.

‘Good,’ said Lord Hong. He nodded at the other warlords. He saved a
special friendly nod for Lord Tang. Lord Hong had prodded the thought
with some intrigued interest, but it really did seem that Lord Tang was
a man of honour. It was a rather cowed and crabbed honour, but it was
definitely in there somewhere, and would have to be dealt with.

‘It would be better in any case, my lords, if we spoke in private,’ he
said. ‘On the matter of the rebels. Disturbing intelligence has reached
me of their activities.’

Lord McSweeney nodded. ‘I have seen to it that thirty rebels in Sum Dim
have been executed,’ he said. ‘As an example.’

As an example of the mindlessness of Lord McSweeney, thought Lord Hong.
To his certain knowledge, and none had better knowledge than he, there
had not even been a cadre of the Red Army in Sum Dim. But, almost
certainly, there was one now. It was really too easy.

The other warlords also made small but proud speeches about their
efforts to turn barely noticeable unrest into bloody revolution,
although they hadn’t managed to see it like that.

They were nervous, under the bravado, like sheep-dogs who’d had a
glimpse of a world where the sheep did not run.

Lord Hong cherished the nervousness. He intended to use it, by and by.
He smiled and smiled.

Finally he said: ‘However, my lords, despite your sterling efforts the
situation remains grave. I have information that a very senior wizard
from Ankh-Morpork has arrived to assist the rebels here in Hunghung, and
that there is a plot to overthrow the good organization of the celestial
world and assassinate the Emperor, may he live for ten thousand years. I
must naturally assume that the foreign devils are behind this.’

‘I know nothing of this!’ snapped Lord Tang.

‘My dear Lord Tang. I was not suggesting that you should,’ said Lord
Hong.

‘I meant—’ Lord Tang began.

‘Your devotion to the Emperor is unquestioned,’ Lord Hong continued, as
smoothly as a knife through warm butter. ‘It is true that there is
almost certainly someone highly placed assisting these people, but not
one shred of evidence points to you.’

‘I should hope not!’

‘Indeed.’

The Lords Fang and McSweeney moved very slightly away from Lord Tang.

‘How can we have let this happen?’ said Lord Fang. ‘Certainly it is true
that people, foolish deranged people, have sometimes ventured out beyond
the Wall. But to let one come _back_—’

‘I am afraid the Grand Vizier at the time was a man of changeable
humours,’ said Lord Hong. ‘He thought it would be interesting to see
what intelligence was brought back.’

‘Intelligence?’ said Lord Fang. ‘This city of Ank . . . More . . . Pork
is an abomination! Mere anarchy! There appear to be no nobles of
consequence and the society is that of a termite nest! It would be
better for us, my lords, if it was wiped from the face of the world!’

‘Your incisive comments are duly noted, Lord Fang,’ said Lord Hong,
while part of him rolled on the floor laughing. ‘In any event,’ he went
on, ‘I shall see that extra guards are posted in the Emperor’s chambers.
However all this trouble began, we must see that it ends here.’

He watched them watching him. They think I want to rule the Empire, he
thought. So they’re all – except for Lord Tang, rebel fellow traveller
as he will undoubtedly prove to be – working out how this will be to
their advantage . . .

He dismissed them, and retired to his chambers.

It was a fact that the ghosts and devils who lived beyond the Wall had
no grasp of culture and certainly no concept of books, and being in
possession of such a patently impossible object was punishable by
eventual death. And confiscation.

Lord Hong had built up quite a library. He had even acquired maps.

And more than maps. There was a box he kept locked, in the room with the
full-length mirror . . .

Not now. Later on . . .

Ankh-Morpork! Even the name sounded rich.

All he needed was a year. The dreadful scourge of the rebellion would
allow him to wield the kind of powers that even the maddest Emperor had
not dreamed of. And then it would be unthinkable not to build a vengeful
fleet to wreak terror on the foreign devils. Thank you, Lord Fang. Your
point is duly noted.

As if it mattered who was Emperor! The Empire was possibly a bonus, to
be acquired later, perhaps, in passing. Let him just have Ankh-Morpork,
with its busy dwarfs and its grasp, above all, of machinery. Look at the
Barking Dogs. Half the time they blew up. They were inaccurate. The
principle was sound but the execution was terrible, especially when they
blew up.

It had come as a revelation to Lord Hong when he looked at the problem
the Ankh-Morpork way and realized that it might just possibly be better
to give the job of Auspicious Dog-maker to some peasant with a fair idea
about metal and explosive earths than to some clerk who’d got the
highest marks in an examination to find the best poem about iron. In
Ankh-Morpork people _did_ things.

Let him just walk down Broadway as owner, and eat the pies of the famous
Mr Dibbler. Let him play one game of chess against Lord Vetinari. Of
course, it would mean leaving the man one arm.

He was shaking with excitement. Not later . . . now. His fingers reached
for the secret key on its chain around his neck.

It was barely a track. Rabbits would have walked right past it. And
you’d have sworn there was a sheer, passless rock wall until you found
the gap.

Once you _did_ find it, it was hardly worth the bother. It led to a long
gully with a few natural caves in it, and a bit of grass, and a spring.

And, as it turned out, Cohen’s gang. Except that he called it a horde.
They were sitting in the sun, complaining about how it wasn’t as warm as
it used to be.

‘I’m back then, lads,’ said Cohen.

‘Been away, have you?’

‘Whut? Whut’s he say?’

‘He said HE’S BACK.’

‘Black what?’

Cohen beamed at Rincewind. ‘I brought ’em with me,’ he said: ‘Like I
said, no future in going it alone these days.’

‘Er,’ said Rincewind, after surveying the little scene, ‘are any of
these men under eighty years old?’

‘Stand up, Boy Willie,’ said Cohen.

A dehydrated man only marginally less wrinkled than the others got to
his feet. It was his feet that were particularly noticeable. He wore
boots with extremely thick soles.

‘So’s me feet touch the ground,’ he said.

‘Don’t they . . . er . . . touch the ground in ordinary boots?’

‘Nope. Orthopaedic problem, see. Like . . . you know how a lot of
people’ve got one leg shorter than the other? Funny thing, with me
it’s—’

‘Don’t tell me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Sometimes I get these amazing flashes
. . . _Both_ legs are shorter than the other, right?’

‘Amazing. O’ course, I can see you’re a wizard,’ said Boy Willie. ‘You’d
know about this sort of thing.’

Rincewind gave the next member of the Horde a bright mad smile. It was
almost certainly a human being, because wizened little monkeys didn’t
usually go around in a wheelchair while wearing a helmet with horns on
it. It grimaced at Rincewind.

‘This is—’

‘Whut? Whut?’

‘Mad Hamish,’ said Cohen.

‘Whut? Whozee?’

‘I bet that wheelchair _terrifies_ them,’ said Rincewind. ‘Especially
the blades.’

‘We had the devil of a job getting it over the wall,’ Cohen conceded.
‘But you’d be amazed at his turn of speed.’

‘Whut?’

‘And this is Truckle the Uncivil.’

‘Sod off, wizard.’

Rincewind beamed at Exhibit B. ‘Those walking sticks . . . Fascinating!
Very impressive the way you’ve got LOVE and HATE written on them.’

Cohen smiled proprietorially.

‘Truckle used to be reckoned one of the biggest badasses in the world,’
he said.

‘Really? Him?’

‘But it’s amazing what you can do with a herbal suppository.’

‘Up yours, mister,’ said Truckle.

Rincewind blinked. ‘Er. Can I have a word, Cohen?’

He drew the ancient barbarian aside.

‘I don’t want to seem to be making trouble here,’ he said, ‘but it
doesn’t strike you, does it, that these men are a bit, well, past their
sell-by date? A little, not to put too fine a point on it, old?’

‘Whut? Whutzeesayin’?’

‘He says IT’S COLD.’

‘Whut?’

‘What’re you saying? There’s nearly five hundred years of concentrated
barbarian hero experience in ’em,’ said Cohen.

‘Five hundred years’ experience in a fighting unit is good,’ said
Rincewind. ‘It’s _good_. But it should be spread over more than one
person. I mean, what are you expecting them to do? Fall over on people?’

‘Nothin’ wrong with ’em,’ said Cohen, indicating a frail man who was
staring intently at a large block of teak. ‘Look at ole Caleb the Ripper
over there. See? Killed more’n four hundred men with his bare hands.
Eighty-five now and but for the dust he’s marvellous.’

‘What the hell is he _doing_?’

‘Ah, see, they’re into bare-handed combat here. Very big thing, unarmed
combat, on account of most people not being allowed weapons. So Caleb
reckons he’s on to a good thing. See that big lump of teak? It’s
amazin’. He just gives this bloodcurdlin’ shout and—’

‘Cohen, they’re all _very old men_.’

‘They’re the cream!’

Rincewind sighed.

‘Cohen, they’re the cheese. Why’ve you brought them all the way here?’

‘Gonna help me steal something,’ said Cohen.

‘What? A jewel or something?’

‘’S something,’ said Cohen, sulkily. ‘’S in Hunghung.’

‘Really? My word,’ said Rincewind. ‘And there’s a lot of people in
Hunghung, I expect?’

‘About half a million,’ said Cohen.

‘Lots of guards, no doubt?’

‘About forty thousand, I heard. About three-quarters of a million if you
count all the armies.’

‘Right,’ said Rincewind. ‘So, with these half-dozen old men—’

‘The Silver Horde,’ said Cohen, with a touch of pride.

‘What? Pardon?’

‘That’s their name. Got to have a name in the horde business. The Silver
Horde.’

Rincewind turned around. Several of the Horde had fallen asleep.

‘The Silver Horde,’ he said. ‘Right. Matches the colour of their hair.
Those that have _got_ hair. So . . . with this . . . Silver Horde you’re
going to rush the city, kill all the guards and steal all the treasure?’

Cohen nodded. ‘Yeah . . . something like that. Of course, we won’t have
to kill _all_ the guards . . .’

‘Oh, no?’

‘It’d take too long.’

‘Yes, and of course you’ll want to leave something to do tomorrow.’

‘I mean they’ll be busy, what with the revolution and everything.’

‘A revolution too? My word.’

‘They say it’s a time of portents,’ said Cohen. ‘They—’

‘I’m surprised they’ve got time to worry about the state of their
camping equipment,’ said Rincewind.

‘You’d be well advised to stay along o’ us,’ said Ghenghiz Cohen.
‘You’ll be safer with us.’

‘Oh, I’m not sure about that,’ said Rincewind, grinning horribly. ‘I’m
not sure about that at all.’

By myself, he thought, only _ordinary_ horrible things can happen to me.

Cohen shrugged, and then stared around the clearing until his gaze
lighted on a slight figure who was sitting a little apart from the rest,
reading a book.

‘Look at him,’ he said, benevolently, like a man pointing out a dog
doing a good trick. ‘Always got his nose in a book.’ He raised his
voice. ‘Teach? Come and show this wizard the way to Hunghung.’

He turned back to Rincewind. ‘Teach’ll tell you anything you want to
know, ’cos he knows everything. I’ll leave you with him. I’ve got to go
and have a talk with Old Vincent.’ He waved a hand dismissively. ‘Not
that there’s anything wrong with him, at all,’ he said defiantly. ‘It’s
just that his memory’s bad. We had a bit of trouble on the way over. I
keep telling him, it’s rape the _women_ and set fire to the _houses_.’

‘Rape?’ said Rincewind. ‘That’s not very—’

‘He’s eighty-seven,’ said Cohen. ‘Don’t go and spoil an old man’s
dreams.’

Teach turned out to be a tall, stick-like man with an amiably
absent-minded expression and a fringe of white hair so that, when viewed
from above, he would appear to be a daisy. He certainly did not appear
to be a bloodthirsty brigand, even though he was wearing a chain-mail
vest slightly too big for him and a huge scabbard strapped across his
back, which contained no sword but held a variety of scrolls and
brushes. His chain-mail shirt had a breast pocket with three different
coloured pens in a leather pocket protector.

‘Ronald Saveloy,’ he said, shaking Rincewind’s hand. ‘The gentlemen do
rather assume considerable knowledge on my part. Let me see . . . You
want to go to Hunghung, yes?’

Rincewind had been thinking about this.

‘I want to know the _way_ to Hunghung,’ he said guardedly.

‘Yes. Well. At this time of year I’d head towards the setting sun until
I left the mountains and reached the alluvial plain where you’ll see
evidence of drumlins and some quite fine examples of obviously erratic
boulders. It’s about ten miles.’

Rincewind stared at him. A brigand’s directions were usually more on the
lines of ‘keep straight on past the burning city and turn right when
you’ve passed all the citizens hanging up by their ears’.

‘Those drumlins sound dangerous,’ he said.

‘They’re just a type of post-glacial hill,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘What about these erratic boulders? They sound like the kind of thing
that’d pounce on—’

‘Just boulders dropped a long way from home by a glacier,’ said Mr
Saveloy. ‘Nothing to worry about. The landscape is not hostile.’

Rincewind didn’t believe him. He’d had the ground hit him very hard many
times.

‘However,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘Hunghung is a little dangerous at the
moment.’

‘No, really?’ said Rincewind wearily.

‘It’s not _exactly_ a siege. Everyone’s waiting for the Emperor to die.
These are what they call here’ – he smiled – ‘interesting times.’

‘I _hate_ interesting times.’

The other Horders had wandered off, fallen asleep again or were
complaining to one another about their feet. The voice of Cohen could be
heard somewhere in the distance: ‘Look, _this_ is a match, and _this_
is—’

‘You know, you sound a very educated man for a barbarian,’ said
Rincewind.

‘Oh, dear me, I didn’t start out a barbarian. I used to be a school
teacher. That’s why they call me Teach.’

‘What did you teach?’

‘Geography. And I was very interested in Auriental¹⁶ studies. But I
decided to give it up and make a living by the sword.’

‘After being a teacher all your life?’

‘It did mean a change of perspective, yes.’

‘But . . . well . . . surely . . . the privation, the terrible hazards,
the daily risk of death . . . ’

Mr Saveloy brightened up. ‘Oh, you’ve _been_ a teacher, have you?’

Rincewind looked around when someone shouted. He turned, to see two of
the Horde arguing nose to nose.

Mr Saveloy sighed.

‘I’m trying to teach them chess,’ he said. ‘It’s vital to the
understanding of the Auriental mind. But I am afraid they have no
concept of taking turns at moving, and their idea of an opening gambit
is for the King and all the pawns to rush up the board together and set
fire to the opposing rooks.’

Rincewind leaned closer.

‘Look, I mean . . . _Ghenghiz_ Cohen?’ he said. ‘Has he gone off his
head? I mean . . . just killing half a dozen geriatric priests and
nicking some paste gems, _yes._ Attacking forty thousand guards all by
himself is certain death!’

‘Oh, he won’t be by himself,’ said Mr Saveloy.

Rincewind blinked. There was something about Cohen. People caught
optimism off him as though it was the common cold.

‘Oh, yes. Of course. Sorry. I’d forgotten that. Seven against forty
thousand? I shouldn’t think you’ll have any problems. I’ll just be
going. Fairly quickly, I think.’

‘We have a plan. It’s a sort of—’ Mr Saveloy hesitated. His eyes
unfocused slightly. ‘You know? Thing. Bees do it. Wasps, too. Also some
jellyfish, I believe . . . Had the word only a moment ago . . . er. It’s
going to be the biggest one ever, I think.’

Rincewind gave him another blank stare. ‘I’m sure I saw a spare horse,’
he said.

‘Let me give you this,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Then perhaps you’ll
understand. It’s what it’s all about, really . . .’

He handed Rincewind a small bundle of papers fastened together by a loop
of string through one corner.

Rincewind, shoving it hastily into his pocket, noticed only the title on
the first page.

It said:

WHAT I DID ON MY HOLIDAYS

The choices seemed very clear to Rincewind. There was the city of
Hunghung, under siege, apparently throbbing with revolution and danger,
and there was everywhere else.

Therefore it was important to know where Hunghung was so that he didn’t
blunder into it by accident. He paid a lot of attention to Mr Saveloy’s
instructions, and then rode the other way.

He could get a ship somewhere. Of course, the wizards would be surprised
to see him back, but he could always say there’d been no one in.

The hills gave way to scrubland which in turn led down to an apparently
endless damp plain which contained, in the misty distance, a river so
winding that half the time it must have been flowing backwards.

The land was a chequerboard of cultivation. Rincewind liked the
countryside in theory, providing it wasn’t rising up to meet him and was
for preference happening on the far side of a city wall, but this was
hardly countryside. It was more like one big, hedgeless farm. Occasional
huge rocks, looking dangerously erratic, rose out of the fields.

Sometimes he’d see people hard at work in the distance. As far as he
could tell, their chief activity was moving mud around.

Occasionally he’d see a man standing ankle deep in a flooded field
holding a water buffalo on the end of a length of string. The buffalo
grazed and occasionally moved its bowels. The man held the string. It
seemed to be his entire goal and occupation in life.

There were a few other people on the road. Usually they were pushing
wheelbarrows loaded with water buffalo dung or, possibly, mud. They
didn’t pay any attention to Rincewind. In fact they made a _point_ of
not paying attention; they scurried past staring intently at the scenes
of mud dynamics or bovine bowel movement happening in the fields.

Rincewind would be the first to admit that he was a slow thinker.¹⁷ But
he’d been around long enough to spot the signs. These people weren’t
paying him any attention because they didn’t _see_ people on horseback.

They were probably descended from people who learned that if you look
too hard at anyone on horseback you receive a sharp stinging sensation
such as might be obtained by a stick around the ear. Not looking up at
people on horseback had become hereditary. People who stared at people
on horseback in what was considered to be a funny way never survived
long enough to breed.

He decided to try an experiment. The next wheelbarrow that trundled past
was carrying not mud but people, about half a dozen of them, on seats
either side of the huge central wheel. The method of propulsion was
secondarily by a small sail erected to catch the wind but primarily by
that pre-eminent source of motive power in a peasant community,
someone’s great-grandfather, or at least someone who looked like
someone’s great-grandfather.

Cohen had said, ‘There’s men here who can push a wheelbarrow for thirty
miles on a bowl of millet with a bit of scum in it. What does that tell
you? It tells _me_ someone’s porking all the beef.’

Rincewind decided to explore the social dynamics and also try out the
language. It had been years since he’d last used it, but he had to admit
that Ridcully had been right. He did have a gift for languages. Agatean
was a language of few basic syllables. It was really all in the tone,
inflection and context. Otherwise, the word for military leader was also
the word for long-tailed marmot, male sexual organ and ancient chicken
coop.

‘Hey there, you!’ he shouted. ‘Er . . . to bend bamboo? An expression of
disapproval? Er . . . I mean . . . Stop!’

The barrow slewed to a halt. No one looked at him. They looked past him,
or around him, or towards his feet.

Eventually the wheelbarrow-pusher, in the manner of a man who knows he’s
in for it no matter what he does, mumbled, ‘Your honour commands?’

Rincewind felt very sorry, later, for what he said next.

He said, ‘Just give me all your food and . . . unwilling dogs, will
you?’

They watched him impassively.

‘Damn. I mean . . . arranged beetles? . . . variety of waterfall? . . .
Oh, yes . . . _money_.’

There was a general fumbling and shifting among the passengers. Then the
wheelbarrow-pusher sidled towards Rincewind, head down, and held up his
hat. It contained some rice, some dried fish, a highly dangerous-looking
egg. And about a pound of gold, in big round coins.

Rincewind stared at the gold.

Gold was as common as copper on the Counterweight Continent. That was
one of the few things everyone knew about the place. There was no
_point_ in Cohen trying any kind of big robbery. There was a limit to
what anyone could carry. He might as well rob one peasant village and
live like a king for the rest of his life. It wouldn’t be as if he’d
need that much . . .

The ‘later’ suddenly caught up with him, and he did indeed feel quite
ashamed. These people had hardly anything, apart from loads of gold.

‘Er. Thanks. Thank you. Yes. Just checking. Yes. You can all have it
back now. I’ll . . . er . . . keep . . . the elderly grandmother . . .
to run sideways . . . oh, damn . . . _fish_.’

Rincewind had always been on the bottom of the social heap. It didn’t
matter what size heap it was. The top got higher or lower, but the
bottom was always in the same place. But at least it was an Ankh-Morpork
heap.

No one bowed to anyone in Ankh-Morpork. And anyone who tried what he’d
just tried in Ankh-Morpork would, by now, be scrabbling in the gutter
for his teeth and whimpering about the pain in his groin and his horse
would already have been repainted twice and sold to a man who’d be
swearing he’d owned it for years.

He felt oddly proud of the fact.

Something strange welled up from the sludgy depths of his soul. It was,
to his amazement, a generous impulse.

He slid off the horse and held out the reins. A horse was useful, but he
was used to doing without one. Besides, over a short distance a man
could run faster than a horse, and this was a fact very dear to
Rincewind’s heart.

‘Here,’ he said. ‘You can have it. For the fish.’

The wheelbarrow-pusher screamed, grabbed the handles of his conveyance
and hurtled desperately away. Several people were thrown off, took one
almost-look at Rincewind, also screamed, and ran after him.

Worse than whips, Cohen had said. They’ve got something here worse than
whips. They don’t _need_ whips any more. Rincewind hoped he’d never find
out what it was, if it had done this to people.

He rode on through an endless panorama of fields. There weren’t even any
patches of roadside scrub, or taverns. Away among the fields were shapes
that might be small towns or villages, but no apparent paths to them,
possibly because paths used up valuable agricultural mud.

Finally he sat down on a rock that presumably not even the peasants’
most concerted efforts had been able to move, and reached into his
pocket for his shameful dried fish lunch.

His hand touched the bundle of papers Mr Saveloy had given him. He
pulled them out, and got crumbs on them.

This is what it’s all about, the barbarian teacher had said. He hadn’t
explained what ‘it’ was.

WHAT I DID ON MY HOLIDAYS, said the title. It was in bad handwriting or,
rather, bad painting – the Agateans wrote with paintbrushes, assembling
little word pictures out of handy components. One picture wasn’t just
worth a thousand words, it _was_ a thousand words.

Rincewind wasn’t much good at reading the language. There were very few
Agatean books even in the Unseen University Library. And this one looked
as though whoever had written it had been trying to make sense of
something unfamiliar.

He turned over a couple of pages. It was a story about a Great City,
containing magnificent things – ‘beer strong like an ox’, it said, and
‘pies containing many many parts of pig’. Everyone in the city seemed to
be wise, kind, strong or all three, especially some character called the
Great Wizard who seemed to feature largely in the text.

And there were mystifying little comments, as in, ‘I saw a man tread
upon the toes of a City Guard who said to him “Your wife is a big
hippo!” to which the man responded “Place it where the sun does not shed
daylight, enormous person”, upon which the Guard [this bit was in red
ink and the handwriting was shaky, as if the writer was quite excited]
_did not remove the man’s head according to ancient custom_.’ The
statement was followed by a pictogram of a dog passing water, which was
for some obscure reason the Agatean equivalent of an exclamation mark.
There were five of these.

Rincewind flicked through the pages. They were filled with the same dull
stuff, sentences stating the blindingly obvious but often followed by
several incontinent dogs. Such as: ‘The innkeeper said the City had
demanded tax but he did not intend to pay, and when I asked if he was
not afraid he vouchsafed: “[Complicated pictogram] them all except one
and he can [complicated pictogram] himself” [urinating dog, urinating
dog]. He went on to say, “The [pictogram indicating Supreme Ruler] is a
[another pictogram which, after some thought and holding up the picture
at various angles, Rincewind decided meant ‘a horse’s bottom’] and you
can tell him I said so”, _at which point_ a Guard in the tavern _did not
disembowel him_ [urinating dog, urinating dog] but said, “Tell him from
me also” [urinating dog, urinating dog, urinating dog, urinating dog,
urinating dog].’

What was so odd about that? People talked like that in Ankh-Morpork all
the time, or at least expressed those sentiments. Apart from the dog.

Mind you, a country that’d wipe out a whole city to teach the other
cities a lesson was a mad place. Perhaps this was a book of jokes and he
just hadn’t seen the point. Perhaps comedians here got big laughs with
lines like: ‘I say, I say, I say, I met a man on the way to the theatre
and _he didn’t chop my legs off,_ urinating dog, urinating dog—’

He had been aware of the jingle of harness on the road, but hadn’t paid
it any attention. He hadn’t even looked up at the sound of someone
approaching. By the time he did think of looking up it was too late,
because someone had their boot on his neck.

‘Oh, urinating dog,’ he said, before passing out.

There was a puff of air and the Luggage appeared, dropping heavily into
a snowdrift.

There was a meat cleaver sticking into its lid.

It remained motionless for some time and then, its legs moving in a
complicated little dance, it turned around 360 degrees.

The Luggage did not think. It had nothing to think with. Whatever
processes went on inside it probably had more to do with the way a tree
reacts to sun and rain and sudden storms, but speeded up very fast.

After a while it seemed to get its bearings and ambled off across the
melting snow.

The Luggage did not feel, either. It had nothing to feel with. But it
reacted, in the same way that a tree reacts to the changing of the
seasons.

Its pace quickened.

It was close to home.

Rincewind had to concede that the shouting man was right. Not, that is,
about Rincewind’s father being the diseased liver of a type of mountain
panda and his mother being a bucket of turtle slime; Rincewind had no
personal experience of either parent but felt that they were probably at
least vaguely humanoid, if only briefly. But on the subject of appearing
to own a stolen horse he had Rincewind bang to rights and, also, a foot
on his neck. A foot on the neck is nine points of the law.

He felt hands rummaging in his pockets.

Another person – Rincewind was not able to see much beyond a few inches
of alluvial soil, but from context it appeared to be an unsympathetic
person – joined in the shouting.

Rincewind was hauled upright.

The guards were pretty much like guards as Rincewind had experienced
them everywhere. They had exactly the amount of intellect required to
hit people and drag them off to the scorpion pit. They were league
champions at shouting at people a few inches from their face.

The effect was made surreal by the fact that the guards themselves had
no faces, or at least no faces they could call their own. Their ornate,
black-enamelled helmets and huge moustachioed visages painted on them,
leaving only the owner’s mouth uncovered so that he could, for example,
call Rincewind’s grandfather a box of inferior goldfish droppings.

_What I Did On My Holidays_ was waved in front of his face.

‘Bag of rotted fish!’

‘I don’t know what it means,’ said Rincewind. ‘Someone just gave it to—’

‘Feet of extreme rotted milk!’

‘Could you perhaps not shout quite so loud? I think my eardrum has just
exploded.’

The guard subsided, possibly only because he had run out of breath.
Rincewind had a moment to look at the scenery.

There were two carts on the road. One of them seemed to be a cage on
wheels; he made out faces watching him in terror. The other was an
ornate palanquin carried by eight peasants; rich curtains covered the
sides but he could see where they had been twitched aside so that
someone within could look at him.

The guards were aware of this. It seemed to make them awkward.

‘If I could just expl—’

‘Silence, mouth of—’ The guard hesitated.

‘You’ve used turtle, goldfish and what you probably meant to be cheese,’
said Rincewind.

‘Mouth of chicken gizzards!’

A long thin hand emerged from the curtains and beckoned, just once.

Rincewind was hustled forward. The hand had the longest fingernails he’d
ever seen on something that didn’t purr.

‘Kowtow!’

‘Sorry?’ said Rincewind.

‘Kowtow!’

Swords were produced.

‘I don’t know what you mean!’ Rincewind wailed.

‘Kowtow, please,’ whispered a voice by his ear. It was not a
particularly friendly voice but compared to all the other voices it was
positively affectionate. It sounded as though it belonged to quite a
young man. And it was speaking very good Morporkian.

‘How?’

‘You don’t know _that_? Kneel down, press your forehead on the ground.
That’s if you want to be able to wear a hat again.’

Rincewind hesitated. He was a free-born Morporkian, and on the list of
things a citizen didn’t do was bow down to any, not to put too fine a
point on it, _foreigner._

On the other hand, right at the _top_ of the list of things a citizen
didn’t do was get their head chopped off.

‘That’s better. That’s good. How did you know you ought to tremble?’

‘Oh, I thought up that bit myself.’

The hand beckoned with a finger.

A guard slapped Rincewind in the face with the mud-encrusted _What I
Did_ . . . Rincewind clutched it guiltily as the guard scurried towards
his master’s digit.

‘Voice?’ said Rincewind.

‘Yes?’

‘What happens if I claim immunity because I’m a foreigner?’

‘There’s a special thing they do with a wire-mesh waistcoat and a
cheesegrater.’

‘Oh.’

‘And there are torturers in Hunghung who can keep a man alive for
years.’

‘I suppose you’re not talking about healthy early morning runs and a
high-fibre diet?’

‘No. So keep quiet and with any luck you’ll be sent to be a slave in the
palace.’

‘Luck is my middle name,’ said Rincewind, indistinctly. ‘Mind you, my
first name is Bad.’

‘Remember to gibber and grovel.’

‘I’ll do my very best.’

The white hand emerged bearing a scrap of paper. The guard took it,
turned towards Rincewind and cleared his throat.

‘Harken to the wisdom and justice of District Commissioner Kee, ball of
swamp emanations! Not him, I mean you!’

He cleared his throat again and peered closer at the paper in the manner
of one who learned to read by saying the name of each letter very
carefully to himself.

‘“The white pony runs through the . . . the . . .”’

The guard turned and held a whispered conversation with the curtains,
and turned back again.

‘“. . . chrysanthemum . . . mumum blossoms,
The cold wind stirs the
Apricot trees. Send him to
The palace to slave
Until all appendages drop
Off.”’

Several of the other guards applauded.

‘Look up and clap,’ said the Voice.

‘I’m afraid my appendages will drop off.’

‘It’s a _big_ cheesegrater.’

‘Encore! Wow! Superb! That bit about the chrysanthemumums? Wonderful!’

‘Good. Listen. You’re from Bes Pelargic. You’ve got the right accent,
damned if I know why. It’s a seaport and people there are a little
strange. You were robbed by bandits and escaped on one of their horses.
That’s why you haven’t got your papers. You need pieces of paper for
everything here, including being anybody. And pretend you don’t know
me.’

‘I _don’t_ know you.’

‘Good. Long Live The Changing Things To A More Equitable State While
Retaining Due Respect For The Traditions Of Our Forebears And Of Course
Not Harming The August Personage Of The Emperor Endeavour!’

‘Good. Yes. What?’

A guard kicked Rincewind in the region of the kidneys. This suggested,
in the universal language of the boot, that he should get up.

He managed to get up on one knee, and saw the Luggage.

It wasn’t his, and there were three of them.

The Luggage trotted to the crest of a low hill and stopped so fast that
it left a lot of little grooves in the dirt.

In addition to not having any equipment with which to think or feel, the
Luggage also had no means of seeing. The manner in which it perceived
events was a complete mystery.

It perceived the other Luggages.

The three of them stood patiently in a line behind the palanquin. They
were big. They were black.

The Luggage’s legs disappeared inside its body.

After a while it very cautiously opened its lid, just a fraction.

Of the three things that most people know about the horse, the third is
that, over a short distance, it can’t run as fast as a man. As Rincewind
had learned to his advantage, it has more legs to sort out.

There are additonal advantages if a) the people on horseback aren’t
expecting you to run and b) you happen to be, very conveniently, in an
athletic starting position.

Rincewind rose like a boomerang curry from a sensitive stomach.

There was a lot of shouting but the comforting thing, the important
thing, was that it was all behind him. It would soon try to catch him up
but that was a problem for the future. He could also consider where he
was running to as well, but an experienced coward never bothered with
the _to_ when the _from_ held such fascination.

A less practised runner would have risked a glance behind, but Rincewind
instinctively knew all about wind drag and the tendency of inconvenient
rocks to position themselves under the unwary foot. Besides, why look
behind? He was already running as fast as he could. Nothing he could see
would make him run any faster.

There was a large shapeless village ahead, a construction apparently of
mud and dung. In the fields in front of it a dozen peasants looked up
from their toil at the accelerating wizard.

Perhaps it was Rincewind’s imagination, but as he passed them he could
have sworn that he heard the cry:

‘Necessarily Extended Duration To The Red Army! Regrettable Decease
Without Undue Suffering To The Forces of Oppression!’

Rincewind dived through the huts as the soldiers charged at the
peasants.

Cohen had been right. There seemed to be a revolution. But the Empire
had been in unchanged existence for thousands of years, courtesy and a
respect for protocol were part of its very fabric, and by the sound of
it the revolutionaries had yet to master the art of impolite slogans.

Rincewind preferred running to hiding. Hiding was all very well, but if
you were found then you were stuck. But the village was the only cover
for miles around, and some of the soldiers had horses. A man might be
faster than a horse over a short distance, but over this panorama of
flat, open fields a horse had a running man bang to rights.

So he ducked into a building at random and pushed aside the first door
he came to.

It had, pasted on it, the words: Examination. Silence!

Forty expectant and slightly worried faces looked up at him from their
writing stools. They weren’t children, but full-grown adults.

There was a lectern at the end of the room and, on it, a pile of papers
sealed with string and wax.

Rincewind felt the atmosphere was familiar. He’d breathed it before,
even if it had been a world away. It was full of those cold sweaty
odours created by the sudden realization that it was probably too late
to do that revision you’d kept on putting off. Rincewind had faced many
horrors in his time, but none held quite the same place in the lexicon
of dread as those few seconds after someone said, ‘Turn over your papers
_now_.’

The candidates were watching him.

There was shouting somewhere outside.

He hurried up to the lectern, tore at the string and distributed the
papers as fast as he could. Then he dived back to the safety of the
lectern, removed his hat, and was bent low when the door opened slowly.

‘Go away!’ he screamed. ‘Examination in progress!’

The unseen figure behind the door murmured something to someone else.
The door was closed again.

The candidates were still staring at him.

‘Er. Very well. Turn over your papers.’

There was a rustle, a few moments of that dreadful silence, and then
much activity with brushes.

Competitive examinations. Oh, yes. That was another thing people knew
about the Empire. They were the only way to get any kind of public post
and the security that brought. People had said that this must be a very
good system, because it opened up opportunities for people of merit.

Rincewind picked up a spare paper and read it.

It was headed: Examination for the post of Assistant Night-Soil
Operative for the District of W’ung.

He read question one. It required candidates to write a sixteen-line
poem on evening mist over the reed beds.

Question two seemed to be about the use of metaphor in some book
Rincewind had never heard of.

Then there was a question about music . . .

Rincewind turned the paper over a couple of times. There didn’t seem to
be any mention, anywhere, of words like ‘compost’ or ‘bucket’ or
‘wheelbarrow’. But presumably all this produced a better class of person
than the Ankh-Morpork system, which asked just one question: ‘Got your
own shovel, have you?’

The shouting outside seemed to have died away; Rincewind risked poking
his head out of the door. There was a commotion near the road but it no
longer seemed Rincewind-orientated.

He ran for it.

The students got on with their examination. One of the more
enterprising, however, rolled up his trouser leg and copied down a poem
about mist he’d composed, at great effort, some time previously. After a
while you got to know what kind of questions the examiners asked.

Rincewind trotted onwards, trying to keep to ditches wherever these
weren’t knee-deep in sucking mud. It wasn’t a landscape built for
concealment. The Agateans grew crops on any piece of ground the seeds
wouldn’t roll off. Apart from the occasional rocky outcrop there was a
distinct lack of places in which to lurk.

No one paid him much attention once he’d left the village far behind.
The occasional water buffalo operative would turn to watch him until he
was out of sight, but displayed no special curiosity; it was merely that
Rincewind was marginally more interesting than watching a water buffalo
defecate.

He kept the road just in sight and, by evening, reached a crossroads.

There was an inn.

Rincewind hadn’t eaten since the leopard. The inn meant food, but food
meant money. He was hungry, and he had no money.

He chided himself for this kind of negative thinking. That was not the
right approach. What he should do was go in and order a large,
nourishing meal. Then instead of being hungry with no money he’d be well
fed with no money, a net gain on his current position. Of course, the
world was likely to raise some objections, but in Rincewind’s experience
there were few problems that couldn’t be solved with a scream and a good
ten yards’ start. And, of course, he would just have had a strengthening
meal.

Besides, he liked Hunghungese food. A few refugees had opened
restaurants in Ankh-Morpork and Rincewind considered himself something
of an expert on the dishes.¹⁸

The one huge room was thick with smoke and, insofar as this could be
determined through the swirls and coils, quite busy. A couple of old men
were sitting in front of a complicated pile of ivory tiles, playing
_Shibo Yangcong-san._ He wasn’t sure what they were smoking but, by the
looks on their faces, they were happy they’d chosen it.

Rincewind made his way to the fireplace, where a skinny man was tending
a cauldron.

He gave him a cheery smile. ‘Good morning! Can I partake of your famous
delicacy “Meal A for two People with extra Prawn Cracker”?’

‘Never heard of it.’

‘Um. Then . . . could I see a painful ear . . . a croak of a frog . . .
a menu?’

‘What’s a menu, friend?’

Rincewind nodded. He knew what it meant when a stranger called you
‘friend’ like that. No one who called someone else ‘friend’ was feeling
very kindly disposed.

‘What is there to eat, I meant.’

‘Noodles, boiled cabbage and pork whiskers.’

‘Is that _all_?’

‘Pork whiskers don’t grow on trees, san.’

‘I’ve been seeing water buffalo all day,’ Rincewind said. ‘Don’t you
people ever eat beef?’

The ladle splashed into the cauldron. Somewhere behind him a _shibo_
tile dropped on to the floor. The back of Rincewind’s head prickled
under the stares.

‘We don’t serve rebels in this place,’ said the landlord loudly.

Probably too meaty, Rincewind thought. But it seemed to him that the
words had been addressed to the world in general rather than to him.

‘Glad to hear it,’ he said, ‘because—’

‘Yes indeed,’ said the landlord, a little louder. ‘No rebels welcome
here.’

‘That’s fine by me, because—’

‘If I knew of any rebels I would be certain to alert the authorities,’
the landlord bellowed.

‘I’m not a rebel, I’m just hungry,’ said Rincewind. ‘I’d, er, like a
bowlful, please.’

A bowl was filled. Rainbow patterns shimmered on its oily surface.

‘That’ll be half a _rhinu_,’ said the landlord.

‘You mean you want me to pay before I eat it?’ said Rincewind.

‘You might not want to afterwards, friend.’

A _rhinu_ was more gold than Rincewind had ever owned. He patted his
pockets theatrically.

‘In fact, it seems that—’ he began. There was a small thump beside him.
_What I Did On My Holidays_ had fallen on to the floor.

‘Yes, thank you, that will do nicely,’ said the landlord to the room at
large. He pushed the bowl into Rincewind’s hand and, in one movement,
scooped up the booklet and crammed it back into the wizard’s pocket.

‘Go and sit down in the corner!’ he hissed. ‘And you’ll be told what to
do!’

‘But I’m sure I _know_ what to do. Dip spoon in bowl, raise spoon to
mouth—’

‘Sit down!’

Rincewind found the darkest corner and sat down. People were still
watching him.

To avoid the group gaze he pulled out _What I Did_ and opened it at
random, in an effort to find out why it had a magical effect on the
landlord.

‘. . . sold me a bun containing what was called a [complicated
pictogram] made _entirely of the inside of pigs_ [urinating dog]’ he
read. ‘And such as these could be bought for small coin at any time, and
so replete were the citizens that hardly any bought these [complicated
pictogram] from the stall of [complicated pictogram, but it seemed to
involve a razor]-san.’

Sausages filled with pig parts, thought Rincewind. Well, perhaps they
_might_ be amazing if, up until then, a bowl of dishwater with something
congealing on the top of it had been your idea of a hearty meal.

Hah! Mister What-I-Did-On-My-Holidays should try coming to Ankh-Morpork
next time, and see how much he liked one of old . . . Dibbler’s sausages
. . . full of genuine . . . pig product . . .

The spoon splashed into the bowl.

Rincewind turned the pages hurriedly.

‘. . . peaceful streets, along which I walked, were quite free of crime
and brigandage . . .’

‘Of course they were, you four-eyed little git!’ shouted Rincewind.
‘That was because it was all happening to me!’

‘. . . a city where all men are free . . .’

‘Free? _Free?_ Well, yes, free to starve, get robbed by the Thieves’
Guild . . . ’ said Rincewind to the book.

He fumbled through to another page.

‘. . . my companion was the Great Wizard [complicated pictogram, but now
that Rincewind studied it he realized with a plummeting heart it had a
few lines that looked like the Agatean for ‘wind’], the most prominent
and powerful wizard in the entire country . . .’

‘I never said that! I—’ Rincewind stopped. Memory treacherously dredged
up a few phrases, such as _Oh, the Archchancellor listens to everything
I say_ and _That place would just fall down without me around._ But that
was just the sort of thing you said after a few beers, surely no one
would be so gullible as to write . . .

A picture focused itself in Rincewind’s memory. It was of a happy,
smiling little man with huge spectacles and a trusting, innocent
approach to life which brought terror and destruction everywhere he
wandered. Twoflower had been quite unable to believe that the world was
a bad place and that was largely because, to him, it wasn’t. It saved it
all up for Rincewind.

Rincewind’s life had been quite uneventful before he’d met Twoflower.
Since then, as far as he could remember, it had contained events in huge
amounts.

And the little man had gone back home, hadn’t he? To Bes Pelargic – the
Empire’s only proper seaport.

Surely no one would be so gullible as to write this sort of thing?

Surely no one apart from one person would be so gullible.

Rincewind was not politically minded but there were some things he could
work out not because they were to do with politics but because they had
a lot to do with human nature. Nasty images moved into place like bad
scenery.

The Empire had a wall around it. If you lived in the Empire then you
learned how to make soup out of pig squeals and swallow spit because
that’s how it was done, and you were bullied by soldiers all the time
because that was how the world worked.

But if someone wrote a cheerful little book about . . .

. . . what I did on my holidays . . .

. . . in a place where the world worked quite differently . . .

. . . then however fossilized the society there would always be _some_
people who asked themselves dangerous questions like ‘Where’s the pork?’

Rincewind stared glumly at the wall. Peasants of the Empire, Rebel! You
have nothing to lose but your heads and hands and feet and there’s this
thing they do with a wire waistcoat and a cheesegrater . . .

He turned the book over. There was no author’s name. There was simply a
little message: Increased Luck! Make Copies! Extended Duration And
Happiness To The Endeavour!

Ankh-Morpork had had the occasional rebellion, too, over the years. But
no one went around _organizing_ things. They just grabbed themselves a
weapon and took to the streets. No one bothered with a formal battlecry,
relying instead on the well-tried ‘There ’e goes! Get ’im! Got ’im? Now
_kick_ ’im inna fork!’

The point was . . . whatever _caused_ that sort of thing wasn’t usually
the _reason_ for it. When Mad Lord Snapcase had been hung up by his
figgin¹⁹ it hadn’t _really_ been because he’d made poor old Spooner
Boggis eat his own nose, it had been because years of inventive
nastiness had piled on one another until the grievances reached—

There was a terrible scream from the far side of the room. Rincewind was
half out of his seat before he noticed the little stage, and the actors.

A trio of musicians had squatted down on the floor. The inn’s customers
turned to watch.

It was, in a way, quite enjoyable. Rincewind didn’t quite follow the
plot, but it went something like: man gets girl, man loses girl to other
man, man cuts couple in half, man falls on own sword, all come up front
for a bow to what might be the Agatean equivalent of ‘Happy Days Are
Here Again’. It was a little hard to make out the fine detail because
the actors shouted ‘Hoorrrrrraa!’ a lot and spent much of their time
talking to the audience and their masks all looked the same to
Rincewind. The musicians were in a world of their own or, by the sound
of it, three different worlds.

‘Fortune cookie?’

‘Huh?’

Rincewind re-emerged from the thickets of thespianism to see the
landlord beside him.

A dish of vaguely bivalvular biscuits was thrust under his nose.

‘Fortune cookie?’

Rincewind reached out. Just as his fingers were about to close on one,
the plate was jerked sideways an inch or two, bringing another under his
hand.

Oh, well. He took it.

The thing was – his thoughts resumed, as the play screamed on – at least
in Ankh-Morpork you _could_ lay your hands on real weapons.

Poor devils. It took more than well-turned slogans and a lot of
enthusiasm to run a good rebellion. You needed well-trained fighters
and, above all, a good leader. He hoped they found one when he was well
away.

He unrolled the fortune and read it idly, oblivious to the landlord
walking around behind him.

Instead of the usual ‘You have just enjoyed an inferior meal’ it was
quite a complicated pictogram.

Rincewind’s fingers traced the brush strokes.

‘“Many . . . many . . . apologies . . .” What kind—’

The musician with the cymbals clashed them together sharply.

The wooden cosh bounced off Rincewind’s head.

The old men playing _shibo_ nodded happily to themselves and turned back
to their game.

It was a fine morning. The hideout echoed to the sounds of the Silver
Horde getting up, groaning, adjusting various home-made surgical
supports, complaining that they couldn’t find their spectacles, and
mistakenly gumming one another’s dentures.

Cohen sat with his feet in a bath of warm water, enjoying the sunshine.

‘Teach?’

The former geography teacher concentrated on a map he was making.

‘Yes, Ghenghiz?’

‘What’s Mad Hamish going on about?’

‘He says the bread’s stale and he can’t find his teeth.’

‘Tell him if things go right for us he can have a dozen young women just
to chew his bread for him,’ said Cohen.

‘That is not very hygienic, Ghenghiz,’ said Mr Saveloy, without
bothering to look up. ‘Remember, I explained about hygiene.’

Cohen didn’t bother to answer. He was thinking: six old men. And you
can’t really count Teach, he’s a thinker, not a fighter . . .

Self-doubt was not something regularly entertained within the Cohen
cranium. When you’re trying to carry a struggling temple maiden and a
sack of looted temple goods in one hand and fight off half a dozen angry
priests with the other there is little time for reflection. Natural
selection saw to it that professional heroes who at a crucial moment
tended to ask themselves questions like ‘What is my purpose in life?’
very quickly lacked both.

But: six old men . . . and the Empire had almost a million men under
arms.

When you looked at the odds in the cold light of dawn, or even this
rather pleasant warm light of dawn, they made you stop and do the
arithmetic of death. If the Plan went wrong . . .

Cohen bit his lip thoughtfully. If the Plan went wrong, it’d take
_weeks_ to kill all of them. Maybe he should have let old Thog the
Butcher come along too, even though he had to stop fighting every ten
minutes to go to the lavatory.

Oh, well. He was committed now, so he might as well make the best of it.

Cohen’s father had taken him to a mountain top, when he was no more than
a lad, and explained to him the hero’s creed and told him that there was
no greater joy than to die in battle.

Cohen had seen the flaw in this straight away, and a lifetime’s
experience had reinforced his belief that in fact a greater joy was to
kill the _other_ bugger in battle and end up sitting on a heap of gold
higher than your horse. It was an observation that had served him well.

He stood up and stretched in the sunshine.

‘It’s a lovely morning, lads,’ he said. ‘I feel like a million dollars.
Don’t you?’

There was a murmur of reluctant agreement.

‘Good,’ said Cohen. ‘Let’s go and get some.’

The Great Wall completely surrounds the Agatean Empire. The word is
_completely._

It is usually about twenty feet high and sheer on its inner side. It is
built along beaches and across howling deserts and even on the lip of
sheer cliffs where the possibility of attack from outside is remote. On
subject islands like Bhangbhangduc and Tingling there are similar walls,
all metaphorically the same wall, and that seems strange to those of an
unthinking military disposition who do not realize what its function
really is.

It is more than just a wall, it is a marker. On one side is the Empire,
which in the Agatean language is a word identical with ‘universe’. On
the other side is – nothing. After all, the universe is everything there
is.

Oh, there may _appear_ to be things, like sea, islands, other continents
and so on. They may even appear solid, it may be possible to conquer
them, walk on them . . . but they are not _ultimately_ real. The Agatean
word for foreigner is the same as the word for ghost, and only one brush
stroke away from the word for victim.

The walls are sheer in order to discourage those boring people who
persist in believing that there might be anything interesting on the
other side. Amazingly enough there are people who simply won’t take the
hint, even after thousands of years. The ones near the coast build rafts
and head out across lonely seas to lands that are a fable. The ones
inland resort to man-carrying kites and chairs propelled by fireworks.
Many of them die in the attempt, of course. Most of the others are soon
caught, and made to live in interesting times.

But some did make it to the great melting pot called Ankh-Morpork. They
arrived with no money – sailors charged what the market would bear,
which was everything – but they had a mad gleam in their eye and they
opened shops and restaurants and worked twenty-four hours a day. People
called this the Ankh-Morpork Dream (of making piles of cash in a place
where your death was unlikely to be a matter of public policy). And it
was dreamed all the stronger by people who didn’t sleep.

Rincewind sometimes thought that his life was punctuated by awakenings.
They were not always rude ones. Sometimes they were merely impolite. A
very few – one or two, perhaps – had been quite nice, especially on the
island. The sun had come up in its humdrum fashion, the waves had washed
the beach in quite a boring way, and on several occasions he’d managed
to erupt from unconsciousness without his habitual small scream.

This one wasn’t just rude. It was downright insolent. He was being
bumped about and someone had tied his hands together. It was dark, a
fact occasioned by the sack over his head.

Rincewind did some calculation, and reached a conclusion.

‘This is the seventeenth worst day of my life so far,’ he thought.

Being knocked unconscious in pubs was quite commonplace. If it happened
in Ankh-Morpork then you’d likely as not wake up lying on the Ankh with
all your money gone or, if a ship was due out on a long and unpopular
voyage, chained up in some scupper somewhere with no option for the next
two years but to plough the ocean wave.²⁰ But generally the knocker
wanted to keep you alive. The Thieves’ Guild were punctilious about
that. As they said: ‘Hit a man too hard and you can only rob him once;
hit him just hard enough and you can rob him every week.’

If he was in what felt like a cart then someone had some purpose in
keeping him alive.

He wished he hadn’t thought of that.

Someone pulled the sack off. A terrifying visage stared down at him.

‘“I would like to eat your foot!”’ said Rincewind.

‘Don’t worry. I am a friend.’

The mask was lifted away. There was a young woman behind it –
round-faced, snub-nosed and quite different from any other citizen
Rincewind had met hitherto. That was, he realized, because she was
looking straight at him. Her clothes, if not her face, had last been
seen on the stage.

‘Don’t cry out,’ she said.

‘Why? What are you going to do?’

‘We would have welcomed you properly but there was no time.’ She sat
down among the bundles in the back of the swaying cart and regarded him
critically.

‘Four Big Sandal said you arrived on a dragon and slaughtered a regiment
of soldiers,’ she said.

‘I did?’

‘And then you worked magic on a venerable old man and he became a great
fighter.’

‘He did?’

‘And you gave him whole meat, even though Four Big Sandal is only of the
_pung_ class.’

‘I did?’

‘And you have your hat.’

‘Yes, yes, got my hat.’

‘And yet,’ said the girl, ‘you don’t _look_ like a Great Wizard.’

‘Ah. Well, the fact is—’

The girl looked as fragile as a flower. But she had just pulled out,
from somewhere in the folds of her costume, a small but perfectly
serviceable knife.

Rincewind had picked up an instinct for this sort of thing. This was
probably not the time to deny Great Wizardry.

‘The fact is . . .’ he repeated, ‘that . . . how do I know I can trust
you?’

The girl looked indignant. ‘Do you not have amazing wizardly powers?’

‘Oh, yes. Yes! Certainly! But—’

‘Say something in wizard language!’

‘Er. _Stercus, stercus, stercus, moriturus sum_,’ said Rincewind, his
eye on the knife.

‘“O excrement, I am about to die?”’

‘It’s . . . er . . . a special mantra I say to raise the magical
fluxes.’

The girl subsided a little.

‘But it takes it out of you, wizarding,’ said Rincewind. ‘Flying on
dragons, magically turning old men into warriors . . . I can only do so
much of that sort of thing before it’s time for a rest. Right now I’m
very weak on account of the _tremendous_ amounts of magic I’ve just
used, you see.’

She looked at him with doubt still in her eyes.

‘All the peasants believe in the imminent arrival of the Great Wizard,’
she said. ‘But, in the words of the great philosopher Ly Tin Wheedle,
“When many expect a mighty stallion they will find hooves on an ant.”’

She gave him another calculating look.

‘When you were on the road,’ she said, ‘you grovelled in front of
District Commissioner Kee. You could have blasted him with terrible
fire.’

‘Biding my time, spying out the land, not wanting to break my cover,’
Rincewind gabbled. ‘Er. No good revealing myself straight away, is
there?’

‘You are maintaining a disguise?’

‘Yes.’

‘It is a very good one.’

‘Thank you, because—’

‘Only a great wizard would dare to look like such a pathetic piece of
humanity.’

‘Thank you. Er . . . how _did_ you know I was on the road?’

‘They would have killed you there and then if I had not told you what to
do.’

‘You were the _guard_?’

‘We had to catch up with you quickly. It was sheer luck you were seen by
Four Big Sandal.’

‘We?’

She ignored the question. ‘They are only provincial soldiers. I would
not have got away with it in Hunghung. But I can play many roles.’ She
put away the knife, but Rincewind had a feeling that he hadn’t talked
her into believing him, only into not killing him.

He groped for a straw.

‘I’ve got a magic box on legs,’ he said, with a touch of pride. ‘It
follows me around. It seems to have got itself mislaid right now, but
it’s quite an amazing thing.’

The girl gave him a wooden look. Then she reached down with a delicate
hand and hauled him upright.

‘Is it,’ she said, ‘something like this?’

She twitched aside the curtains at the rear of the cart.

Two boxes were trundling along in the dust. They were more battered and
cheaper-looking than the Luggage, but recognizably the same general
species, if you could apply the word to travel accessories.

‘Er. Yes.’

She let go. Rincewind’s head hit the floor.

‘Listen to me,’ she said. ‘A lot of bad things are happening. I don’t
believe in great wizards, but other people do, and sometimes people need
something to believe in. And if these other people die because we’ve got
a wizard who is not so very great, then he will be a very unlucky wizard
indeed. You may be the Great Wizard. If you are not, then I suggest you
study very hard to be great. Do I make myself clear?’

‘Er. Yes.’

Rincewind had been faced with death on numerous occasions. Often there
was armour and swords involved. This occasion just involved a pretty
girl and a knife, but somehow managed to be among the worst. She sat
back.

‘We are a travelling theatre,’ she said. ‘It is convenient. Noh actors
are allowed to move around.’

‘Aren’t they?’ said Rincewind.

‘You do not understand. We _are_ Noh actors.’

‘Oh, you weren’t too bad.’

‘Great Wizard, “Noh” is a non-realist symbolic form of theatre employing
archaic language, stylized gestures and an accompaniment of flutes and
drums. Your pretence of stupidity is masterly. So much so that I could
even believe that you are no actor.’

‘Excuse me, what is your name?’ Rincewind said.

‘Pretty Butterfly.’

‘Er. Yes?’

She glared at him and slipped away towards the front of the cart.

It rumbled on. Rincewind lay with his head in a sack smelling of onions
and methodically cursed things. He cursed women with knives, and history
generally, and the entire faculty of Unseen University, and his absent
Luggage, and the population of the Agatean Empire. But right now, at the
top of the list, was whoever had designed this cart. By the feel of it,
whoever had thought that rough, splintery wood was the right surface for
a floor was also the person who thought ‘triangular’ was a nice shape
for a wheel.

The Luggage lurked in a ditch, watched without much interest by a man
holding a water buffalo on the end of a piece of string.

It was feeling ashamed, and baffled, and lost. It was lost because
everywhere around it was . . . familiar. The light, the smells, the feel
of the soil . . . But it didn’t feel _owned._

It was made of wood. Wood is sensitive to these things.

One of its many feet idly traced an outline in the mud. It was a random,
wretched pattern familiar to anyone who’s had to stand in front of the
class and be scolded.

Finally, it reached something that was probably as close as timber can
get to a decision.

It had been given away. It had spent many years trailing through strange
lands, meeting exotic creatures and jumping up and down on them. Now it
was back in the country where it had once been a tree. Therefore, it was
free.

It was not the most logical chain of thought, but pretty good when all
you’ve got to think with are knotholes.

And there was something it very much wanted to do.

‘_When_ you’re ready, Teach?’

‘Sorry, Ghenghiz. I’m just finishing . . .’

Cohen sighed. The Horde were taking advantage of the rest to sit in the
shade of a tree and tell one another lies about their exploits, while Mr
Saveloy stood on top of a boulder squinting through some kind of
home-made device and doodling on his maps.

Bits of paper ruled the world now, Cohen told himself. It certainly
ruled this part of it. And Teach . . . well, Teach ruled bits of paper.
He might not be traditional barbarian hero material, despite his deeply
held belief that all headmasters should be riveted to a cowshed door,
but the man was _amazing_ with bits of paper.

And he could speak Agatean. Well, speak it better than Cohen, who’d
picked it up in a rough and ready way. He said he’d learned it out of
some old book. He said it was amazing how much interesting stuff was in
old books.

Cohen struggled up alongside him.

‘What exactly you plannin’, Teach?’ he said.

Mr Saveloy squinted at Hunghung, just visible on the dusty horizon.

‘Do you see that hill behind the city?’ he said. ‘The huge round mound?’

‘Looks like my dad’s burial mound to me,’ said Cohen.

‘No, it must be a natural formation. It’s far too big. There’s some kind
of pagoda on top, I see. Interesting. Perhaps, later, I shall take a
closer look.’

Cohen peered at the big round hill. It was a big round hill. It wasn’t
threatening him and it didn’t look valuable. End of saga as far as he
was concerned. There were more pressing matters.

‘People appear to be entering and leaving the outer city,’ Mr Saveloy
continued. ‘The siege is more a threat than a reality. So getting inside
should not be a problem. Of course, getting into the Forbidden City
itself will be a lot more difficult.’

‘How about if we kill everyone?’ said Cohen.

‘A good idea, but impractical,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘And liable to cause
comment. No, my current methodology is predicated on the fact that
Hunghung is some considerable way from the river yet has almost a
million inhabitants.’

‘Predicated, yeah,’ said Cohen.

‘And the local geography is quite wrong for artesian wells.’

‘Yeah, ’s what I thought . . .’

‘And yet there is no visible aqueduct, you notice.’

‘No aqueduct, right,’ said Cohen. ‘Prob’ly flown to the Rim for the
summer. Some birds do that.’

‘Which rather leads me to doubt the saying that not even a mouse can get
into the Forbidden City,’ said Mr Saveloy, with just a trace of
smugness. ‘I suspect a mouse could get into the Forbidden City _if it
could hold its breath_.’

‘Or ride on one of them invisible ducks,’ said Cohen.

‘Indeed.’

The cart stopped. The sack came off. Instead of the cheesegrater
Rincewind was secretly expecting, the view consisted of a couple of
young, concerned faces. One of them was female, but Rincewind was
relieved to see that she wasn’t Pretty Butterfly. This one looked
younger, and made Rincewind think a little of potatoes.²¹

‘How are you?’ she said, in fractured but recognizable Morporkian. ‘We
are very sorry. All better now? We speak you in language of celestial
city of Ankh-More-Pork. Language of freedom and progress. Language of
One Man, One Vote!’

‘Yes,’ said Rincewind. A vision of Ankh-Morpork’s Patrician floated
across his memory. One man, one vote. Yes. ‘I’ve met him. He’s
definitely got the vote. But—’

‘Extra Luck To The People’s Endeavour!’ said the boy. ‘Advance
Judiciously!’ He looked as though he’d been built with bricks.

‘Excuse me,’ said Rincewind, ‘but why did you . . . a paper lantern for
ceremonial purposes . . . bale of cotton . . . _rescue_ me? Uh, that is,
when I say rescue, I suppose I mean: why did you hit me on the head, tie
me up, and bring me to wherever this is? Because the worst that could
have happened to me in the inn was a ding around the ear for not paying
for lunch—’

‘The worst that _would_ have happened was an agonizing death over
several years,’ said the voice of Butterfly. She appeared around the
cart and smiled grimly at Rincewind. Her hands were tucked demurely in
her kimono, presumably to hide the knives.

‘Oh. Hello,’ he said.

‘Great Wizard,’ said Butterfly, bowing. ‘I you already know, but these
two are Lotus Blossom and Three Yoked Oxen, other members of our cadre.
We had to bring you here like this. There are spies everywhere.’

‘Timely Demise To All Enemies!’ said the boy, beaming.

‘Good, yes, right,’ said Rincewind. ‘All enemies, yes.’

The cart was in a courtyard. The general noise level on the other side
of the very high walls suggested a large city. Nasty certainty
crystallized.

‘And you’ve brought me to Hunghung, haven’t you?’ he said.

Lotus Blossom’s eyes widened.

‘Then it are _true_,’ she said, in Rincewind’s own language. ‘You _are_
the Great Wizard!’

‘Oh, you’d be amazed at the things I can foresee,’ said Rincewind
despondently.

‘You two, go and stable the horses,’ said Butterfly, not taking her eyes
off Rincewind. When they’d hurried away, with several backward glances,
she walked up to him.

‘They believe,’ she said. ‘Personally, I have my doubts. But Ly Tin
Wheedle says an ass may do the work of an ox in a time of no horses. One
of his less convincing aphorisms, I’ve always thought.’

‘Thank you. What is a cadre?’

‘Have you heard of the Red Army?’

‘No. Well . . . I heard someone shout something . . .’

‘According to legend, an unknown person known only as the Great Wizard
led the first Red Army to an impossible victory. Of course, that was
thousands of years ago. But the people believe that he – that is, _you
–_ will return to do it again. So . . . there should be a Red Army ready
and waiting.’

‘Well, of course, a man can get a little stiff after several thousand
years—’

Her face was suddenly level with his own.

‘_Personally_ I suspect there has been a misunderstanding,’ she hissed.
‘But now you’re here you’ll be a Great Wizard. If I have to prod you
every step of the way!’

The other two returned. Butterfly went from snarling tiger to demure doe
in an instant.

‘And now you must come and _meet_ the Red Army,’ she said.

‘Won’t they be a little smelly—’ Rincewind began, and stopped when he
saw her expression.

‘The original Red Army was clearly only a legend,’ she said, in fast and
faultless Ankh-Morporkian. ‘But legends have their uses. You’d better
know the legend . . . Great Wizard. When One Sun Mirror was fighting all
the armies of the world the Great Wizard came to his aid and the earth
itself rose up and fought for the new Empire. And lightning was
involved. The army was made from the earth but in some way driven by the
lightning. Now, lightning may kill but I suspect it lacks discipline.
And earth cannot fight. But no doubt our army of the earth and sky was
nothing more nor less than an uprising of the peasants themselves. Well,
now we have a new army, and a name that fires the imagination. And a
Great Wizard. I don’t believe in legends. But I believe that other
people believe.’

The younger girl, who had been trying to follow this, stepped forward
and gripped his arm.

‘You come seeing Red Army _now_,’ she said.

‘Forward Motion With Masses!’ said the boy, taking Rincewind’s other
arm.

‘Does he always talk like that?’ said Rincewind, as he was propelled
gently towards a door.

‘Three Yoked Oxen does not study,’ said the girl.

‘Extra Success Attend Our Leaders!’

‘“Tuppence A Bucket, Well Stamped Down!”’ said Rincewind encouragingly.

‘Much Ownership Of Means Of Production!’

‘ “How’s Your Granny Off For Soap?” ’

Three Yoked Oxen beamed.

Butterfly opened the door. That left Rincewind outside with the other
two.

‘Very useful slogans,’ he said, moving sideways just a little. ‘But I
would draw your attention to the famous saying of the Great Wizard
Rincewind.’

‘Indeed, I am all ear,’ said Lotus Blossom politely.

‘Rincewind, he say . . . Goodbyeeeeeeeee—’

His sandals skidded on the cobbles but he was already travelling fast
when he hit the doors, which turned out to be made of bamboo and smashed
apart easily.

There was a street market on the other side. That was something
Rincewind remembered later about Hunghung; as soon as there was a space,
any kind of space, even the space created by the passage of a cart or a
mule, people flowed into it, usually arguing with one another at the
tops of their voices over the price of a duck which was being held
upside down and quacking.

His foot went through a wicker cage containing several chickens, but he
pressed on, scattering people and produce. In an Ankh-Morpork street
market something like this would have caused some comment, but since
everyone around him already seemed to be screaming into other people’s
faces Rincewind was merely a momentary and unremarked nuisance as he
half ran, half limped with one squawking foot past the stalls.

Behind him, the people flowed back. There may have been some cries of
pursuit, but they were lost in the hubbub.

He didn’t stop until he found an overlooked alcove between a stall
selling songbirds and another purveying something that bubbled in bowls.
His foot crowed.

He smashed it against cobbles until the cage broke; the cockerel,
maddened by the heady air of freedom, pecked him on the knee and
fluttered away.

There were no sounds of pursuit. However, a battalion of trolls in tin
boots would have had trouble making themselves heard above a normal
Hunghung street market.

He let himself get his breath back.

Well, he was his own man again. So much for the Red Army. Admittedly he
was in the capital city, where he didn’t want to be, and it was only a
matter of time before something else unpleasant happened to him, but it
wasn’t actually happening at the moment. Let him find his bearings and
five minutes’ start and they could watch his dust. Or mud. There was a
lot of both, here.

So . . . this was Hunghung . . .

There didn’t seem to be streets in the sense Rincewind understood the
term. Alleys opened on to alleys, all of them narrow and made narrower
by the stalls that lined them. There was a large animal population in
the marketplace. Most of the stalls had their share of caged chickens,
ducks in sacks and strange wriggling things in bowls. From one stall a
tortoise on top of a struggling heap of other tortoises under a sign
saying: _3r. each, good for Ying_ gave Rincewind a slow, ‘You think
you’ve got troubles?’ look.

But it was hard to tell where the stalls ended and the buildings began
in any case. Dried-up things hanging on a string might be merchandise or
someone’s washing or quite possibly next week’s dinner.

The Hunghungese were an outdoor kind of people; from the look of it,
they conducted most of their lives on the street and at the top of their
voice.

Progress was made by viciously elbowing and shoving people until they
got out of the way. Standing still and saying, ‘Er, excuse me’ was a
recipe for immobility.

The crowds did part, though, at the banging of a gong and a succession
of loud ‘pops’. A group of people in white robes danced past, throwing
fireworks around and banging on gongs, saucepans and odd bits of metal.
The din contrived to be louder than the street noise, but only by very
great effort.

Rincewind had been getting the occasional puzzled glance from people who
stopped screaming long enough to notice him. Perhaps it was time to act
like a native.

He turned to the nearest person and screamed, ‘Pretty good, eh?’

The person, a little old lady in a straw hat, stared at him in distaste.

‘It’s Mr Whu’s funeral,’ she snapped, and walked off.

There were a couple of soldiers nearby. If this had been Ankh-Morpork,
then they’d have been sharing a cigarette and trying not to see anything
that might upset them. But these had an alert look.

Rincewind backed into another alley. An untutored visitor could clearly
find himself in big trouble here.

This alley was quieter and, at the far end, opened into something much
wider and empty looking. On the basis that people also meant trouble,
Rincewind headed in that direction.

Here, at last, was an open space. It was very open indeed. It was a
paved square, big enough to hold a couple of armies. It had cherry trees
growing along the verges. And, given the heaving mob everywhere else, a
surprising absence of anyone . . .

‘You!’

. . . apart from the soldiers.

They appeared abruptly from behind every tree and statue.

Rincewind tried to back away, but that proved unfortunate since there
was a guard behind him.

A terrifying armoured mask confronted him.

‘Peasant! Do you not know this is the Imperial Square?’

‘Was that a capital S on Square, please?’ said Rincewind.

‘You do not ask questions!’

‘Ah. I’ll take that as a “yes”. So it’s important, then. Sorry. I’ll
just sort of go away, then . . .’

‘You stay!’

But what struck Rincewind as amazingly odd was that none of them
actually took hold of him. And then he realized that this must be
because they hardly ever needed to. People did what they were told.

There’s something worse than whips in the Empire, Cohen had said.

At this point, he realized, he should be on his knees. He crouched down,
hands placed lightly in front of him.

‘I wonder,’ he said brightly, rising into the starting position, ‘if
this is the time to draw your attention to a famous saying?’

Cohen was familiar with city gates. He’d broken down a number in his
time, by battering ram, siege gun and on one occasion with his head.

But the gates of Hunghung were pretty damn good gates. They weren’t like
the gates of Ankh-Morpork, which were usually wide open to attract the
spending customer and whose concession to defence was the sign ‘Thank
You For Not Attacking Our City. Bonum Diem’. _These_ things were big and
made of metal and there was a guardhouse and a squad of unhelpful men in
black armour.

‘Teach?’

‘Yes, Cohen?’

‘Why’re we doing this? I thought we were going to use the invisible duck
the mice use.’

Mr Saveloy waggled a finger.

‘That’s for the Forbidden City itself. I hope we’ll find that inside.
Now, remember your lessons,’ he said. ‘It’s important that you all learn
how to behave in cities.’

‘I _know_ how to bloody well behave in cities,’ said Truckle the
Uncivil. ‘Pillage, ravish, loot, set fire to the damn place on your way
out. Just like towns only it takes longer.’

‘That’s all very well if you’re just passing through,’ said Mr Saveloy,
‘but what if you want to come back next day?’

‘It ain’t bloody well there next day, mister.’

‘Gentlemen! Bear with me. You will have to learn the ways of
civilization!’

People couldn’t just walk through. There was a line. And the guards
gathered rather offensively around each cowering visitor to examine
their papers.

And then it was Cohen’s turn.

‘Papers, old man?’

Cohen nodded happily, and handed the guard captain a piece of paper on
which was written, in Mr Saveloy’s best handwriting:

WE ARE WANDERING MADMEN WHO
HAVE NO PAPERS. SORRY.

The guard’s gaze lifted from the paper and met Cohen’s cheerful grin.

‘Indeed,’ he said nastily. ‘Can’t you speak, grandfather?’

Cohen, still grinning, looked questioningly at Mr Saveloy. They hadn’t
rehearsed this part.

‘Foolish dummy,’ said the guard.

Mr Saveloy looked outraged.

‘I thought you were supposed to show special consideration for the
insane!’ he said.

‘You cannot be insane without papers to say you’re insane,’ said the
guard.

‘Oh, I’m fed up with this,’ said Cohen. ‘I _said_ it wouldn’t work if we
came across a thick guard.’

‘Insolent peasant!’

‘I’m not as insolent as my friends here,’ said Cohen.

The Horde nodded.

‘That’s us, flatfoot.’

‘Bum to you.’

‘Whut?’

‘Extremely foolish soldier.’

‘Whut?’

The captain was taken aback. Deeply ingrained in the Agatean psyche was
the habit of obedience. But even stronger was a veneration of one’s
ancestors and a respect for the elderly, and the captain had never seen
anyone so elderly while still vertical. They practically _were_
ancestors. The one in the wheelchair certainly smelled like one.

‘Take them to the guardhouse!’ he shouted.

The Horde let themselves be manhandled, and did it quite well. Mr
Saveloy had spent hours training them in this, since he knew he was
dealing with men whose response to a tap on the shoulder was to turn
around and hack off someone’s arm.

It was crowded in the guardhouse, with the Horde and the guards and with
Mad Hamish’s wheelchair. One of the guards looked down at Hamish,
glowering under his blanket.

‘What do you have there, grandfather?’

A sword came up through the cloth and stabbed the guard in the thigh.

‘Whut? Whut? Whutzeesay?’

‘He said, “Aargh!”, Hamish,’ said Cohen, a knife appearing in his hand.
With one movement his skinny arms had the captain in a lock, the knife
at his throat.

‘Whut?’

‘He said, “Aargh!” ’

‘Whut? I ain’t even married!’

Cohen put a little more pressure on the captain’s neck.

‘Now then, friend,’ he said. ‘You can have it the easy way, see, or the
hard way. It’s up to you.’

‘Blood-sucking pig! You call this the easy way?’

‘Well, _I_ ain’t sweatin’.’

‘May you live in interesting times! I would rather die than betray my
Emperor!’

‘Fair enough.’

It took the captain only a fraction of a second to realize that Cohen,
being a man of his word, assumed that other people were too. He might,
if he had time, have reflected that the purpose of civilization is to
make violence the final resort, while to a barbarian it is the first,
preferred, only and above all most enjoyable option. But by then it was
too late. He slumped forward.

‘I _always_ lives in interestin’ times,’ said Cohen, in the satisfied
voice of someone who did a lot to keep them interesting.

He pointed his knife at the other guards. Mr Saveloy’s mouth was wide
open in horror.

‘By rights I should be cleanin’ this,’ said Cohen. ‘But I ain’t goin’ to
bother if it’s only goin’ to get dirty again. Now, _person’ly,_ I’d as
soon kill you as look at you but Teach here says I’ve got to stop doin’
that and become respectable.’

One of the guards looked sideways at his fellows and then fell on his
knees.

‘What is your wish, o master?’ he said.

‘Ah, officer material,’ said Cohen. ‘What’s your name, lad?’

‘Nine Orange Trees, master.’

Cohen looked at Mr Saveloy.

‘What do I do now?’

‘Take them prisoner, _please_.’

‘How do I do that?’

‘Well . . . I suppose you tie them up, that sort of thing.’

‘Ah. And then cut their throats?’

‘No! No. You see, once you’ve got them at your mercy, you’re not allowed
to kill them.’

The Silver Horde, to a man, stared at the ex-teacher.

‘I’m afraid that’s civilization for you,’ he added.

‘But you said the sods haven’t got any bloody weapons!’ said Truckle.

‘Yes,’ said Mr Saveloy, shuddering a little. ‘That’s why you’re not
allowed to kill them.’

‘Are you mad? Got mad papers, have you?’

Cohen scratched his stubbly chin. The remainder of the guard watched him
in trepidation. They were used to cruel and unusual punishment, but they
were unaccustomed to argument first.

‘You haven’t had a lot of military experience, have you, Teach?’ he
said.

‘Apart from Form Four? Not a lot. But I’m afraid this is the way it has
to be done. I’m sorry. You did say you wanted me—’

‘Well, _I_ vote we just cuts their throats right now,’ said Boy Willie.
‘I can’t be having with this prisoner business either. I mean, who’s
gonna feed them?’

‘I’m afraid you have to.’

‘Who me? Not likely! I vote we make them eat their own eyeballs. Hands
up all in favour.’

There was a chorus of assent from the Horde and, among the raised hands,
Cohen noticed one belonging to Nine Orange Trees.

‘What you voting for, lad?’ he said.

‘Please, sir, I would like to go to the lavatory.’

‘You listen to me, you lot,’ said Cohen. ‘This slaughtering and
butchering business isn’t how you do it these days, right? That’s what
Mr Saveloy says and he knows how to spell words like “marmalade” which
is more than you do. Now, we know why we’re here, and we’d better start
as we mean to go on.’

‘Yeah, but you just killed that guard,’ said Truckle.

‘I’m breaking myself in,’ said Cohen. ‘You’ve got to creep up on
civilization a bit at a time.’

‘I still say we should cut their heads off. That’s what I did to the Mad
Demon-Sucking Priests of Ee!’

The kneeling guard had cautiously raised his hand again.

‘Please, master?’

‘Yes, lad?’

‘You could lock us up in that cell over there. Then we wouldn’t be any
trouble to anyone.’

‘Good thinking,’ said Cohen. ‘Good lad. The boy keeps his head in a
crisis. Lock ’em up.’

Thirty seconds later the Horde had limped off, into the city.

The guards sat in the cramped, hot cell.

Eventually one said, ‘What were they?’

‘I think they might have been ancestors.’

‘I thought you had to be dead to be an ancestor.’

‘The one in the wheelchair _looked_ dead. Right up to the point where he
stabbed Four White Fox.’

‘Should we shout for help?’

‘They might hear us.’

‘Yes, but if we don’t get let out we’ll be stuck in here. And the walls
are very thick and the door is very strong.’

‘Good.’

Rincewind stopped running in some alley somewhere. He hadn’t bothered to
see if they’d followed him. It was true – here, with one mighty bound,
you _could_ be free. Provided you realized it was one of your options.

Freedom did, of course, include man’s age-old right to starve to death.
It seemed a long time since his last proper meal.

The voice erupted further down the alley, as if on cue.

‘Rice cakes! Rice cakes! Get chore nice rice cakes! Tea!
Hundred-Year-Old Eggs! Eggs! Get them while they’re nice and vintage!
Get chore – Yeah, what is it?’

An elderly man had approached the salesman.

‘Dibhala-san! This egg you sold me—’

‘What about it, venerable squire?’

‘Would you care to smell it?’

The street vendor took a sniff.

‘Ah, yes, lovely,’ he said.

‘Lovely? _Lovely?_ This egg,’ said the customer, ‘this egg is
practically fresh!’

‘Hundred years old if it’s a day, shogun,’ said the vendor happily.
‘Look at the colour of that shell, nice and black—’

‘It rubs off!’

Rincewind listened. There was, he thought, probably something in the
idea that there were only a few people in the world. There were lots of
_bodies_, but only a few people. That’s why you kept running into the
same ones. There was probably some mould somewhere.

‘You saying my produce is fresh! May I disembowel myself honourably!
Look, I’ll tell you what I’ll do—’

Yes, there seemed to be something familiar and magical about that
trader. Someone had come to complain about a fresh egg, and yet within a
couple of minutes he’d somehow been talked into forgetting this and
purchasing two rice cakes and something strange wrapped in leaves.

The rice cakes looked nice. Well . . . nicer than the other things.

Rincewind sidled over. The trader was idly jigging from one foot to the
other and whistling under his breath, but he stopped and gave Rincewind
a big, honest, friendly grin.

‘Nice ancient egg, shogun?’

The bowl in the middle of the tray was full of gold coins. Rincewind’s
heart sank. The price of one of Mr Dibhala’s foul eggs would have bought
a street in Ankh-Morpork.

‘I suppose you don’t give . . . credit?’ he suggested.

Dibhala gave him a Look.

‘I’ll pretend I never heard that, shogun,’ he said.

‘Tell me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Do you know if you have any relatives
overseas?’

This got him another look – a sideways one, full of sudden appraisal.

‘What? There’s nothing but evil blood-sucking ghosts beyond the seas.
Everyone knows that, shogun. I’m surprised you don’t.’

‘Ghosts?’ said Rincewind.

‘Trying to get here, do us harm,’ said Disembowel-Meself-Honourably.
‘Maybe even steal our merchandise. Give ’em a dose of the old
firecracker, that’s what _I_ say. They don’t like a good loud bang,
ghosts.’

He gave Rincewind another look, even longer and more calculating.

‘Where you from, shogun?’ he asked, and his voice suddenly had the
little barbed edge of suspicion.

‘Bes Pelargic,’ said Rincewind quickly. ‘That explains my strange accent
and mannerisms that might otherwise lead people to think I was some sort
of foreigner,’ he added.

‘Oh, Bes Pelargic,’ said Disembowel-Meself-Honourably. ‘Well, in that
case, I expect you know my old friend Five Tongs who lives in the Street
of Heavens, yes?’

Rincewind was ready for this old trick.

‘No,’ he said. ‘Never heard of him, never heard of the street.’

Disembowel-Meself-Honourably Dibhala grinned happily. ‘If I yell
“foreign devil” loud enough you won’t get three steps,’ he said in
conversational tones. ‘The guards will drag you off to the Forbidden
City where there’s this special thing they do with—’

‘I’ve heard about it,’ said Rincewind.

‘Five Tongs has been the district commissioner for three years and the
Street of Heavens is the main street,’ said
Disembowel-Meself-Honourably. ‘I’ve always wanted to meet a
blood-sucking foreign ghost. Have a rice cake.’

Rincewind’s gaze darted this way and that. But strangely enough the
situation didn’t seem dangerous, or at least inevitably dangerous. It
seemed that danger was negotiable.

‘Supposing I was to admit I _was_ from behind the Wall?’ he said,
keeping his voice as low as possible.

Dibhala nodded. One hand reached into his robe and, in a quick movement,
revealed and then concealed the corner of something which Rincewind was
not entirely surprised to see was entitled WHAT I DID . . .

‘Some people say that beyond the Wall there’s nothing but deserts and
burning wastes and evil ghosts and terrible monsters,’ said Dibhala,
‘but _I_ say, what about the merchandizing opportunities? A man with the
right contacts . . . Know what I mean, shogun? He could go a _long_ way
in the land of blood-sucking ghosts.’

Rincewind nodded. He didn’t like to point out that if you turned up in
Ankh-Morpork with a handful of gold then about three hundred people
would turn up with a handful of steel.

‘The way I see it, what with all this uncertainty about the Emperor and
talk of rebels and that – Long Live His Excellency The Son Of Heaven, of
course – there might just be a nitch for the open-minded trader, am I
right?’

‘Nitch?’

‘Nitch. Like . . . we’ve got this stuff – he leaned closer – ‘comes out
of a caterpillar’s [unidentified pictogram]. ‘S called . . . _silk._
It’s—’

‘Yes, I know. We get it from Klatch,’ said Rincewind.

‘Or, well, there’s this bush, see, you dry the leaves, but then you put
it in hot water and you drin—’

‘Tea, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘That comes from Howondaland.’

D. M. H. Dibhala looked taken aback.

‘Well . . . we’ve got this powder, you put it in tubes—’

‘Fireworks? Got fireworks.’

‘How about this really fine china, it’s so—’

‘In Ankh-Morpork we’ve got dwarfs that can make china you can read a
book through,’ said Rincewind. ‘Even if it’s got tiny footnotes in it.’

Dibhala frowned.

‘Sounds like you are very clever blood-sucking ghosts,’ he said, backing
away. ‘Maybe it’s true and you _are_ dangerous.’

‘Us? Don’t worry about us,’ said Rincewind. ‘We hardly ever kill
foreigners in Ankh-Morpork. It makes it so hard to sell them things
afterwards.’

‘What’ve we got that you want, though? Go on, have a rice cake. On the
pagoda. Wanna try some pork balls? Onna chopstick?’

Rincewind selected a cake. He didn’t like to ask about the other stuff.

‘You’ve got gold,’ he said.

‘Oh, _gold._ It’s too soft to do much with,’ said Dibhala. ‘It’s all
right for pipes and putting on roofs, though.’

‘Oh . . . I daresay people in Ankh-Morpork could find a use for some,’
said Rincewind. His gaze returned to the coins in Dibhala’s tray.

A land where gold was as cheap as lead . . .

‘What’s that?’ he said, pointing to a crumpled rectangle half covered
with coins.

D. M. H. Dibhala looked down. ‘It’s this thing we have here,’ he said,
speaking slowly. ‘Of course, it’s probably all new to you. It’s called
mon-ey. It’s a way of carrying around your—’

‘I meant the bit of paper,’ said Rincewind.

‘So did I,’ said Dibhala. ‘That’s a ten-_rhinu_ note.’

‘What does that mean?’ said Rincewind.

‘Means what it says,’ said Dibhala. ‘Means it’s worth ten of these,’ He
held up a gold coin about the size of a rice cake.

‘Why’d you want to buy a piece of paper?’ said Rincewind.

‘You don’t buy it, it’s for buying things _with_,’ said Dibhala.

Rincewind looked blank.

‘You go to a mark-et stall,’ said Dibhala, getting back into the
slow-voice-for-the-hard-of-thinking, ‘and you say, “Good morn-ing,
but-cher, how much for those dog noses?” and he says, “Three _rhinu,_
shogun,” and _you_ say, “I’ve only got a pony, OK?” (look, there’s an
etch-ing of a pony on it, see, that’s what you get on ten-_rhinu_ notes)
and he gives you the dog noses and seven coins in what we call “change”.
Now, if you had a monkey, that’s fifty _rhinu,_ he’d say “Got anything
smal-ler?” and—’

‘But it’s only a bit of paper!’ Rincewind wailed.

‘It may be a bit of paper to you but it’s ten rice cakes to me,’ said
Dibhala. ‘What do you foreign bloodsuckers use? Big stones with holes in
them?’

Rincewind stared at the paper money.

There were dozens of papermills in Ankh-Morpork, and some of the
craftsmen in the Engravers’ Guild could engrave their name and address
on a pinhead.

He suddenly felt immensely proud of his countrymen. They might be venal
and greedy, but by heaven they were _good_ at it and they never assumed
that there wasn’t any more to learn.

‘I think you’ll find,’ he said, ‘that there’s a lot of buildings in
Ankh-Morpork that need new roofs.’

‘Really?’ said Dibhala.

‘Oh, yes. The rain’s just pouring in.’

‘And people can pay? Only I heard—’

Rincewind looked at the paper money again. He shook his head. Worth more
than gold . . .

‘They’ll pay with notes at least as good as that,’ he said. ‘Probably
even better. I’ll put in a good word for you. And now,’ he added
hurriedly, ‘which way is out?’

Dibhala scratched his head.

‘Could be a bit tricky,’ he said. ‘There’s armies outside. You look a
bit foreign with that hat. Could be tricky—’

There was a commotion further along the alley or, rather, a general
increase in the commotion. The crowd parted in that hurried way common
to unarmed crowds in the presence of weaponry, and a group of guards
hurried towards Disembowel-Meself-Honourably.

He stepped back and gave them the friendly grin of one happy to sell at
a discount to anyone with a knife.

A limp figure was being dragged between two of the guards. As it went
past it raised a slightly blood-stained head and said, ‘Extended
Duration to the—’ before a gloved fist smacked across its mouth.

And then the guards were heading down the street. The crowd flowed back.

‘Tch, tch,’ said D. M. H. ‘Seems to be – Hello? Where’d you go?’

Rincewind reappeared from around a corner. D. M. H. looked impressed.
There had actually been a small thunderclap when Rincewind moved.

‘See they got another of ’em,’ he said. ‘Putting up wall posters again,
I expect.’

‘Another one of who?’ said Rincewind.

‘Red Army. Huh!’

‘Oh.’

‘I don’t pay much attention,’ said D. M. H. ‘They say some old legend’s
going to come true about emperors and stuff. Can’t see it myself.’

‘He didn’t look very legendary,’ said Rincewind.

‘Ach, some people will believe anything.’

‘What’ll happen to him?’

‘Difficult to say, with the Emperor about to die. Hands and feet cut
off, probably.’

‘What? Why?’

‘ ’Cos he’s young. That’s leniency. A bit older and it’s his head on a
spike over one of the gates.’

‘That’s punishment for putting up a _poster_?’

‘Stops ’em doing it again, see,’ said D. M. H.

Rincewind backed away.

‘Thank you,’ he said, and hurried off.

‘Oh, no,’ he said, pushing his way through the crowds. ‘I’m _not_
getting mixed up in people’s heads getting chopped off—’

And then someone hit him again. But politely.

As he sank to his knees, and then to his chin, he wondered what had
happened to the good old-fashioned ‘Hey, you!’

The Silver Horde wandered through the alleys of Hunghung.

‘I don’t call _this_ bloody well sweeping through a city, slaughtering
every bugger,’ muttered Truckle. ‘When I was riding with Bruce the Hoon,
we _never_ walked in through a front gate like a bunch of soppy mother—’

‘Mr Uncivil,’ said Mr Saveloy hurriedly, ‘I wonder if this might be a
good time to refer you to that list I drew up for you?’

‘What bloody list?’ said Truckle, sticking out his jaw belligerently.

‘The list of acceptable _civilized_ words, yes?’ He turned to the
others. ‘Remember I was telling you about civ-il-ized be-hav-iour.
Civilized behaviour is vital to our long-term strategy.’

‘What’s a long-term strategy?’ said Caleb the Ripper.

‘It’s what we’re going to do later,’ said Cohen.

‘And what’s that, then?’

‘It’s the Plan,’ said Cohen.

‘Well, I’ll be f—’ Truckle began.

‘The list, Mr Uncivil, only the words on the _list_,’ snapped Mr
Saveloy. ‘Listen, I bow to your expertise when it comes to crossing
wildernesses, but this is civilization and you must use the right words.
Please?’

‘Better do what he says, Truckle,’ said Cohen.

With bad grace, Truckle fished a grubby piece of paper out of his pocket
and unfolded it.

‘“Dang”?’ he said. ‘Wassat mean? And what’s this “darn” and “heck”?’

‘They are . . . _civilized_ swearwords,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Well, you can take ’em and—’

‘Ah?’ said Mr Saveloy, raising a cautionary finger.

‘You can shove them up—’

‘Ah?’

‘You can—’

‘Ah?’

Truckle shut his eyes and clenched his fists.

‘Dang it all to heck!’ he shouted.

‘Good,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘That’s much better.’

He turned to Cohen, who was grinning happily at Truckle’s discomfort.

‘Cohen,’ he said, ‘there’s an apple stall over there. Do you fancy an
apple?’

‘Yeah, might do,’ Cohen conceded, in the cautious manner of someone
giving a conjuror his watch while remaining aware that the man is
grinning and holding a hammer.

‘Right. Now, then, cla— I mean, gentlemen. Ghenghiz wants an apple.
There’s a stall over there selling fruit and nuts. What does he do?’ Mr
Saveloy looked hopefully at his charges. ‘Anyone? Yes?’

‘Easy. You kill that little’ – there was a rustle of unfolding paper
again – ‘_chap_ behind the stall, then—’

‘No, Mr Uncivil. Anyone else?’

‘Whut?’

‘You set fire to—’

‘No, Mr Vincent. Anyone else . . . ?’

‘You rape—’

‘No, no, Mr Ripper,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘We take out some muh – muh—?’ He
looked at them expectantly.

‘—money—’ chorused the Horde.

‘—and we . . . What do we do? Now, we’ve gone through this hundreds of
times. We . . .’

This was the difficult bit. The Horde’s lined faces creased and puckered
still further as they tried to force their minds out of the chasms of
habit.

‘Gi . . . ?’ said Cohen hesitantly. Mr Saveloy gave him a big smile and
a nod of encouragement.

‘Give? . . . it . . . to . . .’ Cohen’s lips tensed around the word ‘. .
. him?’

‘Yes! Well done. In _exchange_ for the apple. We’ll talk about making
change and saying “thank you” later on, when you’re ready for it. Now
then, Cohen, here’s the coin. Off you go.’

Cohen wiped his forehead. He was beginning to sweat.

‘How about if I just cut him up a bit—’

‘No! This is _civilization_.’

Cohen nodded uncomfortably. He threw back his shoulders and walked over
to the stall, where the apple merchant, who had been eyeing the group
suspiciously, nodded at him.

Cohen’s eyes glazed and his lips moved silently, as if he were
rehearsing a script. Then he said:

‘Ho, fat merchant, give me all your . . . one apple . . . and I will
give you . . . this coin . . .’

He looked around. Mr Saveloy had his thumb up.

‘You want an apple, is that it?’ said the apple merchant.

‘Yes!’

The apple merchant selected one. Cohen’s sword had been hidden in the
wheelchair again but the merchant, in response to some buried
acknowledgement, made sure it was a _good_ apple. Then he took the coin.
This proved a little difficult, since his customer seemed loath to let
go of it.

‘Come on, hand it over, venerable one,’ he said.

Seven crowded seconds passed.

Then, when they were safely around the corner, Mr Saveloy said, ‘Now,
everyone: who can tell me what Ghenghiz did wrong?’

‘Didn’t say please?’

‘Whut?’

‘No.’

‘Didn’t say thank you?’

‘Whut?’

‘No.’

‘Hit the man over the head with a melon and thumped him into the
strawberries and kicked him in the nuts and set fire to his stall and
stole all the money?’

‘Whut?’

‘Correct!’ Mr Saveloy sighed. ‘Ghenghiz, you were doing _so_ well up to
then.’

‘He didn’t ort to have called me what he did!’

‘But “venerable” means old and wise, Ghenghiz.’

‘Oh. Does it?’

‘Yes.’

‘We-ell. . . I did leave him the money for the apple.’

‘Yes, but, you see, I do believe you took all his other money.’

‘But I _paid_ for the apple,’ said Cohen, rather testily.

Mr Saveloy sighed. ‘Ghenghiz, I do rather get the impression that
several thousand years of the patient development of fiscal propriety
have somewhat passed you by.’

‘Come again?’

‘It is possible sometimes for money to legitimately belong to other
people,’ said Mr Saveloy patiently.

The Horde paused to wrap their minds around this, too. It was, of
course, something they knew to be true in theory. Merchants always had
money. But it seemed wrong to think of it as _belonging_ to them; it
_belonged_ to whoever took it off them. Merchants didn’t actually _own_
it, they were just looking after it until it was needed.

‘Now, there is an elderly lady over there selling ducks,’ said Mr
Saveloy. ‘I think the next stage – Mr Willie, I am not over there, I am
sure whatever you are looking at is very interesting, but please pay
attention – is to practise our grasp of social intercourse.’

‘Hur, hur, hur,’ said Caleb the Ripper.

‘I mean, Mr Ripper, that you should go and enquire how much it would be
for a duck,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Hur, hur, hur – What?’

‘And you are not to rip all her clothes off. That’s not civilized.’

Caleb scratched his head. Flakes fell out.

‘Well, what else am I supposed to do?’

‘Er . . . engage her in conversation.’

‘Eh? What’s there to talk about with a woman?’

Mr Saveloy hesitated again. To some extent this was unknown territory to
him as well. His experience with women at his last school had been
limited to an occasional chat with the housekeeper, and on one occasion
the matron had let him put his hand on her knee. He had been forty
before he found out that oral sex didn’t mean talking about it. Women
had always been to him strange and distant and wonderful creatures
rather than, as the Horde to a man believed, something to do. He was
struggling a little.

‘The weather?’ he hazarded. His memory threw in vague recollections of
the staple conversation of the maiden aunt who had brought him up. ‘Her
health? The trouble with young people today?’

‘And then I rip her clothes off?’

‘Possibly. Eventually. If she wants you to. I might draw your attention
to the discussion we had the other day about taking regular baths’ – or
even _a_ bath, he added to himself – ‘and attention to fingernails and
hair and changing your clothes more often.’

‘This is leather,’ said Caleb. ‘You don’t have to change it, it don’t
rot for _years_.’

Once again Mr Saveloy readjusted his sights. He’d thought that
Civilization could be overlaid on the Horde like a veneer. He had been
mistaken.

But the funny thing – he mused, as the Horde watched Caleb’s painful
attempts at conversation with a representative of half the world’s
humanity – was that although they were as far away as possible from the
kind of people he normally mixed with in staffrooms, or possibly because
they were as far away as possible from the kind of people he normally
mixed with in staffrooms, he actually _liked_ them. Every one of them
saw a book as either a lavatorial accessory or a set of portable
firelighters and thought that hygiene was a greeting. Yet they were
honest (from their specialized point of view) and decent (from their
specialized point of view) and saw the world as hugely simple. They
stole from rich merchants and temples and kings. They didn’t steal from
poor people; this was not because there was anything virtuous about poor
people, it was simply because poor people had no money.

And although they didn’t set out to give the money _away_ to the poor,
that was nevertheless what they did (if you accepted that the poor
consisted of innkeepers, ladies of negotiable virtue, pickpockets,
gamblers and general hangers-on), because although they would go to
great lengths to steal money they then had as much control over it as a
man trying to herd cats. It was there to be spent and lost. So they kept
the money in circulation, always a praiseworthy thing in any society.

They never worried about what other people thought. Mr Saveloy, who’d
spent his whole life worrying about what other people thought and had
been passed over for promotion and generally treated as a piece of
furniture as a result, found this strangely attractive. And they never
agonized about anything, or wondered if they were doing the right thing.
And they enjoyed themselves immensely. They had a kind of honour. He
_liked_ the Horde. They weren’t his kind of people.

Caleb returned, looking unusually thoughtful.

‘Congratulations, Mr Ripper!’ said Mr Saveloy, a great believer in
positive reinforcement. ‘She still appears to be fully clothed.’

‘Yeah, what’d she say?’ said Boy Willie.

‘She smiled at me,’ said Caleb. He scratched his crusty beard uneasily.
‘A bit, anyway,’ he added.

‘Good,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘She, er . . . she said she’d . . . she wouldn’t mind seein’ me . . .
later . . .’

‘Well done!’

‘Er . . . Teach? What’s a _shave_?’

Saveloy explained.

Caleb listened carefully, grimacing occasionally. He turned round
occasionally to look at the duck seller, who gave him a little wave.

‘Cor,’ he said. ‘Er. I dunno . . .’ He looked around again. ‘Never seen
a woman who wasn’t running away before.’

‘Oh, women are like deer,’ said Cohen loftily. ‘You can’t just charge
in, you gotta stalk ’em—’

‘Hur, hur, h – Sorry,’ said Caleb, catching Mr Saveloy’s stern eye.

‘I think perhaps we should end the lesson here,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘We
don’t want to get you _too_ civilized, do we . . . ? I suggest we take a
stroll around the Forbidden City, yes?’

They’d all seen it. It dominated the centre of Hunghung. Its walls were
forty feet high.

‘There’s a lot of soldiers guarding the gates,’ said Cohen.

‘So they should. A great treasure lies within,’ said Mr Saveloy. He
didn’t raise his eyes, though. He seemed to be staring intently at the
ground, as though searching for something he’d lost.

‘Why don’t we just rush up and kill the guards?’ Caleb demanded. He was
still feeling a bit shaken.

‘Whut?’

‘Don’t be daft,’ said Cohen. ‘It’d take all day. Anyway,’ he added,
feeling a little proud despite himself, ‘Teach here is goin’ to get us
in on an invisible duck, ain’t that so, Teach?’

Mr Saveloy stopped.

‘Ah. Eureka,’ he said.

‘That’s Ephebian, that is,’ Cohen told the Horde. ‘It means “Give me a
towel.” ’

‘Oh yeah,’ said Caleb, who had been surreptitiously trying to untangle
the knots in his beard. ‘And when were you ever in Ephebe?’

‘Went bounty hunting there once.’

‘Who for?’

‘You, I think.’

‘Hah! Did you find me?’

‘Dunno. Nod your head and see if it falls off.’

‘Ah. Gentlemen . . . behold . . .’

Mr Saveloy’s orthopaedic sandal was prodding an ornamental metal square
in the ground.

‘Behold what?’ said Truckle.

‘Whut?’

‘We should look for more of these,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘But I think we
have it. All we need to do now is wait until dark.’

* * *

There was an argument going on. All Rincewind could make out were the
voices; another sack had been tied over his head, while he himself was
tied to a pillar.

‘Does he even _look_ like a Great Wizard?’

‘That’s what it says on his hat in the language of ghosts—’

‘So you say!’

‘What about the testimony of Four Big Sandal, then?’

‘He was overtaxed. He could have imagined it!’

‘I did not! He came out of thin air, flying like a dragon! He knocked
over five soldiers. And Three Maximum Luck saw it also. And the others.
And then he freed an ancient man and turned him into a mighty fighting
warrior!’

‘And he can speak our language, just as it says in the book.’

‘All right. Supposing he _is_ the Great Wizard? Then we should kill him
now!’

In the darkness of his sack, Rincewind shook his head furiously.

‘Why?’

‘He will be on the side of the Emperor.’

‘But the legend says the Great Wizard led the Red Army!’

‘Yes, for Emperor One Sun Mirror. It crushed the people!’

‘No, it crushed all the bandit chiefs! Then it built the Empire!’

‘So? The Empire is so great? Untimely Demise To The Forces Of
Oppression!’

‘But _now_ the Red Army is on the side of the people! Maximum
Advancement With The Great Wizard!’

‘The Great Wizard is the Enemy of the People!’

‘I saw him, I tell you! A legion of soldiers collapsed with the wind of
his passage!’

The wind of his passage was beginning to worry Rincewind as well. It
always tended to when he was frightened.

‘If he is such a great wizard, why is he still tied up? Why has he not
made his bonds disappear in puffs of green smoke?’

‘Perhaps he is saving his magic for some even mightier deeds. He
wouldn’t do firecracker tricks for earthworms.’

‘Hah!’

‘And he had the Book! He was looking for us! It is his destiny to lead
the Red Army!’

Shake, shake, shake.

‘We can lead ourselves!’

Nod, nod, nod.

‘We don’t need any suspicious Great Wizards from illusionary places!’

Nod, nod, nod.

‘So we should kill him now!’

Nod, no – _Shakeshakeshake._

‘Hah! He laughs at you with scorn! He waits to make your head explode
with snakes of fire!’

Shake, shake, shake.

‘You do know that while we’re arguing Three Yoked Oxen is being
tortured?’

‘The People’s Army is more than just individuals, Lotus Blossom!’

In the foetid sack Rincewind grimaced. He was already beginning to take
a dislike to the first speaker, as one naturally does with people urging
that you be put to death without delay. But when that sort of person
started talking about things being more important than people, you knew
you were in big trouble.

‘I’m sure the Great Wizard could rescue Three Yoked Oxen,’ said a voice
by his ear. It was Butterfly.

‘Yes, he could easily rescue Three Yoked Oxen!’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘Hah! You say? He could get into the Forbidden City? Impossible! It’s
certain death!’

Nod, nod, nod.

‘Not to the Great Wizard,’ said the voice of Butterfly.

‘_Shut up!_’ hissed Rincewind.

‘_Would you like to know how big the meat cleaver is that Two Fire Herb
is holding in his hand_?’ whispered Butterfly.

‘No!’

‘It’s very big.’

‘He said that going into the Forbidden City is certain death!’

_‘No. It’s only_ probable _death. I assure you, if you run away from me
again that is_ certain _death_.’

The sack was pulled away.

The face immediately in front of him was that of Lotus Blossom, and a
man could see a lot worse things with his daylight than her face, which
made him think of cream and masses of butter and just the right amount
of salt.²²

One of the things he might see, for example, was the face of Two Fire
Herb. This was not a nice face. It was podgy and had tiny little pupils
in its eyes, and looked like a living example of the fact that although
the people could be oppressed by kings and emperors and mandarins, the
job could often be done just as well by the man next door.

‘Great Wizard? Hah!’ Two Fire Herb said now.

‘He can do it!’ said Lotus Blossom (and cream cheese, thought Rincewind,
and maybe coleslaw on the side). ‘He _is_ the Great Wizard come back to
us! Did he not guide the Master through the lands of ghosts and
blood-sucking vampires?’

‘Oh, I wouldn’t say—’ Rincewind began.

‘Such a great wizard allowed you to bring him here in a sack?’ said Two
Fire Herb, sneering. ‘Let us see him do some conjuring . . .’

‘A truly _great_ wizard would not stoop to doing party tricks!’ said
Lotus Blossom.

‘That’s right,’ said Rincewind. ‘Not stoop.’

‘Shame on Herb to suggest such a thing!’

‘Shame,’ Rincewind agreed.

‘Besides, he will need all of his power to enter the Forbidden City,’
said Butterfly. Rincewind found himself hating the sound of her voice.

‘Forbidden City,’ he murmured.

‘Everyone knows there are terrible snares and traps and many, many
guards.’

‘Snares, traps . . .’

‘Why, if his magic should fail him because he did tricks for Herb, he
would find himself in the deepest dungeon, dying by inches.’

‘Inches . . . er . . . which particular inch—’

‘So much shame to Two Fire Herb!’

Rincewind gave her a sickly grin.

‘Actually,’ he said, ‘I’m not _that_ great. I’m a _bit_ great,’ he added
quickly, as Butterfly began to frown, ‘but not _very_ great—’

‘The writings of the Master say that you defeated many powerful
enchanters and resolutely succeeded in dangerous situations.’

Rincewind nodded glumly. It was more or less true. But most of the time
he hadn’t intended to. Whereas the Forbidden City had looked . . . well
. . . forbidden. It didn’t look inviting. It didn’t look as though it
sold postcards. The only souvenir they were likely to give you would be,
perhaps, your teeth. In a bag.

‘Er . . . I expect this Oxen lad is in some deep dungeon, yes?’

‘The deepest,’ said Two Fire Herb.

‘And . . . you’ve never seen anyone again? Who’s been taken prisoner, I
mean.’

‘We have seen _bits_ of them,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘Usually their heads,’ said Two Fire Herb. ‘On spikes over the gates.’

‘But not Three Yoked Oxen,’ said Lotus Blossom firmly. ‘The Great Wizard
has spoken!’

‘Actually, I’m not sure I actually said—’

‘You have spoken,’ said Butterfly firmly.

As Rincewind got accustomed to the gloom he realized that he was in some
storeroom or cellar; the noise of the city came, rather muffled, from
grilles near the ceiling. It was half full of barrels and bundles, and
every one of them was a perch for someone. The room was crowded.

The people were watching him with expressions of rapt attention, but
that wasn’t the only thing they had in common.

Rincewind turned right around.

‘Who are all these children?’ he said.

‘This,’ said Lotus Blossom, ‘is the Hunghung cadre of the Red Army.’

Two Fire Herb snorted.

‘Why did you tell him that?’ he said. ‘Now we may have to kill him.’

‘But they’re all so young!’

‘They may be underprivileged in years,’ said Two Fire Herb, ‘but they
are ancient in courage and honour.’

‘And experienced in fighting?’ said Rincewind hotly. ‘The guards I’ve
seen do not look like nice people. I mean, do you even have any
weapons?’

‘We will wrest the weapons we need from our enemies!’ said Two Fire
Herb. A cheer went up.

‘Really? How do you actually make them let go?’ said Rincewind. He
pointed to a very small girl, who leaned away from his digit as though
it were loaded. She looked about seven and was holding a toy rabbit.

‘What’s your name?’

‘One Favourite Pearl, Great Wizard!’

‘And what do you do in the Red Army?’

‘I have earned a medal for putting up of wall posters, Great Wizard!’

‘What . . . like “Slightly Bad Things Please Happen To Our Enemies”?
That sort of thing?’

‘Er . . .’ said the girl, looking imploringly at Butterfly.

‘Rebellion is not easy for us,’ said the older girl. ‘We don’t have . .
. experience.’

‘Well, I’m here to tell you that you don’t do it by singing songs and
putting up posters and fighting bare-handed,’ said Rincewind. ‘Not when
you’re up against real people with real weapons. You . . .’ His voice
trailed away as he realized that a hundred pairs of eyes were watching
him intently, and two hundred ears were carefully listening.

He played back his own words in the echo chamber of his head. He’d said,
‘I’m here to tell you . . .’

He spread out his hands and waved them frantically.

‘. . . that is, it’s not up to me to tell you anything,’ he said.

‘That is _correct_,’ said Two Fire Herb. ‘We will overcome because
history is on our side.’

‘We will overcome because the Great Wizard is on our side,’ said
Butterfly sharply.

‘I’ll tell you this!’ shouted Rincewind. ‘I’d rather trust me than
history! Oh, shit, did I just say that?’

‘So you _will_ help Three Yoked Oxen,’ said Butterfly.

‘Please!’ said Lotus Blossom.

Rincewind looked at her, and the tears in the corners of her eyes, and
the bunch of awed teenagers who really thought that you could beat an
army by singing rousing songs.

There was only one thing he could do, if he really thought about it.

He could play along for now and then get the hell out of it at the very
first opportunity. Butterfly’s anger was bad, but a spike was a spike.
Of course, he’d feel a bit of a heel for a while, but that was the
point. He’d feel a heel, but he wouldn’t feel a spike.

The world had too many heroes and didn’t need another one. Whereas the
world had only one Rincewind and he owed it to the world to keep this
one alive for as long as possible.

There was an inn. There was a courtyard. There was a corral, for the
Luggages.

There were large travelling trunks, big enough to carry the needs of an
entire household for a fortnight. There were merchants’ sample cases,
mere square boxes on crude legs. There were sleek overnight bags.

They shuffled aimlessly in their pen. Occasionally there was the rattle
of a handle or the creak of a hinge, and once or twice the snap of a lid
and the bonk-bonk-bonk of boxes trying to get out of the way.

Three of them were big and covered with studded leather. They looked the
kind of travelling accessories that hang around outside cheap hotels and
make suggestive remarks to handbags.

The object of their attention was a rather smaller trunk with an inlaid
lid and dainty feet. It had already backed into a corner as far as it
could go.

A large spiked lid creaked open a couple of times as the largest of the
boxes edged closer.

The smaller box had retreated so far its back legs were trying to climb
the corral fence.

There was the sound of running feet on the other side of the courtyard
wall. They got closer, and then stopped abruptly.

Then there was a twang such as would be made by an object landing on the
taut roof of a cart.

For a moment, against the rising moon, there was the shape of something
somersaulting slowly through the evening air.

It landed heavily in front of the three big chests, bounced upright and
charged.

Eventually various travellers spilled out into the night but by then
items of clothing were strewn and trampled around the courtyard. Three
black chests, battered and scarred, were discovered on the roof, each
one scrabbling on the tiles and butting the others in an effort to be
the highest. Others had panicked and broken down the wall and headed out
across the country.

Eventually, all but one of them were found.

The Horde were feeling quite proud of themselves when they sat down for
dinner. They acted, Mr Saveloy thought, rather like boys who’d just got
their first pair of long trousers.

Which they had done. Each man had one baggy pair of same, plus a long
grey robe.

‘We’ve been _shopping_,’ said Caleb proudly. ‘Paying for things with
_money._ We’re dressed up like civilized people.’

‘Yes indeed,’ said Mr Saveloy indulgently. He was hoping that they could
all get through this without the Horde finding out what _kind_ of
civilized people they were dressed up as. As it was, the beards were a
problem. The kind of people who wore these kind of clothes in the
Forbidden City didn’t usually have beards. They were proverbial for not
having them. Actually, they were more properly proverbial for not having
other things but, as a sort of consequence of this lack, also for not
having beards.

Cohen shifted. ‘Itchy,’ he said. ‘This is pants, is it? Never worn ’em
before. Same with shirts. What good’s a shirt that’s not chain mail?’

‘We did very well, though,’ said Caleb. He had even had a shave,
obliging the barber, for the first time in his experience, to use a
chisel. He kept rubbing his naked, baby-pink chin.

‘Yeah, we’re really civilized,’ said Vincent.

‘Except for the bit where you set fire to that shopkeeper,’ said Boy
Willie.

‘Nah, I only set fire to him a bit.’

‘Whut?’

‘Teach?’

‘Yes, Cohen?’

‘Why did you tell that firework merchant that everyone you knew had died
suddenly?’

Mr Saveloy’s foot tapped gently against the large parcel under the
table, alongside a nice new cauldron.

‘So he wouldn’t get suspicious about what I was buying,’ he said.

‘Five thousand firecrackers?’

‘Whut?’

‘Well,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Did I ever tell you that after I taught
geography in the Assassins’ Guild and the Plumbers’ Guild I did it for a
few terms in the Alchemists’ Guild?’

‘Alchemists? Loonies, the lot of them,’ said Truckle.

‘But they’re keen on geography,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I suppose they need
to know where they’ve landed. Eat up, gentlemen. It may be a long
night.’

‘What is this stuff?’ said Truckle, spearing something with his
chopstick.

‘Er. Chow,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Yes, but what _is_ it?’

‘Chow. A kind of . . . er . . . dog.’

The Horde looked at him.

‘There’s nothing _wrong_ with it,’ he said hurriedly, with the sincerity
of a man who had ordered bamboo shoots and bean curd for himself.

‘I’ve eaten everything else,’ said Truckle, ‘but I ain’t eating dog. I
had a dog once. Rover.’

‘Yeah,’ said Cohen. ‘The one with the spiked collar? The one who used to
eat people?’

‘Say what you like, he was a friend to me,’ said Truckle, pushing the
meat to one side.

‘Rabid death to everyone else. I’ll eat yours. Order him some chicken,
Teach.’

‘Et a man once,’ mumbled Mad Hamish. ‘In a siege, it were.’

‘You ate someone?’ said Mr Saveloy, beckoning to the waiter.

‘Just a leg.’

‘That’s terrible!’

‘Not with mustard.’

Just when I think I know them, Mr Saveloy mused . . .

He reached for his wine glass. The Horde reached for their glasses too,
while watching him carefully.

‘A toast, gentlemen,’ he said. ‘And remember what I said about not
quaffing. Quaffing just gets your ears wet. Just sip. To Civilization!’

The Horde joined in with their own toasts.

‘“Pcharn’kov!” ’²³

‘“Lie down on the floor and no one gets hurt!”’

‘“May you live in interesting pants!”’

‘“What’s the magic word? Gimmee!”’

‘“Death to most tyrants!”’

‘Whut?’

* * *

‘The walls of the Forbidden City are forty feet high,’ said Butterfly.
‘And the gates are made of brass. There are hundreds of guards. But of
course we have the Great Wizard.’

‘Who?’

‘You.’

‘Sorry, I was forgetting.’

‘Yes,’ said Butterfly, giving Rincewind a long, appraising look.
Rincewind remembered tutors giving him a look like that when he’d got
high marks in some test by simply guessing at the answers.

He looked down hurriedly at the charcoal scrawls Lotus Blossom had made.

Cohen’d know what to do, he thought. _He’d_ just slaughter his way
through. It’d never cross his mind to be afraid or worried. He’s the
kind of man you need at a time like this.

‘No doubt you have magic spells that can blow down the walls,’ said
Lotus Blossom.

Rincewind wondered what they would do to him when it turned out that he
couldn’t. Not a lot, he thought, if I’m already running. Of course they
could curse his memory and call him names, but he was used to that.
Sticks and stones may break my bones, he thought. He was vaguely aware
that there was a second half to the saying, but he’d never bothered
because the first half always occupied all his attention.

Even the Luggage had left him. That was a minor bright spot, but he
missed that patter of little feet . . .

‘Before we start,’ he said, ‘I think you ought to sing a revolutionary
song.’

The cadre liked the idea. Under cover of their chanting he sidled over
to Butterfly, who gave him a knowing smile.

‘You know I can’t do it!’

‘The Master said you were very resourceful.’

‘I can’t magic a hole in a wall!’

‘I’m sure you’ll think of something. And . . . Great Wizard?’

‘Yes, what?’

‘Favourite Pearl, the child with the toy rabbit . . . ’

‘Yes?’

‘The cadre is all she has. The same goes for many of the others. When
the warlords fight, lots of people die. Parents. Do you understand? I
was one of the first to read _What I Did On My Holidays_, Great Wizard,
and what I saw in there was a foolish man who for some reason is always
lucky. Great Wizard . . . I hope for everyone’s sake you have a great
deal of luck. Especially for yours.’

Fountains tinkled in the courts of the Sun Emperor. Peacocks made their
call, which sounds like a sound made by something that shouldn’t look as
beautiful as that. Ornamental trees cast their shade as only they knew
how – ornamentally.

The gardens occupied the heart of the city and it was possible to hear
the noises from outside, although these were muted because of the straw
spread daily on the nearest streets and also because any sound
considered too loud would earn its originator a very brief stay in
prison.

Of the gardens, the most aesthetically pleasing was the one laid out by
the first Emperor, One Sun Mirror. It consisted entirely of gravel and
stones, but artfully raked and laid out as it might be by a mountain
torrent with a refined artistic sense. It was here that One Sun Mirror,
in whose reign the Empire had been unified and the Great Wall built,
came to refresh his soul and dwell upon the essential unity of all
things, while drinking wine out of the skull of some enemy or possibly a
gardener who had been too clumsy with his rake.

At the moment the garden was occupied by Two Little Wang, the Master of
Protocol, who came there because he felt it was good for his nerves.

Perhaps it was the number two, he’d always told himself. It was an
unlucky birth number. Being called Little Wang was merely a
lack-of-courtesy detail, a sort of minor seagull dropping after the
great heap of buffalo excrement that Heaven had pasted into his very
horoscope. Although he had to admit that he hadn’t made things any
better by allowing himself to become Master of Protocol.

It had seemed such a good idea at the time. He’d risen gently through
the Agatean civil service by mastering those arts essential to the
practice of good government and administration (such as calligraphy,
origami, flower arranging and the Five Wonderful Forms of poetry). He’d
dutifully got on with the tasks assigned to him and noticed only vaguely
that there didn’t seem to be quite as many high-ranking members of the
civil service as there used to be, and then one day a lot of senior
mandarins – most of them a lot more senior than he was, it occurred to
him later – had rushed up to him while he was trying to find a rhyme for
‘orange blossom’ and congratulated him on being the new Master.

That had been three months ago.

And of the things that had occurred to him in those intervening three
months the most shameful was this: he had come to believe that the Sun
Emperor was not, in fact, the Lord of Heaven, the Pillar of the Sky and
the Great River of Blessings, but an evil-minded madman whose death had
been too long delayed.

It was an awful thought. It was like hating motherhood and raw fish, or
objecting to sunlight. Most people develop their social conscience when
young, during that brief period between leaving school and deciding that
injustice isn’t necessarily all bad, and it was something of a shock to
suddenly find one at the age of sixty.

It wasn’t that he was against the Golden Rules. It made sense that a man
prone to thieving should have his hands cut off. It prevented him from
thieving again and thus tarnishing his soul. A peasant who could not pay
his taxes _should_ be executed, in order to prevent him falling into the
temptations of slothfulness and public disorder. And since the Empire
was created by Heaven as the only true world of human beings, all else
outside being a land of ghosts, it was certainly in order to execute
those who questioned this state of affairs.

But he felt that it wasn’t right to laugh happily while doing so. It
wasn’t _pleasant_ that these things should happen, it was merely
necessary.

From somewhere in the distance came the screams. The Emperor was playing
chess again. He preferred to use live pieces.

Two Little Wang felt heavy with knowledge. There had been better times.
He knew that now. Things hadn’t always been the way they were. Emperors
didn’t use to be cruel clowns, around whom it was as safe as mudbanks in
the crocodile season. There hadn’t always been a civil war every time an
Emperor died. Warlords hadn’t run the country. People had rights as well
as duties.

And then one day the succession had been called into question and there
was a war and since then it’d never seemed to go right.

Soon, with any luck, the Emperor would die. No doubt a special Hell was
being made ready. And there’d be the usual battle, and then there’d be a
new Emperor, and if he was very lucky Two Little Wang would be beheaded,
which was what tended to happen to people who had risen to high office
under a previous incumbent. But that was quite reasonable by modern
standards, since it was possible these days to be beheaded for
interrupting the Emperor’s thoughts or standing in the wrong place.

At which point, Two Little Wang heard ghosts.

They seemed to be right under his feet.

They were talking in a strange language, so to Two Little Wang the
speech was merely sounds, which went as follows:

‘Where the hell are we?’

_‘Somewhere under the palace, I’m sure. Look for another manhole in the
ceiling_ . . .’

‘Whut?’

‘I’m fed up with pushing this damn wheelchair!’

‘It’s me for a hot footbath after this, I’m telling you.’

_‘You call this a way to enter a city? You call_ this _a way to enter a
city? Waist deep in water? We didn’t enter a_ . . . wretched . . . _city
like this when I rode with Bruce the Hoon! You enter a_ . . . lovemaking
. . . _city by overrunning it with a thousand horsemen, that’s how you
take a city—!’_

‘Yeah, but there ain’t room for ’em in this pipe.’

The sounds had a hollow, booming quality to them. With a kind of
fascinated puzzlement Two Little Wang followed them, walking across the
manicured gravel in an unthinking way that would have earned him an
immediate tongue-extraction from its original lover of peace and
tranquillity.

‘Can we please hurry? I’d like us to be out of here when the cauldron
goes off and I didn’t really have much time to experiment with the
fuses.’

‘I still don’t understand about the cauldron, Teach.’

‘I hope all those firecrackers will blow a hole in the wall.’

‘Right! So why ain’t we there? Why are we in this pipe?’

‘Because all the guards will rush to see what the bang was.’

‘Right! So we should be there!’

_‘No! We should be_ here, _Cohen. The word is_ decoy. _It’s . . . more
civilized this way_.’

Two Little Wang pressed his ear to the ground.

‘What’s the penalty for entering the Forbidden City again, Teach?’

‘I believe it’s a punishment similar to hanging, drawing and quartering.
So, you see, it would be a good idea if—’

There was a very faint splashing.

‘How’re you drawn, then?’

‘I think your innards are cut out and shown to you.’

‘What for?’

‘I don’t really know. To see if you recognize them, I suppose.’

_‘What_ . . . _like, “Yep, that’s my kidneys, yep, that’s my
breakfast”?’_

‘How’re you quartered? Is that, like, they give you somewhere to stay?’

‘I think not, from context.’

For a while there was no sound but the splash of six pairs of feet and
the _squeak-squeak_ of what sounded like a wheel.

‘Well, how’re you hung?’

‘Excuse me?’

_‘Hur, hur, hur_ . . . _sorry, sorry.’_

Two Little Wang tripped over a two-hundred-year-old bonsai tree and hit
his head on a rock chosen for its fundamental serenity. When he came
round, a few seconds later, the voices had gone. If there had ever been
any.

Ghosts. There were a lot of ghosts around these days. Two Little Wang
wished he had a few firecrackers to scatter around.

Being Master of Protocol was even worse than trying to find a rhyme for
‘orange blossom’.

* * *

Flares lit the alleys of Hunghung. With the Red Army chattering behind
him, Rincewind wandered up to the wall of the Forbidden City.

No one knew better than Rincewind that he was totally incapable of
proper magic. He’d only ever done it by accident.

So he could be sure that if he waved a hand and said some magic words
the wall would in all probability become just a little bit less full of
holes than it was now.

It was a shame to disappoint Lotus Blossom, with her body that reminded
Rincewind of a plate of crinkle-cut chips, but it was about time she
learned that you couldn’t rely on wizards.

And then he could be out of here. What could Butterfly do to him if he
tried and failed? And, much to his surprise, he found himself hoping
that, on the way out, he could poke Herb in the eye. He was amazed the
others couldn’t spot him for what he was.

This area of wall was between gates. The life of Hunghung lapped against
it like a muddy sea; there were stalls and booths everywhere. Rincewind
had thought Ankh-Morpork citizens lived out on the streets, but they
were agoraphobes compared to the Hunghungese. Funerals (with associated
firecrackers) and wedding parties and religious ceremonies went on
alongside, and intermingled with, the normal market activities such as
free-form livestock slaughter and world-class arguing.

Herb pointed to a clear area of wall stacked with timber.

‘Just about there, Great Wizard,’ he sneered. ‘Do not exert yourself
unduly. A small hole should be sufficient.’

‘But there’s hundreds of people around!’

‘Is that a problem to such a great wizard? Perhaps you can’t do it with
people watching?’

‘I have no doubt that the Great Wizard will astonish us,’ said
Butterfly.

‘When the people see the power of the Great Wizard they will speak of it
for ever!’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘Probably,’ muttered Rincewind.

The cadre stopped talking, although it was only possible to notice this
by watching their closed mouths. The hole left by their silence was soon
filled by the babble of the market.

Rincewind rolled up his sleeves.

He wasn’t even certain about a spell for blowing things up . . .

He waved a hand vaguely.

‘I should stand well back, everyone,’ said Herb, grinning unpleasantly.

‘Quanti canicula illa in fenestre?’ said Rincewind. ‘Er . . .’

He stared desperately at the wall and, with that heightened perception
that comes to those on the edge of terror, noticed a cauldron half
hidden in the timber. There seemed to be a little glowing string
attached to it.

‘Er,’ he said, ‘there seems to be—’

‘Having problems?’ said Herb, nastily.

Rincewind squared his shoulders.

‘—’ he said.

There was a sound like a marshmallow gently landing on a plate, and
everything in front of him went white.

Then the white turned red, streaked with black, and the terrible noise
clapped its hands across his ears.

A crescent-shaped piece of something glowing scythed the top off his hat
and embedded itself in the nearest house, which caught fire.

There was a strong smell of burning eyebrows.

When the debris settled Rincewind saw quite a large hole in the wall.
Around its edge the brickwork, now a red-hot ceramic, started to cool
with a noise like _glinka-glinka._

He looked down at his soot-blackened hands.

‘Gosh,’ he said.

And then he said, ‘All _right_’!

And then he turned and began to say, ‘How about that, then?’ but his
voice faded when it became apparent that everyone was lying flat on the
ground.

A duck watched him suspiciously from its cage. Owing to the slight
protection afforded by the bars, its feathers were patterned alternately
natural and crispy.

He’d always _wanted_ to do magic like that. He’d always been able to
visualize it perfectly. He’d just never been able to do it . . .

A number of guards appeared in the gap. One, whose ferocity of helmet
suggested that he was an officer, glared at the charred hole and then at
Rincewind.

‘Did you do this?’ he demanded.

‘Stand back!’ shouted Rincewind, drunk with power. ‘I’m the Great
Wizard, I am! You see this finger? Don’t make me use it!’

The officer nodded to a couple of his men.

‘Get him.’

Rincewind took a step back.

‘I warn you! Anyone lays a hand on me, he’ll be eating flies and hopping
for the rest of his life!’

The guards advanced with the determination of those who were prepared to
risk the uncertainty of magic against the definite prospect of
punishment for disobeying orders.

‘Stand back! This could go off! All right, then, since you force—’

He waved his hand. He snapped his fingers a few times.

‘Er—’

The guards, after checking that they were still the same shape, each
grabbed an arm.

‘It may be delayed action,’ he ventured, as they gripped harder.

‘Alternatively, would you be interested in hearing a famous quotation?’
he said. His feet were lifted off the ground. ‘Or perhaps not?’

Rincewind, running absent-mindedly in mid-air, was brought in front of
the officer.

‘On your knees, rebel!’ said the officer.

‘I’d like to, but—’

‘I saw what you did to Captain Four White Fox!’

‘What? Who’s he?’

‘Take . . . him . . . to . . . the . . . Emperor.’

As he was dragged off Rincewind saw, for one brief moment, the guards
closing on the Red Army, swords flashing . . .

A metal plate shuddered for a moment, and then dropped on the floor.

‘Careful!’

‘I ain’t used to being careful! Bruce the Hoon wasn’t care—’

‘Shut up about Bruce the Hoon!’

‘Well, dang you too!’

‘Whut?’

‘Anyone out there?’

Cohen stuck his head out of the pipe. The room was dark, damp and full
of pipes and runnels. Water went off in every direction to feed
fountains and cisterns.

‘No,’ he said, in a disappointed voice.

‘Very well. Everyone out of the pipe.’

There was some echoey swearing and the scrape of metal as Hamish’s
wheelchair was manoeuvred into the long, low cellar.

Mr Saveloy lit a match as the Horde spread out and examined their
surroundings.

‘Congratulations, gentlemen,’ he said. ‘I believe we are in the palace.’

‘Yeah,’ said Truckle. ‘We’ve conquered a f— a _lovemaking_ pipe. What
good is that?’

‘We could rape it,’ said Caleb hopefully.

‘Hey, this wheel thing turns . . . ’

‘What’s a lovemaking pipe?’

‘What does this lever do?’

‘Whut?’

‘How about we find a door, rush out, and kill everyone?’

Mr Saveloy closed his eyes. There was something familiar about this
situation, and now he realized what it was. He’d once taken an entire
class on a school trip to the city armoury. His right leg still hurt him
on wet days.

‘No, no, _no_!’ he said. ‘What good would that do? Boy Willie, please
don’t pull that lever.’

‘Well, _I’d_ feel better, for one,’ said Cohen. ‘Ain’t killed anyone all
day except a guard, and they hardly count.’

‘Remember that we’re here for theft, not murder,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Now,
please, out of all that wet leather and into your nice new clothes.’

‘I don’t like this part,’ said Cohen, pulling on a shirt. ‘I like people
to know who I was.’

‘Yeah,’ said Boy Willie. ‘Without our leather and mail people’ll just
think we’re a load of old men.’

‘Exactly,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘That is part of the subterfuge.’

‘Is that like tactics?’ said Cohen.

‘Yes.’

‘All right, but _I_ don’t like it,’ said Old Vincent. ‘S’posing we win?
What kind of song will the minstrels sing about people who invaded
through a pipe?’

‘An echoey one,’ said Boy Willie.

‘They won’t sing anything like that,’ said Cohen firmly. ‘You pay a
minstrel enough, he’ll sing whatever you want.’

A flight of damp steps led to a door. Mr Saveloy was already at the top,
listening.

‘That’s right,’ said Caleb. ‘They say that whoever pays the piper calls
the tune.’

‘But, gentlemen,’ said Mr Saveloy, his eyes bright, ‘whoever holds a
knife to the piper’s throat writes the symphony.’

The assassin moved slowly through Lord Hong’s chambers.

He was one of the best in Hunghung’s small but very select guild, and he
certainly was not a rebel. He disliked rebels. They were invariably poor
people, and therefore unlikely to be customers.

His mode of movement was unusual and cautious. It avoided the floor;
Lord Hong was known to tune his floorboards. It made considerable use of
furniture and decorative screens, and occasionally of the ceiling as
well.

And the assassin was very good at it. When a messenger entered the room
through a distant door he froze for an instant, and then moved in
perfect rhythm towards his quarry, letting the newcomer’s clumsy
footsteps mask his own.

Lord Hong was making another sword. The folding of the metal and all the
tedious yet essential bouts of heating and hammering were, he found,
conducive to clear thinking. Too much pure cerebration was bad for the
mind. Lord Hong liked to use his hands sometimes.

He plunged the sword back into the furnace and pumped the bellows a few
times.

‘Yes?’ he said. The messenger looked up from his prone position near the
floor.

‘Good news, o lord. We have captured the Red Army!’

‘Well, that _is_ good news,’ said Lord Hong, watching the blade
carefully for the change of colour. ‘Including the one they call the
Great Wizard?’

‘Indeed! But he is not that great, o lord!’ said the messenger.

His cheerfulness faded when Lord Hong raised an eyebrow.

‘Really? On the contrary, I suspect him of being in possession of huge
and dangerous powers.’

‘Yes, o lord! I did not mean—’

‘See that they are all locked up. And send a message to Captain Five
Hong Man to undertake the orders I gave him today.’

‘Yes, o lord!’

‘And now, stand up!’

The messenger stood up, trembling. Lord Hong pulled on a thick glove and
reached for the sword handle. The furnace roared.

‘Chin up, man!’

‘My lord!’

‘Now open your eyes wide!’

There was no need for that order. Lord Hong peered into the mask of
terror, noted the flicker of movement, nodded, and then in one almost
balletic movement pulled the spitting blade from the furnace, turned,
thrust . . .

There was a very brief scream, and a rather longer hiss.

Lord Hong let the assassin sag. Then he tugged the sword free and
inspected the steaming blade.

‘Hmm,’ he said. ‘Interesting . . .’

He caught sight of the messenger.

‘Are you still here?’

‘No, my lord!’

‘See to it.’

Lord Hong turned the sword so that the light caught it, and examined the
edge.

‘And, er, shall I send some servants to clear away the, er, body?’

‘What?’ said Lord Hong, lost in thought.

‘The body, Lord Hong?’

‘What body? Oh. Yes. See to it.’

The walls were beautifully decorated. Even Rincewind noticed this,
though they went past in a blur. Some had marvellous birds painted on
them, or mountain scenes, or sprays of foliage, every leaf and bud done
in exquisite detail with just a couple of brush strokes.

Ceramic lions reared on marble pedestals. Vases bigger than Rincewind
lined the corridors.

Lacquered doors opened ahead of the guards. Rincewind was briefly aware
of huge, ornate and empty rooms stretching away on either side.

Finally they passed through yet another set of doors and he was flung
down on a wooden floor.

In these circumstances, he always found, it was best not to look up.

Eventually an officious voice said, ‘What do you have to say for
yourself, miserable louse?’

‘Well, I—’

‘Silence!’

Ah. So it was going to be _that_ kind of interview.

A different voice, a cracked, breathless and elderly voice, said, ‘Where
is the Grand . . . Vizier?’

‘He has retired to his rooms, O Great One. He said he had a headache.’

‘Summon him at . . . once.’

‘Certainly, O Great One.’

Rincewind, his nose pressed firmly to the floor, made some further
assumptions. Grand Vizier was always a bad sign; it generally meant that
people were going to suggest wild horses and red-hot chains. And when
people were called things like ‘O Great One’, it was pretty certain that
there was no appeal.

‘This is a . . . rebel, is it?’ The sentence was wheezed rather than
spoken.

‘Indeed, O Great One.’

‘I think I would like a clo . . . ser look.’

There was a general murmur, suggesting that a number of people had been
greatly surprised, and then the sound of furniture being moved.

Rincewind thought he saw a blanket on the edge of his vision. Someone
was wheeling a bed across the floor . . .

‘Make it . . . stand up.’ The gurgle in the pause was like the last
bathwater going down the plughole. It sucked as wetly as an outgoing
wave.

Once again a foot kicked Rincewind in the kidneys, making its usual
explicit request in the Esperanto of brutality. He got up.

It _was_ a bed, and quite the biggest Rincewind had ever seen. In it,
swathed in brocades and almost lost in pillows, was an old man.
Rincewind had never seen anyone look so ill. The face was pale, with a
greenish pallor; veins showed up under the skin of his hands like worms
in a jar.

The Emperor had all the qualifications for a corpse except, as it were,
the most vital one.

‘So . . . this is the new Great Wizard of . . . whom we have read so
much, is . . . it?’ he said.

When he spoke, people waited expectantly for the final gurgle in
mid-sentence.

‘Well, I—’ Rincewind began.

‘Silence!’ screamed a chamberlain.

Rincewind shrugged.

He hadn’t known what to expect of an Emperor, but the mental picture had
room for a big fat man with lots of rings. Talking to this one was a
hair’s breadth from necromancy.

‘Can you show us some more . . . magic, Great Wizard?’

Rincewind glanced at the chamberlain.

‘W—’

‘Silence!’

The Emperor waved a hand vaguely, gurgled with the effort, and gave
Rincewind another enquiring look. Rincewind decided to chance things.

‘I’ve got a good one,’ he said. ‘It’s a vanishing trick.’

‘Can you . . . do it now?’

‘Only if everyone opens all the doors and turns their back.’

The Emperor’s expression did not change. The court fell silent. Then
there was a sound like a number of small rabbits being choked to death.

The Emperor was laughing. Once this was established, everyone else
laughed too. No one can get a laugh like a man who can have you put to
death more easily than he goes to the lavatory.

‘What _shall_ we do with . . . you?’ he said. ‘Where _is_ the . . .
Grand . . . Vizier?’

The crowd parted.

Rincewind risked a sideways squint. Once you were in the hands of a
Grand Vizier, you were dead. Grand Viziers were _always_ scheming
megalomaniacs. It was probably in the job description: ‘Are you a
devious, plotting, unreliable madman? Ah, good, then you can be my most
trusted minister.’

‘Ah, Lord . . . Hong,’ said the Emperor.

‘Mercy?’ suggested Rincewind.

‘Silence!’ screamed the chamberlain.

‘Tell me, Lord . . . Hong,’ said the ancient Emperor. ‘What would be the
punishment for a . . . foreigner . . . entering the Forbidden City?’

‘Removal of all limbs, ears and eyes, and then allowed to go free,’ said
Lord Hong.

Rincewind raised his hand.

‘First offence?’ he said.

‘Silence!’

‘We find, generally, that there is no second offence,’ said Lord Hong.
‘What is this person?’

‘I like him,’ said the Emperor. ‘I think I shall . . . keep him. He
makes me . . . laugh.’

Rincewind opened his mouth.

‘Silence!’ screamed the chamberlain, perhaps unwisely in view of current
thinking.

‘Er . . . could you stop him shouting “Silence!” every time I try to
speak?’ Rincewind ventured.

‘Certainly . . . Great Wizard,’ said the Emperor. He nodded at some
guards. ‘Take the chamberlain . . . away and cut his . . . lips off.’

‘Great One, I—!’

‘And his ears . . . also.’

The wretched man was dragged away. A pair of lacquered doors slammed
shut. There was a round of applause from the courtiers.

‘Would you . . . like to watch him eat . . . them?’ said the Emperor
grinning happily. ‘It’s tre . . . mendous fun.’

‘Ahahaha,’ said Rincewind.

‘A good decision, lord,’ said Lord Hong. He turned his head towards
Rincewind.

To the wizard’s immense surprise, and some horror too, he winked.

‘O Great One . . .’ said a plump courtier, dropping to his knees,
bouncing slightly, and then nervously approaching the Emperor, ‘I wonder
if perhaps it is entirely wise to be so merciful to this foreign dev—’

The Emperor looked down. Rincewind would have sworn that dust fell off
him.

There was a gentle movement among the crowd. Without anyone apparently
doing anything so gross as activating their feet, there was nevertheless
a widening space around the kneeling man.

Then the Emperor smiled.

‘Your concern is well . . . received,’ he said. The courtier risked a
relieved grin. The Emperor added, ‘However, your presumption is not.
Kill him slowly . . . over several . . . days.’

‘Aaargh!’

‘Yes in . . . deed! Lots of boiling . . . oil!’

‘An excellent idea, o lord,’ said Lord Hong.

The Emperor turned back to Rincewind.

‘I am sure the . . . Great Wizard is my friend,’ he suctioned.

‘Ahahaha,’ said Rincewind.

He’d been in this approximate position before, gods knew. But he’d
always been facing someone – well, usually someone who looked like Lord
Hong, not a near-corpse who was clearly so far round the bend he
couldn’t poke sanity with a long pole.

‘We shall have _such_ . . . fun,’ said the Emperor. ‘I read . . . all
about you.’

‘Ahahaha,’ said Rincewind.

The Emperor waved a hand at the court again.

‘Now I will retire,’ he said. There was a general movement and much
ostensible yawning. Clearly no one stayed up later than the Emperor.

‘Emperor,’ said Lord Hong wearily, ‘what will you have us do with this
Great Wizard of yours?’

The old man gave Rincewind the look a present gets around the time the
batteries have run out.

‘Put him in the special . . . dungeon,’ he said. ‘For . . . now.’

‘Yes, Emperor,’ said Lord Hong. He nodded at a couple of guards.

Rincewind managed a quick look back as he was dragged from the room. The
Emperor was lying back in his movable bed, quite oblivious to him.

‘Is he mad or what?’ he said.

‘Silence!’

Rincewind looked up at the guard who’d said that. ‘A mouth like that
could get a man into big trouble around here,’ he muttered.

Lord Hong always found himself depressed by the general state of
humanity. It often seemed to him to be flawed. There was no
_concentration._ Take the Red Army. If _he_ had been a rebel the Emperor
would have been assassinated months ago and the country would now be
aflame, except for those bits too damp to burn. But these? Despite his
best efforts, their idea of revolutionary activity was a surreptitious
wall poster saying something like ‘Unpleasantness To Oppressors When
Convenient!’

They had tried to set fire to guardhouses. That was good. That was
proper revolutionary activity, except for the bit where they tried to
make an appointment first. It had taken Lord Hong some considerable
effort to see that the Red Army appeared to achieve any victories at
all.

Well, he’d given them the Great Wizard they so sincerely believed in.
They had no excuse now. And by the look of him, the wretch was as craven
and talentless as Lord Hong had hoped. Any army led by him would either
flee or be slaughtered, leaving the way open for the counter-revolution.

The counter-revolution would _not_ be inefficient. Lord Hong would see
to that.

But things had to be done one step at a time. There were enemies
everywhere. Suspicious enemies. The path of the ambitious man was a
nightingale floor. One wrong step and it would sing out. It was a shame
the Great Wizard would turn out to be so good at locks. Lord Tang’s men
were guarding the prison block tonight. Of course, if the Red Army were
to escape, no blame at all could possibly attach to Lord Tang . . .

Lord Hong risked a little chuckle to himself as he strode back to his
suite. Proof, that was the thing. There must never be proof. But that
wouldn’t matter very long. There was nothing like a fearsomely huge war
to unite people, and the fact that the Great Wizard – that is, the
leader of the terrible rebel army – was an evil foreign troublemaker was
just the spark to light the firecracker.

And then . . . Ankh-Morpork [urinating dog].

Hunghung was old. The culture was based on custom, the alimentary tract
of the common water buffalo, and base treachery. Lord Hong was in favour
of all three, but they did not add up to world domination, and Lord Hong
was particularly in favour of that, provided it was achieved by Lord
Hong.

If I was the traditional type of Grand Vizier, he thought as he sat down
before his tea table, I’d cackle with laughter at this point.

He smiled to himself, instead.

Time for the box again? No. Some things were all the better for the
anticipation.

Mad Hamish’s wheelchair caused a few heads to turn, but no actual
comment. Undue curiosity was not a survival trait in Hunghung. They just
got on with their work, which appeared to be the endless carrying of
stacks of paper along the corridors.

Cohen looked down at what was in his hand. Over the decades he’d fought
with many weapons – swords, of course, and bows and spears and clubs and
. . . well, now he came to think of it, just about anything.

Except this . . .

‘I _still_ don’t like it,’ said Truckle. ‘Why’re we carrying pieces of
paper?’

‘Because no one looks at you in a place like this if you’re carrying a
piece of paper,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Why?’

‘Whut?’

‘It’s – a kind of magic.’

‘I’d feel happier if it was a weapon.’

‘As a matter of fact, it can be the greatest weapon there is.’

‘I know, I’ve just cut myself on my bit,’ said Boy Willie, sucking his
finger.

‘Whut?’

‘Look at it like this, gentlemen,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Here we are,
actually _inside_ the Forbidden City, and no one is dead!’

‘Yes. That’s what we’re . . . _danging_ . . . complaining about,’ said
Truckle.

Mr Saveloy sighed. There was something in the way Truckle used words. It
didn’t matter what he actually said, what you heard was in some strange
way the word he actually _meant._ He could turn the air blue just by
saying ‘socks’.

The door slammed shut behind Rincewind, and there was the sound of a
bolt shooting into place.

The Empire’s jails were pretty much like the ones at home. When you want
to incarcerate such an ingenious creature as the common human being, you
tend to rely on the good old-fashioned iron bar and large amounts of
stone. It looked as though this well-tried pattern had been established
here for a very long time.

Well, he’d definitely scored a hit with the Emperor. For some reason
this did not reassure him. The man gave Rincewind the distinct
impression of being the kind of person who is at least as dangerous to
his friends as to his enemies.

He remembered Noodle Jackson, back in the days when he was a very young
student. Everyone wanted to be friends with Noodle but somehow, if you
were in his gang, you found yourself being trodden on or chased by the
Watch or being hit in fights you didn’t start, while Noodle was
somewhere on the edge of things, laughing.

Besides, the Emperor wasn’t simply at Death’s door but well inside the
hallway, admiring the carpet and commenting on the hatstand. And you
didn’t have to be a political genius to know that when someone like that
died, scores were being settled before he’d even got cold. Anyone he’d
publicly called a friend would have a life expectancy more normally
associated with things that hover over trout streams at sunset.

Rincewind moved aside a skull and sat down. There was the possibility of
rescue, he supposed, but the Red Army would be hard put to it to rescue
a rubber duck from drowning. Anyway, that’d put him back in the clutches
of Butterfly, who terrified him almost as much as the Emperor.

He had to believe that the gods didn’t intend for Rincewind, after all
his adventures, to rot in a dungeon.

No, he added bitterly, they probably had something much more inventive
in mind.

What light reached the dungeon came from a very small grille and had a
second-hand look. The rest of the furnishing was a pile of what had
possibly once been straw. There was—

—a gentle tapping at the wall.

Once, twice, three times.

Rincewind picked up the skull and returned the signal.

One tap came back.

He repeated it.

Then there were two.

He tapped twice.

Well, this was familiar. Communication without meaning . . . it was just
like being back at Unseen University.

‘Fine,’ he said, his voice echoing in the cell. ‘Fine. Très prisoner.
But what are we _saying_?’

There was a gentle scraping noise and one of the blocks in the wall very
gently slid out of the wall, dropping on to Rincewind’s foot.

‘Aargh!’

‘What big hippo?’ said a muffled voice.

‘What?’

‘Sorry?’

‘What?’

‘You wanted to know about the tapping code? It’s how we communicate
between cells, you see. One tap means—’

‘Excuse me, but aren’t we communicating now?’

‘Yes, but not formally. Prisoners are not . . . allowed . . . to talk .
. .’ The voice slowed down, as if the speaker had suddenly remembered
something important.

‘Ah, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘I was forgetting. This is . . . Hunghung.
Everyone . . . obeys . . . the rules . . .’

Rincewind’s voice died away too.

On either side of the wall there was a long, thoughtful silence.

‘Rincewind?’

‘Twoflower?’

‘What are _you_ doing here?’ said Rincewind.

‘Rotting in a dungeon!’

‘Me too!’

‘Good grief! How long has it been?’ said the muffled voice of Twoflower.

‘What? How long has what been?’

‘But _you_ . . . why are . . .’

‘You wrote that damn book!’

‘I just thought it would be interesting for people!’

‘Interesting? _Interesting?’_

‘I thought people would find it an interesting account of a foreign
culture. I never meant it to cause trouble.’

Rincewind leaned against his side of the wall. No, of course, Twoflower
never wanted to cause any trouble. Some people never did. Probably the
last sound heard before the Universe folded up like a paper hat would be
someone saying, ‘What happens if I do this?’

‘It must have been Fate that brought you here,’ said Twoflower.

‘Yes, it’s the sort of thing he likes to do,’ said Rincewind.

‘You remember the good times we had?’

‘Did we? I must have had my eyes shut.’

‘The adventures!’

‘Oh, _them._ You mean hanging from high places, that sort of thing . . .
?’

‘Rincewind?’

‘Yes? What?’

‘I feel a lot happier about things now _you’re_ here.’

‘That’s amazing.’

Rincewind enjoyed the comfort of the wall. It was just rock. He felt he
could rely on it.

‘Everyone seems to have a copy of your book,’ he said. ‘It’s a
revolutionary document. And I do mean _copy._ It looks as though they
make their own copy and pass it on.’

‘Yes, it’s called _samizdat_.’

‘What does that mean?’

‘It means each one must be the same as the one before. Oh, dear. I
thought it would just be entertainment. I didn’t think people would take
it seriously. I do hope it’s not causing too much bother.’

‘Well, your revolutionaries are still at the slogan-and-poster stage,
but I shouldn’t think that’ll count for much if they’re caught.’

‘Oh, dear.’

‘How come you’re still alive?’

‘I don’t know. I think they may have forgotten about me. That tends to
happen, you know. It’s the paperwork. Someone makes the wrong stroke
with the brush or forgets to copy a line. I believe it happens a lot.’

‘You mean that there’s people in prison and no one can remember why?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘Then why don’t they set them free?’

‘I suppose it is felt that they must have done something. All in all,
I’m afraid our government does leave something to be desired.’

‘Like a new government.’

‘Oh, dear. You could get locked up for saying things like that.’

People slept, but the Forbidden City never slept. Torches flickered all
night in the great Bureaux as the ceaseless business of Empire went on.

This largely involved, as Mr Saveloy had said, moving paper.

Six Beneficent Winds was Deputy District Administrator for the Langtang
district, and good at a job which he rather enjoyed. He was not a wicked
man.

True, he had the same sense of humour as a chicken casserole. True, he
played the accordion for amusement, and disliked cats intensely, and had
a habit of dabbing his upper lip with his napkin after his tea ceremony
in a way that had made Mrs Beneficent Winds commit murder in her mind on
a regular basis over the years. And he kept his money in a small leather
shovel purse, and counted it out very thoroughly whenever he made a
purchase, especially if there was a queue behind him.

But on the other hand, he was kind to animals and made small but regular
contributions to charity. He frequently gave moderate sums to beggars in
the street, although he made a note of this in the little notebook he
always carried to remind him to visit them in his official capacity
later on.

And he never took away from people more money than they actually had.

He was also, unusually for men employed in the Forbidden City after
dark, not a eunuch. Guards were not eunuchs, of course, and people had
got around this by classifying them officially as furniture. And it had
been found that tax officials also needed every faculty at their
disposal to combat the wiles of the average peasant, who had this
regrettable tendency to avoid paying taxes.

There were much nastier people in the building than Six Beneficent Winds
and it was therefore just his inauspicious luck that his paper and
bamboo door slid aside to reveal seven strange-looking old eunuchs, one
of them in a wheeled contrivance.

They didn’t even bow, let alone fall on their knees. And he not only had
an official red hat but it had a white button on it!

His brush dropped from his hands when the men wandered into his office
as if they owned it. One of them started poking holes in the wall and
speaking gibberish.

‘Hey, the walls are just made of paper! Hey, look, if you lick your
finger it goes right through! See?’

‘I will call for the guards and have you all flogged!’ shouted Six
Beneficent Winds, his temper moderated slightly by the extreme age of
the visitors.

‘_What did he say?’_

‘_He said he’d call for the guards_.’

‘_Ooo, yes. Please let him call for the guards!_’

‘_No, we don’t want that yet. Act normally_.’

‘_You mean cut his throat?_’

‘_I meant a more normal kind of normally_.’

‘_It’s what_ I _call normal_.’

One of the old men faced the speechless official and gave him a big
grin.

‘Excuse us, your supreme . . . _oh dear, what’s the word?_ . . .
pushcart sail? . . . immense rock? . . . _ah, yes_ . . . venerableness,
but we seem to be a little lost.’

A couple of the old men shuffled around behind Six Beneficent Winds and
started to read, or at least try to read, what he’d been working on. A
sheet of paper was snatched from his hand.

‘What’s this say, Teach?’

‘Let me see . . . “The first wind of autumn shakes the lotus flower.
Seven Lucky Logs to pay one pig and three [_looks like a four-armed man
waving a flag_] of rice on pain of having his [_rather a stylized thing
here, can’t quite make it out_] struck with many blows. By order of Six
Beneficent Winds, Collector of Revenues, Langtang.”’

There was a subtle change among the old men. Now they were all grinning,
but not in a way that gave him any comfort. One of them, with teeth like
diamonds, leaned towards him and said, in bad Agatean:

‘You are a tax collector, Mr Knob on Your Hat?’

Six Beneficent Winds wondered if he’d be able to summon the guard. There
was something terrible about these old men. They weren’t venerable at
all. They were horribly menacing and, although he couldn’t see any
obvious weapons, he knew for a cold frozen fact that he wouldn’t be able
to get out more than the first syllable before he’d be killed. Besides,
his throat had gone dry and his pants had gone wet.

‘Nothing wrong with being a tax collector . . .’ he croaked.

‘We never said that,’ said Diamond Teeth. ‘We always like to meet tax
collectors.’

‘Some of our most favouritest people, tax collectors,’ said another old
man.

‘Saves a lot of trouble,’ said Diamond Teeth.

‘Yeah,’ said a third old man. ‘Like, it means you don’t have to go from
house to house killin’ everyone for their valuables, you just wait and
kill the—’

‘Gentlemen, can I have a word?’

The speaker was the slightly goat-faced one that didn’t seem quite so
unpleasant as the others. The terrible men clustered around him and Six
Beneficent Winds heard the strange syllables of a coarse foreign tongue:

‘What? But he’s a tax collector! That’s what they’re for!’

‘Whut?’

_‘A firm tax base is the foundation of sound governance, gentlemen.
Please trust me_.’

_‘I understood all of that up to “A firm tax”_.’

_‘Nevertheless, no useful purpose will be served by killing this
hard-working tax gatherer_.’

_‘He’d be dead. I call_ that _useful.’_

There was some more of the same. Six Beneficent Winds jumped when the
group broke up and the goat-faced man gave him a smile.

‘My humble friends are overawed by your . . . variety of plum . . .
small knife for cutting seaweed . . . _presence,_ noble sir,’ he said,
his every word slandered by Truckle’s vigorous gesticulations behind his
back.

‘How about if we just cut a bit off?’

‘Whut?’

‘How did you get in here?’ said Six Beneficent Winds. ‘There are many
strong guards.’

‘I _knew_ we missed something,’ said Diamond Teeth.

‘We would like you to show us around the Forbidden City,’ said Goat
Face. ‘My name is . . . Mr Stuffed Tube, I think you would call it. Yes.
Stuffed Tube, I’m pretty sure—’

Six Beneficent Winds glanced hopefully towards the door.

‘—and we are here to learn more about your wonderful . . . mountain . .
. variety of bamboo . . . sound of running water at evening . . . _drat
. . ._ civilization.’

Behind him, Truckle was energetically demonstrating to the rest of the
Horde what he and Bruce the Hoon’s Skeletal Riders once did to a tax
gatherer. The sweeping arm movements in particular occupied Six
Beneficent Winds’ attention. He couldn’t understand the words but,
somehow, you didn’t need to.

‘Why are you talking to him like that?’

‘Ghenghiz, I’m lost. There are no maps of the Forbidden City. We need a
guide.’

Goat Face turned back to the taxman. ‘Perhaps you would like to come
with us?’ he said.

Out, thought Six Beneficent Winds. Yes! There may be guards out there!

‘Just a minute,’ said Diamond Teeth, as he nodded. ‘Pick up your
paintbrush and write down what I say.’

A minute later, they’d gone. All that remained in the taxman’s office
was an amended piece of paper, which read as follows:

‘Roses are red, violets are blue. Seven Lucky Logs to be given one pig
and all the rice he can carry, because he is now One Lucky Peasant. By
order of Six Beneficent Winds, Collector of Revenues, Langtang. Help.
Help. If anyone reads this I am being held prisoner by an evil eunuch.
Help.’

Rincewind and Twoflower lay in their separate cells and talked about the
good old days. At least, Twoflower talked about the good old days.
Rincewind worked at a crack in the stone with a piece of straw, it being
all he had to hand. It would take several thousand years to make any
kind of impression, but that was no reason to give up.

‘Do we get fed in here?’ he said, interrupting the flow of reminiscence.

‘Oh, sometimes. But it’s not like the marvellous food in Ankh-Morpork.’

‘Really,’ murmured Rincewind, scratching away. A tiny piece of mortar
seemed ready to move.

‘I’ll always remember the taste of Mr Dibbler’s sausages.’

‘People do.’

‘A once-in-a-lifetime experience.’

‘Frequently.’

The straw broke.

‘Damn and blast!’ Rincewind sat back. ‘What’s so important about the Red
Army?’ he said. ‘I mean, they’re just a bunch of kids. Just a nuisance!’

‘Yes, I’m afraid things got rather confused,’ said Twoflower. ‘Um. Have
you ever heard of the theory that History goes in cycles?’

‘I saw a drawing in one of Leonard of Quirm’s notebooks—’ Rincewind
began, trying again with another straw.

‘No, I mean . . . like a . . . wheel, spinning. If you stand in the same
place it all comes round again?’

‘Oh, _that._ Blast!’

‘Well, a lot of people believe it here. They think History starts again
every three thousand years.’

‘Could be,’ said Rincewind, who was looking for another straw and wasn’t
really listening. Then the words sank in. ‘Three thousand years? That’s
a bit short, isn’t it? The whole thing? Stars and oceans and intelligent
life evolving from arts graduates, that sort of thing?’

‘Oh, no. That’s just . . . stuff. _Proper_ history started with the
founding of the Empire by One Sun Mirror. The first Emperor. And his
servant, the Great Wizard. Just a legend, really. It’s the sort of thing
peasants believe. They look at something like the Great Wall and say,
that’s such a marvellous thing it must have been built by magic . . .
And the Red Army . . . what it _probably_ was was just a well-organized
body of trained fighting men. The first real army, you see. All there
was before was just undisciplined mobs. That’s what it must have been.
Not magical at all. The Great Wizard couldn’t really have _made_ . . .
What the peasants believe is silly . . .’

‘Why, what do they believe?’

‘They say the Great Wizard made the earth come alive. When all the
armies on the continent faced One Sun Mirror the Great Wizard . . . flew
a kite.’

‘Sounds sensible to me,’ said Rincewind. ‘When there’s war around take
the day off, that’s my motto.’

‘No, you don’t understand. This was a special kite. It trapped the
lightning in the sky and the Great Wizard stored it in bottles and then
took the mud itself and . . . baked it with the lightning, and made it
into an army.’

‘Never heard of any spells for that.’

‘And they have funny ideas about reincarnation, too . . .’

Rincewind conceded that they probably would. It probably whiled away
those long water-buffaloid hours: hey, after I die I hope I come back as
. . . a man holding a water buffalo, but facing a different way.

‘Er . . . no,’ said Twoflower. ‘They don’t think you come _back_ at all.
Er . . . I’m not using the right words, am I? . . . Bit corroded on this
language . . . I mean _pre_incarnation. It’s like reincarnation
backwards. They think you’re born before you die.’

‘Oh, really?’ said Rincewind, scratching at the stones. ‘Amazing! Born
before you die? Life before death? People will get really excited when
they hear about that.’

‘That’s not exactly . . . er. It’s all tied in with ancestors. You
should always venerate ancestors because you might be them one day, and
. . . Are you listening?’

The little piece of mortar fell away. Not bad for ten minutes’ work,
thought Rincewind. Come the next Ice Age, we’re out of here . . .

It dawned on him that he was working on the wall that led to Twoflower’s
cell. Taking several thousand years to break into an adjoining cell
could well be thought a waste of time.

He started on a different wall. Scratch . . . scratch . . .

There was a terrible scream.

_Scratchscratchscratch_—

‘Sounds like the Emperor has woken up,’ said Twoflower’s voice from the
hole in the wall.

‘That’s kind of an early morning torture, is it?’ said Rincewind. He
started to hammer at the huge blocks with a piece of shattered stone.

‘It’s not really his fault. He just doesn’t understand about people.’

‘Is that so?’

‘You know how common kids go through a stage of pulling the wings off
flies?’

‘_I_ never did,’ said Rincewind. ‘You can’t trust flies. They may look
small but they can turn nasty.’

‘Kids generally, I mean.’

‘Yes? Well?’

_‘He_ is an Emperor. No one ever dared tell him it was wrong. It’s just
a matter of, you know, scaling up. All the five families fight among
themselves for the crown. He killed his nephew to become Emperor. No one
has ever told him that it’s not right to keep killing people for fun. At
least, no one who has ever managed to get to the end of the first
sentence. And the Hongs and the Fangs and the Tangs and the Sungs and
the McSweeneys have been killing one another for thousands of years.
It’s all part of the royal succession.’

‘McSweeneys?’

‘Very old-established family.’

Rincewind nodded gloomily. It was probably like breeding horses. If you
have a system where treacherous murderers tend to win, you end up
breeding _really_ treacherous murderers. You end up with a situation
where it’s dangerous to lean over a cradle . . .

There was another scream.

Rincewind started kicking at the stones.

A key turned in the lock.

‘Oh,’ said Twoflower.

But the door didn’t open.

Finally Rincewind walked over and tried the big iron ring.

The door swung outwards, but not too far because the recumbent body of a
guard makes an unusual but efficient doorstop.

There was a whole ring of keys hanging from the one in the door . . .

An inexperienced prisoner would simply have run for it. But Rincewind
was a post-graduate student in the art of staying alive, and knew that
in circumstances like these much the best thing to do was let out every
single prisoner, pat each one hurriedly on the back and say, ‘Quick!
They’re coming for you!’ and then go and sit somewhere nice and quiet
until the pursuit has disappeared in the distance.

He opened the door to Twoflower’s cell first.

The little man was skinnier and grubbier than he remembered, and had a
wispy beard, but in one very significant way he had the feature that
Rincewind remembered so well – the big, beaming, _trusting_ smile that
suggested that anything bad currently happening to him was just some
sort of laughable mistake and would be bound to be sorted out by
reasonable people.

‘Rincewind! It _is_ you! I certainly never thought I’d see _you_ again!’
he said.

‘Yes, I thought something on those lines,’ said Rincewind.

Twoflower looked past Rincewind at the fallen guard.

‘Is he dead?’ he said, speaking of a man with a sword half buried in his
back.

‘Extremely likely.’

‘Did _you_ do that?’

‘I was _inside_ the cell!’

‘Amazing! Good trick!’

Despite several years of exposure to the facts of the matter, Rincewind
remembered, Twoflower had never really wanted to grasp the fact that his
companion had the magical abilities of the common house fly. It was
useless to try to dissuade him. It just meant that modesty was added to
the list of non-existent virtues.

He tried some of the keys in other cell doors. Various raggedy people
emerged, blinking in the slightly better light. One of them, turning his
body slightly in order to get it through the door, was Three Yoked Oxen.
From the look of him he’d been beaten up, but this might just have been
someone’s attempt to attract his attention.

‘This is Rincewind,’ said Twoflower proudly. ‘The Great Wizard. Did you
know he killed the guard from inside the cell?’

They politely inspected the corpse.

‘I didn’t, really,’ said Rincewind.

‘And he’s modest, too!’

‘Long Life To The People’s Endeavour!’ said Three Yoked Oxen through
rather swollen lips.

‘“Mine’s A Pint!” ’ said Rincewind. ‘Here’s big-fella keys belong door,
you go lettee people outee chop-chop.’

One of the freed prisoners limped to the end of the passage.

‘There’s a dead guard here,’ he said.

‘It wasn’t me,’ said Rincewind plaintively. ‘I mean, perhaps I _wished_
they were dead, but—’

People edged away. You didn’t want to be too close to anyone who could
wish like that.

If this had been Ankh-Morpork someone would have said, ‘Oh, yeah, sure,
he magically stabbed them in the back?’ But that was because people in
Ankh-Morpork knew Rincewind, and they knew that if a wizard really
wanted you dead you’d have no back left to stab.

Three Yoked Oxen had been able to master the technical business of
opening doors. More swung open . . .

‘Lotus Blossom?’ said Rincewind.

She clung to Oxen’s arm and smiled at Rincewind. Other members of the
cadre trooped out behind her.

Then, to Rincewind’s amazement, she looked at Twoflower, screamed, and
threw her arms around his neck.

‘Extended Continuation To Filial Affection!’ chanted Three Yoked Oxen.

‘“Close Cover Before Striking!”’ said Rincewind. ‘Er. What exactly is
happening?’

A very small Red soldier tugged at his robe.

‘He is her daddy,’ it said.

‘You never said you had children!’

‘I’m sure I did. Often,’ said Twoflower, disentangling himself. ‘Anyway
. . . it _is_ allowed.’

‘You’re _married_?’

‘I was, yes. I’m sure I must have said.’

‘We were probably running away from something at the time. So there’s a
Mrs Twoflower, is there?’

‘There was for a while,’ said Twoflower, and for a moment an expression
almost of anger distorted his preternaturally benign countenance. ‘Not,
alas, any more.’

Rincewind looked away, because that was better than looking at
Twoflower’s face.

Butterfly had also emerged. She stood just outside the cell door, with
her hands clasped in front of her, looking down demurely at her feet.

Twoflower rushed over to her.

‘Butterfly!’

Rincewind looked down at the rabbit clutcher.

‘She another daughter, Pearl?’

‘Yeth.’

The little man came towards Rincewind, dragging the girls.

‘Have you met my daughters?’ he said. ‘This is Rincewind, who—’

‘We have had the pleasure,’ said Butterfly, gravely.

‘How did you all get here?’ said Rincewind.

‘We fought as hard as we could,’ said Butterfly. ‘But there were simply
too many of them.’

‘I hope you didn’t try to grab their weapons,’ said Rincewind, as
sarcastically as he dared.

Butterfly glared at him.

‘Sorry,’ said Rincewind.

‘Herb says it is the system that is to blame,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘I bet he’s got a better system all worked out.’ Rincewind looked at the
throng of prisoners. ‘They usually have. Where is he, by the way?’

The girls looked around.

‘I don’t see him here,’ said Lotus Blossom. ‘But I think that when the
guards attacked us he laid down his life for the cause.’

‘Why?’

‘Because that’s what he said we should do. I am ashamed that I did not.
But they seemed to want to capture us, not kill us.’

‘I did not see him,’ said Butterfly. She and Rincewind exchanged a
glance. ‘I think perhaps . . . he was not there.’

‘You mean he had been caught already?’ said Lotus Blossom.

Butterfly looked at Rincewind again. It occurred to him that whereas
Lotus Blossom had inherited a Twoflower view of the world, Butterfly
_must_ have taken after her mother. She thought more like Rincewind,
i.e., the worst of everyone.

‘Perhaps,’ she said.

‘Make Considerable Sacrifice For The Common Good,’ said Three Yoked
Oxen.

‘“There’s One Born Every Minute,”’ said Rincewind, absently.

Butterfly seemed to get a grip on herself.

‘However,’ she said, ‘we must make the most of this opportunity.’

Rincewind, who had been heading for the stairs, froze.

‘Exactly what do you mean?’ he said.

‘Don’t you see? We are at large in the Forbidden City!’

‘Not me!’ said Rincewind. ‘I’ve never been at large. I’ve always been at
hunched.’

‘The enemy brought us in here and now we are free—’

‘Thanks to the Great Wizard,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘—and we must seize the day!’

She picked up a sword from a stricken guard and waved it dramatically.

‘We must storm the palace, just as Herb suggested!’

‘There’s only thirty of you!’ said Rincewind. ‘You’re not a storm!
You’re a shower!’

‘There are hardly any guards within the city itself,’ said Butterfly.
‘If we can overcome those around the Emperor’s apartments—’

‘You’ll be killed!’ said Rincewind.

She turned on him. ‘Then at least we shall have died for something!’

‘Cleanse The State With The Blood Of Martyrs,’ rumbled Three Yoked Oxen.

Rincewind spun around and waved a finger under Three Yoked Oxen’s nose,
which was as high as he could reach.

‘I’ll bloody well thump you if you trot out something like that one more
time!’ he shouted, and then grimaced at the realization that he had just
threatened a man three times heavier than he was.

‘Listen to me, will you?’ he said, settling down a little. ‘I know about
people who talk about suffering for the common good. It’s never bloody
them! When you hear a man shouting “Forward, brave comrades!” you’ll see
he’s the one behind the bloody big rock and wearing the only really
arrow-proof helmet! Understand?’

He stopped. The cadre were looking at him as if he was mad. He stared at
their young, keen faces, and felt very, very old.

‘But there are causes worth dying for,’ said Butterfly.

‘No, there aren’t! Because you’ve only got one life but you can pick up
another five causes on any street corner!’

‘Good grief, how can you _live_ with a philosophy like that?’

Rincewind took a deep breath.

‘Continuously!’

Six Beneficent Winds had thought it was a pretty good plan. The horrible
old men were lost in the Forbidden City. Although they had a wiry look,
rather like natural bonsai trees that had managed to flourish on a
wind-swept cliff, they were nevertheless _very_ old and not at all
heavily armed.

So he led them in the direction of the gymnasium.

And when they were inside he screamed for help at the top of his voice.
To his amazement, they didn’t turn and run.

‘Can we kill him _now_?’ said Truckle.

A couple of dozen muscular men had stopped pounding logs of wood and
piles of bricks and were regarding them suspiciously.

‘Got any ideas?’ said Cohen to Mr Saveloy.

‘Oh, dear. They’re so very _tough_ looking, aren’t they?’

‘You can’t think of anything civilized?’

‘No. It’s over to you, I’m afraid.’

‘Hah! Hah! I bin _waiting_ for this,’ said Caleb, pushing forward. ‘Bin
practising every day,’ n I? With my big lump o’ teak.’

‘These are ninjas,’ said Six Beneficent Winds proudly, as a couple of
the men wandered towards the door and pulled it shut. ‘The finest
fighters in the world! Yield now!’

‘That’s interesting,’ said Cohen. ‘Here, you, in the black pyjamas . . .
Just got out of bed, have you? Who’s the best out of all of you?’

One of the men stared fixedly at Cohen and thrust out a hand at the
nearest wall. It left a dent.

Then he nodded at the tax gatherer. ‘What are these old fools you’ve
brought us?’

‘I think they’re barbarian invaders,’ said the taxman.

‘How’d you – How’d he know that?’ said Boy Willie. ‘We’re wearin’ itchy
trousers and eatin’ with forks and _everythin’_—’

The leading ninja sneered. ‘Heroic eunuchs?’ he said. ‘Old men?’

‘Who’re you calling a eunuch?’ Cohen demanded.

‘Can I just show him what I’ve been practising with my lump o’ teak?’
said Caleb, hopping arthritically from one foot to the other.

The ninja eyed the slab of timber.

‘You could not make a dent on that, old man,’ he said.

‘You watch,’ said Caleb. He held out the wood at arm’s length. Then he
raised his other hand, grunting a little as it got past shoulder height.

‘You watching this hand? You watching this hand?’ he demanded.

‘I am watching,’ said the ninja, trying not to laugh.

‘Good,’ said Caleb. He kicked the man squarely in the groin and then, as
he doubled up, hit him over the head with the teak. ‘ ’Cos you should’ve
been watchin’ this foot.’

And that would have been all there was to it if there had only been one
ninja. But there was a clatter of rice flails and an unsheathing of
long, curved swords.

The Horde drew closer together. Hamish pushed back his rug to reveal
their armoury, although the collection of notched blades looked
positively homely compared with the shiny toys ranged against them.

‘Teach, why don’t you take Mr Taxman over to the corner out of harm’s
way?’ said Ghenghiz.

‘This is madness!’ said Six Beneficent Winds. ‘They’re the finest
fighters in the world and you’re just old men! Give in now and I’ll see
if I can get you a rebate!’

‘Calm down, calm down,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘No one’s going to get hurt.
Metaphorically, at least.’

Ghenghiz Cohen waved his sword a few times.

‘Okay, you lads,’ he said. ‘Give us your best ninje.’

Six Beneficent Winds looked on in horror as the Horde squared up.

‘But it will be terrible slaughter!’ he said.

‘I’m afraid so,’ said Mr Saveloy. He fished in his pockets for a bag of
peppermints.

‘Who are these mad old men? What do they _do_?’

‘Barbarian heroing, generally,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Rescuing princesses,
robbing temples, fighting monsters, exploring ancient and terror-filled
ruins . . . that sort of thing.’

‘But they look old enough to be dead! Why do they do it?’

Saveloy shrugged. ‘That’s all they’ve ever done.’

A ninja somersaulted down the room, screaming, a sword in either hand;
Cohen waited in an attitude rather similar to that of a baseball batter.

‘I wonder,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘if you have ever heard of the term
“evolution”?’

The two met. The air blurred.

‘Or “survival of the fittest”?’ said Mr Saveloy.

The scream continued, but rather more urgently.

‘I didn’t even see his sword move!’ whispered Six Beneficent Winds.

‘Yes. People often don’t,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘But . . . they’re so old!’

‘Indeed,’ said the teacher, raising his voice above the screams, ‘and of
course this is true. They are very _old_ barbarian heroes.’

The taxman stared.

‘Would you like a peppermint?’ said Mr Saveloy, as Hamish’s wheelchair
thundered past in pursuit of a man with a broken sword and a pressing
desire to stay alive. ‘You may find it helps, if you are around the
Horde for any length of time.’

The aroma from the proffered paper bag hit Six Beneficent Winds like a
flamethrower.

‘How can you smell anything after eating those?’

‘You can’t,’ said Mr Saveloy happily.

The taxman continued to stare. The fighting was a fast and furious
affair but, somehow, only on one side. The Horde fought like you’d
expect old men to fight – slowly, and with care. All the activity was on
the part of the ninjas, but no matter how well flung the throwing star
or speedy the kick, the target was always, without any obvious effort,
not there.

‘Since we have this moment to chat,’ said Mr Saveloy, as something with
a lot of blades hit the wall just above the taxman’s head, ‘I wonder:
could you tell me about the big hill just outside the city? It is quite
a remarkable feature.’

‘What?’ said Six Beneficent Winds distractedly.

‘The big hill.’

‘You want to know about _that_? _Now_?’

‘Geography is a little hobby of mine.’

Someone’s ear hit Six Beneficent Winds on the ear.

‘Er. What? We call it the Big Hill . . . Hey, look at what he’s doing
with his—’

‘It seems remarkably regular. Is it a natural feature?’

‘What? Eh? Oh . . . I don’t know, they say it turned up thousands of
years ago. During a terrible storm. When the first Emperor died. He . .
. he’s going to be killed! He’s going to be killed! He’s going to be –
How did he do that?’

Six Beneficent Winds suddenly remembered, as a child, playing _Shibo
Yangcong-san_ with his grandfather. The old man always won. No matter
how carefully he’d assembled his strategy, he’d find Grandfather would
place a tile quite innocently right in the crucial place just before he
could make his big move. The ancestor had spent his whole life playing
_shibo._ The fight was just like that.

‘Oh, my,’ he said.

‘That’s right,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘They’ve had a lifetime’s experience of
not dying. They’ve become very good at it.’

‘But . . . why here? Why come here?’

‘We’re going to undertake a robbery,’ said Mr Saveloy.

Six Beneficent Winds nodded sagely. The wealth of the Forbidden City was
legendary. Probably even blood-sucking ghosts had heard of it.

‘The Talking Vase of Emperor P’gi Su?’ he said.

‘No.’

‘The Jade Head of Sung Ts’uit Li?’

‘No. Wrong track entirely, I’m afraid.’

‘Not the secret of how silk is made?’

‘Good grief. Silkworms’ bottoms. Everyone knows that. No. Something
rather more precious than that.’

Despite himself, Six Beneficent Winds was impressed. Apart from anything
else, only seven ninjas were still standing and Cohen was fencing with
one of them while rolling a cigarette in the other hand.

And Mr Saveloy could see _it_ dawning in the fat man’s eyes.

The same thing had happened to him.

Cohen came into people’s lives like a rogue planet into a peaceful solar
system, and you felt yourself being dragged along simply because nothing
like that would ever happen to you again.

He himself had been peacefully hunting for fossils during the school
holidays when he had, more or less, stumbled into the camp of those
particular fossils called the Horde. They’d been quite friendly, because
he had neither weapons nor money. And they’d taken to him, because he
knew things they didn’t. And that had been it.

He’d decided there and then. It must have been something in the air. His
past life had suddenly unrolled behind him and he couldn’t remember a
single day of it that had been any fun. And it had dawned on him that he
could join the Horde or go back to school and, pretty soon, a limp
handshake, a round of applause and his pension.

It was something about Cohen. Maybe it was what they called charisma. It
overpowered even his normal smell of a goat that had just eaten curried
asparagus. He did everything wrong. He cursed people and used what Mr
Saveloy considered very offensive language to foreigners. He shouted
terms that would have earned anyone else a free slit throat from a
variety of interesting ethnic weapons – and he got away with it, partly
because it was clear that there was no actual malice there but mainly
because he was, well, Cohen, a sort of basic natural force on legs.

It worked on everything. When he wasn’t actually fighting them, he got
on a lot better with trolls than did people who merely thought that
trolls had rights just like everyone else. Even the Horde, bloody-minded
individualists to a man, fell for it.

But Mr Saveloy had also seen the aimlessness in their lives and, one
night, he’d brought the conversation round to the opportunities offered
in the Aurient . . .

There was a light in Six Beneficent Winds’ expression.

‘Have you got an accountant?’ he said.

‘Well, no, as a matter of fact.’

‘Will this theft be treated as income or capital?’

‘I haven’t really thought like that. The Horde doesn’t pay taxes.’

‘What? Not to _anyone_?’

‘No. It’s funny, but they never seem to keep their money for long. It
seems to disappear on drink and women and high living. I suppose, from a
heroing point of view, they may count as taxes.’

There was a ‘pop’ as Six Beneficent Winds uncorked a small bottle of ink
and licked his writing brush.

‘But those sort of things probably count as allowable expenses for a
barbarian hero,’ he said. ‘They are part of the job specification. And
then of course there is wear and tear on weaponry, protective clothing .
. . They could certainly claim for at least one new loincloth a year—’

‘I don’t think they’ve claimed for one per century.’

‘And there’s pensions, of course.’

‘Ah. Don’t use that word. They think it’s a dirty word. But in a way
_that_ is what they’re here for. This is their last adventure.’

‘When they’ve stolen this very valuable thing that you won’t tell me
about.’

‘That’s right. You’d be very welcome to join us. You could perhaps be a
barbarian . . . to push beans . . . a length of knotted string . . .
_ah_ . . . accountant. Have you ever killed anyone?’

‘Not outright. But I’ve always thought you can do considerable damage
with a well-placed Final Demand.’

Mr Saveloy beamed. ‘Ah, yes,’ he said. ‘Civilization.’

The last ninja was upright, but only just; Hamish had run his wheelchair
over his foot. Mr Saveloy patted the taxman’s arm. ‘Excuse me,’ he said.
‘I find I often have to intervene at this stage.’

He padded over to the surviving man, who was looking around wildly. Six
swords had become interlaced around his neck as though he’d taken part
in a rather energetic folk dance.

‘Good morning,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I should just point out that Ghenghiz
here is, despite appearances, a remarkably honest man. He finds it hard
to understand empty bravura. May I venture to suggest therefore that you
refrain from phrases like “I would rather die than betray my Emperor” or
“Go ahead and do your worst” unless you _really, really_ mean them.
Should you wish for mercy, a simple hand signal will suffice. I strongly
advise you not to attempt to nod.’

The young man looked sideways at Cohen, who gave him an encouraging
smile.

Then he waved a hand quickly.

The swords unwove. Truckle hit the ninja over the head with a club.

‘It’s all right, you don’t have to go on about it, I didn’t kill him,’
he said sulkily.

‘Ow!’ Boy Willie had been experimenting with a rice flail and had hit
his own ear. ‘How’d they manage to fight with this rubbish?’

‘Whut?’

‘These little Hogswatch decoration thingies look the business, though,’
said Vincent, picking up a throwing star. ‘Aaargh!’ He sucked his
fingers. ‘Useless foreign junk.’

‘That bit where that lad sprang backwards right across the room with
them axes in his hands was impressive, though.’

‘Yeah.’

‘You didn’t ought to have stuck your sword out like that, I thought.’

‘He’s learned an important lesson.’

‘It won’t do him much good now where he’s gone.’

‘Whut?’

Six Beneficent Winds was half laughing, half shocked.

‘But . . . but . . . I’ve seen these guards fight before!’ he said.
‘They’re _invincible_!’

‘No one told _us_.’

‘But you beat them all!’

‘Yep!’

‘And you’re just eunuchs!’

There was a scrape of steel. Six Beneficent Winds closed his eyes. He
could feel metal touching his neck in at least five places.

‘There’s that word again,’ said the voice of Cohen the Barbarian.

‘But . . . you’re . . . _dressed_ . . . as . . . eunuchs . . .’ murmured
Six Beneficent Winds, trying not to swallow.

Mr Saveloy backed away, chuckling nervously.

‘You see,’ he said, speaking fast, ‘you’re too old to be taken for
guards and you don’t look like bureaucrats, so I thought it would be,
er, a very good disguise to—’

_‘Eunuch?’_ roared Truckle. ‘You mean people’ve been looking at me and
thinking I mince around saying, _Helluo, Saltat?’_

Like many men whose testosterone had always sloshed out of their ears,
the Horde had never fine-tuned their approach to the more complex areas
of sexuality. A teacher to the core, Mr Saveloy couldn’t help correcting
them, even at swordpoint.

‘That means, “the glutton dances”, not, as you seem to think, “hello,
sailor”, which is _heus nauta_,’ he said. ‘And eunuchs don’t say it. Not
as a matter of course. Look, it’s an _honour_ to be a eunuch in the
Forbidden City. Many of them occupy very exalted positions in—’

‘Then prepare yourself for high office, teacher!’ Truckle shouted.

Cohen knocked the sword out of his hand.

‘All right, none of that. I don’t like it either,’ he said, ‘but it’s
just a disguise. Shouldn’t mean anything to a man who once bit a bear’s
head off, should it?’

‘Yeah, but . . . you know . . . it’s not . . . I mean, when we went past
those young ladies back there they all giggled . . . ’

‘Maybe later you can find them and make them laugh,’ said Cohen. ‘But
you should’ve told us, Teach.’

‘Sorry.’

‘Whut? Whatseesay?’

‘He said you’re a EUNUCH!’ Boy Willie bellowed in Hamish’s ear.

‘Yep!’ said Hamish happily.

‘What?’

‘That’s me! The one an’ only!’

‘No, he didn’t mean—’

‘Whut?’

‘Oh, never mind. It’s all pretty much the same to you, Hamish.’

Mr Saveloy surveyed the wrecked gym. ‘I wonder what time it is?’ he
said.

‘Ah,’ gurgled Six Beneficent Winds, happy to lighten things a little.
‘Here, you know, we have an amazing demon-powered device that tells you
what the time is even when the sun isn’t—’

‘Clocks,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘We’ve got them in Ankh-Morpork. Only demons
evaporate eventually so now they work by—’ He paused. ‘Interesting. You
don’t have a word for it. Er. Shaped metal that does work? Toothed
wheels?’

The taxman looked frightened. ‘Wheels with teeth?’

‘What do you call the things that grind corn?’

‘Peasants.’

‘Yes, but what do they grind corn with?’

‘I don’t know. Why should I know? Only peasants need to know _that_.’

‘Yes, I suppose that says it all, really,’ said Mr Saveloy sadly.

‘It’s a long way off dawn,’ said Truckle. ‘Why don’t we go and kill
everyone in their beds?’

‘No, no, no!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I keep telling you, we’ve got to do it
_properly_.’

‘I could show you the treasure house,’ said Six Beneficent Winds
helpfully.

‘Never a good idea to give a monkey the key to a banana plantation,’
said Mr Saveloy. ‘Can you think of anything else to keep them amused for
an hour?’

Down in the basement, there was a man who was talking about the
government. At the top of his voice.

‘You can’t fight for a cause! A cause is just a thing!’

‘Then we are fighting for the peasants,’ said Butterfly. She’d backed
away. Rincewind’s anger was coming off him like steam.

‘Oh? Have you ever met them?’

‘I – have seen them.’

‘Oh, good! And what is it you want to _achieve_?’

‘A better life for the people,’ said Butterfly coldly.

‘You think you having some uprising and hanging a few people will do it?
Well, I come from Ankh-Morpork and we’ve had more rebellions and civil
wars than you’ve had . . . lukewarm ducks’ feet, and you know what? The
rulers are still in charge! They always are!’

They smiled at him in polite and nervous incomprehension.

‘Look,’ he said, rubbing his forehead. ‘All those people out in the
fields, the water buffalo people . . . If you have a revolution it’ll
all be better for them, will it?’

‘Of course,’ said Butterfly. ‘They will no longer be subject to the
cruel and capricious whims of the Forbidden City.’

‘Oh, that’s good,’ said Rincewind. ‘So they’ll sort of be in charge of
themselves, will they?’

‘Indeed,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘By means of the People’s Committee,’ said Butterfly.

Rincewind pressed both hands to his head.

‘My word,’ he said. ‘I don’t know why, but I had this predictive flash!’

They looked impressed.

‘I had this sudden feeling,’ he went on, ‘that there won’t be all that
many water buffalo string holders on the People’s Committee. In fact . .
. I get this kind of . . . voice telling me that a lot of the People’s
Committee, correct me if I’m wrong, are standing in front of me right
now?’

_‘Initially,_ of course,’ said Butterfly. ‘The peasants can’t even read
and write.’

‘I expect they don’t even know how to farm properly,’ said Rincewind,
gloomily. ‘Not after doing it for only three or four thousand years.’

‘We certainly believe that there are many improvements that could be
made, yes,’ said Butterfly. ‘If we act collectively.’

‘I bet they’ll be really glad when you show them,’ said Rincewind.

He stared glumly at the floor. He quite liked the job of a water buffalo
string holder. It sounded nearly as good as the profession of castaway.
He longed for the kind of life where you could really _concentrate_ on
the squishiness of the mud underfoot, and make up pictures in the
clouds; the kind of life where you could let your mind catch up with you
and speculate for hours at a time about when your water buffalo was next
going to enrich the loam. But it was probably difficult enough as it was
without people trying to _improve_ it . . .

He wanted to say: how can you be so nice and yet so dumb? The best thing
you can do with the peasants is leave them alone. Let them get on with
it. When people who can read and write start fighting on behalf of
people who can’t, you just end up with another kind of stupidity. If you
want to help them, build a big library or something somewhere and leave
the door open.

But this is Hunghung. You can’t think like that in Hunghung. This is
where people have learned to do what they’re told. The Horde worked that
one out.

The Empire’s got something worse than whips all right. It’s got
obedience. Whips in the soul. They obey anyone who tells them what to
do. Freedom just means being told what to do by someone different.

You’ll all be killed.

I’m a coward. And even _I_ know more about fights than you do. I’ve run
away from some really good ones.

‘Oh, let’s just get out of here,’ he said. He gingerly took the sword
from a dead guard and held it the right way round on the second attempt.
He weighed it for a second, then shook his head and threw it away.

The cadre looked a lot happier.

‘But I’m not leading you,’ said Rincewind. ‘I’m just showing you the
way. And it’s the way _out,_ do you understand?’

They stood wearing rather bruised looks, as people do who’ve been
subject to several minutes’ ranting. No one spoke, until Twoflower
whispered:

‘He often goes on like this, you know. And then he does something very
brave.’

Rincewind snorted.

There was another dead guard at the top of the stairs. Sudden death
seemed to be catching.

And, leaning against the wall, was a bundle of swords. Tied to it was a
scroll.

‘The Great Wizard has shown us the way for only two minutes and already
we have extra luck,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘Don’t touch the swords,’ said Rincewind.

‘But supposing we see more guards? Should we not resist them with every
drop of our life’s blood?’ said Butterfly.

Rincewind looked blank. ‘No. Run away.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said Twoflower. ‘And live to fight another day. That is an
Ankh-Morpork saying.’

Rincewind had always assumed that the purpose of running away was to be
able to run away another day.

‘However,’ he said, ‘people don’t usually find themselves mysteriously
let out of prison with a bunch of weapons handily close by and all the
guards out of action. Ever thought of that?’

‘And with a map!’ said Butterfly.

Her eyes shone. She flourished the scroll.

‘It’s a map of the way out?’ said Rincewind.

‘No! To the Emperor’s chambers! Look, it has been marked! That’s what
Herb used to talk about sometimes! He must be in the palace! We should
assassinate the Emperor!’

‘More luck!’ said Twoflower. ‘But look, you know, I’m sure if we talked
to him—’

‘Haven’t you been listening? We are _not_ going to see the Emperor!’
hissed Rincewind. ‘Does it occur to you that guards don’t stab
themselves? Cells don’t suddenly become unlocked? You don’t find swords
lying around so conveniently and you don’t, you really _don’t_ find maps
saying “This Way, Folks”! And anyway, you can’t talk to someone who’s a
plate of prawn crackers short of a Set Meal A for Two!’

‘No,’ said Butterfly. ‘We must make the most of this opportunity.’

‘There will be lots of guards!’

‘Well, Great Wizard, you’ll have a lot of wishing to do.’

‘You think I can snap my fingers like _this_, and all the guards would
drop dead? Hah! I wish they would!’

‘These two out here have,’ Lotus Blossom reported, from the entrance to
the dungeons. She was already in awe of Rincewind. Now she looked
positively terrified.

‘Coincidence!’

‘Let’s be serious,’ said Butterfly. ‘We have a sympathizer in the
palace. Perhaps it is someone risking their lives every moment! We know
some of the eunuchs are on our side.’

‘They’ve got nothing left to lose, I suppose.’

‘You have a better idea, Great Wizard?’

‘Yes. Back into the cells.’

‘What?’

‘This smells wrong. Would you _really_ kill the Emperor? I mean,
_really_?’

Butterfly hesitated.

‘We’ve often talked about it. Two Fire Herb said that if we could
assassinate the Emperor we would light the torch of freedom . . .’

‘Yes. It’d be you, burning. Look, get back in the cells. It’s the safest
place. I’ll lock you in and . . . scout.’

‘That’s a very brave suggestion,’ said Twoflower. ‘And typical of the
man,’ he added proudly.

Butterfly gave Rincewind a look he’d come to dread.

‘It _is_ a good idea,’ she said. ‘And I will accompany you.’

‘Oh, but it’s bound to be . . . very dangerous,’ said Rincewind quickly.

‘No harm can possibly come to me when I’m with the Great Wizard,’ said
Butterfly.

‘Very true. Very true,’ said Twoflower. ‘No harm ever came to me, I know
that.’

‘Besides,’ his daughter went on, ‘I have the map. And it would be
dreadful if you lost your way and accidentally strayed out of the
Forbidden City, wouldn’t it?’

Rincewind gave in. It struck him that Twoflower’s late wife must have
been a remarkably intelligent woman.

‘Oh, all right,’ he said. ‘But you’re not to get in the way. And you’re
to do what I tell you, Okay?’

Butterfly bowed.

‘Lead on, O Great Wizard,’ she said.

‘I _knew_ it!’ said Truckle. ‘Poison!’

‘No, no. You don’t eat it. You rub it on your body,’ said Mr Saveloy.
‘Watch. And you get what we in civilization call _clean_.’

Most of the Horde stood waist-deep in the warm water, every man with his
hands chastely wrapped around his body. Hamish had refused to relinquish
his wheelchair, so only his head was above the surface.

‘It’s all prickly,’ said Cohen. ‘And my skin’s peeling off and
dissolving.’

‘That’s _not_ skin,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Haven’t _any_ of you seen a bath
before?’

‘Oh, I _seen_ one,’ said Boy Willie. ‘I killed the Mad Bishop of
Pseudopolis in one. You get’ – he furrowed his brow – ‘bubbles and
stuff. And fifteen naked maidens.’

‘Whut?’

‘Definitely. Fifteen. Remember it well.’

‘That’s more _like_ it,’ said Caleb.

‘All _we’ve_ got to rub is this soap stuff.’

‘The Emperor is ritually bathed by twenty-two bath women,’ said Six
Beneficent Winds. ‘I could go and check with the harem eunuchs and wake
them up, if you like. It’s probably allowable under Entertaining.’

The taxman was warming to his new job. He’d worked out that although the
Horde, as individuals, had acquired mountains of cash in their careers
as barbarian heroes they’d lost almost all of it engaging in the other
activities (he mentally catalogued these as Public Relations) necessary
to the profession, and therefore were entitled to quite a considerable
rebate.

The fact that they were registered with no revenue collecting authority
_anywhere_²⁴ was entirely a secondary point. It was the principle that
counted. And the interest too, of course.

‘No, no young women, I insist,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘You’re having a bath
to get clean. Plenty of time for young women later.’

‘Gotta date when all this is over,’ said Caleb, a little shyly, thinking
wistfully of one of the few women he’d ever had a conversation with.
‘She’s got her own farm, she said. I could be all right for a duck.’

‘I bet Teach don’t want you to say that,’ said Boy Willie. ‘I bet he’d
say you gotta call it a waterfowl.’

‘Huh, huh, hur!’

‘Whut?’

Six Beneficent Winds sidled over to the teacher as the Horde
experimented with the bath oil, initially by drinking it.

‘I’ve worked out what it is you’re going to steal,’ he said.

‘Oh, yes?’ said Mr Saveloy politely. He was watching Caleb who, having
had it brought home to him that he might have been adopting the wrong
approach all his life, was trying to cut his nails with his sword.

‘It’s the legendary Diamond Coffin of Schz Yu!’ said Six Beneficent
Winds.

‘No. Wrong again.’

‘Oh.’

‘Out of the baths, gentlemen,’ said the teacher. ‘I think . . . yes . .
. you’ve mastered commerce, social intercourse—’

‘—hur, hur, hur . . . sorry—’

‘—and the principles of taxation,’ Mr Saveloy went on.

‘Have we done that? What _are_ they, then?’ said Cohen.

‘You take away almost all the money that the merchants have got,’ said
Six Beneficent Winds, handing him a towel.

‘Oh, is that it? I’ve been doing that for _years_.’

‘No, you’ve been taking away _all_ the money,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘That’s
where you go wrong. You kill too many of them, and the ones you don’t
kill you leave too poor.’

‘Sounds _frightfully_ good to me,’ said Truckle, excavating the
cretaceous contents of an ear. ‘Poor merchants, rich us.’

‘No, no, no!’

‘No, no, no?’

‘Yes! That’s not _civilized_!’

‘It’s like with sheep,’ Six Beneficent Winds explained. ‘You don’t tear
their skin off all in one go, you just shear them every year.’

The Horde looked blank.

‘Hunter-gatherers,’ said Mr Saveloy, with a touch of hopelessness.
‘Wrong metaphor.’

‘It’s the marvellous Singing Sword of Wong, isn’t it?’ whispered Six
Beneficent Winds. ‘That’s what you’re going to steal!’

‘No. In fact, “steal” is rather the wrong word. Well, anyway, gentlemen
. . . you might not yet be civilized but at least you’re nice and clean,
and many people think this is identical. Time, I think, for . . .
action.’

The Horde straightened up. This was back in the area they understood.

‘To the Throne Room!’ said Ghenghiz Cohen.

Six Beneficent Winds wasn’t that fast on the uptake, but at last he put
two and two together.

‘It’s the Emperor!’ he said, and raised his hand to his mouth in horror
tinged with evil delight. ‘You’re going to kidnap him!’

Diamonds glittered when Cohen grinned.

There were two dead guards in the corridor leading to the private
Imperial apartments.

‘Look, how come you were all taken alive?’ whispered Rincewind. ‘The
guards I saw had big swords. How come you’re not dead?’

‘I suppose they planned to torture us,’ said Butterfly. ‘We did injure
ten of them.’

‘Oh? Pasted posters on them, did you? Sang revolutionary songs until
they gave in? Listen, someone _wanted_ you alive.’

The floors sang in the darkness. Every footstep produced a chorus of
squeaks and groans, just like the floorboards at the University. But you
didn’t expect that sort of thing in a nice shiny palace like this.

‘They’re called nightingale floors,’ said Butterfly.

‘The carpenters put little metal collars around the nails so that no one
can creep up unawares.’

Rincewind looked down at the corpses. Neither man had drawn his sword.
He leaned his weight on his left foot. The floor squeaked. Then he
leaned on his right foot. The floor groaned.

‘This isn’t right, then,’ he whispered. ‘You can’t creep up on someone
on a floor like this. So someone they _knew_ killed those guards. Let’s
get out of here . . .’

‘We go on,’ said Butterfly firmly.

‘It’s a trap. Someone’s using you to do their dirty work.’

She shrugged. ‘Turn left by the big jade statue.’

It was four in the morning, an hour before dawn. There were guards in
the official staterooms, but not very many. After all, this was well
inside the Forbidden City, with its high walls and small gates. It
wasn’t as though anything was going to happen.

It needed a special type of mind to stand guard over some empty rooms
all night. One Big River had such a mind, orbiting gently within the
otherwise blissful emptiness of his skull.

They’d happily called him One Big River because he was the same size and
moved at the same speed as the Hung. Everyone had expected him to become
a _tsimo_ wrestler, but he’d failed the intelligence test because he
hadn’t eaten the table.

It was impossible for him to get bored. He just didn’t have the
imagination. But, since the visor of his huge helmet registered a
permanent expression of metal rage, he’d in any case cultivated the art
of going to sleep on his feet.

He was dozing happily now, aware only of an occasional squeaking, like
that of a very cautious mouse.

The helmet’s visor swung up. A voice said: ‘Would you rather die than
betray your Emperor?’

A second voice said: ‘This is not a trick question.’

One Big River blinked, and then turned his gaze downwards. An apparition
in a squeaky-wheeled wheelchair had a very large sword pointing at
exactly that inconvenient place where his upper armour didn’t quite meet
his lower armour.

A third voice said: ‘I should add that the last twenty-nine people who
answered wrong are . . . dried shredded fish . . . sorry, dead.’

A fourth voice said: ‘And we’re not eunuchs.’

One Big River rumbled with the effort of thought.

‘I tink I rather live,’ he said.

A man with diamonds where his teeth should have been gave him a
comradely pat on the shoulder. ‘Good man,’ he said. ‘Join the Horde. We
could use a man like you. Maybe as a siege weapon.’

‘Who you?’ he said.

‘This is Ghenghiz Cohen,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Doer of mighty deeds. Slayer
of dragons. Ravager of cities. He once bought an apple.’

No one laughed. Mr Saveloy had found that the Horde had no concept
whatsoever of sarcasm. Probably no one had ever tried it on them.

One Big River had been raised to do what he was told. Everyone had told
him what to do, all through his life. He fell in behind the man with
diamond teeth because he was the sort of man you followed when he said
‘follow’.

‘But, you know, there are tens of thousands of men who _would_ die
rather than betray their Emperor,’ whispered Six Beneficent Winds, as
they filed through the corridors.

‘I hope so.’

‘Some of them will be on guard around the Forbidden City. We’ve avoided
them, but they’re still there. We’ll have to deal with them eventually.’

‘Oh, good!’ said Cohen.

‘Bad,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘That business with the ninjas was just high
spirits—’

‘—high spirits—’ murmured Six Beneficent Winds.

‘—but you don’t want a big fight out in the open. It’ll get messy.’

Cohen walked over to the nearest wall, which had a gorgeous pattern of
peacocks, and took out his knife.

‘Paper,’ he said. ‘Bloody paper. Paper walls.’ He poked his head
through. There was a shrill whimper. ‘Oops, sorry, ma’am. Official wall
inspection,’ He extracted his head, grinning.

‘But you can’t go through walls!’ said Six Beneficent Winds.

‘Why not?’

‘They’re – well, they’re the _walls._ What would happen if everyone
walked through walls? What do you think doors are for?’

‘I think they’re for other people,’ said Cohen. ‘Which way’s that throne
room?’

‘Whut?’

‘This is lateral thinking,’ explained Mr Saveloy, as they followed him.
‘Ghenghiz is quite good at a certain kind of lateral thinking.’

‘What a lateral?’

‘Er. It’s a kind of muscle, I believe.’

‘Thinking with your muscles . . . Yes. I see,’ said Six Beneficent
Winds.

Rincewind sidled into a space between the wall and a statue of a rather
jolly dog with its tongue hanging out.

‘What now?’ said Butterfly.

‘How big’s the Red Army?’

‘We number many thousands,’ said Butterfly, defiantly.

‘In Hunghung?’

‘Oh, no. There is a cadre in every city.’

‘You know that, do you? You’ve met them?’

‘That would be dangerous. Only Two Fire Herb knows how to contact them .
. .’

‘Fancy that. Well, do you know what I think? I think someone _wants_ a
revolution. And you’re all so damn respectful and polite he’s having his
work cut out trying to organize one! But once you’ve got rebels you can
do _anything_.’

‘That can’t be true . . .’

‘The rebels in other cities, they do great revolutionary deeds, do
they?’

‘We hear reports all the time!’

‘From our friend Herb?’

Butterfly frowned.

‘Yes . . .’

‘You’re thinking, aren’t you?’ said Rincewind. ‘The old brain cells are
finally banging together, yes? Good. Have I convinced you?’

‘I . . . don’t know.’

‘Now let’s go back.’

‘No. Now I’ve got to find out if what you’re suggesting is true.’

‘Dying to find out, eh? Good grief, you people make me so _angry._ Look,
watch this . . .’

Rincewind strode to the end of the corridor. There was a pair of wide
doors, flanked by a pair of jade dragons.

He flung them back.

The room inside was low-ceilinged but large. In the centre, under a
canopy, was a bed. It was hard to make out the figure lying there, but
it had that certain stillness that suggests the kind of sleep from which
there is unlikely to be any kind of awakening.

‘You see?’ he said. ‘He’s been . . . killed . . . already . . .’

A dozen soldiers were staring at Rincewind in amazement.

Behind him he heard the creaking of the floor and then some whooshing
sounds followed by a noise like wet leather being hit against rock.

Rincewind looked at the nearest soldier. The man was holding a sword.

One drop of blood coursed down the blade and, with a brief pause for
dramatic effect, fell on to the floor.

Rincewind looked up and raised his hat.

‘I do beg your pardon,’ he said, brightly. ‘Isn’t this room 3B?’

And ran for it.

The floors screamed under him, and behind him someone screamed
Rincewind’s nickname, which was: ‘Don’t let him get away!’

Let me get away, Rincewind prayed, oh, please, let me get away.

He slipped as he turned the corner, skidded through a paper wall and
landed in an ornamental fish pond. But Rincewind in full flight had
catlike, even messianic abilities. The water barely rippled under his
feet as he bounced off the surface and headed away.

Another wall erupted and he was in what was possibly the same corridor.

Behind him, someone landed heavily on a valuable koi.

Rincewind shot forward again.

From; that was the most important factor in any mindless escape. You
were always running _from. To_ could look after itself.

He cleared a long flight of shallow stone steps, rolled upright at the
bottom and set off at random along another corridor.

His legs had sorted themselves out now. First the mad, wild dash to get
you out of immediate danger and then the good solid strides to put as
much distance as possible between you and it. That was the trick.

History told of a runner who’d run forty miles after a battle to report
its successful outcome to those at home. He was traditionally regarded
as the greatest runner of all time, but if he’d been reporting news of
an _impending_ battle he’d have been overtaken by Rincewind.

And yet . . . someone was gaining.

A knife poked through the wall of the throne room and cut a hole large
enough to afford space for an upright man or one wheelchair.

There was muttering from the Horde.

‘Bruce the Hoon never went in the back way.’

‘Shut up.’

‘Never one for back gates, Bruce the Hoon.’

‘Shut up.’

‘When Bruce the Hoon attacked Al Khali, he did it right at the main
guard tower, with a thousand screaming men on very small horses.’

‘Yeah, but . . . last I saw of Bruce the Hoon, his head was on a spike.’

‘All right, I’ll grant you that. But at least it was over the main gate.
I mean, at least he got in.’

‘His head did.’

‘Oh, my . . . ’

Mr Saveloy was gratified. The room they’d stepped into was enough to
silence the Horde, if only briefly. It was large, of course, but that
hadn’t been its only purpose. One Sun Mirror, as he welded the tribes
and countries and little island nations together, had wanted a room
built which said to chieftains and ambassadors: this is the biggest
space you’ve ever been in, it is more splendid than anything you could
ever imagine, and we’ve got a lot more rooms like this.

He had wanted it to be impressive. He had very clearly wanted it to
intimidate mere barbarians so much that they’d give in there and then.
Let there be huge statues, he’d said. And vast decorative hangings. Let
there be pillars and carvings. Let the visitor be silenced by the sheer
magnificence. Let it say to him, ‘This is civilization, and you can join
it or die. Now drop to your knees or be shortened some other way.’

The Horde gave it the benefit of their inspection.

Finally Truckle said, ‘It’s all right, I suppose, but not a patch on our
chieftain’s longhouse back in Skund. It hasn’t even got a fire in the
middle of the floor, look.’

‘Gaudy, to my mind.’

‘Whut?’

‘Typically foreign.’

‘I’d do away with most of this and get some decent straw on the floor, a
few shields round the walls.’

‘Whut?’

‘Mind you, get in a few hundred tables and you could have a helluva
carouse in here.’

Cohen walked across the huge expanse towards the throne, which was under
a vast ornamental canopy.

‘ ’S got ’n umbrella over it, look.’

‘Probably the roof leaks. You can’t trust tiles. A good reed thatch’ll
give you forty years bone dry.’

The throne was lacquered wood, but with many precious gems set in it.
Cohen sat down.

‘Is this it?’ he said. ‘We’ve done it, Teach?’

‘Yes. Of course, now you have to get away with it,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘I’m sorry,’ said Six Beneficent Winds. ‘What’ve you done?’

‘You know that thing we were here to steal?’ said the teacher.

‘Yes?’

‘It’s the Empire.’

The taxman’s expression didn’t change for a few seconds, and then it
flowed into a horrified grin.

‘I think some breakfast is called for before we go any further,’ said Mr
Saveloy. ‘Mr Winds, perhaps you would be so good as to summon someone?’

The taxman was still grinning fixedly.

‘But . . . but . . . you can’t conquer an empire like this!’ he managed.
‘You’ve got to have an army, like the warlords! Just walking in like
this . . . It’s against the rules! And . . . and . . . there are
thousands of guards!’

‘Yes, but they’re all out there,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Guarding us,’ said Cohen.

‘But they’re guarding the _real_ Emperor!’

‘That’s me,’ said Cohen.

‘Oh yeah?’ said Truckle. ‘Who died and made _you_ Emperor?’

‘No one has to die,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘It’s called usurping.’

‘That’s right,’ said Cohen. ‘You just say, see here, Gunga Din, you’re
out on your ear, Okay? Piss off to some island somewhere or—’

‘Ghenghiz,’ said Mr Saveloy gently, ‘do you think you could refrain from
referring to foreigners in that rather offensive fashion? It’s not
civilized.’

Cohen shrugged.

‘You’re still going to have big trouble with the guards and things,’
said Six Beneficent Winds.

‘Maybe not,’ said Cohen. ‘Tell ’em, Teach.’

‘Have you ever _seen_ the, er, former Emperor?’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Mr
Winds?’

‘Of course not. Hardly anyone has seen—’

He stopped.

‘There you are, then,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Very quick on the uptake, Mr
Winds. As befits the Lord High Chief Tax Gatherer.’

‘But it won’t work because—’ Six Beneficent Winds stopped again. Mr
Saveloy’s words reached his brain.

‘Lord High Chief? Me? The black hat _with_ the red ruby button?’

‘Yes.’

‘And a feather in it, if you like,’ said Cohen munificently.

The taxman looked in rapt consideration.

‘So . . . if there was, say, a mere District Administrator who was
incredibly cruel to his staff, particularly to a hard-working deputy,
and thoroughly deserving of a good sound thrashing—’

‘As the Lord High Chief Tax Gatherer, of course, that would be entirely
your affair.’

Six Beneficent Winds’ grin now threatened to remove the top of his head.

‘On the subject of new taxation,’ he said, ‘I’ve often had this thought
that fresh air is all too readily available at far below the cost of
production—’

‘We will listen to your ideas with extreme interest,’ said Mr Saveloy.
‘In the meantime, please arrange breakfast.’

‘And have summoned,’ said Cohen, ‘all those buggers who think they know
what the Emperor looks like.’

The pursuer was closing.

Rincewind skidded around a corner and there, blocking the passageway,
were three guards. These were not dead. They were alive, and they had
got swords.

Someone cannoned into the back of him, pushed him to the ground, and
leapt past.

He shut his eyes.

There were a couple of thumps, a groan, and then a very strange metallic
noise.

It was a helmet, spinning round and round on the floor.

He was pulled to his feet.

‘Are you going to lie around all day?’ said Butterfly. ‘Come on. They’re
not far behind!’

Rincewind glanced at the recumbent guards, and then loped after the
girl.

‘How many of them are there?’ he managed.

‘Seven now. But two of them are limping and one’s having trouble
breathing. Come _on_.’

‘You _hit_ them?’

‘Do you always waste breath like this?’

‘Never found anyone who could keep up with me before!’

They turned a corner and almost ran into another guard.

Butterfly didn’t even stop. She took a ladylike step, whirled around on
one foot, and kicked the man so hard on his ear that he spun on his own
axis and landed on his head.

She paused, panted, and tucked a hair back into place.

‘We should split up,’ she said.

‘Oh, no!’ said Rincewind. ‘I mean, I must protect you!’

‘I’ll head back to the others. You lead the guards away somewhere—’

‘Can you _all_ do that?’

‘Of course,’ said Butterfly, testily. ‘I _told_ you we fought the
guards. Now, if we split up one of us is bound to escape. The murderers!
We were supposed to take the blame for that!’

‘Didn’t I try to tell you? I thought you _wanted_ him dead!’

‘Yes, but we’re rebels. They were palace guards!’

‘Er—’

‘No time. See you in Heaven.’

She darted away.

‘Oh.’

Rincewind looked around. It had all gone quiet.

Guards appeared at the end of the corridor, but cautiously, as befitted
people who’d just met Butterfly.

‘There!’

‘Is it her?’

‘No, it’s him!’

‘Get him!’

He accelerated again, rounded a corner, and found that he was in a
cul-de-sac that would undoubtedly, given the sounds behind, become a
dead end. But there was a pair of doors. He kicked them open, ran
inside, and slowed . . .

The space inside was dark, but the sound and air suggested a large space
and a certain flatulent component indicated some kind of stable.

There was some light, though, from a fire. Rincewind trotted towards it
and saw that it was under a huge cauldron, man-sized, full of boiling
rice.

And now that his eyes were accustomed to the gloom he realized that
there were shapes lying on slabs along both walls of an enormous room.

They were snoring gently.

They were, in fact, people. They might even have been humans, or at
least had humans in their ancestry before someone, hundreds of years
ago, had said, ‘Let’s see how big and fat we can breed people. Let’s try
for really big bastards.’

Each giant frame was dressed in what looked like a nappy to Rincewind’s
eyes and was dozing happily alongside a bowl holding enough rice to
explode twenty people, just in case it woke up in the night and felt
like a light snack.

A couple of his pursuers appeared in the doorway, and stopped. Then they
advanced, but very cautiously, carefully watching the gently moving
mounds.

‘Oi, oi, oi!’ shouted Rincewind.

The men stopped and stared at him.

‘Wakey wakey! Let’s see the rising sons!’ He grabbed a mighty ladle and
banged it on the rice cauldron.

‘Up you get! Hands off – er – whatever you can find and on with socks!’

The sleepers stirred.

‘Oooorrrrr?’

‘Ooooaaaoooooor!’

The room shook as forty tree-trunk legs swung off the slabs. Flesh
rearranged itself so that, in the gloom, Rincewind appeared to be being
watched by twenty small pyramids.

‘Haaaroooooohhhh?’

‘Those men,’ said Rincewind, pointing desperately at his pursuers, who
were slowly backing away, ‘those men have a pork sandwich!’

‘Oorrryorrraaah?’

‘Oooorrrr?’

‘With mustard!’

‘Oooorrrr!’

Twenty very small heads turned. A total of eighty specialized neurones
fired into life.

And the floor shook. The wrestlers started to move hopefully towards the
men, in a slow but deliberate run designed to be halted only by
collision with another wrestler or a continent.

‘Oooorrr!’

Rincewind dashed for the far door and burst through it. A couple of men
were sitting in a small room drinking tea and playing _shibo,_ watched
by a third.

‘The wrestlers are wrestless!’ he shouted. ‘I think you’ve got a
stampede going on!’

A man threw down his _shibo_ tiles. ‘Blast! And it’s been at least an
hour since they were fed!’

The men grabbed various nets and prods and items of protective clothing,
leaving Rincewind alone.

There was another door. He sashayed through it. He’d never essayed a
sashay before, but he reckoned he was due a sashay for quick thinking.

There was another passage. He ran down it, on the basis that absence of
pursuit is no reason to stop running.

Lord Hong was folding paper.

He was an expert at it because when he did it he gave it his full
attention. Lord Hong had a mind like a knife, although possibly a knife
with a curved blade.

The door slid aside. A guard, red in the face from running, threw
himself on to the floor.

‘O Lord Hong, who is exalted—’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Lord Hong distantly, essaying a taxing crease. ‘What
has gone wrong this time?’

‘My lord?’

‘I asked you what has gone wrong.’

‘Uh . . . we killed the Emperor as directed—’

‘By whom?’

‘My lord! You commanded it!’

‘Did I?’ said Lord Hong, folding the paper lengthwise.

The guard shut his eyes. He had a vision, a very short vision, of the
future. There was a spike in it. He carried on.

‘But the . . . prisoners can’t be found anywhere, lord! We heard someone
approach and then . . . well, we saw two people, lord. We’re chasing
them. But the others have vanished.’

‘No slogans? No revolutionary posters? No _culprits_?’

‘No, lord.’

‘I see. Remain here.’

Lord Hong’s hands continued with the folding as he looked at the room’s
other occupant.

‘You have something to say, Two Fire Herb?’ he said pleasantly.

The revolutionary leader looked sheepish.

‘The Red Army has been quite expensive,’ said Lord Hong. ‘The printing
costs alone . . . And you cannot say I have not helped you. We unlocked
the doors and killed the guards and gave your wretched people swords and
a map, did we not? And now I can hardly claim that they killed the
Emperor, may he stay dead for ten thousand years, when there is no sign
of them. People will ask too many questions. I can hardly kill
_everyone._ And we appear to have some barbarians in the building, too.’

‘Something must have gone wrong, my lord.’ Herb was hypnotized by the
moving hands as they caressed that paper.

‘What a pity. I do not like it when things go wrong. Guard? Redeem your
miserable self. Take him away. I will have to try a different plan.’

‘My lord!’

‘Yes, Two Fire Herb?’

‘When you . . . when we agreed . . . when it was agreed that the Red
Army should be turned over to you, you did promise me indemnity.’

Lord Hong smiled.

‘Oh, yes. I recall. I said, did I not, that I would neither say nor
write any order for your death? And I must keep my word, otherwise what
am I?’

He folded the last crease and opened his hands, putting the little paper
decoration on the lacquered table beside him.

Herb and the guard stared at it.

‘Guard . . . take him away,’ said Lord Hong.

It was a marvellously constructed paper figure of a man.

But there didn’t seem to have been enough paper for a head.

* * *

The immediate court turned out to be about eighty men, women and
eunuchs, in various states of sleeplessness.

They were astonished at what sat on the throne.

The Horde were quite astonished at the court.

‘Who’re all them vinegar-faced old baggages at the front?’ whispered
Cohen, who was idly tossing a throwing knife into the air and catching
it again. ‘I wouldn’t even set fire to them.’

‘They’re the wives of former Emperors,’ hissed Six Beneficent Winds.

‘We don’t have to marry them, do we?’

‘I don’t think so.’

‘Why’re their feet so small?’ said Cohen. ‘I like to see big feet on a
woman.’

Six Beneficent Winds told him. Cohen’s expression hardened.

‘I’m learning a lot about civilization, I am,’ he said. ‘Long
fingernails, crippled feet and servants running around without their
family jewels. Huh.’

‘What is going on here, pray?’ said a middle-aged man. ‘Who are you? Who
are these old eunuchs?’

‘Who’re you?’ said Cohen. He drew his sword. ‘I need to know so’s it can
be put on your gravestone—’

‘I wonder if I might effect some introductions at this point?’ said Mr
Saveloy. He stepped forward.

‘This,’ he said, ‘is Ghenghiz Cohen – put it away, Ghenghiz – who is
technically a barbarian, and this is his Horde. They have overrun your
city. And you are–?’

‘Barbarian invaders?’ said the man haughtily, ignoring him. ‘Barbarian
invaders come in their thousands! Big screaming men on little horses!’

‘I _told_ you,’ said Truckle. ‘But would anyone listen?’

‘—and there is fire, terror, rapine, looting and blood in the streets!’

‘We haven’t had breakfast yet,’ said Cohen, tossing his knife into the
air again.

‘Hah! I would rather die than submit to such as you!’

Cohen shrugged. ‘Why didn’t you say earlier?’

‘Oops,’ said Six Beneficent Winds.

It was a very accurate throw.

‘Who _was_ he, anyway?’ said Cohen, as the body folded up. ‘Anyone know
who he was?’

‘Ghenghiz,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘I’ve kept meaning to tell you: when people
say they’d rather die, they don’t really _mean_ they’d rather die. Not
always.’

‘Why’d they say it, then?’

‘It’s the done thing.’

‘Is this civilization again?’

‘I’m afraid so.’

‘Let’s settle this once and for all, shall we?’ said Cohen. He stood up.
‘Hands up those who’d rather die than have me as Emperor.’

‘Anyone?’ said Mr Saveloy.

Rincewind trotted along another passage. Was there no outside to this
place? Several times he thought he’d found an exit, but it led only to a
courtyard within the huge building, filled with tinkling fountains and
willow trees.

And the place was waking up. There were—

—running steps behind him.

A voice shouted, ‘Hey—’

He dived for the nearest door.

The room beyond was full of steam. It roiled in great billowing clouds.
He could dimly make out a figure toiling at the huge wheel and the words
‘torture chamber’ crossed his mind until the smell of soap replaced them
with the word ‘laundry’. Rather wan but incredibly clean figures looked
up from their vats and watched him with barely a hint of interest.

They did not look like people in close touch with current events.

He half ran, half sauntered between the bubbling cauldrons.

‘Keep it up. Good man. That’s it, scrub, scrub, scrub. Let me see those
wringers wringing. Well done. Is there another door out of here? Good
bubbles there, very good bubbles. Ah . . .’

One of the laundry workers, who appeared to be in charge, gave him a
suspicious glare and seemed to be about to say something.

Rincewind dodged through a courtyard crisscrossed with washing lines and
stopped, panting, with his back to a wall.

Although it was against his general principles, it was perhaps time to
stop and think.

People were chasing him. That is to say, they were chasing a running
figure in a faded red robe and a very charred pointy hat.

It took a great effort for Rincewind to come to terms with the idea, but
it was just possible that if he was _wearing something else_ he might
not be chased.

On the line in front of him, shirts and trousers flapped in the breeze.
Their construction was to tailoring in the same way that woodchopping is
to carpentry. Someone had mastered the art of the tube, and left it at
that. They looked just like the clothes nearly everyone wore in
Hunghung.

The palace was almost a city in its own right, said the voice of reason.
It must be full of people on all sorts of errands, it added.

It would mean . . . taking off our hat, it added.

Rincewind hesitated. It would be hard for a non-wizard to grasp the
enormity of the suggestion. A wizard would sooner go without his robe
and trousers than forgo his hat. Without his hat, people might think he
was an _ordinary person._

There was shouting in the distance.

The voice of reason could see that if it wasn’t careful it was going to
end up as dead as the rest of Rincewind and added sarcastically: all
right, keep our wretched hat. Our damn hat is why we’re in this mess in
the first place. Perhaps you think you’re going to have a head left to
wear it on?

Rincewind’s hands, also aware that times were going to be extremely
interesting and very short unless they took matters into themselves,
reached out slowly and removed a pair of pants and a shirt and rammed
them inside his robe.

The door burst open. There were _still_ guards behind him, and a couple
of the _tsimo_ herders had joined in the chase. One of them waved a prod
in Rincewind’s direction.

He plunged towards an archway and out into a garden.

It had a little pagoda. It had willow trees, and a pretty lady on a
bridge feeding the birds.

And a man painting a plate.

Cohen rubbed his hands together.

‘No one? Good. That’s all sorted, then.’

‘Ahem.’

A small man at the front of the crowd made a great play of keeping his
hands to himself, but said:

‘Excuse me, but . . . what would happen in the hypothetical situation of
us calling the guards and denouncing you?’

‘We’d kill you all before they were halfway through the door,’ said
Cohen, matter of factly. ‘Any more questions?’ he added, to a chorus of
gasps.

‘Er . . . the Emperor . . . that is to say, the _last_ Emperor . . . had
some very special guards . . .’

There was a tinkling sound. Something small and multi-pointed rolled
down the steps and spun round on the floor. It was a throwing star.

‘Met them,’ said Boy Willie.

‘Fine, fine,’ said the little man. ‘That all seems in order. Ten
Thousand Years to the Emperor!’

The shout was taken up, a little raggedly.

‘What’s your name, young man?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Four Big Horns, my lord.’

‘Very good. Very good. I can see that you will go a long way. What is
your job?’

‘I am Grand Assistant to the Lord Chamberlain, my lord.’

‘Which one of you is the Lord Chamberlain?’

Four Big Horns pointed to the man who had preferred to die.

‘There we are, you see,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Promotion comes fast to
adaptable people, Lord Chamberlain. And now, the Emperor will
breakfast.’

‘And what is his pleasure?’ said the new Lord Chamberlain, endeavouring
to look bright and adaptable.

‘All sorts of things. But right now, big lumps of meat and lots of beer.
You will find the Emperor very easy to cater for.’ Mr Saveloy smiled the
knowing little smile he sometimes smiled when he knew he was the only
one seeing the joke. ‘The Emperor doesn’t favour what he calls “fiddly
foreign muck full of eyeballs and suchlike” and much prefers simple,
wholesome food like sausages, which are made of miscellaneous animal
organs minced up in a length of intestine. Ahaha. But if you want to
please him, just keep up the big lumps of meat. Isn’t that so, my lord?’

Cohen had been gazing at the assembled courtiers. When you’ve survived
for ninety years all the attacks that can be thrown at you by men,
women, trolls, dwarfs, giants, green things with lots of legs and, on
one occasion, an enraged lobster, you can learn a lot by looking at
faces.

‘Eh?’ said Cohen. ‘Oh. Yep. Right enough. Big lumps. Here, Mr Taxman . .
. what do these people _do_ all day?’

‘What would you like them to do?’

‘I’d like them to bugger off.’

‘Sorry, my lord?’

‘[Complicated pictogram],’ said Mr Saveloy. The new Lord Chamberlain
looked a little startled.

‘What, _here_?’

‘It’s a figure of speech, lad. He just means he wants everyone to go
away quickly.’

The court scurried out. A sufficiently complicated pictogram is worth a
thousand words.

After the stampede the artist Three Solid Frogs got to his feet,
retrieved his brush from his nostril, pulled his easel out of a tree,
and tried to think placid thoughts.

The garden was not what it had been.

The willow tree was bent. The pagoda had been demolished by an
out-of-control wrestler, who had eaten the roof. The doves had flown.
The little bridge had been broken. His model, the concubine Jade Fan,
had run off crying after she’d managed to scramble out of the ornamental
pond.

_And_ someone had stolen his straw hat.

Three Solid Frogs adjusted what remained of his dress and endeavoured to
compose himself.

The plate with his sketch on had been smashed, of course.

He pulled another one out of his bag and reached for his palette.

There was a huge footprint in the middle of it . . .

He wanted to cry. He’d had such a _good_ feeling about this picture. He
just _knew_ it would be one that people would remember for a long time.
And the colours? Did anyone _understand_ how much vermilion cost these
days?

He pulled himself together. So there was only blue left. Well, he’d show
them . . .

He tried to ignore the devastation in front of him and concentrated on
the picture in his mind.

‘Let me see, now,’ he thought. ‘Jade Fan being pursued over a bridge by
man waving his arms and screaming, “Get out of the way!” followed by man
with prod, three guards, five laundry men and a wrestler unable to
stop.’

He had to simplify it a bit, of course.

The pursuers rounded a corner, except for the wrestler, who wasn’t built
for such a difficult manoeuvre.

‘Where’d he go?’

They were in a courtyard. There were pigsties on one side, and middens
on the other.

And, in the middle of the courtyard, a pointy hat.

One of the guards reached out and grabbed a colleague’s arm before the
man stepped forward.

‘Steady now,’ he said.

‘It’s just a hat.’

‘So where’s the rest of him? He couldn’t have just . . . disappeared . .
. into . . .’

They backed away.

‘You heard about him too?’

‘They said he blew a hole in the wall just by waving his hands!’

‘That’s nothing! I heard he appeared on an invisible dragon up in the
mountains!’

‘What shall we tell Lord Hong?’

‘I don’t want to be blown to pieces!’

‘_I_ don’t want to tell Lord Hong we lost him. We’re in enough trouble
already. And I’ve only just paid for this helmet.’

‘Well . . . we could take the hat. That’d be evidence.’

‘Right. You pick it up.’

‘Me? _You_ pick it up!’

‘It might be surrounded by terrible spells.’

‘Really? So it’s all right for _me_ to touch it? Thank you! Get one of
them to pick it up!’

The laundry men backed away, the Hunghungese habit of obedience
evaporating like morning dew. The soldiers weren’t the only ones to have
heard rumours.

‘Not us!’

‘Got a rush order for socks!’

The guard turned. A peasant was stumbling out of one of the pigsties,
carrying a sack, his face covered by his big straw hat.

‘Hey, you!’

The man dropped to his knees and banged his head on the ground.

‘Don’t kill me!’

The guards exchanged a glance.

‘We ain’t going to kill you,’ said one of them. ‘We just want you to try
and pick up that hat over there.’

‘What hat, o mighty warrior?’

‘That hat there! Right now!’

The man crawled crabwise across the cobbles.

‘This hat, o great lord?’

‘Yes!’

The man’s fingers crept over the stones and prodded the hat’s ragged
brim.

Then he screamed.

‘Your wife is a big hippo! My face is melting! My face is meltinnnnggg!’

Rincewind waited until the sound of fleeing sandals had quite faded, and
then stood up, dusted off his hat, and put it in the sack.

That had gone a lot better than he’d expected. So there was another
valuable thing to know about the Empire: no one looked at peasants. It
must be the clothes and the hat. No one but the common people dressed
like that, so anyone dressed like that must be a common person. It was
the advertising principle of a wizard’s hat, but in reverse. You were
careful and polite around people in a pointy hat, in case they took a
very physical offence, whereas someone in a big straw hat was a suitable
target for a ‘Hey, you!’ and a—

It was at exactly this point that someone behind him shouted, ‘Hey,
you!’ and hit Rincewind across the shoulders with a stick.

The irate face of a servant appeared in front of him. The man waved a
finger in front of Rincewind’s nose.

‘You are late! You are a bad man! Get inside right now!’

‘I—’

The stick hit Rincewind again. The servant pointed at a distant doorway.

‘Insolence! Shame! Go to work!’

Rincewind’s brain prepared the words: Oh, so we think we’re Clever-san
just because we’ve got a big stick, do we? Well, I happen to be a great
wizard and you know what you can do with your big stick.

Somewhere between the brain and his mouth they became:

‘Yessir! Right away!’

The Horde were left alone.

‘Well, gentlemen, we did it,’ said Mr Saveloy eventually. ‘You have the
world on a plate.’

‘All the treasure we want,’ said Truckle.

‘That’s right.’

‘Let’s not hang around, then,’ said Truckle. ‘Let’s get some sacks.’

‘There’s no _point_,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘You’d only be stealing from
yourselves. This is an _Empire._ You don’t just shove it in a bag and
divvy it up at the next campfire!’

‘How about the ravishing?’

Mr Saveloy sighed. ‘There are, I understand, three hundred concubines in
the imperial harem. I’m sure they will be very pleased to see you,
although matters will be improved if you take your boots off.’

The old men wore the puzzled look such as might be worn by fish trying
to understand the concept of the bicycle.

‘We ought to take just small stuff,’ said Boy Willie at last. ‘Rubies
and emeralds, for preference.’

‘And chuck a match on the place as we go out,’ said Vincent. ‘These
paper walls and all this lacquered wood should go up a treat.’

‘No, no, no!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘The vases in this room alone are
priceless!’

‘Nah, too big to carry. Can’t get ’em onna horse.’

‘But I’ve shown you civilization!’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Yeah. It’s all right to visit. Ain’t that so, Cohen?’

Cohen was hunched down in the throne, glaring at the far wall.

‘What’s that?’

‘I’m saying we take everything we can carry and head off back home,
right?’

‘Home . . . yeah . . .’

‘That was the Plan, yeah?’

Cohen didn’t look at Mr Saveloy’s face.

‘Yeah . . . the Plan . . .’ he said.

‘It’s a good plan,’ said Truckle. ‘Great idea. You move in as boss?
Fine. Great scam. Saves trouble. None of that fiddling with locks and
things. So we’ll all be off home, Okay? With all the treasure we can
carry?’

‘What for?’ said Cohen.

‘What for? It’s _treasure_.’

Cohen seemed to reach a decision.

‘What did you spend your last haul on, Truckle? You said you got three
sacks of gold and gems from that haunted castle.’

Truckle looked puzzled, as if Cohen had asked what purple smelled like.

‘Spend it on? _I_ dunno. You know how it is. What’s it matter what you
spend it on? It’s _loot._ Anyway . . . what do you spend yours on?’

Cohen sighed.

Truckle gaped at him.

‘You’re not thinking of _really_ staying here?’ He glared at Mr Saveloy.
‘Have you two been cooking up something?’

Cohen drummed his fingers on the arm of the throne. ‘You said go home,’
he said. ‘Where to?’

‘Well . . . wherever . . .’

‘And Hamish there—’

‘Whut? Whut?’

‘I mean . . . he’s a hundred and five, right? Time to settle down,
maybe?’

‘Whut?’

‘Settle down?’ said Truckle. ‘_You_ tried it once. Stole a farm and said
you was goin’ to raise pigs! Gave it up after . . . What was it? . . .
three hours?’

‘Whutzeesayin’? Whutzeesayin’?’

‘He said IT’S TIME YOU SETTLED DOWN, Hamish.’

‘Bugrthat!’

The kitchens were in uproar. Half the court had ended up there, in most
cases for the first time. The place was as crowded as a street market,
through which the servants tried to go about their business as best they
could.

The fact that one of them seemed a little unclear as to what his
business actually consisted of was quite unnoticed in the turmoil.

‘Did you _smell_ him?’ said Lady Two Streams. ‘The _stink_!’

‘Like a hot day in a pig yard!’ said Lady Peach Petal.

_‘I’m_ pleased to say I have never experienced that,’ said Lady Two
Streams haughtily.

Lady Jade Night, who was rather younger than the other two, and who had
been rather attracted to Cohen’s smell of unwashed lion, said nothing.

The head cook said: ‘Just that? Big lumps? Why doesn’t he just eat a cow
while he’s about it?’

‘You wait till you hear about this devil food called _sausage_,’ said
the Lord Chamberlain.

‘Big lumps.’ The cook was almost in tears. ‘Where’s the skill in big
lumps of meat? Not even sauce? I’d rather die than simply heat up big
lumps of meat!’

‘Ah,’ said the new Lord Chamberlain, ‘I should think very carefully
about that. The new Emperor, may he have a bath for ten thousand years,
tends to interpret that as a request—’

The babble of voices stopped. The cause of the sudden silence was one
small, sharp noise. It was a cork, popping.

Lord Hong had a Grand Vizier’s talent for apparently turning up out of
nowhere. His gaze swept the kitchens. It was certainly the only
housework that he had ever done.

He stepped forward. He’d taken a small black bottle from out of the
sleeve of his robe.

‘Bring me the meat,’ he said. ‘The sauce will take care of itself.’

The assembled people watched with horrified interest. Poison was all
part of the Hunghungese court etiquette but people generally did it
while hidden from sight somewhere, out of good manners.

‘Is there anyone,’ said Lord Hong, ‘who has anything they would like to
say?’

His gaze was like a scythe. As it swung around the room people wavered,
and hesitated, and fell.

‘Very well,’ said Lord Hong. ‘I would rather die than see a . . .
_barbarian_ on the Imperial throne. Let him have his . . . big lumps.
Bring me the meat.’

There was movement in the ground, and the sound of shouting and the
thump of a stick. A peasant scuttled forward, reluctantly wheeling a
huge covered dish on a trolley.

At the sight of Lord Hong he pushed the trolley aside, flung himself
forward and grovelled.

‘I avert my gaze from your . . . an orchard in a favourable position . .
. _damn_ . . . countenance, o lord.’

Lord Hong prodded the prone figure with his foot.

‘It is good to see the arts of respect maintained,’ he observed. ‘Remove
the lid.’

The man got up and, still bowing and ducking, lifted the cover.

Lord Hong upended the bottle and held it there until the last drop had
hissed out. His audience was transfixed.

‘And now let it be taken to the barbarians,’ he said.

‘Certainly, your celestial . . . ink brush . . . willow frond . . .
righteousness.’

‘Where are you from, peasant?’

‘Bes Pelargic, o lord.’

‘Ah. I thought so.’

The big bamboo doors slid back. The new Lord Chamberlain stepped in,
followed by a caravan of trolleys.

‘Breakfast, o lord of a thousand years,’ he said. ‘Big lumps of pig, big
lumps of goat, big lumps of ox and seven fried rice.’

One of the servants lifted the lid of a dish. ‘But take my tip and don’t
go for this pork,’ he said. ‘It’s been poisoned.’

The Chamberlain spun around.

‘Insolent pig! You will die for this.’

‘It’s Rincewind, isn’t it?’ said Cohen. _‘Looks_ like Rincewind—’

‘Got my hat here somewhere,’ said Rincewind. ‘Had to stuff it down my
trousers—’

‘Poison?’ said Cohen. ‘You sure?’

‘Well, Okay, it was a black bottle and it had a skull and crossbones on
it and when he tipped it out it smoked,’ said Rincewind, as Mr Saveloy
helped him up. ‘Was it anchovy essence? I don’t _think_ so.’

‘Poison,’ said Cohen. ‘I _hate_ poisoners. Just about the worst sort,
poisoners. Creeping around, putting muck in a man’s grub . . .’

He glared at the Chamberlain.

‘Was it you?’ He looked at Rincewind and jerked a thumb towards the
cowering Chamberlain. ‘Was it him? Because if it was he’s going to get
done to him what I did to the mad Snake Priests of Start, and this time
I’ll use both thumbs!’

‘No,’ said Rincewind. ‘It was someone they called Lord Hong. But they
all watched him do it.’

A little scream erupted from the Lord Chamberlain. He threw himself to
the floor and was about to kiss Cohen’s foot until he realized that this
would have about the same effect as eating the pork.

‘Mercy, o celestial being! We are all pawns in the hands of Lord Hong!’

‘What’s so special about Lord Hong, then?’

‘He’s . . . a fine man!’ the Chamberlain gibbered. ‘I won’t say a word
against Lord Hong! I certainly don’t believe it’s true that he has spies
everywhere! Long life to Lord Hong, that’s what I say!’

He risked looking up and found the point of Cohen’s sword just in front
of his eyes.

‘Yeah, but right now who’re you more frightened of? Me or this Lord
Hong?’

‘Uh . . . Lord Hong!’

Cohen raised an eyebrow. ‘I’m impressed. Spies everywhere, eh?’

He looked around the huge room and his gaze came to rest on a very large
vase. He sauntered over to it and raised the lid.

‘You Okay in there?’

‘Er . . . yes?’ said a voice from the depths of the vase.

‘Got everythin’ you want? Spare notebook? Potty?’

‘Er . . . yes?’

‘Would you like, oh, let’s say about sixty gallons of boiling water?’

‘Er . . . no?’

‘Would you rather die than betray Lord Hong?’

‘Er . . . can I have a moment to think about it, please?’

‘No problem. It takes a long time to heat the water in any case. As you
were, then.’

He replaced the lid.

‘One Big Mother?’ he said.

‘That’s One Big _River,_ Ghenghiz,’ said Mr Saveloy.

The guard rumbled into life.

‘Just you watch this vase and if it moves again you do to it what I once
did to the Green Necromancer of the Night, all right?’

‘Don’t know what that was you did, lord,’ said the soldier.

Cohen told him. One Big River beamed. From inside the jar came the noise
of someone trying not to be sick.

Cohen strolled back to the throne.

‘So tell me a bit more about Lord Hong, then,’ he said.

‘He’s the Grand Vizier,’ said the Chamberlain.

Cohen and Rincewind looked at one another.

‘That’s right. And everyone knows,’ said Rincewind, ‘that Grand Viziers
are _always_—’

‘—complete and utter bastards,’ said Cohen. ‘Dunno why. Give ’em a
turban with a point in the middle and their moral wossname just gets
eaten away. I always kill ’em soon as I meet ’em. Saves time later on.’

‘I _thought_ there was something fishy about him as soon as I saw him,’
said Rincewind. ‘Look, Cohen—’

‘That’s _Emperor_ Cohen to you,’ said Truckle. ‘I’ve never trusted
wizards, mister. Never trusted any man in a dress.’

‘Rincewind’s all right—’ said Cohen.

‘Thank you!’ said Rincewind.

‘—but a bloody useless wizard.’

‘I just happened to risk my neck to save you, thank you so very much,’
said Rincewind. ‘Look, some friends of mine are in the prison block.
Could you . . . _Emperor_?’

‘Sort of,’ said Cohen.

‘Temp’ry,’ said Truckle.

‘Technically,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Does that mean you can get my friends somewhere safe? I think Lord Hong
has murdered the old Emperor and wants them to take the blame. I’m just
hoping he won’t believe they’ll be hiding in the cells.’

‘Why in the cells?’ said Cohen.

‘Because if I had the chance to get away from Lord Hong’s cells I
would,’ said Rincewind, fervently. ‘No one in their right minds’d go
back inside if they thought they had a chance to get away.’

‘Okay,’ said Cohen. ‘Boy Willie, One Big Mother, go and round up some of
your mates and bring those people here.’

‘Here?’ said Rincewind. ‘I wanted them to be somewhere safe!’

‘Well, _we’re_ here,’ said Cohen. ‘We can protect ’em.’

‘Who’s going to protect you?’

Cohen ignored this. ‘Lord Chamberlain,’ he said, ‘I don’t ’spect Lord
Hong’ll be around but . . . in the court was a guy with a nose like a
badger. A fat bugger, he was, with a big pink hat. And a skinny woman
with a face like a hatful of pins.’

‘That would be Lord Nine Mountains and Lady Two Streams,’ said the Lord
Chamberlain. ‘Er. You are not angry with me, o lord?’

‘Gods bless you, no,’ said Cohen. ‘In fact, mister, I’m so impressed I’m
going to give you extra responsibilities.’

‘Lord?’

‘Food taster, for a start. And now go and fetch them other two. Didn’t
like the look of them at _all_.’

Nine Mountains and Two Streams were ushered in a few moments later.
Their merest glance from Cohen to the untouched food would have passed
entirely unnoticed by those who weren’t watching for it.

Cohen nodded cheerfully at them. ‘Eat it,’ he said.

‘My lord! I had a large breakfast! I am entirely full!’ said Nine
Mountains.

‘That’s a pity,’ said Cohen. ‘One Big Mother, before you go off just see
Mr Nine Mountains over there and make some room in him so he can have
another breakfast. The same goes for the lady, too, if I don’t hear
chomping in the next five seconds. A good mouthful of everything,
understand? With lots of sauce.’

One Big River drew his sword.

The two nobles stared fixedly at the glistening mounds.

‘Looks good to me,’ said Cohen conversationally. ‘The way _you’re_
looking at it, anyone’d think there was something wrong with it.’

Nine Mountains gingerly put a piece of pork into his mouth.

‘Extremely good,’ he said, indistinctly.

‘Now _swallow_,’ said Cohen.

The mandarin gulped.

‘Marvellous,’ he said. ‘And now, if your excellency will excuse me, I—’

‘Don’t rush off,’ said Cohen. ‘We don’t want you accidentally sticking
your fingers down your throat or anything like that, do we?’

Nine Mountains hiccuped.

Then he hiccuped again.

Smoke appeared to be rising from the bottom of his robe.

The Horde dived for cover just as the explosion removed an area of
floorboards, a circular part of the ceiling and all of Lord Nine
Mountains.

A black hat with a ruby button on it spun around on the floor for a
moment.

‘That’s just like me and pickled onions,’ said Vincent.

Lady Two Streams was standing with her eyes shut.

‘Not hungry?’ said Cohen.

She nodded.

Cohen leaned back.

‘One Big Mother?’

‘It’s “River”, Cohen,’ said Mr Saveloy, as the guard lumbered forward.

‘Take her with you and put her in one of the dungeons. See that she has
plenty to eat, if you know what I mean.’

‘Yes, excellency.’

‘And Mr Chamberlain here can push off down to the kitchen again and tell
the chef _he’s_ going to share what we eat this time, and he’s gonna eat
it _first,_ all right?’

‘Yes indeed, excellency.’

‘Call this living?’ Caleb burst out, as the Lord Chamberlain scuttled
away. ‘This is being Emperor, is it? Can’t even trust the food? We’ll
probably be murdered in our beds!’

‘Can’t see _you_ being murdered in your bed,’ said Truckle.

‘Yeah, ’cos you’re never in it,’ said Cohen.

He walked over to the big jar and gave it a kick.

‘You getting all this?’

‘Yessir,’ said the jar.

There was some laughter. But it had an edge of nervousness. Mr Saveloy
realized that the Horde weren’t used to this. If a true barbarian wanted
to kill someone during a meal, he’d invite him in with all his henchmen,
sit them down, get them drunk and sleepy and then summon his own men
from hiding places to massacre them instantly in a straightforward,
no-nonsense and honourable manner. It was completely fair. The ‘get them
drunk and butcher the lot of them’ stratagem was the oldest trick in the
book, or would have been if barbarians bothered with books. Anyone
falling for it would be doing the world a favour by being slaughtered
over the pudding. But at least you could trust the _food._ Barbarians
didn’t poison food. You never knew when you might be short of a mouthful
yourself.

‘Excuse me, your excellency,’ said Six Beneficent Winds, who had been
hovering, ‘I think Lord Truckle is right. Er. I know a little history.
The correct method of succession is to wade to the throne through seas
of blood. That is what Lord Hong is planning to do.’

‘You say? Seas of blood, right?’

‘Or over a mountain of skulls. That’s an option, too.’

‘But . . . but . . . I thought the Imperial crown was handed down from
father to son,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Well, yes,’ said Six Beneficent Winds. ‘I suppose that could happen in
theory.’

‘You said once we were at the top of the pyramid everyone’d do what we
said,’ said Cohen to Mr Saveloy.

Truckle looked from one to the other. ‘You two _planned_ this?’ he said
accusingly. ‘This is what it’s all been about, isn’t it? All that
learnin’ to be civilized? And right at the start you just said it was
going to be a really big theft! Eh? I thought we were just going to nick
a load of stuff and push off! Loot and pillage, that’s the way—’

‘Oh, loot and pillage, loot and pillage, I’ve had it up to here with
loot and pillage!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Is that all you can think of,
looting and pillaging?’

‘Well, there used to be ravishing, too,’ said Vincent wistfully.

‘I hate to tell you, but they’ve got a point, Teach,’ said Cohen.
‘Fightin’ and lootin’ . . . that’s what we do. I ain’t happy with all
this bowing and scraping business. I ain’t sure if I was cut out for
civilization.’

Mr Saveloy rolled his eyes. ‘Even you, Cohen? You’re all so . . .
_dim-witted_!’ he snapped. ‘I don’t know why I bother! I mean, look at
you! You know what you are? You’re legends!’

The Horde stepped back. No one had ever seen Teach lose his temper
before.

‘From _legendum,_ which means “something written down”,’ said Mr
Saveloy. ‘Books, you know. Reading and writing. Which incidentally is as
alien to you as the Lost City of Ee—’

Truckle’s hand went up, a little nervously.

‘Actually, I once discovered the Lost City of—’

‘Shut up! I’m saying . . . What was I saying? . . . yes . . . you don’t
read, do you? You never learned to read? Then you’ve wasted half your
life. You could have been accumulating pearls of wisdom instead of
rather shoddy gems. It’s just as well people read about you and don’t
meet you face to face because, gentlemen, you are a big disappointment!’

Rincewind watched, fascinated, waiting for Mr Saveloy to have his head
cut off. But this didn’t seem about to happen. He was possibly too angry
to be beheaded.

‘What have you actually _done,_ gentlemen? And don’t tell me about
stolen jewels and demon lords. What have you done that’s _real_?’

Truckle raised a hand again.

‘Well, I once killed all four of the—’

‘Yes, yes, yes,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘You killed _this_ and you stole
_that_ and you defeated the giant man-eating avocados of somewhere else,
but . . . it’s all . . . _stuff._ It’s just wallpaper, gentlemen! It
never changes anything! No one _cares_! Back in Ankh-Morpork I’ve taught
boys who think you are myths. That’s what you’ve achieved. They don’t
believe you ever really existed. They think someone made you up. You’re
_stories,_ gentlemen. When you die no one will know, because they think
you’re already dead.’

He paused for breath, and then continued more slowly. ‘But here . . .
here you _could_ be real. You could stop playing at your lives. You
could take this ancient and somewhat rotten Empire back into the world.
At least . . .’ he trailed off. ‘That’s what I’d hoped. I really thought
that, perhaps, we might actually achieve something . . .’

He sat down.

The Horde stood staring at its various feet or wheels.

‘Um. Can I say something? The warlords will all be against you,’ said
Six Beneficent Winds. ‘They’re out there now, with their armies.
Normally they’d fight amongst themselves, but they’ll _all_ fight you.’

‘They’d rather have some poisoner like this Hong instead of me?’ said
Cohen. ‘But he’s a bastard!’

‘Yes, but . . . he’s _their_ bastard, you see.’

‘We could hold out here. This place has got thick walls,’ said Vincent.
‘The ones not made of paper, that is.’

‘Don’t think about that,’ said Truckle. ‘Not a siege. Sieges are messy.
I hate eating boots and rats.’

‘Whut?’

‘He said WE DON’T WANT A SIEGE WHERE WE HAVE TO EAT BOOTS AND RATS,
Hamish.’

‘Run outa legs, have we?’

‘How many soldiers have they got?’ said Cohen.

‘I think . . . six or seven hundred thousand,’ said the taxman.

‘Excuse us,’ said Cohen, getting off the throne. ‘I have to join my
Horde.’

The Horde went into a huddle. There was an occasional ‘Whut?’ in the
hoarse whispered interchanges. Then Cohen turned round.

‘Seas of blood, wasn’t it?’ he said.

‘Er. Yes,’ said the taxman.

The huddle resumed.

After some further exchanges Truckle’s head poked up.

‘Did you say _mountain_ of skulls?’ he said.

‘Yes. Yes, I think that’s what I said,’ said the taxman. He glanced
nervously at Rincewind and Mr Saveloy, who shrugged.

Whisper, whisper, Whut . . .

‘Excuse me?’

‘Yes?’

‘About how big a mountain? Skulls don’t pile up that well.’

‘I don’t know how big a mountain! A lot of skulls!’

‘Just checking.’

The Horde seemed to reach a decision. They turned to face the other men.

‘We’re going to fight,’ said Cohen.

‘Yes, you should have said all that about skulls and blood before,’ said
Truckle.

‘We’ll show ye whether we’m dead or not!’ cackled Hamish.

Mr Saveloy shook his head.

‘I think you must have misheard. The odds are a hundred thousand to
one!’ he said.

‘I reckon _that_’ll show people we’re still alive,’ said Caleb.

‘Yes, but the whole point of my plan was to show you that you could get
to the top of the pyramid without having to fight your way up,’ said Mr
Saveloy. ‘It really is possible in such a stale society. But if you try
to fight hundreds of thousands of men you’ll _die_.’

And then, to his surprise, he found himself adding: ‘Probably.’

The Horde grinned at him.

‘Big odds don’t frighten us,’ said Truckle.

‘We _like_ big odds,’ said Caleb.

‘Y’see, Teach, odds of a thousand to one ain’t a lot worse than ten to
one,’ said Cohen. ‘The reasons bein’—’ He counted on his fingers. ‘One,
your basic soldier who’s fightin’ for pay rather than his life ain’t
goin’ to stick _his_ neck out when there’s all these other blokes around
who might as well do the business, and, two, not very many of ’em are
goin’ to be able to get near us at one time and they’ll all be pushin’
and shovin’, and . . .’ He looked at his fingers with an expression of
terminal calculation.

‘. . . Three . . .’ said Mr Saveloy, hypnotized by this logic.

‘. . . three, right . . . Half the time when they swings their swords
they’ll hit one of their mates, savin’ us a bit of effort. See?’

‘But even if that were true it’d only work for a little while,’ Mr
Saveloy protested. ‘Even if you killed as many as two hundred you’d be
tired and there’d be fresh troops attacking you.’

‘Oh, they’d be tired too,’ said Cohen cheerfully.

‘Why?’

‘Because by then, to get to us, they’d have to be running uphill.’

‘That’s logic, that is,’ said Truckle, approvingly.

Cohen slapped the shaken teacher on the back.

‘Don’t you worry about a thing,’ he said. ‘If we’ve got the Empire by
your kind of plan, we’ll keep it by _our_ kind of plan. You’ve shown us
civilization, so we’ll show you barbarism.’

He walked a few steps and then turned, an evil glint in his eye.
‘Barbarism? Hah! When we kills people we do it there and then, lookin’
’em in the eye, and we’d be happy to buy ’em a drink in the next world,
no harm done. I never knew a barbarian who cut up people slowly in
little rooms, or tortured women to make ’em look pretty, or put poison
in people’s grub. Civilization? If that’s civilization, you can shove it
where the sun don’t shine!’

‘Whut?’

‘He said SHOVE IT WHERE THE SUN DOESN’T SHINE, Hamish.’

‘Ah? Bin there.’

‘But there is more to civilization than that!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘There’s
. . . music, and literature, and the concept of justice, and the ideals
of—’

The bamboo doors slid aside. As one man, joints creaking, the Horde
turned with weapons raised.

The men in the doorway were taller and much more richly dressed than the
peasants, and they moved in the manner of people who are used to there
being no one in the way. Ahead of them, though, was a trembling peasant
holding a red flag on a stick. He was prodded into the room at
swordpoint.

‘Red flag?’ whispered Cohen.

‘It means they want to parley,’ said Six Beneficent Winds.

‘You know . . . it’s like our white flag of surrender,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Never heard of it,’ said Cohen.

‘It means you mustn’t kill anyone until they’re ready.’

Mr Saveloy tried to shut out the whispers behind him.

‘Why don’t we just invite them to dinner and massacre them all when
they’re drunk?’

‘You heard the man. There’s seven hundred thousand of them.’

‘Ah? So it’d have to be something simple with pasta, then.’

A couple of the lords strode into the middle of the room. Cohen and Mr
Saveloy went to meet them.

‘And you, too,’ said Cohen, grabbing Rincewind as he tried to back away.
‘You’re a weaselly man with words in a tight spot, so come on.’

Lord Hong regarded them with the expression of a man whose ancestry had
bequeathed to him the ability to look down on everything.

‘My name is Lord Hong. I am the Emperor’s Grand Vizier. I order you to
quit these premises immediately and submit to judgement.’

Mr Saveloy turned to Cohen.

‘Ain’t gonna,’ said Cohen.

Mr Saveloy tried to think.

‘Um, how shall I phrase this? Ghenghiz Cohen, leader of the Silver
Horde, presents his compliments to Lord Hong but—’

‘Tell him he can stuff it,’ said Cohen.

‘I think, Lord Hong, that perhaps you may have perceived the general
flow of opinion here,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Where are the rest of your barbarians, peasant?’ he demanded.

Rincewind watched Mr Saveloy. The old teacher seemed at a loss for words
this time.

The wizard wanted to run away. But Cohen had been right. Mad as it
sounded, it was probably safer to be near him. Running away would put
him closer, sooner or later, to Lord Hong.

Who believed that there were _other_ barbarians somewhere . . .

‘I tell you this, and this only,’ said Lord Hong. ‘If you quit the
Forbidden City now, your deaths, at least, will be quick. And then your
heads and significant parts will be paraded through the cities of the
Empire so that people will know of the terrible punishment.’

‘Punishment?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘For killing the Emperor.’

‘We ain’t killed no Emperor,’ said Cohen. ‘I’ve got nothing _against_
killing Emperors, but we ain’t killed one.’

‘He was killed in his bed an hour ago,’ said Lord Hong.

‘Not by us,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘By you,’ said Rincewind. ‘Only it’s against the rules to kill the
Emperor so you wanted it to look as though the Red Army did it.’

Lord Hong looked at him as if seeing him for the first time and less
than happy about doing so.

‘In the circumstances,’ said Lord Hong, ‘I doubt that anyone will
believe you.’

‘What will happen if we yield now?’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I like to know
these things.’

‘Then you will die very slowly in . . . interesting ways.’

‘That’s the saga of my life,’ said Cohen. ‘I’ve _always_ been dying very
slowly in interesting ways. What’s it to be? Street fighting? House to
house? Free for all or what?’

‘In the real world,’ said one of the other lords, ‘we _battle._ We do
not scuffle like barbarians. Our armies will meet on the plain before
the city.’

‘Before the city what?’

‘He means in front of the city, Cohen.’

‘Ah. Civilized talk again. When?’

‘Dawn tomorrow!’

‘Okay,’ said Cohen. ‘It’ll give us an appetite for our breakfast.
Anything else we can do for you?’

‘How big is your army, barbarian?’

‘You would not believe how big,’ said Cohen, which was probably true.
‘We have overrun countries. We have wiped whole cities off the map.
Where my army passes, nothing grows.’

‘That’s true, at least,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘We have not heard of you!’ said the warlord.

‘Yeah,’ said Cohen. _‘That’s_ how good we are.’

‘There is one other thing about his army, actually,’ said someone.

They all turned to Rincewind, who’d been almost as surprised as they
were to hear his voice. But a train of thought had just reached the
terminus . . .

‘Yes?’

‘You may have been wondering why you have only seen the . . . generals,’
Rincewind went on, slowly, as if working it out as he went along. ‘That
is because, you see, the men themselves are . . . invisible. Er. Yes.
Ghosts, in fact. Everyone knows this, don’t they?’

Cohen gaped at him in astonishment.

‘Blood-sucking ghosts, as a matter of fact,’ said Rincewind. ‘After all,
everyone knows that’s what you get beyond the Wall, don’t they?’

Lord Hong sneered. But the warlords stared at Rincewind with the
expressions of people who strongly suspected that the people beyond the
Wall were flesh and blood but who also relied on millions of people not
believing that this was so.

‘Ridiculous! _You_ are not invisible blood-sucking ghosts,’ said one of
them.

Cohen opened his mouth so that the diamond teeth glinted.

‘ ’S right,’ he said. ‘Fact is . . . we’re the _visible_ sort.’

‘Hah! A pathetic attempt!’ said Lord Hong. ‘Ghosts or no ghosts, we will
beat you!’

‘Well, that went better than I expected,’ Mr Saveloy remarked as the
warlords strode out. ‘Was that an attempt at a little bit of
psychological warfare there, Mr Rincewind?’

‘Is that what it was? I know about that kind of stuff,’ said Cohen.
‘It’s where you bang your shield all night before the fight so’s the
enemy can’t get any sleep and you sing, “We’re gonna _cut_ yer _tonkers_
off,” and stuff like that.’

‘Similar,’ said Mr Saveloy, diplomatically. ‘But it failed to work, I’m
afraid. Lord Hong and his generals are rather too sophisticated. It’s a
great shame you couldn’t try it on the common soldiers.’

There was a faint squeak of rabbit behind them. They turned, and looked
at the somewhat under-age cadre of the Red Army that was being ushered
in. Butterfly was with them. She even gave Rincewind a very faint smile.

Rincewind had always relied on running away. But sometimes, perhaps, you
had to stand and fight if only because there was nowhere left to run.

But he was no good at all with weapons.

At least, the normal sort.

‘Um,’ he said, ‘if we leave the palace now, we’ll be killed, right?’

‘I doubt it,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘It’s become a matter of the Art of War
now. Someone like Hong would probably slit our throats, but now war is
declared things have to be done according to custom.’

Rincewind took a deep breath.

‘It’s a million-to-one chance,’ he said, ‘but it might just work . . .’

The Four Horsemen whose Ride presages the end of the world are known to
be Death, War, Famine and Pestilence. But even less significant events
have their own Horsemen. For example, the Four Horsemen of the Common
Cold are Sniffles, Chesty, Nostril and Lack of Tissues; the Four
Horsemen whose appearance foreshadows any public holiday are Storm,
Gales, Sleet and Contra-flow.

Among the armies encamped in the broad alluvial plain around Hunghung,
the invisible horsemen known as Misinformation, Rumour and Gossip
saddled up . . .

A large army encamped has all the tedious problems of a city without any
of the advantages. Its watchfires and picket lines are, after a while,
open to local civilians, especially if they have anything to sell and
even more so if they are women whose virtue has a certain commercial
element and even, sometimes, if they appear to be selling food which is
a break from the monotonous army diet. The food currently on sale was
certainly such a break.

‘Pork balls! Pork balls! Get them while they’re . . .’ There was a pause
as the vendor mentally tried out ways of ending the sentence, and gave
up. ‘Pork balls! Onna stick! How about you, shogun, you look like –
Here, aren’t you the—?’

‘Shutupshutupshutup!’

Rincewind pulled D. M. H. Dibhala into the shadows by a tent.

The trader looked at the anguished face framed between a eunuch outfit
and a big straw hat.

‘It’s the Wizard, isn’t it? How are—?’

‘You know how you seriously wanted to become very rich in international
trade?’ Rincewind said.

‘Yes? Can we start?’

‘Soon. Soon. But there’s something you must do. You know this rumour
about the army of invisible vampire ghosts that’s heading this way?’

D. M. H. Dibhala’s eyes swivelled nervously. But it was part of his
stock in trade never to appear to be ignorant of anything except,
perhaps, how to give correct change.

‘Yes?’ he said.

‘The one about there being millions of them?’ said Rincewind. ‘And very
hungry on account of not having eaten on the way? And made specially
fierce by the Great Wizard?’

‘Um . . . yes?’

‘Well, it’s _not true_.’

‘It’s not?’

‘You don’t believe me? After all, I ought to know.’

‘Good point.’

‘And we don’t want people to panic, do we?’

‘Very bad for business, panic,’ said D. M. H., nodding uncomfortably.

‘So make sure you tell people there’s no truth in this rumour, will you?
Set their minds at rest.’

‘Good idea. Er. These invisible vampire ghosts . . . Do they carry money
of any sort?’

‘No. Because they don’t exist.’

‘Ah, yes. I forgot.’

‘And there are not 2,300,009 of them,’ said Rincewind. He was rather
proud of this little detail.

‘Not 2,300,009 of them . . .’ said D. M. H., a little glassy-eyed.

‘Absolutely not. There are _not_ 2,300,009 of them, no matter what
anyone says. Nor has the Great Wizard made them twice as big as normal.
Good man. Now I’d better be off—’

Rincewind hurried away.

The trader stood in thought for a while. It stole over him that he’d
probably sold enough things for now, and he might as well go home and
spend a quiet night in a barrel in the root cellar with a sack over his
head.

His route led him through quite a large part of the camp. He made sure
that soldiers he met knew there was no truth in the rumour, even though
this invariably meant that, first of all, he had to tell them what the
rumour actually _was._

* * *

A toy rabbit squeaked nervously.

‘And I’m afraid of the big inwisible wampire ghosts!’ sobbed Favourite
Pearl.

The soldiers around this particular campfire tried to comfort her but,
unfortunately, there was no one to comfort them.

‘An’ I heard they alweady et some men!’

One or two soldiers looked over their shoulders. There was nothing to be
seen in the darkness. This wasn’t, however, a reassuring sign.

The Red Army moved obliquely from campfire to campfire.

Rincewind had been very specific. He’d spent all his adult life – at
least, those parts of it where he wasn’t being chased by things with
more legs than teeth – in Unseen University, and he felt he knew what he
was talking about here. Don’t tell people anything, he said. Don’t
_tell_ them. You didn’t get to survive as a wizard in UU by believing
what people told you. You believed what you were _not_ told.

Don’t tell them. _Ask_ them. Ask them if it’s true. You can beg them to
tell you it’s _not_ true. Or you can even tell them you’ve been told to
tell them it’s not true, and that is the best of all.

Because Rincewind knew very well that when the four rather small and
nasty Horsemen of Panic ride out there is a good job done by
Misinformation, Rumour and Gossip, but they are as nothing compared to
the fourth horseman, whose name is Denial.

After an hour Rincewind felt quite unnecessary.

There were conversations breaking out everywhere, particularly in those
areas on the edge of the camps, where the night stretched away so big
and dark and, so very obviously, empty.

‘All right, so how come they’re saying there’s not 2,300,009 of them,
eh? If there’s none of them, then why’s there a number?’

‘Look, there’s no such thing as invisible vampire ghosts, all right?’

‘Oh yeah? How do you know? Have you ever seen any?’

‘Listen, I went and asked the captain and he says he’s certain there’s
no invisible ghosts out there.’

‘How can he be certain if he can’t see them?’

‘He says there’s no such things as invisible vampire ghosts at all.’

‘Oh? How come he’s saying that all of a sudden? My grandfather told me
there’s millions of them outside the—’

‘Hold on . . . What’s that out there . . . ?’

‘What?’

‘Could’ve sworn I heard something . . .’

‘_I_ can’t see anything.’

‘Oh, _no_!’

Things must have filtered through to High Command because, getting on
towards midnight, trumpets were sounded around the camps and a special
proclamation was read out.

It confirmed the reality of vampire ghosts in general but denied their
existence in any specific, here-and-now sense. It was a masterpiece of
its type, particularly since it brought the whole subject to the ears of
soldiers the Red Army hadn’t been able to reach yet.

An hour later the situation had reached the point of criticality and
Rincewind was hearing things he personally hadn’t made up and, on the
whole, would much rather not hear.

He’d chat with a couple of soldiers and say: ‘I’m sure there’s no huge
hungry army of vampire ghosts’ and get told, ‘No, there’s seven old
men.’

‘Just seven old men?’

‘I heard they’re _very_ old,’ said a soldier. ‘Like, too old to die. I
heard from someone at the palace that they can walk through walls and
make themselves invisible.’

‘Oh, come _on_,’ said Rincewind. ‘Seven old men fighting this whole
army?’

‘Makes you think, eh? Corporal Toshi says the Great Wizard is helping
them. Stands to reason. I wouldn’t be fighting a whole army if I didn’t
have a lot of magic on my side.’

‘Er. Anyone know what the Great Wizard looks like?’ said Rincewind.

‘They say he’s taller than a house and got three heads.’

Rincewind nodded encouragingly.

‘I heard,’ said a soldier, ‘that the Red Army is going to fight on their
side, too.’

‘So what? Corporal Toshi says they’re just a bunch of kids.’

‘No, I heard . . . the _real_ Red Army . . . you know . . .’

‘The Red Army ain’t gonna side with barbarian invaders! Anyway, there’s
no such thing as the Red Army. That’s just a myth.’

‘Like the invisible vampire ghosts,’ said Rincewind, giving the
clockwork of anxiety another little turn.

‘Er . . . yeah.’

He left them arguing.

No one was deserting. Running off into a night full of non-specific
terrors was worse than staying in camp. But that was all to the good, he
decided. It meant that the really frightened people were staying put and
seeking reassurance from their comrades. And there was nothing like
someone repeating ‘I’m _sure_ there’s no vampire wizards’ and going to
the latrine four times an hour to put backbone into a platoon.

Rincewind crept back towards the city, rounded a tent in the shadows,
and collided with a horse, which trod heavily on his foot.

‘Your wife is a big hippo!’

SORRY.

Rincewind froze, both hands clutching his aching foot. He knew only one
person with a voice like a cemetery in midwinter.

He tried to hop backwards, and collided with another horse.

RINCEWIND, ISN’T IT? said Death. YES. GOOD EVENING. I DON’T BELIEVE YOU
HAVE MET WAR. RINCEWIND, WAR. WAR, RINCEWIND.

War touched his helmet in salute.

‘Pleasure’s all mine,’ he said. He indicated the other three riders.
‘Like to introduce you to m’sons, Terror and Panic. And m’daughter,
Clancy.’

The children chorused a ‘hello’. Clancy was scowling, looked about seven
years old and was wearing a hard hat and a Pony Club badge.

I WASN’T EXPECTING TO SEE _YOU_ HERE, RINCEWIND.

‘Oh. Good.’

Death pulled an hourglass out of his robe, held it up to the moonlight,
and sighed. Rincewind craned to see how much sand was left.

HOWEVER, I COULD —

‘Don’t you make any special arrangement just on my account,’ said
Rincewind hurriedly. ‘I, er . . . I expect you’re all here for the
battle?’

YES. IT PROMISES TO BE EXTREMELY – SHORT.

‘Who’s going to win?’

NOW, YOU KNOW I WOULDN’T TELL YOU THAT, EVEN IF I KNEW.

‘Even if you knew?’ said Rincewind. ‘I thought you were supposed to know
everything!’

Death held up a finger. Something fluttered down through the night.
Rincewind thought it was a moth, although it looked less fluffy and had
a strange speckled pattern on its wings.

It settled on the extended digit for a moment, and then flew up and away
again.

ON A NIGHT LIKE THIS, said Death, THE ONLY CERTAIN THING IS UNCERTAINTY.
TRITE, I KNOW, BUT TRUE.

Somewhere on the horizon, thunder rumbled.

‘I’ll, er, just be sort of going, then,’ said Rincewind.

DON’T BE A STRANGER, said Death, as the wizard hurried off.

‘Odd person,’ said War.

WITH HIM HERE, EVEN UNCERTAINTY IS UNCERTAIN. AND I’M NOT SURE EVEN
ABOUT THAT.

War pulled a large paper-wrapped package out of his saddlebag.

‘We’ve got . . . let’s see now . . . Egg and Cress, Chicken Tikka, and
Mature Cheese with Crunchy Pickle, I think.’

THEY DO SUCH MARVELLOUS THINGS WITH SANDWICHES THESE DAYS.

‘Oh . . . and Bacon Surprise.’

REALLY? WHAT IS SO SURPRISING ABOUT BACON?

‘I don’t know. I suppose it comes as something of a shock to the pig.’

Ridcully had been having a long wrestle with himself, and had won.

‘We’re going to bring him back,’ he said. ‘It’s been four days. And then
we can send them back their bloody tube thing. It gives me the willies.’

The senior wizards looked at one another. No one was very keen on a
university with a Rincewind component, but the metal dog _did_ give them
the willies. No one had wanted to go near it. They’d piled some tables
around it and tried to pretend it wasn’t there.

‘All right,’ said the Dean. ‘But Stibbons kept going on about things
weighing the same, right? If we send that back, won’t it mean Rincewind
arrives here going very fast?’

‘Mr Stibbons says he’s working on the spell,’ said Ridcully. ‘Or we
could pile some mattresses up at one end of the hall or something.’

The Bursar raised a hand.

‘Yes, Bursar?’ said Ridcully encouragingly.

‘Ho, landlord, a pint of your finest ale!’ said the Bursar.

‘Good,’ said Ridcully. ‘That’s settled, then. I’ve already told Mr
Stibbons to start looking . . .’

‘On that demonic device?’

‘Yes.’

‘Then nothing can _possibly_ go wrong,’ said the Dean sourly.

‘A trumpet of lobsters, if you would be so good.’

‘And the Bursar agrees.’

The warlords had gathered in Lord Hong’s chambers. They carefully kept a
distance from one another, as befitted enemies who were in the most
shaky of alliances. Once the barbarians were dealt with, the battle
might still continue. But they wanted assurance on one particular point.

‘No!’ said Lord Hong. ‘Let me make this absolutely clear! There is _no_
invisible army of blood-sucking ghosts, do you understand? The people
beyond the Wall are just like us – except vastly inferior in every
respect, of course. But totally visible.’

One or two of the lords did not look convinced.

‘And all this talk about the Red Army?’ said one of them.

‘The Red Army, Lord Tang, is an undisciplined rabble that shall be put
down with resolute force!’

‘You know what Red Army the peasants are talking about,’ said Lord Tang.
‘They say that thousands of years ago it—’

‘They say that thousands of years ago a wizard who did not exist took
mud and lightning and made soldiers that couldn’t die,’ said Lord Hong.
‘Yes. It’s a _story,_ Lord Tang. A story made up by peasants who did not
understand what really happened. One Sun Mirror’s army just had’ – Lord
Hong waved a hand vaguely – ‘better armour, better discipline. I am not
frightened of ghosts and I am _certainly_ not afraid of a legend that
probably never existed.’

‘Yes, but—’

‘Soothsayer!’ snapped Lord Hong. The soothsayer, who hadn’t been
expecting it, gave a start.

‘Yes, my lord?’

‘How’re those entrails coming along?’

‘Er – they’re about ready, my lord,’ said the soothsayer.

The soothsayer was rather worried. This must have been the wrong kind of
bird, he told himself. About the only thing the entrails were telling
him was that if he got out of this alive he, the soothsayer, might be
lucky enough to enjoy a nice chicken dinner. But Lord Hong sounded like
a man with the most dangerous kind of impatience.

‘And what do they tell you?’

‘Er – the future is . . . the future is . . .’

Chicken entrails had never looked like this. For a moment he thought
they were moving.

‘Er . . . it is uncertain,’ he hazarded.

_‘Be_ certain,’ said Lord Hong. ‘Who will win in the morning?’

Shadows flickered across the table.

Something was fluttering around the light.

It looked like an undistinguished yellow moth, with black patterns on
its wings.

The soothsayer’s precognitive abilities, which were considerably more
powerful than he believed, told him: this is not a good time to be a
clairvoyant.

On the other hand, there was never a good time to be horribly executed,
so . . .

‘Without a shadow of doubt,’ he said, ‘the enemy will be most
emphatically beaten.’

‘How can you be so certain?’ said Lord McSweeney.

The soothsayer bridled.

‘You see this wobbly bit near the kidneys? You want to argue with this
green trickly thing? You know all about liver suddenly? All right?’

‘So there you are,’ said Lord Hong. ‘Fate smiles upon us.’

‘Even so—’ Lord Tang began. ‘The men are very—’

‘You can tell the men—’ Lord Hong began. He stopped. He smiled.

‘You can tell the men’, he said, ‘that there _is_ a huge army of
invisible vampire ghosts.’

‘What?’

‘Yes!’ Lord Hong began to stride up and down, snapping his fingers.
‘Yes, there is a terrible army of foreign ghosts. And this has so
enraged our _own_ ghosts . . . yes, a thousand generations of our
ancestors are riding on the wind to repel this barbaric invasion! The
ghosts of the Empire are arising! Millions and millions of them! Even
our demons are furious at this intrusion! They will descend like a mist
of claws and teeth to – Yes, Lord Sung?’

The warlords were looking at one another nervously.

‘Are you _sure,_ Lord Hong?’

Lord Hong’s eyes gleamed behind his tiny spectacles.

‘Make the necessary proclamations,’ he said.

‘But only a few hours ago we told the men there were no—’

‘Tell them differently!’

‘But will they believe that there—’

‘They will believe what they are told!’ shouted Lord Hong. ‘If the enemy
thinks his strength lies in deceit, then we will use their deceit
against them. Tell the men that behind them will be a billion ghosts of
the Empire!’

The other warlords tried to avoid his gaze. No one was actually going to
suggest that your average soldier would not be totally happy with ghosts
front and rear, especially given the capriciousness of ghosts.

‘Good,’ said Lord Hong. He looked down.

‘Are you _still_ here?’ he said.

‘Just clearing up my giblets, my lord!’ squealed the soothsayer.

He picked up the remains of his stricken chicken and ran for it.

After all, he told himself as he pelted back home, it’s not as though I
said _whose_ enemy.

Lord Hong was left alone.

He realized he was shaking. It was probably fury. But perhaps . . .
perhaps things could be turned to his advantage, even so. Barbarians
came from outside, and to most people everywhere outside was the same.
Yes. The barbarians were a minute detail, easily disposed of, but
carefully managed, perhaps, might figure in his overall strategy.

He was breathing heavily, too.

He walked into his private study and shut the door.

He pulled out the key.

He opened the box.

There was a few minutes’ silence, except for the rustle of cloth.

Then Lord Hong looked at himself in the mirror.

He’d gone to great lengths to achieve this. He had used several agents,
none of whom knew the whole plan. But the Ankh-Morpork tailor had been
good at his work and the measurements had been followed exactly. From
pointy boots to hose to doublet, cloak and hat with a feather in it,
Lord Hong knew he was a perfect Ankh-Morpork gentleman. The cloak was
lined with silk.

The clothes felt uncomfortable and touched him in unfamiliar ways, but
those were minor details. This was how a man looked in a society that
breathed, that moved, that could go somewhere . . .

He’d walk through the city on that first great day and the people would
be silent when they saw their natural leader.

It never crossed his mind that anyone would say, ‘’Ere, wot a toff!
’Eave ’arf a brick at ’im!’

The ants scurried. The thing that went ‘parp’ went parp.

The wizards stood back. There wasn’t much else to do when Hex was
working at full speed, except watch the fish and oil the wheels from
time to time. There were occasional flashes of octarine from the tubes.

Hex was spelling several hundred times a minute. It was as simple as
that. It would take a human more than an hour to do an ordinary finding
spell. But Hex could do them faster. Over and over again. It was netting
the whole occult sea in the search for one slippery fish.

It achieved, after ninety-three minutes, what would otherwise have taken
the faculty several months.

‘You see?’ said Ponder, his voice shaking a little as he took the line
of blocks out of the hopper. ‘I _said_ he could do it.’

‘Who’s he?’ said Ridcully.

‘Hex.’

‘Oh, you mean _it_.’

‘That’s what I said, sir . . . er . . . yes.’

Another thing about the Horde, Mr Saveloy had noticed, was their ability
to relax. The old men had the catlike ability to do nothing when there
was nothing to do.

They’d sharpened their swords. They’d had a meal – big lumps of meat for
most of them, and some kind of gruel for Mad Hamish, who’d dribbled most
of it down his beard – and assured its wholesomeness by dragging the
cook in, nailing him to the floor by his apron, and suspending a large
axe on a rope that crossed a beam in the roof and was held at the other
end by Cohen, while he ate.

Then they’d sharpened their swords again, out of habit, and . . .
stopped.

Occasionally one of them would whistle a snatch of a tune, through what
remained of his teeth, or search a bodily crevice for a particularly
fretful louse. Mainly, though, they just sat and stared at nothing.

After a long while, Caleb said, ‘Y’know, I’ve never been to XXXX. Been
everywhere else. Often wondered what it’s like.’

‘Got shipwrecked there once,’ said Vincent. ‘Weird place. Lousy with
magic. There’s beavers with beaks and giant rats with long tails that
hops around the place and boxes with one another. Black fellas wanderin’
around all over the place. They say they’re in a dream. Bright, though.
Show ’em a bit of desert with one dead tree in it, next minute they’ve
found a three-course meal with fruits and nuts to follow. Beer’s good,
too.’

‘Sounds like it.’

There was another long pause.

Then:

‘I suppose they’ve _got_ minstrels here? Be a bit of a bloody waste,
wouldn’t it, if we all got killed and no one made up any songs about
it.’

‘Bound to have loads of minstrels, a city like this.’

‘No problem there, then.’

‘No.’

‘No.’

There was another lengthy pause.

‘Not that we’re going to get killed.’

‘Right. I don’t intend to start getting killed at my time of life,
haha.’

Another pause.

‘Cohen?’

‘Yep?’

‘You a religious man at all?’

‘Well, I’ve robbed loads of temples and killed a few mad priests in my
time. Don’t know if that counts.’

‘What do your tribe believe happens to you when you die in battle?’

‘Oh, these big fat women in horned helmets take you off to the halls of
Io where there is fighting and carousing and quaffing for ever.’

Another pause.

‘You mean, like, _really_ for ever?’

‘S’pose so.’

‘ ’Cos generally you get fed up even with turkey by about day four.’

‘All right, what do _your_ lot believe?’

‘I think we go off to Hell in a boat made of toenail clippings.
Something like that, anyway.’

Another pause.

‘But it’s not worth talking about ’cos we’re not going to get killed
today.’

‘You said it.’

‘Hah, it’s not worth dying if all you’ve got to look forward to is
leftover meat and floating around in a boat smelling of your socks, is
it, eh?’

‘Haha.’

Another pause.

‘Down in Klatch they believe if you lead a good life you’re rewarded by
being sent to a paradise with lots of young women.’

‘That’s your reward, is it?’

‘Dunno. Maybe it’s their punishment. But I do remember you eat sherbet
all day.’

‘Hah. When I was a lad we had proper sherbet, in little tube things and
a liquorice straw to suck it up with. You don’t get that sort of thing
today. People’re too busy rushin’ about.’

‘Sounds a lot better than quaffing toenails, though.’

Another pause.

‘Did you ever believe that business about every enemy you killed
becoming your servant in the next world?’

‘Dunno.’

‘How many you killed?’

‘What? Oh. Maybe two, three thousand. Not counting dwarfs and trolls, o’
course.’

‘Definitely not going to be short of a hairbrush or someone to open
doors for you after you’re dead, then.’

A pause.

‘We’re definitely not going to die, right?’

‘Right.’

‘I mean, odds of 100,000 to one . . . hah. The difference is just a lot
of zeroes, right?’

‘Right.’

‘I mean, stout comrades at our side, a strong right arm . . . What more
could we want?’

Pause.

‘A volcano’d be favourite.’

Pause.

‘We’re going to die, aren’t we?’

‘Yep.’

The Horde looked at one another.

‘Still, to look on the bright side, I recall I still owe Fafa the dwarf
fifty dollars for this sword,’ said Boy Willie. ‘Looks as though I could
end up ahead of the game.’

Mr Saveloy put his head in his hands.

‘I’m really sorry,’ he said.

‘Don’t worry about it,’ said Cohen.

The grey light of dawn was just visible in the high windows.

‘Look,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘you don’t _have_ to die. We could . . . well,
we could sneak out. Back along the pipe, maybe. Perhaps we could carry
Hamish. People are coming and going all the time. I’m sure we could get
out of . . . the city . . . without . . . any . . .’

His voice faded away. No voice could keep going under the pressure of
those stares. Even Hamish, whose gaze was generally focused on some
point about eighty years away, was glaring at him.

‘Ain’t gonna run,’ said Hamish.

‘It’s not running away,’ he managed. ‘It’s a sensible withdrawal.
Tactics. Good grief, it’s common sense!’

‘Ain’t gonna run.’

‘Look, even barbarians can count! And you’ve admitted you’re going to
die!’

‘Ain’t gonna run.’

Cohen leaned forward and patted Mr Saveloy on the hand.

‘It’s the heroing, see,’ he said. ‘Who’s ever heard of a hero running
away? All them kids you was telling us about . . . you know, the ones
who think we’re stories . . . you reckon they’d believe we ran away?
Well, then. No, it’s not part of the whole deal, running away. Let
someone else do the running.’

‘Besides,’ said Truckle, ‘where’d we get another chance like this? Six
against five armies! That’s bl— that’s fantastic! We’re not talking
legends here. I reckon we’ve got a good crack at some mythology as
well.’

‘But . . . you’ll . . . _die_.’

‘Oh, that’s part of it, I’ll grant you, that’s part of it. But what a
way to go, eh?’

Mr Saveloy looked at them and realized that they were speaking another
language in another world. It was one he had no key to, no map for. You
could teach them to wear interesting pants and handle money but
something in their soul stayed exactly the same.

‘Do teachers go anywhere special when they die?’ said Cohen.

‘I don’t think so,’ said Mr Saveloy gloomily. He wondered for a moment
whether there really _was_ a great Free Period in the sky. It didn’t
sound very likely. Probably there would be some marking to do.

‘Well, whatever happens, when you’re dead, if you ever feel like a good
quaff, you’re welcome to drop in at any time,’ said Cohen. ‘It’s been
_fun._ That’s the important thing. And it’s been an education, hasn’t
it, boys?’

There was a general murmur of assent.

‘Amazing, all those long words.’

‘And learnin’ to buy things.’

‘And social intercourse, hur, hur . . . sorry.’

‘Whut?’

‘Shame it didn’t work out, but I’ve never been one for plans,’ said
Cohen.

Mr Saveloy stood up.

‘I’m going to join you,’ he said grimly.

‘What, to fight?’

‘Yes.’

‘Do you know how to handle a sword?’ said Truckle.

‘Er. No.’

‘Then you’ve wasted _all_ your life.’

Mr Saveloy looked offended at this.

‘I expect I’ll get the hang of it as we go along,’ he said.

‘Get the hang of it? It’s a _sword_!’

‘Yes, but . . . when you’re a teacher, you have to pick things up fast.’
Mr Saveloy smiled nervously. ‘I once taught practical alchemy for a
whole term when Mr Schism was off sick after blowing himself up, and up
until then I’d never seen a crucible.’

‘Here.’ Boy Willie handed the teacher a spare sword. He hefted it.

‘Er. I expect there’s a manual, or something?’

‘Manual? No. You hold the blunt end and poke the other end at people.’

‘Ah? Really? Well, that seems quite straightforward. I thought there was
rather more to it than that.’

‘You _sure_ you want to come with us?’ said Cohen.

Mr Saveloy looked firm. ‘Absolutely. I very much doubt if I’ll survive
if you lose and . . . well, it seems that you heroes get a better class
of Heaven. I must say I rather suspect you get a better class of life,
too. And I really don’t know where teachers go when they’re dead, but
I’ve got a horrible suspicion it’ll be full of sports masters.’

‘It’s just that I don’t know if you could really go properly berserk,’
said Cohen. ‘Have you ever had the red mist come down and woke up to
find you’d bitten twenty people to death?’

‘I used to be reckoned a pretty ratty man if people made too much noise
in class,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘And something of a dead shot with a piece
of chalk, too.’

‘How about you, taxman?’

Six Beneficent Winds backed away hurriedly.

‘I . . . I think I’m probably more cut out for undermining the system
from within,’ he said.

‘Fair enough.’ Cohen looked at the others. ‘I’ve never done this
official sort of warring before,’ he said. ‘How’s it supposed to go?’

‘I think you just line up in front of one another and then charge,’ said
Mr Saveloy.

‘Seems straightforward enough. All right, let’s go.’

They strode, or in one case wheeled and in another case moved at Mr
Saveloy’s gentle trot, down the hall. The taxman trailed after them.

‘Mr Saveloy!’ he shouted. ‘You know what’s going to happen! Have you
lost your senses?’

‘Yes,’ said the teacher, ‘but I may have found some better ones.’

He grinned to himself. The whole of his life, so far, had been
complicated. There had been timetables and lists and a whole basket of
things he must do and things he shouldn’t do, and the life of Mr Saveloy
had been this little wriggly thing trying to survive in the middle of it
all. But now it had suddenly all become very simple. You held one end
and you poked the other into people. A man could live his whole life by
a maxim like that. And, afterwards, get a very interesting afterlife—

‘Here, you’ll need this too,’ said Caleb, poking something round at him
as they stepped into the grey light. ‘It’s a shield.’

‘Ah. It’s to protect myself, yes?’

‘If you really need to, bite the edge.’

‘Oh, I know about that,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘That’s when you go berserk,
right?’

‘Could be, could be,’ said Caleb. ‘That’s why a lot of fighters do it.
But personally _I_ do it ’cos it’s made of chocolate.’

‘Chocolate?’

‘You can never get a proper meal in these battles.’

And this is me, thought Mr Saveloy, marching down the street with
_heroes._ They are the great fi—

‘And when in doubt, take all your clothes off,’ said Caleb.

‘What for?’

‘Sign of a good berserk, taking all your clothes off. Frightens the hell
out of the enemy. If anyone starts laughing, stab ’em one.’

There was a movement among the blankets in the wheelchair.

‘Whut?’

‘I said, STAB ’EM ONE, Hamish.’

Hamish waved an arm that looked like bone with skin on it, and
apparently far too thin to hold the axe it was in fact holding.

‘That’s right! Right in the nadgers!’

Mr Saveloy nudged Caleb.

‘I ought to be writing this down,’ he said. ‘Where exactly are the
nadgers?’

‘Small range of mountains near the Hub.’

‘Fascinating.’

The citizens of Hunghung were ranged along the city walls. It was not
every day you saw a fight like this.

Rincewind elbowed and kicked his way through the people until he reached
the cadre, who’d managed to occupy a prime position over the main gate.

‘What’re you hanging around here for?’ he said. ‘You could be miles
away!’

‘We want to see what happens, of course,’ said Twoflower, his spectacles
gleaming.

‘I know what happens! The Horde will be instantly slaughtered!’ said
Rincewind. ‘What did you _expect_ to happen?’

‘Ah, but you’re forgetting the invisible vampire ghosts,’ said
Twoflower.

Rincewind looked at him.

‘What?’

‘Their secret army. I heard that _we’ve_ got some, too. Should be
interesting to watch.’

‘Twoflower, there are _no_ invisible vampire ghosts.’

‘Ah, yes, everyone’s going round denying it,’ said Lotus Blossom. ‘So
there must be some truth in it.’

‘But I made it up!’

‘Ah, you may _think_ you made it up,’ said Twoflower. ‘But perhaps you
are a pawn of Fate.’

‘Listen, there’s no—’

‘Same old Rincewind,’ said Twoflower, in a jolly way. ‘You always were
so pessimistic about everything, but it always worked out all right in
the end.’

‘There are no ghosts, there are no magic armies,’ said Rincewind.
‘There’s just—’

‘When seven men go out to fight an army 100,000 times bigger there’s
only one way it can end,’ said Twoflower.

‘Right. I’m glad you see sense.’

‘They’ll win,’ said Twoflower. ‘They’ve got to. Otherwise the world’s
just not working properly.’

‘You look educated,’ said Rincewind to Butterfly. ‘Explain to him why
he’s wrong. It’s because of a little thing we have in our country. I
don’t know if you’ve ever heard of it – it’s called _mathematics_.’

The girl smiled at him.

‘You don’t believe me, do you?’ said Rincewind flatly. ‘You’re just like
him. What d’you think this is, homeopathic warfare? The smaller your
side the more likely you are to win? Well, it’s not like that. I wish it
_was_ like that, but it isn’t. Nothing is. There are no amazing strokes
of luck, no magic solutions, and the good people don’t win because
they’re small and plucky!’ He waved his hand irritably at something.

_‘You_ always survived,’ said Twoflower. ‘We had amazing adventures and
you always survived.’

‘That was just coincidence.’

‘You kept _on_ surviving.’

‘And you got us safely out of prison,’ said Lotus Blossom.

‘There were just a lot of coinci— _Will you go away!’_

A butterfly skittered away from his flailing hand.

‘Damn things,’ he mumbled. And added: ‘Well, that’s it. I’m off. I can’t
watch. I’ve got things to do. Besides, afterwards I think nasty people
are going to be looking for me.’

And then he realized there were tears in Lotus Blossom’s eyes.

‘We . . . we thought you would do something,’ she said.

‘Me? I can’t do anything! Especially not magic! I’m famous for it! Don’t
go around believing that Great Wizards solve all your problems, because
there aren’t any and they don’t and I should know because I’m not one!’

He backed away. ‘This is always happening to me! I’m just minding my own
business and everything goes wrong and suddenly everyone’s relying on me
and saying, ‘Oh, Rincewind, what are you going to do about it?’ Well,
what Mrs Rincewind’s little boy, if she was a Mrs Rincewind of course,
what he’s going to do about it is nothing, right? You have to sort it
all out yourselves! No mysterious magical armies are going to – Will you
stop looking at me like that? I don’t see why it’s _my_ fault! I’ve got
other things to do! It’s not my business!’

And then he turned and ran.

The crowds didn’t take much notice of him.

The streets were deserted by Hunghung standards, which meant you could
quite often see the cobbles. Rincewind pushed and shoved his way along
the alleys nearest the Wall, looking for another gateway with guards too
busy to ask questions.

There were footsteps behind him.

‘Look,’ he said, spinning round, ‘I told you, you can all—’

It was the Luggage. It contrived to look a little ashamed of itself.

‘Oh, turned up at last, have we?’ said Rincewind savagely. ‘What
happened to the following-master-everywhere thing?’

The Luggage shuffled its feet. From out of an alleyway came a slightly
larger and far more ornate version of itself. Its lid was inset with
decorative wood and, it seemed to Rincewind, its feet were rather more
dainty than the horny-nailed, calloused ones of the Luggage. Besides,
the toenails had been painted.

‘Oh,’ he said. ‘Well. Good grief. Fair enough, I suppose. Really? I mean
. . . yes. Well. Come on, then.’

He reached the end of the alley and turned round. The Luggage was gently
bumping the larger chest, urging it to follow him.

Rincewind’s own sexual experiences were not excessive although he had
seen diagrams. He hadn’t the faintest idea about how it applied to
travel accessories. Did they say things like ‘What a chest!’ or ‘Get a
load of the hinges on that one!’?

If it came to that, he had no real reason for considering that the
Luggage was male. Admittedly it had a homicidal nature, but so had a lot
of the women that Rincewind had met, and they had often become a little
more homicidal as a result of meeting him. Capacity for violence,
Rincewind had heard, was unisexual. He wasn’t certain what unisex was,
but expected that it was what he normally experienced.

There was a small gate ahead. It seemed to be unguarded.

Despite his fear he walked through it, and refrained from running.
Authority always noticed a running man. The time to start running was
around about the ‘e’ in ‘Hey, you!’

No one paid him any attention. The attention of the people along the
Wall was all on the armies.

‘Look at them,’ he said bitterly, to the generality of the universe.
_‘Stupid._ If it was seven against seventy, everyone’d _know_ who’d
lose. Just because it’s seven again 700,000, everyone’s not sure. As
though suddenly numbers don’t mean anything any more. Huh! Why should
_I_ do anything? It’s not as if I even know the guy all that well.
Admittedly he saved my life a couple of times, but that’s no reason to
die horribly just because he can’t count. So you can stop looking at me
like that!’

The Luggage backed away a little. The _other_ Luggage . . .

. . . Rincewind supposed it just _looked_ female. Women had bigger
luggage than men, didn’t they? Because of the – he moved into unknown
territory – extra frills and stuff. It was just one of those things,
like the fact that they had smaller handkerchiefs than men even though
their noses were generally the same size. The Luggage had always been
_the_ Luggage. Rincewind wasn’t mentally prepared for there to be more
than one. There was the Luggage and . . . the _other_ Luggage.

‘Come on, both of you,’ he said. ‘We’re getting out of here. I’ve done
what I can. I just don’t care any more. It’s nothing to do with me. I
don’t see why everyone depends on me. I’m not dependable. Even _I_ don’t
depend on me, and I’m me.’

Cohen looked at the horizon. Grey-blue clouds were piling up.

‘There’s a storm coming,’ he said.

‘It’s a mercy that we won’t be alive to get wet, then,’ said Boy Willie,
cheerfully.

‘Funny thing, though. It looks like it’s coming from every direction at
once.’

‘Filthy foreign weather. You can’t trust it.’

Cohen turned his attention to the armies of the five warlords.

There seemed to have been some agreement.

They’d arranged themselves around the position that Cohen had taken up.
The tactic seemed quite clear. It was simply to advance. The Horde could
see the commanders riding up and down in front of their legions.

‘How’s it supposed to start?’ said Cohen, the rising wind whipping at
what remained of his hair. ‘Does someone blow a whistle or something? Or
do we just scream and charge?’

‘Commencement is generally by agreement,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Oh.’

Cohen looked at the forest of lances and pennants. Hundreds of thousands
of men looked like quite a lot of men when you saw them close to.

‘I suppose,’ he said, slowly, ‘that none of you has got some amazing
plan you’ve been keeping quiet about?’

‘We thought _you_ had one,’ said Truckle.

Several riders had now left each army and approached the Horde in a
group. They stopped a little more than a spear’s throw away, and sat and
watched.

‘All right, then,’ said Cohen. ‘I hate to say this, but perhaps we
should talk about surrender.’

‘No!’ said Mr Saveloy, and then stopped in embarrassment at the loudness
of his own voice. ‘No,’ he repeated, a little more quietly. ‘You won’t
live if you surrender. You just won’t die immediately.’

Cohen scratched his nose. ‘What’s that flag . . . you know . . . when
you want to talk to them without them killing you?’

‘It’s got to be red,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘But look, it’s no good you—’

‘I don’t know, red for surrender, white for funerals . . .’ muttered
Cohen. ‘All right. Anyone got something red?’

‘I’ve got a handkerchief,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘but it’s white and anyway—’

‘Give it here.’

The barbarian teacher very reluctantly handed it over.

Cohen pulled a small, worn knife from his belt.

‘I don’t believe this!’ said Mr Saveloy. He was nearly in tears. ‘Cohen
the Barbarian talking surrender with people like that!’

‘Influence of civilization,’ said Cohen. ‘ ’S probably made me go soft
in the head.’

He pulled the knife over his arm, and then clamped the handkerchief over
the cut.

‘There we are,’ he said. ‘Soon have a nice red flag.’

The Horde nodded approvingly. It was an amazingly symbolic, dramatic and
above all stupid gesture, in the finest traditions of barbarian heroing.
It didn’t seem to be lost on some of the nearer soldiers, either.

‘Now,’ Cohen went on, ‘I reckon you, Teach, and you, Truckle . . . you
two come with me and we’ll go and talk to these people.’

‘They’ll drag you off to their dungeons!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘They’ve got
torturers that can keep you alive for _years_!’

‘Whut? Whutzeesay?’

‘He said THEY CAN KEEP YOU ALIVE FOR YEARS IN THEIR DUNGEONS, Hamish.’

‘Good! Fine by me!’

‘Oh, dear,’ said Mr Saveloy.

He trailed after the other two towards the warlords.

Lord Hong raised his visor and stared down his nose at them as they
approached.

‘Red flag, look,’ said Cohen, waving the rather damp object on the end
of his sword.

‘Yes,’ said Lord Hong. ‘We saw that little show. It may impress the
common soldiers but it does not impress me, barbarian.’

‘Please yourself,’ said Cohen. ‘We’ve come to talk about surrender.’

Mr Saveloy noticed some of the lesser lords relax a little. Then he
thought: a real soldier probably doesn’t like this sort of thing. You
don’t want to go to soldier Heaven or wherever you go and say, I once
led an army against seven old men. It wasn’t medal-winning material.

‘Ah. Of course. So much for bravado,’ said Lord Hong. ‘Then lay down
your arms and you will be escorted back to the palace.’

Cohen and Truckle looked at one another.

‘Sorry?’ said Cohen.

‘Lay down your arms.’ Lord Hong snorted. ‘That means put down your
weapons.’

Cohen gave him a puzzled look. ‘Why should we put down our weapons?’

‘Are we not talking about your surrender?’

_‘Our_ surrender?’

Mr Saveloy’s mouth opened in a mad, slow grin.

Lord Hong stared at Cohen.

‘Hah! You can hardly expect me to believe that you have come to ask _us_
. . .’

He leaned from the saddle and glared at them.

‘You do, don’t you?’ he said. ‘You mindless little barbarians. Is it
true that you can only count up to five?’

‘We just thought that it might save people getting hurt,’ said Cohen.

‘You thought it would save _you_ getting hurt,’ said the warlord.

‘I daresay a few of yours might get hurt, too.’

‘They’re peasants,’ said the warlord.

‘Oh, yes. I was forgetting that,’ said Cohen. ‘And you’re their chief,
right? It’s like your game of chess, right?’

‘I am their lord,’ said Lord Hong. ‘They will die at my bidding, if
necessary.’

Cohen gave him a big, dangerous grin.

‘When do we start?’ he said.

‘Return to your . . . band,’ said Lord Hong. ‘And then I think we shall
start . . . shortly.’

He glared at Truckle, who was unfolding his bit of paper. The
barbarian’s lips moved awkwardly and he ran a horny finger across the
page.

‘Misbegotten . . . wretch, so you are,’ he said.

‘My word,’ said Mr Saveloy, who’d created the look-up table.

As the three returned to the Horde Mr Saveloy was aware of a grinding
sound. Cohen was wearing several carats off his teeth.

‘ “Die at my bidding”,’ he said. ‘The bugger doesn’t even know what a
chief is meant to _be,_ the bastard! Him and his horse!’

Mr Saveloy looked around. There seemed to be some arguing among the
warlords.

‘You know,’ he said, ‘they probably will try to take us alive. I used to
have a headmaster like him. He liked to make people’s lives a misery.’

‘You mean they’ll be trying not to kill us?’ said Truckle.

‘Yes.’

‘Does that mean we have to try not to kill them?’

‘No, I don’t think so.’

‘Sounds Okay to me.’

‘What do we do now?’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Do we do a battle chant or
something?’

‘We just wait,’ said Cohen.

‘There’s a lot of waiting in warfare,’ said Boy Willie.

‘Ah, yes,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I’ve heard people say that. They say
there’s long periods of boredom followed by short periods of
excitement.’

‘Not really,’ said Cohen. ‘It’s more like short periods of waiting
followed by long periods of being dead.’

‘Blast.’

The fields were crisscrossed with drainage ditches. There seemed to be
no straight path anywhere. And the ditches were too wide to jump; they
_looked_ shallow enough to wade, but only because eighteen inches of
water overlay a suffocating depth of rich thick mud. Mr Saveloy said
that the Empire owed its prosperity to the mud of the plains, and right
now Rincewind was feeling extremely rich.

He was also quite close to the big hill that dominated the city. It
really was rounded, with a precision apparently far too accurate for
mere natural causes; Saveloy had said that hills like that were
drumlins, great piles of topsoil left behind by glaciers. Trees covered
the lower slopes of this one, and there was a small building on the top.

Cover. Now, _that_ was a good word. It was a big plain and the armies
weren’t too far away. The hill looked curiously peaceful, as if it
belonged to a different world. It was strange that the Agateans, who
otherwise seemed to farm absolutely everywhere a water buffalo could
stand, had left it alone.

Someone was watching him.

It _was_ a water buffalo.

It would be wrong to say it watched him with interest. It just watched
him, because its eyes were open and had to be facing in some direction,
and it had randomly chosen one which included Rincewind.

Its face held the completely serene expression of a creature that had
long ago realized that it was, fundamentally, a tube on legs and had
been installed in the universe to, broadly speaking, achieve throughput.

At the other end of the string was a man, ankle-deep in the mud of the
field. He had a broad straw hat, like every other buffalo holder. He had
the basic pyjama suit of the Agatean man-in-the-field. And he had an
expression not of idiocy, but of preoccupation. He was looking at
Rincewind. As with the buffalo, this was only because his eyes had to be
doing something.

Despite the pressing dangers, Rincewind found himself overcome by a
sudden curiosity.

‘Er. Good morning,’ he said.

The man gave him a nod. The water buffalo made the sound of
regurgitating cud.

‘Er. Sorry if this is a personal question,’ said Rincewind, ‘but . . . I
can’t help wondering . . . why do you stand out in the fields all day
with the water buffalo?’

The man thought about it.

‘Good for soil,’ he said eventually.

‘But doesn’t it waste a lot of time?’ said Rincewind.

The man gave this due appraisal also.

‘What’s time to a cow?’ he said.

Rincewind reversed back on to the highway of reality.

‘You see those armies over there?’ he said.

The buffalo holder concentrated his gaze.

‘Yes,’ he decided.

‘They’re fighting for you.’

The man did not appear moved by this. The water buffalo burped gently.

‘Some want to see you enslaved and some want you to run the country, or
at least to let them run the country while telling you it’s you doing it
really,’ said Rincewind. ‘There’s going to be a terrible battle. I can’t
help wondering . . . What do _you_ want?’

The buffalo holder absorbed this one for consideration, too. And it
seemed to Rincewind that the slowness of the thought process wasn’t due
to native stupidity, but more to do with the sheer size of the question.
He could feel it spreading out so that it incorporated the soil and the
grass and the sun and headed on out into the universe.

Finally the man said:

‘A longer piece of string would be nice.’

‘Ah. Really? Well, well. There’s a thing,’ said Rincewind. ‘Talking to
you has been an education. Goodbye.’

The man watched him go. Beside him, the buffalo relaxed some muscles and
contracted others and lifted its tail and made the world, in a very
small way, a better place.

Rincewind headed on towards the hill. Random as the animal tracks and
occasional plank bridges were, they seemed to head right for it. If
Rincewind had been thinking clearly, an activity he last remembered
doing around the age of twelve, he might have wondered about that.

The trees of the lower slopes were sapient pears, and he didn’t even
think about _that._ Their leaves turned to watch him as he scrambled
past. What he needed now was a cave or a handy—

He paused.

‘Oh, no,’ he said. ‘No, no, no. You don’t catch _me_ like that. I’ll go
into a handy cave and there’ll be a little door or some wise old man or
something and I’ll be dragged back into events. Right. Stay out in the
open, that’s the style.’

He half climbed, half walked to the rounded top of the hill, which rose
above the trees like a dome. Now he was closer he could see that it
wasn’t as smooth as it looked from below. Weather had worn gullies and
channels in the soil, and bushes had colonized every sheltered slope.

The building on the top was, to Rincewind’s surprise, rusty. It had been
made of iron – pointed iron roof, iron walls, iron doorway. There were a
few old nests and some debris on the floor, but it was otherwise empty.
And not a good place to hide. It’d be the first place anyone would look.

There was a cloud wall around the world now. Lightning crackled in its
heart, and there was the sound of thunder – not the gentle rumble of
summer thunder but the crackackack of splitting sky.

And yet the heat wrapped the plain like a blanket. The air felt thick.
In a minute it was going to rain cats and food.

‘Find somewhere where I won’t be noticed,’ he muttered. ‘Keep head down.
Only way. Why should I care? Other people’s problem.’

Panting in the oppressive heat, he wandered on.

Lord Hong was enraged. Those who knew him could tell, by the way he
spoke more slowly and smiled continuously.

‘And how do the men know the lightning dragons are _angry?’_ he said.
‘It may be mere high spirits.’

‘Not with a sky that colour,’ said Lord Tang. ‘That is not an auspicious
colour for a sky. It looks like a bruise. A sky like that is
portentous.’

‘And what, pray, do you think it portends?’

‘It’s just _generally_ portentous.’

‘I know what’s behind this,’ Lord Hong snarled. ‘You’re too frightened
to fight seven old men, is that it?’

‘The men say they’re the legendary Seven Indestructible Sages,’ said
Lord Fang. He tried to smile. ‘You know how superstitious they are . .
.’

‘What Seven Sages?’ said Lord Hong. ‘I am extremely familiar with the
history of the world and there are no legendary Seven Indestructible
Sages.’

‘Er . . . not _yet_,’ said Lord Fang. ‘Uh. But . . . a day like this . .
. Perhaps legends have to _start_ somewhere . . .’

‘They’re barbarians! Oh, gods! Seven men! Can I believe we’re afraid of
seven men?’

‘It feels wrong,’ said Lord McSweeney. He added, quickly, ‘That’s what
the men say.’

‘You have made the proclamation about our celestial army of ghosts? All
of you?’

The warlords tried to avoid his gaze.

‘Er . . . yes,’ said Lord Fang.

‘That must have improved morale.’

‘Uh. Not . . . entirely . . .’

‘What do you mean, man?’

‘Uh. Many men have deserted. Uh. They’ve been saying that foreign ghosts
were bad enough, but . . .’

‘But what?’

‘They are _soldiers,_ Lord Hong,’ said Lord Tang sharply. ‘They all have
people they do not want to meet. Don’t you?’

Just for a second, there was the suggestion of a twitch on Lord Hong’s
cheek. It was only for a second, but those who saw it took note. Lord
Hong’s renowned glaze had shown a crack.

‘What would you do, Lord Tang? Let these insolent barbarians go?’

‘Of course not. But . . . you don’t need an army against seven men.
Seven ancient old men. The peasants say . . . they say . . .’

Lord Hong’s voice was slightly higher.

‘Come on, man who talks to peasants. I’m sure you’re going to tell us
what they say about these foolish and foolhardy old men?’

‘Well, that’s it, you see. They say, if they’re so foolish and foolhardy
. . . how did they manage to become so old?’

‘Luck!’

It was the wrong word. Even Lord Hong realized it. He’d never believed
in luck. He’d always taken pains, usually those of other people, to fill
life with certainties. But he knew that others believed in luck. It was
a foible he’d always been happy to make use of. And now it was turning
and stinging him on the hand.

‘There is nothing in the Art of War to tell us how five armies attack
seven old men,’ said Lord Tang. ‘Ghosts or no ghosts. And this, Lord
Hong, is because no one ever thought such a thing would be done.’

‘If you feel so frightened I’ll ride out against them with my mere
250,000 men,’ he said.

‘I am not frightened,’ said Lord Tang. ‘I am ashamed.’

‘Each man armed with two swords,’ Lord Hong went on, ignoring him. ‘And
I shall see how lucky these . . . sages . . . are. Because, my lords, I
will only have to be lucky once. They will have to be lucky a quarter of
a million times.’

He lowered his visor.

‘How lucky do you feel, my lords?’

The other four warlords avoided one another’s gaze.

Lord Hong noticed their resigned silence.

‘Very well, then,’ he said. ‘Let the gongs be sounded and the
firecrackers lit – to ensure good luck, of course.’

There were a large number of ranks in the armies of the Empire, and many
of them were untranslatable. Three Pink Pig and Five White Fang were,
loosely speaking, privates, and not just because they were pale,
vulnerable and inclined to curl up and hide when danger threatened.

In fact they were so private as to be downright secretive. Even the
army’s mules ranked higher than them, because good mules were hard to
come by whereas men like Pink Pig and White Fang are found in every
army, somewhere where a latrine is in need of cleaning.

They were so insignificant that they had, privately, decided that it
would be a waste of an invisible foreign blood-sucking ghost’s valuable
time to attack them. They felt it only fair, after it had come all this
way, to give it the chance of fiendishly killing someone superior.

They had therefore hospitably decamped just before dawn and were now
hiding out. Of course, if victory threatened they could always _re_camp.
It was unlikely that they’d be missed in all the excitement, and both
men were somewhat expert at turning up on battlefields in time to join
in the victory celebrations. They lay in the long grass, watching the
armies manoeuvre.

From this height, it looked like an impressive war. The army on one side
was so small as to be invisible. Of course, if you accepted the very
strong denials of last night, it was so _invisible_ as to be invisible.

It was also their elevation which meant that they were the first to
notice the ring around the sky.

It was just above the thunderous wall on the horizon. Where stray shafts
of sunlight hit it, it glowed golden. Elsewhere it was merely yellow.
But it was continuous, and thin as a thread.

‘Funny-looking cloud,’ said White Fang.

‘Yeah,’ said Pink Pig. ‘So what?’

It was while they were thus engaged, and sharing a small bottle of rice
wine liberated by Pink Pig from an unsuspecting comrade the previous
evening, that they heard a groan.

‘Oooooohhhhhh . . .’

Their drinks froze in their throats.

‘Did you hear that?’ said Pink Pig.

‘You mean the—’

‘Ooooohhhh . . .’

‘That’s it!’

They turned, very slowly.

Something had pulled itself out of a gully behind them. It was humanoid,
more or less. Red mud dripped from it. Strange noises issued from its
mouth.

‘Oooooohhhhshit!’

Pink Pig grabbed White Fang’s arm.

‘It’s an invisible blood-sucking ghost!’

‘But I can see it!’

Pink Pig squinted.

‘It’s the Red Army! They’ve come up outa the earth like everybody says!’

White Fang, who had several brain cells more than Pink Pig, and more
importantly was only on his second cup of wine, took a closer look.

‘It could be just one ordinary man with mud all over him,’ he suggested.
He raised his voice. ‘Hey, you!’

The figure turned and tried to run.

Pink Pig nudged his friend.

‘Is he one of ours?’

‘Looking like that?’

‘Let’s get him!’

‘Why?’

‘ ’Cos he’s running away!’

‘Let him run.’

‘Maybe he’s got money. Anyway, what’s he running away for?’

Rincewind slid down into another gully. Of all the luck! Soldiers should
be where they were expected to be. What had happened to duty and honour
and stuff like that?

The gully had dead grass and moss in the bottom.

He stood still and listened to the voices of the two men.

The air was stifling. It was as if the oncoming storm was pushing all
the hot air in front of it, turning the plain into a pressure cooker.

And then the ground creaked, and sagged suddenly.

The faces of the absentee soldiers appeared over the edge of the gully.

There was another creak and the ground sank another inch or two.
Rincewind didn’t dare breathe in, in case the extra weight of air made
him too heavy. And it was very clear that the least activity, such as
jumping, was going to make things worse . . .

Very carefully, he looked down.

The dead moss had given way. He seemed to be standing on a baulk of
timber buried in the ground, but dirt pouring around it suggested that
there was a hole beneath.

It was going to give way any second n—

Rincewind threw himself forward. The ground fell away underneath so
that, instead of standing on a slowly breaking piece of timber, he was
hanging with his arms over what felt like another concealed log and, by
the feel of it, one which was as riddled with rot as the first one.

This one, possibly out of a desire to conform, began to sag.

And then jolted to a stop.

The faces of the soldiers vanished backwards as the sides of the gully
began to slide. Dry earth and small stones slid past Rincewind. He could
feel them rattle on his boots and drop away.

He felt, as an expert in these things, that he was over a depth. From
his point of view, it was also a height.

The log began to shift again.

This left Rincewind with, as he saw it, two options. He could let go and
plunge to an uncertain fate in the darkness, or he could hang on until
the timber gave way, and then plunge to an uncertain fate in the
darkness.

And then, to his delight, there was a third option. The toe of his boot
touched something, a root, a protruding rock. It didn’t matter. It took
some of his weight. It took at least enough to put him in precarious
equilibrium – not exactly safe, not exactly falling. Of course, it was
only a temporary measure, but Rincewind had always considered that life
was no more than a series of temporary measures strung together.

A pale yellow butterfly with interesting patterns on its wings fluttered
along the gully and settled on the only bit of colour available, which
turned out to be Rincewind’s hat.

The wood sagged slightly.

‘Push off!’ said Rincewind, trying not to use heavy language. ‘Go away!’

The butterfly flattened its wings and sunned itself.

Rincewind pursed his lips and tried to blow up his own nostrils.

Startled, the creature skittered into the air . . .

‘Hah!’ said Rincewind.

. . . and, in response to its instincts in the face of a threat, moved
its wings like _this_ and _this._

The bushes shivered. And around the sky, the towering clouds curved into
unusual patterns.

Another cloud formed. It was about the size of an angry grey balloon.
And it started to rain. Not rain generally, but specifically.
Specifically on about a square foot of ground which contained Rincewind;
specifically, on his hat.

A very small bolt of lightning stung Rincewind on the nose.

‘Ah! So we have’ – Pink Pig, appearing around the curve of the gully,
hesitated a bit before continuing slightly more thoughtfully – ‘a head
in a hole . . . with a very small thunderstorm above it.’

And then it dawned on him that, storm or no storm, nothing was
preventing him from cutting off significant parts. The only significant
part available was a head, but that was fine by him.

At which point, Rincewind’s hat having absorbed enough moisture, the
ancient wood gave way under the strain and plunged him to an uncertain
fate in the darkness.

It was utterly dark.

There had been a painful confusion of tunnels and sliding dirt.
Rincewind assumed – or the small part of him that was not sobbing with
fear assumed – that the earth had caved in after him. Cave. That was a
significant word. He was in a cave. Reaching out carefully, in case he
felt something, he felt for something to feel.

There was a straight edge. It led to three more straight edges, going
off at right angles. So . . . this meant slab.

The darkness was still a choking velvet shroud.

Slab meant that there was some other entrance, some proper entrance.
Even now guards were probably hurrying towards him.

Perhaps the Luggage was hurrying towards _them._ It had been acting very
funny lately, that was for certain. He was probably better off without
it. Probably.

He patted his pockets, saying the mantra that even non-wizards invoke in
order to find matches; that is, he said, ‘Matches, matches, matches,’
madly to himself, under his breath.

He found some, and scratched one desperately with his thumbnail.

‘Ow!’

The smoky yellow flame lit nothing except Rincewind’s hand and part of
his sleeve.

He ventured a few steps before it burned his fingers, and when it died
it left a blue afterglow in the darkness of his vision.

There were no sounds of vengeful feet. There were no sounds at all. In
theory there should be the drip of water, but the air felt quite dry.

He tried another match, and this time raised it as high as he could and
peered ahead.

A seven-foot warrior smiled at him.

Cohen looked up again.

‘It’s going to piss down in a minute,’ he said. ‘Will you look at that
sky?’

There were hints of purple and red in the mass, and the occasional
momentary glow of lightning somewhere inside the clouds.

‘Teach?’

‘Yes?’

‘You know everything. Why’s that cloud looking like that?’

Mr Saveloy looked where Cohen was pointing. There was a yellowish cloud
low on the horizon. Right around the horizon – one thin streak, as
though the sun was trying to find a way through.

‘Could be the lining?’ said Boy Willie.

‘What lining?’

‘Every cloud’s supposed to have a silver one.’

‘Yeah, but that’s more like gold.’

‘Well, gold’s cheaper here.’

‘Is it me,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘or is it getting wider?’

Caleb was staring at the enemy lines.

‘There’s been a lot of blokes galloping about on their little horses,’
he said. ‘I hope they get a move on. We don’t want to be here all day.’

‘I vote we rushes ’em while they’re not expectin’ it,’ said Hamish.

‘Hold on . . . hold on . . .’ said Truckle. There was the sound of many
gongs being beaten, and the crackling of fireworks. ‘Looks like the bas—
the love-childs are moving.’

‘Thank goodness for that,’ said Cohen. He stood up and stubbed out his
cigarette.

Mr Saveloy trembled with excitement.

‘Do we sing a song for the gods before we go into battle?’ he said.

‘You can if you like,’ said Cohen.

‘Well, do we say any heathen chants or prayers?’

‘Shouldn’t think so,’ said Cohen. He glanced up at the horizon-girdling
band. It was unsettling him far more than the approaching enemy. It was
wider now, but slightly paler. For just a moment he found himself
wishing that there was one god or goddess somewhere whose temple he
hadn’t violated, robbed or burned down.

‘Don’t we bang our swords on our shields and utter defiance?’ said the
teacher hopefully.

‘Too late for that, really,’ said Cohen.

Mr Saveloy looked so crestfallen at the lack of pagan splendour that the
ancient barbarian was, to his own surprise, moved to add: ‘But feel
free, if that’s what you want.’

The Horde drew their various swords. In Hamish’s case, another axe was
produced from under his rug.

‘See you in Heaven!’ said Mr Saveloy excitedly.

‘Yeah, right,’ said Caleb, eyeing the line of approaching soldiers.

‘Where there’s feasting and young ladies and so forth!’

‘Yeah, yeah,’ said Boy Willie, testing the blade of his sword.

‘And carousing and quaffing, I believe!’

‘Could be,’ said Vincent, trying to ease the tendonitis in his arm.

‘And we’ll do that thing, you know, where you throw the axes and cut
ladies’ plaits off!’

‘Yeah, if you like.’

‘But—’

‘Whut?’

‘The actual feasting . . . Do they do anything vegetarian?’

And the advancing army screamed and charged.

They rushed at the Horde, almost as fast as the clouds boiling in from
every direction.

Rincewind’s brain unfroze slowly, in the darkness and silence of the
hill.

It’s a statue, he told himself. That’s all it is. No problem there. Not
even a particularly good one. Just a big statue of a man in armour.
Look, there’s a couple more, you can just see them at the edge of the
light . . .

‘Ow!’

He dropped the match and sucked his fingers.

What he needed now was a wall. Walls had exits. True, they could also be
entrances, but now there did not seem much danger of any guards hurrying
in here. The air had an ancient smell, with a hint of fox and a slight
trace of thunderstorms, but above all it tasted unused.

He crept forward, testing each step with his foot.

Then there _was_ light. A small blue spark jumped off Rincewind’s
finger.

Cohen grabbed at his beard. It was straining away from his face.

Mr Saveloy’s fringe of hair stood out from his head and sparked at the
ends.

‘Static discharges!’ he shouted, above the crackle.

Ahead of them the spears of the enemy glowed at the tips. The charge
faltered. There was the occasional shriek as sparks leaped from man to
man.

Cohen looked up.

‘Oh, my,’ he said. ‘Will you look at _that_!’

Tiny sparks flickered around Rincewind as he eased himself over the
unseen floor.

The word _tomb_ had presented itself for his consideration, and one
thing Rincewind knew about large tombs was that their builders were
often jolly inventive in the traps and spikes department. They also put
in things like paintings and statues, possibly so that the dead had
something to look at if they became bored.

Rincewind’s hand touched stone, and he moved carefully sideways. Now and
again his feet touched something yielding and soft. He very much hoped
it was mud.

And then, right at hand height, was a lever. It stuck out fully two
feet.

Now . . . it _could_ be a trap. But traps were generally, well, traps.
The first you knew about them was when your head was rolling along the
corridor several yards away. And trap builders tended to be
straightforwardly homicidal and seldom required victims to actively
participate in their own destruction.

Rincewind pulled it.

The yellow cloud sailed overhead in its millions, moving much faster on
the wind they’d created than the slow beating of their wings would
suggest. Behind them came the storm.

Mr Saveloy blinked.

‘Butterflies?’

Both sides stopped as the creatures sleeted past. It was even possible
to hear the rustle of their wings.

‘All right, Teach,’ said Cohen. ‘Explain _this_ one.’

‘It, it, it could be a natural phenomenon,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Er . . .
Monarch butterflies, for example, have been known to . . . er . . . to
tell you the truth, I don’t know . . .’

The cloud swarmed on towards the hill.

‘Not some kind of sign?’ said Cohen. ‘There must have been _some_ temple
I didn’t rob.’

‘The trouble with signs and portents,’ said Boy Willie, ‘is you never
know who they’re for. This’n could be a nice one for Hong and his pals.’

‘Then I’m nicking it,’ said Cohen.

‘You can’t steal a message from the gods!’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Can you see it nailed down anywhere? No? Sure? Right. So it’s mine.’

He raised his sword as the stragglers fluttered past overhead.

‘The gods smile on us!’ he bellowed. ‘Hahaha!’

‘Hahaha?’ whispered Mr Saveloy.

‘Just to worry ’em,’ said Cohen.

He glanced at the other members of the Horde. Each man nodded, very
slightly.

‘All right, lads,’ he said quietly. ‘This is it.’

‘Er . . . what do I do?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Think of something to make yourself good and angry. That gets the ole
blood boiling. Imagine the enemy is everything you hate.’

‘Head teachers,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Good.’

‘Sports masters!’ shouted Mr Saveloy.

‘Yep.’

‘Boys who chew gum!’ screamed Mr Saveloy.

‘Look at him, steam coming out of his ears already,’ said Cohen. ‘First
one to the afterlife gets ’em in. Charge!’

The yellow cloud thronged up the slopes of the hill and then, carried on
the uprising wind, rose.

Above it the storm rose too, piling up and up and spreading into a shape
something like a hammer—

It struck.

Lightning hit the iron pagoda so hard that it exploded into white-hot
fragments.

It is confusing for an entire army to be attacked by seven old men. No
book of tactics is up to the task of offering advice. There is a
tendency towards bafflement.

The soldiers backed away in the face of the rush and then, driven by
currents in the great mass of men, closed in behind.

A solid circle of shields surrounded the Horde. It buckled and swayed
under the press of men, and also under the blows rained on it by Mr
Saveloy’s sword.

‘Come on, fight!’ he shouted. ‘Smoke pipes at me, would you? You! That
boy there! Answer me back, eh! Take that!’

Cohen looked at Caleb, who shrugged. He’d seen berserk rages in his
time, but nothing quite so incandescent as Mr Saveloy.

The circle broke as a couple of men tried to dart backwards and cannoned
into the rank behind and then rebounded on to the swords of the Horde.
One of Hamish’s wheels caught a soldier a vicious blow on the knee and,
as he bent over, one of Hamish’s axes met him coming the other way.

It wasn’t speed. The Horde couldn’t move very fast. But it _was_
economy. Mr Saveloy had remarked on it. They were simply always where
they wanted to be, which was never where someone’s sword was. They let
everyone else do the running around. A soldier would risk a slash in the
direction of Truckle and find Cohen rising in front of him, grinning and
swinging, or Boy Willie giving him a nod of acknowledgement and a stab.
Occasionally one of the Horde took time to parry a blow aimed at Mr
Saveloy, who was far too excited to defend himself.

‘Pull back, you bloody fools!’

Lord Hong appeared behind the throng, his horse rearing, his helmet
visor flung back.

The soldiers tried to obey. Finally, the press eased a little, and then
opened. The Horde were left in a widening ring of shields. There was
something like silence, broken only by the endless thunder and the
crackle of lightning on the hill.

And then, pushing their way angrily through the soldiers, came an
altogether different breed of warrior. They were taller, and heavier
armoured, with splendid helmets and moustaches that looked like a
declaration of war in themselves.

One of them glared at Cohen.

‘Orrrrr! Itiyorshu! Yutimishu!’

‘Wassat?’ said Cohen.

‘He’s a samurai,’ said Mr Saveloy, wiping his forehead. ‘The warrior
caste. I think that’s their formal challenge. Er. Would you like me to
fight him?’

One samurai glared at Cohen. He pulled a scrap of silk out of his armour
and tossed it into the air. His other hand grabbed the hilt of his long,
thin sword . . .

There was hardly even a hiss, but three shreds of silk tumbled gently to
the ground.

‘Get back, Teach,’ said Cohen slowly. ‘I reckon this one’s mine. Got
another hanky? Thanks.’

The samurai looked at Cohen’s sword. It was long, heavy and had so many
notches it could have been used as a saw.

‘You’ll never do it,’ he said. ‘With that sword? Never.’

Cohen blew his nose noisily.

‘You say?’ he said. ‘Watch this.’

The handkerchief soared into the air. Cohen gripped his sword . . .

He’d beheaded three upward-staring samurai before the handkerchief
started to tumble. Other members of the Horde, who tended to think in
much the same way as their leader, had accounted for half a dozen more.

‘Got the idea from Caleb,’ said Cohen. ‘And the message is: either fight
or muck about, it’s up to you.’

‘Have you no honour?’ screamed Lord Hong. ‘Are you just a ruffian?’

‘I’m a barbarian,’ shouted Cohen. ‘And the honour I got, see, is mine. I
didn’t steal it off’f someone else.’

‘I had wanted to take you alive,’ said Lord Hong. ‘However, I see no
reason to stick to this policy.’

He drew his sword.

‘Back, you scum!’ he screamed. ‘Right back! Let the bombardiers come
forward!’ He looked back at Cohen. His face was flushed. His spectacles
were askew.

Lord Hong had lost his temper. And, as is always the case when a dam
bursts, it engulfs whole countries.

The soldiers pulled back.

The Horde were, once again, in a widening circle.

‘What’s a bombardier?’ said Boy Willie.

‘Er, I believe it must mean people who fire some sort of projectile,’
said Mr Saveloy. ‘The word derives from—’

‘Oh, archers,’ said Boy Willie, and spat.

‘Whut?’

‘He said THEY’RE GOING TO USE ARCHERS, Hamish!’

‘Heheh, we never let archers stop us at the Battle of Koom Valley!’
cackled the antique barbarian.

Boy Willie sighed.

‘That was between dwarfs and trolls, Hamish,’ he said. ‘And you ain’t
either. So whose side were you on?’

‘Whut?’

‘I said WHOSE SIDE WERE YOU ON?’

‘I were on the side of being paid money to fight,’ said Hamish.

‘Best side there is.’

Rincewind lay on the floor with his hands over his ears.

The sound of thunder filled the underground chamber. Blue and purple
light shone so brightly that he could see it through his eyelids.

Finally the cacophony subsided. There were still the sounds of the storm
outside, but the light had faded to a blue-white glow, and the sound
into a steady humming.

Rincewind risked rolling over and opening his eyes.

Hanging from rusted chains in the roof were big glass globes. Each one
was the size of a man, and lightning crackled and sizzled inside,
stabbing at the glass, seeking a way out.

At one time there must have been many more. But dozens of the big globes
had fallen down over the years, and lay in pieces on the floor. There
were still scores up there, swaying gently on their chains as the
imprisoned thunderstorms fought for their freedom.

The air felt greasy. Sparks crawled over the floor and crackled on each
angle.

Rincewind stood up. His beard streamed out as a mass of individual
hairs.

The lightning globes shone down on a round lake of, to judge from the
ripples, pure quicksilver. In the centre was a low, five-sided island.
As Rincewind stared, a boat came drifting gently around to his side of
the pool, making little _slupslup_ noises as it moved through the
mercury.

It was not a lot larger than a rowing boat and, lying on its tiny deck,
was a figure in armour. Or possibly just the armour. If it _was_ just
empty armour, then it was lying in the arms-folded position of a suit of
armour that has passed away.

Rincewind sidled around the silver lake until he reached a slab of what
looked very much like gold, set in the floor in front of a statue.

He knew you got inscriptions in tombs, although he was never sure who it
was who was supposed to read them. The gods, possibly, although surely
they knew everything already? He’d never considered that they’d cluster
round and say things like, ‘Gosh, “Dearly Beloved” was he? I never knew
that.’

This one simply said, in pictograms: One Sun Mirror.

There wasn’t anything about mighty conquests. There was no list of his
tremendous achievements. There was nothing down there about wisdom or
being the father of his people. There was no _explanation._ Whoever
knows this name, it seemed to say, knows everything. And there was no
admitting the possibility that anyone getting this far would not have
heard the name of One Sun Mirror.

The statue looked like porcelain. It had been painted quite
realistically. One Sun Mirror seemed an ordinary sort of man. You would
not have pointed him out in a crowd as Emperor material. But this man,
with his little round hat and little round shield and little round men
on little round ponies, had glued together a thousand warring factions
into one great Empire, often using their own blood to do it.

Rincewind looked closer. Of course, it was just an impression, but
around the set of the mouth and the look of the eyes there was an
expression he’d last seen on the face of Ghenghiz Cohen.

It was the expression of someone who was absolutely and totally unafraid
of anything.

The little boat headed towards the far side of the lake.

One of the globes flickered a little and then faded to red. It winked
out. Another followed it.

He had to get out.

There was something else, though. At the foot of the statue, lying as if
they’d just been dropped there, were a helmet, a pair of gauntlets, and
two heavy-looking boots.

Rincewind picked up the helmet. It didn’t look very strong, but it did
look quite light. Normally he didn’t bother with protective clothing,
reasoning that the best defence against threatening danger was to be on
another continent, but right now the idea of armour had its attractions.

He removed his hat, put the helmet on, pulled down the visor, and then
wedged the hat on top of the helmet.

There was a flicker in front of his eyes and Rincewind was staring at
the back of his own head. It was a grainy picture, and it was in shades
of green rather than proper colours, but it was definitely the back of
his own head he was looking at. People had told him what it looked like.

He raised the visor and blinked.

The pool was still in front of him.

He lowered the visor.

There he was, about fifty feet away, with this helmet on his head.

He waved a hand up and down.

The figure in the visor waved a hand up and down.

He turned around and faced himself. Yep. That was him.

Okay, he thought. A magic helmet. It lets you see yourself a long way
away. Great. You can have fun watching yourself fall into holes you
can’t see because they’re right up close.

He turned around again, raised the visor and inspected the gloves. They
seemed as light as the helmet but quite clumsy. You could hold a sword,
but not much else.

He tried one on. Immediately, with a faint sizzling noise, a row of
little pictures lit up on the wide cuff. They showed soldiers. Soldiers
digging, soldiers fighting, soldiers climbing . . .

Ah. So . . . _magic_ armour. Perfectly normal magic armour. It had never
been very popular in Ankh-Morpork. Of course, it was light. You could
make it as thin as cloth. But it tended to lose its magic without
warning. Many an ancient lord’s last words had been, ‘You can’t kill me
because I’ve got magic aaargh.’

Rincewind looked at the boots, with suspicious recollection of the
trouble there had been with the University’s prototype Seven League
boots. Footwear which tried to make you take steps twenty-one miles long
imposed unfortunate groinal strains; they’d got the things off the
student just in time, but he’d still had to wear a special device for
several months, and ate standing up.

All right, but even _old_ magic armour would be useful now. It wasn’t as
if it weighed much, and the mud of Hunghung hadn’t improved what was
left of his own boots. He put his feet into them.

He thought: Well, so what is supposed to happen now?

He straightened up.

And behind him, with the sound of seven thousand flower pots smashing
together, the lightning still crackling over them, the Red Army came to
attention.

Hex had grown a bit during the night. Adrian Turnipseed, who had been on
duty to feed the mice and rewind the clockwork and clean out the dead
ants, had sworn that he’d done nothing else and that no one had come in.

But now, where there had been the big clumsy arrangement of blocks so
that the results could be read, was a quill pen in the middle of a
network of pulleys and levers.

‘Watch,’ said Adrian, nervously tapping out a very simple problem. ‘It’s
come up with this after doing all those spells at suppertime …’

The ants scuttled. The clockwork spun. The springs and levers jerked so
sharply that Ponder took a step back.

The quill pen wobbled over to an inkwell, dipped, returned to the sheet
of paper Adrian had put under the levers, and began to write.

‘It blots a bit,’ he said, in a helpless tone of voice. ‘What’s
_happening?’_

Ponder had been thinking further about this. The latest conclusions
hadn’t been comforting.

‘Well . . . we know that books containing magic become a little bit . .
. sapient . . .’ he began. ‘And we’ve made a _machine_ for . . .’

‘You mean it’s _alive?’_

‘Come on, let’s not get all occult about this,’ said Ponder, trying to
sound jovial. ‘We’re wizards, after all.’

‘Listen, you know that long problem in thaumic fields you wanted me to
put in?’

‘Yes. Well?’

‘It gave me the answer at midnight,’ said Adrian, his face pale.

‘Good.’

‘Yes, good, except that I didn’t actually _give_ it the problem until
half past one, Ponder.’

‘You’re telling me you got the answer before you asked the question?’

‘Yes!’

‘Why _did_ you ask the question, then?’

‘I thought about it, and I thought maybe I had to. I mean, it couldn’t
have known what the answer was going to be if I didn’t give it the
problem, yes?’

‘Good point. Er. You waited ninety minutes, though.’

Adrian looked at his pointy boots.

‘I . . . was hiding in the privy. Well, Redo from Start could—’

‘All right, all right. Go and have something to eat.’

‘Are we meddling with things we don’t understand, Ponder?’

Ponder looked up at the gnomic bulk of the machine. It didn’t seem
threatening, merely . . . _other._

He thought: meddle first, understand later. You had to meddle a _bit_
before you had anything to try to understand. And the thing was never,
ever, to go back and hide in the Lavatory of Unreason. You have to try
to get your mind around the Universe before you can give it a twist.

Perhaps we shouldn’t have given you a name. We didn’t think about that.
It was a joke. But we should have remembered that names are important. A
thing with a name is a bit more than a thing.

‘Off you go, Adrian,’ he said firmly.

He sat down and carefully typed:

Hello.

Things whirred.

The quill wrote:

+++ ?????? +++ Hello +++ Redo From Start +++

Far above, a butterfly – its wings an undistinguished yellow, with black
markings – fluttered through an open window.

Ponder began the calculations for the transfer between Hunghung and
Ankh-Morpork.

The butterfly alighted for a moment on the maze of glass pipes. When it
rose again, it left behind a very small blob of nectar.

Ponder typed carefully, far below.

A small but significant ant, one of the scurrying thousands, emerged
from a break in the tube and spent a few seconds sucking at the sweet
liquid before going back to work.

After a while, Hex gave an answer. Apart from one small but significant
point, it was entirely correct.

Rincewind turned around.

With an echoing chorus of creaks and groans, the Red Army turned around
too.

And it _was_ red. It was the same colour, Rincewind realized, as the
soil.

He’d bumped into a few statues in the darkness. He hadn’t realized that
there were _this_ many. They stretched, rank on rank, into the distant
shadows.

Experimentally, he turned around. Behind him, there was another chorus
of stampings.

After a few false starts he found that the only way to end up facing
them was to take off the boots, turn, and put the boots on again.

He lowered the visor for a moment, and saw himself lowering the visor
for a moment.

He stuck up an arm. They stuck out their arms. He jumped up and down.
They jumped up and down, with a crash that made the globes swing.
Lightning sizzled from their boots.

He felt a sudden hysterical urge to laugh.

He touched his nose. They touched their noses. He made, with terrible
glee, the traditional gesture for the dismissal of demons. Seven
thousand terracotta middle fingers stabbed towards the ceiling.

He tried to calm down.

The word his mind had been groping for finally surfaced, and it was
_golem._

There were one or two of them, even in Ankh-Morpork. You were bound to
get them in any area where you had wizards or priests of an experimental
turn of mind. They were usually just figures made out of clay and
animated with some suitable spell or prayer. They pottered about doing
simple odd jobs, but they were not very fashionable these days. The
problem was not putting them to work but stopping them from working; if
you set a golem to digging the garden and then forgot about it, you’d
come back to find it’d planted a row of beans 1500 miles long.

Rincewind looked down at one of the gloves.

He cautiously touched the little picture of a fighting soldier.

The sound of seven thousand swords being simultaneously unsheathed was
like the tearing of a thick sheet of steel. Seven thousand points were
pointed right at Rincewind.

He took a step back. So did the army.

He was in a place with thousands of artificial soldiers wearing swords.
The fact that he appeared to have control of them was no great comfort.
He’d theoretically had control of Rincewind for the whole of his life,
and look what had happened to him.

He looked at the little pictures again. One of them showed a soldier
with two heads. When he touched it, the army turned about smartly. Ah.

Now to get out of here . . .

The Horde watched the bustle among Lord Hong’s men. Objects were being
dragged to the front line.

‘They don’t look like archers to me,’ said Boy Willie.

‘Those things are Barking Dogs,’ said Cohen. ‘I should know. Seen ’em
before. They’re like a barrel full of fireworks, and when the fireworks
are lit a big stone comes rushing out of the other end.’

‘Why?’

‘Well, would you hang around if someone had just lit a firework by your
arse?’

‘Here, Teach, he said “arse”,’ complained Truckle. ‘Look, on my bit of
paper here it says you mustn’t say—’

‘We’ve got shields, haven’t we?’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I’m sure if we keep
close together and put the shields over our heads we’ll be as right as
rain.’

‘The stone’s about a foot across and going very fast and it’s red hot.’

‘Not shields, then?’

‘No,’ said Cohen. ‘Truckle, you push Hamish—’

‘We won’t get fifty yards, Ghenghiz,’ said Caleb.

‘Better fifty yards now than six feet in a minute, yes?’ said Cohen.

‘Bravo!’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Whut?’

Lord Hong watched them. He saw the Horde hang their shields around the
wheelchair to form a crude travelling wall, and saw the wheels begin to
turn.

He raised his sword.

‘Fire!’

‘Still tamping the charges, o lord!’

‘I said _fire_!’

‘Got to prime the Dogs, o lord!’

The bombardiers worked feverishly, spurred on less by terror of Lord
Hong than by the onrushing Horde.

Mr Saveloy’s hair streamed in the wind. He bounded through the dust,
waving his sword and screaming.

He’d never been so happy in all his life.

So this was the secret at the heart of it all: to look death right in
the face and charge . . . It made everything so utterly simple.

Lord Hong threw down his helmet. ‘Fire, you wretched peasants! You scum
of the earth! Why must I ask twice! Give me that torch!’

He pushed a bombardier aside, crouched down beside a Dog, heaved on it
so that the barrel was pointing at the oncoming Cohen, lifted the torch—

The earth heaved. The Dog reared and rolled sideways.

A round red head, smiling faintly, rose out of the ground.

There were screams in the ranks as the soldiers looked down at the
moving dirt under their boots, tried to run on a surface that was just
shifting soil, and disappeared in the rising cloud of dust.

The ground caved in.

Then it caved out again as stricken soldiers climbed up one another to
escape because, rising gently through the turmoil, was the soil in human
shape.

The Horde skidded to a halt.

‘What’re they? Trolls?’ said Cohen. Ten of the figures were visible now,
industriously digging at the air.

Then they stopped. One of them turned its gently smiling head this way
and that.

A sergeant must have screamed a handful of archers into line, because a
few arrows shattered on the terracotta armour, with absolutely no
effect.

Other red warriors were climbing up behind the former diggers. They
collided with them, with a sound of crockery. Then, as one man – or
troll, or demon – they drew their swords, turned around, and headed
towards Lord Hong’s army.

A few soldiers tried to fight them simply because there was too great a
crowd behind them to run away. They died.

It wasn’t that the red guards were good fighters. They were very
mechanical, each one performing the same thrust, parry, slash,
regardless of what their opponent was doing. But they were simply
unstoppable. If their opponent escaped one of the blows but didn’t get
out of the way then he was just trodden on – and by the looks of things,
the warriors were extremely heavy.

And it was the way the things _smiled_ all the time that added to the
terror.

‘Well, now, there’s a thing,’ Cohen said, feeling for his tobacco pouch.

‘Never seen trolls fight like that,’ said Truckle. Rank after rank was
walking up out of the hole, stabbing happily at the air.

The front row were moving in a cloud of dust and screams. It is hard for
a big army to do anything quickly, and divisions trying to move forward
to see what the trouble was were getting in the way of fleeing
individuals seeking a hole to hide in and permanent civilian status.
Gongs were banging and men were trying to shout orders, but no one knew
what the gongs were meant to mean or how the orders should be obeyed,
because there didn’t seem to be enough time.

Cohen finished rolling his cigarette, and struck a match on his chin.

‘Right,’ he said, to the world in general. ‘Let’s get that bloody Hong.’

The clouds overhead were less fearsome now. There was less lightning.
But there were still a lot of them, greeny-black, heavy with rain.

‘But this is _amazing_!’ said Mr Saveloy.

A few drops hit the ground, leaving wide craters in the dirt.

‘Yeah, right,’ said Cohen.

‘A most strange phenomenon! Warriors rising out of the ground!’

The craters joined up. It felt as though the drops were joining up as
well. The rain began to pour down.

‘Dunno,’ said Cohen, watching a ragged platoon flee past. ‘Never been
here before. P’raps this happens a lot.’

‘I mean, it’s just like that myth about the man who sowed dragons’ teeth
and terrible fighting skeletons came up!’

‘I don’t believe _that,’_ said Caleb, as they jogged after Cohen.

‘Why not?’

‘If you sow dragons’ teeth, you should get dragons. Not fighting
skeletons. What did it say on the packet?’

‘I don’t know! The myth never said anything about them coming in a
packet!’

‘Should’ve said “Comes up Dragons” on the packet.’

‘You can’t believe myths,’ said Cohen. ‘I should know. Right . . . there
he is . . .’ he added, pointing to a distant horseman.

The whole plain was in turmoil now. The red warriors were only the
start. The alliance of the five warlords was glass fragile in any case,
and panicky flight was instantly interpreted as sneak attack. No one
paid any attention to the Horde. They didn’t have any coloured pennants
or gongs. They weren’t traditional enemies. And, besides, the soil was
now mud, and the mud flew, and everyone from the waist down was the same
colour and this was rising.

‘What’re we doing, Ghenghiz?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘We’re heading back for the palace.’

‘Why?’

‘ ’Cos that’s where Hong’s gone.’

‘But there’s this astonishing—’

‘Look, Teach, I’ve seen walking trees and spider gods and big green
things with teeth,’ said Cohen. ‘It’s no good goin’ around saying
“astonishing” all the time, ain’t that so, Truckle?’

‘Right. D’you know, when I went after that Five-Headed Vampire Goat over
in Skund they said I shouldn’t on account of it being an endangered
species? I said, yes, that was down to me. Were they grateful?’

‘Huh,’ said Caleb. ‘Should’ve thanked you, giving them all those
endangered species to worry about. Turn around and go home right now,
soldier boy!’

A group of soldiers, fighting to get away from the red warriors, skidded
in the mud, stared in terror at the Horde, and headed off in a new
direction.

Truckle stopped for breath, rain streaming off his beard.

‘I can’t be having with this running, though,’ he said. ‘Not and push
Hamish’s wheelchair in all this mud. Let’s have a breather.’

‘Whut?’

‘Stopping for a breather?’ said Cohen. ‘My gods! I never thought I’d see
the day! A _hero_ having a rest? Did Voltan the Indestructible have a
bit of a rest?’

‘He’s having one now. He’s dead, Ghenghiz,’ said Caleb.

Cohen hesitated.

‘What, old Voltan?’

‘Didn’t you know? And the Immortal Jenkins.’

‘Jenkins isn’t dead, I saw him only last year.’

‘But he’s dead now. All the heroes are dead, ’cept us. And I ain’t too
sure about me, too.’

Cohen splashed forward and snatched Caleb upright by his shirt.

‘What about Hrun? He can’t be dead. He’s half our age!’

‘Last I heard he got a job. Sergeant of the Guard somewhere.’

‘Sergeant of the _Guard_?’ said Cohen. ‘What, for _pay_?’

‘Yep.’

‘But . . . what, like, for _pay_?’

‘He told me he might make Captain next year. He said . . . he said it’s
a job with a pension.’

Cohen released his grip.

‘There’s not many of us now, Cohen,’ said Truckle.

Cohen spun around.

‘All right, but there’s never been many of us! And I ain’t dyin’! Not if
it means the world’s taken over by bastards like Hong, who don’t know
what a chieftain is. Scum. That’s what he called his soldiers. Scum.
It’s like that bloody civilized game you showed us, Teach!’

‘Chess?’

‘Right. The prawns are just there to be slaughtered by the other side!
While the king just hangs around at the back.’

‘Yeah, but the other side’s _you,_ Cohen.’

‘Right! Right . . . well, _yes,_ that’s fine when I’m the _enemy._ But I
don’t shove men in front of me to get killed instead of me. And I never
use bows and them dog things. When I kill someone it’s up close and
personal. Armies? Bloody tactics? There’s only one way to fight, and
that’s everyone charging all at once, waving their swords and shouting!
Now on your feet and let’s get after him!’

‘It’s been a long morning, Ghenghiz,’ said Boy Willie.

‘Don’t give me that!’

‘I could do with the lavatory. It’s all this rain.’

‘Let’s get Hong first.’

‘If he’s hiding in the privy that’s fine by me.’

They reached the city gates. They had been shut. Hundreds of people,
citizens as well as guards, watched them from the walls.

Cohen waved a finger at them.

‘Now I ain’t gonna say this twice,’ he said. ‘I’m coming in, Okay? It
can be the easy way, or it can be the hard way.’

Impassive faces looked down at the skinny old man, and up at the plain,
where the armies of the warlords fought one another and, in terror, the
terracotta warriors. Down. Up. Down. Up.

‘Right,’ said Cohen. ‘Don’t say afterwards I didn’t _warn_ youse.’

He raised his sword and prepared to charge.

‘Wait,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Listen . . .’

There was shouting behind the walls, and some confused orders, and then
more shouting. And then a couple of screams.

The gates swung open, pulled by dozens of citizens.

Cohen lowered his sword.

‘Ah,’ he said, ‘they’ve seen reason, have they?’

Wheezing a little, the Horde limped through the gates. The crowd watched
them in silence. Several guards lay dead. Rather more had removed their
helmets and decided to opt for a bright new future in Civvy Street,
where you were less likely to get beaten to death by an angry mob.

Every face watched Cohen, turning to follow him as flowers follow the
sun.

He ignored them.

‘Crowdie the Strong?’ he said to Caleb.

‘Dead.’

‘Can’t be. He was a picture of health when I saw him a coupla months
ago. Going on a new quest and everything.’

‘Dead.’

‘What happened?’

‘You know the Terrible Man-eating Sloth of Clup?’

‘The one they say guards the giant ruby of the mad snake god?’

‘The very same. Well . . . it was.’

The crowd parted to let the Horde through. One or two people tried a
cheer, but were shushed into silence. It was a silence that Mr Saveloy
had only heard before in the most devout of temples.²⁵

There was a whispering, though, growing out of that watchful silence
like bubbles in a pot of water on a hot fire.

It went like this.

The Red Army. The Red Army.

‘How about Organdy Sloggo? Still going strong down in Howondaland, last
I heard.’

‘Dead. Metal poisoning.’

‘How?’

‘Three swords through the stomach.’

The Red Army!

‘Slasher Mungo?’

‘Presumed dead in Skund.’

‘Presumed?’

‘Well, they only found his head.’

The Red Army!

The Horde approached the inner gates of the Forbidden City. The crowd
followed them at a distance.

These gates were shut, too. A couple of heavy-set guards were standing
in front of them. They wore the expressions of men who’d been told to
guard the gates and were going to guard the gates come what may. The
military depends on people who will guard gates or bridges or passes
come what may and there are often heroic poems written in their honour,
invariably posthumously.

‘Gosbar the Wake?’

‘Died in bed, I heard.’

‘Not old Gosbar!’

‘Everyone’s got to sleep some time.’

‘That’s not the only thing they’ve got to do, mister,’ said Boy Willie.
‘I _really_ need the wossname.’

‘Well, there’s the Wall.’

‘Not with everyone watching! That ain’t . . . civilized.’

Cohen strode up to the guards.

‘I’m not mucking about,’ he said. ‘Okay? Would you rather die than
betray your Emperor?’

The guards stared ahead.

‘Right, fair enough.’ Cohen drew his sword. A thought seemed to strike
him.

‘Nurker?’ he said. ‘Big Nurker? Tough as old boots, him.’

‘Fishbone,’ said Caleb.

‘Nurker? He once killed six trolls with a—’

‘Choked on a fishbone in his gruel. I thought you knew. Sorry.’

Cohen stared at him. And then at his sword. And then at the guards. For
a moment there was silence, broken only by the sound of the rain.

‘Y’know, lads,’ he said, in a voice so suddenly full of weariness that
Mr Saveloy felt a pit opening up, here, at the moment of triumph, ‘I was
goin’ to chop your heads off. But . . . what’s the point, eh? I mean,
when you get right down to it, why bother? What sort of difference does
it make?’

The guards still stared straight ahead. But their eyes were widening.

Mr Saveloy turned.

‘You’ll end up dead anyway, sooner or later,’ Cohen went on. ‘Well,
that’s about it. You live your life best way you can and then it don’t
actually matter, ’cos you’re dead—’

‘Er. Cohen?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘I mean, look at me. Been chopping heads off my whole life and what’ve I
got to show for it?’

‘Cohen . . . ’

The guards weren’t just staring now. Their faces were dragging
themselves into very creditable grimaces of fear.

‘Cohen?’

‘Yeah, what?’

‘I think you should look round, Cohen.’

Cohen turned.

Half a dozen red warriors were advancing up the street. The crowd had
pulled right back and were watching in silent terror.

Then a voice shouted: ‘Extended Duration To The Red Army!’

Cries rose up here and there in the crowd. A young woman raised her hand
in a clenched fist.

‘Advance Necessarily With The People While Retaining Due Regard For
Traditions!’

Others joined her.

‘Deserved Correction To Enemies!’

‘I’ve lost Mr Bunny!’

The red giants clonked to a halt.

‘Look at them!’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘They’re not trolls! They move like
some kind of engine! Doesn’t that interest you?’

‘No,’ said Cohen, vacantly. ‘Abstract thinking is not a major aspect of
the barbarian mental process. Now then, where was I?’ He sighed. ‘Oh,
yes. You two . . . you’d rather die than betray your Emperor, would
you?’

The two men were rigid with fear now.

Cohen raised his sword.

Mr Saveloy took a deep breath, grabbed Cohen’s sword arm and shouted:

‘Then open the gates and let him through!’

There was a moment of utter silence.

Mr Saveloy nudged Cohen.

‘Go on,’ he hissed. ‘Act like an Emperor!’

‘What . . . you mean giggle, have people tortured, that sort of thing?
Blow that!’

‘No! Act like an Emperor ought to act!’

Cohen glared at Saveloy. Then he turned to the guards.

‘Well done,’ he said. ‘Your loyalty does you . . . wossname . . .
credit. Keep on like this and I can see it’s promotion for both of you.
Now let us all go inside or I will have my flowerpot men chop off your
feet so you’ll have to kneel in the gutter while you’re looking for your
head.’

The men looked at one another, threw down their swords and tried to
kowtow.

‘And you can bloody well get up, too,’ said Cohen, in a slightly nicer
tone of voice. ‘Mr Saveloy?’

‘Yes?’

‘I’m Emperor now, am I?’

‘The . . . earth soldiers seem to be on our side. The _people_ think
you’ve won. We’re all alive. I’d say we’ve won, yes.’

‘If I’m Emperor, I can tell everyone what to do, right?’

‘Oh, indeed.’

‘Properly. You know. Scrolls and stuff. Buggers in uniform blowing
trumpets and saying. “This is what he wants you to do.”’

‘Ah. You want to make a proclamation.’

‘Yeah. No more of this bloody kowtowing. It makes me squirm. No
kowtowing by anyone to anyone, all right? If anyone sees me they can
salute, or maybe give me some money. But none of this banging your head
on the ground stuff. It gives me the willies. Now, dress that up in
proper writing.’

‘Right away. And—’

‘Hang on, haven’t finished yet.’ Cohen bit his lip in unaccustomed
cogitation, as the red warriors lurched to a stop. ‘Yeah. You can add
that I’m letting all prisoners go free, unless they’ve done something
really bad. Like attempted poisoning, for a start. You can work out the
details. All torturers to have their heads cut off. And every peasant
can have a free pig, something like that. I’ll leave you to put in all
the proper curly bits about “by order” and stuff.’

Cohen looked down at the guards.

‘Get _up,_ I said. I swear, the next bastard that kisses the ground in
front of me is gonna get kicked in the antique chicken coops. Okay? Now
open the gates.’

The crowd cheered. As the Horde stepped inside the Forbidden City they
followed, in a sort of cross between a revolutionary charge and a
respectful walk.

The red warriors stood outside. One of them raised a terracotta foot,
which groaned a little, and walked towards the Wall until it bumped into
it.

The warrior staggered drunkenly for a while and then managed to get
within a yard or two of the Wall without colliding with it.

It raised a finger and wrote, shakily, in red dust that turned to a kind
of paint on the wet plaster:

HELP HELP ITS ME IM OUT HERE ON THEE PLAIN HELP I CAN’T GET THIS BLODY
ARMER OFF.

The crowd surged along behind Cohen, shouting and singing. If he’d had a
surfboard, he could have ridden on it. The rain drummed heavily on the
roof and poured into the courtyards.

‘Why’re they all so excited?’ he said.

‘They think you’re going to sack the palace,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘They’ve
heard about barbarians, you see. They want some of it. Anyway, they like
the idea about the pig.’

‘Hey, you!’ shouted Cohen to a boy struggling past under the weight of a
huge vase. ‘Get your thieving paws off my stuff! That’s valuable, that
is! It’s a . . . a . . .’

‘It’s S’ang Dynasty,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘That’s right,’ said the vase.

‘That’s a S’ang Dynasty, that is! Put it back! And you lot back there—’
He turned and waved his sword. ‘Get those shoes off! You’re scratching
the floor! Look at the state of it already!’

‘You never bothered about the floor yesterday,’ Truckle grumbled.

‘ ’Tweren’t my floor then.’

‘Yes, it was,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Not properly,’ said Cohen. _‘Rite_ of conquest, that’s the thing.
Blood. People understand blood. You just walk in and take over and no
one takes it seriously. But seas of blood . . . Everyone understands
that.’

‘Mountains of skulls,’ said Truckle approvingly.

‘Look at history,’ said Cohen. ‘Whenever you – Hey, you, the man with
the hat, that’s my . . .’

‘Inlaid mahogany _Shibo Yangcong-san_ table,’ murmured Mr Saveloy.

‘—so put it back, d’you hear? Yes, whenever you comes across a king
where everyone says, “Oo, he was a good king all right,” you can bet
your sandals he was a great big bearded bastard who broke heads a lot
and laughed about it. Hey? But some king who just passed decent little
laws and read books and tried to look intelligent . . . “Oh,” they say,
“oh, he was all right, a bit wet, not what I’d call a proper king.”
That’s people for you.’

Mr Saveloy sighed.

Cohen grinned at him and slapped him on the back so hard he stumbled
into two women trying to carry off a bronze statue of Ly Tin Wheedle.

‘Can’t quite face it, Teach, can you? Can’t get your mind round it?
Don’t worry about it. Basically, you ain’t a barbarian. _Put the damn
statue back, missus, or you’ll feel the flat of my sword, so you will!’_

‘But I thought we could do it without anyone getting hurt. By using our
brains.’

‘Can’t. History don’t work like that. Blood first, then brains.’

‘Mountains of skulls,’ said Truckle.

‘There’s got to be a better way than fighting,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Yep. Lots of ’em. Only none of ’em work. Caleb, take those . . . those
. . .’

‘—fine Bhong jade miniatures—’ muttered Mr Saveloy.

‘—take them off that feller. He’s got one under his hat.’

Another set of carved doors was swung open. This room was already
crowded, but the people shuffled backwards as the doors parted and tried
to look keen while avoiding catching Cohen’s eye.

As they pulled away they left Six Beneficent Winds standing all alone.
The court had become very good at this manoeuvre.

‘Mountains of skulls,’ said Truckle, not a man to let go in a hurry.

‘Er. We saw the Red Army rise out of the ground, er, just as the legend
foretold. Er. Truly you are the preincarnation of One Sun Mirror.’

The little taxman had the decency to look embarrassed. As speeches went
it was on a dramatic level with the one that traditionally began, ‘As
you know, your father – the king—’ Besides, he’d never believed in
legends up to now – not even the one about the peasant who every year
filed a scrupulously honest tax return.

‘Yeah, right,’ said Cohen.

He strode to the throne and stuck his sword in the floor, where it
vibrated.

‘Some of you are going to get your heads cut off for your own good,’ he
said. ‘But I haven’t decided who yet. And someone show Boy Willie where
the privy is.’

‘No need,’ said Boy Willie. ‘Not after them big red statues turned up
behind me so sudden.’

‘Mountains of—’ Truckle began.

‘Dunno about mountains,’ said Cohen.

‘And where,’ said Six Beneficent Winds tremulously, ‘is the Great
Wizard?’

‘Great Wizard,’ said Cohen.

‘Yes, the Great Wizard who summoned the Red Army from the earth,’ said
the taxman.

‘Don’t know anything about _him,’_ said Cohen.

The crowd staggered forward as more people piled into the room.

‘They’re coming!’

A terracotta warrior clomped its way into the room, its face still
wearing a very faint smile.

It stopped, rocking a little, while water dripped off it.

People had crouched back in terror. Except the Horde, Mr Saveloy
noticed. Faced with unknown yet terrible dangers, the Horde were either
angry or puzzled.

Then he cheered up. They weren’t better, just different. They’re all
right facing huge terrible creatures, he told himself, but ask them to
go down the street and buy a bag of rice and they go all to pieces . . .

‘What’s my move now, Teach?’ Cohen whispered.

‘Well, you’re Emperor,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I think you talk to it.’

‘Okay.’

Cohen stood up and nodded cheerfully at the terracotta giant.

‘ ’Morning,’ he said. ‘Nice bit of work out there. You and the rest of
your lads can have the day off to plant geraniums in yourselves or
whatever you do. Er. You got a Number One giant I ought to speak to?’

The terracotta warrior creaked as it raised one finger.

Then it pressed two fingers against one forearm, then raised a finger
again.

Everyone in the crowd started talking at once.

The giant tugged one vestigial ear with two fingers.

‘What can this mean?’ said Six Beneficent Winds.

‘I find this a little hard to credit,’ said Mr Saveloy, ‘but it is an
ancient method of communication used in the land of blood-sucking
vampire ghosts.’

‘You can understand it?’

‘Oh, yes. I think so. You have to try to guess the word or phrase. It’s
trying to tell us . . . er . . . one word, two syllables. First syllable
sounds like . . .’

The giant cupped one hand and made circular, handle-turning motions with
the other alongside it.

‘Turning,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Winding? Reeling? Revolve? Grind? Grind?
Chop? Mince—’

The giant tapped its nose hurriedly and did a very heavy, noisy dance,
bits of terracotta armour clanking.

‘Sounds like mince,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘First syllable sounds like
mince.’

‘Er . . .’

A ragged figure pushed its way through the crowd. It wore glasses, one
lens of which was cracked.

‘Er,’ it said, ‘I’ve got an idea about that . . .’

Lord Fang and some of his more trusted warriors had clustered on the
side of the hills. A good general always knows when to leave the
battlefield, and as far as Lord Fang was concerned, it was when he saw
the enemy coming towards him.

The men were shaken. They hadn’t tried to face the Red Army. Those who
had were dead.

‘We . . . regroup,’ panted Lord Fang. ‘And then we’ll wait until
nightfall and – What’s that?’

There was a rhythmic noise coming from the bushes further up the slope,
where sliding earth had left another bush-filled ravine.

‘Sounds like a carpenter, m’lord,’ said one of the soldiers.

‘Up here? In the middle of a war? Go and see what it is!’

The man scrambled away. After a while there was a pause in the sawing
noise. Then it started again.

Lord Fang had been trying to work out a fresh battle plan according to
the Nine Useful Principles. He threw down his map.

‘Why is that still going on? Where is Captain Nong?’

‘Hasn’t come back, m’lord.’

‘Then go and see what has happened to him!’

Lord Fang tried to remember if the great military sage had ever had
anything to say about fighting giant invulnerable statues. He—

The sawing paused. Then it was replaced by the sound of hammering.

Lord Fang looked around.

‘Can I have an order obeyed around here?’ he bellowed.

He picked up his sword and scrambled up the muddy slope. The bushes
parted ahead of him. There was a clearing. There was a rushing shape, on
hundreds of little le—

There was a snap.

The rain was coming down so fast that the drops were having to queue.

The red earth was hundreds of feet deep in places. It produced two or
three crops a year. It was rich. It was fecund. It was, when wet,
extremely sticky.

The surviving armies had squelched from the field of battle, as red from
head to toe as the terracotta men. Not counting those merely trodden on,
the Red Army had not in fact killed very many people. Terror had done
most of _their_ work. Rather more soldiers had been killed in the brief
inter-army battles and, in the scramble to escape, by their own sides.²⁶

The terracotta army had the field to itself. It was celebrating victory
in various ways. Many guards were walking around in circles, wading
through the clinging mud as if it was so much dirty air. A number were
digging a trench, the sides of which were washing in on them in the
thundering rain. A few were trying to climb walls that weren’t there.
Several, possibly as a result of the exertion following centuries of
zero maintenance, had spontaneously exploded in a shower of blue sparks,
the red-hot clay shrapnel being a major factor in the opposition’s death
count.

And all the time the rain fell, a solid curtain of water. It didn’t look
natural. It was as though the sea had decided to reclaim the land by air
drop.

Rincewind shut his eyes. Mud covered the armour. He couldn’t make out
the pictures any more, and that was something of a relief because he was
pretty certain he was messing things up. You could see what any warrior
was seeing – at least, presumably you could, if you knew what some of
the odder pictures actually did and how to press them in the right
order. Rincewind didn’t, and in any case whoever had made the magic
armour hadn’t assumed it would be used in knee-deep mud during a
vertical river. Every now and again it sizzled. One of the boots was
getting hot.

It had started out so well! But there had been what he was coming to
think of as the Rincewind factor. Probably some other wizard would have
marched the army out and wouldn’t have been rained on and even now would
be parading through the streets of Hunghung while people threw flowers
and said, ‘My word, there’s a Great Wizard and no mistake.’

Some _other_ wizard wouldn’t have pressed the wrong picture and started
the things digging.

He realized he was wallowing in self-pity. Rather more pertinently, he
was also wallowing in mud. And he was sinking. Trying to pull a foot out
was no use – it didn’t work, and the other foot only went deeper, and
got hotter.

Lightning struck the ground nearby. He heard it sizzle, saw the steam,
felt the tingle of electricity and tasted the taste of burning tin.

Another bolt hit a warrior. Its torso exploded, raining a sticky black
tar. The legs kept going for a few steps, and then stopped.

Water poured past him, thick and red now that the river Hung was
overflowing. And the mud continued to suck on his feet like a hollow
tooth.

Something swirled past on the muddy water. It looked like a scrap of
paper.

Rincewind hesitated, then reached out awkwardly with a gloved hand and
scooped it up.

It was, as he’d expected, a butterfly.

‘Thank you very much,’ he said, bitterly.

The water drained through his fingers.

He half closed his hand and then sighed and, as gently as he could,
manoeuvred the creature on to a finger. Its wings hung damply.

He shielded it with his other hand and blew on the wings a few times.

‘Go on, push off.’

The butterfly turned. Its multi-faceted eyes glinted green for a moment
and then it flapped its wings experimentally.

It stopped raining.

It started to snow, but only where Rincewind was.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Rincewind. ‘Yes indeed. Oh, thank you so very much.’

Life was, he had heard, like a bird which flies out of the darkness and
across a crowded hall and then through another window into the endless
night again. In Rincewind’s case it had managed to do something
incontinent in his dinner.

The snow stopped. The clouds pulled back from the dome of the sky with
astonishing speed, letting in hot sunlight which almost immediately made
the mud steam.

‘There you are! We’ve been looking everywhere!’

Rincewind tried to turn, but the mud made that impossible. There was a
wooden thump, as of a plank being laid down on wet ooze.

‘Snow on his head? In bright sunshine? I said to myself, that’s him all
right.’

There was the thump of another plank.

A small avalanche slid off the helmet and slid down Rincewind’s neck.

Another thump, and a plank squelched into the mud beside him.

‘It’s me, Twoflower. Are you all right, old friend?’

‘I think my foot is being cooked, but apart from that I’m as happy as
anything.’

‘I knew it would be you doing the charades,’ said Twoflower, sticking
his hands under the wizard’s shoulders and hauling.

‘You got the “Wind” syllable?’ said Rincewind. ‘That was very hard to
do, by remote control.’

‘Oh, none of us got that,’ said Twoflower, ‘but when it did
“ohshitohshitohshit I’m going to die” everyone got _that_ first go. Very
inventive. Er. You seem to be stuck.’

‘I think it’s the magic boots.’

‘Can’t you wiggle them off? This mud dries like – well, like terracotta
in the sun. Someone can come along and dig them out afterwards.’

Rincewind tried to move his feet. There was some sub-mud bubblings and
he felt his feet come free, with a muffled slurping noise.

Finally, with considerable effort, he was sitting on the plank.

‘Sorry about the warriors,’ he said. ‘It looked so simple when I started
out, and then I got confused with all the pictures and it was impossible
to stop some of them doing things—’

‘But it was a famous victory!’ said Twoflower.

‘Was it?’

‘Mr Cohen’s been made Emperor!’

‘He has?’

‘Well, not made, no one made him, he just came along and took it. And
everyone says he’s the preincarnation of the first Emperor and he says
if you want to be the Great Wizard that’s fine by him.’

‘Sorry? You lost me there . . .’

‘You led the Red Army, didn’t you? You made them rise up in the Empire’s
hour of need?’

‘Well, I wouldn’t exactly say that I—’

‘So the Emperor wants to reward you. Isn’t that nice?’

‘How do you mean, reward?’ said Rincewind, with deep suspicion.

‘Not sure, really. Actually, what he said was . . . ’ Twoflower’s eyes
glazed as he tried to recall. ‘He said, “You go and find Rincewind and
say he might be a bit of a pillock but at least he’s straight so he can
be Chief Wizard of the Empire or whatever he wants to call it, ’cos I
don’t trust you foreign . . .” ’ Twoflower squinted upwards as he tried
to remember Cohen’s precise words ‘“. . . house of auspicious aspect . .
. scent of pine trees . . . buggers.”’

The words trickled into Rincewind’s ear, slid up into his brain, and
started to bang on the walls.

‘Chief Wizard?’ he said.

‘That’s what he said. Well. . . actually what he said was he wanted you
to be a blob of swallow’s vomit, but that was because he used the low
sad tone rather than the high questioning one. He definitely _meant_
wizard.’

‘Of the whole Empire?’

Rincewind stood up.

‘Something very bad is about to happen,’ he said flatly.

The sky was quite blue now. A few citizens had ventured on to the
battlefield to tend the wounded and retrieve the dead. Terracotta
warriors stood at various angles, motionless as rocks.

‘Any minute now,’ said Rincewind.

‘Shouldn’t we get back?’

‘Probably a meteorite strike,’ said Rincewind.

Twoflower looked up at the peaceful sky.

‘You know me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Just when I’m getting a grip on
something Fate comes along and jumps on my fingers.’

‘I don’t _see_ any meteorites,’ said Twoflower. ‘How long do we wait?’

‘It’ll be something else, then,’ said Rincewind. ‘Someone will come
leaping out, or there’ll be an earthquake, or _something_.’

‘If you insist,’ said Twoflower, politely. ‘Um. Do you want to wait for
something horrible here or would you like to go back to the palace and
have a bath and change your clothes and then see what happens?’

Rincewind conceded that he might as well await a dreadful fate in
comfort.

‘There’s going to be a feast,’ said Twoflower. ‘The Emperor says he’s
going to teach everyone how to quaff.’

They made their way, plank by plank, back towards the city.

‘You know, I swear you never told me that you were married.’

‘I’m sure I did.’

‘I was, er, I was sorry to hear that your wife, er—’

‘Things happen in war. I have two dutiful daughters.’

Rincewind opened his mouth to say something but Twoflower’s bright,
brittle smile froze the words in his throat.

They worked without speaking, picking up the planks behind them and
extending the walkway in front.

‘Looking on the bright side,’ said Twoflower, breaking the silence, ‘the
Emperor said you could start your own University, if you wanted.’

‘No! No! Someone hit me with an iron bar, please!’

‘He said he’s well in favour of education provided no one makes him have
one. He’s been making proclamations like mad. The eunuchs have
threatened to go on strike.’

Rincewind’s plank dropped on to the mud.

‘What is it that eunuchs do,’ he said, ‘that they stop doing when they
go on strike?’

‘Serve food, make the beds, things like that.’

‘Oh.’

‘They run the Forbidden City, really. But the Emperor talked them round
to his point of view.’

‘Really?’

‘He said if they didn’t get cracking right now he’d cut off everything
else. Um, I think the ground’s firm enough now.’

His own University. That’d make him . . . Archchancellor. Rincewind the
Archchancellor pictured himself visiting Unseen University. He could
have a hat with a really big point. He’d be able to be rude to everyone.
He’d—

He tried to stop himself from thinking like that. It’d all go wrong.

‘Of course,’ said Twoflower, ‘it might be that the bad things have
already happened to you. Have you considered that? Perhaps you’re due
something nice?’

‘Don’t give me any of that karma stuff,’ said Rincewind. ‘The wheel of
fortune has lost a few spokes where I’m concerned.’

‘It’s worth considering, though,’ said Twoflower.

‘What, that the rest of my life will be peaceful and enjoyable? Sorry.
No. You wait. When my back’s turned and – bang!’

Twoflower looked around with some interest.

‘I don’t know why you think your life has been so bad,’ he said. ‘We had
a lot of fun when we were younger. Hey, do you remember the time when we
went over the edge of the world?’

‘Often,’ said Rincewind. ‘Usually around 3 a.m.’

‘And that time we were on a dragon and it disappeared in mid-air?’

‘You know,’ said Rincewind, ‘sometimes a whole hour will go by when I
_don’t_ remember that.’

‘And that time we were attacked by those people who wanted to kill us?’

‘Which of those one hundred and forty-nine occasions are you referring
to?’

‘Character-building, that sort of thing,’ said Twoflower, happily. ‘Made
me what I am today.’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Rincewind. It was no effort, talking to Twoflower. The
little man’s trusting nature had no concept of sarcasm and a keen
ability not to hear things that might upset him. ‘Yes, I can definitely
say it was that sort of thing that made me what I am today, too.’

They stepped inside the city. The streets were practically empty. Most
people had flocked to the huge square in front of the palace. New
Emperors tended towards displays of generosity. Besides, the news had
got around that this one was different and was giving away free pigs.

‘I heard him talking about sending envoys to Ankh-Morpork,’ said
Twoflower, as they dripped up the street. ‘I expect there’s going to be
a bit of a fuss about that.’

‘Was that man Disembowel-Meself-Honourably present at the time?’ said
Rincewind.

‘Yes, as a matter of fact.’

‘When you visited Ankh-Morpork, did you ever meet a man called Dibbler?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘If those two ever shake hands I think there might be some sort of
explosion.’

‘But you could go back, I’m sure,’ said Twoflower. ‘I mean, your new
University will need all sorts of things and, well, I seem to recall
that people in Ankh-Morpork were very keen on gold.’

Rincewind gritted his teeth. The image wouldn’t go away – of
Archchancellor Rincewind buying the Tower of Art and getting them to
number all the stones and send it back to Hunghung, of Archchancellor
Rincewind hiring all the faculty as college porters, of Archchancellor
Rincewi . . .

‘No!’

‘Pardon?’

‘Don’t encourage me to think like that! The moment I think that it’s all
going to be worthwhile something dreadful will happen!’

There was a movement behind him, and a knife suddenly pressed against
his throat.

‘The Great Blob of Swallow’s Vomit?’ said a voice by his ear.

‘There,’ said Rincewind. ‘You see? Run away! Don’t stand there, you
bloody idiot! _Run!’_

Twoflower stared for a moment and then turned and scampered away.

‘Let him go,’ said the voice. ‘He doesn’t matter.’

Hands pulled him into the alley. He had a vague impression of armour,
and mud; his captors were skilled in the way of dragging a prisoner so
that he had no chance to get a foothold anywhere.

Then he was flung on to the cobbles.

‘He does not look so great to me,’ said an imperious voice. ‘Look up,
Great Wizard!’

There was some nervous laughter from the soldiers.

‘You fools!’ raged Lord Hong. ‘He is just a man! Look at him! Does he
look so powerful? He is just a man who has found some old trickery! And
we will find out how great he is without his arms and legs.’

‘Oh,’ said Rincewind.

Lord Hong leaned down. There was mud on his face and a wild glint in his
eyes. ‘We shall see what your barbarian Emperor can do _then,_ won’t
we?’ He indicated the sullen group of mud-encrusted soldiers. ‘You know,
they half believe you really _are_ a great wizard? That’s superstition,
I’m afraid. Very useful most of the time, damn inconvenient on occasion.
But when we march you into the square and show them how great you really
are, I think your barbarian will not have so very long left. What are
these?’

He snatched the gloves off Rincewind’s hand.

‘Toys,’ he said. ‘Made things. The Red Army are just machines, like
mills and pumps. There’s no magic there.’

He tossed them aside and nodded at one of the guards.

‘And now,’ said Lord Hong, ‘let us go to the Imperial Square.’

‘How’d you like to be governor of Bhangbhangduc and all these islands
around here?’ said Cohen, as the Horde pored over a map of the Empire.
‘You like the seaside, Hamish?’

‘Whut?’

The doors of the Throne Room were flung open. Twoflower scuttled in,
trailed by One Big River.

‘Lord Hong’s got Rincewind! He’s going to kill him!’

Cohen looked up.

‘He can wizard himself out of it, can’t he?’

‘No! He hasn’t got the Red Army any more! He’s going to _kill_ him!
You’ve got to _do_ something!’

‘Ach, well, you know how it is with wizards,’ said Truckle. ‘There’s too
many of ’em as it is—’

‘No.’ Cohen picked up his sword and sighed.

‘Come on,’ he said.

‘But, Cohen—’

‘I said _come on._ We ain’t like Hong. Rincewind’s a weasel, but he’s
_our_ weasel. So are you coming or what?’

* * *

Lord Hong and his group of soldiers had almost reached the bottom of the
wide steps to the palace when the Horde emerged. The crowd surrounded
them, held back by the soldiers.

Lord Hong held Rincewind tightly, a knife at his throat.

‘Ah, Emperor,’ he said, in Ankh-Morporkian. ‘We meet again. Check, I
think.’

‘What’s he mean?’ Cohen whispered.

‘He thinks he has you cornered,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘How’s he know I won’t just let the wizard die?’

‘Psychology of the individual, I’m afraid.’

‘It doesn’t make any sense!’ Cohen shouted. ‘If you kill him, you’ll be
dead yourself in seconds. I shall see to it pers’nally!’

‘Indeed, no,’ said Lord Hong. ‘When your . . . Great Wizard . . . is
dead, when people see how easily he dies . . . how long will you be
Emperor? You won by trickery!’

‘What are your terms?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘There are none. You can give me nothing I cannot take myself.’ Lord
Hong grabbed Rincewind’s hat from one of the guards and rammed it on to
Rincewind’s head.

‘This is yours,’ he hissed. ‘“Wizzard” hah! You can’t even spell! Well,
_wizzard?_ Aren’t you going to say something?’

‘Oh, no!’

Lord Hong smiled. ‘Ah, that’s better,’ he said.

‘Oh, noooooo!’

‘Very good!’

‘Aarrgh!’

Lord Hong blinked. For a moment the figure in front of him appeared to
stretch to twice its height and then have its feet snap up under its
chin.

And then it disappeared, with a small thunderclap.

There was silence in the square, except for the sound of several
thousand people being astonished.

Lord Hong waved his hand vaguely in the air.

‘Lord Hong?’

He turned. There was a short man behind him, covered in grime and mud.
He wore a pair of spectacles, one lens of which was cracked.

Lord Hong hardly glanced at him. He prodded the air again, unwilling to
believe his own senses.

‘Excuse me, Lord Hong,’ said the apparition, ‘but do you by any chance
remember Bes Pelargic? About six years ago? I think you were quarrelling
with Lord Tang? There was something of a skirmish. A few streets
destroyed. Nothing very major.’

Lord Hong blinked.

‘How dare you address me!’ he managed.

‘It doesn’t really matter,’ said Twoflower. ‘But it’s just that I’d have
liked you to have remembered. I got . . . quite angry about it. Er. I
want to fight you.’

_‘You_ want to fight _me?_ Do you know who you are talking to? Have you
any _idea?’_

‘Er. Yes. Oh, yes,’ said Twoflower.

Lord Hong’s attention finally focused. It had not been a good day.

‘You foolish, stupid little man! You don’t even have a sword!’

‘Oi! Four-eyes!’

They both turned. Cohen threw his sword. Twoflower caught it clumsily
and was almost knocked over by the weight.

‘Why did you do that?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘Man wants to be a hero. That’s fine by me,’ said Cohen.

‘He’ll be slaughtered!’

‘Might do. Might do. Might do. He might do that, certainly,’ Cohen
conceded. ‘That’s not up to me.’

‘Father!’

Lotus Blossom grabbed Twoflower’s arm.

‘He _will_ kill you! Come away!’

‘No.’

Butterfly took her father’s other arm.

‘No good purpose will be served,’ she said. ‘Come on. We can find a
better time—’

‘He killed your mother,’ said Twoflower flatly.

‘His soldiers did.’

‘That makes it worse. He didn’t even know. Please get back, both of
you.’

‘Look, Father—’

‘If you don’t both do what you’re told I shall get angry.’

Lord Hong drew his long sword. The blade gleamed.

‘Do you know _anything_ about fighting, clerk?’

‘No, not really,’ said Twoflower. ‘But the important thing is that
someone should stand up to you. Whatever happens to them afterwards.’

The Horde were watching with considerable interest. Hardened as they
were, they had a soft spot for pointless bravery.

‘Yes,’ said Lord Hong, looking around at the silent crowd. ‘Let
_everyone_ see what happens.’

He raised his sword.

The air crackled.

The Barking Dog dropped on to the flagstones in front of him.

It was very hot. Its string was alight.

There was a brief sizzle.

Then the world went white.

After some time, Twoflower picked himself up. He seemed to be the first
one upright; those people who hadn’t flung themselves to the ground had
fled.

All that remained of Lord Hong was one shoe, which was smouldering. But
there was a smoking trail all the way up the steps behind it.

Staggering a little, Twoflower followed the trail.

A wheelchair was on its side, one wheel spinning.

He peered over it.

‘You all right, Mr Hamish?’

‘Whut?’

‘Good.’

The rest of the Horde were crouched in a circle at the top of the steps.
Smoke billowed around them. In its continuing passage, the ball had set
fire to part of the palace.

‘Can you hear me, Teach?’ Cohen was saying.

‘ ’Course he can’t hear you! How can he hear you, looking like that?’
said Truckle.

‘He could still be alive,’ said Cohen defiantly.

‘He is _dead,_ Cohen. Really, really _dead._ Alive people have more
_body.’_

‘But you’re all alive?’ said Twoflower. ‘I saw it bark straight at you!’

‘We got out of the way,’ said Boy Willie. ‘We’re good at getting out of
the way.’

‘Poor ole Teach didn’t have our experience of not dyin’,’ said Caleb.

Cohen stood up.

‘Where’s Hong?’ he said grimly. ‘I’m going to—’

‘He’s dead too, Mr Cohen,’ said Twoflower.

Cohen nodded, as if this was all perfectly normal.

‘We owe it to ole Teach,’ he said.

‘He was a good sort,’ Truckle conceded. ‘Funny ideas about swearing,
mind you.’

‘He had brains. He cared about stuff! And he might not have lived like a
barbarian, but he’s bloody well going to be buried like one, all right?’

‘In a longship, set on fire,’ suggested Boy Willie.

‘My word,’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘In a big pit, on top of the bodies of his enemies,’ suggested Caleb.

‘Good heavens, all of 4B?’ said Mr Saveloy.

‘In a burial mound,’ suggested Vincent.

‘Really, I wouldn’t put you to the trouble,’ said Mr Saveloy.

_‘In_ a longship set on fire, _on top_ of a heap of the bodies of his
enemies, _under_ a burial mound,’ said Cohen flatly. ‘Nothing’s too good
for ole Teach.’

‘But I assure you, I feel fine,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘Really, I – er . . .
Oh . . .’

RONALD SAVELOY?

Mr Saveloy turned. ‘Ah,’ he said. ‘Yes. I see.’

IF YOU WOULD CARE TO STEP THIS WAY?

The palace and the Horde froze and faded gently, like a dream.

‘It’s funny,’ said Mr Saveloy, as he followed Death. ‘I didn’t expect it
to be this way.’

FEW PEOPLE EVER EXPECT IT TO BE _ANY_ WAY.

Gritty black sand crunched under what Mr Saveloy supposed he should
still call his feet.

‘Where is this?’

THE DESERT.

It was brilliantly lit, and yet the sky was midnight-black. He stared at
the horizon.

‘How big is it?’

FOR SOME, VERY BIG. FOR LORD HONG, FOR INSTANCE, IT CONTAINS A LOT OF
IMPATIENT GHOSTS.

‘I thought Lord Hong didn’t believe in ghosts.’

HE MAY DO SO NOW. A LOT OF GHOSTS BELIEVE IN LORD HONG.

‘Oh. Er. What happens now?’

‘Come on, come on, haven’t got all day! Step lively, man!’

Mr Saveloy turned around and looked up at the woman on the horse. It was
a big horse but, then, it was a big woman. She had plaits, a hat with
horns on it, and a breastplate that must have been a week’s work for an
experienced panelbeater. She gave him a look that was not unkind but had
impatience in every line.

‘I’m sorry?’ he said.

‘Says here Ronald Saveloy,’ she said. ‘The what?’

‘The what?’

‘Everyone I pick up,’ said the woman, leaning down, ‘is called “Someone
_the_ Something”. What _the_ are you?’

‘I’m sorry, I—’

‘I’ll put you down as Ronald the Apologetic, then. Come on, hop up,
there’s a war on, got to be going.’

‘Where to?’

‘Says here quaffing, carousing, throwing axes at young women’s hair?’

‘Ah, er, I think perhaps there’s been a bit of a—’

‘Look, old chap, are you coming or what?’

Mr Saveloy looked around at the black desert. He was totally alone.
Death had gone about his essential business.

He let her pull him up behind her.

‘Have they got a library, perhaps?’ he asked hopefully, as the horse
rose into the dark sky.

‘Don’t know. No one’s ever asked.’

‘Evening classes, perhaps. I could start evening classes?’

‘What in?’

‘Um. Anything, really. Table manners, perhaps. Is that allowed?’

‘I suppose so. I don’t think anyone’s ever asked that, either.’ The
Valkyrie turned in the saddle.

‘You _sure_ you’re coming to the right afterlife?’

Mr Saveloy considered the possibilities.

‘On the whole,’ he said, ‘I think it’s worth a try.’

The crowd in the square were getting to their feet.

They looked at all that remained of Lord Hong, and at the Horde.

Butterfly and Lotus Blossom joined their father. Butterfly ran her hand
over the cannon, looking for the trick.

‘You see,’ said Twoflower, a little indistinctly because he couldn’t
quite hear the sound of his own voice yet, ‘I _told_ you he was the
Great Wizard.’

Butterfly tapped him on the shoulder.

‘What about those?’ she said.

A small procession was picking its way through the square. In front,
Twoflower recognized, was something he’d once owned.

‘It was a very cheap one,’ he said, to no one in particular. ‘I always
thought there was something a little warped about it, to tell you the
truth.’

It was followed by a slightly larger Luggage. And then, in descending
order of size, four little chests, the smallest being about the size of
a lady’s handbag. As it passed a prone Hunghungese who’d been too
stunned to flee, it paused to kick him in the ear before hurrying after
the others.

Twoflower looked at his daughters.

‘Can they do that?’ he said. ‘Make new ones? I thought it needed
carpenters.’

‘I suppose it learned many things in Ankh-More-Pork,’ said Butterfly.

The Luggages clustered together in front of the steps. Then _the_
Luggage turned around and, after one or two sad backward glances, or
what might have been glances if it had eyes, cantered away. By the time
it reached the far side of the square it was a blur.

‘Hey, you! Four-eyes!’

Twoflower turned, Cohen was advancing down the steps.

‘I remember you,’ he said. ‘D’you know anything about Grand Viziering?’

‘Not a thing, Mr Emperor Cohen.’

‘Good. The job’s yours. Get cracking. First thing, I want a cup of tea.
Thick enough to float a horseshoe. Three sugars. In five minutes.
Right?’

‘A cup of tea in _five minutes?’_ said Twoflower. ‘But that’s not long
enough for even a short ceremony!’

Cohen put a companionable arm around the little man’s shoulders.

‘There’s a _new_ ceremony,’ he said. ‘It goes: “Tea up, luv. Milk?
Sugar? Doughnut? Want another one?” And you could tell the eunuchs,’ he
added, ‘that the Emperor is a lit’ral-minded man and used the phrase
“heads will roll”.’

Twoflower’s eyes gleamed behind his cracked glasses. Somehow, he liked
the sound of that.

It looked as though he was living in interesting times—

The Luggages sat quietly, and waited.

Fate sat back.

The gods relaxed.

‘A draw,’ he announced. ‘Oh, yes. You have appeared to win in Hunghung
_but_ you have had to lose your most valuable piece, is that not so?’

‘I’m sorry?’ said the Lady. ‘I don’t quite follow you.’

‘Insofar as I understand this . . . physics . . . ’ said Fate, ‘I cannot
believe that anything could be materialized in the University without
dying almost instantly. It is one thing to hit a snowdrift, but quite
another to hit a wall.’

‘I never sacrifice a pawn,’ said the Lady.

‘How can you hope to win without sacrificing the occasional pawn?’

‘Oh, I never play to win.’ She smiled. ‘But I do play not to lose. Watch
. . .’

The Council of Wizards gathered in front of the wall at the far end of
the Great Hall and stared up at the thing which now covered half of it.

‘Interesting effect,’ said Ridcully, eventually. ‘How fast do you think
it was going?’

‘About five hundred miles an hour,’ said Ponder. ‘I think perhaps we
were a little enthusiastic. Hex says—’

‘From a standing start to five hundred miles an hour?’ said the Lecturer
in Recent Runes. ‘That must have come as a shock.’

‘Yes,’ said Ridcully, ‘but I suppose it’s a mercy for the poor creature
that it was such a brief one.’

‘And, of course, we must all be thankful that it wasn’t Rincewind.’

A couple of the wizards coughed.

The Dean stood back.

‘But what _is_ it?’ he said.

‘Was,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘We could have a look in the Bestiaries,’ said Ridcully. ‘Shouldn’t be
hard to find. Grey. Long hind feet like a clown’s boots. Rabbit ears.
Tail long and pointy. And, of course, not many creatures are twenty feet
across, one inch thick and deep fried, so that narrows it down a bit.’

‘I don’t want to cast a shadow on things,’ said the Dean, ‘but if this
isn’t Rincewind, then where is he?’

‘I’m sure Mr Stibbons can give us an explanation as to why his
calculations went wrong,’ said Ridcully.

Ponder’s mouth dropped open.

Then he said, as sourly as he dared, ‘I probably forgot to take into
account that there’s three right angles in a triangle, didn’t I? Er.
I’ll have to try and work everything back, but I think that somehow a
lateral component was introduced into what should have been a
bidirectional sortilegic transfer. It’s probably that this was most
pronounced at the effective median point, causing an extra node to
appear in the transfers at a point equidistant to the other two as
prediction in Flume’s Third Equation, and Turffe’s Law would see to it
that the distortion would stabilize in such a way as to create three
separate points, each moving a roughly equal mass one jump around the
triangle. I’m not sure why the third mass arrived here at such speed,
but I think the increased velocity might have been caused by the sudden
creation of the node. Of course, it might have been going quite fast
anyway. But I shouldn’t think it is cooked in its natural state.’

‘Do you know,’ said Ridcully, ‘I think I actually understood some of
that? Certainly some of the shorter words.’

‘Oh, it’s perfectly simple,’ said the Bursar brightly. ‘We sent the . .
. dog thing to Hunghung. Rincewind was sent to some other place. And
this creature was sent here. Just like Pass the Parcel.’

‘You see?’ said Ridcully to Stibbons. ‘You’re using language the
_Bursar_ can understand. And _he’s_ been chasing the dried frog all
morning.’

The Librarian staggered into the hall under the weight of a large atlas.

‘Oook.’

‘At least you can show us where you think our man is,’ said Ridcully.

Ponder took a ruler and a pair of compasses out of his hat.

‘Well, if we assume Rincewind was in the middle of the Counterweight
Continent,’ he said, ‘then all we need do is draw—’

‘Oook!’

‘I assure you, I was only going to use pencil—’

_‘Eeek_.’

‘All we have to do is _imagine,_ all right, a third point equidistant
from the other two . . . er . . . that looks like somewhere in the Rim
Ocean to me, or probably over the Edge.’

‘Can’t see that thing in the sea,’ said Ridcully, glancing up at the
recently laminated corpse.

‘In that case, it must have been in the other direction—’

The wizards crowded round.

There _was_ something there.

‘ ’S not even properly drawn in,’ said the Dean.

‘That’s because no one’s sure it really exists,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

It floated in the middle of the sea, a tiny continent by Discworld
standards.

‘“XXXX”,’ Ponder read.

‘They only put that on the map because no one knows what it’s really
called,’ said Ridcully.

‘And we’ve sent him there,’ said Ponder. ‘A place that we’re not even
certain _exists?’_

‘Oh, we know it exists now,’ said Ridcully. ‘Must do. Must do. Must be a
pretty rich land, too, if the rats grow that big.’

‘I’ll go and see if we can bring—’ Ponder began.

‘Oh, no,’ said Ridcully firmly. ‘No, thank you very much. Next time it
might be an elephant whizzing over our heads, and those things make a
splash. No. Give the poor chap a rest. We’ll have to think of something
else . . .’

He rubbed his hands together. ‘Time for dinner, I feel,’ he said.

‘Um,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Do you think we were wise to light that
string when we sent the thing back?’

‘Certainly,’ said Ridcully, as they strolled away. ‘No one could say we
didn’t return it in exactly the same state as it arrived . . .’

Hex dreamed gently in its room.

The wizards were right. Hex couldn’t think.

There weren’t words, yet, for what it could do.

Even Hex didn’t know what it could do.

But it was going to find out.

The quill pen scritched and blotted its way over a fresh sheet of paper
and drew, for no good reason, a calendar for the year surmounted by a
rather angular picture of a beagle, standing on its hind legs.

The ground was red, just like at Hunghung. But whereas that was a kind
of clay so rich that leaving a chair on the lawn meant that you had four
small trees by nightfall, this ground was sand that looked as if it had
got red by being baked in a million-year summer.

There were occasional clumps of yellowed grass and low stands of
grey-green trees. But what there was everywhere was heat.

This was especially noticeable in the pond under the ghost gums. It was
steaming.

A figure emerged from the clouds, absentmindedly picking the burnt bits
off his beard.

Rincewind waited until his own personal world had stopped spinning and
concentrated on the four men who were watching him.

They were black with lines and whorls painted on their faces and had,
between them, about two square feet of clothing.

There were three reasons why Rincewind was no racist. He’d ended up in
too many places too suddenly to develop that kind of mind. Besides, if
he’d thought about it much, most of the really dreadful things that had
happened to him had been done by quite pale people with big wardrobes.
Those were two of the reasons.

The third was that these men, who were just rising from a half-crouching
position, were all holding spears pointing at Rincewind and there is
something about the sight of four spears aimed at your throat that
causes no end of respect and the word ‘sir’ to arise spontaneously in
the mind.

One of the men shrugged, and lowered his spear.

‘G’day, bloke,’ he said.

This meant only three spears, which was an improvement.

‘Er. This isn’t Unseen University, is it, sir?’ said Rincewind.

The other spears stopped pointing at him. The men grinned. They had very
white teeth.

‘Klatch? Howondaland? It looks like Howondaland,’ said Rincewind
hopefully.

‘Don’t know them blokes, bloke,’ said one of the men.

The other three clustered around him.

‘What’ll we call him?’

‘He’s Kangaroo Bloke. No worries there. One minute a kangaroo, next
minute a bloke. The old blokes say that sort of thing used to happen all
the time, back in the Dream.’

‘I reckoned he’d look better than that.’

‘Yeah.’

‘One way to tell.’

The man who was apparently the leader of the group advanced on Rincewind
with the kind of grin reserved for imbeciles and people holding guns,
and held out a stick.

It was flat, and had a bend in the middle. Someone had spent a long time
making rather nice designs on it in little coloured dots. Somehow,
Rincewind wasn’t at all surprised to see a butterfly among them.

The hunters watched him expectantly.

‘Er, yes,’ he said. ‘Very good. Very good workmanship, yes. Interesting
pointillistic effect. Shame you couldn’t find a straighter bit of wood.’

One of the men laid down his spear, and squatted down and picked up a
long wooden tube, covered with the same designs. He blew into it. The
effect was not unpleasant. It sounded like bees would sound if they’d
invented full orchestration.

‘Um,’ said Rincewind. ‘Yes.’

It was a test, obviously. They’d given him this bent piece of wood. He
had to do something with it. It was clearly very important. He’d—

Oh, no. He’d say something or do something, wouldn’t he, and then they’d
say, yes, you are the Great Bloke or something, and they’d drag him off
and it’d be the start of another Adventure, i.e., a period of horror and
unpleasantness. Life was full of tricks like that.

Well, this time Rincewind wasn’t going to fall for it.

‘I want to go home,’ he said. ‘I want to go back home to the Library
where it was nice and quiet. And I don’t know where I am. And I don’t
care what you do to me, right? I’m not going to have any kind of
adventure or start saving the world again and you can’t trick me into it
with mysterious bits of wood.’

He gripped the stick and flung it away from him with all the force he
could still muster.

They stared at him as he folded his arms.

‘I’m not playing,’ he said. ‘I’m stopping right here.’

They were still staring. And now they were grinning, too, at something
behind him.

He felt himself getting quite annoyed.

‘Do you understand? Are you listening?’ he said. ‘That’s the last time
the universe is going to trick Rincewi—’

THE END

¹ People are always a little confused about this, as they are in the
case of miracles. When someone is saved from certain death by a strange
concatenation of circumstances, they say that’s a miracle. But of course
if someone is _killed_ by a freak chain of events – the oil spilled just
_there,_ the safety fence broken just _there_ – that must _also_ be a
miracle. Just because it’s not nice doesn’t mean it’s not miraculous.

² Usually about six inches across.

³ People wonder how this works, since a terrestrial elephant would be
unlikely to bear a revolving load for any length of time without some
serious friction burns. But you may as well ask why the axle of a planet
doesn’t squeak, or where love goes, or what sound yellow makes.

⁴ Which is like Fuzzy Logic, only less so.

⁵ All _virtual_ lectures took place in room 3B, a room not locatable on
any floor plan of the University and also, it was considered, infinite
in size.

⁶ A policy adopted by almost all managers and several notable gods.

⁷ Such as ‘Ouch!’, ‘Aargh!’, ‘Give me back my money, you scoundrel!’ and
‘You call these chestnuts? I call them little balls of charcoal, that’s
what I call them!’

⁸ And often the phrase ‘a bastard you don’t want to cross, and I didn’t
say that’.

⁹ The UU college porters. Renowned among the entire faculty for the
hardness of their skulls, their obtuseness in the face of reasonable
explanation, and their deeply held conviction that the whole place would
collapse without them.

¹⁰ Except during extreme flood conditions it is extremely difficult to
make much progress on the Ankh, and the University rowing teams compete
by running over the surface of the river. This is generally quite safe
provided they don’t stand in one place for very long and, of course, it
eats the soles off their boots.

¹¹ This at least was true. Rincewind could scream for mercy in nineteen
languages, and just scream¹² in another forty-four.

¹² This is important. Inexperienced travellers might think that ‘Aargh!’
is universal, but in Betrobi it means ‘highly enjoyable’ and in
Howondaland it means, variously, ‘I would like to eat your foot’, ‘Your
wife is a big hippo’ and ‘Hello, Thinks Mr Purple Cat.’ One particular
tribe has a fearsome reputation for cruelty merely because prisoners
appear, to them, to be shouting ‘Quick! Extra boiling oil!’

¹³ Named after the wizard Sangrit Heisenberg and not after the more
famous Heisenberg who is renowned for inventing what is _possibly_ the
finest lager in the world.

¹⁴ There was still a certain amount of confusion on this point.

¹⁵ KIDS! Only very silly wizards with bad sinus trouble do this.
_Sensible_ people go off to a roped-off enclosure where they can watch a
heavily protected man, in the middle distance, light (with the aid of a
very long pole) something that goes ‘fsst’. And then they can shout
‘Hooray’.

¹⁶ The Ankh-Morpork name for the Counterweight Continent and its nearby
islands. It means ‘place where the gold comes from’.

¹⁷ In fact, he’d be about the seventy-third to admit it.

¹⁸ Such as Dish of Glistening Brown Stuff, Dish of Glistening Crunchy
Orange Stuff, and Dish of Soft White Lumps.

¹⁹ According to the history books. However, in common with every other
young student, Rincewind had hopefully looked up ‘figgin’ in the
dictionary and found it was ‘a small bun with currants in it’. This
meant that either the language had changed a little over the years, or
that there really was some horrifying aspect to suspending a man
alongside a teacake.

²⁰ A dismal prospect, especially when the horses keep sinking.

²¹ When you’re on a desert island, your appetites can become a bit
confused.

²² Much later, Rincewind had to have therapy for this. It involved a
pretty woman, a huge plate of potatoes and a big stick with a nail in
it.

²³ ‘Your feet shall be cut off and be buried several yards from your
body so your ghost won’t walk.’

²⁴ Except on posters with legends like ‘Wanted – Dedd’.

²⁵ The only sound the Horde had ever heard in temples was people
shouting ‘Infidel! He has stolen the Jewelled Eye of – your wife is a
big hippo!’

²⁶ ‘Friendly stab’, as it is formally known.


About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT was the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld® series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His fortieth Discworld novel, _Raising Steam_, was
published in 2013. His books have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he was the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
He died in March 2015.

www.terrypratchett.co.uk
@terryandrob

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

THE DISCWORLD® SERIES

1. _The Colour of Magic_

2. _The Light Fantastic_

3. _Equal Rites_

4. _Mort_

5. _Sourcery_

6. _Wyrd Sisters_

7. _Pyramids_

8. _Guards! Guards!_

9. _Eric_ (illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. _Moving Pictures_

11. _Reaper Man_

12. _Witches Abroad_

13. _Small Gods_

14. _Lords and Ladies_

15. _Men at Arms_

16. _Soul Music_

17. _Interesting Times_

18. _Maskerade_

19. _Feet of Clay_

20. _Hogfather_

21. _Jingo_

22. _The Last Continent_

23. _Carpe Jugulum_

24. _The Fifth Elephant_

25. _The Truth_

26. _Thief of Time_

27. _The Last Hero_ (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. _The Amazing Maurice and his Educated Rodents_ (for young adults)

29. _Night Watch_

30. _The Wee Free Men_ (for young adults)

31. _Monstrous Regiment_

32. _A Hat Full of Sky_ (for young adults)

33. _Going Postal_

34. _Thud!_

35. _Wintersmith_ (for young adults)

36. _Making Money_

37. _Unseen Academicals_

38. _I Shall Wear Midnight_ (for young adults)

39. _Snuff_

40. _Raising Steam_

OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD

_The Science of Discworld_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld III: Darwin’s Watch_ (with Ian Stewart and
Jack Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

_Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion...So Far_ (with Stephen Briggs)

_Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_ (with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

_The Pratchett Portfolio_ (with Paul Kidby)

_The Discworld Almanak_ (with Bernard Pearson)

_The Unseen University Cut-Out Book_ (with Alan Batley and Bernard
Pearson)

_Where’s My Cow?_ (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

_The Art of Discworld_ (with Paul Kidby)

_The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld_ (compiled by Stephen Briggs)

_The Folklore of Discworld_ (with Jacqueline Simpson)

_The World of Poo_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_Mrs Bradshaw’s Handbook_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_ (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen
Player)

_The Discworld Mapp_ (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

_A Tourist Guide to Lancre – a Discworld Mapp_ (with Stephen Briggs,
illustrated by Paul Kidby)

_Death’s Domain_ (with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays, graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on www.terrypratchett.co.uk

NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS

_The Dark Side of the Sun_

_Strata_

_The Unadulterated Cat_ (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

_Good Omens_ (with Neil Gaiman)

SHORTER WRITING

_A Blink of the Screen_

_A Slip of the Keyboard_

WITH STEPHEN BAXTER

_The Long Earth_

_The Long War_

_The Long Mars_

_The Long Utopia_

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNG ADULTS

_The Carpet People_

_Truckers_

_Diggers_

_Wings_

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

_Nation_

_Dodger_

_Dodger’s Guide to London_

_Dragons at Crumbling Castle_

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

Transworld is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com

[image]

First published in Great Britain in 1994 by Victor Gollancz Ltd
Corgi edition puplished 1995
Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett 1994

Terry Pratchett has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the author of this work.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

Discworld® and Unseen University® are trademarks registered by Terry
Pratchett

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781407034966
ISBN 9780552142359

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
