[]


About the Book

_Neighbours...hah. People’d live for ages side by side, nodding at one
another amicably on their way to work, and then some trivial thing would
happen and someone would be having a garden fork removed from their
ear._

And when the neighbours in question are the proud empires of Klatch and
Ankh-Morpork, those are going to be some pretty large garden tools
indeed. Of course, no one would dream of starting a war without a
perfectly good reason . . . such as a ‘strategic’ piece of old rock in
the middle of nowhere. It is after all every citizen’s right to bear
arms to defend what they consider to be their own. Even if it isn’t. And
even if they don’t have much in the way of actual weaponry. As two
armies march, Commander Vimes of Ankh-Morpork City Watch faces
unpleasant foes who are out to get him . . . and that’s just the people
on his side. The enemy might be even worse.

Discworld goes to war, with armies of sardines, warriors, fishermen,
squid and at least one very camp follower.


Introducing Discworld

The Discworld Series is a continuous history of a world not totally
unlike our own except that it is a flat disc carried on the backs of
four elephants astride a giant turtle floating through space, and that
it is peopled by, among others, wizards, dwarves, policemen, thieves,
beggars, vampires and witches. Within the history of Discworld there are
many individual stories, which can be read in any order, but reading
them in sequence can increase your enjoyment through the accumulation of
all the fine detail that contributes to the teeming imaginative
complexity of this brilliantly conceived world.

Contents

Cover

About the Book

Introducing Discworld

Title Page

Jingo

Footnotes

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright



Terry Pratchett

JINGO

A DISCWORLD® NOVEL

IT WAS A moonless night, which was _good_ for the purposes of Solid
Jackson.

He fished for Curious Squid, so called because, as well as being squid,
they were curious. That is to say, their curiosity was the curious thing
about them.

Shortly after they got curious about the lantern that Solid had hung
over the stern of his boat, they started to become curious about the way
in which various of their number suddenly vanished skywards with a
splash.

Some of them even became curious – very _briefly_ curious – about the
sharp barbed thing that was coming very quickly towards them.

The Curious Squid were extremely curious. Unfortunately, they weren’t
very good at making connections.

It was a very long way to this fishing ground, but for Solid the trip
was usually well worth it. The Curious Squid were very small, harmless,
difficult to find and reckoned by connoisseurs to have the foulest taste
of any creature in the world. This made them very much in demand in a
certain kind of restaurant where highly skilled chefs made, with great
care, dishes containing _no trace of the squid whatsoever_.

Solid Jackson’s problem was that tonight, a moonless night in the
spawning season, when the squid were especially curious about
everything, the chef seemed to have been at work on the sea itself.

There was not a single interested eyeball to be seen. There weren’t any
other fish either, and usually there were a few attracted to the light.
He’d caught sight of one. It had been making through the water extremely
fast in a straight line.

He laid down his trident and walked to the other end of the boat, where
his son Les was also gazing intently at the torch-lit sea.

‘Not a thing in half an hour,’ said Solid.

‘You sure we’re in the right spot, Dad?’

Solid squinted at the horizon. There was a faint glow in the sky that
indicated the city of Al-Khali, on the Klatchian coast. He turned round.
The other horizon glowed, too, with the lights of Ankh-Morpork. The boat
bobbed gently halfway between the two.

‘’Course we are,’ he said, but certainty edged away from his words.

Because there was a hush on the sea. It didn’t look right. The boat
rocked a little, but that was with their movement, not from any motion
of the waves.

It _felt_ as if there was going to be a storm. But the stars twinkled
softly and there was not a cloud in the sky.

The stars twinkled on the surface of the water, too. Now _that_ was
something you didn’t often see.

‘I reckon we ought to be getting out of here,’ Solid said.

Les pointed at the slack sail. ‘What’re we going to use for wind, Dad?’

It was then that they heard the splash of oars.

Solid, squinting hard, could just make out the shape of another boat,
heading towards him. He grabbed his boat-hook.

‘I knows that’s you, you thieving foreign bastard!’

The oars stopped. A voice sang over the water.

‘May you be consumed by a thousand devils, you damned person!’

The other boat glided closer. It looked foreign, with eyes painted on
the prow.

‘Fished ’em all out, have you? I’ll take my trident to you, you
bottom-feedin’ scum that y’are!’

‘My curvy sword at your neck, you unclean son of a dog of the female
persuasion!’

Les looked over the side. Little bubbles fizzed on the surface of the
sea.

‘Dad?’ he said.

‘That’s Greasy Arif out there!’ snapped his father. ‘You take a good
look at him! He’s been coming out here for years, stealing _our_ squid,
the evil lying little devil!’

‘Dad, there’s—’

‘You get on them oars and I’ll knock his black teeth out!’

Les could hear a voice saying from the other boat, ‘—see, my son, how
the underhanded fish thief—’

‘Row!’ his father shouted.

‘To the oars!’ shouted someone in the other boat.

‘Whose squid _are_ they, Dad?’ said Les.

‘_Ours!_’

‘What, even before we’ve caught them?’

‘Just you shut up and row!’

‘I can’t move the boat, Dad, we’re stuck on something!’

‘It’s a hundred fathoms deep here, boy! What’s there to stick on?’

Les tried to disentangle an oar from the thing rising slowly out of the
fizzing sea.

‘Looks like a . . . a chicken, Dad!’

There was a sound from below the surface. It sounded like some bell or
gong, slowly swinging.

‘Chickens can’t swim!’

‘It’s made of iron, Dad!’

Solid scrambled to the rear of the boat.

It _was_ a chicken, made of iron. Seaweed and shells covered it and
water dripped off it as it rose against the stars.

It stood on a cross-shaped perch.

There seemed to be a letter on each of the four ends of the cross.

Solid held the torch closer.

‘What the—’

Then he pulled the oar free and sat down beside his son.

‘Row like the blazes, Les!’

‘What’s happening, Dad?’

‘Shut up and row! Get us away from it!’

‘Is it a monster, Dad?’

‘It’s worse than a monster, son!’ shouted Solid, as the oars bit into
the water.

The thing was quite high now, standing on some kind of tower . . .

‘What is it, Dad! _What is it?_’

‘It’s a damned weathercock!’

There was not, on the whole, a lot of geological excitement. The
_sinking_ of continents is usually accompanied by volcanoes, earthquakes
and armadas of little boats containing old men anxious to build pyramids
and mystic stone circles in some new land where being the possessor of
genuine ancient occult wisdom might be expected to attract girls. But
the rising of this one caused barely a ripple in the purely physical
scheme of things. It more or less sidled back, like a cat who’s been
away for a few days and knows you’ve been worrying.

Around the shores of the Circle Sea a large wave, only five or six feet
high by the time it reached them, caused some comment. And in some of
the very low-lying swamp areas the water swamped some villages of people
that no one else cared about very much. But, in a purely geological
sense, nothing very much happened.

In a purely geological sense.

‘It’s a _city_, Dad! Look, you can see all the windows and—’

‘I told you to shut up and keep rowing!’

The seawater surged down the streets. On either side, huge,
weed-encrusted buildings boiled slowly out of the surf.

Father and son fought to keep some way on the boat as it was dragged
along. And, since lesson one in the art of rowing is that you do it
while looking the wrong way, they didn’t see the other boat . . .

‘You lunatic!’

‘Foolish man!’

‘Don’t you touch that building! This country belongs to Ankh-Morpork!’

The two boats spun in a temporary whirlpool.

‘I claim this land in the name of the Seriph of Al-Khali!’

‘We saw it first! Les, you tell him we saw it first!’

‘We saw it first before you saw it first!’

‘Les, you saw him, he tried to hit me with that oar!’

‘But Dad, you’re waving that trident—’

‘See the untrustworthy way he attacks us, Akhan!’

There was a grinding noise from under the keel of both boats and they
began to tip as they settled into the sea-bottom ooze.

‘Look, Father, there is an interesting statue—’

‘He has set his foot on Klatchian soil! The squid thief!’

‘Get those filthy sandals off Ankh-Morporkian territory!’

‘Oh, _Dad_—’

The two fishermen stopped screaming at each other, mainly in order to
get their breath back. Crabs scuttled away. Water drained between the
patches of weed, carving runnels in the grey silt.

‘Father, look, there’s still coloured tiles on the—’

‘Mine!’

‘_Mine!_’

Les caught Akhan’s eye. They exchanged a very brief glance which was
nevertheless modulated with a considerable amount of information,
beginning with the sheer galactic-sized embarrassment of having parents
and working up from there.

‘Dad, we don’t _have_ to—’ Les began.

‘You shut up! It’s your future I’m thinking about, my lad—’

‘Yes, but who _cares_ who saw it first, Dad? We’re both hundreds of
miles from home! I mean, who’s going to _know_, Dad?’

The two squid fishermen glared at one another.

The dripping buildings rose above them. There were holes that might well
have been doorways, and glassless apertures that could have been
windows, but all was darkness within. Now and again, Les fancied he
could hear something slithering.

Solid Jackson coughed. ‘The lad’s right,’ he muttered. ‘Daft to argue.
Just the four of us.’

‘Indeed,’ said Arif.

They backed away, each man carefully watching the other. Then, so
closely that it was a chorus, they both yelled: ‘Grab the boat!’

There was a confused couple of moments and then each pair, boat carried
over their heads, ran and slithered along the muddy streets.

They had to stop and come back, with mutual cries of ‘A kidnapper as
_well_, eh?’, to get the right sons.

As every student of exploration knows, the prize goes not to the
explorer who first sets foot upon the virgin soil but to the one who
gets that foot home first. If it is still attached to his leg, this is a
bonus.

The weathercocks of Ankh-Morpork creaked around in the wind.

Very few of them were in fact representations of _Avis domestica_. There
were various dragons, fish and miscellaneous animals. On the roof of the
Assassins’ Guild a silhouette of one of the members squeaked into a new
position, cloak and dagger at the ready. On the Beggars’ Guild a tin
beggar’s hand asked the wind for a quarter. On the Butchers’ Guild a
copper pig sniffed the air. On the roof of the Thieves’ Guild a _real_
if rather deceased unlicensed thief turned gently, which shows what you
are capable of if you try, or at least if you try stealing without a
licence.

The one on the library dome of Unseen University was running slow and
wouldn’t show the change for half an hour yet, but the smell of the sea
drifted over the city.

There was a tradition of soap-box public speaking in Sator Square.
‘Speaking’ was stretching a point to cover the ranters, haranguers and
occasional self-absorbed mumblers that spaced themselves at intervals
amongst the crowds. And, traditionally, people said whatever was on
their minds and at the top of their voices. The Patrician, it was said,
looked kindly on the custom. He did. And very closely, too. He probably
had someone make notes.

So did the Watch.

It wasn’t spying, Commander Vimes told himself. Spying was when you
crept around peeking in windows. It wasn’t spying when you had to stand
back a bit so that you weren’t deafened.

He reached out without paying attention and struck a match on Sergeant
Detritus.

‘Dat was me, sir,’ said the troll reproachfully.

‘Sorry, sergeant,’ said Vimes, lighting his cigar.

‘It not a problem.’

They returned their attention to the speakers.

It’s the wind, thought Vimes. It’s bringing something new . . .

Usually the speakers dealt with all kinds of subjects, many of them on
the cusp of sanity or somewhere in the peaceful valleys on the other
side. But now they were all monomaniacs.

‘—time they were taught a lesson!’ screamed the nearest one. ‘Why don’t
our so-called masters listen to the voice of the people? Ankh-Morpork
has had _enough_ of these swaggering brigands! They steal our fish, they
steal our trade and now they’re stealing our land!’

It would have been better if people had cheered, Vimes thought. People
generally cheered the speakers indiscriminately, to egg them on. But the
crowd around this man just seemed to nod approval. He thought: they’re
actually _thinking_ about what he said . . .

‘They stole my merchandise!’ shouted a speaker opposite him. ‘It’s a
pirate bloody empire! I was boarded! In Ankh-Morpork waters!’

There was a general self-righteous muttering.

‘What did they steal, Mr Jenkins?’ said a voice from the crowd.

‘A cargo of fine silks!’

The crowd hissed.

‘Ah? Not dried fish offal and condemned meat, then? That’s your normal
cargo, I believe.’

Mr Jenkins strained to look for the speaker.

‘Fine silks!’ he said. ‘And what does the city care about that?
Nothing!’

There were shouts of ‘Shame!’

‘Has the city been told?’ said the enquiring voice.

People started to crane their heads. And then the crowd opened a little,
to reveal the figure of Commander Vimes of the City Watch.

‘Well, it’s . . . I . . .’ Jenkins began. ‘Er . . . I . . .’

‘_I_ care,’ said Vimes calmly. ‘Shouldn’t be too hard to track down a
cargo of fine silks that stink of fish guts.’ There was laughter.
Ankh-Morpork people always like some variety in their street theatre.

Vimes apparently spoke to Sergeant Detritus, while keeping his gaze
locked on Jenkins. ‘Detritus, just you go along with Mr Jenkins here,
will you? His ship is the _Milka_, I believe. He’ll show you all the
lading bills and manifests and receipts and things, and then we can sort
him out in jig time.’

There was a clang as Detritus’s huge hand came to rest against his
helmet.

‘Yessir!’

‘Er . . . er . . . you can’t,’ said Jenkins quickly. ‘They . . .
er . . . stole the paperwork as well . . .’

‘Really? So they can take the stuff back to the shop if it doesn’t fit?’

‘Er . . . anyway, the ship’s sailed. Yes! Sailed! Got to try and recoup
my losses, you know!’

‘Sailed? Without its captain?’ said Vimes. ‘So Mr Scoplett is in charge?
Your first officer?’

‘Yes, yes—’

‘Damn!’ said Vimes, snapping his fingers theatrically. ‘That man we’ve
got in the cells on a charge of being Naughtily Drunk last night . . .
we’re going to have to charge him with impersonation as well, then? I
don’t know, more blasted paperwork, the stuff just piles up . . .’

Mr Jenkins tried to look away but Vimes’s stare kept pulling him back.
The occasional tremble of a lip suggested that he was preparing a
riposte, but he was bright enough to spot that Vimes’s grin was as funny
as the one that moves very fast towards drowning men. And has a fin on
top.

Mr Jenkins made a wise decision, and got down. ‘I’ll . . . er . . . I’ll
go and sort . . . I’d better go and . . . er . . .’ he said, and pushed
his way through the mob, which waited a little while to see if anything
interesting was going to happen and then, disappointed, sought out other
entertainment.

‘You want I should go an’ have a look at his boat?’ said Detritus.

‘No, sergeant. There won’t be any silk, and there won’t be any
paperwork. There won’t be anything except a lingering aroma of fish
guts.’

‘Wow, dem damn Klatchians steals everything that ain’t nailed down,
right?’

Vimes shook his head and strolled on. ‘They don’t have trolls in Klatch,
do they?’ he said.

‘Nossir. It’s der heat. Troll brains don’t work in der heat. If I was to
go to Klatch,’ said Detritus, his knuckles making little bink-bink
noises as he dragged them over the cobbles, ‘I’d be really _stoopid_.’

‘Detritus?’

‘Yessir?’

‘Never go to Klatch.’

‘Nossir.’

Another speaker was attracting a much larger crowd. He stood in front of
a large banner that proclaimed: GREASY FORANE HANDS OFF LESHP.

‘Leshp,’ said Detritus. ‘Now _dere_’s a name that ain’t got its teef
in.’

‘It’s the land that came back up from under the sea last week,’ said
Vimes despondently.

They listened while the speaker proclaimed that Ankh-Morpork had a duty
to protect its kith and kin on the new land. Detritus looked puzzled.

‘How come dere’s dese kiff and kin on dere when it only just come up
from under der water?’ he said.

‘Good question,’ said Vimes.

‘Dey been holding dere breath?’

‘I doubt it.’

There was more in the air than the salt of the sea, Vimes thought. There
was some other current. He could sense it. Suddenly, the problem was
Klatch.

Ankh-Morpork had been at peace with Klatch, or at least in a state of
non-war, for almost a century. It was, after all, the neighbouring
country.

Neighbours . . . hah! But what did that mean? The Watch could tell you a
thing or two about neighbours. So could lawyers, especially the real
rich ones to whom ‘neighbour’ meant a man who’d sue for twenty years
over a strip of garden two inches wide. People’d live for ages side by
side, nodding at one another amicably on their way to work every day,
and then some trivial thing would happen and someone would be having a
garden fork removed from their ear.

And now some damn rock had risen up out of the sea and everyone was
acting as if Klatch had let its dog bark all night.

‘_Aagragaah_,’ said Detritus, mournfully.

‘Don’t mind me, just don’t spit it on my boot,’ said Vimes.

‘It mean—’ Detritus waved a huge hand, ‘like . . . dem things, what only
comes in . . .’ he paused and looked at his fingers, while his lips
moved ‘. . .  fours. Aagragaah. It mean lit’rally der time when you see
dem little pebbles and you jus’ _know_ dere’s gonna be a great big
landslide on toppa you and it already too late to run. Dat moment, dat’s
aagragaah.’

Vimes’s own lips moved. ‘_Forebodings?_’

‘Dat’s der bunny.’

‘Where does the word come from?’

Detritus shrugged. ‘Maybe it named after der soun’ you make just as a
t’ousand ton of rock hit you.’

‘Forebodings . . .’ Vimes rubbed his chin. ‘Yeah. Well, I’ve got plenty
of them . . .’

Landslides and avalanches, he thought. All the little snowflakes land,
light as a feather – and suddenly the whole side of a mountain is
moving . . .

Detritus looked at him slyly. ‘I know everyone say “Dem two short
planks, dey’re as fick as Detritus”,’ he said, ‘but I know which way der
wind is blowin’.’

Vimes looked at his sergeant with a new respect.

‘You can spot it, can you?’

The troll’s finger tapped his helmet twice, knowingly.

‘It pretty obvious,’ he said. ‘You see up on der roofs dem little
chickies and dragons and stuff? And dat poor bugger on der Fieves’
Guild? You just has to watch ’em. _Dey_ know. Beats me how dey always
pointin’ der right way.’

Vimes relaxed a little. Detritus’s intelligence wasn’t too bad for a
troll, falling somewhere between a cuttlefish and a line-dancer, but you
could rely on him not to let it slow him down.

Detritus winked. ‘An’ it look to me like dat time when you go an’ find a
big club and listen to grandad tellin’ you how he beat up all dem dwarfs
when he was a boy,’ he said. ‘Somethin’ in der wind, right?’

‘Er . . . yes . . .’ said Vimes.

There was a fluttering above him. He sighed. A message was coming in.

On a pigeon.

But they’d tried everything else, hadn’t they? Swamp dragons tended to
explode in the air, imps ate the messages and the semaphore helmets had
_not_ been a success, especially in high winds. And then Corporal
Littlebottom had pointed out that Ankh-Morpork’s pigeons were, because
of many centuries of depredation by the city’s gargoyle population,
considerably more intelligent than most pigeons, although Vimes
considered that this was not difficult because there were things growing
on old damp bread that were more intelligent than most pigeons.

He took a handful of corn out of his pocket. The pigeon, obedient to its
careful training, settled on his shoulder. In obedience to internal
pressures, it relieved itself.

‘You know, we’ve got to find something better,’ said Vimes, as he
unwrapped the message. ‘Every time we send a message to Constable
Downspout he eats it.’

‘Well, he _are_ a gargoyle,’ said Detritus. ‘He fink it lunch arriving.’

‘Oh,’ said Vimes, ‘his lordship requires my attendance. How nice.’

Lord Vetinari looked attentive, because he’d always found that listening
keenly to people tended to put them off.

And at meetings like this, when he was advised by the leaders of the
city, he listened with great care because what people said was what they
wanted him to hear. He paid a lot of attention to the spaces outside the
words, though. That’s where the things were that they hoped he didn’t
know and didn’t want him to find out.

Currently he was paying attention to the things that Lord Downey of the
Assassins’ Guild was failing to say in a lengthy exposition of the
Guild’s high level of training and value to the city. The voice,
eventually, came to a stop in the face of Vetinari’s aggressive
listening.

‘Thank you, Lord Downey,’ he said. ‘I’m sure we shall all be able to
sleep a lot more uneasily for knowing all that. Just one minor
point . . . I believe the word “assassin” actually comes from Klatch?’

‘Well . . . indeed . . .’

‘And I believe also that many of your students are, as it turns out,
from Klatch and its neighbouring countries?’

‘The unrivalled quality of our education . . .’

‘Quite so. What you are telling me, in point of fact, is that their
assassins have been doing it longer, know their way around our city and
have had their traditional skills honed by you?’

‘Er . . .’

The Patrician turned to Mr Burleigh.

‘We surely have superiority in weapons, Mr Burleigh?’

‘Oh, yes. Say what you like about dwarfs, but we’ve been turning out
some superb stuff lately,’ said the President of the Guild of Armourers.

‘Ah. That at least is some comfort.’

‘Yes,’ said Burleigh. He looked wretched. ‘However, the thing about
weapons manufacture . . . the important thing . . . ’

‘I believe you are about to say that the important thing about the
business of weaponry is that it is a business,’ said the Patrician.

Burleigh looked as though he’d been let off the hook on to a bigger
hook.

‘Er . . . yes.’

‘That, in fact, the weapons are for selling.’

‘Er . . . exactly.’

‘To anyone who wishes to buy them.’

‘Er . . . yes.’

‘Regardless of the use to which they are going to be put?’

The armaments manufacturer looked affronted.

‘Pardon me? Of _course_. They’re _weapons_.’

‘And I suspect that in recent years a very lucrative market has been
Klatch?’

‘Well, yes . . . the Seriph needs them to pacify the outlying
regions . . .’

The Patrician held up his hand. Drumknott, his clerk, gave him a piece
of paper.

‘The “Great Leveller” Cart-Mounted Ten-Bank 500-pound Crossbow?’ he
said. ‘And, let me see . . . the “Meteor” Automated Throwing Star
Hurler, Decapitates at Twenty Paces, Money Back If Not Completely
Decapitated?’

‘Have you ever heard of the D’regs, my lord?’ said Burleigh. ‘They say
the only way to pacify one of _them_ is to hit him repeatedly with an
axe and bury what’s left under a rock. And, even then, choose a heavy
rock.’

The Patrician seemed to be staring at a large drawing of the ‘Dervish’
Mk III Razor-Wire Bolas. There was a painful silence. Burleigh tried to
fill it up, always a bad mistake.

‘Besides, we provide much-needed jobs in Ankh-Morpork,’ he murmured.

‘Exporting these weapons to other countries,’ said Lord Vetinari. He
handed the paper back and fixed Burleigh with a friendly smile.

‘I’m very pleased to see that the industry has done so well,’ he said.
‘I will bear this particularly in mind.’

He placed his hands together carefully. ‘The situation is grave,
gentlemen.’

‘Whose?’ said Mr Burleigh.

‘I’m sorry?’

‘What? Oh . . . I was thinking about something else, my lord . . .’

‘I _was_ referring to the fact that a number of our citizens have gone
out to this wretched island. As have, I understand, a number of
Klatchians.’

‘Why are our people going out there?’ said Mr Boggis of the Thieves’
Guild.

‘Because they are showing a brisk pioneering spirit and seeking wealth
and . . . additional wealth in a new land,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘What’s in it for the Klatchians?’ said Lord Downey.

‘Oh, they’ve gone out there because they are a bunch of unprincipled
opportunists always ready to grab something for nothing,’ said Lord
Vetinari.

‘A masterly summation, if I may say so, my lord,’ said Mr Burleigh, who
felt he had some ground to make up.

The Patrician looked down again at his notes. ‘Oh, I do beg your
pardon,’ he said, ‘I seem to have read those last two sentences in the
wrong order . . . Mr Slant, I believe you have something to say here?’

The president of the Guild of Lawyers cleared his throat. The sound was
like a death rattle and technically it was, since the man had been a
zombie for several hundred years although historical accounts suggested
that the only difference dying had made to Mr Slant was that he’d
started to work through his lunch break.

‘Yes, indeed,’ he said, opening a large legal tome. ‘The history of the
city of Leshp and its surrounding country is a little obscure. It is
known to have been above the sea almost a thousand years ago, however,
when records suggest that it was considered part of the Ankh-Morpork
empire—’

‘What is the nature of these records and do they tell us who was doing
the considering?’ said the Patrician. The door opened and Vimes stepped
in. ‘Ah, commander, do take a seat. Continue, Mr Slant.’

The zombie did not like interruptions. He coughed again. ‘The records
relating to the lost country date back several hundred years, my lord.
And they are of course _our_ records.’

‘Only ours?’

‘I hardly see how any others could apply,’ said Mr Slant severely.

‘Klatchian ones, for example?’ said Vimes, from the far end of the
table.

‘Sir Samuel, the Klatchian language does not even have a word for
lawyer,’ said Mr Slant.

‘Doesn’t it?’ said Vimes. ‘Good for them.’

‘It is our view’, said Slant, turning his chair slightly so that he did
not have to look at Vimes, ‘that the new land is ours by Eminent Domain,
Extra-Territoriality and, most importantly, _Acquiris Quodcumque Rapis_.
I am given to understand that it was one of our fishermen who first set
foot on it this time.’

‘I hear the Klatchians claim that it was one of _their_ fishermen,’ said
Vetinari.

At the end of the table Vimes’s lips were moving. _Let’s see,
Acquiris_ . . . ‘“You get what you grab”?’ he said aloud.

‘We’re not going to take their word for it, are we?’ said Slant,
pointedly ignoring him. ‘Excuse me, my lord, but I don’t believe that
proud Ankh-Morpork is told what to do by a bunch of thieves with towels
on their heads.’

‘No, indeed! It’s about time Johnny Klatchian was taught a lesson,’ said
Lord Selachii. ‘Remember all that business last year with the cabbages?
Ten damn boatloads they wouldn’t accept!’

‘And everyone knows caterpillars _add_ to the flavour,’ said Vimes, more
or less to himself.

The Patrician shot him a glance.

‘That’s right!’ said Selachii. ‘Good honest protein! And you remember
all that trouble Captain Jenkins had over that cargo of mutton? They
were going to _imprison_ him! In a _Klatchian_ jail!’

‘Surely not? Meat is at its _best_ when it’s going green,’ said Vimes.

‘It’s not as if it’d taste any different under all that curry,’ said
Burleigh. ‘I was at a dinner in their embassy once, and do you know what
they made me eat? It was a sheep’s—’

‘Excuse me, gentlemen,’ said Vimes, standing up. ‘There are some urgent
matters I must deal with.’

He nodded to the Patrician and hurried out of the room. He shut the door
behind him and took a breath of fresh air, although right now he’d have
happily inhaled deeply in a tannery.

Corporal Littlebottom stood up and looked at him expectantly. She had
been sitting next to a box, which cooed peacefully.

‘Something’s up. Run down to . . . I mean, send a pigeon down to the
Yard,’ said Vimes.

‘Yes, sir?’

‘All leave is cancelled as of now and I want to see every officer, and I
_mean_ every officer, at the Yard at, oh, let’s say six o’clock.’

‘Right, sir. That might mean an extra pigeon unless I can write small
enough.’

Littlebottom hurried off.

Vimes glanced out of the window. There was always a certain amount of
activity outside the palace but today there was . . . not so much a
crowd as, just, rather more people than you normally saw, hanging
around. As if they were waiting for something.

Klatch!

Everyone _knows_ it.

Old Detritus was right. You could hear the little pebbles bouncing. It’s
not just a few fishermen having a scrap, it’s a hundred years of . . .
well, like two big men trying to fit in one small room, trying to be
polite about it, and then one day one of them just _has_ to stretch and
pretty soon they’re both smashing the furniture.

But it couldn’t really happen, could it? From what he’d heard, the
present Seriph was a competent man who was mostly concerned with
pacifying the rowdy edges of his empire. And there were Klatchians
living in Ankh-Morpork, for heaven’s sake! There were Klatchians _born_
in Ankh-Morpork. You saw some lad with a face that’d got camels written
all over it, and when he opened his mouth it’d turn out he had an
Ankhian accent so thick you could float rocks. Oh, there’s all the jokes
about funny food and foreigners, but surely . . .

Not very funny jokes, come to think of it.

When you hear the bang, there’s no time to wonder how long the little
fuse has been fizzing.

There were raised voices when he went back into the Rats Chamber.

‘_Because_, Lord Selachii,’ the Patrician was saying, ‘these are _not_
the old days. It is no longer considered . . . _nice_ . . . to send a
warship over there to, as you put it, show Johnny Foreigner the error of
his ways. For one thing, we haven’t had any warships since the
_Mary-Jane_ sank four hundred years ago. And times have changed. These
days, the whole world watches. And, my lord, you are no longer allowed
to say “What’re _you_ lookin’ at?” and black their eyes.’ He leaned
back. ‘There’s Chimeria, and Khanli, and Ephebe, and Tsort. And Muntab,
these days, too. And Omnia. Some of these are powerful nations,
gentlemen. Many of them don’t like Klatch’s current expansionist
outlook, but they don’t like us much, either.’

‘Whyever not?’ said Lord Selachii.

‘Well, because during our history those we haven’t occupied we’ve tended
to wage war on,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘For some reason the slaughter of
thousands of people tends to stick in the memory.’

‘Oh, _history_,’ said Lord Selachii. ‘That’s all in the past!’

‘A good place for history, agreed,’ said the Patrician solemnly.

‘I meant: why don’t they like us now? Do we owe them money?’

‘No. Mostly they owe _us_ money. Which is, of course, a far better
reason for their dislike.’

‘How about Sto Lat and Pseudopolis and the other cities?’ said Lord
Downey.

‘They don’t like us much, either.’

‘Why not? I mean t’say, we do share a common heritage,’ said Lord
Selachii.

‘Yes, my lord, but that common heritage largely consists of having had
wars with one another,’ said the Patrician. ‘I can’t see much support
there. Which is a little unfortunate because we do not, in fact, have an
army. I am not, of course, a military man but I believe that one of
those is generally considered vital to the successful prosecution of a
war.’

He looked along the table.

‘The fact _is_,’ he went on, ‘that Ankh-Morpork has been violently
against a standing army.’

‘We all know _why_ people don’t trust an army,’ said Lord Downey. ‘A lot
of armed men, standing around with nothing to do . . . they start to get
ideas . . .’

Vimes saw the heads turn towards him.

‘My word,’ he said, with glassy brightness, ‘can this be a reference to
“Old Stoneface” Vimes, who led the city’s militia in a revolt against
the rule of a tyrannical monarch in an effort to bring some sort of
freedom and justice to the place? I do believe it is! And was he
Commander of the Watch at the time? Good heavens, yes, as a matter of
fact he was! Was he hanged and dismembered and buried in five graves?
And is he a distant ancestor of the current Commander? My word, the
coincidences just _pile_ up, don’t they?’ His voice went from manic
cheerfulness to a growl. ‘Right! That’s got _that_ over with. Now – has
anyone got any point they wish to make?’

There was a general shifting of position and a group clearing of
throats.

‘What about mercenaries?’ said Boggis.

‘The problem with mercenaries,’ said the Patrician, ‘is that they need
to be paid to start fighting. And, unless you are very lucky, you end up
paying them even more to stop—’

Selachii thumped the table.

‘Very well, then, by jingo!’ he snarled. ‘Alone!’

‘We could certainly do with one,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘We need the
money. I was about to say that we cannot _afford_ mercenaries.’

‘How can this be?’ said Lord Downey. ‘Don’t we pay our taxes?’

‘Ah, I thought we might come to that,’ said Lord Vetinari. He raised his
hand and, on cue again, his clerk placed a piece of paper in it.

‘Let me see now . . . ah yes. Guild of Assassins . . . Gross earnings in
the last year: AM$13,207,048. Taxes paid in the last year: forty-seven
dollars, twenty-two pence and what on examination turned out to be a
Hershebian half-_dong_, worth one-eighth of a penny.’

‘That’s all perfectly legal! The Guild of Accountants—’

‘Ah yes. Guild of Accountants: gross earnings AM$7,999,011. Taxes paid:
nil. But, ah yes, I see they applied for a rebate of AM$200,000.’

‘And what we received, I may say, included a Hershebian half-_dong_,’
said Mr Frostrip of the Guild of Accountants.

‘What goes around comes around,’ said Vetinari calmly.

He tossed the paper aside. ‘Taxation, gentlemen, is very much like dairy
farming. The task is to extract the maximum amount of milk with the
minimum of moo. And I am afraid to say that these days all I get is
moo.’

‘Are you telling us that Ankh-Morpork is _bankrupt_?’ said Downey.

‘Of course. While, at the same time, full of rich people. I trust they
have been spending their good fortune on swords.’

‘And you have _allowed_ this wholesale tax avoidance?’ said Lord
Selachii.

‘Oh, the taxes haven’t been avoided,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘Or even
evaded. They just haven’t been paid.’

‘That is a disgusting state of affairs!’

The Patrician raised his eyebrows. ‘Commander Vimes?’

‘Yes, sir?’

‘Would you be so good as to assemble a squad of your most experienced
men, liaise with the tax gatherers and obtain the accumulated back
taxes, please? My clerk here will give you a list of the prime
defaulters.’

‘Right, sir. And if they resist, sir?’ said Vimes, smiling nastily.

‘Oh, how can they resist, commander? This is the will of our civic
leaders.’ He took the paper his clerk proffered. ‘Let me see, now. Top
of the list—’

Lord Selachii coughed hurriedly. ‘Far too late for that sort of nonsense
now,’ he said.

‘Water under the bridge,’ said Lord Downey.

‘Dead and buried,’ said Mr Slant.

‘I paid mine,’ said Vimes.

‘So let me recap, then,’ said Vetinari. ‘I don’t think anyone wants to
see two grown nations scrapping over a piece of rock. We don’t want to
fight, but—’

‘By jingo, if we do, we’ll show those—’ Lord Selachii began.

‘We have no ships. We have no men. We have no money, too,’ said Lord
Vetinari. ‘Of course, we have the art of diplomacy. It is amazing what
you can do with the right words.’

‘Unfortunately, the right words are more readily listened to if you also
have a sharp stick,’ said Lord Downey.

Lord Selachii slapped the table. ‘We don’t have to _talk_ to these
people! My lords . . . gentlemen . . . it’s up to us to show them we
won’t be pushed around! We must re-form the regiments!’

‘Oh, _private_ armies?’ said Vimes. ‘Under the command of someone whose
fitness for it lies in the fact that he can afford to pay for a thousand
funny hats?’

Someone leaned forward, halfway along the table. Up to that moment Vimes
had thought he was asleep, and when Lord Rust spoke it was, indeed, in a
sort of yawn.

‘Whose _fitness_, Mister Vimes, lies in a thousand years of breeding for
leadership,’ he said.

The ‘Mister’ twisted in Vimes’s chest. He knew he was a mister, would
always be a mister, was probably a blueprint for mistership, but he’d be
damned if he wouldn’t be Sir Samuel to someone who pronounced years as
‘hyahs’.

‘Ah, good breeding,’ he said. ‘No, sorry, don’t have any of _that_, if
that’s what you need to get your own men killed by sheer—’

‘Gentlemen, please,’ said the Patrician. He shook his head. ‘Let’s have
no fighting, please. This is, after all, a council of war. As for
re-forming the regiments, well, this is of course your ancient right.
The supplying of armed men in times of need is one of the duties of a
gentleman. History is on your side. The precedents are clear enough, I
can’t go against them. I have to say I cannot afford to.’

‘You’re going to let them play soldiers?’ said Vimes.

‘Oh, Commander Vimes,’ said Mr Burleigh, smiling. ‘As a military man
yourself, you must—’

Sometimes people can attract attention by shouting. They might opt for
thumping a table, or even take a swing at someone else. But Vimes
achieved the effect by freezing, by simply doing nothing. The chill
radiated off him. Lines in his face locked like a statue.

‘_I am not a military man_.’

And then Burleigh made the mistake of trying to grin disarmingly.

‘Well, commander, the helmet and armour and everything . . . It’s really
all the same in the end, isn’t it?’

‘_No. It’s not_.’

‘Gentlemen . . . ’ Lord Vetinari put his hands flat on the table, a sign
that the meeting had ended. ‘I can only repeat that tomorrow I shall be
discussing the matter with Prince Khufurah—’

‘I’ve heard good reports of him,’ said Lord Rust. ‘Strict but fair. One
can only admire what he’s doing in some of those backward regions. A
most—’

‘No, sir. You are thinking of Prince Cadram,’ said Lord Vetinari.
‘Khufurah is the younger brother. He is arriving here as his brother’s
special envoy.’

‘Him? _That_ one? The man’s a wastrel! A cheat! A liar! They say he
takes bri—’

‘Thank you for your diplomatic input, Lord Rust,’ said the Patrician.
‘We must deal with facts as they are. There is always a way. Our nations
have many interests in common. And of course it says a lot for the
seriousness with which Cadram is treating this matter that he is sending
his own brother to deal with it. It’s a nod towards the international
community.’

‘A Klatchian bigwig is coming _here_?’ said Vimes. ‘No one told me!’

‘Strange as it may seem, Sir Samuel, I am occasionally capable of
governing this city for minutes at a time without seeking your advice
and guidance.’

‘I meant there’s a lot of anti-Klatchian feeling around—’

‘_A really greasy piece of work_—’ Lord Rust whispered to Mr Boggis, in
that special aristocratic whisper that carries to the rafters. ‘_It’s an
insult to send him here!_’

‘I am sure that you will see to it that the streets are safe to walk,
Vimes,’ said the Patrician sharply. ‘I know you pride yourself on that
sort of thing. Officially he’s here because the wizards have invited him
to their big award ceremony. An honorary doctorate, that sort of thing.
And one of their lunches afterwards. I do like negotiating with people
after the faculty of Unseen University have entertained them to lunch.
They tend not to move about much and they’ll agree to practically
anything if they think there’s a chance of a stomach powder and a small
glass of water. And now, gentlemen . . . if you will excuse me . . .’

The lords and leaders departed in ones and twos, talking quietly as they
walked out into the hall.

The Patrician shuffled his papers into order, running a thin finger
along each edge of the pile, and then looked up.

‘You appear to be casting a shadow, commander.’

‘You’re not _really_ going to allow them to re-form the regiments, are
you?’ said Vimes.

‘There is absolutely no law against it, Vimes. And it will keep them
occupied. Every official gentleman is entitled, in fact I believe used
to be _required_, to raise men when the city required it. And, of
course, any citizen has the right to bear arms. Bear that in mind,
please.’

‘Arms is one thing. Holding weapons in ’em and playing soldiers is
another.’ Vimes put his knuckles on the table and leaned forward.

‘You see, sir,’ he said, ‘I can’t help but think that over there in
Klatch a bunch of idiots are doing the same thing. They’re saying to the
Seriph “It’s time to sort out those devils in Ankh-Morpork, offendi”.
And when a lot of people are running around with weapons and talking
daft stuff about war, accidents happen. Have you ever been in a pub when
everyone goes armed? Oh, things are a little polite at first, I’ll grant
you, and then some twerp drinks out of the wrong mug or picks up someone
else’s change by mistake and five minutes later you’re picking noses out
of the beer nuts—’

The Patrician looked down at Vimes’s knuckles and stared fixedly until
Vimes removed them.

‘Vimes, you will be at the wizards’ Convivium tomorrow. I sent you a
memo about it.’

‘I never—’ A vision of the piles of unread paperwork on Vimes’s desk
loomed treacherously in his mind. ‘Ah,’ he said.

‘The Commander of the Watch leads the procession in full dress uniform.
It’s an ancient custom.’

‘Me? Walk in front of everyone?’

‘Indeed. Very . . . civic. As I’m sure you recall. It demonstrates the
friendly alliance between the University and the civil government which,
I may say, seems to consist of their promising to do anything we ask
provided we promise not to ask them to do anything. Anyway, it is your
duty. Tradition decrees it. And Lady Sybil has agreed to see to it that
you are there with a crisp bright shining morning face.’

Vimes took a deep breath. ‘You asked my _wife_?’

‘Certainly. She is very proud of you. She believes you are capable of
great things, Vimes. She must be a great comfort to you.’

‘Well, I . . . I mean, I . . . yes . . .’

‘Excellent. Oh, just one other thing, Vimes. I do have the Assassins and
the Thieves in agreement on this, but to cover _all_ eventualities . . .
I would consider it a favour if you could see to it that no one throws
eggs or something at the Prince. That sort of thing always upsets
people.’

The two sides watched each other carefully. They were old enemies. They
had tested strengths many a time, had tasted defeat and victory, had
contested turf. But this time it would go all the way.

Knuckles whitened. Boots scraped impatiently.

Captain Carrot bounced the ball once or twice.

‘All right, lads, one more try, eh? And this time, no horseplay.
William, what are you eating?’

The Artful Nudger scowled. _No one_ knew his name. Kids he’d grown up
with didn’t know his name. His mother, if he ever found out who she was,
probably didn’t know his name. But Carrot had found out somehow. If
anyone else had called him ‘William’ they’d be looking for their ear. In
their mouth.

‘Chewing gum, mister.’

‘Have you brought enough for everybody?’

‘No, mister.’

‘Then put it away, there’s a good chap. Now, let’s— Gavin, what’s that
up your sleeve?’

The one known as Scumbag Gav didn’t bother to argue.

‘’s a knife, Mr Carrot.’

‘And I _bet_ you brought enough for everybody, eh?’

‘’sright, mister.’ Scumbag grinned. He was ten.

‘Go on, put them on the heap with the others . . .’

Constable Shoe looked over the wall in horror. There were about fifty
youths in the wide alleyway. Average age in years, about eleven. Average
age in cynicism and malevolent evil: about 163. Although Ankh-Morpork
football doesn’t usually have goals in the normal sense, two had been
nevertheless made at each end of the alley using the time-honoured
method of piling up things to mark where the posts would be.

Two piles: one of knives, one of blunt instruments.

In the middle of the boys, who were wearing the colours of some of the
nastier street gangs, Captain Carrot was bouncing an inflated pig’s
bladder.

Constable Shoe wondered if he ought to go and get help, but the man
seemed quite at ease.

‘Er, captain?’ he ventured.

‘Oh, hello, Reg. We were just having a friendly game of football. This
is Constable Shoe, lads.’

Fifty pairs of eyes said: We’ll remember your face, copper.

Reg edged around the wall and the eyes noted the arrow which had gone
straight through his breastplate and protruded several inches from his
back.

‘There’s been a bit of trouble, sir,’ said Reg. ‘I thought I’d better
fetch you. It’s a hostage situation . . .’

‘I’ll come right away. Okay, lads, sorry about this. Play amongst
yourselves, will you? And I hope I’ll see you all on Tuesday for the
sing-song and sausage sizzle.’

‘Yeah, mister,’ said the Artful Nudger.

‘And Corporal Angua will see if she can teach you the campfire howl.’

‘Yeah, right,’ said Scumbag.

‘But what do we do before we part?’ said Carrot expectantly.

The bloods of the Skats and the Mohocks looked bashfully at one another.
Usually they were nervous of nothing, it being a banishment matter to
show fear in any circumstances. But when they’d variously drawn up the
clan rules, no one had ever thought there’d be someone like Carrot.

Glaring at one another with I’ll-kill-you-if-you-ever-mention-this
expressions, they all raised the index fingers of both hands to the
level of their ears and chorused: ‘Wib wib wib.’

‘Wob wob wob,’ Carrot replied heartily. ‘Okay, Reg, let’s go.’

‘How’d you do that, captain?’ said Constable Shoe, as the watchmen
hurried off.

‘Oh, you just raise both fingers like _this_,’ said Carrot. ‘But I’d be
obliged if you don’t tell anyone, because it’s meant to be a secret
sig—’

‘But they’re thugs, captain! Young killers! Villains!’

‘Oh, they’re a bit cheeky, but nice enough boys underneath, when you
take the time to understand—’

‘I heard they never give anyone enough _time_ to understand! Does Mr
Vimes know you’re doing this?’

‘He sort of knows, yes. I said I’d like to start a club for the street
kids and he said it was fine provided I took them camping on the edge of
some really sheer cliff somewhere in a high wind. But he always says
things like that. And I’m sure we wouldn’t have him any other way. Now,
where are these hostages?’

‘It’s at Vortin’s again, captain. But it’s . . . sort of worse than
that . . .’

Behind them, the Skats and the Mohocks looked at one another warily.
Then they picked up their weapons and edged away with care. It’s not
that we don’t want to fight, their manner said. It’s just that we’ve got
better things to do right now, and so we’re going to go away and find
out what they are.

Unusually for the docks, there was not a great deal of shouting and
general conversation. People were too busy thinking about money.

Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs leaned against a stack of timber and
watched a man very carefully painting the name _Pride of Ankh-Morpork_
on the prow of a ship. At some point he’d realize that he’d left out the
‘e’, and they were idly looking forward to this modest entertainment.

‘You ever been to sea, sarge?’ said Nobby.

‘Hah, not me!’ said the sergeant. ‘Don’t go flogging the oggin, lad.’

‘I don’t,’ said Nobby. ‘I have never flogged any oggin. Never in my
entire life have I flogged oggin.’

‘Right.’

‘I’ve always been very clean in that respect.’

‘Except you don’t know what flogging the oggin means, do you?’

‘No, sarge.’

‘It means going to sea. You can’t bloody trust the sea. When I was a
little lad I had this book about this little kid, he turned into a
mermaid, sort of thing, and he lived down the bottom of the sea—’

‘—the oggin—’

‘Right, and it was all nice talking fishes and pink seashells and stuff,
and then I went on my holidays to Quirm and I _saw_ the sea, and I
thought: here goes, and if our ma hadn’t been quick on her feet I don’t
know what would have happened. I mean, the kid in the book could breathe
under the sea, so how was I to know? It’s all bloody _lies_ about the
sea. It’s just all yuk with lobsters in it.’

‘My mum’s uncle was a sailor,’ said Nobby. ‘But after the big plague he
got press-ganged. Bunch of farmers got him drunk, he woke up next
morning tied to a plough.’

They lounged some more.

‘Looks like we’re going to be in a fight, sarge,’ said Nobby, as the
painter very carefully started on the final ‘k’.

‘Won’t last long. Lots of cowards, the Klatchians,’ said Colon. ‘The
moment they taste a bit of cold steel they’re legging it away over the
sand.’

Sergeant Colon had had a broad education. He’d been to the School of My
Dad Always Said, the College of It Stands to Reason, and was now a
postgraduate student at the University of What Some Bloke In the Pub
Told Me.

‘Shouldn’t be any trouble to sort out, then?’ said Nobby.

‘And, o’course, they’re not the same colour as what we are,’ said Colon.
‘Well . . . as me, anyway,’ he added, in view of the various hues of
Corporal Nobbs. There was probably no one alive who was the same colour
as Corporal Nobbs.

‘Constable Visit’s pretty brown,’ said Nobby. ‘I never seen him run
away. If there’s a chance of giving someone a religious pamphlet ole
Washpot’s after them like a terrier.’

‘Ah, but Omnians are more like us,’ said Colon. ‘Bit weird but,
basic’ly, just the same as us underneath. No, the way you can tell a
Klatchian is, you look an’ see if he uses a lot of words beginning with
“al”, right? ’Cos that’s a dead giveaway. They invented all the words
starting with “al”. That’s how you can tell they’re Klatchian. Like
al-cohol, see?’

‘They invented beer?’

‘Yeah.’

‘That’s clever.’

‘I wouldn’t call it _clever_,’ said Sergeant Colon, realizing too late
that he’d made a tactical error. ‘More, luck, I’d say.’

‘What else did they do?’

‘Well, there’s . . .’ Colon racked his brains. ‘There’s al-gebra. That’s
like sums with letters. For . . . for people whose brains aren’t clever
enough for numbers, see?’

‘Is that a fact?’

‘Right,’ said Colon. ‘In fact,’ he went on, a little more assertively
now he could see a way ahead, ‘I heard this wizard down the University
say that the Klatchians invented nothing. That was their great
contribution to maffs, he said. I said “What?” an’ he said, they come up
with zero.’

‘Dun’t sound that clever to me,’ said Nobby. ‘Anyone could invent
nothing. I ain’t invented anything.’

‘My point exactly,’ said Colon. ‘I told him, it was people who invented
numbers like four and, and—’

‘—seven—’

‘—right, who were the geniuses. _Nothing_ didn’t need inventing. It was
just there. They probably just found it.’

‘It’s having all that desert,’ said Nobby.

‘Right! Good point. Desert. Which, as everyone knows, is basically
nothing. Nothing’s a natural resource to them. It stands to reason.
Whereas we’re more civilized, see, and we got a lot more stuff around to
count, so we invented numbers. It’s like . . . well, they _say_ the
Klatchians invented astronomy—’

‘Al-tronomy,’ said Nobby helpfully.

‘No, no . . . no, Nobby, I reckon they’d discovered esses by then,
probably nicked ’em off’f us . . . anyway, they were _bound_ to invent
astronomy, ’cos there’s bugger all else for them to look at but the sky.
Anyone can look at the stars and give ’em names. ’s going it a bit to
call it _inventing_, in any case. We don’t go around saying we’ve
_invented_ something just because we had a quick dekko at it.’

‘I heard where they’ve got a lot of odd gods,’ said Nobby.

‘Yeah, _and_ mad priests,’ said Colon. ‘Foaming at the mouth, half of
’em. Believe all kinds of loony things.’

They watched the painter in silence for a moment. Colon was dreading the
question that came.

‘So how _exactly_ are they different from ours, then?’ said Nobby. ‘I
mean, some of _our_ priests are—’

‘I hope you ain’t being _unpatriotic_,’ said Colon severely.

‘No, of course not. I was just asking. I can see where they’d be a lot
worse than ours, being foreign and everything.’

‘And of course they’re all mad for fighting,’ said Colon. ‘Vicious
buggers with all those curvy swords of theirs.’

‘You mean, like . . . they viciously attack you while cowardly running
away after tasting cold steel?’ said Nobby, who sometimes had a
treacherously good memory for detail.

‘You can’t trust ’em, like I said. And they burp hugely after meals.’

‘Well . . . so do you, sarge.’

‘Yes, but I don’t pretend it’s _polite_, Nobby.’

‘Well, it’s certainly a good job there’s you around to explain things,
sarge,’ said Nobby. ‘It’s amazing the stuff you know.’

‘I surprise myself, sometimes,’ said Colon modestly.

The painter of the ship leaned back to admire his work. They heard him
give a heartfelt little groan, and both of them nodded in satisfaction.

Hostage negotiations were always tricky, Carrot had learned. It paid not
to rush things. Let the other man talk when he was ready.

So he was whiling away the time sitting behind the upturned cart they
were using as a shield from the occasional random arrow and writing his
letter home. The exercise was carried out with much frowning, sucking of
the pencil and what Commander Vimes called a ballistic approach to
spelling and punctuation.

Dere Mum and Dade,

I hope this letter finds you in good health as I am also. Thank you for
the big parcel of dwarf bread you sent me I have sharred it with the
other dwarfs on the Watch and they say it is better even than Ironcrufts
(‘T’Bread Wi’ T’Edge’) and you carn’t beat the taste of a home-forged
loaf, so well done mum.

Things are going well with the Wolf Pack that I have told you about but
Cmdr. Vimes is not happy, I told him they were good lads at heart and it
would help them to learn the ways of Natchure and the Wilderness and he
said hah they know them already that is the trouble. But he gave me $5
to buy a football which proves he cares deep down.

We have more new faeces in the Watch which is just as well with this
truble with Klatch, it is all looking very Grave, I feel it is the Clam
before the Storm and no mistake.

I must brake off now because some robbers have broke into Vortin’s
Dimond Warehouse and have taken Corporal Angua hostage. I fear there may
be terrible bloodshed so,

_I remain_,

_Yr. Loving Son_,

_Carrot Ironfoundersson (Captain_)

ps I will write again tomorrow

Carrot folded the letter carefully and slipped it under his breastplate.

‘I think they have had long enough to consider our suggestion,
constable. What’s next on the list?’

Constable Shoe leafed through a file of grubby paper and pulled out
another sheet.

‘Well, we’re down to offences of stealing pennies off blind beggars
now,’ he said. ‘Oh, no, this is a good one . . .’

Carrot took the sheet in one hand and megaphone in the other and raised
his head carefully over the edge of the cart.

‘Good morning again!’ he said brightly. ‘We’ve found another one. Theft
of jewellery from—’

‘Yes! Yes! We did it!’ shouted a voice from the building.

‘Really? I haven’t even said what it was yet,’ said Carrot.

‘Never mind, we _did_ it! Now can we come out, please?’ There was
another sound behind the voice. It sounded like a low, continuous growl.

‘I think you ought to be able to tell me what you stole,’ said Carrot.

‘Er . . . rings? Gold rings?’

‘Sorry, no rings mentioned.’

‘Pearl necklace? Yes, that’s what—’

‘Getting warmer, but no.’

‘Earrings?’

‘Ooo, you’re so close,’ said Carrot encouragingly.

‘A crown, was it? Maybe a coronet?’

Carrot leaned down to the constable. ‘Says here a tiara, Reg, can we
let—?’ He stood up. ‘We’re prepared to accept “coronet”. Well done!’

He looked down at Constable Shoe again.

‘This _is_ all right, isn’t it, Reg? It’s not coercion, is it?’

‘Can’t see how it can be, captain. I mean, _they_ broke in, _they_ took
a hostage . . .’

‘I suppose you’re right—’

‘_Please! No! Good boy! Down!_’

‘Seems to be about it, sir,’ said Reg Shoe, peering around the edge of
the cart. ‘We’ve got them down for everything but the Hide Park
Flasher—’

‘We did that!’ screamed someone.

‘—and that was a woman . . .’

‘_We did it!_’ This time the voice was a lot higher. ‘_Now please can we
come out?_’

Carrot stood up and raised the megaphone. ‘If you gentlemen would care
to step out with your hands up?’

‘Are you joking?’ whimpered someone, against the background of another
growl.

‘Well, at least with your hands where I can see them.’

‘You bet, mister!’

Four men stumbled out into the street. Their torn clothing fluttered in
the breeze. The apparent leader pointed an angry finger back at the
doorway as Carrot walked towards them.

‘The owner of that place ought to be prosecuted!’ he shouted. ‘Keeping a
wild animal like that in his strongroom, it’s disgraceful! We broke in
perfectly peacefully and it just attacked us for no reason at all!’

‘You shot at Constable Shoe here,’ said Carrot.

‘Only to miss! Only to miss!’

Constable Shoe pointed at the arrow sticking into his breastplate.

‘Right where it shows!’ he complained. ‘It’s a welding job and we have
to pay for our own armour repairs and there’ll always be a mark, you
know, no matter what I do.’

Their horrified gaze took in the stitch marks around his neck and on his
hands, and it dawned on them that, although the human race came in a
variety of colours, very few living people were grey with a hint of
green.

‘Here, you’re a _zombie_!’

‘That’s right, kick a man when he’s dead,’ said Constable Shoe sharply.

‘And you took Corporal Angua hostage. A _lady_,’ said Carrot, in the
same level voice. It was very polite. But it simply suggested that
somewhere a fuse was burning, and it would be a good idea not to wait
for it to reach the barrel.

‘Yes . . . sort of . . . but she must’ve got away when that _creature_
turned up . . .’

‘So you left her in there?’ said Carrot, still very calm.

The men dropped to their knees. The leader raised his hand imploringly.

‘Please! We’re just robbers and thieves! We’re not bad men!’

Carrot nodded to Constable Shoe. ‘Take them down to the Yard,
constable.’

‘Right!’ said Reg. There was a mean look in his eye as he cocked his
crossbow. ‘I’m down ten dollars thanks to you. So you’d better not try
to escape.’

‘No, sir. Not us.’

Carrot wandered into the gloom of the building. Fearful faces peered out
of doorways. He gave them a reassuring smile as he walked towards the
strongroom.

Corporal Angua was adjusting her uniform.

‘I didn’t bite anyone, before you start,’ she said, as he appeared in
the doorway. ‘Not even flesh wounds. I just tore at their trousers. And
that was no bed of roses, I might add.’

A frightened face appeared round the door.

‘Ah, Mr Vortin,’ said Carrot. ‘I think you will find that all is in
order. They seem to have dropped everything.’

The diamond merchant looked at him in amazement.

‘But they had a hostage—’

‘They saw the error of their ways,’ said Carrot.

‘And . . . and there were snarling noises . . . sounded like a
wolf . . .’

‘Ah, yes,’ said Carrot. ‘Well, you know, when thieves fall out . . .’
Which was no kind of explanation, but because the tone of voice
suggested that it _was_, Mr Vortin accepted it as such for fully five
minutes after Carrot and Angua had left.

‘Well, that’s a nice start to the day,’ said Carrot.

‘Thank you, yes, I wasn’t hurt,’ said Angua.

‘It makes it all seem worthwhile, somehow.’

‘Just my hair messed up and another shirt ruined.’

‘Well done.’

‘Sometimes I might suspect that you don’t listen to anything I say,’
said Angua.

‘Glad to hear it,’ said Carrot.

The entire Watch was mustering. Vimes looked down at the sea of faces.

My gods, he thought. How many have we got now? A few years ago you could
count the Watch on the fingers of a blind butcher’s hand, and now . . .

There’s _more_ coming in!

He leaned sideways to Captain Carrot. ‘Who’re all these people?’

‘Watchmen, sir. You appointed them.’

‘Did I? I haven’t even _met_ some of them!’

‘You signed the paperwork, sir. And you sign the wage bill every month.
Eventually.’

There was a hint of criticism in his voice. Vimes’s approach to
paperwork was not to touch it until someone was shouting, and then at
least there would be someone to help him sort through the stacks.

‘But how did they join?’

‘Usual way, sir. Swore them in, gave them each a helmet—’

‘Hey, that’s Reg Shoe! He’s a zombie! He falls to bits all the time!’

‘Very big man in the undead community, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘How come _he_ joined?’

‘He came round last week to complain about the Watch harassing some
bogeymen, sir. He was very, er, vehement, sir. So I persuaded him that
what the Watch needed was some expertise, and so he joined up, sir.’

‘No more complaints?’

‘Twice as many, sir. All from undead, sir, and all against Mr Shoe.
Funny, that.’

Vimes gave his captain a sideways look.

‘He’s very hurt about it, sir. He says he’s found that the undead just
don’t understand the difficulties of policing in a multi-vital society,
sir.’

Good gods, thought Vimes, that’s just what I would have done. But I’d
have done it because I’m not a nice person. Carrot _is_ a nice person,
he’s practically got medals for it, surely he wouldn’t have . . .

And he knew that he would never know. Somewhere behind Carrot’s innocent
stare was a steel door.

‘_You_ enrolled him, did you?’

‘Nossir. You did, sir. You signed his joining orders and his kit chitty
and his posting orders, sir.’

Vimes had another vision of too many documents, hurriedly signed. But he
_must_ have signed them and they needed the men, true enough. It was
just that it ought to be _him_ who—

‘And anyone of sergeant rank or above can recruit, sir,’ said Carrot, as
if reading his mind. ‘It’s in the General Orders. Page twenty-two, sir.
Just below the tea stain.’

‘And you’ve recruited . . . how many?’

‘Oh, just one or two. We’re still very shorthanded, sir.’

‘We are with Reg. His arms keep falling off.’

‘Aren’t you going to talk to the men, sir?’

Vimes looked at the assembled . . . well, multitude. There was no other
word. Well, there were plenty, but none that it would be fair to use.

Big ones, short ones, fat ones, troll ones with the lichen still on,
bearded dwarf ones, the looming pottery presence of the golem Constable
Dorfl, undead ones . . . and even now he wasn’t certain if that term
should include Corporal Angua, an intelligent girl and a very useful
wolf when she had to be. Waifs and strays, Colon had said once. Waifs
and bloody strays, because normal people wouldn’t be coppers.

Technically they were all in uniform, too, except that mostly they
weren’t wearing the same uniform as anyone else. Everyone had just been
sent down to the armoury to collect whatever fitted, and the result was
a walking historical exhibit: Funny-Shaped Helmets Through the Ages.

‘Er . . . ladies and gentlemen—’ he began.

‘Be quiet, please, and listen to Commander Vimes!’ bellowed Carrot.

Vimes found himself meeting the gaze of Angua, who was leaning against
the wall. She rolled her eyes helplessly.

‘Yes, _yes_, thank you, captain,’ said Vimes. He turned back to the
massed array of Ankh-Morpork’s finest. He opened his mouth. He stared.
And then he shut his mouth, all but a corner of it. And said out of that
corner: ‘What’s that little lump on Constable Flint’s head?’

‘That’s Probationary Constable Buggy Swires, sir. He likes to get a good
view.’

‘He’s a _gnome_!’

‘Well done, sir.’

‘Another one of yours?’

‘_Ours_, sir,’ said Carrot, using his reproachful voice again. ‘Yes,
sir. Attached to the Chitterling Street Station since last week, sir.’

‘Oh my gods . . .’ murmured Vimes.

Buggy Swires saw his stare and saluted. He was five inches tall.

Vimes regathered his mental balance. The long and the short and the
tall . . . waifs and strays, all of us.

‘I’m not going to keep you long,’ he said. ‘You all know me . . . well,
_most_ of you know me,’ he added, with a sidelong glance at Carrot, ‘and
I don’t make speeches. But I’m sure all of you have noticed the way this
Leshp business has got people all stirred up. There’s a lot of loose
talk about war. Well, war isn’t our business. War is soldiers’ business.
Our business, I think, is to keep the peace. Let me show you this—’

He stood back and pulled something out of his pocket with a flourish. At
least, that was the intention. There was a rip as something ceased to be
entangled in the lining.

‘Damn . . . ah . . . ’

He produced a length of shiny black wood from the ragged pocket. There
was a large silver knob on the end. The watchmen craned to look.

‘This . . . er . . . this . . .’ Vimes groped. ‘This old man turned up
from the palace a couple of weeks ago. Gave me this damn thing. Got a
label saying “_Regalia of the Watch Commandr., Citie of Ankh-Morporke_”.
You know they never throw anything away up at the palace.’

He waved it vaguely. The wood was surprisingly heavy.

‘It’s got the coat of arms on the knob, look.’ Thirty watchmen tried to
see.

‘And I thought . . . I thought, good grief, _this_ is what I’m supposed
to carry? And I thought about it, and then I thought, no, that’s right,
just once someone got it _right_. It’s not even a weapon, it’s just a
_thing_. It ain’t for using, it’s just for having. That’s what it’s all
about. Same thing with uniforms. You see, a soldier’s uniform, it’s to
turn him into part of a crowd of other parts all in the same uniform,
but a copper’s uniform is there to—’

Vimes stopped. Perplexed expressions in front of him told him that he
was building a house of cards with too few cards on the bottom.

He coughed.

‘_Anyway_,’ he went on, with a glare to indicate that everyone should
forget the previous twenty seconds, ‘our job is to _stop_ people
fighting. There’s a lot happening on the street. You’ve probably heard
that they’re starting up the regiments again. Well, people can recruit
if they like. But we’re not going to have any mobs. There’s a nasty mood
around. I don’t know what’s going to happen, but we’ve got to be there
when it does.’ He looked around the room. ‘Another thing. This new
Klatchian envoy or whatever he’s called is arriving tomorrow. I don’t
think the Assassins’ Guild has anything planned but _tonight_ we’re
going to check the route the wizards’ procession will be taking. A nice
little job for the night shift. And tonight we’re _all_ on the night
shift.’

There was a groan from the Watch.

‘As my old sergeant used to say, if you can’t take a joke you shouldn’t
have joined,’ said Vimes. ‘A nice gentle door-to-door inspection,
shaking hands with doorknobs, giving the uniform a bit of an airing.
Good old-fashioned policing. Any questions? Good. Thank you very much.’

There was a general rustling and relaxing among the squad as it dawned
on them that they were free to go.

Carrot started to clap.

It wasn’t the clap used by middlings to encourage underlings to applaud
overlings.¹ It had genuine enthusiasm behind it which was, somehow,
worse. A couple of the more impressionable new constables picked it up
and then, in the same way that little pebbles lead the avalanche, the
sound of humanoids banging their hands together filled the room.

Vimes glowered.

‘Very inspiring, sir!’ said Carrot, as the clapping rose to a storm.

Rain poured on Ankh-Morpork. It filled the gutters and overflowed and
was then flung away by the wind. It tasted of salt.

The gargoyles had crept out of their daytime shadows and were perched on
every cornice and tower, ears and wings outstretched to sieve anything
edible out of the water. It was amazing what could fall on Ankh-Morpork.
Rains of small fish and frogs were common enough, although bedsteads
caused comment.

A broken gutter poured a sheet of water down the window of Ossie Brunt,
who was sitting on his bed because there were no chairs or, indeed, any
other furniture. He didn’t mind at the moment. In a minute or two he
might be very angry. And, then again, possibly not.

It was not that Ossie was insane in any way. Friends would have called
him a quiet sort who kept himself to himself, but they didn’t because he
didn’t have any friends. There _was_ a group of men who went to practise
at the archery butts on Tuesday nights, and he sometimes went to a pub
with them afterwards and sat and listened to them talk, and he’d saved
up once and bought a round of drinks, although they probably wouldn’t
remember or maybe they’d say, ‘Oh . . . yeah . . . Ossie.’ People said
that. People tended to put him out of their minds, in the same way that
you didn’t pay much attention to empty space.

He wasn’t stupid. He thought a lot about things. Sometimes he’d sit and
think for hours, just staring at the opposite wall where the rain came
in on damp nights and made a map of Klatch.

Someone hammered on the door. ‘Mr Brunt? Are you decent?’

‘I’m a bit busy, Mrs Spent,’ he said, putting his bow under the bed with
his magazines.

‘It’s about the rent!’

‘Yes, Mrs Spent?’

‘You know my rules!’

‘I shall pay you tomorrow, Mrs Spent,’ said Ossie, looking towards the
window.

‘Cash in my hand by noon or it’s out you go!’

‘Yes, Mrs Spent.’

He heard her stamp downstairs again.

He counted to fifty, very carefully, and then reached down and pulled
out his bow again.

Angua was on patrol with Nobby Nobbs. This was not an ideal arrangement,
but Carrot was on swing patrol and on a night like this Fred Colon, who
kept the roster, had an uncanny knack of being on desk duty in the warm.
So the spare partners had been thrown together. It was a terrible
thought.

‘Can I have a word, miss?’ said Nobby, as they rattled doorknobs and
waved their lanterns into alleyways.

‘Yes, Nobby?’

‘It’s pers’nal.’

‘Oh.’

‘Only I’d ask Fred, but he wouldn’t understand, and I fink you _would_
understand on account of you being a woman. Most of the time, anyway. No
offence meant.’

‘What do you _want_, Nobby?’

‘It’s about my . . . sexual nature, miss.’

Angua said nothing. Rain banged off Nobby’s ill-fitting helmet.

‘I think it’s time I looked it full in the face, miss.’

Angua cursed her graphic imagination again.

‘And, er . . . how were you thinking of doing that, Nobby?’

‘I mean, I sent off for stuff, miss. Creams an’ that.’

‘Creams,’ said Angua flatly.

‘That you rub on,’ said Nobby helpfully.

‘Rub on.’

‘And a thing you do exercises with—’

‘Oh gods . . .’

‘Sorry, miss?’

‘What? Oh . . . I was just thinking of something else. Do go on.
Exercises?’

‘Yeah. To build up my biceps and that.’

‘Oh, _exercises_. Really?’ Nobby did not appear to have any biceps to
speak of. There wasn’t really anything for them to be on. Technically he
had arms, because his hands were attached to his shoulders, but that was
about all you could say.

Horrified interest got the better of her.

‘_Why_, Nobby?’

He looked down, sheepishly.

‘Well . . . I mean . . . you know . . . girls an’ that . . .’

To her amazement, Nobby was blushing.

‘You mean you . . .’ she began. ‘You want to . . . you’re looking
for . . .’

‘Oh, I’m not just after . . . I mean, if you want a thing done properly
then . . . I mean, no,’ said Nobby reproachfully. ‘What I’m saying is,
as you get older, you know, you think about settlin’ down, findin’
someone who’ll go with you hand in hand down life’s bumpy highway— Why’s
your mouth open?’

Angua shut it abruptly.

‘But I just don’t seem to meet girls,’ Nobby said. ‘Well, I mean, I
_meet_ girls, and then they rush off.’

‘Despite the cream.’

‘Right.’

‘And the exercises.’

‘Yes.’

‘Well, you’ve covered all the angles, I can see that,’ said Angua.
‘Beats me where you’re going wrong.’ She sighed. ‘What about Stamina
Thrum, in Elm Street?’

‘She’s got a wooden leg.’

‘Well, then . . . Verity Pushpram, nice girl, she runs the clam and
cockle barrow in Rime Street?’

‘Hammerhead? Stinks of fish all the time. And she’s got a squint.’

‘She’s got her own business, though. Does wonderful chowder, too.’

‘And a squint.’

‘Not exactly a squint, Nobby.’

‘Yes, but you know what I mean.’

Angua had to admit that she did. Verity had the _opposite_ of a squint.
Both eyes appeared to be endeavouring to see the adjacent ear. When you
talked to her, you had to suppress a feeling that she was about to walk
off in two directions. But she could gut fish like a champion.

She sighed again. She was familiar with the syndrome. They _said_ they
wanted a soulmate and helpmeet but sooner or later the list would
include a skin like silk and a chest fit for a herd of cows.

Except for Carrot. That was almost . . . almost one of the _annoying_
things about him. She suspected he wouldn’t mind if she shaved her head
or grew a beard. It wasn’t that he wouldn’t notice, he just wouldn’t
_mind_, and for some reason that was very aggravating.

‘The only thing I can suggest’, she said, ‘is that women are quite often
attracted to men who can make them laugh.’

Nobby brightened. ‘Really?’ he said. ‘I ought to be well in there,
then.’

‘Good.’

‘People laugh at me all the time.’

High above, quite oblivious of the rain that had already soaked him to
the skin, Ossie Brunt checked the oilskin cover round his bow and
settled down for the long wait.

Rain was a copper’s friend. Tonight people were making do with indoor
crime.

Vimes stood in the lee of one of the fountains in Sator Square. The
fountain hadn’t worked for years, but he was getting just as wet as if
it were in full flow. He’d never experienced truly horizontal rain
before.

There was no one around. The rain marched across the square like . . .
like an army . . .

Now _there_ was an image from his youth. Funny how they hung around in
the dark alleys of your brain and suddenly jumped out on you.

Rain falling on water . . .

Ah, yes . . . When he was a little lad he’d pretended that the raindrops
splashing in the running gutters were soldiers. Millions of soldiers.
And the bubbles that sometimes went floating by were men on horseback.

Right now he couldn’t remember what the occasional dead dog had been.
Some kind of siege weapon, possibly.

Water swirled around his boots and dripped off his cape. When he tried
to light a cigar the wind blew the match out and the rain poured off his
helmet and soaked the cigar in any case.

He grinned in the night.

He was, temporarily, a happy man. He was cold, wet and alone, trying to
keep out of the worst of the weather at three o’clock on a ferocious
morning. He’d spent some of the best nights of his life like this. At
such times you could just . . . sort of hunch your shoulders like _this_
and let your head pull in like _this_ and you became a little hutch of
warmth and peace, the rain banging on your helmet, the mind just ticking
over, sorting out the world . . .

It was like this in the old days, when no one cared about the Watch and
all you really had to do was keep out of trouble. Those were the days
when there wasn’t as much to do.

But there _was_ as much to do, said an inner voice. You just didn’t do
it.

He could feel the official truncheon hanging heavily in the special
pocket that Sybil herself had sewn in his breeches. Why is it just a bit
of wood? he’d asked himself when he’d unwrapped it. Why not a sword?
_That_’s the symbol of power. And then he’d realized why it couldn’t
ever be a sword—

‘Ho there, good citizen! May I ask your business this brisk morning?’

He sighed. There was a lantern appearing through the murk, surrounded by
a halo of water.

_Ho there, good citizen_ . . . There was only one person in the city who
would say something like that and mean it.

‘It’s me, captain.’

The halo drew nearer and illuminated the damp face of Captain Carrot.
The young man ripped off a salute – at godsdamn three in the morning,
Vimes thought – that would have brought a happy tear to the eye of the
most psychotic drill sergeant.

‘What’re you doing out, sir?’

‘I just wanted to . . . check up on things,’ said Vimes.

‘You could have left it all to me, sir,’ said Carrot. ‘Delegation is the
key to successful command.’

‘Really? Is it?’ said Vimes sourly. ‘My word, we live and learn, don’t
we.’ And you certainly learn, he added in the privacy of his head. And
he was _almost_ sure he was being mean and stupid.

‘We’ve just about finished, sir. We’ve checked all the empty buildings.
And there will be an extra squad of constables on the route. _And_ the
gargoyles will be up as high as they can. You know how good they are at
watching, sir.’

‘Gargoyles? I thought we just had Constable Downspout . . .’

‘And Constable Pediment now, sir.’

‘One of yours?’

‘One of ours, sir. You signed—’

‘Yes, yes, I’m sure I did. Damn!’

A gust of wind caught the water pouring from an overloaded gutter and
dumped it down Vimes’s neck.

‘They say this new island’s upset the air streams,’ said Carrot.

‘Not just the air,’ said Vimes. ‘A lot of damn fuss over a few square
miles of silt and some old ruins! Who cares?’

‘They say it’s strategically very important,’ said Carrot, falling into
step beside him.

‘What for? We’re not at war with anyone. Hah! But we might go to war to
keep some damn island that’s only useful in case we have to go to war,
right?’

‘Oh, his lordship will have it all sorted out today. I’m sure that when
moderate-mannered men of goodwill can get round a table there’s no
problem that can’t be resolved,’ said Carrot cheerfully.

He is, thought Vimes glumly. He really _is_ sure. ‘Know much about
Klatch?’ he said.

‘I’ve read a little, sir.’

‘Very sandy place, they say.’

‘Yes, sir. Apparently.’

There was a crash somewhere ahead of them, and a scream. Coppers learned
to be good at screams. There was to the connoisseur a world of
difference between ‘I’m drunk and I’ve just trodden on my fingers and I
can’t get up!’ and ‘Look out! He’s got a knife!’

Both men started to run.

Light blazed out in a narrow street. Heavy footsteps vanished into the
darkness.

The light flickered beyond a shop’s broken window. Vimes stumbled
through the doorway, pulled off his sodden cape and threw it over the
fire in the middle of the floor.

There was a hiss, and a smell of hot leather.

Then Vimes stood back and tried to work out where the hell he was.

People were staring at him. Dimly, his mind assembled clues: the turban,
the beard, the woman’s jewellery . . .

‘Where did he come from? Who is this man?’

‘Er . . . good morning?’ he said. ‘Looks like there’s been a bit of an
accident?’ He raised the cape gingerly.

A broken bottle lay in a pool of sizzling oil.

Vimes looked up at the broken window. ‘Oh . . .’

The other two people were a boy almost as tall as his father and a small
girl trying to hide behind her mother.

Vimes felt his stomach turn to lead.

Carrot arrived in the doorway.

‘I lost them,’ he panted. ‘There were three of them, I think. Can’t see
anything in this rain . . . Oh, it’s you, Mr Goriff. What happened
here?’

‘Captain Carrot! Someone threw a burning bottle through our window and
then this beggar man rushed in and put it out!’

‘What’d he say? What did _you_ say?’ said Vimes. ‘You _speak_
Klatchian?’

‘Not very well,’ said Carrot modestly. ‘I just can’t get the
back-of-the-throat sound to—’

‘But . . . you can understand what he said?’

‘Oh, yes. He just thanked you very much, by the way. It’s all right, Mr
Goriff. He’s a watchman.’

‘But _you_ speak—’

Carrot knelt down and looked at the broken bottle.

‘Oh, you know how it is. You come in here on night shift for a hot
caraway bun and you just get chatting. You must have picked up the odd
word, sir.’

‘Well . . . vindaloo, maybe, but . . .’

‘This is a firebomb, sir.’

‘I know, captain.’

‘This is very bad. Who would do a thing like this?’

‘Right now?’ said Vimes. ‘Half the city, I should think.’

He looked helplessly at Goriff. He vaguely recognized the face. He
vaguely recognized Mrs Goriff’s face. They were . . . faces. They were
usually at the other end of some arms holding a portion of curry or a
kebab. Sometimes the boy ran the place. The shop opened very early in
the morning and very late at night, when the streets were owned by
bakers, thieves and watchmen.

Vimes knew the place as Mundane Meals. Nobby Nobbs had said that Goriff
had wanted a word that meant ordinary, everyday, straight-forward, and
had asked around until he found one he liked the sound of.

‘Er . . . tell him . . . tell him you’re staying here, and I’ll go back
to the Watch House and send someone out to relieve you,’ said Vimes.

‘Thank you,’ said Goriff.

‘Oh, you underst—’ Vimes felt like an idiot. ‘Of course you do, you must
have been here, what, five, six years?’

‘Ten years, sir.’

‘Really?’ said Vimes manically. ‘That long? Really? My word . . . well,
I’d better get along . . . Good morning to you—’

He hurried out into the rain.

I must have been going in there for _years_, he thought, as he splashed
through the darkness. And I know how to say ‘vindaloo’. And . . .
‘korma’ . . . ? Carrot’s hardly been here five minutes and he gargles
the language like a native.

Good grief, I can get by in dwarfish and I can at least say, ‘Put down
that rock, you’re under arrest,’ in troll, but . . .

He stamped into the Watch House, water pooling off him. Fred Colon was
dozing quietly at the desk. In deference to the fact that he’d known
Fred all these years, Vimes was extra noisy about taking off his cape.

When he officially turned round, the sergeant was sitting at attention.

‘I didn’t know you were on tonight, Mr Vimes . . .’

‘This is unofficial, Fred,’ said Vimes. He accepted ‘Mr’ from certain
people. In an odd way, they’d earned it. ‘Send someone along to Mundane
Meals in Scandal Alley, will you? A bit of trouble there.’

He reached the stairs.

‘You stopping, sir?’ said Fred.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Vimes grimly. ‘I’ve got to catch up on the paperwork.’

The rain fell on Leshp so hard it probably hadn’t been worth the
island’s bother of rising from the bottom of the sea.

Most of the explorers slept in their boats now. There _were_ buildings
on the risen island, but . . .

 . . . the buildings weren’t quite right.

Solid Jackson peered out from the tarpaulin he’d rigged up on deck. Mist
was rising off the soaking ground and was made luminous by the
occasional flash of lightning.

The city, by storm light, looked far too malevolent. There _were_ things
he could recognize – columns and steps and archways and so on – but
there were others . . . he shuddered. It looked as if people had once
tried to add human touches to structures that were already ancient . . .

It was because of his son that everyone was staying in the boats.

A party of Ankh-Morpork fishermen had gone ashore that morning to search
for the heaps of treasure that everyone knew littered the ocean bottom
and had found a tiled floor, washed clean by the rain. Pretty blue and
white squares showed a pattern of waves and shells, and, in the middle,
a squid.

And Les had said, ‘That looks pretty big, Dad.’

And everyone had looked around at the weed-covered buildings and had
shared the Thought, which remained unspoken but was made up of a lot of
little thoughts like the occasional ripples in the pools, and the little
splashes in the dark water of cellars that made the mind think of claws,
winnowing the deeps, and the odd things that sometimes got washed up on
beaches or turned up in nets. Sometimes you pulled things over the side
that’d put a man off fish for life.

And suddenly no one wanted to explore any more, just in case they found
something.

Solid Jackson pulled his head back under the cover.

‘Why’n’t we going home, Dad?’ said his son. ‘You said this place gives
you the willies.’

‘All right, but they’re _Ankh-Morpork_ willies, see? And no foreigner’s
going to get his hands on them.’

‘Dad?’

‘Yes, lad?’

‘Who was Mr Hong?’

‘How should I know?’

‘Only, when we was all heading back for the boats one of the other men
said, “We all know what happened to Mr Hong when he opened the Three
Jolly Luck Take-Away Fish Bar on the site of the old fish-god temple in
Dagon Street on the night of the full moon, don’t we . . . ?” Well, _I_
don’t know.’

‘Ah . . .’ Solid Jackson hesitated. Still, Les was a big lad now . . .

‘He . . . closed up and left in a bit of a hurry, lad. So quick he had
to leave some things behind.’

‘Like what?’

‘If you must know . . . half an earhole and one kidney.’

‘Cool!’

The boat rocked, and wood splintered. Jackson jerked the cover up. Spray
washed over him. Somewhere close in the wet darkness a voice shouted:
‘Why you not carrying lights, you second cousin of a jackal?’

Jackson pulled out the lantern and held it up.

‘What’re you doing in Ankh-Morpork territorial waters, you camel-eating
devil?’

‘These waters belong to us!’

‘We were here first!’

‘Yeah? _We_ were here first!’

‘We were here first _first_!’

‘You damaged my boat! That’s _piracy_, that is!’

There were other shouts around them. In the darkness the two flotillas
had collided. Bowsprits tore away rigging. Hulls boomed. The controlled
panic that is normal sailing became the frantic panic composed of
darkness, spray and too much rigging coming unrigged.

At times like this the ancient traditions of the sea that unite all
mariners should come to the fore and see them combine in the face of
their common foe, the hungry and relentless ocean.

However, at this point, Mr Arif hit Mr Jackson over the head with an
oar.

* * *

‘Hnh? Wuh?’

Vimes opened the only eye that appeared to respond. A horrible sight met
it.

 . . . I read him his rites, whereupon he said, Up, yours copper. Sgnt
Detritus then, cautioned him, upon which he said, ouch . . .

There may be a lot of things I’m not good at, thought Vimes, but at
least I don’t treat the punctuation of a sentence like a game of Pin the
Tail on the Donkey . . .

He rolled his head away from Carrot’s fractured grammar. The pile of
paper shifted under him.

Vimes’s desk was becoming famous. Once there were piles, but they had
slipped as piles do, forming this dense compacted layer that was now
turning into something like peat. It was said there were plates and
unfinished meals somewhere down there. No one wanted to check. Some
people said they’d heard movement.

There was a genteel cough. Vimes rolled his head again and looked up
into the big pink face of Willikins, Lady Sybil’s butler. _His_ butler
too, technically, although Vimes hated to think of him like that.

‘I think we had better proceed with alacrity, Sir Samuel. I have brought
your dress uniform, and your shaving things are by the basin.’

‘What? What?’

‘You are due at the University in half an hour. Lady Sybil has
vouchsafed to me that if you are not there she will utilize your
intestines for hosiery accessories, sir.’

‘Was she smiling?’ said Vimes, staggering to his feet and making his way
to the steaming basin on the wash stand.

‘Only slightly, sir.’

‘Oh gods . . .’

‘_Yes_, sir.’

Vimes made an attempt at shaving while, behind him, Willikins brushed
and polished. Outside, the city’s clocks began to strike ten.

It must’ve been almost four when I sat down, Vimes thought. I know I
heard the shift change at eight, and then I had to sort out Nobby’s
expenses, that’s advanced mathematics if ever there was some . . .

He tried to yawn and shave at the same time, which is never a good idea.

‘Damn!’

‘I shall fetch some tissue paper directly, sir,’ said Willikins, without
looking round. As Vimes dabbed at his chin, the butler went on: ‘I
should like to take this opportunity to raise a matter of some import,
sir . . .’

‘Yes?’ Vimes stared blearily at the red tights that seemed to be a major
item of his dress uniform.

‘Regretfully, I am afraid I must ask leave to give in my notice, sir. I
wish to join the Colours.’

‘Which colours are these, Willikins?’ said Vimes, holding up a shirt
with puffed sleeves. Then his brain caught up with his ears. ‘You want
to become a _soldier_?’

‘They say Klatch needs to be taught a sharp lesson, sir. A Willikins has
never been found wanting when his country calls. I thought that Lord
Venturi’s Heavy Infantry would do for me. They have a particularly
attractive uniform of red and white, sir. With gold frogging.’

Vimes pulled his boots on. ‘You’ve had military experience, have you?’

‘Oh, no, sir. But I am a quick learner, sir, and I believe I have some
prowess with the carving knife.’ The butler’s face showed a patriotic
alertness.

‘On turkeys and on . . .’ said Vimes.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Willikins, buffing up the ceremonial helmet.

‘And you’re off to fight the screaming hordes in Klatch, are you?’

‘If it should come to that, sir,’ said Willikins. ‘I think this is
adequately polished now, sir.’

‘A very sandy place, so they say.’

‘Indeed, sir,’ said Willikins, adjusting the helmet under Vimes’s chin.

‘And rocky. Very rocky. Lots of rocks. Dusty, too.’

‘Very parched in parts, sir, I believe you are correct.’

‘And so into this land of sand-coloured dust and sand-coloured rocks and
sand-coloured sand _you_, Willikins, will march with your expertise in
cutlery and your red and white uniform?’

‘With the gold frogging, sir.’ Willikins thrust out his jaw. ‘Yes, sir.
If the need arises.’

‘You don’t see anything wrong with this picture?’

‘Sir?’

‘Oh, never mind.’ Vimes yawned. ‘Well, we shall miss you, Willikins.’
Others may not, he thought. Especially if they have time for a second
shot.

‘Oh, Lord Venturi says it’ll all be over by Hogswatch, sir.’

‘Really? I didn’t know it had started.’

Vimes ran down the stairs and into a smell of curry.

‘We saved you some, sir,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘You was asleep when the
lad brought it round.’

‘It was Goriff’s kid,’ said Nobby, chasing a bit of rice around his tin
plate. ‘Enough for half the shift.’

‘The rewards of duty,’ said Vimes, hurrying towards the door.

‘Bread and mango pickle and everything,’ said Colon happily. ‘I’ve
always said old Goriff isn’t that bad for a rag’ead.’

_A pool of sizzling oil_ . . . Vimes stopped at the door. _The family,
huddling together_ . . . He took out his watch. It was twenty past ten.
If he ran—

‘Fred, could you just step up to my office?’ he said. ‘It won’t take a
moment.’

‘Right, sir.’

Vimes ushered the sergeant up the stairs and closed the door.

Nobby and the other watchmen strained to listen, but there was no sound
except for a low murmuring which went on for some time.

The door opened again. Vimes came down the stairs.

‘Nobby, come up to the University in five minutes, will you? I want to
stay in touch and I’m damned if I’m taking a pigeon with this uniform
on.’

‘Right, sir.’

Vimes left.

A few moments later Sergeant Colon walked carefully down to the main
office. He had a slightly glassy look and walked back to his desk with
the nonchalance that only the extremely worried try to achieve. He toyed
with some paper for a while and then said:

‘You don’t mind what people call _you_, do you, Nobby?’

‘I’d be minding the whole time if I minded that, sarge,’ said Corporal
Nobbs cheerfully.

‘Right. Right! And _I_ don’t mind what people call _me_, neither.’ Colon
scratched his head. ‘Don’t make sense, really. I reckon Sir Sam is
missing too much sleep.’

‘He’s a very busy man, Fred.’

‘Trying to do everything, that’s his trouble. And . . . Nobby?’

‘Yes?’

‘It’s Sergeant Colon, thanks.’

There was sherry. There was always sherry at these occasions. Sam Vimes
could regard it dispassionately, since he always drank fruit juice these
days. He’d heard they made sherry by letting wine go rotten. He couldn’t
see the _point_ of sherry.

‘And you will _try_ to look dignified, won’t you?’ said Lady Sybil,
adjusting his cloak.

‘Yes, dear.’

‘What will you try to look?’

‘Dignified, dear.’

‘And _please_ try to be diplomatic.’

‘Yes, dear.’

‘What will you try to be?’

‘Diplomatic, dear.’

‘You’re using your “henpecked” voice, Sam.’

‘Yes, dear.’

‘You know that’s not fair.’

‘No, dear.’ Vimes raised a hand in a theatrical gesture of submission.
‘All right, all _right_. It’s just these feathers. And these tights.’ He
winced and tried to do some surreptitious re-arranging in an effort to
prevent himself becoming the city’s first hunchgroin. ‘I mean, supposing
people _see_ me?’

‘Of course they’ll see you, Sam. You’re leading the procession. And I’m
_very_ proud of you.’

She brushed some lint off his shoulder.²

Feathers in my hat, Vimes thought glumly. And fancy tights. And a shiny
breastplate. A breastplate shouldn’t be shiny. It should be too dented
to take a decent polish. And diplomatic talk? How should I know how to
talk diplomatically?

‘And now I must go and have a word with Lady Selachii,’ said Lady Sybil.
‘You’ll be all right, will you? You keep yawning.’

‘Of course. Didn’t get much sleep last night, that’s all.’

‘You promise not to run away?’

‘_Me?_ I _never_ run—’

‘You ran away before the big soirée for the Genuan ambassador. Everyone
saw you.’

‘I’d just got news that the De Bris gang were robbing Vortin’s
strongroom!’

‘But _you_ don’t have to chase everyone, Sam. You employ people for that
now.’

‘We got ’em, though,’ said Vimes, with satisfaction.

He’d enjoyed it immensely, too. It wasn’t just the pursuit that was so
invigorating, with his velvet cloak left behind on a tree and his hat in
a puddle somewhere, it was the knowledge that while he was doing this he
wasn’t eating very small sandwiches and making even smaller talk. It
wasn’t proper police work, Vimes considered, unless you were doing
something that someone somewhere would much rather you weren’t doing.

When Sybil had disappeared into the crowd he found a handy shadow and
lurked in it. It enabled him to see almost the whole of the University’s
Great Hall.

He quite liked the wizards. They didn’t commit crimes. Not Vimes’s type
of crimes, anyway. The occult wasn’t Vimes’s beat. The wizards might
well mess up the very fabric of time and space but they didn’t lead to
paperwork, and that was fine by Vimes.

There were a lot of them in the hall, in all their glory. And there was
nothing finer than a wizard dressed up formally, until someone could
find a way of inflating a Bird of Paradise, possibly by using an elastic
band and some kind of gas. But the wizards were getting a run for their
money, because the rest of the guests were either nobles or guild
leaders or both, and an occasion like the Convivium brought out the
peacock in everyone.

His gaze went from face to chatting face, and he wondered idly what each
person was guilty of.³

Quite a few of the ambassadors were there, too. They were easy to pick
out. They wore their national costumes, but since by and large their
national costumes were what the average peasant wore they looked
slightly out of place in them. Their bodies wore feathers and silks, but
their minds persistently wore suits.

They chatted in small groups. One or two nodded and smiled to him as
they passed.

_The world is watching_, Vimes thought. If something went wrong and this
stupid Leshp business started a war, it’s men like these who’d be
working out exactly how to deal with the winner, whoever it was. Never
mind who started it, never mind how it was fought, they’d want to know
how to deal with things _now_. They represented what people called the
‘international community’. And like all uses of the word ‘community’,
you were never quite sure what or who it was.

He shrugged. It wasn’t his world, thank goodness.

He sidled over to Corporal Nobbs, who was standing by the main doors in
the sort of lopsided slouch which was the closest a living Nobbs could
come to attention.

‘All quiet, Nobby?’ he said, out of the corner of his mouth.

‘Yessir.’

‘Nothing going on _at all_?’

‘Nossir. Not a pigeon anywhere, sir.’

‘What, nowhere? Nothing?’

‘Nossir.’

‘There was trouble all over the place yesterday!’

‘Yessir.’

‘You did _tell_ Fred he was to send a bird if there was anything at
all?’

‘Yessir.’

‘The Shades? There’s _always_ something—’

‘Dead quiet, sir.’

‘_Damn!_’

Vimes shook his head at the sheer untrustworthiness of Ankh-Morpork’s
criminal fraternity.

‘I suppose you couldn’t take a brick and—’

‘Lady Sybil was very speffic about how you was to stop here,’ said
Corporal Nobbs, staring straight ahead.

‘Speffic?’

‘Yeah, sir. She come and have a word with me. Gave me a dollar,’ said
Nobby.

‘Ah, Sir Samuel!’ said a booming voice behind him, ‘I don’t think you’ve
met Prince Khufurah yet, have you?’

He turned. Archchancellor Ridcully was bearing down on him, towing a
couple of swarthy men. Vimes hurriedly put on his official face.

‘This is Commander Vimes, gentlemen. Sam . . . no, I’m doing this the
wrong way round, aren’t I, got the protocol all wrong – so much to sort
out, the Bursar’s locked himself in the safe again, we don’t know how he
manages to get the key in there with him, I mean, it’s not even as if
it’s got a keyhole on the inside . . .’

The first man held out a hand as Ridcully bustled off again. ‘Prince
Khufurah,’ he said. ‘My carpet got in only two hours ago.’

‘Carpet? Oh . . . yes . . . you flew . . .’

‘Yes, very chilly and of course you just can’t get a good meal. And did
you get your man, Sir Samuel?’

‘What? Pardon?’

‘I believe our ambasssador told me you had to leave the reception last
week . . . ?’ The Prince was a tall man who had probably once been quite
athletic until the big dinners had finally weighed him down. And he had
a beard. All Klatchians had beards. This Klatchian had intelligent eyes,
too. Disconcertingly intelligent. You looked into them and several
layers of person looked back at you.

‘What? Oh. Yes. Yes, we got ’em all right,’ said Vimes.

‘Well done. He put up a fight, I see.’

Vimes looked surprised. The Prince tapped his jaw thoughtfully. Vimes’s
hand flew up and encountered a little bit of tissue on his own chin.

‘Ah . . . er . . . yes . . .’

‘Commander Vimes _always_ gets his man,’ said the Prince.

‘Well, I wouldn’t say I—’

‘Vetinari’s terrier, I’ve heard them call you,’ the Prince went on.
‘Always hot on the chase, they say, and he won’t let go.’

Vimes stared into the calm, knowing gaze.

‘I suppose, at the end of the day, we’re all someone’s dog,’ he said,
weakly.

‘In fact it is fortuitous I have met you, commander.’

‘It is?’

‘I was just wondering about the meaning of the word shouted at me as we
were on our way down here. Would you be so kind?’

‘Er . . . if I . . .’

‘I believe it was . . . let me see now . . . oh, yes . . . _towelhead_.’

The Prince’s eyes stayed locked on Vimes’s face.

Vimes was conscious of his own thoughts moving very fast, and they
seemed to reach their own decision. We’ll explain later, they said.
You’re too tired for explanations. Right now, with this man, it’s oh so
much better to be honest . . .

‘It . . . refers to your headdress,’ he said.

‘Oh. Is it some kind of obscure joke?’

Of _course_ he knows, thought Vimes. And he knows I know . . .

‘No. It’s an insult,’ he said eventually.

‘Ah? Well, we certainly cannot be held responsible for the ramblings of
idiots, commander.’ The Prince flashed a smile. ‘I must commend you,
incidentally.’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘For your breadth of knowledge. I must have asked a dozen people that
question _this morning_ and, do you know? Not _one_ of them knew what it
meant. And they _all_ seemed to have caught a cough.’

There was a diplomatic pause but, in it, someone sniggered.

Vimes let his glance drift sideways to the other man, who had not been
introduced. He was shorter and skinnier than the Prince and, under his
black headdress, had the most crowded face Vimes had ever seen. A
network of scars surrounded a nose like an eagle’s beak. There was a
sort of beard and moustache, but the scars had affected the hair growth
so much that they stuck out in strange bunches and at odd angles. The
man looked as though he had been hit in the mouth by a hedgehog. He
could have been any age. Some of the scars looked fresh.

All in all, the man had a face that any policeman would arrest on sight.
There was no possible way it could be innocent of _anything_.

He caught Vimes’s expression and grinned, and Vimes had never seen so
much gold in one mouth. He’d never seen so much gold in one _place_.

Vimes realized he was staring when he ought to have been making polite
diplomatic conversation.

‘So,’ he said, ‘are we going to have a scrap over this Leshp business or
what?’

The Prince gave a dismissive shrug.

‘Pfui,’ he said. ‘A few square miles of uninhabited fertile ground with
superb anchorage in an unsurpassed strategic position? What sort of
inconsequence is that for civilized people to war over?’

Once again Vimes felt the gaze on him, _reading_ him. Well, the hell
with it. He said, ‘Sorry, I’m not good at this diplomacy business. Did
you _mean_ what you just said then?’

There was another snigger. Vimes turned and looked at the leering
bearded face again. And was aware of a smell, no, a _stench_ of cloves.

_Good grief, he_ chews _the stinking things_ . . .

‘Ah,’ said the Prince, ‘you haven’t met 71-hour Ahmed?’

Ahmed grinned again and bowed. ‘Offendi,’ he said, in a voice like a
gravel path.

And that seemed to be it. Not ‘This is 71-hour Ahmed, Cultural Attaché’
or ‘71-hour Ahmed, my bodyguard’ or even ‘71-hour Ahmed, walking
strongroom and moth killer’. It was clear that the next move was up to
Vimes.

‘That’s . . . er . . . that’s an unusual name,’ he said.

‘Not at all,’ said the Prince smoothly. ‘Ahmed is a very common name in
my country.’

He leaned forward again. Vimes recognized this as the prelude to a
confidential aside. ‘Incidentally, was that beautiful lady I saw just
now your first wife?’

‘Er . . . all my wives,’ said Vimes. ‘That is—’

‘Could I offer you twenty camels for her?’

Vimes looked back into the dark eyes for a moment, glanced at 71-hour
Ahmed’s 24-carat grin, and said:

‘This is another test, isn’t it . . . ?’

The Prince straightened up, looking pleased.

‘Well done, Sir Samuel. You’re _good_ at this. Do you know, Mr Boggis of
the Thieves’ Guild was prepared to accept fifteen?’

‘For Mrs Boggis?’ Vimes waggled a hand dismissively. ‘Nah . . . four
camels, maybe four camels and a goat in a good light. And when she’s had
a shave.’

The milling guests turned at the sound of the Prince’s explosion of
laughter.

‘Very good! Very good! I am afraid, commander, that some of _your_
fellow citizens feel that just because _my_ people invented advanced
mathematics and all-day camping we are complete barbarians who’d try to
buy their wives at the drop of, shall we say, a turban. I am surprised
they’re giving me an honorary degree, considering how incredibly
backward I am.’

‘Oh? What degree is that?’ said Vimes. No wonder this man was a
diplomat. You couldn’t trust him an inch, he thought in loops, and you
couldn’t help liking him despite it.

The Prince pulled a letter out of his robe.

‘Apparently it’s a _Doctorum Adamus cum Flabello Dulci_ – Is there
something wrong, Sir Samuel?’

Vimes managed to turn the treacherous laugh into a coughing fit. ‘No,
no, nothing,’ he said. ‘No.’

He desperately wanted to change the subject. And fortunately there was
something here to provide just the opportunity.

‘Why has Mr Ahmed got such a big curved sword slung on his back?’ he
said.

‘Ah, you are a policeman, you notice such things—’

‘It’s hardly a concealed weapon, is it? It’s nearly bigger than him.
He’s practically a concealed owner!’

‘It’s ceremonial,’ said the Prince. ‘And he does fret so if he has to
leave it behind.’

‘And what exactly is his—’

‘Ah, there you are,’ said Ridcully. ‘I think we’re just about ready. You
know you go right at the front, Sam—’

‘Yes, I know,’ said Vimes. ‘I was just asking His Highness what—’

‘—and if you, Your Highness, and you, Mr . . . my word, what a big
sword, and you come back here and take your place among the honoured
guests, and we’ll be ready in a brace of sheikhs . . .’

What a thing it is to have a copper’s mind, Vimes thought, as the great
file of wizards and guests tried to form a dignified and orderly line
behind him. Just because someone makes himself pleasant and likeable you
start to be suspicious of him, for no other reason than the fact that
_anyone_ who goes out of their way to be nice to a copper has got
something on their mind. Of course, he’s a diplomat, but still . . . I
just hope he never studied ancient languages, and that’s a fact.

Someone tapped Vimes on the shoulder. He turned and looked right into
the grin of 71-hour Ahmed.

‘If hyou changing your mind, offendi, I give hyou twenty-five camels, no
problem,’ he said, pulling a clove from his teeth. ‘May your hloins be
full of fruit.’

He winked. It was the most suggestive gesture Vimes had ever seen. ‘Is
this another—’ he began, but the man had vanished into the crowd.

‘My loins be full of fruit?’ he repeated to himself. ‘Good grief!’

71-hour Ahmed reappeared at his other elbow in a gust of cloves. ‘I go,
I hcome back,’ he growled happily. ‘The Prince hsays the degree is
Doctor of Sweet Fanny Adams. A hwizard wheeze, yes? Oh, how we are
laughing.’

And then he was gone.

The Convivium was Unseen University’s Big Day. Originally it had just
been the degree ceremony, but over the years it had developed into a
kind of celebration of the amicable relationship between the University
and the city, in particular celebrating the fact that people were hardly
ever turned to clams any more. In the absence of anything resembling a
Lord Mayor’s Show or a state opening of Parliament, it was one of the
few formal opportunities the citizens had of jeering at their social
superiors, or at least at people wearing tights and ridiculous costumes.

It had grown so big that it was now held in the city’s Opera House.
Distrustful people – that is to say, people like Vimes – considered that
this was _so_ there could be a procession. There was nothing like the
massed ranks of wizardry walking sedately through the city in a spirit
of civic amicability to subtly remind the more thoughtful kind of person
that it hadn’t always been this way. Look at us, the wizards seemed to
be saying. We used to rule this city. Look at our big staffs with the
knobs on the end. Any one of these could do some very serious damage in
the wrong hands so it’s a good thing, isn’t it, that they’re in the
right hands at the moment? Isn’t it nice that we all get along so well?

And someone, once, had decided that the Commander of the Watch should
walk in front, for symbolic reasons. That hadn’t mattered for years
because there hadn’t been a Commander of the Watch, but now there was,
and he was Sam Vimes. In a red shirt with silly baggy sleeves, red
tights, some kind of puffed shorts in a style that went out of fashion,
by the look of it, at the time when flint was at the cutting edge of
cutting-edge technology, a tiny shiny breastplate and a helmet with
feathers in it.

And he really did need some sleep.

And he had to carry the truncheon.

He kept his eyes fixed on the damn thing as he walked out of the
University’s main gate. Last night’s rain had cleaned the sky. The city
steamed.

If he stared at the truncheon he didn’t have to see who was giggling at
him.

The downside was that he had to keep staring at the thing.

It said, on a little tarnished shield that he’d had to clean before
reading it, _Protecter of thee Kinge’s Piece_.

That had brightened the occasion slightly.

Feathers and antiques, gold braid and fur . . .

Perhaps it was because he was tired, or just because he was trying to
shut out the world, but Vimes found himself slowing down into the
traditional watchman’s walk and the traditional idling thought process.

It was an almost Pavlovian response.⁴ The legs swung, the feet moved,
the mind began to work in a certain way. It wasn’t a dream state,
exactly. It was just that the ears, nose and eyeballs wired themselves
straight into the ancient ‘suspicious bastard’ node of his brain,
leaving his higher brain centre free to freewheel.

 . . . Fur and tights . . . what kind of wear was that for a watchman?
Bashed-in armour, greasy leather breeches and a tatty shirt with
bloodstains on it, someone else’s for preference . . . that was the
stuff . . . nice feel of the cobbles through his boots, it was really
comforting . . .

Behind him, confusion running up and down the ranks, the procession
slowed down to keep in step.

 . . . Hah, _Protecter of thee Kinge’s Piece_ indeed . . . he’d said to
the old man who’d delivered it, ‘Which piece did you have in mind?’ but
that had fallen on stony ears . . . damn silly thing anyway, he’d
thought, a short length of wood with a lump of silver on the end . . .
even a constable got a decent sword, what was he supposed to do, _wave_
it at people? . . . ye gods, it was months since he’d had a good walk
through the streets . . . lot of people about today . . . some parade
on, wasn’t there . . . ?

‘Oh dear,’ said Captain Carrot, in the crowd. ‘What’s he doing?’

Next to him an Agatean tourist was industriously pulling the lever of
his iconograph.

Commander Vimes stopped and, with a faraway look in his eyes, tucked his
truncheon under one arm and reached up to his helmet.

The tourist looked up at Carrot and tugged his shirt politely.

‘Please, what is he doing now?’ he said.

‘Er . . . he’s . . . he’s taking out . . .’

‘Oh, _no_ . . .’ said Angua.

‘. . .  he’s taking the ceremonial packet of cigars out of his helmet,’
said Carrot. ‘Oh . . . and he’s, he’s lighting one . . .’

The tourist pulled the lever a few times.

‘Very historic tradition?’

‘Memorable,’ murmured Angua.

The crowd had fallen silent. No one wanted to break Vimes’s
concentration. There was the big gusty silence of a thousand people
holding their breath.

‘What’s he doing now?’ said Carrot.

‘Can’t you see?’ said Angua.

‘Not with my hands over my eyes. Oh, the poor man . . .’

‘He’s . . . he’s just blown a smoke ring . . .’

‘. . .  first one of the day, he _always_ does that . . .’

‘. . .  and now he’s set off again . . . and now he’s pulled out the
truncheon and he’s tossing it up in the air and catching it again, you
know the way he does with his sword when he’s thinking . . . He looks
quite happy . . .’

‘I think he’s going to really _treasure_ this moment of happiness,’ said
Carrot.

Then the murmur started. The procession had halted behind Vimes. Some of
the more impressionable people who weren’t sure what they should be
doing, and those who had partaken too heavily of the University’s rather
good sherry, started to fumble around on their person for something to
throw up in the air and catch. After all, this was a Traditional
Ceremony. If you took the view that you were not going to do things
because they were apparently ridiculous, you might as well go home right
now.

‘He’s tired, that’s what it is,’ said Carrot. ‘He’s been running around
overseeing things for days. Night _and_ day watches. You know what a
hands-on person he is.’

‘Let’s hope the Patrician will agree to let him stay that way.’

‘Oh, his lordship wouldn’t . . . He wouldn’t, would he?’

Laughter was starting. Vimes had started to toss the truncheon from one
hand to the other.

‘He can make his sword spin three times and still catch it—’

Vimes’s head turned. He looked up. His truncheon clattered on to the
cobbles and rolled into a puddle, unheeded.

Then he started to run.

Carrot stared at him and then tried to see what the man had been looking
at.

‘On top of the Barbican . . .’ he said. ‘In that window . . . isn’t that
someone up there? Excuse me, excuse me, sorry, excuse me—’ He began to
push his way through the crowd.

Vimes was already a small figure in the distance, his red cloak flying
out after him.

‘Well? There’s lots of people watching the parade from high places,’
said Angua. ‘What’s so special about—’

‘No one should be up there!’ said Carrot, starting to run now he was
free of the crowd. ‘It’s all sealed up!’

Angua looked around. Every face was turned towards the street theatre,
and there was a cart near by. She sighed and strolled behind it wearing
an expression of suspicious nonchalance. There was a gasp, a faint but
distinctly organic sound, a muffled yelp and then the clank of armour
hitting the ground.

Vimes didn’t know why he ran. It was a sixth sense. It was when the back
of the brain picked up out of the ether that something bad was going to
happen, and didn’t have time to rationalize, and just took over the
spinal cord.

No one could get to the top of the Barbican. The Barbican had been the
fortified gateway in the days when Ankh-Morpork didn’t regard an
attacking army as a marvellous commercial opportunity. Some parts were
still in use, but the bulk of it was six or seven storeys of ruin,
without stairs that any sensible man would trust. For years it had been
used as an unofficial source of masonry for the rest of the city. Bits
of it fell off on windy nights. Even gargoyles avoided it.

He was aware that far behind him the noise of the crowd became a lot of
shouting. One or two people screamed. He didn’t turn round. Whatever was
going on, Carrot could take care of it.

Something overtook him. It looked like a wolf would look if one of its
ancestors had been a long-haired Klatchistan hunting dog, one of those
graceful things that were all nose and hair.

It bounded ahead and through the crumbling gateway.

The creature was nowhere to be seen when Vimes arrived. But the absence
was not a matter that grabbed at his attention, because of the more
pressing presence of the corpse, lying in a mess of fallen masonry.

One of the things Vimes had always said – that is to say, one of the
things he said he always said, and no one disagrees with the commanding
officer – was that sometimes small details, tiny little details, things
that no one would notice in ordinary circumstances, grab your senses by
the throat and scream, ‘See me!’

There was a lingering, spicy scent in the air. And in the gap between a
couple of cobblestones was a clove.

It was five o’clock. Vimes and Carrot sat in the Patrician’s outer
office, in silence except for the irregular ticking of the clock.

After a while Vimes said: ‘Let me have a look at that again.’

Carrot obediently pulled out the small square of paper. Vimes looked at
it. There was no mistaking what it showed. He tucked it into his own
pocket.

‘Er . . . why do you want to keep it, sir?’

‘Keep what?’ said Vimes.

‘The iconograph I borrowed from the tourist.’

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ said Vimes.

‘But you—’

‘I can’t see you going very far in the Watch, captain, if you go around
seeing things that aren’t there.’

‘Oh.’

The clock seemed to tick louder.

‘You’re thinking something, sir. Aren’t you?’

‘It is a use to which I occasionally put my brain, captain. Strange as
it may seem.’

‘_What_ are you thinking, sir?’

‘What they want me to think,’ said Vimes.

‘Who’s _they_?’

‘I don’t know yet. One step at a time.’

A bell tinkled.

Vimes stood up. ‘You know what I always say,’ he said.

Carrot removed his helmet and polished it with his sleeve. ‘Yes, sir.
“Everyone’s guilty of something, especially the ones that aren’t,” sir.’

‘No, not that one . . .’

‘Er . . . “Always take into consideration the fact that you might be
dead wrong,” sir?’

‘No, nor that one either.’

‘Er . . . “How come Nobby ever got a job as a watchman?” sir? You say
that a lot.’

‘No! I meant “Always act stupid,” Carrot.’

‘Ah, right, sir. From now on I shall remember that you always said that,
sir.’

They put their helmets under their arms. Vimes knocked at the door.

‘Come,’ said a voice.

The Patrician was standing at the window.

Sitting or standing around the office were Lord Rust and the others.
Vimes never quite understood how the civic leaders were chosen. They
just seemed to turn up, like a tack on the sole of your shoe.

‘Ah, Vimes,’ said Vetinari.

‘Sir.’

‘Let us not beat about the bush, Vimes. How did the man get up there
when your people had so thoroughly checked everything last night?
Magic?’

‘Couldn’t say, sir.’

Carrot, still staring straight ahead, blinked.

‘Your people _did_ check the Barbican, I assume?’

‘No, sir.’

‘They _didn’t_?’

‘No, sir. I did that myself.’

‘You physically checked it yourself, Vimes?’ said Boggis of the Thieves’
Guild.

Captain Carrot could _feel_ Vimes’s thoughts at this point.

‘That is correct . . . Boggis,’ said Vimes, without turning his head.
‘But . . . we think someone got in where the windows are boarded up and
pulled the boards back after him. Dust has been disturbed and—’

‘And you didn’t spot this, Vimes?’

Vimes sighed. ‘It’d be hard enough to spot the nailed-back boards in
daylight, Boggis, let alone in the middle of the night.’ Not that we
did, he added to himself. Angua smelled the scent on them.

Lord Vetinari sat down at his desk. ‘The situation is grave, Vimes.’

‘Yes, sir?’

‘His Highness is very seriously injured. And Prince Cadram, we
understand, is beside himself with rage.’

‘They _insist_ on keeping his brother in the embassy,’ said Lord Rust.
‘A studied insult. As if we haven’t good surgeons in this city.’

‘That’s right, of course,’ said Vimes. ‘And many of them could give him
a decent shave and a haircut, too.’

‘Are you making fun of me, Vimes?’

‘Certainly not, my lord,’ said Vimes. ‘In my opinion, no surgeons
anywhere have cleaner sawdust on their floors than the ones in this
city.’

Rust glared at him.

The Patrician coughed.

‘You have identified the assassin?’ said the Patrician.

Carrot was expecting Vimes to say, ‘Alleged assassin, sir,’ but instead
he said:

‘Yes. He is— He _was_ called Ossie Brunt, sir. No other name that we
know. Lived in Market Street. Did odd jobs from time to time. Bit of a
loner. No relatives or friends that we can find. We are making
enquiries.’

‘And that’s all you fellows know?’ said Lord Downey.

‘It took some time to identify him, sir,’ said Vimes stolidly.

‘Oh? Why should that be?’

‘Couldn’t give you the technical answer, sir, but it looked to me like
they wouldn’t need to make him a coffin, they could just have posted him
between two barn doors.’

‘Was he acting alone?’

‘We only found the one body, sir. And a lot of recently fallen masonry,
so it looks as—’

‘I _meant_ does he belong to any organization? Any suggestion that he’s
anti-Klatchian?’

‘Apart from him trying to kill one? Enquiries are continuing.’

‘Are you taking this _seriously_, Vimes?’

‘I have put my best men on the job, sir.’ _Who’s looking worried?_
‘Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs.’ _Who’s looking relieved?_ ‘Very
experienced men. The keystones of the Watch.’

‘Colon and Nobbs?’ said the Patrician. ‘Really?’

‘Yes, sir.’

Their gazes met, very briefly.

‘We’re getting some very threatening noises, Vimes,’ said Vetinari.

‘What can I say, sir? I saw someone up on the tower, I ran, someone shot
the Prince with an arrow and then I found the man at the bottom of the
tower very obviously dead, with a broken bow and a lot of rock beside
him. The storm last night probably loosened things up. I can’t make up
facts that don’t exist, sir.’

Carrot watched the faces round the table. The general expression was one
of relief.

‘A lone bowman,’ said Vetinari. ‘An idiot with some kind of mad grudge.
Who died in the execution of the, uh, attempted execution. And, of
course, valiant action by our watchmen probably at least prevented an
immediately fatal shot.’

‘Valiant action?’ said Downey. ‘I know Captain Carrot here ran towards
the VIPs and Vimes headed for the tower, but frankly, Vimes, your
strange behaviour beforehand—’

‘Somewhat immaterial now,’ said Lord Vetinari. Once again he adopted a
slightly faraway voice, as if reporting to somebody else. ‘If Commander
Vimes had not slowed down the procession, the wretch would undoubtedly
have got a much better shot. As it was, the man panicked. Yes . . . the
Prince, possibly, would accept that.’

‘Prince?’ said Vimes. ‘But the poor devil—’

‘His brother,’ said the Patrician.

‘Ah. The nice one?’

‘Thank you, commander,’ said the Patrician. ‘Thank you, gentlemen. Do
not let me detain you. Oh, Vimes . . . just a brief word, if you would
be so good. Not you, Captain Carrot. I’m sure someone is committing some
crime somewhere.’

Vimes remained staring at the far wall while the room emptied. Vetinari
left his chair and went over to the window.

‘Strange days indeed, commander,’ he said.

‘Sir.’

‘For example, I gather that this afternoon Captain Carrot was on the
roof of the Opera House firing arrows down towards the archery butts.’

‘Very keen lad, sir.’

‘It could well be that the distance between the Opera House and the
targets is about the same, you know, as the distance between the top of
the Barbican and the spot where the Prince was hit.’

‘Just fancy that, sir.’

Vetinari sighed. ‘And why was he doing this?’

‘It’s a funny thing, sir, but he was telling me the other day that in
fact it is still law that every citizen should do one hour’s archery
practice every day. Apparently the law was made in 1356 and it’s never
been—’

‘Do you know why I sent Captain Carrot away just now, Vimes?’

‘Couldn’t say, sir.’

‘Captain Carrot is an honest young man, Vimes.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘And did you know that he winces when he hears you tell a direct lie?’

‘Really, sir?’ _Damn_.

‘I can’t stand to see his poor face twitch all the time, Vimes.’

‘Very thoughtful of you, sir.’

‘Where was the second bowman, Vimes?’

_Damn!_ ‘Second bowman, sir?’

‘Have you ever had a hankering to go on the stage, Vimes?’

_Yes, at the moment I’d leap on it wherever it’s heading_, thought
Vimes.

‘No, sir.’

‘Pity. I am certain you’re a great loss to the acting profession. I
believe you said the man had put the boards back after him.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘_Nailed_ them back?’

_Blast_. ‘Yes, sir.’

‘From the outside.’

_Damn_. ‘Yes, sir.’

‘A particularly _resourceful_ lone bowman, then.’

Vimes didn’t bother to comment. Vetinari sat down at his desk, raised
his steepled fingers to his lips and stared at Vimes over the top of
them.

‘Colon and Nobbs are investigating this? Really?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘If I were to ask you why, you’d pretend not to understand?’

Vimes let his forehead wrinkle in honest perplexity. ‘Sir?’

‘If you say “Sir?” again in that stupid voice, Vimes, I swear there will
be trouble.’

‘They’re good men, sir.’

‘However, some people might consider them to be unimaginative, stolid
and . . . how can I put this? . . . possessed of an inbuilt disposition
to accept the first explanation that presents itself and then bunk off
somewhere for a quiet smoke? A certain lack of imagination? An ability
to get out of their depth on a wet pavement? A tendency to rush to
judgement?’

‘I hope you are not impugning my men, sir.’

‘Vimes, Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs have never _been_ pugn’d in
their entire lives.’

‘Sir?’

‘And yet . . . in fact, we do not _need_ complications, Vimes. An
ingenious lone madman . . . well, there are many madmen. A regrettable
incident.’

‘Yes, sir.’ The man was looking harassed and Vimes felt there was room
for a pinch of sympathy.

‘Fred and Nobby don’t like complications either, sir.’

‘We need simple answers, Vimes.’

‘Sir. Fred and Nobby are _good_ at simple.’

The Patrician turned away and looked out over the city.

‘Ah,’ he said, in a quieter voice. ‘Simple men to see the simple truth.’

‘This is a fact, sir.’

‘You are learning fast, Vimes.’

‘Couldn’t say about that, sir.’

‘And when they have found the simple truth, Vimes?’

‘Can’t argue with the truth, sir.’

‘In my experience, Vimes, you can argue with anything.’

When Vimes had gone Lord Vetinari sat at his desk for a while, staring
at nothing. Then he took a key from a drawer and walked across to a
wall, where he pressed a particular area.

There was a rattle of a counterweight. The wall swung back.

The Patrician walked softly through the narrow passageway beyond. Here
and there it was illuminated by a very faint glow from around the edges
of the little panels which, if gently slid back, would allow someone to
look out through the eyesockets of a handy portrait.

They were a relic of a previous ruler. Vetinari never bothered with
them. Looking out of someone else’s eyes wasn’t the trick.

There was a certain amount of travel up dark stairways and along musty
corridors. Occasionally he’d make movements the meaning of which might
not be readily apparent. He’d touch a wall _here_ and _here_, apparently
without thinking, as he passed. Along one stone-flagged passage, lit
only by the grey light from a window forgotten by everyone except the
most optimistic flies, he appeared to play a game of hopscotch, robes
flying around him and calves twinkling as he skipped from stone to
stone.

These various activities did not seem to cause anything to happen.
Eventually he reached a door, which he unlocked. He did this with some
caution.

The air beyond was full of acrid smoke, and the steady _pop-pop_ sound
which he had begun to hear further back along the passage was now quite
loud. It faltered for a moment, was followed by a much louder bang, and
then a piece of hot metal whirled past the Patrician’s ear and buried
itself in the wall.

In the smoke a voice said, ‘Oh dear.’

It didn’t seem unhappy, but sounded rather like the voice one might use
to a sweet and ingratiating little puppy which, despite one’s best
efforts, is sitting next to a spreading damp patch on the carpet.

As the billows cleared the indistinct shape of the speaker turned to
Vetinari with a wan little smile and said, ‘Fully fifteen seconds this
time, my lord! There is no doubt that the _principle_ is sound.’

That was one of Leonard of Quirm’s traits: he picked up conversations
out of the air, he assumed everyone was an interested friend, and he
took it for granted that you were as intelligent as he was.

Vetinari peered at a small heap of bent and twisted metal.

‘What was it, Leonard?’ he said.

‘An experimental device for turning chemical energy into rotary motion,’
said Leonard. ‘The problem, you see, is getting the little pellets of
black powder into the combustion chamber at exactly the right speed and
one at a time. If two ignite together, well, what we have is the
_external_ combustion engine.’

‘And, er, what would be the purpose of it?’ said the Patrician.

‘I believe it could replace the horse,’ said Leonard proudly.

They looked at the stricken thing.

‘One of the advantages of horses that people often point out,’ said
Vetinari, after some thought, ‘is that they very seldom explode. Almost
never, in my experience, apart from that unfortunate occurrence in the
hot summer a few years ago.’ With fastidious fingers he pulled something
out of the mess. It was a pair of cubes, made out of some soft white fur
and linked together by a piece of string. There were dots on them.

‘Dice?’ he said.

Leonard smiled in an embarrassed fashion. ‘Yes. I can’t think why I
thought they’d help it go better. It was just, well, an idea. You know
how it is.’

Lord Vetinari nodded. He knew how it was. He knew how it was far more
than Leonard of Quirm did, which was why there was one key to the door
and he had it. Not that the man was a prisoner, except by dull, humdrum
standards. He appeared rather grateful to be confined in this light,
airy attic with as much wood, paper, sticks of charcoal and paint as he
desired and no rent or food bills to pay.

In any case, you couldn’t really imprison someone like Leonard of Quirm.
The most you could do was lock up his body. The gods alone knew where
his mind went. And, although he had so much cleverness it leaked
continually, he couldn’t tell you which way the political wind was
blowing even if you fitted him with sails.

Leonard’s incredible brain sizzled away alarmingly, an overloaded chip
pan on the Stove of Life. It was impossible to know what he would think
of next, because he was constantly reprogrammed by the whole universe.
The sight of a waterfall or a soaring bird would send him spinning down
some new path of practical speculation that invariably ended in a heap
of wire and springs and a cry of ‘I think I know what I did wrong.’ He’d
been a member of most of the craft guilds in the city but had been
thrown out for getting impossibly high marks in the exams or, in some
cases, correcting the questions. It was said that he’d accidentally
blown up the Alchemists’ Guild using nothing more than a glass of water,
a spoonful of acid, two lengths of wire and a ping-pong ball.

Any sensible ruler would have killed off Leonard, and Lord Vetinari was
extremely sensible and often wondered why he had not done so. He’d
decided that it was because, imprisoned in the priceless, enquiring
amber of Leonard’s massive mind, underneath all that bright
investigative genius was a kind of wilful innocence that might in lesser
men be called stupidity. It was the seat and soul of that force which,
down the millennia, had caused mankind to stick its fingers in the
electric light socket of the Universe and play with the switch to see
what happened – and then be very surprised when it did.

It was, in short, something useful. And if the Patrician was anything,
he was the political equivalent of the old lady who saves bits of string
because you never know when they might come in handy.

After all, you couldn’t plan for every eventuality, because that would
involve knowing what was going to happen, and if you _knew_ what was
going to happen, you could probably see to it that it didn’t, or at
least happened to someone else. So the Patrician never planned. Plans
often got in the way.

And, finally, he kept Leonard around because the man was easy to talk
to. He never understood what Lord Vetinari was talking about, he had a
world view about as complex as that of a concussed duckling and, above
all, never really paid attention. This made him an excellent confidant.
After all, when you seek advice from someone it’s certainly not because
you want them to give it. You just want them to be there while you talk
to yourself.

‘I’ve just made some tea,’ said Leonard. ‘Will you join me?’

He followed the Patrician’s gaze to a brown stain all up one wall, which
ended in a star of molten metal in the plaster.

‘I’m afraid the automatical tea engine went wrong,’ he said. ‘I shall
have to make it by hand.’

‘So kind,’ said Lord Vetinari.

He sat down amidst the easels and, while Leonard busied himself at the
fireplace, leafed through the latest sketches. Leonard sketched as
automatically as other people scratched; genius – a certain _kind_ of
genius – fell off him like dandruff.

There was a picture of a man drawing, the lines catching the figure so
accurately it appeared to stand out of the paper. And around it, because
Leonard never wasted white space, were _other_ sketches, scattered
aimlessly. A thumb. A bowl of flowers. A device, apparently, for
sharpening pencils by water power . . .

Vetinari found what he was looking for in the bottom left-hand corner,
sandwiched between a sketch for a new type of screw and a tool for
opening oysters. It, or something very much like it, was always there
somewhere.

One of the things that made Leonard such a rare prize, and kept him
under such secure lock and key, was that he really didn’t see any
difference between the thumb and the roses and the pencil-sharpener and
_this_.

‘Ah, the self-portrait,’ said Leonard, returning with two cups.

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Vetinari. ‘But my eye was drawn to this little
sketch here. The war machine . . .’

‘Oh, that? A mere nothing. Have you ever noticed the way in which the
dew on roses—’

‘This bit here . . . what is it for?’ said Vetinari, pointing
persistently.

‘Oh, that? That’s just the throwing arm for the balls of molten
sulphur,’ said Leonard, picking up a plate of small cakes. ‘I calculate
that one should get a range of almost half a mile, if one detaches the
endless belt from the driving wheels and uses the oxen to wind the
windlass.’

‘Really?’ said Vetinari, taking in the carefully numbered parts. ‘And it
could be built?’

‘What? Oh, yes. Macaroon? In theory.’

‘In theory?’

‘No one would ever actually do it. Raining unquenchable fire down upon
fellow humans? Hah!’ Leonard sprayed macaroon crumbs. ‘You’d never find
an artisan to build it, or a soldier who would pull the lever . . .
That’s part 3(b) on the plan, just here, look . . .’

‘Ah, yes,’ said Vetinari. ‘Anyway,’ he added, ‘I imagine these huge
power arms here couldn’t possibly be operated without them
breaking . . .’

‘Seasoned ash and yew, laminated and held together by special steel
bolts,’ said Leonard promptly. ‘I made a few calculations, just there
below the sketch of light on a raindrop. As an intellectual exercise,
obviously.’

Vetinari ran his eye along several lines of Leonard’s spidery
mirror-writing.

‘Oh, yes,’ he said glumly. He put the paper aside.

‘Have I told you that the Klatchian situation is intensely political?
Prince Cadram is trying to do a great deal very fast. He needs to
consolidate his position. He is depending on support that is somewhat
volatile. There are many plotting against him, I understand.’

‘Really? Well, this is the sort of thing people do,’ said Leonard.
‘Incidentally, I’ve recently been examining cobwebs and, I know this
will interest you, their strength in relation to their weight is much
greater even than our best steel wire. Isn’t that fascinating?’

‘What kind of weapon do you intend to make out of them?’ said the
Patrician.

‘Sorry?’

‘Oh, nothing. I was just thinking aloud.’

‘And you haven’t touched your tea,’ said Leonard.

Vetinari looked around the room. It was full of . . . _things_. Tubes
and odd paper kites and things that looked like the skeletons of ancient
beasts. One of Leonard’s saving graces, in a very _real_ sense from
Vetinari’s point of view, was his strange attention span. It wasn’t that
he soon got bored with things. He didn’t seem to get bored with
_anything_. But since he was interested in everything in the universe
all the time the end result tended to be that an experimental device for
disembowelling people at a distance then became a string-weaving machine
and ended up as an instrument for ascertaining the specific gravity of
cheese.

He was as easily distracted as a kitten. All that business with the
flying machine, for example. Giant bat wings hung from the ceiling even
now. The Patrician had been more than happy to let him waste his time on
that idea, because it was obvious to anyone that no human being would
ever be able to flap the wings hard enough.

He needn’t have worried. Leonard was his own distraction. He had ended
up spending ages designing a special tray so that people could eat their
meals in the air.

A truly innocent man. And yet always, always, some little part of him
would sketch these wretchedly beguiling engines, with their clouds of
smoke and carefully numbered engineering diagrams . . .

‘What’s this?’ Vetinari said, pointing to yet another doodle. It showed
a man holding a large metal sphere.

‘That? Oh, something of a toy, really. Makes use of the strange
properties of some otherwise quite useless metals. They don’t like being
_squeezed_. So they go bang. With extreme alacrity.’

‘Another weapon . . .’

‘Certainly not, my lord! It would be no possible use as a weapon! I did
think it might have a place in the mining industries, though.’

‘Really . . .’

‘For when they need to move mountains out of the way.’

‘Tell me,’ Vetinari said, putting this paper aside as well, ‘you don’t
have any relatives in Klatch, do you?’

‘I don’t believe so. My family lived in Quirm for generations.’

‘Oh. Good. But . . . very clever people in Klatch, are they?’

‘Oh, in many disciplines they practically wrote the scroll. Fine
metalwork, for example.’

‘Metalwork . . .’ The Patrician sighed.

‘And Alchemy, of course. Affir Al-chema’s _Principia Explosia_ has been
_the_ seminal work for more than a hundred years.’

‘Alchemy,’ said the Patrician, glumly. ‘Sulphur and so forth . . .’

‘Yes, indeed.’

‘But the way you put it, these major achievements were some considerable
time ago . . .’ Lord Vetinari sounded like a man straining to see a
light at the end of the tunnel.

‘Certainly! I would be astonished if they haven’t made considerable
progress!’ said Leonard of Quirm happily.

‘Ah?’ The Patrician sank a little in his chair. It had turned out that
the end of the tunnel was on fire.

‘A splendid people with much to recommend them,’ said Leonard. ‘I always
thought it was the presence of the desert. It leads to an urgency of
thought. It makes you aware of the briefness of life.’

The Patrician glanced at another page. Between a sketch of a bird’s wing
and a careful drawing of a ball-joint was a little doodle of something
with spiked wheels and spinning blades. And then there was the device
for moving mountains aside . . .

‘The desert is not required,’ he said. He sighed again and pushed the
pages aside. ‘Have you heard about the lost continent of Leshp?’ he
said.

‘Oh, yes. I did some sketches there a few years ago,’ said Leonard.
‘Some interesting aspects, I recall. More tea? I fear you’ve let that
one get cold. Was there anything you particularly wanted?’

The Patrician pinched the bridge of his nose.

‘I’m not sure. There is a small problem developing. I thought perhaps
you could help. Unfortunately,’ the Patrician glanced at the sketches
again, ‘I suspect that you can.’ He stood up, straightened his robe and
forced a smile. ‘You have everything you require?’

‘Some more wire would be nice,’ said Leonard. ‘And I have run out of
Burnt Umber.’

‘I shall have some sent along directly,’ said Vetinari. ‘And now, if you
will excuse me—’

He let himself out.

Leonard nodded happily as he cleared away the teacups. The infernal
combustion engine was carried to the heap of scrap metal beside the
small forge, and he fetched a ladder and removed the piston from the
ceiling.

He’d just opened out his easel to start work on a new design when he was
aware of a distant pattering. It sounded like someone running but also
occasionally pausing to hop sideways on one leg.

Then there was a pause, such as might be made by someone adjusting their
clothing and getting their breath back.

The door opened and the Patrician returned. He sat down and looked
carefully at Leonard of Quirm.

‘You did _what_?’ he said.

Vimes turned the clove over and over under the magnifying glass.

‘I see tooth marks,’ he said.

‘Yes sir,’ said Littlebottom, who represented in her entirety the
watch’s forensic department. ‘Looks like someone was chewing it like a
toothpick.’

Vimes sat back. ‘I would say’, he said, ‘that this was last touched by a
swarthy man of about my height. He had several gold teeth. And a beard.
And a slight cast in one eye. Scarred. He was carrying a large weapon.
Curved, I’d say. And you’d have to call what he was wearing a turban
because it wasn’t moving fast enough to be a badger.’

Littlebottom looked astonished.

‘Detectoring is like gambling,’ said Vimes, putting down the clove. ‘The
secret is to know the winner in advance. Thank you, corporal. Write down
that description and make sure everyone gets a copy, please. He goes by
the name of 71-hour Ahmed, heaven knows why. And then go and get some
rest.’

Vimes turned to face Carrot and Angua, who had crammed into the tiny
little room, and nodded at the girl.

‘I followed the clove smell all the way down to the docks,’ she said.

‘And then?’

‘Then I lost it, sir.’ Angua looked embarrassed. ‘I didn’t have any
trouble through the fish market, sir. Or in the slaughterhouse district.
And then it went into the spice market—’

‘Ah. I see. And didn’t come out again?’

‘In a way, sir. Or came out going fifty different ways. Sorry.’

‘Can’t be helped. Carrot?’

‘I did what you said, sir. The top of the Opera House is about the right
distance from our archery butts. I used a bow just like the one he used,
sir—’

Vimes raised a finger. Carrot stared, and then said slowly: ‘. . . 
like . . . the one you found next to him . . .’

‘Right. And?’

‘It’s a Burleigh and Stronginthearm “Shureshotte Five”, sir. A bow for
the expert. I’m not a great bowman but I could at least hit the target
at that elevation. But . . .’

‘I’m ahead of you,’ said Vimes. ‘You’re a big lad, Carrot. Our late
Ossie had arms like Nobby. I could put my hand round them.’

‘Yes, sir. It’s a hundred-pound draw. I doubt if he could even pull the
string back.’

‘I’d hate to watch him try. Good grief . . . the only thing he could be
sure of hitting with a bow like that would be his foot. By the way, do
you think anyone saw you up there?’

‘I doubt it, sir. I was right in among the chimneys and the air vents.’

Vimes sighed. ‘Captain, I expect if you’d done it in a cellar at
midnight his lordship would have said “Wasn’t it rather dark down
there?” next morning.’

He took out the by now rather creased picture. There was Carrot – or at
least Carrot’s arm and ear – as he ran towards the procession. And
there, among the people in the procession turning to look at him, was
the face of the Prince. There was no sign of 71-hour Ahmed. He’d been at
the soirée, hadn’t he? But then there’d been all that milling around at
the door, people changing places, treading on one another’s robes,
nipping back to the privy, walking into one another . . . He could have
gone _anywhere_.

‘And the Prince fell as you got to him? With the arrow in his back? He
was still facing you?’

‘Yes, sir. I’m sure of that. Everyone else was milling around, of
course . . .’

‘So he was shot in the back by a man in front of him who could not
possibly have used the bow that he didn’t shoot him with from the wrong
direction . . .’

There was a tapping at the window.

‘That’ll be Downspout,’ said Vimes, without looking round. ‘I sent him
on an errand . . .’

Downspout never quite fitted in. It wasn’t that he didn’t get on with
people, because he hardly ever _met_ people, except those whose
activities took them above, say, second-floor level. Constable
Downspout’s beat was the rooftops. Very slowly. He’d come down for the
Watch’s Hogswatch party and had poured gravy in his ears to show
willing, but gargoyles got very nervy indoors at ground level and he had
soon exited via the chimney and his paper squeaker had echoed out
forlornly amongst the snowy rooftops all night.

But gargoyles were good at watching, and good at remembering, and very,
very good at being patient.

Vimes opened the window. Moving jerkily, Downspout unfolded himself into
the room and then quickly scrambled up on to a corner of Vimes’s desk,
for the comfort that it brought.

Angua and Carrot stared at the arrow the gargoyle held in his hand.

‘Ah, well done,’ said Vimes, in the same even voice. ‘Where did you find
it, Downspout?’

Downspout spluttered a series of guttural syllables only pronounceable
by someone with a mouth shaped like a pipe.

‘In the wall on the second floor of the dress shop in the Plaza of
Broken Moons,’ Carrot translated.

‘ ’eshk,’ said Downspout.

‘That’s barely halfway to Sator Square, sir.’

‘Yes,’ said Vimes. ‘A small weak man trying to pull a heavy bow, the
arrow wobbling all over the place . . . Thank you very much, Downspout.
There will be an extra pigeon for you this week.’

‘ ’nkorr,’ said Downspout, and clambered back out of the window.

‘Excuse me, sir?’ said Angua. She took the arrow from Vimes and, closing
her eyes, sniffed at it gingerly.

‘Oh, yes . . . Ossie,’ she said. ‘All over it . . .’

‘Thank you, corporal. It’s as well to be sure.’

Carrot took the arrow from the werewolf and looked at it critically.
‘Huh. Peacock feathers and a plated point. It’s the sort of thing an
amateur buys because he thinks it’ll magically improve his shot. Showy.’

‘Right,’ said Vimes. ‘You, Carrot, and you, Angua . . . you’re on the
case.’

‘Sir, I don’t understand,’ said Carrot. ‘I am perplexed. I thought you
said Fred and Nobby were investigating this?’

‘Yes,’ said Vimes.

‘But—’

‘Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs are investigating why the late Ossie
tried to kill the Prince. And do you know what? They’re going to find
lots of clues. I just _know_ it. I can feel it in my water.’

‘But we know he _couldn’t_—’ said Carrot.

‘Isn’t this fun?’ said Vimes. ‘I don’t want you to get in Fred’s way.
Just . . . ask around. Try Done It Duncan, or Sidney Lopsides, hah,
there’s a man with his ear to the ground all right. Or the Agony Aunts,
or Lily Goodtime. Or Mr Slider, haven’t seen him around for a while,
but—’

‘He’s dead, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘What, Smelly Slider? When?’

‘Last month, sir. He got hit by a falling bedstead. Freak accident,
sir.’

‘No one told _me_.’

‘You were busy, sir. But you put some money in the envelope when Fred
brought it round, sir. Ten dollars, which Fred remarked was very
generous.’

Vimes sighed. Oh, yes, the envelopes. Fred was always wandering around
with an envelope these days. Someone was always leaving, or some friend
of the Watch was in trouble, or there was a raffle, or the tea money was
low again, or some complicated explanation . . . so Vimes just put some
money in. Simplest way.

Old Smelly Slider . . .

‘You should’ve mentioned it,’ he said reproachfully.

‘You’ve been working hard, sir.’

‘Any other street news you haven’t mentioned, captain?’

‘Not that I can think of, sir.’

‘All right. Well . . . see which way the wind is blowing. Very
carefully. And – trust no one.’

Carrot looked worried.

‘Er . . . I can trust Angua, can’t I?’ he said.

‘Well, of _course_ you—’

‘And you, presumably.’

‘Me, well, obviously. That goes without say—’

‘Corporal Littlebottom? She can be very helpful—’

‘Cheery, yes, certainly you can trust—’

‘Sergeant Detritus? I always thought he was very trust—’

‘Detritus, oh yes, he—’

‘Nobby? Should I—’

‘Carrot, I understand what he _means_,’ said Angua, tugging his arm.

Carrot looked a little crestfallen. ‘I’ve never liked . . . you know,
underhand things,’ he mumbled.

‘I don’t want any written reports,’ said Vimes, grateful for that small
mercy. ‘This is . . . unofficial. But _officially_ unofficial, if you
see what I mean.’

Angua nodded. Carrot just stayed looking dismal.

She’s a werewolf, thought Vimes, _of course_ she understands. And you’d
think a man who is technically a dwarf’d be able to fold his head around
the idea of subterfuge.

‘Look, just . . . listen to the streets,’ said Vimes. ‘The streets know
everything. Talk to . . . Blind Hugh—’

‘I’m afraid he passed away last month,’ said Carrot.

‘Did he? No one told me!’

‘I thought I sent you a memo, sir.’

Vimes glanced guiltily at his overloaded desk, and then shrugged.

‘Have a quiet look at things. Get to the bottom of things. And trust no—
Trust practically no one. All right? Except trustworthy people.’

‘Come on, open up! Watch business!’

Corporal Nobbs pulled at Sergeant Colon’s sleeve and whispered in his
ear.

‘_Not_ Watch business!’ said Colon, pounding the door again. ‘Nothing to
do with the Watch at all! We are just civilians, all right?’

The door opened a crack.

‘Yes?’ said a voice that counted its small change.

‘We have to ask you some questions, missus.’

‘_Are_ you the Watch?’ said the voice.

‘No! I think I just made that clear—’

‘Piss off, copper!’

The door slammed.

‘You sure this is the right place, sarge?’

‘Harry Chestnuts said he saw Ossie going in here. Come on, open up!’

‘Everyone’s looking at us, sarge,’ said Nobby. Doors and windows had
opened all along the street.

‘And don’t call me sarge when we’re in plain clothes!’

‘Right you are, Fred.’

‘That’s—’ Colon hesitated in an agony of status. ‘Well, that’s
_Frederick_ to you, Nobby.’

‘And they’re giggling, Fred . . . er . . . erick.’

‘We don’t want to make a cock-up of this, Nobby.’

‘Right, Frederick. And that’s Cecil, thank you.’

‘Cecil?’

‘That is my name,’ said Nobby coldly.

‘Have it your way,’ said Colon. ‘Just remember who’s the superior
civilian around here, all right?’

He hammered on the door again.

‘We hear you’ve got a room to let, missus!’ he yelled.

‘Brilliant, Frederick,’ said Nobby. ‘That was bloody _brilliant_!’

‘Well, I _am_ the sergeant, right?’ Colon whispered.

‘No.’

‘Er . . . yeah . . . right . . . well, just you remember that, right?’

The door snapped open.

The woman within had one of those faces that had settled over the years,
as though it had been made of butter and then left in the sun. But age
hadn’t been able to do much with her hair. It was a violent ginger and
piled up like a threatening thunderhead.

‘Room? You shoulda said,’ she said. ‘Two dollars a week, no pets, no
cookin’, no wimmin after 6 a.m., if you don’t want it thousands do, are
you with the circus? You look like you’re with the circus.’⁵

‘We’re—’ Colon began, and then stopped. There were undoubtedly a large
number of things to be apart from policemen, but there and then he
couldn’t think of any of them.

‘—actors,’ said Nobby.

‘Then it’s payment a week in advance,’ said the woman. ‘And no filthy
foreign habits. This is a respectable house,’ she added, in defiance of
evidence so far.

‘We ought to see the room first,’ said Colon.

‘Oh, the choosy sort, eh?’

She led them upstairs.

The room vacated so terminally by Ossie was small and bare. A few items
of clothing hung on nails in the wall, and a heap of wrappers and greasy
bags indicated that Ossie had been a man who ate, as it were, off the
street.

‘Whose is this stuff?’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘Oh, he’s gone now. I _told_ him he’d be out if he didn’t pay up. I’ll
throw it out afore you settle in.’

‘We’ll get rid of it for you,’ said Sergeant Colon. He fumbled in his
pouch and produced a couple of dollars. ‘Here you are, Miss—?’

‘_Mrs_ Spent,’ said Mrs Spent. She gave them a lopsided look. ‘Are you
both stopping here or what?’

‘Nah, I’ve just come along as his chaperon,’ said Colon, giving her a
friendly grin. ‘He has to fight women off when they find out about his
sexual magnetism.’

Mrs Spent gave the shocked Nobby a sharp look and bustled out of the
room.

‘What’d you go and say that for?’ said Nobby.

‘It’s got rid of her, hasn’t it?’

‘You were having a go at me, don’t deny it! Just because I’m going
through a bit of an emotional wossname, eh?’

‘It was just a joke, Nobby. Just a joke.’

Nobby peered under the narrow bed.

‘Wow!’ he said, all emotional wossnames forgotten.

‘What is it? What is it?’ said Colon.

‘It looks like a complete run of _Bows and Ammo_! And . . .’ Nobby
pulled another stack of badly engraved magazines out into the light,
‘here’s _Warrior of Fortune_, look! And _Practical Siege Weapons_ . . .’

Colon leafed through page after page of very similar-looking people
holding very similar weapons of personal destruction.

‘You got to be a bit odd to sit around all day reading this kind of
thing,’ he said.

‘Yeah,’ said Nobby. ‘Here, don’t put that one back, that’s last August’s
issue, I ain’t got that one. Hang on, there’s a box right at the
back . . .’

He wriggled out, towing a small box with him. It was locked, but the
cheap metal gave way when he accidentally levered at the lid.

Silver coins gleamed. Lots and lots of them.

‘Whoops . . .’ he muttered. ‘We’re in trouble now . . .’

‘That’s _Klatchian_ money, that is!’ said Colon. ‘Sometimes people slip
you one instead of a half-dollar in your change. Look, there’s all curly
writing on them!’

‘We’re in _big_ trouble,’ said Nobby.

‘No, no, no, this is a Clue what we have found by patient detectoring,’
said Sergeant Colon. ‘And it’s going to be a feather in our caps and no
mistake when Mr Vimes hears about it!’

‘How much do you reckon there is?’

‘Got to be hundreds and hundreds of dollars’ worth,’ said Colon. ‘And
that’s a lot of money to a Klatchian. You can probably live like a king
for a year on a dollar, in Klatch.’

‘It wasn’t _very_ patient detectoring,’ said Nobby doubtfully. ‘All I
did was look under the bed.’

‘Ah, but that’s because you is trained,’ said Colon. ‘Your basic
_civilian_ wouldn’t think of that, right? Ah, it all begins to make
sense!’

‘Does it? Why would the Klatchians give him money to shoot a Klatchian?’
said Nobby.

Colon tapped the side of his nose. ‘_Politics_,’ he said.

‘Ah, _politics_,’ said Nobby. ‘Ah, well, _politics_. I see. _Politics_.
Right. So why?’

‘Aha,’ said Colon again, tapping the other side of his nose.

‘Why’re you picking your nose, sarge?’

‘I’m _tapping_ it,’ said Colon severely. ‘That’s to show I’m in the
know.’

‘In the nose,’ said Nobby cheerfully.

‘It’s just the sort of underhand cunning thing they’d do,’ said Colon.

‘Payin’ us to kill them?’ said Nobby.

‘Ah, you see, some Klatchian nob gets topped _here_, and then _they_ can
send a snotty note saying, “You killed our big nob, you foreign nephews
of dogs, this means war!” see? A perfect excuse.’

‘Do you _need_ an excuse to have a war?’ said Nobby. ‘I mean, who for?
Can’t you just say, “You got lots of cash and land but I’ve got a big
sword so divvy up right now, chop chop?” That’s what _I’d_ do,’ said
Corporal Nobbs, military strategist. ‘And I wouldn’t even say _that_
until after I’d attacked.’

‘Ah, but that’s ’cos you don’t know about politics,’ said Colon. ‘You
can’t do that stuff any more. Mark my words, this case has got politics
written all over it. That’s why old Vimes put me on it, depend upon it.
Politics. Young Carrot’s all very well, but you need a hexperienced man
of the world in these delicate political situations.’

‘You’ve certainly got the nose-tapping just right,’ said Nobby. ‘I
generally miss.’

But he felt troubled, if not in his nose then in whatever small organ
propelled his blood around his body. This didn’t feel right. Nothing
much in Nobby’s life had ever felt right, so he knew very well how the
feeling felt.

He looked up at the bare walls and down at the rough floorboards.

‘There’s a bit of sand on the floor,’ he said.

‘Another Clue, then,’ said Colon happily. ‘A Klatchian has been here.
Bugger all else but sand in Klatch. Still got some in his sandals.’

Nobby opened the window. It gave on to a gently sloping roof. Someone
could get through it easily and be away over the tiles and into the maze
of chimneys.

‘He could’ve gone in and out this way, sarge,’ he volunteered.

‘Good point, Nobby. Write that down. Evidence of conniving and sneaking
around.’

Nobby peered down. ‘Here, there’s glass outside, Fred . . .’

Sergeant Colon joined him at the stricken window. One of the panes had
been smashed. Outside, glass glittered on the tiles.

‘That could be a clue, eh?’ said Nobby, hopefully.

‘It certainly is,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘See the glass fell _outside_
the window? Everyone knows you look at which way the glass falls. I
reckon he was just testing his bow and it went off while it was loaded.’

‘That’s clever, sarge,’ said Nobby.

‘That’s _detectoring_,’ said Colon. ‘It’s no good just _looking_ at
things, Nobby. You got to _think_ straight, too.’

‘_Cecil_, sarge.’

‘That’s Frederick, Cecil. Come on, I think we’ve wrapped this up nicely.
Old Vimes says he wants a report toot sweet.’

Nobby looked out of the broken window. The roof abutted the end wall of
a much larger warehouse. For a moment he found himself thinking bendy
rather than straight, but he reasoned that his thinking was only a
corporal’s thinking, and worth far less per thought than a sergeant’s
thinking, so he kept his private thoughts to himself.

As they went downstairs Mrs Spent watched them suspiciously through a
barely opened doorway at the far end of the hall, clearly ready to slam
it shut at the first suggestion of any sexual magnetism.

‘It’s not as if I even know where to _get_ a sexual magnet,’ Nobby
muttered. ‘And she didn’t even laugh.’

 . . . _Also, we went to the bow shops in the Street of Cunning
Artificers and showed the iconograph to the man in Burleigh and
Stronginthearm, who vouchsafed, that is him, e.g., he was referring to
the Diseased_ . . .

‘Oh, my . . .’ Vimes’s lips moved slightly as his gaze went back up the
page.

 . . . _also in addition to the Klatchian money you could tell one of
them had been there because of, e.g., the sand on the floor_ . . .

‘He’d still got sand in his sandals?’ murmured Vimes. ‘Good grief.’

‘_Sam?_’

Vimes looked up from his reading.

‘Your soup will be cold,’ said Lady Sybil from the far end of the table.
‘You’ve been holding that spoonful in the air for the last five minutes
by the clock.’

‘Sorry, dear.’

‘What are you reading?’

‘Oh, just a little masterpiece,’ said Vimes, pushing Fred Colon’s report
aside.

‘Interesting, is it?’ said Lady Sybil a little sourly.

‘Practically unparalleled,’ said Vimes. ‘The only things they haven’t
found are the bunch of dates and the camel hidden under the
pillow . . .’

Belatedly, his nuptial radar detected a certain chilliness from the far
side of the cruet.

‘Is, er, there something wrong, dear?’ he said.

‘Can you remember when we last had dinner together, Sam?’

‘Tuesday, wasn’t it?’

‘That was the Guild of Merchants’ annual dinner, Sam.’

Vimes’s brow wrinkled. ‘But you were there too, weren’t you?’

A further subtle change in the dragonhouse quotient told him that this
was not a well chosen answer.

‘And then you rushed off afterwards because of that business with the
barber in Gleam Street.’

‘Sweeney Jones,’ said Vimes. ‘Well, he _was_ killing people, Sybil. The
best you could say is that he didn’t mean to. He was just very bad at
shaving—’

‘But _you_ didn’t have to go, I’m sure.’

‘Policing’s a twenty-four-hour job, dear.’

‘Only for you! Your constables do their ten hours and that’s _it_. But
you’re _always_ working. It’s not good for you. You’re always running
around during the day, and when I wake up in the middle of the night
there’s always a cold space beside me . . .’

The dots hung in the air, the ghosts of words unsaid. Little things,
thought Vimes. That’s how a war starts.

‘There’s so much to do, Sybil,’ he said, as patiently as he could.

‘There’s always been a lot to do. And the bigger the Watch gets the
_more_ there is to do, have you noticed that?’

Vimes nodded. That was true. Rotas, receipts, notebooks, reports . . .
the Watch might or might not be making a difference in the city, but it
was certainly frightening a lot of trees.

‘You ought to delegate,’ said Lady Sybil.

‘So he tells me,’ muttered Vimes.

‘Pardon?’

‘Just thinking aloud, dear.’ Vimes pushed the paperwork away. ‘I’ll tell
you what . . . let’s have an evening in,’ he said. ‘There’s a nice fire
in the drawing room—’

‘Er . . . no, Sam, there isn’t.’

‘Hasn’t young Forthright lit it?’ Forthright was the Boy; it came as
news to Vimes that this was an official servant position, but the Boy’s
job was to light the fires, clean the privies, help the gardener and
take the blame.

‘He’s gone off to be a drummer boy in the Duke of Eorle’s regiment,’
said Lady Sybil.

‘Him too? He seemed a bright lad! Isn’t he too young?’

‘He said he was going to lie about his age.’

‘I hope he lies about his musical ability. I’ve heard him whistling.’
Vimes shook his head. ‘Whatever possessed him to do such a daft thing?’

‘He thinks the uniform will impress the girls.’

Sybil gave him a gentle smile. An evening at home suddenly began to seem
very inviting.

‘Well, it won’t take a genius to find the woodshed,’ said Vimes. ‘And
then we can bolt the doors and—’

One of the aforesaid doors shook to the sound of frantic knocking.

Vimes caught Sybil’s gaze.

‘Go on, then. Answer it,’ she sighed, and sat down.

The door admitted Corporal Littlebottom, seriously out of breath.

‘You . . . got to come quick, sir . . . it’s . . . murder this . . .
time!’

Vimes looked helplessly at his wife.

‘Of course you must go,’ she said.

Angua brushed out her hair in front of the mirror.

‘I don’t like this,’ said Carrot. ‘It’s not a proper way to behave.’

She patted him on the shoulder. ‘Don’t _worry_,’ she said. ‘Vimes
explained it all. You’re acting as though we’re doing something
_wrong_.’

‘I like being a watchman,’ said Carrot, still in the mournful depths.
‘And you’ve got to wear a uniform. If you _don’t_ wear a uniform it’s
like spying on people. He _knows_ I think that.’

Angua looked at his short red hair and honest ears.

‘I’ve taken a lot of the work off his shoulders,’ Carrot went on. ‘He
doesn’t have to go on patrol at _all_, but he still tries to do
everything.’

‘Perhaps he doesn’t want you to be quite so helpful?’ said Angua, as
tactfully as possible.

‘It’s not as if he’s getting any younger, either. I’ve tried to point
that out.’

‘That was kind of you.’

‘And I’ve never _worn_ plain clothes.’

‘On you they’ll never be very plain,’ said Angua, pulling on her coat.
It was a relief to be out of that armour. As for Carrot, there was no
disguising him. The size, the ears, the red hair, the expression of
muscular good-naturedness . . .

‘I suppose a werewolf is in plain clothes all the time, when you think
about it,’ said Carrot.

‘Thank you, Carrot. And you are absolutely right.’

‘I just don’t feel comfortable, living a lie.’

‘Walk a mile on these paws.’

‘Pardon?’

‘Oh . . . nothing.’

Goriff’s son Janil had been angry. He didn’t know why. The anger was
built up of a lot of things. The firebomb last night was a big part. So
were some of the words he’d been hearing in the street. He’d had an
argument with his father about sending that food round to the Watch
House this morning. They were an official part of the city. They had
those stupid badges. They had uniforms. He was angry about a lot of
things, including the fact that he was thirteen.

So when, at nine in the evening while his father was baking bread, the
door had slammed back and a man had rushed in, Janil had pulled his
father’s elderly crossbow from under the counter and aimed it where he
thought the heart was and pulled the trigger.

Carrot stamped his feet once or twice and looked around.

‘Here,’ he said. ‘I was standing _here_. And the Prince was . . . in
that direction.’

Angua obediently walked across the square. Several people turned to look
curiously at Carrot.

‘All right . . . stop . . . no, on a bit . . . stop . . . turn a little
bit to the left . . . I mean my left . . . back a bit . . . now throw
your arms up . . .’

He walked over to her and followed her gaze.

‘He was shot from the University?’

‘Looks like the library building,’ said Angua. ‘But a wizard wouldn’t do
it, surely? They keep out of that sort of thing.’

‘Oh, it’s not too hard to get in there, even when the gates are shut,’
said Carrot. ‘Let’s try the unofficial way, shall we?’

‘Okay. Carrot?’

‘Yes?’

‘The false moustache . . . it’s not you, you know. And the nose is far
too pink.’

‘Doesn’t it make me look inconspicuous?’

‘No. And the hat . . . I should lose the hat, too. It is a _good_ hat,’
she added quickly. ‘But a brown bowler . . . it’s not your style. It
doesn’t suit you.’

‘Exactly!’ said Carrot. ‘If it _was_ my style, people would know it’s
me, right?’

‘I mean it makes you look like a twerp, Carrot.’

‘Do I normally look like a twerp?’

‘No, not—’

‘Aha!’ Carrot fumbled in the pocket of his large brown overcoat. ‘I got
this book of disguises from the joke shop in Phedre Road, look. Funny
thing, Nobby was in there buying stuff too. I asked him why and he said
it was desperate measures. What d’you think he meant by that?’

‘I can’t imagine,’ said Angua.

‘It’s just amazing the stuff they’ve got. False hair, false noses, false
beards, even false . . .’ He hesitated, and began to blush. ‘Even
false . . . you know, chests. For ladies. But I can’t imagine for the
life of me why they’d want to disguise those.’

He probably couldn’t, Angua thought. She took the very small book from
Carrot and glanced through it. She sighed.

‘Carrot, these disguises are meant for a potato.’

‘Are they?’

‘Look, they’re all on potatoes, see?’

‘I thought that was just for display.’

‘Carrot, it’s got “Mr Spuddy Face” on it.’

Behind his thick black moustache Carrot looked hurt and perplexed. ‘What
does a potato want a disguise for?’ he said.

They’d reached the alley alongside the University that had been known
informally as Scholars’ Entry for so many centuries that this was now on
a nameplate at one end. A couple of student wizards went past.

The unofficial entrance to the University has always been known only to
students. What most students failed to remember was that the senior
members of the faculty had also been students once, and also liked to
get out and about after the official shutting of the gates. This
naturally led to a certain amount of embarrassment and diplomacy on dark
evenings.

Carrot and Angua waited patiently as a few more students climbed over,
followed by the Dean.

‘Good evening, sir,’ said Carrot, politely.

‘Good evening to you, Spuddy,’ said the Dean, and ambled off into the
night.

‘You see?’

‘Ah, but he didn’t call me Carrot,’ said Carrot. ‘The _principle_ is
sound.’

They dropped down on to lawns of academia and headed for the library.

‘It’ll be shut,’ said Angua.

‘Remember, we have a man on the inside,’ said Carrot, and knocked.

The door opened a little way. ‘Ook?’

Carrot raised his horrible little round hat.

‘Good evening, sir, I wonder if we could come in? It’s Watch business.’

‘Ook eek ook?’

‘Er . . .’

‘What did he say?’ said Angua.

‘If you must know, he said, “My goodness me, a walking potato,”’ said
Carrot.

The Librarian wrinkled his nose at Angua. He did not like the smell of
werewolves. But he beckoned them inside and then left them waiting while
he knuckled back to his desk and rummaged in a drawer. He produced a
Watch Special Constable’s badge on a string, which he hung around the
general area where his neck should have been, and then stood as much to
attention as an orang-utan can, which is not a great deal. The central
ape gets the idea but outlying areas are slow to catch on.

‘Ook ook!’

‘Was that “How may I be of assistance, Captain Tuber?”’ said Angua.

‘We need to have a look on the fifth floor, overlooking the square,’
said Carrot, a shade coldly.

‘Ook oook – ook.’

‘He says that’s just old storerooms,’ said Carrot.

‘And that last “ook”?’ said Angua.

‘“Mr Horrible Hat”,’ said Carrot.

‘Still, he hasn’t worked out who you are, eh?’ said Angua.

The fifth floor was a corridor of airless rooms, smelling sadly of old,
unwanted books. They were stacked not on shelves but on wide racks,
bundled up with string. A lot of them were battered and missing their
covers. Judging by what remained, though, they were old textbooks that
not even the most ardent bibliophile could treasure.

Carrot picked up a torn copy of Woddeley’s _Occult Primer_. Several
loose pages fell out. Angua picked one up.

‘“Chapter Fifteen, Elementary Necromancy”,’ she read aloud. ‘“Lesson
One: Correct Use of Shovel . . .”’

She put it down again and sniffed the air. The presence of the Librarian
filled the nasal room like an elephant in a matchbox, but—

‘Someone else has been in here,’ she said. ‘In the last couple of days.
Could you leave us, sir? When it comes to odours, you’re a bit . . .
forthright . . .’

‘Ook?’

The Librarian nodded at Carrot, shrugged at Angua and ambled out.

‘Don’t move,’ said Angua. ‘Stay right where you are, Carrot. Don’t
disturb the air . . .’

She inched forward carefully.

Her ears told her the Librarian was down the corridor, because she could
hear the floorboards creaking. But her nose told her that he was still
here. He was a little fuzzy, but—

‘I’m going to have to change,’ she said. ‘I can’t get a proper picture
this way. It’s too strange.’

Carrot obediently shut his eyes. She’d forbidden him to watch her en
route from a human to a wolf, because of the unpleasant nature of the
shapes in between. Back in Überwald people went from one shape to the
other as naturally as ordinary humans would put on a different coat, but
even there it was considered polite to do it behind a bush.

When he re-opened them Angua was slinking forward, her whole being
concentrated in her nose.

The olfactory presence of the Librarian was a complex shape, a mere
purple blur where he had been moving but almost a solid figure where
he’d been standing still. Hands, face, lips . . . they’d be just the
centre of an expanding cloud in a few hours’ time, but now she could
still smell them out.

There must be only the tiniest air currents in here. There weren’t even
any flies buzzing in the dead air to cause a ripple of disturbance.

She edged nearer to the window. Vision was a mere shadowy presence,
providing a charcoal sketch of a room over which the scents painted
their glorious colours.

By the window . . . by the window . . .

Yes! A man had stood there, and by the scent of it he hadn’t moved for
some time. The smell wavered in the air, on the edge of her nasal skill.
The curling, billowing traces said that the window had been opened and
closed again, and was there just the merest, tiniest suggestion that
he’d held an arm out in front of him?

_Her nose raced, trying to form original shapes from the patterns
hanging in the room like dead smoke_ . . .

When she’d finished, Angua went back to her pile of clothes and coughed
politely while she was pulling on her boots.

‘There _was_ a man standing by the window,’ she said. ‘Long hair, a bit
dry, stinks of expensive shampoo. He was the man who nailed the boards
back after Ossie got into the Barbican.’

‘Are you sure?’

‘Is this nose ever wrong?’

‘Sorry. Go on.’

‘I’d say he was heavy-set, a bit bulky for his height. He doesn’t wash a
lot, but when he does he uses Windpike’s Soap, the cheap brand. But
expensive shampoo, which is odd. Quite new boots. And a green coat.’

‘You can smell the colour?’

‘No. The dye. It comes from Sto Lat, I think. And . . . I _think_ he
shot a bow. An _expensive_ bow. There’s a hint of silk in the air, and
that’s what the strongest bowstrings are made of, isn’t it? And you
wouldn’t put one of those on a cheap bow.’

Carrot stood by the window. ‘He got a good view,’ he said, and looked
down at the floor. And then at the sill. And on the shelves nearby.

‘How long was he here?’

‘Two or three hours, I’d say.’

‘He didn’t move around much.’

‘No.’

‘Or smoke, or spit. He just stood and waited. A professional. Mr Vimes
was _right_.’

‘A lot more professional than Ossie,’ said Angua.

‘Green coat,’ said Carrot, as if thinking aloud. ‘Green coat, green
coat . . .’

‘Oh . . . and bad dandruff,’ said Angua, standing up.

‘_Snowy Slopes?!_’ shouted Carrot.

‘What?’

‘_Really_ bad dandruff?’

‘Oh, yes, it—’

‘That’s why they call him Snowy,’ said Carrot. ‘Daceyville Slopes, the
man with the reinforced comb. But I’d heard he’d moved to Sto Lat—’

In unison they said: ‘—where the dye comes from—’

‘Is he good with a bow?’ said Angua.

‘Very good. He’s good at killing people he never met, too.’

‘He’s an Assassin, is he?’

‘Oh, no. He just kills people for money. No style. Snowy can’t read and
write.’

Carrot scratched his head in sympathetic recollection. ‘He doesn’t even
look at complicated pictures. We’d have got him last year, but he shook
his head fast and got away while we were trying to dig out Nobby. Well,
well. I wonder where he’s staying?’

‘Don’t ask me to follow him in these streets. Thousands of people will
have walked over the trail.’

‘Oh, there’s people who will know. Someone sees everything in this
town.’

MR SLOPES?

Snowy Slopes gingerly felt his neck, or at least the neck of his soul.
The human soul tends to keep to the shape of the original body for some
time after death. Habit is a wonderful thing.

‘Who the _hell_ was he?’ he said.

NOT SOMEONE YOU KNOW? said Death.

‘Well, no! I don’t know many people who cut my head off!’

Snowy Slopes’s body had knocked against the table as it fell. Several
bottles of medicated shampoo now dripped and mixed their contents into
the other more intimate fluids from the Slopes corpse.

‘That stuff with the special oil in it cost me nearly four dollars,’
said Snowy. Yet, somehow, it all seemed slightly . . . irrelevant now.
Death happens to other people. The other person in this case had been
him. That is, the one down there. Not the one standing here looking at
it. In life, Snowy hadn’t even been able to _spell_ ‘metaphysical’, but
he was already beginning to view life in a different way. From the
outside, for a start.

‘Four dollars,’ he repeated. ‘I never even had time to try it!’

IT WOULDN’T HAVE WORKED, said Death, patting the man on a fading
shoulder. BUT, IF I MIGHT SUGGEST THAT YOU LOOK ON THE BRIGHT SIDE, IT
WILL NO LONGER BE NECESSSARY.

‘No more dandruff?’ said Snowy, now quite transparent and fading fast.

EVER, said Death. TRUST ME ON THIS.

Commander Vimes ran down darkened streets, trying to buckle on his
breastplate as he ran.

‘All right, Cheery, what’s happening?’

‘They say a Klatchian killed someone, sir. There’s a mob up in Scandal
Alley and it’s looking bad. I was on the desk and I thought you ought to
be told, sir.’

‘Right!’

‘And anyway I couldn’t find Captain Carrot, sir.’

A little bit of acid ink scribbled its subtle entry on the ledger of
Vimes’s soul.

‘Oh, gods . . . so who’s the officer in charge?’

‘Sergeant Detritus, sir.’

It seemed to the dwarf that she was suddenly standing still. Commander
Vimes had become a rapidly disappearing blur.

With the calm expression of someone who was methodically doing his duty,
Detritus picked up a man and used him to hit some other men. When he had
a clear area around him and a groaning heap of former rioters, he
climbed the heap and cupped his hands round his mouth.

‘Listen to me, youse people!’

A troll shouting at the top of his voice could easily be heard above a
riot. When he seemed to have their attention he pulled a scroll out of
his breastplate and waved it over his head.

‘Dis is der Riot Act,’ he said. ‘You know what dat means? It means if’n
I reads it out and youse don’t disb . . . disp . . . go away, der Watch
can use deadly force, you unnerstand?’

‘What did you just use, then?’ moaned someone from underneath his feet.

‘Dat was you helpin’ der Watch,’ said Detritus, shifting his weight.

He unrolled the scroll.

Although there was some scuffling in alleyways and shouts from the next
street, a ring of silence expanded outwards from the troll. An almost
genetic component of the citizens of Ankh-Morpork was their ability to
spot an opportunity for amusement.

Detritus held the document at arm’s length. And then a few inches from
his face. He tried turning it round a few times.

His lips moved uneasily.

Finally, he leaned down and showed it to Constable Visit.

‘What dis word?’

‘That’s “Whereby”, sergeant.’

‘I knew dat.’

He straightened up again.

‘“Whereby . . . it is . . .”’ Beads of the troll equivalent of sweat
began to form on Detritus’s forehead. ‘“Whereby it is . . .
ack-no-legg-ed . . .”’

‘Acknowledged,’ whispered Constable Visit.

‘I knew dat.’ Detritus stared at the paper again, and then gave up.
‘Youse don’t want to stand here listenin’ to me all day!’ he bellowed.
‘Dis is der Riot Act and you’ve all got to read it, right? Pass it
round.’

‘What if we don’t read it?’ said a voice in the crowd.

‘You got to read it. It _legal_.’

‘And then what happens?’

‘Den I shoot you,’ said Detritus.

‘That’s not allowed!’ said another voice. ‘You’ve got to shout “Stop!
Armed Watchman!” first.’

‘Sure, dat suits me,’ said Detritus. He shrugged one huge shoulder to
bring his crossbow under his arm. It was a siege bow, intended to be
mounted on the cart. The bolt was six feet long. ‘It harder to hit
runnin’ targets.’

He released the safety catch.

‘Anyone finishing readin’ dat thing yet?’

‘Sergeant!’

Vimes pushed his way through the crowd. And it _was_ a crowd now.
Ankh-Morpork was always a good audience.

There was a clang as Detritus saluted.

‘Were you proposing to shoot these people in cold blood, sergeant?’

‘Nossir. Just a warning shot inna head, sir.’

‘Really? Just give me a moment to talk to them, then.’

Vimes looked at the man next to him. He was holding a flaming torch in
one hand and a long length of wood in the other. He gave Vimes the
nervously defiant stare of someone who has just felt the ground shift
under his feet.

Vimes pulled the torch towards him and lit a cigar. ‘What’s happening
here, friend?’

‘The Klatchians have been shooting people, Mr Vimes! Unprovoked attack!’

‘Really?’

‘People have been killed!’

‘Who?’

‘I . . . there were . . . everyone _knows_ they’ve been killing people!’
The man’s mental footsteps found safer ground. ‘Who do they think they
are, coming over—’

‘That’s enough,’ said Vimes. He stood back and raised his voice.

‘I recognize a lot of you,’ he said. ‘And I know you’ve got homes to go
to. See this?’ He pulled his baton of office out of his pocket. ‘This
says I’ve got to keep the peace. So in ten seconds I’m going somewhere
else to find some peace to keep, but Detritus is going to stay here. And
I just hope he doesn’t do anything to disgrace the uniform. Or get it
very dirty, at least.’

Irony was not a degree-level subject among the listeners, but the
brighter ones recognized Vimes’s expression. It said that here was a man
hanging on to his patience by his teeth.

The mob dispersed, going ragged at the edges as people legged it down
side alleys, threw away their makeshift weapons and emerged at the other
end walking the grave, thoughtful walk of honest citizens.

‘All right, what _happened_?’ said Vimes, turning to the troll.

‘We’re hearing where dis boy shot dis man,’ said Detritus. ‘We got here,
next minute it rainin’ people from everywhere, shoutin’.’

‘He smote him as Hudrun smote the fleshpots of Ur,’ said Constable
Visit.⁶

‘Smote?’ said Vimes, bewildered. ‘He killed someone?’

‘Not by der way der man was cussing, sir,’ said Detritus. ‘Hit him in
der arm. His friends brought him round der Watch House to complain. He a
baker on der night shift. He said he was late for work, he come runnin’
in to pick up his dinner, next minute he flat on der floor.’

Vimes walked across the street and tried the door of the shop. It opened
a little way, and then fetched up against what seemed to be a barricade.
Furniture had been piled up against the window as well.

‘How many people were there, constable?’

‘A multitude thereof, sir.’

And four people in here, thought Vimes. A family. The door moved a
fraction and Vimes realized he was ducking even before the crossbow
protruded.

There was the _thung_ of the string. The bolt tumbled rather than sped.
It corkscrewed wildly across the alley and was almost moving sideways
when it hit the opposite wall.

‘Look,’ said Vimes, keeping his body down but raising his voice. ‘Anyone
who got hit with _that_, it must have been an accident. This is the
Watch. Open the door. Otherwise Detritus will open it. And when he opens
a door, it stays open. You know what I mean?’

There was no reply.

‘All right. Detritus, just step over here—’

There was a hissed argument inside, and then the sound of scraping as
furniture was moved.

He tried the door. It swung inwards.

The family were at the far end of the room. Vimes felt eight eyes on
him. The atmosphere had a hot, worrying feel, spiced with the smell of
burnt food.

Mr Goriff was holding the crossbow gingerly, and the expression on his
son’s face told Vimes a lot of what he needed to know.

‘All _right_,’ he said. ‘Now you all listen to me. I’m not arresting
anyone right now, you hear? This sounds like one of those things that
make his lordship yawn. But you’d do better spending the rest of the
night in the Watch House. I can’t spare the men to stand guard here. Do
you understand? I _could_ arrest you. But this is just a request.’

Mr Goriff cleared his throat.

‘The man I shot—’ he began, and left the question and the lie hanging in
the air.

Vimes forced himself not to glance at the boy. ‘Not badly hurt,’ he
said.

‘He . . . ran in,’ said Mr Goriff. ‘And after last night—’

‘You thought you were being attacked again and grabbed the crossbow?’

‘Yes,’ said the boy, defiantly, before his father could speak.

There was a brief argument in Klatchian. Then Mr Goriff said:

‘We must leave the house?’

‘For your own good. We’ll try to have someone watch it. Now, get
something together and go off with the sergeant. And give me that
crossbow.’

Goriff handed it over with a look of relief. It was a typical Saturday
Night Special, so badly made and erratic that the only safe place to be
when it was fired would be directly behind it, and even then you would
be running a risk. And then no one had told its owner that under the
counter in a steamy shop and a perpetual rain of grease wasn’t the best
place to keep it strung. The string sagged. Probably the only way you
could reliably hurt someone with it was to beat them over the head.

Vimes waited until they’d been ushered out and took a last look around
the room. It wasn’t large. In the kitchen behind the shop something
spicy in a pot was boiling dry. After burning his fingers a couple of
times he managed to tip the pot on to the fire to put it out and then,
vaguely remembering his mother doing something like this, put the pot
under the pump to soak.

Then he barricaded the windows as best he could and went out, locking
the door behind him. A discreetly obvious brass Thieves’ Guild plaque
over the door told the world that Mr Goriff had conscientiously paid his
annual fee,⁷ but the world had plenty of less formal dangers and so
Vimes took a piece of chalk out of his pocket and wrote on the door:

UNDER THE PROTECTION OF THE WATCH

As an afterthought he signed it:

SGT DETRITUS

In the imaginations of the less civically minded the majesty of the rule
of law didn’t carry anything like as much weight as the dread of
Detritus.

The Riot Act! Where the _hell_ had he dredged that from? Carrot,
probably. It hadn’t been used for as long as Vimes could remember, and
that was no wonder when you knew what it really did. Even Vetinari would
hesitate to use it. Now it was nothing more than a phrase. Thank
goodness for trollish illiteracy . . .

It was when Vimes stood back to admire his handiwork that he saw the
glow in the sky over Park Lane, almost at the same time as he heard the
clatter of iron boots on the street.

‘Oh, hello, Littlebottom,’ he said. ‘What now? Don’t tell me – someone’s
set fire to the Klatchian embassy.’

‘All right, sir,’ said the dwarf. She stood uncertainly in the middle of
the alley, looking worried.

‘Well?’ said Vimes.

‘Er . . . you said—’

With a sinking feeling Vimes remembered that the generic dwarfish skill
with iron was matched only by the fumble-fingered grasp of irony.

‘The Klatchian embassy is _really_ on fire?’

‘Yes, sir!’

Mrs Spent opened the door a crack.

‘Yes?’

‘I’m a friend of . . .’ Carrot hesitated, wondering if Fred would have
given his real name. ‘Er . . . big fat man, suit doesn’t fit—’

‘The one who goes around with the sex maniac?’

‘Pardon?’

‘Skinny little twerp, dresses like a clown?’

‘They said you’d have a room,’ said Carrot desperately.

‘They’ve got it,’ said Mrs Spent, trying to shut the door.

‘They said I could use it—’

‘No sub-lettin’!’

‘They said I should pay you two dollars!’

The pressure of the door was released a little.

‘On top of what they paid?’ said Mrs Spent.

‘Of course.’

‘Well . . .’ She looked Carrot up and down and sniffed. ‘All right. What
shift are you on?’

‘Sorry?’

‘You’re a watchman, right?’

‘Er . . .’ Carrot hesitated, and then raised his voice. ‘No, I am not a
watchman. Haha, you think I’m a watchman? Do I look like a watchman?’

‘Yes, you do,’ said Mrs Spent. ‘You’re Captain Carrot. I _seen_ you
walking about the town. Still, I suppose even coppers have to sleep
somewhere.’

On the roof, Angua rolled her eyes.

‘No wimmin, no cookin’, no music, no pets,’ said Mrs Spent, as she led
the way up the creaking stairs.

Angua waited in the dark until she heard the window open.

‘She’s gone,’ Carrot hissed.

‘There’s glass on the tiles out here, just like Fred reported,’ said
Angua, as she swung herself over the sill. Inside the room she took a
deep breath and shut her eyes.

First she had to forget the smell of Carrot – anxious sweat, soap, the
lingering hints of armour polish . . .

 . . . _and Fred Colon, all perspiration with a hint of beer, and then
the odd ointment Nobby used for his skin condition, and the smells of
feet, bodies, clothes, polish, fingernails_ . . .

After an hour it was possible for the eye of the nose to see someone
walk across the room, frozen in time by their smell. But after a day
smells crisscrossed and entangled. You had to take them apart, remove
the familiar pieces, and what you had left—

‘They’re so mixed up!’

‘All right, all right,’ said Carrot soothingly.

‘At least three people! But I think one of them is Ossie . . . It’s
stronger round the bed . . . and . . .’

She opened her eyes wide and looked down at the floor. ‘Somewhere here!’

‘What? What is?’

Angua crouched down with her nose just above the floorboards.

‘I can smell it but I can’t see it!’

A knife appeared in front of her. Carrot got down on his knees and ran
the blade along the dust-filled crack between the floorboards.

Something splintery and brown popped up. It had been trodden on and
rolled underfoot, but at this distance even Carrot could pick up traces
of the clove smell. ‘Do you think Ossie made a lot of apple pies?’ he
whispered.

‘No cookin’, remember?’ said Angua, and grinned.

‘There’s something else . . .’

Carrot levered out more dirt and dust. In it, something glittered. ‘Fred
said all the glass was outside, didn’t he?’

‘Yes.’

‘Well, supposing we assume that someone didn’t pick up _all_ the bits
when they broke in?’

‘For someone that doesn’t like lying, Carrot, you can be quite devious,
you know?’

‘Just logical. There’s glass outside the window, but all that means is
that there is glass outside the window. Commander Vimes always says
there’re no such things as clues. It’s how you look at them.’

‘You think someone broke in and then carefully put the glass outside?’

‘Could be.’

‘Carrot? Why are we whispering?’

‘No wimmin, remember?’

‘And no pets,’ said Angua. ‘So she’s got me coming _and_ going. Don’t
look like that,’ she added, when she saw his face. ‘It’s only bad taste
if someone else says it. _I’m_ allowed.’

Carrot scratched up some more glass fragments. Angua looked under the
bed and pulled out the battered magazines.

‘Ye gods, do people really read this stuff?’ she said, flicking through
_Bows and Ammo_. ‘“Testing the Locksley Reflex 7: A Whole Lotta
Bow” . . . “Footsore! We test the Ten Best Caltrops!” . . . and what’s
this magazine . . . ? _Warrior of Fortune?_’

‘There’s always little wars somewhere,’ said Carrot, pulling out the box
of money.

‘But will you look at the size of this axe here? “Get A Head, Get A
Burleigh and Stronginthearm ‘Street-sweeper’ and Win By A Neck!” Well,
it must be true what they say about men who like big weapons . . .’

‘And that is?’ said Carrot, lifting the lid of the box.

She looked at the top of his head. As always, Carrot radiated innocence
like a small sun. But he’d . . . They’d . . . _Surely_ he . . .

‘They, er . . . they’re rather small,’ she said.

‘Oh, that’s true,’ said Carrot, picking up some of the Klatchian coins.
‘Look at dwarfs. Never happier than with a chopper the same size as
them. And Nobby’s _fascinated_ by weapons and he’s practically
dwarf-sized.’

‘Er . . .’

Technically, Angua was sure she knew Carrot better than anyone else. She
was pretty sure he cared a lot for her. He seldom said so, he just
assumed that she knew. She’d known other men, although turning into a
wolf for part of the month was one of those little flaws that could put
any _normal_ man off and, up until Carrot, always had. And she knew the
sort of things men said in what might be called the heat of the moment
and then forgot. But when Carrot said things, you knew that _he_ felt
that everything was now settled until further notice, so if she made any
comment he’d be genuinely surprised that she’d forgotten what it was he
had said and would probably quote date and time.

And yet all the time there was this feeling that the greater part of him
was always deep, deep inside, looking out. No one could be so simple, no
one could be so creatively _dumb_, without being very intelligent. It
was like being an actor. Only a very good actor was any good at being a
bad actor.

‘Rather a lonely person, our Nobby,’ said Carrot.

‘Well, yes . . .’

‘But I’m sure he’ll find the right person for him,’ Carrot added,
cheerfully.

Probably in a bottle, said Angua to herself. She remembered the
conversation with him. It was a terrible thing to think, but there was
something itchy about the thought of Nobby being allowed in the gene
pool, even at the shallow end.

‘You know, these coins are odd,’ said Carrot.

‘How do you mean?’ said Angua, grateful for the distraction.

‘Why would he be paid in Klatchian _wols_? He wouldn’t be able to spend
them here, and the money changers don’t give very good rates.’ Carrot
tossed a coin in the air and caught it. ‘When we were leaving, Mr Vimes
said to me, “Make sure you find the bunch of dates and the camel hidden
under the pillow.” I think I know what he meant.’

‘Sand on the floor,’ said Angua. ‘Now, isn’t that an _obvious_ clue? You
can tell they were Klatchian because of the sand in their sandals!’

‘But these cloves . . .’ Carrot prodded the little bud. ‘It’s not as if
it’s a common habit, even among Klatchians. _That_’s not a very obvious
clue, is it?’

‘It smells newer,’ said Angua. ‘I’d say he was here last night.’

‘_After_ Ossie was dead?’

‘Yes.’

‘Why?’

‘How should I know? What kind of name is 71-hour Ahmed?’ said Angua.

Carrot shrugged. ‘I don’t know. I _think_ Mr Vimes thinks that someone
in Ankh-Morpork wants us to believe that Klatchians paid to have the
Prince killed. That sounds . . . nasty but logical. But I don’t
understand why a _real_ Klatchian would get involved . . .’

Their eyes met.

‘Politics?’ they said together.

‘For enough money, a lot of people would do _anything_,’ said Angua.

There was a sudden and ferocious knocking at the door.

‘Have you got someone in there?’ said Mrs Spent.

‘Out of the window!’ said Carrot.

‘Why don’t I just stay and rip her throat out?’ said Angua. ‘All right,
all right, it was a _joke_, all right?’ she said, swinging her legs over
the sill.

Ankh-Morpork no longer had a fire brigade. The citizens had a rather
disturbingly direct way of thinking at times, and it did not take long
for people to see the rather obvious flaw in paying a group of people by
the number of fires they put out. The penny really dropped shortly after
Charcoal Tuesday.

Since then they had relied on the good old principle of enlightened
self-interest. People living close to a burning building did their best
to douse the fire, because the thatch they saved might be their own.

But the crowd watching the burning embassy were doing so in a
hollow-eyed, distant way, as if it was all taking place on some distant
planet.

They moved aside automatically as Vimes elbowed his way through to the
space in front of the gates. Flames were already licking from every
ground-floor window, and they could make out scurrying silhouettes in
the flickering light.

He turned to the crowd. ‘Come on! What’s up with you? Get a bucket chain
going!’

‘It’s _their_ bloody embassy,’ said a voice.

‘Yeah. ’s Klatchian soil, right?’

‘Can’t go on Klatchian soil.’

‘That’d be an _invasion_, that would.’

‘They wouldn’t let us,’ said a small boy holding a bucket.

Vimes looked at the embassy gateway. There were a couple of guards.
Their worried glances kept going back from the fire behind them to the
crowd in front. They were nervous men, but it was much worse than that,
because they were nervous men holding big swords.

He advanced on them, trying to smile and holding his badge out in front
of him. It had a shield on it. It was not a very big shield.

‘Commander Vimes, Ankh-Morpork City Watch,’ he said, in what he hoped
was a helpful and friendly voice.

A guard waved him away. ‘Hyou be off!’

‘Ah . . .’ said Vimes. He looked down at the cobbles of the gateway and
then back up at the guard. Somewhere in the flames someone was
screaming.

‘You! Come here! You see this?’ he shouted at the guard, pointing down.
The man took a hesitant step forward.

‘That’s Ankh-Morpork soil down there, my friend,’ said Vimes. ‘And
you’re standing on it and you’re obstructing me in my—’ he rammed his
fist as hard as he could into the guard’s stomach ‘—duty!’

He was already kicking out as the other guard rushed him. He caught him
on the knee. Something went click. It felt like Vimes’s own ankle.

Cursing and limping slightly, he ran on into the embassy and caught a
scurrying man by his robe.

‘Are there people still in there? Are there _people_ in there?’

The man gave Vimes a panicky look. The armfuls of paper he’d been
carrying spilled on to the ground.

Someone else grabbed his shoulder. ‘Can you climb, Mr Vimes?’

‘Who’re—’

The newcomer turned to the cowering paper-carrier and struck him heavily
across the face. ‘Rescuer of paper!’

As the man fell back his turban was snatched from his head.

‘This way!’ The figure plunged off through the smoke. Vimes hurried
after him until they reached a wall, with a drainpipe attached.

‘How did you—?’

‘Up! Up!’

Vimes put one foot in the man’s cupped hands, managed to get the other
one on a bracket, and forced himself upwards.

‘Hurry!’

He managed to half climb, half pull himself up the pipe, little
fireworks of pain exploding up and down his legs as he reached a parapet
and hauled himself over. The other man rose behind him as if he’d run up
the wall.

There was a strip of cloth hiding the lower half of his face. He thrust
another strip towards Vimes.

‘Across your nose and mouth!’ he commanded. ‘For the smoke!’

It was boiling across the roof. Beside Vimes a chimneypot gushed a
roaring tongue of flame.

The rest of the unwound turban was thrust into his hands.

‘You take this side, I’ll take the other,’ said the apparition, and
darted away again into the smoke.

‘But wh—’

Vimes could feel the heat through his boots. He edged away across the
roof, and heard the shouting coming from below.

When he leaned over the edge here he could see the window some way below
him. Someone had smashed a pane, because a hand was waving.

There was more commotion down in the courtyard. Amid a press of figures
he could make out the huge shape of Constable Dorfl, a golem and quite
definitely fireproof. But Dorfl was bad enough at stairs as it was.
There weren’t many that could take the weight.

The hand in the smoke stopped waving.

Vimes looked down again.

Can you fly, Mr Vimes?

He looked at the chimney, belching flame.

He looked at the unwound turban.

A lot of Sam Vimes’s brain had shut down, although the bits relaying the
twinges of pain from his legs were operating with distressing
efficiency. But there were still some thoughts operating down around the
core, and they delivered for his consideration the insight:

 . . . tough-looking cloth . . .

He looked back at the chimney. It looked stout enough.

The window was about six feet below.

Vimes began to move automatically.

So, purely theoretically, if a man were to wrap one end of the cloth
round the belching stack like _this_ and pay it out like _this_ and
lower himself over the parapet like _this_ and kick himself away from
the wall like _this_, then when he swung back again his feet ought to be
able to smash his way through the other panes of the window, like
_this_—

A cart squeaked along the wet street. Its progress was erratic because
no two of its wheels were the same size, so it rocked and wobbled and
skidded and probably involved more effort to pull than it saved overall,
especially since its contents appeared to be rubbish. But then, so did
its owner.

Who was about the size of a man, but bent almost double, and was covered
with hair or rags or quite possibly a matted mixture of both that was so
felted and unwashed that small plants had taken root on it. If the thing
had stopped walking and crouched down, it would have given an
astonishingly good impression of a long-neglected compost heap. As it
walked along, it snuffled.

A foot was stuck out to impede its progress.

‘Good evening, Stoolie,’ said Carrot as the cart halted.

The heap stopped. Part of it tilted upwards.

‘Geroff,’ it muttered, from somewhere in the thatch.

‘Now, now, Stoolie, let’s help one another, shall we? You help me, and
I’ll help you.’

‘B’g’r ’ff, c’p’r.’

‘Well, you tell _me_ things I want to know,’ said Carrot, ‘and I won’t
search your cart.’

‘I hate gnolls,’ said Angua. ‘They smell _awful_.’

‘Oh, that’s hardly fair. The streets’d be a lot dirtier without you and
yours, eh, Stoolie?’ said Carrot, still speaking quite pleasantly. ‘You
pick up this, you pick up that, maybe bash it against a wall until it
stops struggling—’

‘’s a vile accur’cy,’ said the gnoll. There was a bubbling noise that
might have been a chuckle.

‘So I’m hearing you might know where Snowy Slopes is these days,’ said
Carrot.

‘D’nno n’thin’.’

‘Fine.’ Carrot produced a three-tined garden fork and walked round to
the cart, which dripped.

‘D’nno n’thin’ _ab’t_—’ said the gnoll quickly.

‘Yes?’ said Carrot, fork poised.

‘D’nno n’thin’ ab’t t’ sweetsh’p ’n M’ney Tr’p L’ne.’

‘The one with the Rooms To Let sign?’

‘R’t.’

‘Well done. Thank you for being a good citizen,’ said Carrot.
‘Incidentally, we passed a dead seagull on the way here. It’s in Brewer
Street. I bet if you hurried you could beat the rush.’

‘H’t d’gg’ty,’ snuffled the gnoll. The cart started to judder forward.
The watchmen watched it lurch and scrape around the corner.

‘They’re good fellows at heart,’ said Carrot. ‘I think it says a lot for
the spirit of tolerance in this city that even gnolls can call it home.’

‘They turn my stomach,’ said Angua, as they set off again. ‘That one had
plants growing on him!’

‘Mr Vimes says we ought to do something for them,’ said Carrot.

‘All heart, that man.’

‘With a flamethrower, he says.’

‘Wouldn’t work. Too soggy. Has anyone ever _really_ found out what they
eat?’

‘It’s better to think of them as . . . cleaners. You certainly don’t see
as much rubbish and dead animals on the streets as you used to.’

‘Yes, but have you ever seen a gnoll with a brush and shovel?’

‘Well, that’s society for you, I’m afraid,’ said Carrot. ‘Everything is
dumped on the people below until you find someone who’s prepared to eat
it. That’s what Mr Vimes says.’

‘Yes,’ said Angua. They walked in silence for a while, and then she
said, ‘You care a lot about what Mr Vimes says, don’t you . . . ?’

‘He is a fine officer and an example to us all.’

‘And . . . you’ve never thought of getting a job in Quirm or somewhere,
have you? The other cities are headhunting Ankh-Morpork watchmen now.’

‘What, leave Ankh-Morpork?’ The tone of voice included the answer.

‘No . . . I suppose not,’ said Angua sadly.

‘Anyway, I don’t know what Mr Vimes would do without me running around
all the time.’

‘It’s a point of view, certainly,’ said Angua.

It wasn’t far to Money Trap Lane. It was in a ghetto of what Lord Rust
would probably call ‘skilled artisans’, the people too low down the
social scale to be movers and shakers but slightly too high to be easily
moved or shook. The sanders and polishers, generally. The people who
hadn’t got very much but were proud even of that. There were little
clues. Shiny house numbers, for a start. And, on the walls of houses
that were effectively just one long continuous row, after centuries of
building and in-building, very careful boundaries in the paint where
people had brushed up to the very border of their property and not a
gnat’s blink to each side. Carrot always said it showed the people were
the kind who instinctively realized that civilization was based on a
shared respect for ownership; Angua thought they were just tight little
bastards who’d sell you the time of day.

Carrot walked noiselessly down the alley beside the sweetshop. There was
a rough wooden staircase going up to the first floor. He pointed
silently to the midden below it.

It seemed to consist almost entirely of bottles.

‘Big drinker?’ Angua mouthed. Carrot shook his head.

She crouched down and looked at the labels, but her nose was already
giving her a hint. _Dibbler’s Homoeopathic Shampoo. Mere and Stingbat’s
Herbal Wash – with Herbs! Rinse ’n’ Run Scalp Tonic – with Extra
Herbs!_ . . .

There were others. Herbs, she thought. Chuck a handful of weeds in the
pot and you’ve got herbs . . .

Carrot was starting up the stairs when she put her hand on his shoulder.
There was another smell. It was one that drove through all the other
scents of the streets like a spear. It was one that a werewolf’s nose is
particularly attuned to.

He nodded and went carefully to the door. Then he pointed down. There
was a stain under the gap.

Carrot drew his sword and kicked the door open.

Daceyville Slopes hadn’t taken his condition lightly. Bottles of all
shapes and colours occupied most flat surfaces, giving testimony to the
alchemist’s art and humanity’s optimism.

The suds of his latest experiment were still in a bowl on the table, and
his body on the floor had a towel around his neck. The watchmen looked
down at it. Snowy had cleaned, washed and gone.

‘I think we can say life is extinct,’ said Carrot.

‘Yuk,’ said Angua. She grabbed the open shampoo bottle and sniffed
deeply. The sickly scent of marinated herbs assailed her sinuses, but
anything was better than the sharp, beguiling smell of blood.

‘I wonder where his head is at?’ said Carrot, in a determinedly
matter-of-fact voice. ‘Oh, it’s rolled over there . . . What’s the
horrible smell?’

‘This!’ Angua flourished the shampoo. ‘Four dollars a bottle, it says.
Sheesh!’

Angua took another deep sniff at the herbal goo, to drown out the call
of the wolf.

‘Doesn’t look as if they stole anything,’ said Carrot. ‘Unless they were
_very_ neat— What’s the matter?’

‘Don’t ask!’

She managed to get a window open and sucked down great draughts of
comparatively fresh air, while Carrot went through the corpse’s pockets.

‘Er . . . you can’t tell if there’s a clove around, can you?’ he said.

‘Carrot! Please! This is a room with blood all over the floor! Have you
_any idea_? Excuse me . . .’

She rushed out and down the steps. The alley had the generic smell of
all alleys everywhere, overlaid on the basic all-embracing smell of the
city. But at least it didn’t make your hair grow and your teeth try to
lengthen. She leaned against the wall and fought for control. Shampoo?
She could have saved Snowy a hell of a lot of money with just one
careful bite. Then he’d know _all_ about a really bad hair day . . .

Carrot came down a couple of minutes later, locking the door behind him.

‘Are you feeling better?’

‘A bit . . .’

‘There was something else,’ said Carrot, looking thoughtful. ‘I think he
wrote a note before he died. But it’s all rather odd.’ He waved in the
air what looked like a cheap notepad. ‘This needs careful looking at.’
He shook his head. ‘Poor old Snowy.’

‘He was a killer!’

‘Yes, but that’s a nasty way to die.’

‘Decapitation? With a very sharp sword, by the look of it. I can think
of worse.’

‘Yes, but I can’t help thinking that if only the chap had better hair or
had found the right shampoo at an early age he’d have led a different
life . . .’

‘Well, at least he won’t have to worry about dandruff any more.’

‘That was a little tasteless.’

‘Sorry, but you know how blood makes me tense.’

‘_Your_ hair always looks amazing,’ said Carrot, changing the subject
with, Angua thought, unusual tact. ‘I don’t know what you use, but it’s
a shame he never tried it.’

‘I doubt if he went to the right shop,’ said Angua. ‘It says “For a
Glossy Coat” on the bottles I usually buy— What’s the matter?’

‘Can you smell smoke?’ said Carrot.

‘Carrot, it’s going to be five minutes before I can smell _anything_
except—’

But he was staring past her, at the big red glow in the sky.

* * *

Vimes coughed. And then coughed some more. And eventually opened his
streaming eyes in the confident expectation of seeing his own lungs in
front of him.

‘Glass of water, Mr Vimes?’

Vimes peered through the tears at the shifting shape of Fred Colon.

‘Thanks, Fred. What’s the horrible burning smell?’

‘It’s you, sir.’

Vimes was sitting on a low wall outside the wreck of the embassy. Cool
air washed around him. He felt like underdone beef. The heat was
_radiating_ off him.

‘You was passed on for a while there, sir,’ said Sergeant Colon
helpfully. ‘But everyone saw you swing in that window, sir! _And_ you
threw that woman out for Detritus to catch! That’ll be a feather in your
cap and no mistake, sir! I bet the ragh— I bet the Klatchians’ll be
giving you the Order of the Camel or something for _this_ night’s work,
sir!’ Colon beamed, bursting with pride by association.

‘A feather in my cap . . .’ murmured Vimes. He undid his helmet and with
a certain amount of exhausted delight saw that every single plume had
been burned to a stub.

He blinked slowly.

‘What about the man, Fred? Did he get out?’

‘What man?’

‘There was . . .’ Vimes blinked again. Various parts of his body, aware
that he hadn’t been taking calls, were ringing in to complain.

There had been . . . _some man? Vimes had landed on a bed of something,
and there was a woman clutching at him, and he had smashed out what was
left of the window, seen the big, broad and above all strong arms of
Detritus down below, and had thrown her out as politely as the
circumstances allowed. Then the man from the roof had come out of the
smoke again, carrying another figure over his shoulder, screamed
something at him and beckoned him to follow and . . ._

_ . . . then the floor had given way_ . . .

‘There were . . . two other people in there,’ he said, coughing again.

‘They didn’t get out the front way, then,’ said Colon.

‘How did _I_ get out?’ said Vimes.

‘Oh, Dorfl was stamping on the fire down below, sir. Very handy, a
ceramic constable. You landed right on him, so of course he stopped what
he was doing and brought you out. ’s gonna be handshakes and buns all
round in the morning, sir!’

There weren’t any right now, Vimes noted. There were still plenty of
people around, carrying bundles, putting out small fires, arguing with
one another . . . but there was a big hole where
congratulating-the-hero-of-the-hour should have been.

‘Oh, everyone’s always a bit preoccupied after something like this,
sir,’ said Colon, as if reading his thoughts.

‘I think I’ll have a nice cold bath,’ said Vimes, to the world in
general. ‘And then some sleep. Sybil’s got some wonderful ointment for
burns . . . Ah, hello, you two.’

‘We saw the fire—’ Carrot began, running up. ‘Is it all over?’

‘Mr Vimes saved the day!’ said Sergeant Colon excitedly. ‘Just went
straight in and saved everyone, in the finest tradition of the Watch!’

‘Fred?’ said Vimes, wearily.

‘Yessir?’

‘Fred, the finest tradition of the Watch is having a quiet smoke
somewhere out of the wind at 3 a.m. Let’s not get carried away, eh?’

Colon looked crestfallen. ‘Well—’ he began.

Vimes staggered to his feet and patted his sergeant on the back.

‘Oh, all right, it’s a tradition,’ he conceded. ‘You can do the next
one, Fred. And now,’ he steadied himself as he stood up, ‘I’m going down
to the Yard to write my report.’

‘You’re covered in ash and you’re swaying,’ said Carrot. ‘I should just
get on home, sir.’

‘Oh no,’ said Vimes. ‘Got to do the paperwork. Anyone know the time?’

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’ said a cheerful voice from his pocket.

‘Damn!’ said Vimes, but it was too late.

‘It is’, said the voice, which had the squeaky friendly quality that
begs to be strangled, ‘about . . . nineish.’

‘Nineish?’

‘Yep. Nineish. Precisely about nineish.’

Vimes rolled his eyes. ‘_Precisely_ about nineish?’ he said, pulling a
small box out of his pocket and opening the lid. The demon inside gave
him an angry look.

‘Yesterday you _said_,’ it said, ‘that if I, and I quote, Didn’t Stop
all that Eight Fifty-Six and Six Seconds Precisely business I Would Be
Looking at a Hammer From Below. And when I said, Mr Insert Name Here,
that this would invalidate my warranty, you said that I could take my
warranty and—’

‘I thought you’d lost that thing,’ said Carrot.

‘Hah,’ said the Dis-organizer, ‘really? You thought he did? I don’t call
putting something in your trouser pockets just before they go into the
wash _losing_ it.’

‘That was an accident,’ muttered Vimes.

‘Oh? Oh? And dropping me in the dragon’s feeding bowl, that was
accidental too, was it?’ The demon mumbled to itself for a moment and
then said, ‘Anyway, do you want to know your appointments for this
evening?’

Vimes looked at the smouldering wreckage of the embassy.

‘Do tell,’ he said.

‘You don’t have any,’ said the demon sulkily. ‘You haven’t told me any.’

‘You see?’ said Vimes. ‘_That_’s what drives me livid! Why should I have
to tell _you_? Why didn’t you tell _me_, “Eightish: break up riot at
Mundane Meals and stop Detritus shooting people,” eh?’

‘You didn’t tell me to tell you!’

‘I didn’t _know_! And that’s how real life works! How can I tell you to
warn me about things that no one knows are going to happen? If you were
any good, that’d be _your_ job!’

‘He writes in the manual,’ said the demon nastily. ‘Did you know that,
everybody? _He writes in the manual_.’

‘Well, of course I make notes—’

‘He’s actually sneakily trying to keep his diary in the manual so his
wife won’t find out he’s never bothered to learn how to use me,’ said
the demon.

‘What about the _Vimes_ manual, then?’ snapped Vimes. ‘I notice you’ve
never bothered to learn how to use _me_!’

The demon hesitated. ‘Humans come with a manual?’ it said.

‘It’d be a damn good idea!’ said Vimes.

‘True,’ murmured Angua.

‘It could say things like “Chapter One: Bingeley-bingeley beep and other
damn fool things to spring on people at six in the morning,”’ said
Vimes, his eyes wild. ‘And “Troubleshooting: my owner keeps trying to
drop me in the privy, what am I doing wrong?” And—’

Carrot patted him gently on the back. ‘I should sign off now, sir,’ he
said gently. ‘It’s been a busy few days.’

Vimes rubbed his forehead. ‘I daresay I _could_ do with a rest,’ he
said. ‘Come on, there’s nothing more to see here. Let’s go home.’

‘I thought you said you weren’t going—’ Carrot began, but Vimes’s mind
was already scolding him.

‘I meant the Yard, of course,’ he said. ‘I’ll go _home_ afterwards.’

A ball of lamplight floated through the Ramkin library, drifting across
the shelves of huge, leather-bound books.

Many of them had never been read, Sybil knew. Various ancestors had
simply ordered them from the engravers and put them on the shelves,
because a library was something you had to have, don’tcher-know, like a
stableyard and a servants’ wing and some ghastly landscaping mistake
created by ‘Bloody Stupid’ Johnson, although in the latter case her
grandfather had shot the man before he could do any real damage.

She held the lamp higher.

Ramkins looked down their noses at her from their frames, through the
brown varnish of the centuries. Portraits were another thing that had
been collected out of unregarded habit.

Most of them were of men. They were invariably in armour and always on
horseback. And every single one of them had fought the sworn enemies of
Ankh-Morpork.

In recent times this had been quite difficult and her grandfather, for
example, had to lead an expedition all the way to Howondaland in order
to find some sworn enemies, although there was an adequate supply and a
lot of swearing by the time he left. Earlier, of course, it had been a
lot easier. Ramkin regiments had fought the city’s enemies all over the
Sto Plains and had inflicted heroic casualties, quite often on people in
the opposing armies.⁸

There were a _few_ women among the sitters, none of them holding
anything heavier than a glove or a small pet dragon. Their job had
largely been to roll bandages and await the return of their husbands
with, she liked to think, resolution and fortitude and a general hope
that said husbands would return with as many of their bits as possible.

The point was, though, that they never _thought_ about it. There was a
war, and off they went. If there wasn’t a war, they looked for one. They
didn’t even use words like ‘duty’. It was all built in at bone level.

She sighed. It was all so _difficult_ these days, and Lady Sybil came
from a class that was not used to difficulty, or at least the kind that
couldn’t be sorted out by shouting at a servant. Five hundred years ago
one of her ancestors had cut off a Klatchian’s head in battle and had
brought it home on a pole, and no one thought any the worse of him,
given what the Klatchians would have cut off if they’d caught him. That
seemed straightforward. You fought them, they fought you, everyone knew
the rules, and if you got your head cut off you jolly well didn’t blub
about it afterwards.

Certainly, things were _better_ now. But they were just . . . more
difficult.

And of course some of those antique husbands were away for months or
years at a time, and for them wives and families were pretty much like
the library and stableyard and the Johnson Exploding Pagoda. You got
them sorted out and then didn’t think much about it. At least Sam was
home every day.

Well, most days. Every night, anyway.

Well . . . part of most nights, certainly.

At least they ate meals together.

Well, most meals.

Well, at least they made a _start_ on most meals.

Well, at least she knew he was never very far away, just somewhere where
he was trying to do too much and run too fast and people were trying to
kill him.

All in all, she considered, she was jolly lucky.

Vimes stared at Carrot, who was standing in front of his desk.

‘So what does all that add up to?’ he said. ‘The man we know _didn’t_
get the Prince is dead. The man who probably _did_ . . . is dead.
Someone tried very clumsily to make it look as if Ossie was paid by the
Klatchians. Okay, I can see why someone might want to do that. That’s
what Fred calls _politics_. They get Snowy to do the real business, and
he helps poor dumb Ossie who’s there to take the fall, and then the
Watch _proves_ that Ossie was in the pay of the Klatchians and that’s
_another_ reason for fighting. And Snowy just slopes off. Only someone
cured his dandruff for him.’

‘_After_ he’d written something, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘Ah . . . yes.’

Vimes looked at the notepad retrieved from Snowy’s room. It was a crude
affair, the wads of mismatched bits of scrap that the engravers sold off
cheaply. He sniffed at it.

‘Soap on the edges,’ he said.

‘His new shampoo,’ said Carrot. ‘First time he’d used it.’

‘How do you know?’

‘We looked at all the bottles on the heap, sir.’

‘Hmm. Looks like fresh blood here, at the spine, where they’re stitched
together . . .’

‘His, sir,’ said Angua.

Vimes nodded. You never argued with Angua about blood.

‘But none of the actual pages have blood on them . . .’ said Vimes.
‘Which is a bit odd. Messy business, decapitation. People tend to . . .
spray. So the top page—’

‘—has been taken away, sir,’ said Carrot, grinning and nodding. ‘But
that’s not the funny part, sir. See if you can guess, sir!’

Vimes glared at him and then moved the lamp closer. ‘Very faint
impression of writing on the top page . . .’ he muttered. ‘Can’t make it
out . . .’

‘We can’t either, sir. We know he wrote in pencil, sir. There was one on
the table.’

‘_Very_ faint traces,’ said Vimes. ‘Blokes like Snowy write as though
they’re chipping stone.’ He flicked the notebook. ‘Someone tore
out . . . not just the page he’d written on but several below it as
well.’

‘Clever, eh, sir? Everyone knows—’

‘—you can read the suspicious note by looking at the marks on the page
below,’ said Vimes. He tossed the book on to the table again. ‘Hmm.
There’s a message there, yes . . .’

‘Perhaps he was blackmailing whoever’s behind all this?’ said Angua.

‘That’s not his style,’ said Vimes. ‘No, what I meant was—’

There was a knock on the door, and Fred Colon entered.

‘Brung you a mug of coffee,’ he said, ‘and there’s a bunch of wo—
Klatchians to see you downstairs, Mr Vimes. Probably come to give you a
medal and gabble at you in their lingo. And if you’re on for late
supper, Mrs Goriff’s doing goat and rice and foreign gravy.’

‘I suppose I’d better go down and see them,’ said Vimes. ‘But I haven’t
even had time for a wash—’

‘That’s evidence of your heroic endeavours,’ said Colon stoutly.

‘Oh, all right.’

Unease began about halfway down the stairs. Vimes had never run into a
group of citizens wishing to give him a medal and so he did not have a
lot of experience on this score, but the group waiting for him in a
tight cluster near the sergeant’s desk did not look like a committee of
welcome.

They _were_ Klatchian. At least, they were wearing foreign-looking
clothes and one or two of them had caught more sun than you generally
got in Ankh-Morpork. The feeling crept over Vimes that Klatch was a very
big place in which his city and the whole of the Sto Plains would be
lost, and so there must be room in it for all kinds of peoples,
including this short chap in the red fez who was practically vibrating
with indignation.

‘Are you the man Vimes?’ the enfezzed one demanded.

‘Well, I’m Commander Vimes—’

‘We demand the release of the Goriff family! And we won’t take any
excuses!’

Vimes blinked. ‘Release?’

‘You have locked them up! And confiscated their shop!’

Vimes stared at the man, and then he looked across the room at Sergeant
Detritus.

‘Where did you put the family, sergeant?’

Detritus saluted. ‘In der cells, sir.’

‘Aha!’ said the man in the fez. ‘You admit it!’

‘Excuse me, who _are_ you?’ said Vimes, blinking with tiredness.

‘I don’t have to tell you and you can’t beat it out of me!’ said the
man, sticking out his chest.

‘Oh, thank you for telling me,’ said Vimes. ‘I do hate wasted effort.’

‘Oh, hello, Mr Wazir,’ said Carrot, appearing behind Vimes. ‘Did you get
the note about that book?’

There was one of those silences that happen when everyone has to
reprogramme their faces.

Then Vimes said, ‘What?’

‘Mr Wazir sells books in Widdy Street,’ said Carrot. ‘Only I asked him
for some books on Klatch, you see, and one of the ones he gave me was
_The Perfumed Allotment, or, The Garden of Delights_. And I didn’t mind
because the Klatchians invented gardens, sir, so I thought it might be a
very useful cultural insight. Get inside the Klatchian mind, as it were.
Only it, er, it . . . er . . . well, it wasn’t about gardening . . .
er . . .’ He started to blush.

‘Yes, yes, all right, bring it back if you like,’ said Mr Wazir, looking
a little derailed.

‘I just thought you ought to know in case you hadn’t . . . in case you
sold . . . well . . . it could shock the impressionable, you know, a
book like that . . .’

‘Yes, fine—’

‘Corporal Angua was so shocked she couldn’t stop laughing,’ Carrot went
on.

‘I will have your money sent round directly,’ said Wazir. His expression
turned vengeful again. He glared at Vimes.

‘Books are unimportant at this time! We demand you release my countrymen
now!’

‘Detritus, why the hell did you put them in the cells?’ said Vimes
wearily.

‘What else we got, sir? Dey’re not locked in and dey got clean
blankets.’

‘There’s your explanation,’ said Vimes. ‘They’re our guests.’

‘In the cells!’ said Wazir, relishing the word.

‘They’re free to go whenever they like,’ said Vimes.

‘I’m sure they are _now_,’ said Wazir, contriving to indicate that only
his arrival had prevented officially sanctioned bloodshed. ‘You can be
sure the Patrician will hear about this!’

‘He hears about everything else,’ said Vimes. ‘But if they leave here,
who is going to protect them?’

‘We are! Their fellow countrymen!’

‘How?’

Wazir almost stood to attention. ‘By force of arms, if necessary.’

‘Oh, _good_,’ said Vimes. ‘Then there’ll be _two_ mobs—’

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’

‘_Damn!_’ Vimes slapped at his pocket. ‘I don’t _want_ to know I haven’t
got any appointments!’

‘You have one at eleven pee em. The Rats Chamber, at the palace,’ said
the Dis-organizer.

‘Don’t be stupid!’

‘Please yourself.’

‘And shut up.’

‘I was just trying to help.’

‘Shut up.’ Vimes turned back to the Klatchian bookseller.

‘Mr Wazir, if Goriff wants to leave with you, we won’t stop him—’

‘Aha! You may well try!’

Vimes told himself that there was no reason at all why a Klatchian
couldn’t be a pompous little troublemaker. But he felt uneasy about it,
like a man edging along the side of a very deep crevasse.

‘Sergeant Colon?’

‘Yessir?’

‘See to this, will you?’

‘Yessir!’

‘Diplomatically.’

‘Right, sir!’ Colon tapped the side of his nose. ‘Is this politics,
sir?’

‘Just . . . just go and fetch the Goriff family and they can . . .’
Vimes waved a hand vaguely. ‘They can do whatever they like.’

He turned and walked up the stairs.

‘Someone has to protect my people’s rights!’ shouted Wazir.

They heard Vimes stop halfway up the stairs. The board creaked under his
weight for a second. Then he continued upwards, and several of the
watchmen started breathing again.

Vimes shut his office door behind him.

_Politics!_ He sat down and scrabbled through the papers. It was much
easier to think about crime. Give him good honest-crime any time.

He tried to shut out the outside world.

Someone had beheaded Snowy Slopes. That was a _fact_. You couldn’t put
it down to a shaving accident, or unreasonably strong shampoo.

And Snowy had attempted to shoot the Prince.

And so had Ossie, but Ossie only _thought_ he was an assassin. Everyone
else thought he was a weird little twerp who was as impressionable as
wet clay.

A lovely idea, though. You used a _real_ murderer, a nice quiet
professional, and then you had – Vimes smiled grimly – someone else to
take the fall. And if he hadn’t taken a less metaphorical fall the poor
twisted little sod would have _believed_ he was the murderer.

And the Watch was supposed to believe it was a Klatchian plot.

Sand in their sandals . . . The _nerve_ of it! Did they think he was
stupid? He wished Fred had carefully swept up the sand, because he was
damn well going to find out who’d put it there and they were going to
_eat_ it. Someone wanted Vimes to chase Klatchians.

The man on the burning roof. Did he fit in? Did he _have_ to fit in?
What could Vimes recall? A man in a robe, his face hidden. And a voice
of a man not just used to giving commands – _Vimes_ was used to giving
commands – but also used to having commands obeyed, whereas a member of
the Watch treated orders as suggestions.

But some things didn’t have to fit. That was where ‘clues’ let you down.
And the damn notebook. That was the oddest thing yet. So _someone_ had
carefully ripped out several pages after Snowy had written whatever he’d
written. Someone bright enough to know the trick of looking at the pages
underneath for faint impressions.

So why not pinch the whole pad?

It was all too complicated. But somewhere was the one thing that’d make
it simple, that would turn it all into sense—

He flung down his pencil and wrenched open the door to the stairs.

‘What the hell’s all this noise?’ he yelled.

Sergeant Colon was halfway up the stairs.

‘It was Mr Goriff and Mr Wazir having a bit of what you might call an
argy-bargy, sir. Someone set fire to someone else’s country two hundred
years ago, Carrot says.’

‘What, just _now_?’

‘’s all Klatchian to me, sir. Anyway, Wazir’s gone off with his nose in
a sling.’

‘Wazir comes from Smale, you see,’ said Carrot. ‘And Mr Goriff comes
from Elharib, and the two countries only stopped fighting ten years ago.
Religious differences.’

‘Run out of weapons?’ said Vimes.

‘Ran out of rocks, sir. They ran out of weapons last century.’

Vimes shook his head. ‘That always chews me up,’ he said. ‘People
killing one another just because their gods have squabbled—’

‘Oh, they’ve got the same god, sir. Apparently it’s over a word in their
holy book, sir. The Elharibians say it translates as “god” and the
Smalies say it’s “man”.’

‘How can you mix them up?’

‘Well, there’s only one tiny dot difference in the script, you see. And
some people reckon it’s only a bit of fly dirt in any case.’

‘Centuries of war because a fly crapped in the wrong place?’

‘It could have been worse,’ said Carrot. ‘If it had been slightly to the
left the word would have been “liquorice”.’

Vimes shook his head. Carrot was good at picking up this sort of thing.
And I know how to ask for vindaloo, he thought. And it turns out that’s
just a Klatchian word meaning ‘mouth-scalding gristle for macho foreign
idiots’.

‘I wish we understood more about Klatch,’ he said.

Sergeant Colon tapped the side of his nose conspiratorially.

‘Know the enemy, eh, sir?’ he said.

‘Oh, I know the _enemy_,’ said Vimes. ‘It’s Klatchians I want to find
out about.’

‘Commander Vimes?’

The watchmen looked round. Vimes narrowed his eyes.

‘You’re one of Rust’s men, aren’t you?’

The young man saluted.

‘Lieutenant Hornett, sir.’ He hesitated. ‘Er . . . his lordship has sent
me to ask you if you and your senior officers would be so good as to
come to the palace at your convenience, sir.’

‘Really? Those were his words?’

The lieutenant decided that honesty was the only policy.

‘In fact he said, “Get Vimes and his mob up here right now,” sir.’

‘Oh, did he?’ said Vimes.

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’ said a small triumphant voice from his pocket.
‘The time is eleven pee em precisely!’

The door opened before Nobby knocked, and a small stout woman glared out
at him.

‘Yes, I am!’ she snapped.

Nobby stood with his hand still raised. ‘Er . . . are you Mrs Cake?’ he
said.

‘Yes, but I don’t hold with doing it except for money.’

Nobby’s hand did not move.

‘Er . . . you can tell the future, right?’ said Nobby.

They stared at one another. Then Mrs Cake thumped her own ear a couple
of times, and blinked.

‘Drat! Left my precognition on again.’ Her gaze unfocused for a moment
as she replayed the recent conversation in the privacy of her head.

‘I think we’re sorted out,’ she said. She looked at Nobby and sniffed.
‘You’d better come in. Mind the carpet, it’s just been washed. And I can
only give you ten minutes ’cos I’ve got cabbage boilin’.’

She led Corporal Nobbs into her tiny front room. A lot of it was
occupied by a round table covered with a green cloth. There was a
crystal ball on the table, not very well covered by a pink knitted lady
in a crinoline dress.

Mrs Cake motioned Nobby to sit down. He obediently did so. The smell of
cabbage drifted through the room.

‘A bloke in the pub told me about you,’ Nobby mumbled. ‘Said you do
mediuming.’

‘Would you care to tell me your problem?’ said Mrs Cake. She looked at
Nobby again and, in a state of certainty that had nothing to do with
precognition and everything to do with observation, added: ‘That is,
which of your problems do you want to know about?’

Nobby coughed. ‘Er . . . it’s a bit . . . you know . . . intimate.
Affairs of the heart, sort of thing.’

‘Are _women_ involved?’ said Mrs Cake cautiously.

‘Er . . . I hope so. What else is there?’

Mrs Cake visibly relaxed.

‘I just want to know if I’m going to meet any,’ Nobby went on.

‘I see.’ Mrs Cake gave a kind of facial shrug. It wasn’t up to her to
tell people how to waste their money. ‘Well, there’s the tenpenny
future. That’s what you see. And there’s the ten-dollar future. That’s
what you get.’

‘Ten dollars? That’s more’n a week’s pay! I’d better take the tenpenny
one.’

‘A very wise choice,’ said Mrs Cake. ‘Give me your paw.’

‘Hand,’ said Nobby.

‘That’s what I said.’

Mrs Cake examined Nobby’s outstretched palm while taking care not to
touch it.

‘Are you going to moan and roll your eyes and stuff?’ said Nobby, a man
out to get his tenpenn’orth.

‘I don’t have to take cheek,’ said Mrs Cake, without looking up. ‘That
sort of—’

She peered closer, and then gave Nobby a sharp look.

‘Have you been playing with this hand?’

‘Pardon?’

Mrs Cake whipped the crinoline lady off the crystal and glared into the
depths. After a while she shook her head.

‘I don’t know, I’m sure . . . oh, well.’ She cleared her throat and
spoke in a more sibyllic voice. ‘Mr Nobbs, I see you surrounded by dusky
ladies in a hot place. Looks a bit foreign to me. They’re laughing and
chatting with you . . . in fact, one of them’s just handed you a
drink . . .’

‘None of ’em are shouting or anything?’ said Nobby, mystified.

‘Doesn’t look like it,’ said Mrs Cake, equally fascinated. ‘They seem
quite happy.’

‘You can’t see any . . . magnets?’

‘What’re they?’

‘Dunno,’ Nobby admitted. ‘I ’spect you’d know ’em if you saw ’em.’

Mrs Cake, despite a certain rigidity of character, couldn’t help but be
aware of a drift in Nobby’s speculation.

‘Some of the ladies look . . . nubile,’ she hinted.

‘Ah, right,’ said Nobby, his expression not changing in any way.

‘If you understand what I mean . . .’

‘Right. Yes. Nubile. Right.’

Mrs Cake gave up. Nobby counted out ten pennies.

‘And that’ll be soon, will it?’ said Nobby.

‘Oh yes. I can’t see very far for tenpence.’

‘Happy young ladies . . .’ mused Nobby. ‘Nubile, too. Definitely
something to think about.’

After he’d gone, Mrs Cake went back to her crystal and sneaked a whole
ten dollars’ worth of precognition for her own curiosity and
satisfaction, and laughed about it all afternoon.

Vimes was only half surprised when the doors to the Rats Chamber opened
and there, sitting at the head of the table, was Lord Rust. The
Patrician wasn’t there.

He was _half_ surprised. That is, at a certain shallow level he thought,
that’s odd, I thought you couldn’t budge the man with a siege weapon.
But at a dark level, where the daylight seldom penetrated, he thought:
_of course_. At a time like this men like Rust rise to the top. It’s
like stirring a swamp with a stick. Really big bubbles are suddenly on
the surface and there’s a bad smell about everything. Nevertheless, he
saluted and said:

‘Lord Vetinari on his holidays, then?’

‘Lord Vetinari stepped down this evening, Vimes,’ said Lord Rust. ‘Pro
tem, of course. Just for the duration of the emergency.’

‘Really?’ said Vimes.

‘Yes. And I have to say that he anticipated a certain . . . cynicism on
your part, commander, and therefore asked me to give you this letter.
You will see that it is sealed with his seal.’

Vimes looked at the envelope. There was certainly the official seal in
the wax, but—

He met Lord Rust’s gaze and at least that suspicion faded. Rust wouldn’t
try a trick like that. Men like Rust had a moral code of sorts, and some
things weren’t _honourable_. You could own a street of crowded houses
where people lived like cockroaches and the cockroaches lived like kings
and that was perfectly okay, but Rust would probably die before he’d
descend to forgery.

‘I see, sir,’ said Vimes. ‘You wanted me?’

‘Commander Vimes, I must ask you to take the Klatchians resident in the
city into custody.’

‘On what charge, sir?’

‘Commander, we are on the verge of _war_ with Klatch. Surely you
understand?’

‘No, sir.’

‘We are talking about spying, commander. Sabotage, even,’ said Lord
Rust. ‘To be frank . . . the city is to be placed under martial law.’

‘Yessir? What kind of law’s that, sir?’ said Vimes, staring straight
ahead.

‘You know very well, Vimes.’

‘Is it the kind where you shout “Stop!” _before_ you fire, sir, or the
other kind?’

‘Ah. I _see_.’ Rust stood up and leaned forward.

‘It pleased you to be . . . _smart_ with Lord Vetinari, and for some
reason he indulged you,’ he said. ‘I, on the other hand, know your
type.’

‘My type?’

‘It seems to me that the streets are full of crimes, commander.
Unlicensed begging, public nuisances . . . but you seem to turn a blind
eye, you seem to think you should have bigger ideas. But you are not
required to have big ideas, commander. You are a thief-taker, nothing
more. Are you eyeballing me, Vimes?’

‘I was trying not to turn a blind eye, sir.’

‘You seem to feel, Vimes, that the law is some kind of big glowing light
in the sky which is not subject to control. And you are wrong. The law
is what we tell it to be. I’m not going to add “Do you understand?”
because I _know_ you understand and I am not going to try to reason with
you. I know a rank bad hat when I see one.’

‘Bad hat?’ said Vimes weakly.

‘Commander Vimes,’ he said, ‘I had hoped to avoid this, but the last few
days point to a succession of astonishing judgemental errors on your
part. The Prince Khufurah was shot, and you seemed helpless to prevent
this or find the criminal responsible. Mobs appear to run around the
city unimpeded, I gather that one of your sergeants proposed to shoot
innocent people in the head, and we have just heard that you took it
upon yourself to arrest an innocent businessman and lock him in the
cells for no reason at all.’

Vimes heard Colon gasp. But it sounded a long way off. He could feel
everything crumbling under him, but his mind seemed to be flying now,
flapping through a pink sky where nothing mattered very much.

‘Oh, I don’t know about that, sir,’ he said. ‘He was guilty of
repeatedly being Klatchian, wasn’t he? Don’t you want me to do that to
all of ’em?’

‘_And if this was not enough_,’ Rust went on, ‘we are told, and in other
circumstances I would find this _very_ hard to believe, even of a
counter-jumper like you, that earlier tonight you, being quite
unprovoked, assaulted two Klatchian guards, trespassed on Klatchian
soil, entered the women’s quarters, abducted two Klatchians from their
beds, ordered the destruction of Klatchian property and . . . well,
frankly, acted quite disgracefully.’

What is the point of arguing? Vimes thought. Why play cards with a
shaved deck? And yet—

‘Two Klatchians, sir?’

‘It seems Prince Khufurah has been kidnapped, Vimes. I find it hard to
believe that even _you_ would attempt that, but the Klatchians seem to
be suggesting this. You were seen entering their property illegally. And
you appear to have dragged a helpless lady from her bed. What have you
got to say about that?’

‘It was on fire at the time, sir.’

Lieutenant Hornett stepped forward and whispered something. Lord Rust
subsided a bit.

‘All right. Very well. There were perhaps mitigating circumstances, but
politically it was a most ill-advised action, Vimes. I cannot pretend to
know what has happened to the Prince, but frankly you seem to have taken
a positive delight in making matters worse.’

_Can you climb, Mr Vimes?_ Vimes said nothing. The other man had been
carrying something bulky over his shoulder . . .

‘You are removed from authority, commander. And the Watch will come
under the direct command of this council. Is that understood?’

Rust turned to Carrot. ‘Captain Carrot, many of us here have heard . . .
good reports about you, and by due authority I hereby appoint you acting
Commander of the Watch—’

Vimes shut his eyes.

Carrot saluted smartly. ‘No! Sir!’

Vimes opened his eyes wide.

‘Really?’ Rust stared at Carrot for a few moments, and then gave a
little shrug.

‘Ah, well . . . loyalty is a fine thing. Sergeant Colon?’

‘Sir!’

‘In the circumstances, and since you are the most experienced
non-commissioned officer and have an exemp— and have a military record,
you will take command of the Watch for the duration of the . . .
emergency.’

‘Nossir!’

‘That was an instruction, sergeant.’

Beads of sweat began to form on Colon’s brow. ‘Nossir!’

‘_Sergeant!_’

‘You can put it where the sun does not shine, sir!’ said Colon
desperately.

Once again, Vimes saw Rust’s milky-blue stare. Rust never looked
surprised. And since he knew that a mere sergeant would never dare offer
cheeky defiance, he erased Sergeant Colon from the immediate universe.

The gaze turned briefly to Detritus.

And he doesn’t know how to speak to a troll, Vimes thought. And he was
once again impressed, in the same dark way, by the manner in which Rust
dealt with the problem. He dealt with it by making it not be there.

‘Who is the senior corporal in the Watch, Sir Samuel?’

‘That would be Corporal Nobbs.’

The committee went into a huddle. There was a rush of whispering, in
which the words ‘—an absolute little _tit_—’ could be heard several
times. Finally Rust looked up again.

‘And the next in seniority?’

‘Let me see . . . that would be Corporal Stronginthearm,’ said Vimes. He
felt oddly light-headed.

‘Perhaps _he_ is a man who can take orders.’

‘He’s a dwarf, you idiot!’

Not a muscle moved on Rust’s face. There was a _clink_ as Vimes’s badge
was set neatly on the table.

‘I don’t have to take this,’ Vimes said calmly.

‘Oh, so you’d rather be a civilian, would you?’

‘_A watchman_ is _a civilian, you inbred streak of piss!_’

Rust’s brain erased the sounds that his ears could not possibly have
heard.

‘And the keys to the armoury, Sir Samuel,’ he said.

They jangled as they landed on the table.

‘And do the rest of you have any empty gestures to make?’ said Lord
Rust.

Sergeant Colon took his grimy badge out of his pocket and was a little
disappointed that it didn’t make a defiant tinkle when he threw it on
the table but instead bounced and smashed the water jug.

‘I got my badge carved on my arm,’ Detritus rumbled. ‘Someone c’n try
an’ take it off if dey likes.’

Carrot laid his badge down very carefully.

Rust raised his eyebrows. ‘You too, captain?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘I would have thought that _you_ at least—’

He stopped and looked up in annoyance as the doors opened. A couple of
the palace guards ran in, with a group of Klatchians behind them.

The council got to their feet in a hurry.

Vimes recognized the Klatchian in the centre of the group. He’d seen him
around at official functions and, if it hadn’t been for the fact that
the man was a Klatchian, would have marked him down as a shifty piece of
work.

‘Who’s he?’ he whispered to Carrot.

‘Prince Kalif. He’s the deputy ambassador.’

‘Another prince?’

The man came to a halt in front of the table, glanced at Vimes with no
show of recognition and bowed to Lord Rust.

‘Prince Kalif,’ said Lord Rust. ‘Your arrival is unannounced but
nevertheless—’

‘I have grave news, my lord.’ Even in his stunned state, a part of Vimes
registered that the voice was different. Khufurah had learned his second
language on the street, but this one had had tutors.

‘At a time like this, what news isn’t?’ said Rust.

‘There have been developments on the new land. Regrettable incidents.
And indeed in Ankh-Morpork, too.’ He glanced at Vimes again. ‘Although
here, I must say, reports are confused. Lord Rust, I have to tell you we
are, technically, at war.’

‘_Technically_ at war?’ said Vimes.

‘I am afraid events are carrying us forward,’ said Kalif. ‘The situation
is delicate.’

They know they’re going to fight, Vimes thought. This is just like the
start of a dance, where you hang around looking at your partner . . .

‘I must tell you that you are being given twelve hours to remove all
your citizens from Leshp,’ said Kalif. ‘If that is done, matters will be
happily resolved. For the present.’

‘Our response is that _you_ have twelve hours to quit Leshp,’ said Rust.
‘If that is not done, then we will take . . . steps . . .’

Kalif bowed slightly. ‘We understand one another. A formal document will
be with you shortly and, no doubt, we will be receiving one from you.’

‘Indeed.’

‘Here, hang on, you can’t just—’ Vimes began.

‘Sir Samuel, you are no longer Commander of the Watch and you have no
place at these proceedings,’ said Rust sharply. He turned back to the
Prince.

‘It is unfortunate that things have come to this,’ he said stiffly.

‘Indeed. But there comes a time when words are no longer sufficient.’

‘I must agree with you. And then it is time to test one’s strength.’

Vimes stared in fascinated horror from one face to the other.

‘We will, of course, allow you time to quit your embassy. Such of it as
remains.’

‘So kind. And of course we will extend to you the same courtesy.’ Kalif
bowed slightly.

So did Rust.

‘After all, just because our countries are at war is no reason why we
should not respect one another as friends,’ said Lord Rust.

‘What? Yes, it bloody well is!’ said Vimes. ‘I can’t _believe_ this! You
can’t just stand there and . . . good grief, whatever happened to
diplomacy?’

‘War, Vimes, is a continuation of diplomacy by other means,’ said Lord
Rust. ‘As you would know, if you were really a gentleman.’

‘And you Klatchians are as bad,’ Vimes went on. ‘It’s that green mouldy
mutton Jenkins sells. You’ve all got Foaming Sheep Disease. You can’t
just stand there and—’

‘Sir Samuel, you are, as you are at pains to point out, a civilian,’
said Rust. ‘As such, you have no place here!’

Vimes didn’t bother with a salute but just turned away and walked out of
the room. The rest of the squad followed him in silence back to
Pseudopolis Yard.

‘I told him he could put it where the sun didn’t shine,’ said Sergeant
Colon, as they crossed the Brass Bridge.

‘That’s right,’ said Vimes woodenly. ‘Well done.’

‘Right to his face. “Where the sun don’t shine.” Just like that,’ said
Colon. It was a little difficult to tell from his tone whether this was
a matter of pride or dread.

‘I’m afraid Lord Rust is technically correct, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘Really.’

‘Yes, Mr Vimes. The safety of the city is of paramount importance, so in
times of war the civil power is subject to military authority.’

‘Hah.’

‘I _told_ him,’ said Fred Colon. ‘“Right where the sun does not shine,”
I said.’

‘The deputy ambassador didn’t mention Prince Khufurah,’ said Carrot.
‘That was odd.’

‘I’m going home,’ said Vimes.

‘We’re nearly there, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘I mean _home_ home. I need some sleep.’

‘Yes, sir. What shall I tell the lads, sir?’

‘Tell them anything you like.’

‘I looked him right in the eye and I told him, I said, “you can put it
right where the—”’ mused Sergeant Colon.

‘You want me an’ some of der boys go and sort out dat Rust later on?’
said Detritus. ‘It no problem. He bound to be guilty o’ somethin’.’

‘No!’

Vimes’s head felt so light now that he couldn’t touch the ground with a
rope. He left them outside the Yard and let his head drag him on and up
the hill and round the corner and into the house and past his astonished
wife and up the stairs and into the bedroom, where he fell full length
on the bed and was asleep before he hit it.

At nine next morning the first recruits for Lord Venturi’s Heavy
Infantry paraded down Broadway.

The watchmen went out to watch. That was all that was left for them to
do.

‘Isn’t that Mr Vimes’s butler?’ said Angua, pointing to the stiff figure
of Willikins in the front rank.

‘Yeah, and that’s his kitchen boy banging the drum in front,’ said
Nobby.

‘You were a . . . militaryman, weren’t you, Fred?’ said Carrot, as the
parade passed by.

‘Yes, sir. Duke of Eorle’s First Heavy Infantry, sir. The Pheasant
Pluckers.’

‘Pardon?’ said Angua.

‘Nickname for the regiment, miss. Oh, from ages ago. They were
bivvywhacking on some estate and came across a lot of pheasant pens and,
well, you know, having to live off the land and everything . . . anyway,
that’s why we always wore a pheasant feather on our helmets.
Traditional, see?’

Already old Fred’s face was creasing up in the soft expression of
someone who has been mugged in Memory Lane.

‘We even had a marching song,’ he said. ‘Mind you, it was quite hard to
sing right. Er . . . sorry, miss?’

‘Oh, it’s all right, sergeant,’ said Angua. ‘I often start to laugh like
that for no reason at all.’

Fred Colon once again stared dreamily at nothing. ‘And o’course before
that I was in the Duke of Quirm’s Middleweight Infantry. Saw a lot of
action with them.’

‘I’m sure you did,’ said Carrot, while Angua entertained cynical
thoughts about the actual distance of Fred’s vantage point. ‘Your
distinguished military career has obviously given you many pleasant
memories.’

‘The ladies liked the uniform,’ said Fred Colon, with the unspoken rider
that sometimes a growing lad needed all the help he could get. ‘An’
it . . . weelll . . .’

‘Yes, sarge?’

Colon looked awkward, as if the bunched underwear of the past was
tangling itself in the crotch of recollection.

‘It was . . . more easier, sir. Than being a copper, I mean. I mean,
you’re a soldier, right, and the other buggers is the enemy. You march
into some big field somewhere and all form up into them oblongs, and
then a bloke with the feathery helmet gives the order, and you all forms
up into big arrows—’

‘Good gods, do people really do that? I thought it was just how they
drew the battle plans!’

‘Well, the old duke, sir, he did it by the book . . . anyway, it’s just
a case of watching your back and walloping any bloke in the wrong
uniform. But . . .’ Fred Colon’s face screwed up in agonized thought,
‘well, when you’re a copper, well, you dunno the good guys from the bad
guys without a map, miss, and that’s a fact.’

‘But . . . there’s _military_ law, isn’t there?’

‘Well, yes . . . but when it’s pissing with rain and you’re up to your
tonk— your waist in dead horses and someone gives you an order, that
ain’t the time to look up the book of rules, miss. Anyway, most of it’s
about when you’re allowed to get shot, sir.’

‘Oh, I’m sure there’s more to it than that, sergeant.’

‘Oh, prob’ly, sir,’ Colon conceded diplomatically.

‘I’m sure there’s lots of stuff about not killing enemy soldiers who’ve
surrendered, for instance.’

‘Oh, yerss, there’s _that_, captain. Doesn’t say you can’t duff ’em up a
bit, of course. Give ’em a little something to remember you by.’

‘Not _torture_?’ said Angua.

‘Oh, _no_, miss. But . . .’ Memory Lane for Colon had turned into a bad
road through a dark valley ‘. . .  well, when your best mate’s got an
arrow in his eye an’ there’s blokes and horses screamin’ all round you
and you’re scared shi— you’re _really_ scared, an’ you come across one
of the enemy . . . well, for some reason or other you’ve got this kinda
urge to give him a bit of a . . . nudge, sort of thing. Just . . . you
know . . . like, maybe in twenty years’ time his leg’ll twinge a bit on
frosty days and he’ll remember what he done, that’s all.’

He rummaged in a pocket and produced a very small book, which he held up
for inspection.

‘This belonged to my great-grandad,’ he said. ‘He was in the scrap we
had against Pseudopolis and my great-gran gave him this book of prayers
for soldiers, ’cos you need all the prayers you can get, believe you me,
and he stuck it in the top pocket of his jerkin, ’cos he couldn’t afford
armour, and next day in battle – whoosh, this arrow came out of nowhere,
wham, straight into this book and it went all the way through to the
last page before stopping, look. You can see the hole.’

‘Pretty miraculous,’ Carrot agreed.

‘Yeah, it was, I s’pose,’ said the sergeant. He looked ruefully at the
battered volume. ‘Shame about the other seventeen arrows, really.’

The drumming died away. The remnant of the Watch tried to avoid one
another’s gaze.

Then an imperious voice said, ‘Why aren’t you in uniform, young man?’

Nobby turned. He was being addressed by an elderly lady with a certain
turkey-like cast of feature and a capital punishment expression.

‘Me? Got one, missus,’ said Nobby, pointing to his battered helmet.

‘A _proper_ uniform,’ snapped the woman, handing him a white feather.
‘What will _you_ be doing when the Klatchians are ravishing us in our
beds?’

She glared at the rest of the guards and swept on. Angua saw several
others like her passing along the crowds of spectators. Here and there
was a flash of white.

‘I’ll be thinking: those Klatchians are jolly brave,’ said Carrot. ‘I’m
afraid, Nobby, that the white feather is to shame you into joining up.’

‘Oh, that’s all right, then,’ said Nobby, a man for whom shame held no
shame. ‘What am I supposed to do with it?’

‘That reminds me . . . did I tell you what I said to Lord Rust?’ said
Sergeant Colon, nervously.

‘Seventeen times so far,’ said Angua, watching the women with the
feathers. She added, apparently to herself, ‘“Come back with your shield
or on it.”’

‘I wonder if I can get the lady to give me any more?’ said Nobby.

‘What was that?’ said Carrot.

‘These feathers,’ said Nobby. ‘They look like real goose. I’ve got a use
for a lot more of these—’

‘I _meant_ what was it that Angua said?’ said Carrot.

‘What? Oh . . . it’s just something women used to say when they sent
their men off to war. Come back with your shield, or on it.’

‘_On_ your shield?’ said Nobby. ‘You mean like . . . sledging, sort of
thing?’

‘Like dead,’ said Angua. ‘It meant come back a winner or not at all.’

‘Well, I _always_ came back with my shield,’ said Nobby. ‘No problem
there.’

‘Nobby,’ sighed Colon, ‘you used to come back with your shield, everyone
_else_’s shield, a sack of teeth and fifteen pairs of still-warm boots.
On a cart.’

‘We-ell, no point in going to war unless you’re on the winning side,’
said Nobby, sticking the white feather in his helmet.

‘Nobby, you was _always_ on the winning side, the reason bein’, you used
to lurk aroun’ the edges to see who was winning and then pull the right
uniform off’f some poor dead sod. I used to hear where the generals kept
an eye on what you were wearin’ so they’d know how the battle was
going.’

‘Lots of soldiers have served in lots of regiments,’ said Nobby.

‘Right, what you say is true. Only not usually during the same battle,’
said Sergeant Colon.

They trooped back into the Watch House. Most of the shift had taken the
day off. After all, who was in charge? What were they supposed to be
doing today? The only ones left were those who never thought of
themselves as off duty, and the new recruits who hadn’t had their keen
edge blunted.

‘I’m sure Mr Vimes’ll think of something,’ said Carrot. ‘Look, I’d
better take the Goriffs back to their shop. Mr Goriff says he’s going to
pack up and leave. A lot of Klatchians are leaving. You can’t blame
them, either.’

Dreams rising with him like bubbles, Vimes surfaced from the black
fathoms of sleep.

Normally, these days, he treasured the moment of waking. It was when
solutions presented themselves. He assumed bits of his brain came out at
night and worked on the problems of the previous day, handing him the
result just as he opened his eyes.

All that arrived now were memories. He winced. Another memory turned up.
He groaned. The sound of his badge bouncing on the table replayed
itself. He swore.

He swung his legs off the covers and groped for the bedside table.

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’

‘Oh, _no_ . . . All right, what’s the time?’

‘One o’clock pee em! Hello, Insert Name Here!’

Vimes looked blearily at the Dis-organizer. One day, he knew, he really
_would_ have to try to understand the manual for the damn thing. Either
that or drop it off a cliff.⁹

‘What—’ he began, and then groaned again. The twanging sound made by the
unwound turban as it took his weight had just come back to haunt him.

‘Sam?’ The bedroom door was pushed open and Sybil came in carrying a
cup.

‘Yes, dear?’

‘How do you feel?’

‘I’ve got bruises on my brui—’ Another memory crawled up from the pit of
guilt. ‘Oh, good grief, did I really call him a long streak of—?’

‘_Yes_,’ said his wife. ‘Fred Colon came round this morning and told me
all about it. And a very good description, I’d say. I went out with
Ronnie Rust once. Bit of a cold fish.’

Another recollection burst like a ball of marsh gas in Vimes’s head.

‘Did Fred tell you where he said Rust could put his badge?’

‘Yes. Three times. It seems to be weighing on his mind. Anyway, knowing
Ronnie, he’d have to use a hammer.’

Vimes had long ago got used to the fact that the aristocracy all seemed
to know one another by their first name.

‘And did Fred tell you anything else?’ he said timidly.

‘Yes. About the shop and the fire and everything. I’m proud of you.’ She
gave him a kiss.

‘What do I do now?’ he said.

‘Drink your tea and have a wash and a shave.’

‘I ought to go down to the Watch House and—’

‘A shave! There’s hot water in the jug.’

When she had left he hauled himself upright and tottered into his
bathroom. There was, indeed, a jug of hot water on the marble washstand.

He looked at the face in the mirror. Unfortunately, it was his. Perhaps
if he shaved it first . . . ? And then he could wash the bits that were
left.

Fragments of the night before kept on respectfully drawing themselves to
his attention. It was a shame about that guard, but sometimes you just
couldn’t stand and argue—

He shouldn’t have done that with his badge. It wasn’t like the old days.
He had _responsibilities_. He should’ve stayed on and made things just a
little less—

No. That never worked.

He managed to get the lather on his face. The Riot Act! Good grief . . .
He stopped his razor thoughtfully. Rust’s milky eyes stared out of his
memory. Bastard! Men like that thought, they really thought, that the
Watch was a kind of sheepdog, to nip at the heels of the flock, bark
when spoken to and never, ever, bite the shepherd . . .

Oh yes. Vimes knew in his bones who the enemy was.

Except—

No badge, no Watch, no job . . .

Another memory arrived, late.

Lather still dripping down his shirt, he pulled Vetinari’s sealed letter
out of his pocket and slit it open with the razor.

There was a blank sheet of paper inside. He turned it over, and there
was nothing on the other side either. Mystified, he glanced at the
envelope.

_Sir Samuel Vimes, Knight_.

Nice of him to be so precise about it, Vimes thought. What was the point
of a message with no message? Some people might absentmindedly have
slipped the wrong piece of paper in an envelope, but Vetinari wouldn’t.
What was the point of sending him a note telling him he was a knight,
for gods’ sake, he knew _that_ embarrassing fact well enough—

Another little memory burst open as silently as a mouse passing wind in
a hurricane.

Who’d said it? Any gentleman—

Vimes stared. Well, he _was_ a gentleman, wasn’t he? It was official.

And then he _didn’t_ shout, and he _didn’t_ run out of the room. He
finished shaving, had a wash and put on a change of underwear, very
calmly.

Downstairs, Sybil had cooked him a meal. She wasn’t a very good cook.
This was fine by Vimes, because he wasn’t a very good eater. After a
lifetime of street meals his stomach wasn’t set up right. What it craved
was little crunchy brown bits, the food group of the gods, and Sybil
reliably always left the pan too long on the dragon.

She eyed him carefully as he chewed his fried egg and stared into the
middle distance. Her manner was that of someone with a portable safety
net watching a man on the high wire.

After a while, while she watched him crack open a sausage, he said, ‘Do
we have any books on chivalry, dear?’

‘Hundreds, Sam.’

‘Is there any one which tells you what . . . you know, what it’s all
about? I mean, what you have to do if you’re a knight, say?
Responsibilities and so on?’

‘Most of them, I should think.’

‘Good. I think I shall do a little reading.’ Vimes hit the bacon with
his fork. It shattered very satisfactorily.

Afterwards, he went into the library. Twenty minutes later, he came back
out for a pencil and some paper.

Ten minutes after that, Lady Sybil took him a cup of coffee. He was
hidden behind a pile of books, and apparently deep in _Life of
Chivalrie_. She crept out and went into her own study, where she settled
down to update her dragon-breeding records.

It was an hour later when she heard him step out into the hall.

He was humming under his breath, tunelessly, with the faraway look of
preoccupation that means that some Big Thought has required the shutting
down of all non-essential processes. He was also re-radiating the field
of angered innocence that was, to her, part of his essential Vimesness.

‘Are you going out, Sam?’

‘Yes. I’m just going to kick some arse, dear.’

‘Oh, _good_. Just be sure you wrap up well, then.’

The Goriff family trudged along silently beside Carrot.

‘I’m sorry about your shop, Mr Goriff,’ he said.

Goriff shifted the load he was carrying. ‘We can start other shops,’ he
said.

‘We’ll certainly keep an eye on it,’ said Carrot. ‘And . . . when all
this is over, you can come back.’

‘Thank you.’

His son said something in Klatchian. There was a brief family argument.

‘I appreciate your strength of feeling,’ said Carrot, going red,
‘although I must say I think your language was a little strong.’

‘My son is sorry,’ said Goriff automatically. ‘He did not remember that
you speak Kl—’

‘No, I’m not! Why should we run away?’ said the boy. ‘We _live_ here!
I’ve never _seen_ Klatch!’

‘Oh, well, that will be something to look forward to,’ said Carrot. ‘I
hear it has many fine—’

‘Are you _stupid_?’ said Janil. He shook himself free of his father’s
grasp and confronted Carrot. ‘I don’t care! I don’t want all this stuff
about the moon rising over the Mountains of the Sun! I get that at home
all the time! I live _here_!’

‘Now, you really ought to listen to your parents—’

‘Why? My dad works all the time and now he’s being pushed out! What
good’s that? We ought to stay here and defend what’s ours!’

‘Ah, well, you shouldn’t take the law into your own hands—’

‘Why not?’

‘It’s our job—’

‘But you’re not doing it!’

There was a rattle of Klatchian from Mr Goriff.

‘He says I’ve got to apologize,’ said Janil sullenly. ‘I’m sorry.’

‘So am I,’ said Carrot.

The boy’s father gave him that complicated shrug used by adults in a
situation involving adolescents.

‘You’ll be back, I know it,’ said Carrot.

‘We shall see.’

They went down the quay towards a waiting boat. It was a Klatchian ship.
People lined the rails, people who were getting out with what they could
carry before they could only get out with what they wore. The watchmen
found themselves under hostile scrutiny.

‘Surely Rust isn’t already forcing Klatchians out of their homes?’ said
Angua.

‘We can tell which way the wind is blowing,’ said Goriff calmly.

Carrot sniffed the salt air. ‘It’s blowing from Klatch,’ he said.

‘For you, perhaps,’ said Goriff.

A whip cracked behind them and they stood aside as several coaches
rumbled by. A blind at the window was pulled aside momentarily. Carrot
caught a brief glimpse of a face, all gold teeth and black beard, before
the cloth twitched back.

‘That’s _him_, isn’t it?’

There was a faint grunt from Angua. She had her eyes closed, as she
always did when she was letting her nose do the seeing . . .

‘Cloves,’ she murmured, and then grabbed Carrot’s arm.

‘_Don’t_ run after it! There’s armed men on that ship! What will they
think when they see a soldier running towards them?’

‘I’m not a soldier!’

‘How long do you think they’ll spend working out the difference?’

The coach pushed through the press of people on the dock. The crowd
surged back around it.

‘There’s boxes being unloaded – I can’t quite see . . .’ said Carrot,
shading his eyes. ‘Look, I’m sure they’ll understand if—’

71-hour Ahmed stepped out on to the dock and looked back towards the
watchmen. There was a momentary sparkle as he grinned. They saw his hand
reach over his shoulder and come back holding the curved sword.

‘I can’t just let him get away,’ said Carrot. ‘He’s a suspect! Look,
he’s laughing at us!’

‘With diplomatic impunity,’ said Angua. ‘But there’s a lot of armed men
down there.’

‘My strength is as the strength of ten because my heart is pure,’ said
Carrot.

‘Really? Well, there’s eleven of them.’

71-hour Ahmed threw his sword in the air. It spun a couple of times,
making a _whum-whum_ noise, and then his hand shot out and caught it by
the handle as it fell.

‘That’s what Mr Vimes was doing,’ said Carrot, through gritted teeth.
‘Now he’s taunting us—’

‘You will be killed if you go on the ship,’ said Goriff behind him. ‘I
know that man.’

‘You do? How?’

‘He is feared in the whole of Klatch. That is 71-hour Ahmed!’

‘Yes, _why_ is—’

‘You haven’t heard of him? And he is a D’reg!’ Mrs Goriff pulled at her
husband’s arm.

‘D’reg?’ said Angua.

‘A warlike desert tribe,’ said Carrot. ‘Very fierce. Honourable, though.
They say that if a D’reg is your friend he’s your friend for the rest of
your life.’

‘And if he’s _not_ your friend?’

‘That’s about five seconds.’

He drew his sword. ‘Nevertheless,’ he added, ‘we can’t let—’

‘I have said too much. We must go,’ said Goriff. The family picked up
their bundles.

‘Look, there might be another way to find out about him,’ said Angua.
She pointed at the carriage.

A couple of lean, long-haired and extremely graceful dogs had been let
out and were straining at their leashes as they led the way up the
gangplank.

‘Klatchistan hunting dogs,’ she said. ‘The Klatchian nobility are very
keen on them, I understand.’

‘They look a bit like—’ Carrot began, and then the penny dropped. ‘No, I
can’t let you go on there by yourself,’ he said. ‘Something would go
wrong.’

‘I stand a much better chance than you would, believe me,’ said Angua
quickly. ‘They won’t be leaving until the tide changes, in any case.’

‘It’s too dangerous.’

‘Well, they _are_ supposed to be our enemies.’

‘I meant for _you_!’

‘Why?’ said Angua. ‘I’ve never heard of werewolves in Klatch, so they
probably don’t know how to deal with us.’

She undid the little leather collar that held her badge and handed it to
Carrot.

‘Don’t _worry_,’ she said. ‘If the worst comes to the worst, I’ll dive
overboard.’

‘Into the _river_?’

‘Even the river Ankh can’t kill a werewolf.’ Angua glanced at the turgid
water. ‘Probably, anyway.’

Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs had gone on patrol. They weren’t sure
why they were patrolling, and what they were supposed to do if they saw
a crime, although many years of training had enabled them not to see
some quite large crimes. But they were creatures of habit. They were
watchmen, so they patrolled. They didn’t patrol with a purpose. They
patrolled, as it were, in pure essence. Nobby’s progress wasn’t helped
by the large, leather-bound book in his arms.

‘A war’d do this place good,’ said Sergeant Colon, after a while. ‘Put
some backbone in people. Everything’s gone all to pot these days.’

‘Not like when we were kids, sarge.’

‘Not like when we were kids indeed, Nobby.’

‘People trusted one another in them days, didn’t they, sarge?’

‘People trusted one another, Nobby.’

‘Yes, sarge. I know. And people didn’t have to lock their doors, did
they?’

‘That’s right, Nobby. And people were always ready to help. They were
always in and out of one another’s houses.’

‘’sright, sarge,’ said Nobby vehemently. ‘I know no one ever locked
their houses down _our_ street.’

‘That’s what I’m talking about. That’s my point.’

‘It was ’cos the bastards even used to steal the locks.’

Colon considered the truth of this.

‘Yes, but at least it was each other’s stuff they were nicking, Nobby.
It’s not like they was _foreigners_.’

‘Right.’

They strolled on for a while, each entangled in his own thoughts.

‘Sarge?’

‘Yes, Nobby?’

‘Where’s Nubilia?’

‘Nubilia?’

‘It’s got to be a place, I reckon. Pretty warm there, I think?’

‘Ah, _Nubilia_,’ said Colon. He invented desperately. ‘Right. Yes. It’s
one of them Klatchian places. Yeah. Got lots of sand. And mountains.
Exports dates. Why’d you want to know?’

‘Oh . . . no reason.’

‘Nobby?’

‘Yes, sarge?’

‘Why are you carrying that huge book?’

‘Hah, clever idea, sarge. I saw what you said about that book of your
great-grandad, so if there’s any fighting I got this one off’f Washpot.
It’s _The Book of Om_. Five inches thick.’

‘It’s a bit big for a pocket, Nobby. It’s a bit big for a _cart_, to be
honest.’

‘I thought I could make sort of braces to carry it. I reckon even a
longbow could only get an arrow as far as the Apocrypha.’

A familiar creak made them look up.

A Klatchian’s head was swinging in the breeze.

‘Fancy a pint?’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘Big Anjie brews up some that’s a
treat.’

‘Better not, sarge. Mr Vimes is in a bit of a mood.’

Colon sighed. ‘You’re right.’

Nobby looked up at the head again. It was wooden. It had been repainted
many times over the centuries. The Klatchian was smiling very happily
for someone who’d never have to buy a shirt ever again.

‘The Klatchian’s Head. My grandad said _his_ granddad remembered when it
was still the real one,’ Colon said. ‘Of course, it was about the size
of a walnut by then.’

‘Bit . . . nasty, sticking up a bloke’s head for a pub sign,’ said
Nobby.

‘_No_, Nobby. Spoils of war, right? Some bloke came back from one of the
wars with a souvenir, stuck it on a pole and opened a pub. The
Klatchian’s Head. Teach ’em not to do it again.’

‘I used to get into enough trouble just for nicking boots,’ said Nobby.

‘More robust times, Nobby.’

‘You ever _met_ a Klatchian, sarge?’ said Nobby, as they began to pace
the length of the quiet street. ‘I mean one of the wild ones.’

‘Well, no . . . but you know what? They’re allowed three wives! That’s
criminal, that is.’

‘Yeah, ’cos here’s me and I ain’t got one,’ said Nobby.

‘And they eat funny grub. Curry and that.’

Nobby gave this some thought. ‘Like . . . we do, when we’re on late
duty.’

‘Weelll, yerss – but they don’t do it properly—’

‘You mean runny ear-wax yellow with peas and currants in, like your mum
used to do?’

‘Right! You poke around as much as you like in a Klatchian curry and you
won’t find a single _piece_ of swede.’

‘And I heard where they eat sheep’s eyeballs, too,’ said Nobby,
international gastra-gnome.

‘Right again.’

‘Not decent ordinary stuff like lambs’ fry or sweetbreads, then?’

‘That’s . . . right.’

Colon felt that he was being got at in some way.

‘Look, Nobby, when all’s said and done they ain’t the right colour, and
there’s an end to it.’

‘Good job you found out, Fred!’ said Nobby, so cheerfully that Sergeant
Colon was almost sure that he meant it.

‘Well, it’s obvious,’ he conceded.

‘Er . . . what _is_ the right colour?’ said Nobby.

‘White, of course!’

‘Not brick-red, then? ’Cos _you_—’

‘Are you winding me up, Corporal Nobbs?’

‘’Course not, sarge. So . . . what colour am I?’

That caused Sergeant Colon to think. You could have found, somewhere on
Corporal Nobbs, a shade appropriate to every climate on the disc and a
few found only in specialist medical books.

‘White’s . . . white’s a state of, you know . . . _mind_,’ he said.
‘It’s like . . . doing an honest day’s work for an honest day’s pay,
that sort of thing. And washing regular.’

‘Not lazing around, sort of thing.’

‘Right.’

‘Or . . . like . . . working all hours like Goriff does.’

‘Nobby—’

‘And you never see those kids of his with dirty clo—’

‘Nobby, you’re just trying to get me going, right? You _know_ we’re
better’n Klatchians. Otherwise, what’s the point? Anyway, if we’re going
to fight ’em, you could get locked up for going around talking
treachery.’

‘Are you going to fight them, Fred?’

Fred Colon scratched his chin. ‘Well, as a hexperienced milit’ry man, I
suppose I’ll have to . . .’

‘What’re you going to do? Join a regiment and go to the front?’

‘We-ell . . . my fore-tay lies in training, so I reckon I’d better stay
here and train up the new recruits.’

‘Here at the back, you might say.’

‘We all have to do our bit, Nobby. If it was down to me I’d be out there
like a shot to give Johnny Klatchian a taste of cold steel.’

‘Their razor-sharp swords wouldn’t worry you, then?’

‘I should laugh at them with scorn, Nobby.’

‘But s’posing the Klatchians attack here? Then _you’ll_ be at the front,
and the front will be at the back.’

‘I’ll sort of try for a posting in the middle . . .’

‘The middle of the front or—’

‘_Gentlemen?_’

They looked round to find that they had been followed by a man of medium
height but with an extraordinary head. It wasn’t that he had gone bald.
He had quite a lot of hair, which was long and curly and reached almost
to his shoulders, and his beard was large enough to conceal a small
chicken. But his head had simply risen through his hair, like a kind of
intrusive dome.

He gave them a friendly smile.

‘Am I by any chance addressing the heroic Sergeant Colon and the—’ The
man looked at Nobby. Expressions of amazement, dread, interest and
charity passed across his otherwise sunny countenance like storm-driven
clouds. ‘And _the_ Corporal Nobbs?’ he finished.

‘That is us, citizen,’ said Colon.

‘Ah, good. I was very specifically told to find you. It’s quite amazing,
you know. No one had even broken into the boathouse, although I must say
I did design the locks rather well. And all I’ve had to do is replace
the leatherwork around the joints and grease it up . . . oh, do excuse
me, I’ve got rather ahead of myself. Now . . . there was a message I had
to give you . . . what was it now? . . . Something about your
hands . . .’ He reached down into the large canvas bag by his feet and
pulled out a long tube, which he handed to Nobby.

‘I do apologize about this,’ he said, producing a smaller tube and
handing it to Colon. ‘I had to do things in such a hurry, there really
was no time to finish it off properly, and frankly the materials are not
very good—’

Colon looked at his tube. It was pointed at one end.

‘This is a firework rocket,’ he said. ‘Look, it’s got “A riot of
coloured balls and stars” on it . . .’

‘Yes, I do _so_ apologize,’ said the man, lifting a complex little
arrangement of wood and metal out of the bag. ‘May I have the tube back,
corporal?’ He took it and screwed the arrangement on to one end. ‘Thank
you . . . yes, I’m afraid that without my lathe and, indeed, my forge, I
really have had to make do with what I could find lying around . . .
Could I have the rocket back, please? Thank you.’

‘They don’t go properly without a stick,’ said Nobby.

‘Oh, in fact they do,’ said the man. ‘Just not very accurately.’

He raised the tube to shoulder height and peered into a small wire grid.

‘That seems about right,’ he said.

‘And they don’t go along,’ said Nobby. ‘They just go up.’

‘A common misconception,’ said Leonard of Quirm, turning to face them.

Colon could see the tip of the rocket in the depths of the tube, and had
a sudden image of stars and balls.

‘Now, apparently you two have to step into this alley here and come with
me,’ said Leonard. ‘I’m very sorry about this, but his lordship has
explained to me at great length how the needs of society as a whole may
have to overrule the rights of a particular individual. Oh, and I’ve
just remembered. You have to put your hands up.’

Sand had been spilled across the big table in the Rats Chamber.

Lord Rust felt a sensation akin to pleasure as he surveyed it. There
were the little square boxes for the towns and cities, and cut-out palm
trees to indicate the known oasisies. And, although he was uneasy about
the word ‘oasisies’, Lord Rust looked at it and saw that it was good.
Especially since it was a map of Klatch and everyone knew that Klatch
was sand anyway, which made it rather satisfying in an existential sort
of way, although this sand here had been commandeered from the heap
behind Chalky the troll’s wholesale pottery and bore the occasional
cigarette end and trace of feline incontinence that would probably not
be found in the real desert, or certainly not to scale.

‘_Here_ would be a good landing area,’ he said, pointing with his stick.

His equerry tried to look helpful. ‘The El Kinte peninsula,’ he said.
‘That’s the closest point to us, sir.’

‘Exactly! We can be across the straits in jig time.’

‘Very good, sir,’ said Lieutenant Hornett, ‘but . . . you don’t think
the enemy might be expecting us there? It being such an obvious landing
site?’

‘Not obvious at all to the trained military thinker, sir! They won’t be
expecting us there precisely _because_ it is so obvious, d’y’see?’

‘You mean . . . they’ll think only a complete idiot would land there,
sir?’

‘Correct! And they know we’re _not_ complete idiots, sir, and therefore
that will be the last place they will be expecting us, d’y’see? They’ll
be expecting us somewhere like’ – his stick stabbed into the sand –
‘here.’

Hornett looked closely. In the street outside, someone started to bang a
drum.

‘Oh, you mean Eritor,’ he said. ‘Where I believe there is a concealed
landing area, and two days’ forced march through good cover would have
us at the heart of the empire, sir.’

‘Exactly!’

‘Whereas landing at El Kinte means three days over sand dunes and past
the fortified city of Gebra . . .’

‘Precisely. Wide-open spaces! And that is where we can practise the
_art_ of warfare.’ Lord Rust raised his voice above the drumming.
‘That’s how you settle these things. One decisive battle. Us on one
side, the Klatchians on the other. THAT IS HOW THESE THINGS ARE D—’

He threw down his pointer. ‘Who the devil is making that infernal
noise?’

The equerry walked across to the window. ‘It’s someone else recruiting,
sir,’ he said.

‘But we’re all here!’

The equerry hesitated, as the bearers of bad tidings to short-tempered
men often do.

‘It’s Vimes, sir . . .’

‘Recruiting for the _Watch_?’

‘Er . . . no, my lord. For a regiment. Er . . . the banner says “Sir
Samuel Vimes’s First of Foot”, my lord—’

‘The arrogance of the man. Go and— No, I’ll go myself!’

There was a crowd in the street. In the centre there rose the bulk of
Constable Dorfl, and a key thing about the golem was that if he was
banging a drum then no one was going to ask him to stop. No one except
possibly Lord Rust, who strode up and snatched the drumsticks out of his
hands.

‘Yerss, it are species of your choice’s life in der First of Foot!’
shouted Sergeant Detritus, unaware of the events going on behind him.
‘You learnin’ a trade! You learnin’ self-respek! Also you get spiffy
uniform plus all der boots you can eat – here, dat’s my banner!’

‘What’s the meaning of this?’ said Rust, flinging the home-made banner
on to the ground. ‘Vimes can’t do this!’

A figure detached itself from the wall, where it had been watching the
show.

‘You know, I rather think I can,’ said Vimes. He handed Rust a piece of
paper. ‘It’s all here, my lord. With references citing the highest
authorities, in case you are in any doubt.’

‘Citing the—?’

‘On the role of a knight, my lord. In fact the _duties_ of a knight,
funnily enough. A lot of it is pretty damn stupid stuff, riding around
the place on one of those bloody great horses with curtains round it and
so on, but _one_ of them says in time of need a knight _has_ to raise
and maintain – you’ll laugh when I tell you this – a body of armed
soldiers! No one could have been more surprised than me, I don’t mind
telling you! Seems there’s nothing for it but I have to go out and get
some chaps together. Of course, most of the watch have joined, well, you
know how it is, disciplined lads, anxious to do their bit, so that saved
_me_ a bit of effort. Except for Nobby Nobbs, ’cos he says if he leaves
it till Thursday he’s going to have enough white feathers for a
mattress.’

Rust’s expression would have preserved meat for a year.

‘This is a nonsense,’ he said. ‘And you, Vimes, certainly are no knight.
Only a king can make—’

‘There’s a good few lordships in this city created by the Patricians,’
said Vimes. ‘Your friend Lord Downey, for one. You were saying?’

‘Then if you persist in playing games I will say that before a knight is
created he must spend a night’s vigil watching his armour—’

‘Practically every night of my life,’ said Vimes. ‘A man doesn’t keep an
eye on his armour round here, that man’s got no armour in the morning.’

‘In _prayer_,’ said Rust sharply.

‘That’s me,’ said Vimes. ‘Not a night has gone by without me thinking,
“Ye gods, I hope I get through this alive.”’

‘—and he must have proved himself on the field of combat. Against other
trained men, Vimes. Not vermin and thugs.’

Vimes started to undo the strap of his helmet.

‘Well, this isn’t the best of moments, my lord, but if someone’ll hold
your coat I can spare you five minutes . . .’

In Vimes’s eyes Rust recognized the fiery gleam of burning boats.

‘I know what you’re doing, Vimes, and I am not going to rise to it,’ he
said, taking a step back. ‘In any case, you have had no formal training
in arms.’

‘That’s true,’ said Vimes. ‘You’ve got me there, right enough. No one
ever trained me in arms. I was lucky there.’ He leaned closer and
lowered his voice so that the watching crowd wouldn’t hear. ‘Y’see, I
_know_ what “training in arms” means, Ronald. There hasn’t been a real
war in ages. So it’s all prancing around wearing padded waistcoats and
waving swords with knobs on the end so no one’ll really get hurt, isn’t
it? But down in the Shades no one’s had any training in arms either.
Wouldn’t know an épée from a sabre. No, what they’re _good_ at is a
broken bottle in one hand and a length of four-by-two in the other and
when you face ’em, Ronnie, you know you aren’t going off for a laugh and
a jolly drink afterwards, ’cos they want you _dead_. They want to _kill_
you, you see, Ron? And by the time you’ve swung your nice shiny
broadsword they’ve carved their name and address on your stomach. And
_that’s_ where I got _my_ training in arms. Well . . . fists and knees
and teeth and elbows, mostly.’

‘You, sir, are _no gentleman_,’ said Rust.

‘I _knew_ there was something about me that I liked.’

‘Can you not even see that you can’t enrol . . . dwarfs and trolls in an
Ankh-Morpork regiment?’

‘It just says “armed soldiers”, and dwarfs come with their own axes. A
great saving. Besides, if you’ve ever seen them really fight, then you
must’ve been on the same side.’

‘Vimes—’

‘It’s Sir Samuel, my lord.’

Rust seemed to think for a moment.

‘Very well, then,’ he said. ‘Then you and your . . . regiment come under
my command—’

‘Strangely, no,’ said Vimes swiftly. ‘Under the command of the King or
his duly appointed representative, it says in Scavone’s _Chivalric Law
and Usage_. And, of course, there has been no duly appointed
representative ever since some complete bastard cut off the last king’s
head. Oh, assorted bods appeared to have been ruling the city, but
according to the _chivalric tradition_—’

Rust stopped to think again. He had the look of a lawnmower just after
the grass has organized a workers’ collective. There was a definite
suggestion that, deep inside, he knew this was not really happening. It
could not be happening because this sort of thing did not happen. Any
contradictory evidence could be safely ignored. However, it might be
necessary to find some motions to go through.

‘I think you’ll find that, legally, your position—’ he began, and his
eyes bulged for a moment as Vimes interrupted him cheerfully.

‘Oh, there might be a few problems, I grant you. But if you ask Mr Slant
he’ll say “This is a very interesting case”, which as you know is
lawyer-talk for “One thousand dollars a day plus expenses and it’ll take
months.” So I’ll leave you to get on with it, shall I? Got such a lot of
things to do, you know. I think the swatches for the new uniforms should
be in my office about now, it’s so important to look right on the
battlefield, isn’t it?’

Rust gave Vimes another look, and then strode away.

Detritus stamped to attention beside Vimes and his salute clanged
smartly off his helmet.

‘What we doin’ now, sir?’

‘We can pack up now, I think. All the lads have joined up?’

‘Yessir!’

‘You told them it wasn’t compulsory?’

‘Yessir! I said, “It ain’t compuls’ry, you just gotta,” sir.’

‘Detritus, I wanted _volunteers_.’

‘’sright, sir. They volunteered all right, I saw to that.’

Vimes sighed as he walked back to his office. But they were probably
safe. He was pretty sure he was legally sound and if he knew anything
about Rust, the man would respect the letter of the law. Such men did,
in a chilly way. Besides, thirty men in the Watch simply didn’t figure
in the great scheme of things. Rust could ignore them.

Suddenly there’s a war brewing, Vimes thought, and they all come back.
Civil order is turned upside down, because that’s the _rules_. And
people like Rust are at the top of the heap again. You have these
aristocrats lazing around for years, and suddenly the old armour’s out
and the sword is being taken down from over the fireplace. They think
there’s going to be a war and all they can think about is that wars can
be won or lost . . .

Someone’s behind this. Someone wants to see a war. Someone paid to have
Ossie and Snowy killed. Someone wanted the Prince dead. I’ve got to
remember that. This isn’t a war. This is a crime.

And then he realized he was wondering if the attack on Goriff’s shop had
been organized by the same people, and whether those same people had set
fire to the embassy.

And _then_ he realized why he was thinking like this.

It was because he wanted there to be conspirators. It was much better to
imagine men in some smoky room somewhere, made mad and cynical by
privilege and power, plotting over the brandy. You had to cling to this
sort of image, because if you didn’t then you might have to face the
fact that bad things happened because ordinary people, the kind who
brushed the dog and told their children bedtime stories, were capable of
then going out and doing horrible things to other ordinary people. It
was so much easier to blame it on Them. It was bleakly depressing to
think that They were Us. If it was Them, then nothing was anyone’s
fault. If it was Us, what did that make Me? After all, I’m one of Us. I
must be. I’ve certainly never thought of myself as one of Them. _No one_
ever thinks of themselves as one of Them. We’re always one of Us. It’s
Them that do the bad things.

Around about this time, in his former life, Vimes would be taking the
cap off a bottle, and wouldn’t be too bothered about the bottle’s
contents so long as they crinkled paint—

‘Ook?’

‘Oh, hello. What can I do for – oh, yes, I asked about books on
Klatch . . . Is that all?’

The librarian shyly held out a small, battered green book. Vimes had
been expecting something bigger, but he took it anyway. It paid to look
at any book the orang-utan gave you. He matched you up to books. Vimes
supposed it was a knack, in the same way that an undertaker was very
good at judging heights.

On the spine, in very faded gold lettering, were the words ‘_VENI VIDI
VICI: A Soldier’s Life_ by Gen. A. Tacticus’.

* * *

Nobby and Sergeant Colon edged along the alley.

‘I know who he is!’ Fred hissed. ‘That’s Leonard of Quirm, that is! He
went missing five years ago!’

‘So he’s called Leonard and he’s from Quirm, so what?’ said Nobby.

‘He’s a raving genius!’

‘He’s a loony.’

‘Yeah, well, they say there’s a thin line between genius and
madness . . .’

‘He’s fallen off it, then.’

The voice behind them said, ‘Oh, dear, this won’t do at all, will
it . . . ? I can’t deny it, you were quite right, the accuracy would be
quite unacceptable at any reasonable range. Could you bear to stop a
moment, please?’

They turned. Leonard was already dismantling the tube.

‘If you could just hang on to this bit, corporal . . . and, sergeant, if
you would be so good as to hold this piece steady . . . some sort of
fins should do it, I’m sure I had a suitable piece of wood
somewhere . . .’ Leonard began to pat his pockets.

The watchmen realized that the man holding them up had paused to
redesign his weapon and had given it to them to hold while he looked for
a screwdriver. This was a thing that did not often happen.

Nobby silently took the rocket from Colon and pushed it into the tube.

‘What’s this bit here, mister?’ he said.

Leonard glanced up briefly in between patting his pockets.

‘Oh, that is the trigger,’ he said. ‘Which, as you can see, rubs against
the flint and—’

‘_Good_.’

There was a short burst of flame and rather more black smoke.

‘Oh, dear,’ said Leonard.

The watchmen turned, like men dreading what they were about to see. The
rocket had shot the length of the alley and through the window of a
house.

‘Ah . . . putting “This Way Up” on the projectile would be an important
safety point to bear in mind for the new design,’ said Leonard. ‘Now,
where’s that notebook . . . ?’

‘I think we’d better leave,’ said Colon, moving backwards. ‘Very fast.’

Inside the house there was an explosion of stars and balls to delight
young and old but not the troll who had just opened the door.

‘Ah, really?’ said Leonard. ‘Well, if speed is required, I have this
very interesting design for a two-wheeled—’

Acting on an unspoken agreement, the watchmen each put a hand under a
shoulder, lifted him off the ground, and ran for it.

‘Oh, dear,’ said Leonard, as he was dragged backwards.

The watchmen dived into a side alley, and then jinked and dodged along
several others with quiet professionalism. Finally they leaned Leonard
against a wall and peered round the end of the alley.

‘All clear,’ said Nobby. ‘They went the other way.’

‘Right,’ said Colon. ‘Now, what was you doing? I mean, you might be a
genius like I heard, Mister da Quirm, but when it comes to threatening
people you’re as clever as an inflatable dartboard.’

‘I appear to have been a bit of a juggins, don’t I?’ Leonard agreed.
‘But I do implore you to come with me. I’m afraid I thought that as
warriors you would be more inclined to understand force—’

‘Well, yes, we’re _warriors_,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘But—’

‘’ere, have you got another one of these rockets?’ said Nobby, hefting
the tube onto his shoulder again. He had the special gleam in his eye
that a small man gets when he’s laid his hands on a big, big weapon.

‘I _may_ have,’ said Leonard, and the gleam in _his_ eye was the mad
twinkle of the naturally innocent when they think they’re being cunning.
‘Why don’t we go and see? You see, I was told to fetch you by any means
necessary.’

‘Bribery sounds good,’ said Nobby. He put his eye to the tube’s sights
and started making ‘whoosh’ noises.

‘Who told you to fetch us?’ said Colon.

‘Lord Vetinari.’

‘The Patrician wants _us_?’

‘Yes. He said you have special qualities and must come at once.’

‘To the _palace_? I heard he’d done a runner.’

‘Oh, no. To the, er . . . to the, er . . . docks . . .’

‘Special qualities, eh?’ said Colon.

‘Er, sarge . . .’ Nobby began.

‘Now then, Nobby,’ said Colon importantly. ‘It’s about time we were
given some recognition, you know that. Hexperienced officers are the
backbone of the force. Seems to me,’ he went on, ‘seems to _me_ that
this is a case of cometh the time, cometh the man.’

‘When’s he cometh?’

‘I’m talking about us. Men with special qualities.’

Nobby nodded, but with a certain amount of reluctance. In many ways he
was a much clearer thinker than his superior officer, and he was
worrying about ‘special qualities’. Being picked for something because
of your ‘special qualities’ was tantamount to being volunteered. Anyway,
what was so special about ‘special qualities’? _Limpets_ had special
qualities.

‘Will we go undercover again?’ said Colon.

Leonard blinked. ‘There . . . yes, I think I can say there is a strong
_under_ element involved. Yes, indeed.’

‘Sarge—’

‘You just be quiet, corporal.’ Colon pulled Nobby closer. ‘Undercover
means not getting stabbed and shot at, right?’ he whispered. ‘And what’s
the most important thing a professional soldier wants not to happen to
him?’

‘Not getting stabbed and shot,’ said Nobby automatically.

‘Right! So let’s be going, Mr Quirm! The call has come!’

‘Well done!’ said Leonard. ‘Tell me, sergeant, are you of a nautical
persuasion?’

Colon saluted again. ‘Nossir! Happily married man, sir!’

‘I meant, have you ploughed the ocean waves at all?’

Colon gave him a cunning look.

‘Ah, you can’t catch me with that one, sir,’ he said. ‘Everyone knows
the horses sink.’

Leonard paused for a moment and retuned his brain to Radio Colon.

‘Have you, in the past, floated around, on the sea, in a boat, at all?’

‘Me, sir? Not me, sir. It’s the sight of the waves going up and down,
sir.’

‘Really?’ said Leonard. ‘Well, happily, that will not be a problem.’

* * *

All right, start again . . .

Assembling facts, that’s what it was about . . .

The world watched. Someone _wanted_ the Watch to say that the
assassination had been inspired by Klatch. Who?

Someone had also beheaded Snowy Slopes where he stood and left him
deader than six buckets of fish bait.

A vision of 71-hour Ahmed’s big curved sword presented itself for his
attention. So . . .

 . . . let’s assume that Ahmed was Khufurah’s servant or bodyguard, and
he’d found out . . .

No, how could that work? Who’d tell him?

Well, maybe he’d found out _somehow_, and that meant that he might also
know who’d paid the man . . .

Vimes sat back. It was still a mystery but he’d solve it, he knew he
would. He’d assemble the facts, analyse them, look at them from every
angle with an open mind, and _find out exactly how Lord Rust had
organized it_.

Rank bad hat! He didn’t have to sit still for something like that,
especially from a man who rhymed ‘house’ with ‘mice’.

His eye was caught by the ancient book. General Tacticus? Every kid knew
about him. Ankh-Morpork had ruled a huge empire and a lot of it had been
in Klatch, thanks to him. Except there wasn’t any thanks _for_ him,
strangely enough. Vimes had never quite known why, but the city seemed
to be rather ashamed of the general.

One reason, of course, was that he’d ended up fighting Ankh-Mopork. The
city of Genua had run out of royalty, inbreeding having progressed to
the point where the sole remaining example consisted mostly of teeth,
and senior courtiers had written to Ankh-Morpork asking for help.

There’d been a lot of that sort of thing, Vimes had been surprised to
learn. The little kingdoms of the Sto Plains were for ever scrounging
spare royalty off one another. The King had sent Tacticus out of sheer
exasperation. It’s hard to run a proper empire when you’re constantly
getting blood-stained letters on the lines of: _Dear sire, I beg to
inform you that we have conquered Betrek, Smale and Ushistan. Please
send AM$20,000 back pay_. The man never knew when to stop. So he was
hastily made a duke and packed off to Genua, whereupon his first action
was to consider what was that city’s greatest military threat and then,
having identified it, to declare war on Ankh-Morpork.

But what else had anyone expected? He’d done his duty. He’d brought back
heaps of spoils, lots of captives and, almost uniquely among
Ankh-Morpork’s military leaders, most of his men. Vimes suspected that
this last fact was one reason why history didn’t approve. There was a
suggestion that this was, in some way, not playing fair.

‘_Veni, vidi, vici_.’ That was what the man was supposed to have said
when he’d conquered . . . where? Pseudopolis, wasn’t it? Or Al-Khali? Or
Quirm? Maybe Sto Lat? That was in the old days when you attacked anyone
else’s city on principle, and went back and did them over again if they
looked like getting up. And, in those days, you didn’t care if the world
watched. You _wanted_ them to watch, and learn. ‘_Veni, vidi, vici_.’ I
came, I saw, I conquered.

As a comment it always struck Vimes as a bit too pat. It wasn’t the sort
of thing you came up with on the spur of the moment, was it? It sounded
as if he had worked it out. He’d probably spent long evenings in his
tent, looking up in the dictionary short words beginning with V and
trying them out . . . _Veni, vermini, vomui_, I came, I got ratted, I
threw up? _Visi, veneri, vamoosi_, I visited, I caught an embarrassing
disease, I ran away? It must have been a big relief to come up with
three short acceptable words. He probably made them up _first_, and then
went off to see somewhere and conquer it.

He opened the book at random.

‘_It is always useful to face an enemy who is prepared to die for his
country_,’ he read. ‘_This means that both you and he have exactly the
same aim in mind_.’

‘Hah!’

‘Bingeley-bingeley b—’

Vimes’s hand slammed down on the box.

‘Yes? What is it?’

‘Three oh five pee em. Interview with Cpl Littlebottom re Missing Sgt
Colon,’ said the demon sulkily.

‘I never arranged anything like— Who told you—? Are you telling me that
I’ve got an appointment and I don’t know about it?’

‘That’s right.’

‘So how do _you_ know about it?’

‘You _told_ me to know about it. Last night,’ said the demon.

‘You _can_ tell me about appointments I don’t know about?’ said Vimes.

‘They’re still appointments _sine qua_ appointments,’ said the demon.
‘They exist, as it were, in appointment phase space.’

‘What the hell does that mean?’

‘Look,’ said the demon patiently, ‘You can have an appointment at any
time, right? So therefore _any_ appointment exists _in potentia_—’

‘Where’s that?’

‘Any _particular_ appointment simply collapses the waveform,’ said the
demon. ‘I merely select the most likely one from the projected matrix.’

‘You’re just making this up,’ said Vimes. ‘If you were right, then any
second now—’

Someone knocked at the door. It was a polite, tentative tap.

Vimes didn’t take his eyes off the smirking demon.

‘Is that you, Corporal Littlebottom?’ he said.

‘Yes, sir. Sergeant Colon has sent a pigeon. I thought you ought to see
it, sir.’

‘Come in!’

A small roll of thin paper was placed on his desk. He read:

Have volunteered for a mission of Vital

Importance. Nobby is here also. There will be

statchoos of us when this day’s work is over.

PS Someone I can’t tell you who says this

note will self-destruct in five seconds, he

is sorry he hasn’t got good chemicles to do

it better—

The paper began to crinkle around the edges and then vanished in a small
puff of acrid smoke.

Vimes stared at the little pile of ash that remained.

‘I suppose it’s a mercy they didn’t blow up the pigeon, sir,’ said
Cheery.

‘What the hell are they up to? Well, I can’t chase around after them.
Thanks, Cheery.’

The dwarf saluted and departed.

‘Co-incidence,’ said Vimes.

‘All right, then,’ said the demon. ‘Bingeley-bingeley beep! Three
fifteen pee em, Emergency Meeting with Captain Carrot.’

* * *

It was a cylinder, tapering to a point at both ends. At one end the
taper was quite complex, the cylinder narrowing in a succession of
smaller and smaller rings, overlapping one another until they ended in a
large fishtail. Oiled leather could be seen gleaming in the gaps between
the metal.

At the other end, extending from the cylinder for all the world like the
horn of a unicorn, was a very long and pointed screw thread.

The whole thing was mounted on a crude trolley, which was in turn riding
on a pair of iron rails that disappeared into the black water at the far
end of the boathouse.

‘Looks like a giant fish to me,’ said Colon. ‘Made of tin.’

‘With an ’orn,’ said Nobby.

‘It’ll never float,’ said Colon. ‘I can see where you’ve gone wrong
there. Everyone knows metal sinks.’

‘Not _entirely_ true,’ said Leonard, diplomatically. ‘In any case, this
boat is _designed_ to sink.’

‘What?’

‘Propulsion was a major headache, I’m afraid,’ said Leonard, climbing up
a stepladder. ‘I thought of paddles and oars, and even some kind of
screw, and then I thought: dolphins, that’s the ticket! They move
extremely fast with barely an effort. That’s out at sea, of course, we
only get the shovel-nosed dolphin in our estuary here. The linkage rods
are a bit complicated but I used to be able to get quite a turn of
speed. The pedalling can be somewhat tiresome, but with three of us we
should be able to get up to some quite satisfactory accelerations. It’s
amazing what you can do when you imitate nature, I just wish my flying
exp— Oh . . . where did you go . . . ?’

It would be difficult to establish what part of satisfactorily
accelerating nature the watchmen were trying to imitate, but it was a
part which tended to get stuck in doors a lot.

They stopped struggling and began to back into the room.

‘Ah, sergeant,’ said Lord Vetinari, entering in front of them. ‘And
Corporal Nobbs, too. Leonard has explained everything to you?’

‘You can’t ask us to go in that thing, sir! It’ll be suicide!’ said
Colon.

The Patrician brought his hands together in front of his lips in the
manner of someone praying, and sucked air thoughtfully.

‘No. No, I think you are wrong,’ he said at last, as if reaching a
conclusion on some complex metaphysical conundrum. ‘I think that, in all
probability, going into that thing would be a valiant and possibly
rewarding deed. I would venture to suggest that, in fact, it is _not_
going that would be suicidal. But I would appreciate your views.’

Lord Vetinari was not a heavily built man and, these days, he walked
with the aid of an ebony cane. No one could remember seeing him handle a
weapon, and a flash of unaccustomed insight told Sergeant Colon that
this was not in fact a comforting thought at all. They said he’d been
educated at the Assassins’ School, but no one remembered what weapons
he’d learned. He’d studied languages. And suddenly, with him in front of
you, this didn’t seem like the soft option.

Sergeant Colon saluted, always a useful thing to do in an emergency such
as this, and shouted: ‘Corporal Nobbs, why aren’t you in the . . . the
metal sinking fish thing?’

‘Sarge?’

‘Let’s see you get up them steps, lad . . . hup hup hup . . .’

Nobby scrambled up the ladder and disappeared. Colon saluted again. You
could usually tell his nervousness by the smartness of his salute. You
could have cut bread with this one.

‘Ready to go, _sah_!’ he shouted.

‘Well done, sergeant,’ said Vetinari. ‘You’re displaying exactly those
special qualities I’m looking for—’

‘—’_ere, sarge_,’ came a metallic voice from the belly of the fish,
‘_there’s all chains and cogwheels in here. What’s this do_?’ The big
auger in front of the thing started to squeak round.

Leonard appeared from behind the fish.

‘I think we should all get in,’ he said. ‘I’ve lit the candle that’ll
burn down and sever the string that’ll release the weight that’ll pull
the blocks out.’

‘Er . . . what is this thing called?’ said Colon, as he followed the
Patrician up the ladder.

‘Well, because it is _submersed_ in a _marine_ environment I’ve always
called it the Going-Under-The-Water-Safely Device,’ said Leonard, behind
him.¹⁰ ‘But usually I just think of it as the Boat.’

He reached behind him and shut the lid.

After a moment any listener in the boathouse would have heard a
complicated clonk as bolts slid into place.

The candle burned down and severed the string that released the weight
that pulled the blocks out and, slowly at first, the Boat slid down the
rails and into the dark water which, after a second or two, closed over
it with a gloop.

No one took any notice of Angua as she trotted up the gangplank. The
important thing, she knew, was to look at home. No one bothered a large
dog that looked as though it knew where it was going.

People were milling about on deck in the manner peculiar to non-sailors
on board ship, not sure of what they should be doing or where they
should refrain from doing it. Some of the more stoic ones had made
little camps, defining with bundles and pieces of cloth tiny areas of
private property. They reminded Angua of the bi-coloured drainpipes and
microscopically delineated household boundaries in Money Trap Lane,
showing yet another way of drawing a line in the sand. This is Mine, and
that is Yours. Trespass on Mine, and you’ll get Yours.

There were a couple of guards standing on either side of the door to the
cabins. They hadn’t been told to stop dogs.

Scents led down below. She could smell the other dogs and a strong odour
of cloves.

At the end of the narrow passage a door was ajar. She forced it open
with her nose and looked around.

The dogs were lying on a rug on one side of a large cabin. Other dogs
might have barked, but these just turned their beautiful heads towards
her, sighted down the length of their noses and examined her carefully.

A narrow bed beyond them was half concealed by silk hangings. 71-hour
Ahmed was bending over it, but he turned when she entered.

He glanced towards the dogs and gave her a puzzled look. Then, to her
amazement, he sat down on the deck in front of her.

‘And who do you belong to?’ he said in perfect Morporkian.

Angua wagged her tail. There was someone in the bed, she could smell
them, but they wouldn’t be a problem. Jaw muscles strong enough to sever
someone’s neck help you to feel relaxed in most situations.

Ahmed patted her on the head. Very few people have ever done that to a
werewolf without having to get people to cut up their meals for them in
future, but Angua had learned self-control.

Then he stood up and went to the door. She heard him say something to
someone outside, and then he came back into the room and smiled at her.

‘I go, I come back . . .’

He opened a small cupboard and took out a jewelled dog collar. ‘You
shall have a collar. Oh, and here is some food,’ he added, as a servant
brought in some bowls. ‘“Knick-knack, paddywack, give a dog a bone” is a
rhyme I hear your Ankh-Morpork children sing, but a paddywack is a ball
of gristle suitable only for animal food and who knows what part of the
animal is its knick-knack . . .’

The plate was put in front of Angua. The other dogs stirred, but Ahmed
snapped a word at them and they settled back again.

The food was . . . dog food. In Ankh-Morpork terms, it meant something
that you wouldn’t even put in a sausage, and there are very few things
that a man with a big enough mincer cannot put in a sausage.

The little central human part of her was revolted, but the werewolf
drooled at the sight of every glistening tube and wobbly fat bit—

_It was on a silver plate_.

She looked up. Ahmed was watching her carefully.

Of course, the royal dogs were treated like kings, all those diamond
collars . . . It didn’t have to mean he _knew_—

‘Not hungry?’ he said. ‘Your mouth says you are.’

Something snapped around her neck as she spun around to bite. Her teeth
closed on a mouthful of greasy cloth but that wasn’t as important as the
pain.

‘His Highness has always liked fine collars on his dogs,’ said 71-hour
Ahmed, through the red mist. ‘Rubies, emeralds . . . and diamonds, Miss
Angua.’ His face came down level with hers. ‘Set in silver.’

‘. . .  _A crucial factor, I have always found, is NOT the size of the
forces. It is the positioning and commitment of reserves, the bringing
of power to a point_ . . .’

Vimes tried to concentrate on Tacticus. But there were two distractions.
One was that the grinning face of 71-hour Ahmed looked out at him from
every line. The other was his watch, which he had propped up against the
Dis-organizer. It was powered by actual clockwork and was much more
reliable. And it never needed feeding. It ticked quietly. As far as it
was concerned, he could forget his appointments. He liked it.

The second hand was just curving towards the top of the minute when he
heard someone coming up the stairs.

‘Come in, captain,’ said Vimes. There was a snigger from the box.

Carrot’s face was pinker than normal.

‘Something’s happened to Angua,’ said Vimes.

The high colour drained from Carrot’s face. ‘How did you know that?’

Vimes firmly closed the lid on the sniggering demon. ‘Let’s call it
intuition, shall we? I’m right, am I?’

‘Yes, sir! She went aboard a Klatchian boat and now it’s sailing! She
hasn’t come off!’

‘What the hell did she go on board for?’

‘We were after Ahmed! And he looked as if he was taking someone with
him, sir. Someone _ill_, sir!’

‘He’s left? But the diplomats are still—’

Vimes stopped. There was, if you didn’t know Carrot, something wrong
with the situation. There were people who, when their girlfriend was
spirited away on a foreign ship, would have dived into the Ankh, or at
least run briskly along the crust, leapt aboard and dealt out merry hell
on a democratic basis. Of course, at a time like this that would be a
dumb thing to do. The sensible approach _would_ be to let people know,
but even so—

But Carrot really did believe that personal wasn’t the same as
important. Of course, Vimes believed the same thing. You had to hope
that when push came to shove you’d act the right way. But there was
something slightly creepy about someone who didn’t just believe it, but
lived their life by it. It was as unnerving as meeting a really poor
priest.

Obviously, it was a consideration that if someone had captured Angua you
knew that the rescue you were going to probably wouldn’t be hers.

But . . .

The gods alone knew what would happen if he left now. The city had gone
war mad. Big things were happening. At a time like this, every cell in
his body was telling him that the Commander of the Watch had
Responsibilities . . .

He drummed his fingers on the desk. In times like this, it was vital to
make the right decision. That was what he was paid for.
_Responsibility_ . . .

He ought to stay here, and do the best he could.

But . . . history was full of the bones of good men who’d followed bad
orders in the hope that they could soften the blow. Oh, yes, there were
worse things they could do, but most of them began right where they
started following bad orders.

His eyes went from Carrot to the Dis-organizer and then to the tottering
mounds of paperwork on his desk.

Blow that! He was a thief-taker! He’d _always_ be a thief-taker! Why
lie?

‘Damned if I’ll let Ahmed get back to Klatch!’ he said, standing up.
‘Fast boat, was it?’

‘Yes, but it looked pretty heavy in the water.’

‘Then maybe we can catch it up before it goes very far—’

As he hurried forward he had, just for a second, the strange sensation
that he was two people. And this was because, for the merest fraction of
a second, he _was_ two people. They were both called Samuel Vimes.

To history, choices are merely directions. The Trousers of Time opened
up and Vimes began to hurtle down one leg of them.

And, somewhere else, the Vimes who made a different choice began to drop
into a different future.

They both darted back to grab their Dis-organizers. By the most
outrageous of freak chances, quite uniquely, in this split second of
decision, they each got the wrong one.

And sometimes the avalanche depends on one snowflake. Sometimes a pebble
is allowed to find out what might have happened – if only it had bounced
the other way.

* * *

The wizards of Ankh-Morpork had been very firm on the subject of
printing. It’s not happening here, they said. Supposing, they said,
someone printed a book on magic and then broke up the type again and
used it for a book on, say, cookery? The metal would remember. Spells
aren’t just words. They have extra dimensions of existence. We’d be up
to here in talking soufflés. Besides, someone might print _thousands_ of
the damn things, many of which could well be read by unsuitable people.

The Engravers’ Guild was also against printing. There was something
pure, they said, about an engraved page of text. It was there, whole,
unsullied. Their members could do very fine work at very reasonable
rates. Allowing unskilled people to bash lumps of type together showed a
disrespect for words and no good would come of it.

The only attempt ever to set up a printing press in Ankh-Morpork had
ended in a mysterious fire and the death by suicide of the luckless
printer. Everyone knew it was suicide because he’d left a note. The fact
that this had been engraved on the head of a pin was considered an
irrelevant detail.

And the Patrician was against printing because if people knew too much
it would only bother them.

So people relied on word of mouth, which worked very well because the
mouths were so close together. A lot of them were just below the noses
of the members of the Beggars’ Guild,¹¹ citizens generally regarded as
reasonably reliable and well informed. Some of them were highly thought
of for their sports coverage.

Lord Rust looked thoughtfully at Cumbling Michael, a Grade II Mutterer.

‘And what happened next?’

Cumbling Michael scratched his wrist. He’d recently got his extra grade
because he’d finally managed to catch a disfiguring but harmless skin
disease.

‘Mr Carrot was in there about two minutes, m’lord. Then they all come
runnin’ out, right, an’ they—’

‘Who were _they_?’ said Rust. He fought off an urge to scratch his own
arm.

‘There was Carrot an’ Vimes anna dwarf an’ a zombie an’ all of them,
m’lord. They ran all the way to the docks, m’lord, and Vimes saw Captain
Jenkins and he said—’

‘Ah, Captain Jenkins! This is your lucky day!’

The captain looked up from the rope he was coiling. No one likes being
told it’s their lucky day. That sort of thing does not bode well. When
someone tells you it’s your lucky day, something bad is about to happen.

‘It is?’ he said.

‘Yes, because you have an unrivalled opportunity to aid the war effort!’

‘I have?’

‘And also to demonstrate your patriotism,’ Carrot added.

‘I do?’

‘We need to borrow your boat,’ said Vimes.

‘Bugger off!’

‘I’m choosing to believe that was a salty nautical expression meaning
“Why, certainly,”’ said Vimes. ‘Captain Carrot?’

‘Sir.’

‘You and Detritus go and look behind that false partition in the hold,’
said Vimes.

‘Right, sir,’ said Carrot, walking towards the ladder.

‘There’s no false partition in the hold!’ snapped Jenkins. ‘And I know
the law, and you can’t—’

There was a crash of timber from below.

‘If that _wasn’t_ a false partition, our Carrot’s gone and knocked a
hole in the side,’ said Vimes calmly, watching the captain.

‘Er . . .’

‘I know the law too,’ said Vimes. He drew his sword. ‘See this?’ he
said, holding it up. ‘This is _military_ law. And military law is a
sword. Not a two-edged sword. There’s only one edge, and it’s pointing
at you. Found anything, Carrot?’

Carrot appeared over the edge of the hold. There was a crossbow in his
hand.

‘I do declare,’ said Vimes, ‘but that looks to me like a Burleigh and
Stronginthearm “Viper” Mk 3, which kills people but leaves buildings
standing.’

‘There’s crates and crates of stuff,’ said Carrot.

‘’s no law—’ Jenkins began, but he sounded as if the bottom was dropping
out of his world.

‘You know, I think there probably _is_ some law against selling weapons
to the enemy in times of war,’ said Vimes. ‘Of course, there might not
be. Tell you what,’ he added brightly, ‘why don’t we all go along to
Sator Square? It’s full of people around this time, all very keen on the
war and cheering our brave lads . . . Why don’t we go along and put it
to them? You told me I ought to listen to the voice of the people. Odd
thing, ain’t it . . . you meet people one at a time, they seem decent,
they got brains that work, and then they get together and you hear the
_voice_ of the people. And it snarls.’

‘That’s mob rule!’

‘Oh, no, surely not,’ said Vimes. ‘Call it democratic justice.’

‘One man, one rock,’ Detritus volunteered.

Jenkins looked like a man afraid the world was about to drop out of his
bottom. He glared at Vimes and then at Carrot, and saw no help there.

‘Of course, you’d have nothing to fear from _us_,’ said Vimes. ‘Although
you might trip on your way down the stairs to the cells.’

‘There’s no stairs down to your cells!’

‘Stairs can be arranged.’

‘Please, Mr Jenkins,’ said Carrot, the good cop.

‘I wasn’t . . . taking . . . the weapons to . . . Klatch,’ Jenkins said
slowly, as if he was reading the words very painfully off some interior
script. ‘I had . . . in fact . . . bought them to . . . donate
them . . . to . . .’

‘Yes? Yes?’ said Vimes.

‘. . .  our . . . brave lads,’ said Jenkins.

‘Well done!’ said Carrot.

‘And you’d be happy to . . . ?’ Vimes prompted.

‘And . . . I’d be happy to . . . lend my boat to the war effort,’ said
Jenkins, sweating.

‘A true patriot,’ said Vimes.

Jenkins writhed.

‘Who told you there was a false panel in the hold?’ he demanded. ‘It was
a guess, right?’

‘Right,’ said Vimes.

‘Aha! I _knew_ you were only guessing!’

‘Patriotic _and_ clever,’ said Vimes. ‘Now . . . how do you make this
thing go fast?’

* * *

Lord Rust tapped his fingers on the table.

‘What did he take the boat _for_?’

‘Dunno, m’lord,’ said Cumbling Michael, scratching his head.

‘Damn! Did anyone else see them?’

‘Oh, there weren’t many people around, m’lord.’

‘That’s a small mercy, at least.’

‘Just me and Foul Ole Ron and the Duck Man and Blind Hugh and Ringo
Eyebrows and No Way José and Sidney Lopsides and that bastard Stoolie
and Whistling Dick and a few others, m’lord.’

Rust sank back in his chair and put a pale hand over his face. In
Ankh-Morpork the night had a thousand eyes and so did the day, and it
also had five hundred mouths and nine hundred and ninety-nine ears.¹²

‘The Klatchians _must_ know, then,’ he said. ‘A detachment of
Ankh-Morpork soldiery has taken ship for Klatch. An invasion force.’

‘Oh, you could hardly call it—’ Lieutenant Hornett began.

‘The Klatchians will call it that. Besides, the troll Detritus is with
them,’ said Rust.

Hornett looked glum. Detritus was an invasion force all by himself.

‘What ships have we commandeered?’ said Rust.

‘There’s more than twenty now, if you include the _Indestructible_, the
_Indolence_ and the . . .’ Lieutenant Hornett looked at his list again,
‘. . .  and the _Prid of Ankh-Morpork_, sir.’

‘The _Prid_?’

‘I’m afraid so, sir.’

‘We should be able to take more than a thousand men and two hundred
horses, then.’

‘Why not let Vimes go?’ said Lord Selachii. ‘Let the Klatchians deal
with him, and good riddance.’

‘And give them a victory over Ankh-Morpork forces? That’s how they will
see it. Damn the man. He forces our hand. But still, perhaps it is for
the best. We should embark.’

‘Are we entirely ready, sir?’ said Lieutenant Hornett, with the special
inflection that means ‘We are not entirely ready, sir.’

‘We had better be. Glory awaits, gentlemen. In the words of General
Tacticus, let us take history by the scrotum. Of course, he was not a
very honourable fighter.’

White sunlight etched dark shadows in Prince Cadram’s palace. He too had
a map of Klatch, made of tiny coloured tiles set into the floor. He sat
looking at it pensively.

‘Just one boat?’ he said.

General Ashal, his chief adviser, nodded. And added: ‘Our scryers can’t
get a very clear picture over that distance, but we do believe one of
the men to be Vimes. You recall the name, sire.’

‘Ah, the _useful_ Commander Vimes.’ The Prince smiled.

‘Indeed. And since then there has been a lot of activity all along the
docks. We have to take the view that the expeditionary force is setting
out.’

‘I thought we had at least a week, Ashal.’

‘It is certainly puzzling. They cannot possibly be prepared, sire.
Something must have happened.’

Cadram sighed. ‘Oh, well, let us follow where fate points the way. Where
will they attack?’

‘Gebra, sire. I’m sure of it.’

‘Our most heavily fortified city? Surely not. Only an idiot would do
that.’

‘I have studied Lord Rust in some depth, sire. Remember that he doesn’t
expect us to fight, so the size of our forces really doesn’t worry him.’
The general smiled. It was a neat, thin little smile. ‘And of course in
attacking _us_ he is piling infamy upon infamy. The other coastal states
will take note.’

‘A change of plan, then,’ said Cadram. ‘Ankh-Morpork can wait.’

‘A wise move, sire. As always.’

‘Any news of my poor brother?’

‘Alas no, sire.’

‘Our agents must search harder. The world is watching, Ashal.’

‘Correct, sire.’

‘Sarge?’

‘Yes, Nobby?’

‘Tell me again about our special qualities.’

‘Shut up and keep pedalling, Nobby.’

‘Right, sarge.’

It was quite dark in the Boat. A candle swung from a bracket over
Leonard of Quirm’s bowed head as he sat steering with two levers. Around
Nobby, pulleys rattled and little chains clicked. It was like being
inside a sewing machine. A damp one, too. Condensation dropped off the
ceiling in a steady stream.

They had been pedalling for ten minutes. Leonard had spent most of the
time talking excitedly. Nobby got the impression he didn’t get out much.
He talked about _everything_.

There were the tanks of air, for example. Nobby was happy to accept that
you could squeeze air up really small, and that was what was in the
groaning, creaking steel-bound casks strapped to the walls. It was what
happened to the air afterwards that came as a surprise.

‘Bubbles!’ said Leonard. ‘Dolphins again, you see? They don’t swim
through the water, they fly through a cloud of bubbles. Which is much
easier, of course. I add a little soap, which seems to improve matters.’

‘He thinks dolphins fly, sarge,’ whispered Nobby.

‘Just keep pedalling.’

Sergeant Colon risked a glance behind him.

Lord Vetinari was sitting on an upturned box amidst the clicking chains,
with several of Leonard’s sketches open on his knees.

‘Carry on, sergeant,’ said the Patrician.

‘Right, sir.’

The Boat was moving faster now they were away from the city. There was
even a brackish light filtering through the little glass windows.

‘Mr Leonard,’ said Nobby.

‘Yes?’

‘Where’re we going?’

‘His lordship wishes to go to Leshp.’

‘Yes, I thought it’d be something like that,’ said Nobby. ‘I thought:
“Where don’t I want to go?” And the answer just popped into my head,
just like that. Only I don’t think we’ll get there, the reason bein’, in
about another five minutes my knees are going to fall off . . .’

‘Oh, my word, you won’t have to _pedal_ all the way,’ said Leonard.
‘What did you think the big auger on the nose is for?’

‘That?’ said Nobby. ‘I thought that was for drillin’ into the bottom of
enemy ships—’

‘_What?_’ Leonard spun around in his seat, a look of horror on his face.

‘Sink ships? Sink _ships_? With _people_ on them?’

‘Well . . . yes . . .’

‘Corporal Nobbs, I think you are a very misguided young . . . man,’ said
Leonard stiffly. ‘Use the Boat to sink ships? That would be terrible! In
any case, no sailor would dream of doing such a dishonourable thing!’

‘Sorry . . .’

‘The auger, I would have you know, is for _attaching_ us to passing
ships in the manner of the remora, the sucker-fish which attaches itself
to sharks. A few turns is all that is necessary for a firm attachment.’

‘So . . . you couldn’t bore all the way through the hull, then?’

‘Only if you were a very careless and extremely thoughtless young man!’

The ocean waves may not be ploughable, but the crust of the river Ankh
downstream from the city was known to sprout small bushes in the
summertime. The _Milka_ moved slowly, leaving a furrow behind it.

‘Can’t you go faster?’ said Vimes.

‘Why, certainly,’ said Jenkins nastily. ‘Where would you like us to put
the extra mast?’

‘The ship’s just a dot,’ said Carrot. ‘Why aren’t we gaining on them?’

‘It’s a bigger ship so it has got what we technically call _more
sails_,’ said Jenkins. ‘And they’re fast hulls on those Klatchian boats.
And we’ve got a full hold—’

He stopped, but it was too late.

‘Captain Carrot?’ said Vimes.

‘Sir?’

‘Throw everything overboard,’ said Vimes.

‘Not the crossbows! They cost more than a hundred dollars ea—’

Jenkins stopped. Vimes’s expression said, very clearly, that there were
a whole lot of things that could be thrown off the boat, and it would be
a good idea not to be among them.

‘Go and pull some ropes, Mr Jenkins,’ he said.

He watched the captain stamp off. A few moments later there was a
splash. Vimes looked over the side and saw a crate bob for a moment and
then sink. And he felt happy. Thief-taker, Rust had called him. The man
had meant it as an insult, but it’d do. Theft was the only crime,
whether the loot was gold, innocence, land or life. And for the
thief-taker, there was the chase . . .

There were several more splashes. Vimes fancied the ship surged forward.

 . . . the chase. Because the chase was simpler than the capture. Once
you’d caught someone it got complicated, but the chase was pure and
free. Much better than prodding at clues and peering at notebooks. He
flees, I chase. Simple.

Vetinari’s terrier, eh?

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’ said his pocket.

‘Don’t tell me,’ said Vimes. ‘It’s something like “Five pee em, At Sea,”
yes?’

‘Er . . . no,’ said the Dis-organizer. ‘Says here “Violent Row With Lord
Rust”, Insert Name Here.’

‘Aren’t you supposed to tell me what I’m going to do?’ said Vimes,
opening the box.

‘Er . . . what you _should_ be doing,’ said the demon, looking very
worried. ‘What you _should_ be doing. I don’t understand it . . .
er . . . something seems to be wrong . . .’

* * *

Angua stopped trying to rub the collar off against a bulkhead. It wasn’t
working, and the silver pressing against her skin seemed to freeze her
and burn her at the same time.

Apart from that – and a silver collar on a werewolf was a fairly major
_that_ – she’d been treated well. They’d left a plate of food, a
_wooden_ plate, and she’d let her wolf side eat it while the human side
shut its eyes and held its nose. There was a bowl of water, quite fresh
by Ankh-Morpork standards. She could see the bottom of the bowl, at
least.

It was so hard to _think_ in wolf shape. It was like trying to unlock a
door while drunk. It was possible, but you had to concentrate every step
of the way.

There was a sound.

Her ears pricked up.

Something tapped once or twice under the hull. She hoped it was a reef.
That meant . . . land, possibly . . . with any luck she could swim
ashore . . .

Something clinked. She’d forgotten about the chain. It was hardly
necessary. She felt as weak as a kitten.

There was a rhythmic noise, like something chewing at the wood.

A tiny metal point splintered through the wall just in front of her
nose, and rose an inch.

And someone spoke. It sounded far off and distorted, and perhaps only a
werewolf would have heard it, but _words_ were happening, somewhere
under her paws.

‘—_can stop pedalling now, Corporal Nobbs.’_

‘I _am_ knackered, _sarge. Is there anything to eat?’_

‘There’s some more of that garlic sausage. Or there’s the cheese. Or
cold beans.’

‘We’re in a tin with no air and we’re supposed to eat cheese? I ain’t
even going to comment on the beans.’

‘I’m very sorry, gentlemen. Things were rather rushed and I had to take
food which would keep.’

‘It’s just that it’s getting a bit . . . crowded, if you get my
meaning.’

‘I will pay out the rope as soon as it’s dark and we can surface and
take on air.’

_‘Just so long as we get rid of the air we’ve got, that’s all I’m
saying_ . . .’

Angua’s brows wrinkled as she tried to make sense of this. The voices
were familiar. Even muffled as they were, she recognized the tones. The
vague feeling that fought its way through the mists of animal intellect
was: friends.

The tiny little unchangeable centre of her thought: good grief, next
thing I’ll be licking hands.

She laid her head down near the point again.

‘—_way to do it, young man. There you go again! Sink ships? I can’t
imagine how anyone could think of such a thing!_’

Names. Some of those voices had . . . names.

Thinking was getting harder. That was the silver at work. But if she
stopped, she might forget how to start again.

She stared at the point of metal. The point of _metal_ with _sharp_
edges.

The tiny human part of her mind raged at the wolf brain, trying to get
it to understand what it needed to do.

It was after midnight.

The lookout man knelt on the deck in front of 71-hour Ahmed and
trembled.

‘I know what I saw, _wali_,’ he moaned. ‘And the others saw it too!
Something rose up behind the ship and began chasing us! A monster!’

Ahmed looked at the captain, who shrugged. ‘Who knows what lies on the
floor of the sea, _wali_?’

‘Its breath!’ moaned the seaman. ‘There was a great roar of breath like
the stink of a thousand privies! And then it spoke!’

‘Really?’ said Ahmed. ‘This is not usual. What did it say?’

‘I did not understand!’ The man’s face screwed up as he tried to
assemble the unfamiliar syllables. ‘It sounded like . . .’ he swallowed,
and went on, ‘“_Ye gods, that was better out than in, sarge_!”’

Ahmed stared at him. ‘And what did that mean to you?’ he said.

‘I do not know, _wali_!’

‘You have not spent much time in Ankh-Morpork?’

‘No, _wali_!’

‘Then return to your post.’

The man stumbled out.

‘We have lost speed, _wali_,’ said the captain.

‘Perhaps the sea monster is clutching at our keel?’

‘It pleases you to joke, lord. But who knows what has been disturbed by
the rising of the new land?’

‘I shall have to see for myself,’ said 71-hour Ahmed.

He walked alone to the stern of the ship. Dark waters sucked and
splashed and left a phosphorescent glow edging the wake.

He watched for a long time. People bad at watching didn’t last long in
the desert, where a shadow in the moonlight could be just a shadow or it
could be someone anxious to help you on your way to Paradise. The D’regs
came across many shadows of the latter persuasion.

D’reg wasn’t their name for themselves, although they tended to adopt it
now out of pride. The word meant _enemy_. Everyone’s. And if anyone else
wasn’t around, then one another’s.

If he concentrated, he might believe that there was a darker shape about
a hundred yards behind the ship, very low in the water. Waves were
breaking where waves shouldn’t be. It looked as though the ship was
being followed by a reef.

Well, well . . .

71-hour Ahmed was not _super_stitious. He _was_ substitious, which put
him in a minority among humans. He didn’t believe in the things everyone
believed in but which nevertheless weren’t true. He believed instead in
the things that were true in which no one else believed. There are many
such substitions, ranging from ‘It’ll get better if you don’t pick at
it’ all the way up to ‘Sometimes things just happen.’

Currently he was disinclined to believe in sea monsters, especially ones
that spoke in the language of Ankh-Morpork, but he did believe that
there were a lot of things in the world that he didn’t know about.

In the far distance he could see the lights of a ship. It didn’t seem to
be gaining on them.

This was much more worrying.

In the darkness 71-hour Ahmed reached over his shoulder and grasped the
handle of his sword.

Above him, the mainsail creaked in the wind.

Sergeant Colon knew he was facing one of the most dangerous moments in
his career.

There was nothing for it. He was out of options.

‘Er . . . if I add this A and this O and this I and this D,’ he said,
the sweat pouring down his pink cheeks, ‘then I can use that V to make
“avoid”. Er . . . and that gets me, er, a . . . what d’you call these
blue squares, Len?’

‘A “Three Times Ye Value of Thee Letter” score,’ said Leonard of Quirm.

‘Well done, sergeant,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘I do believe that puts you
in the lead.’

‘Er . . . I do believe it does, sir,’ squeaked Sergeant Colon.

‘_However_, I find that you have left me the use of my U, N and A, B, L,
E,’ the Patrician went on, ‘which incidentally lands me on this Three
Times the Whole Worde square and, I rather suspect, wins me the game.’

Sergeant Colon sagged with relief.

‘A capital game, Leonard,’ said Vetinari. ‘What did you say it was
called?’

‘I call it the “Make Words With Letters That Have All Been Mixed Up
Game”, my lord.’

‘Ah. Yes. Obviously. Well done.’

‘Huh, an’ I got three points,’ mumbled Nobby. ‘They was perfectly good
words that you wouldn’t let me have, too.’

‘I’m sure the gentlemen don’t want to know those words,’ said Colon
severely.

‘I’d have got ten points for that X.’

Leonard looked up. ‘Strange. We seem to have stopped moving . . .’

He reached up and opened the hatch. Damp night air poured in, and there
was the sound of voices, quite close, echoing loudly as voices do when
heard across water.

‘Heathen Klatchian talk,’ said Colon. ‘What are they gabblin’ about?’

‘“What nephew of a camel cut the rigging?”’ said Lord Vetinari, without
looking up. ‘“Not just the ropes, look at this sail – here, give me a
hand . . .”’

‘I didn’t know you spoke Klatchian, my lord.’

‘Not a word,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘But you—’

‘I did not,’ said Vetinari calmly.

‘Ah . . . right . . .’

‘Where are we, Leonard?’

‘Well, er, my star charts are all out of date, of course, but if you
would care to wait until the sun rises, and I’ve invented a device for
ascertaining position by reference to the sun, and devised a
satisfactorily accurate watch—’

‘Where are we _now_, Leonard?’

‘Er . . . in the middle of the Circle Sea, I suspect.’

‘The middle?’

‘Pretty close, I should say. Look, if I can measure the wind speed—’

‘Then Leshp should be in this vicinity?’

‘Oh, yes, I should—’

‘Good. Unhitch us from this apparently stricken ship while we still have
the cover of darkness and in the morning I wish to see this troublesome
land. In the meantime, I suggest that everyone gets some sleep.’

Sergeant Colon did not get a lot of sleep. This was partly because he
was woken up several times by sawing and banging coming from the front
of the Boat, and partly because water kept dripping on his head, but
mainly because the lull in activity was causing him to consider his
position.

Sometimes when he woke up he saw the Patrician hunched over Leonard’s
drawings, a gaunt silhouette in the light of the candle – reading,
making notes . . .

He was in the immediate company of a man even the Assassins’ Guild was
frightened of, another man who would stay up all night in order to
invent an alarm clock to wake him up in the morning, and a man who had
never knowingly changed his underwear.

And he was at sea.

He tried to look on the bright side. What was the main reason why he
hated boats? The fact that they sank, right? But this one had the
sinking _built in_ right from the start. And you didn’t have to watch
the waves going _up_ and _down_, because they were already above you.

All this was logical. It just wasn’t very comforting.

When he awoke at one point there were faint voices coming from the other
end of the vessel.

‘—_don’t quite understand, my lord. Why_ them?’

‘_They do what they’re told, they tend to believe the last thing they
heard, they’re not bright enough to ask questions, and they have that
certain unshakable loyalty available to those unencumbered by too much
intelligence.’_

‘I suppose so, my lord.’

‘Such men are valuable, believe me.’

Sergeant Colon turned over and tried to make himself comfortable. Glad
I’m not like _those_ poor bastards, he thought as he drifted off to
sleep on the bosom of the deep. I’m a man with special qualities.

Vimes shook his head. The stern light of the Klatchian ship was barely
visible in the gloom.

‘Are we gaining on them?’ he said.

Captain Jenkins nodded. ‘We might be. There’s a lot of sea between us.’

‘And has _all_ excess weight been thrown overboard?’

‘Yes! What do you want me to do, shave my beard off?’

Carrot’s face appeared over the edge of the hold. ‘All the lads are
bedded down, sir.’

‘Right.’

‘I’ll turn in for a few hours too, sir, if it’s all right with you.’

‘Sorry, captain?’

‘I’ll get my head down, sir.’

‘But . . . but—’ Vimes waved vaguely at the darkening horizon, ‘we’re in
hot pursuit of your girlfriend! Among other things,’ he added.

‘Yes, sir.’

‘So aren’t you . . . you mean you can . . . you want to . . . captain,
you intend to go and have _a bit of a nap_?’

‘To be fresh for when we catch up with them. Yes, sir. If I spend the
whole night staring out there worrying then I’ll probably be a bit
useless when we catch up with them, sir.’

It made sense. It really _did_ make sense. Of _course_ it made sense.
Vimes could see the sense all over it. Carrot had actually sat down and
thought _sensibly_ about things.

‘You’ll be able to _get_ to sleep, will you?’ he said weakly.

‘Oh, yes. I owe it to Angua.’

‘Oh. Well . . . goodnight, then.’

Carrot disappeared into the hold again.

‘Good heavens,’ said Jenkins. ‘Is he real?’

‘Yes,’ said Vimes.

‘I mean . . . would you go and bang your ear if he was chasing _your_
lady in that ship?’

Vimes said nothing.

Jenkins sniggered. ‘Mind you, if it was Lady Sybil, she’d be a bit lower
on the waterline—’

‘You just watch the . . . the sea. Don’t run into any damn whales or
anything,’ said Vimes, and strode up to the sharp end.

Carrot, he thought. If you didn’t know him, you wouldn’t believe
it . . .

‘They’re slowing, Mr Vimes!’ Jenkins called out.

‘What?’

‘I reckon they’re slowing down, I said!’

‘Good.’

‘So what’re you going to do when we catch them?’

‘Er . . .’ Vimes hadn’t given this a lot of thought. But he recalled a
very bad woodcut he’d once seen in a book about pirates.

‘We’ll swing across on to them with our cutlasses in our teeth?’ he
said.

‘Really?’ said Jenkins. ‘That’s good. I haven’t seen that done in years.
Only ever seen it done once, in fact.’

‘Oh, yes?’

‘Yes, this lad’d seen the idea in a book and he swung across into the
other ship’s rigging with his cutlass clenched, as you say, between his
teeth.’

‘Yes?’

‘Topless Harry, we wrote on his coffin.’

‘Oh.’

‘I don’t know if you’ve ever seen a soft-boiled egg after you’ve picked
up your knife and sli—’

‘All right, I see the point. What do you suggest?’

‘Grapnels. You can’t beat grapnels. Catch ’em on the other ship and just
pull ’em towards you.’

‘And you’ve got grapnels?’

‘Oh, yes. Saw some only today, in fact.’

‘Good. Then—’

‘As I recall,’ Jenkins went on relentlessly, ‘it was when your Sergeant
Detritus was chucking stuff over the side and he said, “What shall we do
with dese bendy, hooky things, sir?” and someone, can’t recall his name
just at this minute, said, “They’re dead weight, throw them over.”’

‘Why didn’t you say something?’

‘Oh, well, I didn’t like to,’ said Jenkins. ‘You were doing so well.’

‘Don’t mess me about, captain. Otherwise I’ll clap you in irons.’

‘No, you ain’t going to do that, and I’ll tell you why. First, ’cos when
Captain Carrot said, “These chains, sir, what shall I do with them?” you
said—’

‘Now, you listen to—’

‘—and, second, I don’t reckon you know anything about ships, oh deary
me. We don’t clap people in irons, we put them in chains. Do you know
how to splice the mainbrace? ’Cos I don’t. All that yohoho stuff’s for
landlubbers, or it would be if we ever used words like landlubber. Do
you know the difference between port and starboard? I don’t. I’ve never
even drunk starboard. Shiver my timber!’

‘Isn’t it “shiver my timbers”?’

‘I’ve been ill.’ Captain Jenkins spun the wheel. ‘Also, this is a frisky
wind and me and my crew know how to pull the strings that make the big
square canvas things work properly. If your men tried it you’d soon find
out how far it is to land.’

‘How far is it to land?’

‘About thirty fathoms, hereabouts.’

The light was noticeably nearer.

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’

‘Good grief, what _now_?’ said Vimes.

‘Eight pee em. Er . . . Narrowly Escape Assassination by Klatchian Spy?’

Vimes went cold. ‘Where?’ he said, looking around wildly.

‘Corner of Brewer Street and Broadway,’ said the little sing-song voice.

‘But I’m not there!’

‘What’s the point of having appointments, then? What’s the point of my
making an effort? You _told_ me you wanted to know what you _ought_ to—’

‘Listen, you don’t have an appointment for being assassinated!’

The demon went silent for a moment, and then said:

‘You mean it should be on your To Do list?’ Its voice was trembling.

‘You mean like: “To Do: Die”?’

‘Look, it’s no good taking it out on me just because you’re not on the
right time line!’

‘What the hell does that mean?’

‘Aha, I _knew_ you didn’t read the manual! Chapter xvii-2(c) makes it
very clear that sticking to one reality is vitally important, otherwise
the Uncertainty Principle says—’

‘Forget I asked, all right?’

Vimes glared at Jenkins and at the distant ship.

‘We’ll do this my way, wherever the hell we are,’ he said. He strode to
the hold and pulled aside a hatchway. ‘Detritus?’

The Klatchian sailors struggled with the canvas while their captain
screamed at them.

71-hour Ahmed didn’t scream. He just stood with his sword in his hand,
watching.

The captain hurried over to him, trembling with fear and holding a
length of rope.

‘See, _wali_?’ he said. ‘Someone cut it!’

‘Who would do that?’ said 71-hour Ahmed quietly.

‘I do not know, but when I find him—’

‘The dogs are almost on us,’ said Ahmed. ‘You and your men will work
faster.’

‘Who could have done such a thing?’ said the captain. ‘You were here,
how could they—?’

His gaze flickered from the cut rope to the sword.

‘Was there something you wished to say?’ said Ahmed.

The captain hadn’t got where he was by being stupid. He spun round.

‘Get that sail up right now, you festering sons of bitches!’ he
screamed.

‘Good,’ said 71-hour Ahmed.

Detritus’s crossbow was originally a three-man siege weapon, but he had
removed the windlass as an unnecessary encumbrance. He cocked it by
hand. Usually the mere sight of the troll pulling the string back with
one finger was enough to make the strong-willed surrender.

He looked doubtfully at the distant light.

‘It a million-to-one chance,’ he said. ‘Got to be closer’n this.’

‘Just hit it below the waterline so they can’t cut the rope,’ said
Vimes.

‘Right. Right.’

‘What’s the problem, sergeant?’

‘We headin’ for Klatch, right?’

‘Well, in that direction, yes.’

‘Only . . . I’m gonna be really stoopid in Klatch, ’cos a der heat,
right?’

‘I hope we’re going to stop them before we get there, Detritus.’

‘I ain’t keen on bein’ stoopid. I know people say, that troll Detritus,
he ficker than a, than a—’

‘—brick sandwich—’ said Vimes, staring at the light.

‘Right. Only I hearin’ it get really, really _hot_ in der desert . . .’

The troll looked so mournful that Vimes felt moved to give him a
cheerful slap on the back.

‘Then let’s stop them now, eh?’ he said, shaking his hand hurriedly to
stop the stinging.

The other ship was so close they could see the sailors working
feverishly on the deck. The mainsail billowed in the lamplight.

Detritus raised the bow.

A ball of blue-green light glowed on the tip of the arrow. The troll
stared at it.

Then green fire ran down the masts and, when it hit the deck, burst into
dozens of green balls that rolled, cracking and spitting, over the
planks.

‘Dey’re usin’ magic?’ said Detritus. A green flame spluttered over his
helmet.

‘What is this, Jenkins?’ said Vimes.

‘It ain’t magic, it’s _worse_’n magic,’ said the captain, hurrying
forward. ‘All right, lads, get those sails down right now!’

‘You leave them where they are!’ shouted Vimes.

‘You know what this _is_?’

‘It dun’t even feel warm,’ said Detritus, poking the flame on the
crossbow.

‘Don’t touch it! Don’t _touch_ it! That’s St Ungulant’s Fire, that is!
It means we’re going to die in a dreadful storm!’

Vimes looked up. Clouds were racing across— No, they were _pouring into_
the sky in great twisting billows, like ink streaming into water. Blue
light flashed somewhere inside them. The ship lurched.

‘Look, we got to lose some sail!’ shouted Jenkins. ‘That’s the only
way—’

‘No one touches anything!’ shouted Vimes. Green fire skimmed along the
tops of the waves now. ‘Detritus, arrest any man who touches anything!’

‘Right.’

‘We want to go fast, after all,’ Vimes said, above the hissing and the
distant crackle of thunder.

Jenkins gawped at him as the ship lunged beneath them.

‘You’re mad! Have you any idea what happens to a ship that tries to— You
haven’t got _any_ idea, have you? This ain’t normal weather! You have to
ride it out careful! You can’t try to run ahead of it!’

Something slippery landed on Detritus’s head and bounced onto the deck,
where it tried to slither away.

‘And now it’s raining fish!’ Jenkins moaned.

The clouds formed a yellow haze, lit almost constantly by the lightning.
And it was warm. That was the strangest thing. The wind howled like a
sack full of cats and the waves were turning into walls on either side
of the ship, but the air felt like an oven.

‘Look, even the Klatchians are reducing sail!’ shouted Jenkins, in a
shower of shrimp.

‘Good. We’ll catch them up.’

‘Mad! _Ouch!_’

Something hard rebounded from his hat, hit the rail and rolled to a stop
by Vimes’s feet.

It was a brass knob.

‘Oh, _no_,’ moaned Jenkins, putting his arms over his head. ‘Now it’s
bloody bedsteads again!’

The captain of the Klatchian ship was not an argumentative man when he
was anywhere near 71-hour Ahmed. He just looked at the straining sails
and calculated his chances of Paradise.

‘Perhaps the dog who cut the sail loose did us a favour!’ he shouted,
above the roar of the wind.

Ahmed said nothing. He kept looking back. The occasional burst of
electric storm light showed the ship behind, aflame with green light.

Then he looked at the cold fire streaming behind their own masts.

‘Can you see that light on the edge of the flames?’ he said.

‘My lord?’

‘Can you, man?’

‘Er . . . no . . .’

‘Of course you can’t! But can you see where the light isn’t?’

The captain stared at him and then looked up again in terrified
obedience. And there _was_ somewhere where the light wasn’t. As the
fizzing green tongues waved in the wind they seemed to be edged
with . . . blackness, perhaps, or a moving hole in space.

‘That’s octarine!’ shouted Ahmed, as another wave sloshed over the deck.
‘Only wizards can see it! There’s magic in these storms! That’s why the
weather is so bad!’

The ship screamed in every joint as it hit the waves again.

‘We’re coming right out of the water!’ wept Jenkins. ‘We’re just going
from crest to crest!’

‘Good! It won’t be so bumpy!’ shouted Vimes. ‘We should pick up speed
again now we’ve got those bedsteads over the side! Does it often rain
bedsteads out here?’

‘What do _you_ think?’

‘I’m not a nautical man!’

‘No, rains of bedsteads are _not_ an everyday occurrence! Nor are coal
scuttles!’ Jenkins added, as something black crashed off a rail and over
the side. ‘We just get the normal stuff, you know! Rain! Snow! Sleet!
Fish!’

Another squall blew across the bounding boat and the deck was suddenly
covered with flashing silver.

‘Back to fish!’ shouted Vimes. ‘That’s better, surely?’

‘No! It’s worse!’

‘Why!’

Jenkins held up a tin.

‘These are sardines!’

The ship thumped into another wave, groaned, and took flight again.

The cold green fire was everywhere. Every nail of the deck sprouted its
flame, every rope and ladder had its green outline.

And the feeling crept over Vimes that it was holding the ship together.
He wasn’t at all sure that it was just light. It moved too purposefully.
It crackled, but it didn’t sting. It looked as though it was having fun—

The ship landed. Water washed over Vimes.

‘Captain Jenkins!’

‘Yes?’

‘Why’re we playing with this wheel? It’s not as if the rudder’s in the
water!’

They let go. The spokes blurred for a moment, and then stopped as the
fire wrapped itself around them.

Then it rained cake.

The Watch had tried to make themselves comfortable in the hold, but
there were difficulties. There wasn’t any area of floor which at some
point in every ten seconds wasn’t an area of wall.

Nevertheless, someone was snoring.

‘How can anyone sleep in _this_?’ said Reg Shoe.

‘Captain Carrot can,’ said Cheery. She was hacking at something with her
axe.

Carrot had wedged himself into a corner. Occasionally he mumbled
something, and shifted position.

‘Like a baby. Beats me how he’s managing it,’ said Reg Shoe. ‘Of course,
any minute this thing is going to fall apart.’

‘Yes, but dat shouldn’t worry you, should it?’ said Detritus. ‘On
account of you bein’ dead already?’

‘So? I end up at the bottom of the sea knee-deep in whale droppings? And
it’ll be a long walk home in the dark. Not to mention the problems if a
shark tries to eat me.’

‘I shall fear not. According to the Testament of Mezerek, the fisherman
Nonpo spent four days in the belly of a giant fish,’ said Constable
Visit.

The thunder seemed particularly loud in the silence.

‘Washpot, are we talking miracles here?’ said Reg eventually. ‘Or just a
very slow digestive process?’

‘You would be better employed considering the state of your immortal
soul than making jokes,’ said Constable Visit severely.

‘It’s the state of my immortal body that’s worrying me,’ said Reg.

‘I have a leaflet here which will bring you considerable—’ Visit began.

‘Washpot, is it big enough to be folded into a boat that’ll save us
all?’

Constable Visit pounced on the opening. ‘Aha, yes, metaphorically it
_is_—’

‘Hasn’t this ship _got_ a lifeboat?’ said Cheery hurriedly. ‘I’m sure I
saw one when we came on.’

‘Yeah . . . lifeboat,’ said Detritus.

‘Anyone want a sardine?’ said Cheery. ‘I’ve managed to get a tin open.’

‘Lifeboat,’ Detritus repeated. He sounded like someone exploring an
unpleasant truth. ‘Like . . . a big, heavy thing which would’ve slowed
us down . . . ?’

‘Yes, I saw it, I know I did,’ said Reg.

‘Yeah . . . dere was one,’ said Detritus. ‘Dat was a lifeboat, was it?’

‘At the very least we ought to get somewhere sheltered and drop the
anchor.’

‘Yeah . . . anchor . . .’ mused Detritus. ‘Dat’s a big thing kinda hooks
on, right?’

‘Of course.’

‘Kinda heavy thing?’

‘Obviously!’

‘Right. An’ . . . er . . . if it was dropped a long time ago, on
accounta bein’ heavy, dat wouldn’t do us much good now?’

‘Hardly.’ Reg Shoe glared through the hatchway. The sky was a dirty
yellow blanket, criss-crossed with fire. Thunder boomed continuously.

‘I wonder how far the barometer’s sunk?’ he said.

‘All der way,’ said Detritus gloomily. ‘Trust me on dis.’

It was in the nature of a D’reg to open doors carefully. There was
generally an enemy on the other side. Sooner or later.

He saw the collar lying on the floor, right by a little fountain of
water trickling from the hull, and swore under his breath.

Ahmed waited just a moment, and then pushed the door back quietly. It
rattled against the wall.

‘I don’t intend to harm you,’ he said to the gloom of the bilges. ‘If
that was my intention, by now you’d—’

She wished she’d used the wolf. There would have been no problem with
the wolf. That _was_ the problem. She’d easily win, but then she’d be
nervy and frightened. A human could stay on top of that. A wolf might
not. She’d do the wrong things, panicky things, _animal_ things.

She pushed him hard as she dropped down from above the door,
somersaulted backwards, slammed the door and turned the key.

The sword came through the planking like a hot knife through runny lard.

There was a gasp beside her. She spun round and saw two men holding a
net. They would have thrown it over the wolf. What they hadn’t been
expecting was a naked woman. The sudden appearance of a naked woman
always caused a rethink of anyone’s immediate plans.

She kicked them both hard and ran in the opposite direction, opened the
first door at random and slammed it behind her.

It was the cabin with the dogs in it. They sprang to their feet, opened
their mouths – and slunk down again. A werewolf can have considerable
power over other animals, whatever shape she’s in, although it is
largely the power to make them cringe and try to look inedible.

She hurried past them and pulled at one of the hangings over the bunk.

The man in the bunk opened his eyes. He was a Klatchian, but pale with
weakness and pain. There were dark rings under his eyes.

‘Ah,’ he said, ‘it would appear that I have died and gone to Paradise.
Are you a _houri_?’

‘I don’t have to take that kind of language, thank you,’ said Angua,
ripping the silk in two with a practised hand.

She was aware that she had a slight advantage over male werewolves in
that naked women caused fewer complaints, although the downside was that
they got some pressing invitations. Some kind of covering was essential,
for modesty and the prevention of inconvenient bouncing, which was why
fashioning impromptu clothes out of anything to hand was a lesser-known
werewolf skill.

Angua stopped. Of course, to the unpractised eye all Klatchians looked
alike, but then to a werewolf all humans looked alike: they looked
appetizing. She’d learned to discern.

‘Are you Prince Khufurah?’

‘I am. And you are . . . ?’

The door was kicked open. Angua leapt towards the window and flung aside
the bar restraining the shutters. Water funnelled into the cabin,
drenching her, but she managed to scramble up and out.

‘Just passing through?’ the Prince murmured.

71-hour Ahmed strode to the window and looked out. Green-blue waves
edged with fire fought outside as the ship heaved. No one could stay
afloat in a sea like that.

He turned and looked along the hull to where Angua was clinging to a
trailing line.

She saw him wink at her. Then he turned away and she heard him say, ‘She
must have drowned. Back to your posts!’

Presently, up on the deck, a hatch closed.

* * *

The sun rose in a cloudless sky.

A watcher, if such had been out here, would have noticed a slight
difference in the way the swells were moving on this tiny patch of sea.

They might even have wondered about the piece of bent piping which
turned with a faint squeaking noise.

Had they been able to place an ear to it, they would have heard the
following:

‘—idea while I was dozing off. Piece of pipe, two angled mirrors – the
solution to all our steering and air problems!’

‘Fascinating. A Seeing-Things-Pipe-You-Can-Breathe-Down.’

‘My goodness, how did you know it was called that, my lord?’

‘A lucky guess.’

‘’ere, someone’s re-designed my pedalling seat, it’s _comfortable_—’

‘Ah, yes, corporal, I took some measurements while you were asleep and
rebuilt it for a better anatomical configu—’

‘You took measurements?’

‘Oh, yes, I—’

‘What, of my . . . saddlery regions?’

‘Oh, please don’t be concerned, anatomy is something of a passion with
me—’

‘Is it? Is it? Well, you can stop being passionate about mine for a
start—’

‘Here, I can see an island of some sort!’

The pipe squeaked around.

‘Ah, Leshp. And I see people. To your pedals, gentlemen. Let us explore
the ocean’s bottom . . .’

‘I expect we shall, with _him_ steering—’

‘Shut up, Nobby.’

The pipe slid down into the waves. There was a little flurry of bubbles
and a damp argument about whose job it should have been to put the cork
in, and then the patch of sea that had been empty was, somehow, a little
bit emptier still.

There weren’t any fish.

At a time like this Solid Jackson would have even been prepared to eat
Curious Squid.

But the sea was empty. And it smelled wrong. It fizzed gently. Solid
could see little bubbles breaking on the surface, which burst with a
smell of sulphur and rotting eggs. He guessed that the rise of the land
must have stirred up a lot of mud. It was bad enough at the bottom of a
pond, all those frogs and bugs and things, and this was the sea—

He tried hard to reverse that train of thought, but it kept on rising
from the depths like a . . . like a . . .

Why were there no fish? Oh, there’d been the storm last night, but
generally you got better fishing in these parts after a storm because
it . . . stirred . . . up . . .

The raft rocked.

He was beginning to think it might be a good idea to go home, but that’d
mean leaving the land to the Klatchians, and that’d happen over his dead
body.

The treacherous internal voice said: Funnily enough, they never found Mr
Hong’s body. Not most of the important bits, anyway.

‘I think, think, I think we’ll be getting back now,’ he said to his son.

‘Oh, Dad,’ said Les. ‘Another dinner of limpets and seaweed?’

‘Nothing wrong with seaweed,’ said Jackson. ‘It’s full of
nourishing . . . seaweed. ’s got iron in it. Good for you, iron.’

‘Why don’t we boil an anchor, then?’

‘None of your lip, son.’

‘The Klatchians have got bread,’ said Les. ‘They brought flour with
them. And they’ve got firewood.’ This was a sore point with Jackson.
Efforts to make seaweed combust had not been successful.

‘Yeah, but you wouldn’t like their bread,’ said Jackson. ‘It’s all flat
and got no proper crust—’

A breeze blew the scent of baking over the water. It carried a hint of
spices.

‘They’re baking bread! On _our_ property!’

‘Well, they say it’s _their_—’

Jackson grabbed the piece of broken plank he used as an oar and began to
scull furiously towards the shore. The fact that this only made the raft
go round in circles added to his fury.

‘They bloody move in right next to us and all we get is the stink of
foreign food—’

‘Why’s your mouth watering, Dad?’

‘And how come they’ve got wood, may I ask?’

‘I think the current takes the driftwood to their side of the island,
Dad—’

‘See? They’re stealing our driftwood! Our damn driftwood! Hah! Well,
we’ll—’

‘But I thought we agreed that the bit over _there_ was theirs, and—’

Jackson had finally remembered how to propel a raft with one oar.

‘That wasn’t an agreement,’ he said, creating foam as the oar thrashed
back and forth, ‘that was just an . . . an arrangement. It’s not as if
they _created_ the driftwood. It just turned up. Accident of geography.
It is a natural resource, right? It don’t _belong_ to anyone—’

The raft hit something which made a metallic sound. But they were still
a hundred yards from the rocks.

Something else, long and bent at the end, rose up with a creaking noise.
It twisted around until it pointed at Jackson.

‘Excuse me,’ it said, in a tinny yet polite voice, ‘but this is Leshp,
isn’t it?’

Jackson made a sound in his throat.

‘Only,’ the thing went on, ‘the water’s a little cloudy and I thought we
might have been going the wrong way for the last twenty minutes.’

‘Leshp!’ squeaked Jackson, in an unnaturally high-pitched voice.

‘Ah, good. Thank you so much. Good day to you.’

The appendage sank slowly into the sea again. The last sounds from it,
erupting on the surface in a cloud of bubbles, were, ‘. . .  don’t
forget to put the cork in— _You’ve forgot to put the cor_—’

The bubbles stopped.

After a while Les said, ‘Dad, what was—?’

‘It wasn’t anything!’ snapped his father. ‘That sort of thing doesn’t
happen!’

The raft shot forward. You could have waterski’d behind it.

Another important thing about the Boat, thought Sergeant Colon gloomily
as they slipped back into a blue twilight, was that you couldn’t bale
out the bilges. It _was_ the bilges.

He was pedalling with his feet in water and he was suffering
simultaneously from claustrophobia and agoraphobia. He was afraid of
everything in _here_ and everything out _there_ at the same time. Plus,
there were unpleasantnesses out there, moving past as the Boat drifted
down the wall of rock. Feelers waved. There were claws. _Things_
scuttled into the waving weeds. Giant clams watched Sergeant Colon with
their lips.

The Boat creaked.

‘Sarge,’ said Nobby, as they looked out at the wonders of the deep.

‘Yes, Nobby?’

‘You know they say every tiny part of your body is replaced every seven
years?’

‘A well-known fact,’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘Right. So . . . I’ve got a tattoo on my arm, right? Had it done eight
years ago. So . . . how come it’s still there?’

Giant seaweeds winnowed the gloom.

‘Interesting point,’ quavered Colon. ‘Er . . .’

‘I mean, okay, new tiny bits of skin float in, but that means it ought
to be all new and pink by now.’

A fish with a nose like a saw swam past.

In the middle of all his other fears, Sergeant Colon tried to think
fast.

‘What happens’, he said, ‘is that all the blue skin bits are replaced by
other blue skin bits. Off’f other people’s tattoos.’

‘So . . . I’ve got other people’s tattoos now?’

‘Er . . . yes.’

‘Amazing. ’cos it still looks like mine. ’s got the crossed daggers and
“WUM”.’

‘Wum?’

‘It was gonna be “Mum” but I passed out and Needle Ned didn’t notice I
was upside down.’

‘I should’ve thought he’d notice that . . .’

‘He was pissed too. C’mon, sarge, you know it’s not a proper tattoo
unless no one can remember how it got there.’

Leonard and the Patrician were staring out at the submarine landscape.

‘What’re they looking for?’ said Colon.

‘Leonard keeps talking about hieroglyphs,’ said Nobby. ‘What’re they,
sarge?’

Colon hesitated, but not for long. ‘A type of mollusc, corporal.’

‘Cor, you know everything, sarge,’ said Nobby admiringly. ‘That’s what
hieroglyphs are, is it? So, if we go any deeper, they’ll be
loweroglyphs?’

There was something slightly off-putting about Nobby’s grin. Sergeant
Colon decided to go for broke.

‘Don’t be daft, Nobby. “Loweroglyphs if you go lower . . .” Oh deary
me.’

‘Sorry, sarge.’

‘Everyone knows you don’t get loweroglyphs in these waters.’

A couple of Curious Squid peered at them, curiously.

Jenkins’s ship was a floating wreck.

Several sails were in tatters. Rigging and other string that Vimes
refused to learn the nautical names for covered the deck and trailed in
the water.

Such sail as remained was moving them along in the brisk breeze.

Atop the mast the lookout cupped his hands around his mouth and leaned
down.

‘Land ahoy!’

‘Even I can see that,’ said Vimes. ‘Why does he have to shout?’

‘It’s lucky,’ said Jenkins. He squinted into the haze. ‘But your friend
ain’t heading for Gebra. Wonder where he’s going?’

Vimes stared at the pale yellow mass on the horizon, and then up at
Carrot.

‘We’ll get her back, don’t worry,’ he said.

‘I wasn’t actually worrying, sir. Although I am very concerned,’ said
Carrot.

‘Er . . . right . . .’ Vimes waved his arms helplessly. ‘Er . . .
everyone fit and well? The men in good heart, are they?’

‘It would help morale no end if you were to say a few words, sir.’

The monstrous regiment of watchmen had lined up on the deck, blinking in
the sunshine. Oh, dear. Round up the unusual suspects. One dwarf, one
human who was brought up as a dwarf and thinks like a manual of
etiquette, one zombie, one troll, me and, oh no, one religious fanatic—

Constable Visit saluted. ‘Permission to speak, sir.’

‘Go ahead,’ mumbled Vimes.

‘I’m pleased to tell you, sir, that our mission is clearly divinely
approved of, sir. I refer to the rain of sardines which sustained us in
our extremity, sir.’

‘We were a little hungry, I wouldn’t say we were in extremi—’

‘With respect, sir,’ said Constable Visit firmly, ‘the pattern is firmly
established, sir. Yes, indeed. The Sykoolites when being pursued in the
wilderness by the forces of Offlerian Mitolites, sir, were sustained by
a rain of celestial biscuits, sir. Chocolate ones, sir.’

‘Perfectly normal phenomenon,’ muttered Constable Shoe. ‘Probably swept
up by the wind passing a baker’s shop—’

Visit glared at him, and went on: ‘And the Murmurians, when driven into
the mountains by the tribes of Miskmik, would not have survived but for
a magical rain of elephants, sir—’

‘Elephants?’

‘Well, one elephant, sir,’ Visit conceded. ‘But it splashed.’

‘Perfectly normal phenomenon,’ said Constable Shoe. ‘Probably an
elephant was picked up by a freak—’

‘_And when they were thirsty_ in the desert, sir, the Four Tribes of
Khanli were succoured by a sudden and supernatural rain of rain, sir.’

‘A rain of rain?’ said Vimes, almost mesmerized by Visit’s absolute
conviction.

‘Perfectly normal phenomenon,’ sneered Reg Shoe. ‘Probably water was
evaporated from the ocean, was blown through the sky, condensed around
nuclei when it ran into cold air, and precipitated . . .’ He stopped,
and continued irritably, ‘Anyway, I don’t believe it.’

‘So . . . which particular deity is on our case?’ said Vimes, hopefully.

‘I shall definitely inform you as soon as I have ascertained this, sir.’

‘Er . . . very good, constable.’

Vimes took a step back. ‘I don’t pretend this is going to be easy, men,’
he said. ‘But our mission is to catch up with Angua and this bastard
Ahmed and shake the truth out of him. Unfortunately, this means we will
be following him through his own country, with which we are at war. This
is bound to put a few barriers in our way. But we should not let the
prospect of being tortured to death dismay us, eh?’

‘Fortune favours the brave, sir,’ said Carrot cheerfully.

‘Good. Good. Pleased to hear it, captain. What is her position _vis à
vis_ heavily armed, well prepared and excessively manned armies?’

‘Oh, no one’s ever heard of Fortune favouring them, sir.’

‘According to General Tacticus, it’s because they favour themselves,’
said Vimes. He opened the battered book. Bits of paper and string
indicated his many bookmarks. ‘In fact, men, the general has this to say
about ensuring against defeat when outnumbered, out-weaponed and
out-positioned. It is . . .’ he turned the page, ‘“_Don’t Have a
Battle_.”’

‘Sounds like a clever man,’ said Jenkins. He pointed to the yellow
horizon.

‘See all that stuff in the air?’ he said. ‘What do you think _that_ is?’

‘Mist?’ said Vimes.

‘Hah, yes. _Klatchian_ mist! It’s a sandstorm! The sand blows about all
the time. Vicious stuff. If you want to sharpen your sword, just hold it
up in the air.’

‘Oh.’

‘And it’s just as well because otherwise you’d see Mount Gebra. And
below it is what they call the Fist of Gebra. It’s a town but there’s a
bloody great fort, walls thirty feet thick. ’s like a big city all by
itself. ’s got room inside for thousands of armed men, war elephants,
battle camels, everything. And if you saw _that_, you’d want me to turn
round right now. What’s your famous general got to say about it, eh?’

‘I think I saw _something_ . . .’ said Vimes. He flicked to another
page. ‘Ah, yes, he says, “_After the first battle of Sto Lat, I
formulated a policy which has stood me in good stead in other battles.
It is this: if the enemy has an impregnable stronghold, see he stays
there_.”’

‘That’s a _lot_ of help,’ said Jenkins.

Vimes slipped the book into a pocket.

‘So, Constable Visit, there’s a god on our side, is there?’

‘Certainly, sir.’

‘But probably also a god on _their_ side as well?’

‘Very likely, sir. There’s a god on every side.’

‘Let’s hope they balance out, then.’

The Klatchian ship’s boat hit the water with the gentlest of splashes.
This was because 71-hour Ahmed was standing by the winches with his
sword at the ready, which had the effect of making the men lowering the
boat take some trouble over their task.

‘When we are away you may take the ship into Gebra,’ he said to the
captain.

The captain trembled. ‘What shall I tell them, _wali_?’

‘Tell them the truth . . . eventually. The commander of the garrison is
a man of no breeding and will torture you a little bit. Save up the
truth until you need it. That will make him happy. It will help you to
say that I forced you.’

‘Oh, I will. I _will_ . . . tell that lie,’ the captain added quickly.

Ahmed nodded, slid down the rope into the boat and set it adrift.

The crew watched him row through the surf.

This wasn’t a nice beach. It was a wrecking coast. Ribcages of broken
ships crumbled into the sand. Bones and driftwood and bleached white
seaweed mounded along the high tide line. And, beyond, the dunes of the
real desert rose. Even down here sand stung the eyes and gritted the
teeth.

‘There’s sudden death on that beach,’ said the first mate, looking over
the rail and trying to blink his eyes clear.

‘Yes,’ said the captain. ‘He’s just got out of the boat.’

The figure on the beach pulled the other, recumbent figure out of the
boat and dragged him out of reach of the waves. The mate raised his bow.

‘I could kill him from here, master. Just say the word.’

‘How sure are you? Because you’d better be _really_ sure. First, if you
miss him you’re dead and, second, if you hit him, you’re _still_ dead.
Look up there.’

On the high distant dunes, dark against the sand-filled sky, there were
mounted figures. The mate dropped his bow.

‘How did they know we were here?’

‘Oh, they watch the sea,’ said the captain. ‘D’regs like a good
shipwreck as much as anyone else. More, in fact. A lot more.’

As they turned away from the rail, something leapt from the hull and
entered the water with barely a splash.

Detritus tried to lurk in the shade, but there was not a lot of it
about. The heat came off the high desert ahead of them like a blowtorch.

‘I’m gonna get fick,’ he muttered.

There was a shout from the lookout.

‘He says someone’s climbing the dunes,’ said Carrot. ‘Carrying someone
else, he says.’

‘Er . . . female?’

‘Look, sir, I know Angua. She’s not the useless type. She doesn’t stand
there and scream helplessly. She makes other people do that.’

‘Well . . . if you’re sure . . .’ Vimes turned to Jenkins. ‘Don’t bother
to chase the ship, captain. Just keep heading for the shore.’

‘I don’t work like that, mister. For one thing, that’s a damn difficult
shore, the wind’s always against you, and there’s some very nasty
currents. Many an incautious sailorman has left his bones to bleach on
those sands. No, we’ll stand out a little way and you can lower the—
well, if we had a boat any more, you could lower it . . . and we’ll drop
the anchor, oh, no, tell a lie, it turned out to be too heavy, didn’t
it—’

‘You just keep straight on,’ said Vimes.

‘We’ll all be killed.’

‘Think of it as the lesser of two evils.’

‘What’s the other one?’

Vimes drew his sword.

‘Me.’

The Boat squeaked through the mysterious depths of the ocean. Leonard
spent a lot of time looking out of the tiny windows, particularly
interested in pieces of seaweed which, to Sergeant Colon, looked like
pieces of seaweed.

‘Do you note the fine strands of Dropley’s Etoliated Bladderwrack?’ said
Leonard. ‘That’s the brown stuff. A marvellous growth which, of course,
you will see as significant.’

‘Could we just assume for the moment that I have neglected my seaweed
studies in recent years?’ said the Patrician.

‘Really? Oh, the loss is entirely yours, I assure you. The point _is_,
of course, that the Etoliated Bladderwrack is never usually found
growing above thirty fathoms, and it’s only ten here.’

‘Ah.’ The Patrician flicked through a stack of Leonard’s drawings. ‘And
the hieroglyphs – an alphabet of signs and colours. Colours as a
language . . . what a fascinating idea . . .’

‘An _emotional_ intensifier,’ said Leonard. ‘But of course we ourselves
use something like it. Red for danger and so on. I never did succeed in
translating it, though.’

‘Colours as a language . . .’ murmured Lord Vetinari.

Sergeant Colon cleared his throat. ‘I know something about seaweed,
sir.’

‘Yes, sergeant?’

‘Yessir! If it’s wet, sir, it means it’s going to rain.’

‘Well done, sergeant,’ said Lord Vetinari, without turning his head. ‘I
think it is quite possible that I will never forget you said that.’

Sergeant Colon beamed. He had Made A Contribution.

Nobby nudged him. ‘What’re we doing down here, sarge? I mean, what’s it
all about? Poking around, looking at weird marks on the rocks, going in
and out of caves . . . and the smell . . . well . . .’

‘It’s not me,’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘Smells like . . . sulphur . . .’

Little bubbles streamed past the window.

‘It stunk up on the surface, too,’ Nobby went on.

‘Nearly finished, gentlemen,’ said Lord Vetinari, putting the papers
aside. ‘One last little venture and then we can surface. Very well,
Leonard . . . take us _underneath_.’

‘Er . . . aren’t we underneath already, sir?’ said Colon.

‘Only underneath the sea, sergeant.’

‘Ah. Right.’ Colon gave this due consideration. ‘Is there anything else
to be under, then, sir?’

‘Yes, sergeant. Now we’re going under the land.’

* * *

The beach was a lot closer now. The watchmen couldn’t help noticing that
the sailors were all hurrying to the blunt end of the ship and hanging
on to any small, lightweight and above all buoyant objects they could
find.

‘This seems close enough,’ said Vimes. ‘Right. Stop here.’

‘Stop here? How?’

‘Don’t ask me, I’m no sailor. Aren’t there some sort of brakes?’

Jenkins stared at him. ‘You – you landlubber!’

‘I thought you never used the word!’

‘I never met one like you before! You even think we call the bows the
sharp en—’

It was, the crew agreed later, one of the strangest landings in the
history of bad seamanship. The shelving of the beach must have been
right and the tide as well, because the ship did not so much hit the
beach as sail up it, rising out of the water as the keel de-barnacled
itself on the sand. Finally the forces of wind, water, impetus and
friction all met at the point marked ‘fall over slowly’.

It did so, earning the title of ‘world’s most laughable shipwreck’.

‘Well, that might have been worse,’ said Vimes, when the splintering
noises had died away.

He eased himself out of a tangle of canvas and adjusted his helmet with
as much aplomb as he could muster.

He heard a groan from the lopsided hold.

‘Is dat you, Cheery?’

‘Yes, Detritus.’

‘Is dis me?’

‘No!’

‘Sorry.’

Carrot eased his way down the sloping deck and jumped onto the damp
sand. He saluted.

‘All present and lightly bruised, sir. Shall we establish a beachhead?’

‘A what?’

‘We have to dig in, sir.’

Vimes looked both ways along the beach, if such a sunny-sounding word
could be applied to the forsaken strand. It was really just a hem to the
land. Nothing stirred except the heat haze and, in the distance, one or
two carrion birds.

‘What for?’ he said.

‘Establish a defensible position. It’s just one of those things soldiers
do, sir.’

Vimes glanced at the birds. They were approaching with a kind of sidling
sideways hop, ready to move in just as soon as anyone had been dead for
a few days. Then he flicked through _Tacticus_ until the word
‘beachhead’ caught his eye.

‘It says here “If you want your men to spend much time wielding a
shovel, encourage them to become farmers,”’ he said. ‘So I think we’ll
press on. He can’t have got very far. We’ll be back soon.’

Jenkins waded out of the surf. He didn’t look angry. He was a man who
had passed through the fires of anger and was now in some strange
peaceful bay beyond them. He pointed a quivering finger at his stricken
ship and said ‘Muh . . . ?’

‘Pretty good shape, all things considered,’ said Vimes.

‘Muh?’

‘I’m sure you and your salty sailors will be able to float it again.’

‘Muh . . .’

Jenkins and his wading crew watched the regiment as it slithered and
complained its way up the side of the dune. Eventually the crew went
into a huddle and drew lots and the cook, who was always unlucky in
games of chance, approached the captain.

‘Never mind, captain,’ he said, ‘we can probably find some decent balks
of timber in all this driftwood, and a few days’ work with block and
tackle should—’

‘Muh.’

‘Only . . . we’d better get started ’cos he said they won’t be
long . . .’

‘They won’t be back!’ said the captain. ‘The water they’ve got won’t
last a day up there! They haven’t got the right gear! And once they’re
out of sight of the sea they’ll get lost!’

‘Good!’

It took half an hour to get to the top of the dune. The sand had been
stamped down but, even as Vimes watched, the wind caught the particles
and nibbled away at the prints.

‘Camel tracks,’ said Vimes. ‘Well, camels don’t go all that fast.
Let’s—’

‘I think Detritus is having real trouble, sir,’ said Carrot.

The troll was standing with his knuckles on the ground. The motor of his
cooling helmet sounded harsh for a moment in the dry air, and then
stopped as the sand got into the mechanism.

‘Feelin’ fick,’ he muttered. ‘My brain hurts.’

‘Quick, hold your shield over his head,’ said Vimes. ‘Give him some
shade!’

‘He’s never going to make it, sir,’ said Carrot. ‘Let’s send him back
down to the boat.’

‘We need him! Quick, Cheery, fan him with your axe!’

At which point, the sand stood up and drew a hundred swords.

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep!’ said a cheerful if somewhat muffled voice.
‘Eleven eh em, Get Haircut . . . er . . . that’s right . . . isn’t it?’

It wasn’t large, but slabs of collapsing building had smashed together
in such a way that they made a cistern that the rain had filled half
full.

Solid Jackson slapped his son on the back.

‘Fresh water! At last!’ he said. ‘Well done, lad.’

‘You see, I was looking at these sort of painting things, Dad, and
then—’

‘Yeah, yeah, pictures of octopuses, very nice,’ said Jackson. ‘Hah! The
ball is on the other foot now and no mistake! It’s _our_ water on _our_
side of the island, and I’d just like to see them greasy buggers claim
otherwise. Let ’em keep their damn driftwood and suck water out of
fishes!’

‘Yeah, Dad,’ said Les. ‘And we can trade them some of the water for wood
and flour, right?’

His father waved a hand cautiously. ‘_Maybe_,’ he said. ‘No need to rush
into that, though. We’re pretty close to finding a seaweed that’ll burn.
I mean, what’re our long-term objectives here?’

‘Cooking meals and keeping warm?’ said Les hopefully.

‘Well, _initially_,’ said Jackson. ‘That’s obvious. But you know what
they say, lad. “Give a man a fire and he’s warm for a day, but set fire
to him and he’s warm for the rest of his life.” See my point?’

‘I don’t think that’s actually what the saying is—’

‘I mean, we can stop here living on water and raw fish for . . . well,
practically for ever. But that lot can’t go without proper fresh water
for much longer. See? So they’ll have to come begging to us, right? And
then we deal on our terms, eh?’

He put his arm around his son’s reluctant shoulders and waved a hand at
the landscape.

‘I mean, I started out with nothing, son, except that old boat that your
grandad left me, but—’

‘—you worked and scraped—’ said Les wearily.

‘—I worked and scraped—’

‘—and you’ve always kept your head above water—’

‘—right, I’ve always kept my head above water—’

‘And you’ve always wanted to leave me something that— Ow!’

‘Stop making fun of your dad!’ said Jackson. ‘Otherwise I’ll wallop the
other ear. Look, you see this land? You see it?’

‘I see it, Dad.’

‘It’s a _land of opportunity_.’

‘But there’s no fresh water and all the ground’s full of salt, Dad, and
it smells _bad_!’

‘That’s the smell of freedom, that is.’

‘Smells like someone did a really big fart, Dad— Ow!’

‘Sometimes the two are very similar! And it’s _your_ future I’m thinking
of, lad!’

Les looked at the acres of decomposing seaweed in front of him.

He was learning to be a fisherman like his father before him because
that’s how the family had always done it and he was too good-natured to
argue, although he actually wanted to be a painter like no one in the
family had ever been before. He was noticing things, and they worried
him even though he couldn’t quite say why.

But the buildings didn’t look right. Here and there were definite bits
of, well, architecture, like Morporkian pillars and the remains of
Klatchian arches, but they’d been added to buildings that looked as
though some ham-fisted people had just piled rocks on top of one
another. And then in other places the slabs had been stacked _on top_ of
ancient brick walls and tiled floors. He couldn’t imagine who’d done the
tiling, but they did like pictures of octopussies.

The feeling was stealing over him that Morporkians and Klatchians
arguing over who owned this piece of old sea bottom was _extremely_
pointless.

‘Er . . . I’m thinking about my future too, Dad,’ he said. ‘I really
am.’

Far below Solid Jackson’s feet, the Boat surfaced. Sergeant Colon
reached automatically for the screws that held the lid shut.

‘Don’t open it, sergeant!’ shouted Leonard, rising from his seat.

‘The air’s getting pretty lived-in, sir—’

‘It’s worse outside.’

‘Worse than in here?’

‘I’m almost certain.’

‘But we’re on the surface!’

‘_A_ surface, sergeant,’ said Lord Vetinari. Beside him, Nobby uncorked
the seeing device and peered through it.

‘We’re in a cave?’ said Colon.

‘Er . . . sarge . . .’ said Nobby.

‘Capital! Well worked out,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘Yes. A cave. You could
say that.’

‘Er . . . sarge?’ said Nobby again, nudging Colon. ‘This isn’t a cave,
sarge! It’s bigger than a cave, sarge!’

‘What, you mean . . . like a cavern?’

‘Bigger!’

‘Bigger’n a cavern? More like a . . . _big_ cavern?’

‘Yeah, that’d be about right,’ said Nobby, taking his eye away from the
device. ‘Have a look yourself, sarge.’

Sergeant Colon peered into the tube.

Instead of the darkness he was half expecting, he saw the sea’s surface,
bubbling like a boiling saucepan. Green and yellow flashes of lightning
danced across the water, illuminating a distant wall that seemed
practically a horizon . . .

The tube squeaked around. If this was a cave, it was at least a couple
of miles across.

‘How long, do you think?’ said Lord Vetinari, behind him.

‘Well, the rock has a large proportion of tufa and pumice, very light,
and once floated up the build-up of gas starts to escape very rapidly
because of the swell,’ said Leonard. ‘I don’t know . . . perhaps another
week . . . and then I think it takes a very long time for a sufficient
bubble to build up again . . .’

‘What’re they saying, sarge?’ said Nobby. ‘This place _floats_?’

‘A most unusual natural phenomenon,’ Leonard went on. ‘I’d have thought
it was just a legend had I not seen it for myself . . .’

‘Of course it’s not floating,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘Honestly, Nobby,
how’re you ever going to find out anything when you ask daft questions
like that? Land’s heavier than water, right? That’s why you find it at
the bottom of the sea.’

‘Yes, but he said pumice, and my gran had a pumice stone that worked a
treat for getting tough skin off’f your feet in the tub and that’d
float—’

‘That sort of thing happens in bath tubs _maybe_,’ said Colon. ‘Not in
real life. This is just a phenomenon. It’s not _real_. Next thing you’ll
be saying there’s rocks up in the sky.’

‘Yeah, but—’

‘I am a sergeant, Nobby.’

‘Yes, sarge.’

‘It puts me in mind’, said Leonard, ‘of those nautical stories about
giant turtles that sleep on the surface, thus causing sailors to think
they are an island. Of course, you don’t get giant turtles that small.’

‘Hey, Mr Quirm, this is an amazing boat,’ said Nobby.

‘Thank you.’

‘I bet you could even smash up ships with it if you wanted.’

There was an embarrassed silence.

‘Altogether an interesting experience,’ said Lord Vetinari, making some
notes. ‘And now, gentlemen – downward and onward, please . . .’

The watchmen drew their weapons.

‘They’re D’regs, sir,’ said Carrot. ‘But – this is all wrong . . .’

‘What do you mean?’

‘We’re not dead yet.’

They’re watching us like cats watch mice, thought Vimes. We can’t run
away and we can’t win a fight, and they want to see what we’ll do next.

‘What does General Tacticus have to say about this, sir?’ said Carrot.

There’s a hundred of them, thought Vimes. And six of us. Except that
Detritus is drifting off and there’s no knowing what particular
commandment Visit is obeying right now and Reg’s arms tend to drop off
when he gets excited—

‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘Probably something on the lines of Don’t Allow
This to Happen.’

‘Why don’t you check, sir?’ said Carrot, not taking his eyes off the
watching D’regs.

‘What?’

‘I said, why don’t you check, sir?’

‘Right now?’

‘It might be worth a try, sir.’

‘That’s crazy, captain.’

‘Yes, sir. The D’regs have some very strange notions about crazy people,
sir.’

Vimes pulled out the battered book. The D’reg nearest to him, with a
grin almost as wide and as curved as his sword, had a certain additional
swagger that suggested chieftainship. A huge ancient crossbow was slung
on his back.

‘I say!’ said Vimes. ‘Could we just delay things a little?’ He strode
towards the man, who looked very surprised, and waved the book in the
air. ‘This is a book by General Tacticus, don’t know if you’ve ever
heard of him, quite a big name in these parts once, probably slaughtered
your great-great-great-great-grandfather in fact, and I just want to
take a moment to see what he has to say about this situation. You don’t
mind, do you?’

The man gave Vimes a puzzled look.

‘This might take a moment, there’s no index, but I think I saw
something—’

The chieftain took a step backwards and looked at the men next to him,
who shrugged.

‘I wonder if you could help me with this word here?’ Vimes went on,
reaching the man’s side and holding the book under his nose. He got
another puzzled grin.

What Vimes did next was known in Ankh-Morpork’s alleyways as the
Friendly Handshake, and consisted largely of driving his elbow into the
man’s stomach, then bringing his knee up to meet the man’s chin on its
way down, gritting his own teeth because of the pain in both knee and
ankle, and then drawing his sword and holding it to the D’reg’s throat
before he could scramble up.

‘Now, captain,’ said Vimes, ‘I’d like you to say in a loud clear voice
that unless they back off a really long way, this gentleman here is
going to be in some very serious legal trouble.’

‘Mr Vimes, I don’t think—’

‘Do it!’

The D’reg looked into his eyes while Carrot hawked his way through the
demand. The man was _still_ grinning.

Vimes couldn’t risk shifting his gaze, but he sensed some puzzlement and
confusion among the tribesmen.

Then, as one man, they charged.

A Klatchian fishing boat, whose captain knew which way the wind was
blowing, made its way back to the harbour of Al-Khali. It seemed to the
captain that, despite the favourable wind, he wasn’t making quite the
speed he should. He put it down to barnacles.

* * *

Vimes awoke with a noseful of camel. There are far worse awakenings, but
not as many as you might think.

By turning his head, which took some effort, he ascertained that the
camel was sitting down. By the sound of things, it was digesting
something explosive.

Now, how had he got here . . . Oh, gods . . .

But it _should_ have worked . . . It was _classic_. You threatened to
cut off the head and the body just folded up. That was how everyone
reacted, wasn’t it? That was practically how civilization worked . . .

Put it down to cultural differences, then.

On the other hand, he wasn’t dead. According to Carrot, knowing the
D’regs for five minutes and still being alive at the end of it meant
that they really, really liked you.

On the _other_ other hand, he’d just given their head man a Handshake,
which influenced people without making friends.

Well, no sense lying over this saddle bound hand and foot and dying of
sunstroke all day. He ought to start being a leader of men again, and
would do so just as soon as he could get this camel out of his mouth.

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep?’

‘Yes?’ said Vimes, struggling with his bonds.

‘Would you like to know about the appointments you missed?’

‘No! I’m trying to get these damn ropes untied!’

‘Do you want me to put that on your To Do list?’

‘Oh, you’ve woken up, sir.’

It sounded like Carrot’s voice and it was the sort of thing he’d say.
Vimes tried to turn his head.

What he saw was mainly a white sheet, but it then became Carrot’s face,
upside down.

‘They asked if they should untie you but I said you hadn’t been getting
enough rest lately,’ Carrot went on.

‘Captain, my arms and legs have gone to sleep . . .’ Vimes began.

‘Oh, well done, sir! That’s a start, at least.’

‘Carrot?’

‘Yes, sir?’

‘I want you to listen very carefully to the order I am about to give
you.’

‘Certainly, sir.’

‘The point I’m making is that it won’t be a request or a suggestion or
some sort of hint.’

‘Understood, sir.’

‘I have, as you know, always encouraged my officers to think for
themselves and not blindly obey me, but sometimes in any organization it
is necessary for instructions to be followed to the letter and with
alacrity.’

‘Right, sir.’

‘Untie me right now or you’ll bloody well live to regret untying me!’

‘Er, sir, I believe there is an inadvertent inconsistency in—’

‘Carrot!’

‘Of course, sir.’

His ropes were cut. He slid down onto the sand. The camel turned its
head, looked at him with its nostrils for a moment, and then looked
away.

Vimes managed to sit upright while Carrot busied himself cutting the
rest of his bonds.

‘Captain, why are you wearing a white sheet?’

‘It’s a _burnous_, sir. Very practical for desert wear. The D’regs gave
them to us.’

‘Us?’

‘The rest of us, sir.’

‘Everyone’s okay?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘But they attacked—’

‘Yes, sir. But they only wanted to take us prisoner, sir. One of them
did accidentally cut Reg’s head off, but he did help him sew it on
again, so no real harm done there.’

‘I thought D’regs didn’t take prisoners . . . ?’

‘Beats me too, sir. But they say if we try to escape they’ll cut our
feet off, and Reg says he hasn’t got enough thread for everyone, sir.’

Vimes rubbed his head. Someone had hit him so hard his helmet was
dented.

‘What went wrong?’ he said. ‘I had their boss down!’

‘As I understand it, sir, the D’regs think that any leader who is stupid
enough to be defeated so easily isn’t worth following. It’s a Klatchian
thing.’

Vimes tried to persuade himself that there wasn’t a hint of sarcasm in
Carrot’s voice as he went on: ‘They’re not really very interested in
leaders, sir, to tell you the truth. They look on them as a sort of
ornament. You know . . . just someone to shout “Charge!”, sir.’

‘A leader has to do other things, Carrot.’

‘The D’regs think “Charge!” pretty well covers all of them, sir.’

Vimes managed to stand up. Strange muscles twanged in his legs. He
tottered forward.

‘Here, let me give you a hand . . .’ said Carrot, catching him.

The sun was setting. Ragged tents clustered below one of the dunes, and
there was the glow of firelight. Someone was laughing. It didn’t _sound_
like a prison. But then, thought Vimes, the desert was probably better
than bars. He wouldn’t even know which way to run, feet or no feet.

‘The D’regs, like all Klatchians, are a very hospitable people,’ said
Carrot, as if he’d memorized this. ‘They take hospitality very, very
seriously.’

Their captors were sitting round the fire. So were the watchmen. They’d
also been persuaded to dress more suitably, which meant that Cheery
looked like a girl in her mum’s dress, apart from the iron helmet, and
Reg Shoe looked _like_ a mummy, and Detritus was a small snow-covered
mountain.

‘He’s gone very . . . insensible in all this heat,’ whispered Carrot.
‘And that’s Constable Visit over there, arguing religion. There are six
hundred and fifty-three religions on the Klatchian continent.’

‘He must be having fun.’

‘And this is Jabbar,’ said Carrot. Exhibit A, who looked like a slightly
older version of 71-hour Ahmed, stood up and salaamed to Vimes.

‘Offendi,’ he said.

‘He’s their . . . well, he’s like an official wise man,’ said Carrot.

‘Oh, so he’s not the one who tells them to charge?’ said Vimes. His head
buzzed with the heat.

‘No, that’s the leader,’ said Carrot. ‘Whenever they have one.’

‘So perhaps Jabbar tells them when it’s _wise_ to charge?’ said Vimes
brightly.

‘It’s always wise to charge, offendi,’ said Jabbar. He bowed again. ‘My
tent is your tent,’ he said.

‘It is?’ said Vimes.

‘My wives are your wives . . .’

Vimes looked panicky. ‘They are? Really?’

‘My food is your food . . .’ Jabbar went on.

‘Vimes stared down at the dish by the fire. It looked like a sheep or a
goat had been the main course. And the man bent down, picked up a morsel
and handed it to him.

Sam Vimes looked at the mouthful. And it looked back.

‘The best part,’ said Jabbar, and made appreciative suckling noises. He
added something in Klatchian. There was some muffled laughter from the
other men around the fire.

‘This looks like a sheep’s eyeball,’ said Vimes, doubtfully.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Carrot. ‘But it is unwise to—’

‘You know what?’ Vimes went on. ‘I think this is a little game called
“Let’s see what offendi will swallow”. And I’m not swallowing this, my
friend.’

Jabbar gave him an appraising look.

The sniggering stopped.

‘Then it is true that you can see further than most,’ he said.

‘So can this food,’ said Vimes. ‘My father told me never to eat anything
that can wink back.’

There was one of those little _hanging-by-a-thread_ moments, which might
suddenly rock one way or the other into a gale of laughter or sudden
death.

Then Jabbar slapped Vimes on the back. The eyeball shot off his palm and
into the shadows.

‘Well done! Extremely good! First time it have not worked in twenty
year! Now sit down and have proper rice and sheep just like mother!’

There was a certain feeling of relaxation. Vimes found himself pulled
down. Bottoms shuffled aside to make room for him and a big slab of
bread dripping with meat was put in front of him. Vimes prodded at it as
politely as he dared, and then took the usual view that, if you can
recognize at least half of it, it’s probably okay to eat the rest.

‘So we’re your prisoners, Mr Jabbar?’

‘Honoured guests! My tent is—’

‘But . . . how can I put this? . . . you want us to enjoy your
hospitality for some time?’

‘We have tradition,’ said Jabbar. ‘A man who is a guest in your tent,
even if he is your worst enemy, you owe him hospitality for tree dace.’

‘Tree dace, eh?’ said Vimes.

‘I learn language on . . .’ Jabbar waved a hand vaguely, ‘you know,
wooden ting, a camel of the sea—’

‘Boat?’

‘Right! But too many water!’ He slapped Vimes on the back again, so that
hot fat spilled into his lap. ‘Any road up, lots speaking Morporkian
these dace, offendi. It is language of . . . merchant.’ He put an
inflection on the word that suggested it was the same as ‘earthworm’.

‘So you have to know how to say things like “Give us all your money”?’
said Vimes.

‘Why ask?’ said Jabbar. ‘We take it anyway. But now . . .’ he spat at
the fire with amazing accuracy ‘. . .  they say, we got to stop, this is
wrong. What harm do we do?’

‘Apart from killing people and taking all their merchandise?’ said
Vimes.

Jabbar laughed again. ‘_Wali_ said you were a big diplomatic! But we
don’t kill merchants, why should we kill merchants? What is the sense?
How foolish to be killing gift horse that lays the golden egg!’

‘You could make money exhibiting it, certainly,’ said Vimes.

‘We kill merchants, we rob too much, they never come back. Dumb. We let
them go, they get rich again, our _sons_ rob them. Such is wisdom.’

‘Ah . . . it’s a sort of agriculture,’ said Vimes.

‘Right! But if you plant merchants, they don’t grow so good.’

Vimes realized that it was getting colder as the sun went down. In fact,
a lot colder. He inched closer to the fire.

‘Why is he called 71-hour Ahmed?’ he said.

The murmur of conversation stopped. Suddenly all eyes were on Jabbar,
except the one that had ended up in the shadows.

‘_Not_ so diplomatic,’ said Jabbar.

‘We chase him up here, then suddenly we’re ambushed by you. That seems—’

‘I know nothing,’ said Jabbar.

‘Why won’t you—?’ Vimes began.

‘Er, sir,’ said Carrot urgently. ‘That would be very unwise, sir. Look,
I had a bit of a talk with Jabbar while you were . . . resting. It’s a
bit political, I’m afraid.’

‘What isn’t?’

‘Prince Cadram is trying to unite the whole of Klatch, you see.’

‘Dragging it kicking and screaming into the Century of the Fruitbat?’

‘Why, yes, sir, how did—?’

‘Just a lucky guess. Go on.’

‘But he has been having trouble,’ said Carrot.

‘What kind?’ said Vimes.

‘Us,’ said Jabbar proudly.

‘None of the tribes like the idea, sir,’ Carrot went on. ‘They’ve always
fought among themselves, and now most of them are fighting him.
Historically, sir, Klatch isn’t so much an empire as an argument.’

‘He say, you must be educated. You must be learning to pay taxes. We do
not wish to be educated about taxes,’ said Jabbar.

‘So you think you’re fighting for your freedom?’ said Vimes.

Jabbar hesitated, and looked at Carrot. There was a brief exchange in
Klatchian. Then Carrot said: ‘That’s a rather difficult question for a
D’reg, sir. You see, their word for “freedom” is the same as their word
for “fighting”.’

‘They certainly make their language do a lot of work, don’t
they . . . ?’

Vimes was feeling better in the colder air. He took out a crushed and
damp packet of cigars, pulled a coal out of the fire, and took a deep
drag.

‘So . . . Prince Charming’s got a lot of troubles at home, has he? Does
Vetinari know this?’

‘Does a camel shit in the desert, sir?’

‘You’re really getting the hang of Klatch, aren’t you?’ said Vimes.

Jabbar rumbled something. There was more laughter.

‘Er . . . Jabbar says a camel certainly _does_ shit in the desert, sir,
otherwise you wouldn’t have anything to light your cigar with, sir.’

Once again, there was one of those moments when Vimes felt that he was
under close scrutiny. Be diplomatic, Vetinari had told him.

He took another deep draw. ‘Improves the flavour,’ he said. ‘Remind me
to take some home.’

In Jabbar’s eyes, the judges held up at least a couple of grudging
eights.

‘A man on a horse came and said we must fight the foreign dogs—’

‘That’s us, sir,’ said Carrot helpfully.

‘—because you have stolen an island that is under the sea. But what is
that to us? We know no harm of you foreign devils, but the men who oil
their beards in Al-Khali we do not like. So we send him back.’

‘All of him?’ said Vimes.

‘We are not barbaric. He was clearly a madman. But we kept his horse.’

‘And 71-hour Ahmed told you to keep us, didn’t he?’ said Vimes.

‘No one orders the D’regs! It is our pleasure to keep you here!’

‘And when will it be your pleasure to let us go? When Ahmed tells you?’

Jabbar stared at the fire. ‘I will not speak of him. He is devious and
cunning and not to be trusted.’

‘But _you_ are D’regs, too.’

‘Yes!’ Jabbar slapped Vimes on the back again. ‘We know what we are
talking about!’

The Klatchian fishing boat was a mile or two out of harbour when it
seemed to its captain that it was suddenly riding better in the water.
Perhaps the barnacles have dropped off, he thought.

When his boat was lost in the evening mists a length of bent pipe rose
slowly out of the swell and squeaked around until it faced the coast.

A distant tinny voice said: ‘Oh no . . . ’

And another tinny voice said: ‘What’s up, sarge?’

‘Take a look through this!’

‘Okay.’ There was a pause.

Then the second tinny voice said: ‘Oh, bugger . . .’

What was riding at anchor before the city of Al-Khali wasn’t a fleet. It
was a fleet of fleets. The masts looked like a floating forest.

Down below, Lord Vetinari took his turn to peer through the pipe.

‘So many ships,’ he said. ‘In such a short time, too. How very well
organized. Very well organized. One might almost say . . .
_astonishingly_ well organized. As they say, “If you would seek war,
prepare for war.”’

‘I believe, my lord, the saying is “If you would seek peace, prepare for
war,”’ Leonard ventured.

Vetinari put his head on one side and his lips moved as he repeated the
phrase to himself. Finally he said, ‘No, no. I just don’t see that one
at all.’

He ducked back into his seat.

‘Let us proceed with care,’ he said. ‘We can go ashore under cover of
darkness.’

‘Er . . . can we maybe go ashore under cover of cover?’ said Sergeant
Colon.

‘In fact these extra ships will make our plan that much easier,’ said
the Patrician, ignoring him.

‘Our plan?’ said Colon.

‘People within the Klatchian hegemony come in every shape and colour.’
Vetinari glanced at Nobby. ‘Practically every shape and colour,’ he
added. ‘So our appearance on the streets should not cause undue
comment.’ He glanced at Nobby again. ‘To any great extent.’

‘But we’re wearing our uniforms, sir,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘It’s not
like we can say we’re on our way to a fancy-dress party.’

‘Well, I’m not taking mine off,’ said Nobby firmly. ‘I’m not running
around in my drawers. Not in a port. Sailors are at sea a long time. You
hear stories.’

‘That’d be _worse_,’ said the sergeant, without wasting time calculating
how long any sailor would need to be at sea before the vision of Nobby
Nobbs would present itself as anything other than a target, ‘’cos if
we’re not in uniform, we’ll be spies – and you know what happens to
spies.’

‘Are you going to tell me, sarge?’

‘Excuse me, your lordship?’ Sergeant Colon raised his voice. The
Patrician looked up from a conversation with Leonard.

‘Yes, sergeant?’

‘What do they do to spies in Klatch, sir?’

‘Er . . . let me see . . .’ said Leonard. ‘Oh, yes . . . I believe they
give you to the women.’

Nobby brightened up. ‘Oh well, that doesn’t sound too bad—’

‘Er, no, Nobby—’ Colon began.

‘—’cos I’ve seen the pictures in that book _The Perfumed Allotment_ that
Corporal Angua was reading, and—’

‘—no, _listen_, Nobby, you’ve got the wrong—’

‘—I mean, blimey, I didn’t know you could _do_ that with a—’

‘—Nobby, _listen_—’

‘—and then there’s this bit where she—’

‘Corporal Nobbs!’ Colon yelled.

‘Yes, sarge?’

Colon leaned forward and whispered in Nobby’s ear. The corporal’s
expression changed, slowly.

‘They really—’

‘_Yes_, Nobby.’

‘They _really_—’

‘Yes, Nobby.’

‘They don’t do that at home.’

‘We ain’t at home, Nobby. I wish we was.’

‘Although you hear stories about the Agony Aunts, sarge.’

‘Gentlemen,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘I am afraid Leonard is being rather
fanciful. That may apply to some of the mountain tribes, but Klatch _is_
an ancient civilization and that sort of thing is not done officially. I
should imagine they’d give you a cigarette.’

‘A cigarette?’ said Fred.

‘Yes, sergeant. And a nice sunny wall to stand in front of.’

Sergeant Colon examined this for any downside. ‘A nice roll-up and a
wall to lean against?’ he said.

‘I think they prefer you to stand up straight, sergeant.’

‘Fair enough. No need to be sloppy just because you’re a prisoner. Oh,
_well_. I don’t mind risking it, then.’

‘Well done,’ said the Patrician calmly. ‘Tell me, sergeant . . . in your
long military career, did anyone ever consider promoting you to an
officer?’

‘Nossir!’

‘I cannot think why.’

Night poured over the desert. It came suddenly, in purple. In the clear
air, the stars drilled down out of the sky, reminding any thoughtful
watcher that it is in the deserts and high places that religions are
generated. When men see nothing but bottomless infinity over their heads
they have always had a driving and desperate urge to find someone to put
in the way.

Life emerged from the burrows and fissures. Soon, the desert was filled
with the buzz and click and screech of creatures which, lacking
mankind’s superior brainpower, did not concern themselves with finding
someone to blame and instead tried to find someone to eat.

At around three in the morning Sam Vimes walked out of the tent for a
smoke. The cold air hit him like a door. It was _freezing_. That wasn’t
what was supposed to happen in deserts, was it? Deserts were all hot
sand and camels and . . . and . . . he struggled for a while, as a man
whose geographical knowledge got severely cramped once you got off paved
road . . . camels, yes, and dates. And possibly bananas and coconuts.
But the temperature here made your breath tinkle in the air.

He waved his cigar packet theatrically at a D’reg who was lounging near
the tent. The man shrugged.

The fire was just a heap of grey, but Vimes poked around in the vain
hope of finding a glowing ember.

He was amazed at how angry he was. Ahmed was the key, he _knew_ it. And
now they were stuck out here in the desert, the man had gone, and they
were in the hands of . . . quiet, likeable people, fair enough.
Brigands, maybe, the dry land equivalent of pirates, but Carrot would
have said they were jolly good chaps for all that. If you were content
to be their guest then they were as nice as pie, or sheep’s eyeball and
treacle or whatever you got out here—

Something moved in the moonlight. A shadow slipped down the side of a
dune.

Something howled, out in the desert night.

Tiny hairs rose, all down Vimes’s back, just like they had for his
distant ancestors.

The night is always old. He’d walked too often down dark streets in the
secret hours and felt the night stretching away, and known in his blood
that while days and kings and empires come and go, the night is always
the same age, always aeons deep. Terrors unfolded in the velvet shadows
and while the nature of the talons may change, the nature of the beast
does not.

He stood up quietly, and reached for his sword.

It wasn’t there.

They’d taken it away. They’d not even—

‘A fine night,’ said a voice beside him.

Jabbar was standing by his shoulder.

‘Who is out there?’ Vimes hissed.

‘An enemy.’

‘Which one?’

Teeth gleamed in the shadows.

‘We will find out, offendi.’

‘Why would they attack you now?’

‘Maybe they think we have something they want, offendi.’

More shadows slid across the desert.

And one rose up right behind Jabbar, reached down and picked him up. A
huge grey hand dragged his sword out of his belt.

‘What do you want me to do with him, Mr Vimes?’

‘_Detritus_?’

The troll saluted with the hand that still held the D’reg.

‘All present and correct, sir!’

‘But—’ And then Vimes realized. ‘It’s freezing cold! Your brain’s
working again?’

‘With rather more efficiency, sir.’

‘Is this a djinn?’ said Jabbar.

‘I don’t know, but I could certainly do with one,’ said Vimes. He
finally managed to locate some matches in his pocket, and lit one. ‘Put
him down, sergeant,’ he said, puffing his cigar into life. ‘Jabbar, this
is Sergeant Detritus. He could break every bone in your body, including
some of the small ones in the fingers which are quite hard to do—’

The darkness went _shwup_ and something whispered past the back of his
neck, just a slice of a second before Jabbar cannoned into him and bore
him to the ground.

‘They shoot at the light!’

‘Mwwf?’

Vimes raised his head cautiously and spat out sand and fragments of
tobacco.

‘Mr Vimes?’

Only Carrot could whisper like that. He associated whispering with
concealment and untruth and compromised by whispering very loudly. To
Vimes’s horror the man came round the edge of a tent holding a tiny
lamp.

‘Put that damn—’

But he didn’t have time to finish the sentence because, somewhere out in
the night, a man screamed. It was a high-pitched scream and was suddenly
cut off.

‘Ah,’ said Carrot, crouching down by Vimes and blowing out the lamp.
‘That was Angua.’

‘That was nothing like— oh. Yeah, I think I see what you mean,’ Vimes
said, uneasily. ‘She’s out there, is she?’

‘I heard her earlier. She’s probably enjoying herself. She doesn’t
really get much of a chance to let herself go in Ankh-Morpork.’

‘Er . . . no . . .’ Vimes had a mental picture of a werewolf letting go.
But surely, Angua wouldn’t—

‘You two, uh . . . you’re getting along OK, are you?’ he said, trying to
make out shapes in the darkness.

‘Oh, fine, sir. Fine.’

_So her turning into a wolf occasionally doesn’t worry you_? Vimes
couldn’t bring himself to say it.

‘No . . . problems, then?’

‘Oh, not really, sir. She buys her own dog biscuits and she’s got her
own flap in the door. When it’s full moon I don’t really get involved.’

There were shouts in the night and then a shape erupted from the
darkness, streaked past Vimes, and disappeared into a tent. It didn’t
wait for a door. It simply hit the cloth at full speed and continued
until the tent collapsed around it.

‘And what is _that_?’ said Jabbar.

‘This may take some explaining,’ said Vimes, picking himself up.

Carrot and Detritus were already hauling at the collapsed tent.

‘We are D’regs,’ said Jabbar reproachfully. ‘We are supposed to fold
tents silently in the night, not—’

There was _enough_ moonlight. Angua sat up and snatched a piece of tent
out of Carrot’s hands.

‘Thank _you_,’ she said, wrapping it around her. ‘And before anyone says
anything, I just bit him on the bum. Hard. And that was not the soft
option, let me tell you.’

Jabbar looked back into the desert, and then down at the sand, and then
at Angua. Vimes could _see_ him thinking, and put a fraternal arm around
his shoulders.

‘I’d better explain—’ he began.

‘There’s a couple of hundred soldiers out there!’ Angua snapped.

‘—later.’

‘They’re taking up positions all round you! And they don’t look nice!
Has anyone got any clothes that might fit? And some decent food? And a
drink! There’s no _water_ in this place!’

‘They will not dare attack before dawn,’ said Jabbar.

‘And what will you do, sir?’ said Carrot.

‘At dawn we will charge!’

‘Ah. Uh. I wonder if I could suggest an alternative approach?’

‘Alternative? It is _right_ to charge! Charging is what dawn is _for_.’

Carrot saluted Vimes. ‘I’ve been reading your book, sir. While you
were . . . asleep. Tacticus’s got quite a lot to say about how to deal
with overwhelming odds, sir.’

‘Yes?’

‘He says take every opportunity to turn them into underwhelming odds,
sir. We could attack now.’

‘But it’s dark, man!’

‘It’s just as dark for the enemy, sir.’

‘I mean it’s pitch black! You wouldn’t know who the hell you were
fighting! Half the time you’d be shooting your own side!’

‘_We_ wouldn’t, sir, because there’d only be a few of us. Sir? All we
need to do is crawl out there, make a bit of noise, and then let them
get on with it. Tacticus says all armies are the same size in the night,
sir.’

‘There might be something in that,’ said Angua. ‘They’re crawling around
in ones and twos, and they’re dressed pretty much like—’ She waved a
hand at Jabbar.

‘This is Jabbar,’ said Carrot. ‘He’s sort of not the leader.’

Jabbar grinned nervously. ‘It happens often in your country, where dogs
turn into naked women?’

‘Sometimes days can go past and it doesn’t happen at all,’ Angua
snapped. ‘I’d like some clothes, please. And a sword, if there’s going
to be fighting.’

‘Um, I think Klatchians have a very particular view about women
fighting—’ Carrot began.

‘Yes!’ said Jabbar. ‘We expect them to be good at it, Blue Eyes. We are
D’regs!’
* * *

The Boat surfaced in the scummy dead water under a jetty. The lid opened
slowly.

‘Smells like home,’ said Nobby.

‘You can’t trust the water,’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘But I don’t trust the water at home, sarge.’

Fred Colon managed to get a foothold on the greasy wood. It was, in
theory, quite a heroic enterprise. He and Nobby Nobbs, the bold
warriors, were venturing forth in hostile territory. Unfortunately, he
knew they were doing it because Lord Vetinari was sitting in the Boat
and would raise his eyebrows in no uncertain manner if they refused.

Colon had always thought that heroes had some special kind of clockwork
that made them go out and die famously for god, country and apple pie,
or whatever particular delicacy their mother made. It had never occurred
to him that they might do it because they’d get yelled at if they
didn’t.

He reached down.

‘Come on up, Nobby,’ he said. ‘And remember we’re doing this for the
gods, Ankh-Morpork and—’ It seemed to Colon that a foodstuff would
indeed be somehow appropriate. ‘And my mum’s famous knuckle sandwich!’

‘Our mum never made us knuckle sandwiches,’ said Nobby, as he hauled
himself on to the planks. ‘But you’d be amazed at what she could do with
a bit of cheese . . .’

‘Yeah, all right, but that ain’t much of a battle cry, is it? “For the
gods, Ankh-Morpork and amazing things Nobby’s mum can do with cheese”?
That’ll strike fear in the hearts of the enemy!’ said Sergeant Colon, as
they crept forward.

‘Oh, well, if _that’s_ what you’re after, you want my mum’s Distressed
Pudding and custard,’ said Nobby.

‘Frightening, is it?’

‘They wouldn’t want to know about it, sarge.’

The docks of Al-Khali were like docks everywhere, because all docks
everywhere are connected. Men have to put things on and off boats. There
are only a limited number of ways to do this. So all docks look the
same. Some are hotter, some are damper, there are always piles of
vaguely forgotten-looking things.

In the distance there was the glow of the city, which seemed quite
unaware of the enemy incursion.

‘“Get us some clothes so that we’ll blend in,”’ muttered Colon. ‘That’s
all very well to say.’

‘Nah, nah, that’s _easy_,’ said Nobby. ‘_Everyone_ knows how to do
_that_ one. You lurk in an alley somewhere, right, and you wait until a
couple of blokes come by and you lure them into the alley, see, and
there’s a couple of thumps, and then you come out wearing their
clothes.’

‘That works, does it?’

‘Never fails, sarge,’ said Nobby confidently.

The desert looked like snow in the moonlight.

Vimes found himself quite at ease with the Tacticus method of fighting.
It was how coppers had always fought. A proper copper didn’t line up
with a lot of other coppers and rush at people. A copper lurked in the
shadows, walked quietly and bided his time. In all honesty, of course,
the time he bided until was the point when the criminal had already
_committed_ the crime and was carrying the loot. Otherwise, what was the
point? You had to be realistic. ‘We got the man what done it’ carries a
lot more gravitas than ‘We got the man what looked as if he was going to
do it,’ especially when people say, ‘Prove it.’

Somewhere off to the left, in the distance, someone screamed.

Vimes was a bit uneasy in this robe, though. It was like going into
battle in a nightshirt.

Because he wasn’t at all certain he could kill a man who wasn’t actively
trying to kill _him_. Of course, _technically_ any armed Klatchian these
days was actively trying to kill him. That was what war was about. But—

He raised his head over the top of the dune. A Klatchian warrior was
looking the other way. Vimes crept—

‘Bingeley-bingeley beep! This is your seven eh em alarm call, Insert
Name Here! At least I hope—’

‘Huh?’

‘_Damn!_’

Vimes reacted first and punched the man on the nose. Since there was no
point in waiting to see what effect this would have, he threw himself
forward and the two of them rolled down the other side of the freezing
dune, struggling and punching.

‘—but my real-time function seems erratic at the moment—’

The Klatchian was smaller than Vimes. He was younger, too. But it was
unfortunate for him that he appeared to be too young to have learned the
repertoire of dirty fighting that spelled survival in Ankh-Morpork’s
back streets. Vimes, on the other hand, was prepared to hit anything
_with_ anything. The point was that the opponent shouldn’t get up again.
Everything else was decoration.

They slid to a halt at the bottom of the dune, with Vimes on top and the
Klatchian groaning.

‘Things To Do,’ the Dis-organizer shrilled: ‘Ache.’

And then . . . It was probably throat cutting time. Back home Vimes
could have dragged him off to the cells, in the knowledge that
everything would look better in the morning, but the desert had no such
options.

No, he couldn’t do that. Thump the bloke senseless. That was the
merciful way.

‘Vindaloo! Vindaloo!’

Vimes’s fist stayed raised.

‘What?’

‘That’s you, isn’t it? Mr Vimes? Vindaloo!’

Vimes pulled a fold of cloth away from the figure’s face.

‘Are you _Goriff_’s boy?’

‘I didn’t want to be here, Mr Vimes!’ The words came fast, desperate.

‘All right, all right, I’m not going to hurt you . . .’

Vimes lowered his fist and stood up, pulling the boy up after him.

‘Talk later,’ he muttered. ‘Come on!’

‘No! Everyone knows what the D’regs do to their captives!’

‘Well _I’m_ their captive and they’ll have to do it to both of us, okay?
Keep away from the more amusing food and you’ll probably be okay.’

Someone whistled in the darkness.

‘Come _on_, lad!’ hissed Vimes. ‘No harm’s going to come to you!
Well . . . less than’d come if you stayed here. All right?’

This time he didn’t give the boy time to argue, but dragged him along.
As he headed towards the D’regs’ camp, other figures slid down the
dunes.

One of them had an arm missing and had a sword sticking in him.

‘How did you get on, Reg?’ said Vimes.

‘A bit odd, sir. After the first one chopped my arm off and stabbed me,
the rest of them seemed to keep out of my way. Honestly, you’d think
they’d never seen a man stabbed before.’

‘Did you _find_ your arm?’

Reg waved something in the air.

‘That’s another thing,’ he said. ‘I hit a few of them with it and they
ran off screaming.’

‘It’s your type of unarmed combat,’ said Vimes. ‘It probably takes some
getting used to.’

‘Is that a prisoner you’ve got there?’

‘In a way.’ Vimes glanced around. ‘He seems to have fainted. I can’t
think why.’

Reg leaned closer. ‘These foreigners are a bit weird,’ he said.

‘Reg?’

‘Yes?’

‘Your ear’s hanging off.’

‘Is it? Wretched thing. You’d think a nail would work, wouldn’t you?’

Sergeant Colon looked up at the stars. They looked down at him. At least
Fred Colon had a choice.

Beside him, Corporal Nobbs gave a groan. But the attackers had left him
his pants. There are some places where the boldest dare not go, and
those areas of Nobby upwards of the knees and downwards of the stomach
were among them.

Well, Colon thought of them as attackers. Technically, he supposed they
were defenders. Aggressive defenders.

‘Just run all that past me again, will you?’ he said.

‘We find a couple of blokes about our height and weight—’

‘We did that.’

‘We lure them into this alley—’

‘We did that.’

‘I take a swing at them with a length of wood and hit you by accident in
the dark and they get angry and turn out to be thieves and nick all our
clothes.’

‘We weren’t supposed to do that.’

‘Well it worked _basically_,’ said Nobby, managing to get to his knees.
‘We could give it another go.’

‘Nobby, you’re in a port in a foreign city clad only in your, and I use
this word with feeling, Nobby, your unmentionables. This is not the
point to start talking about luring people into alleys. There could be
talk.’

‘Angua always says that nakedness is the national costume everywhere,
sarge.’

‘She was talking about herself, Nobby,’ said Colon, sidling along in the
shadows. ‘It’s different for you.’

He peered around the other end of the alley. There was noise and chatter
from the building that formed one of the walls. A couple of laden
donkeys waited patiently outside.

‘Nip out and grab one of those packs, right?’

‘Why me, sarge?’

‘’cos you’re the corporal and I’m the sergeant. And you’ve got more on
than me.’

Grumbling under his breath, Nobby edged into the narrow street and
unfastened a tether as fast as he could. The animal followed him
obediently.

Sergeant Colon pulled at the pack.

‘If push comes to shove we can wear the sacks,’ he said. ‘That’ll—
What’s this?’

He held up something red.

‘Flowerpot?’ said Nobby helpfully.

‘It’s a fez! Some Klatchians wear ’em. Looks like we’ve struck lucky.
Whoops, here’s another one. Try it on, Nobby. And . . . looks like one
of them nightshirts they wear . . . and here’s another one of those,
too. We’re home and dry, Nobby.’

‘They’re a bit short, sarge.’

‘Beggars can’t be choosers,’ said Colon, struggling into the costume.
‘Go on, put your fez on.’

‘It makes me look like a twit, sarge.’

‘Look, I’ll put mine on, all right?’

‘Then we’ll be fez to fez, sarge.’

Sergeant Colon gave him a severe look. ‘Did you have that one prepared,
Nobby?’

‘No, sarge, I just made it up in my head right then.’

‘Well, look, no calling me sarge. That doesn’t sound Klatchian.’

‘Nor does Nobby, sa – Sorry . . .’

‘Oh, I dunno . . . you could be . . . Knobi . . . or Nhobi . . . or
Gnobbee . . . Sounds pretty Klatchian to me.’

‘What’s a good Klatchian name for you, then? I don’t know hardly any,’
said Nhobi.

Sergeant Colon didn’t answer. He was peering round the corner again.

‘His lordship did say we was not to hang about,’ Nobby murmured.

‘Yeah, but inside that tin can, well, it smells pretty _lived-in_, if
you know what I mean. What I wouldn’t give for—’

There was a bellow behind them. They turned.

There were three Klatchian soldiers. Or possibly watchmen. Nobby and
Sergeant Colon didn’t look much further than the swords.

The leader growled a question at them.

‘What did he say?’ Nobby quavered.

‘Dunno!’

‘Where you from?’ said the leader, in Morporkian.

‘What? Oh . . . er . . .’ Colon hesitated, waiting for shiny death.

‘Hah, yes.’ The guard lowered his sword and jerked a thumb towards the
docks. ‘You get back to your detachment now!’

‘Right!’ said Nobby.

‘What your name?’ one of the guards demanded.

‘Nhobi,’ said Nobby. This seemed to pass.

‘And you, fat one?’

Colon was panicking on the spot. He sought desperately for any name that
sounded Klatchian, and there was only one that presented itself and
which was absolutely and authentically Klatchian.

‘Al,’ he said, his knees trembling.

‘You get back right now or there will be trouble!’

The watchmen ran for it, dragging the donkey behind them, and didn’t
stop until they were on the greasy jetty, which somehow felt like home.

‘What was that all about, s— Al?’ said Nobby. ‘All they wanted to do was
push us around a bit! Typical Watch behaviour,’ he added. ‘Not ours, of
course.’

‘I suppose we had the right clothes on . . .’

‘You didn’t even tell them where we came from! _And_ they spoke our
language!’

‘Well, they . . . I mean . . . _anyone_ ought to be able to speak
Morporkian,’ said Colon, gradually regaining his mental balance. ‘Even
babies learn it. I bet it comes easy after learning somethin’ as
complicated as Klatchian.’

‘What’re we going to do with the donkey, Al?’

‘Do you think it can pedal?’

‘I doubt it.’

‘Then leave it up here.’

‘But it’ll get pinched, Al.’

‘Oh, these Klatchians’ll pinch anything.’

‘Not like us, eh, Al?’

Nobby looked at the forest of masts filling the bay.

‘Looks like even more of ’em from here,’ he said. ‘You could walk from
boat to boat for a mile. What’re they all here for?’

‘Don’t be daft, Nobby. It’s obvious. They’re to take everyone to
Ankh-Morpork!’

‘What for? We don’t eat that much cur—’

‘_Invasion_, Nobby! There’s a war on, remember?’

They looked back at the ships. Riding lights gleamed on the water.

The bit of it that was immediately below them bubbled for a moment, and
then the hull of the Boat rose a few inches above the surface. The lid
unscrewed and Leonard’s worried face appeared.

‘Ah, there you are,’ he said. ‘We were getting concerned . . .’

They lowered themselves down into the fetid interior of the vessel.

Lord Vetinari was sitting with a pad of paper across his knees, writing
carefully. He glanced up briefly.

‘Report.’

Nobby fidgeted while Sergeant Colon delivered a more or less accurate
account, although there was some witty repartee with the Klatchian
guards that the corporal had not hitherto recalled.

Vetinari did not look up. Still writing, he said, ‘Sergeant, Ur is an
old country Rimward of the kingdom of Djelibeybi, whose occupants are a
byword for bucolic stupidity. For some reason, I cannot think why, the
guard must have assumed you were from there. And Morporkian is something
of a lingua franca even in the Klatchian empire. When someone from
Hersheba needs to trade with someone from Istanzia, they will
undoubtedly haggle in Morporkian. This will serve us well, of course.
The force that is being assembled here must mean that practically every
man is a distant stranger with outlandish ways. Provided we do not act
_too_ foreign, we should pass muster. This means not asking for curry
with swede and currants in it and refraining from ordering pints of
Winkle’s Old Peculiar, do I make myself clear?’

‘Er . . . what is it we’re going to _do_, sir?’

‘We will reconnoitre initially.’

‘Ah, right. Yes. Very important.’

‘And then seek out the Klatchian high command. Thanks to Leonard I have
a little . . . package to deliver. I hope it will end the war very
quickly.’

Sergeant Colon looked blank. At some point in the last few seconds the
conversation had run away with him.

‘Sorry, sir . . . you said high command, sir.’

‘Yes, sergeant.’

‘Like . . . the top brass, or turbans or whatever . . . all surrounded
by crack troops, sir. That’s where you always put the best troops,
around the top brass.’

‘I expect this will be the case, yes. In fact, I rather hope it is.’

Sergeant Colon, once again, tried to keep up.

‘Ah. Right. And we’ll go and look for them, will we, sir?’

‘I can hardly ask them to come to us, sergeant.’

‘Right, sir. I can see that. It could get a bit crowded.’

At last, Lord Vetinari looked up.

‘Is there some problem, sergeant?’

And Sergeant Colon once again knew a secret about bravery. It was
arguably a kind of enhanced cowardice – the knowledge that while death
_may_ await you if you advance it will be a picnic compared to the
_certain_ living hell that awaits should you retreat.

‘Er . . . not as such, sir,’ he said.

‘Very well.’ Vetinari pushed his paperwork aside. ‘If there is more
suitable clothing in your bag, I will get changed and we can take a look
at Al-Khali.’

‘Oh, gods . . .’

‘Sorry, sergeant?’

‘Oh, good, sir.’

‘Good.’ Vetinari began to pull other items out of the liberated sack.
There was a set of juggler’s clubs, a bag of coloured balls and finally
a placard, such as might be placed to one side of the stage during an
artiste’s performance.

‘“Gulli, Gulli and Beti”,’ he read. ‘“Exotic tricks and dances”. Hmm,’
he added. ‘It would seem there was a lady among the owners of this
sack.’

The watchmen looked at the gauzy material that came out of the sack
next. Nobby’s eyes bulged.

‘What are _them_?’

‘I believe they are called harem pants, corporal.’

‘They’re very—’

‘Curiously, the purpose of the clothing of the nautch girl or exotic
dancer has always been less to reveal and more to suggest the
_imminence_ of revelation,’ said the Patrician.

Nobby looked down at his costume, and then at Sergeant Al-Colon in _his_
costume, and said cheerfully, ‘Well, I ain’t sure it’s going to suit
you, sir.’

He regretted the words immediately.

‘I hadn’t intended that they should suit _me_,’ said the Patrician
calmly. ‘Please pass me your fez, Corporal Beti.’

* * *

The subtle, deceiving dawn-before-dawn slid over the desert, and the
commander of the Klatchian detachment wasn’t happy about it.

The D’regs always attacked at dawn. All of them. It didn’t matter how
many of them there were, or how many of you there were. Anyway, the
whole tribe attacked. It wasn’t just the women and children, but the
camels, goats, sheep and chickens too. Of course you were expecting them
and bows could cut them down, but . . . they always appeared suddenly,
as if even the desert had spat them out. Get it wrong, be too slow, and
you’d be hacked, kicked, butted, pecked and viciously spat at.

His troops lay in wait. Well, if you could call them troops. He’d _said_
they were overstretched . . . well, he hadn’t actually _said_, because
that sort of thing could get you into trouble in this man’s army, but
he’d thought it very hard. Half of them were keen kids who thought that
if you went into battle shouting and waving your sword in the air the
enemy just ran away. They’d never faced a D’reg chicken coming in at eye
height.

As for the rest of it . . . in the night people had run into one
another, ambushed one another by mistake and were now as jittery as peas
on a drum. A man had lost his sword and swore that someone had walked
away with it stuck right through him. And some kind of rock had got up
and walked around hitting people. With other people.

The sun was well up now.

‘It’s the waiting that’s the worst part,’ said his sergeant, next to
him.

‘It _might_ be the worst part,’ said the commander. ‘Or, there again,
the bit where they suddenly rise out of the desert and cut you in half
might be the worst part.’ He stared mournfully at the treacherously
empty sand. ‘Or the bit where a maddened sheep tries to gnaw your nose
off might be the worst part. In fact, when you think of all the things
that can happen when you’re surrounded by a horde of screaming D’regs,
the bit where they aren’t there at all is, I think you’ll find, the
_best_ part.’

The sergeant wasn’t trained for this sort of thing. So he said, ‘They’re
late.’

‘Good. Rather them than us.’

‘Sun’s right up now, sir.’

The commander looked at his shadow. It was full day, and the sand was
mercifully free of his blood. The commander had been pacifying various
recalcitrant parts of Klatch for long enough to wonder why, if he was
pacifying people, he always seemed to be fighting them. Experience had
taught him never to say things like ‘I don’t like it, it’s too quiet.’
There was no such thing as too quiet.

‘They might have decamped in the night, sir,’ said the sergeant.

‘That doesn’t sound like the D’regs. They never run away. Anyway, I can
see their tents.’

‘Why don’t we rush ’em, sir?’

‘You haven’t fought D’regs before, sergeant?’

‘No, sir. I’ve been pacifying the Mad Savatars in Uhistan, though, and
they’re—’

‘The D’regs are worse, sergeant. They pacify right back at you.’

‘I didn’t say how mad the Savatars were, sir.’

‘Compared to the D’regs, they were merely slightly vexed.’

The sergeant felt that his reputation was being impugned.

‘How about I take a few men and investigate, sir?’

The commander glanced at the sun again. Already the air was too hot to
breathe.

‘Oh, very _well_. Let’s go.’

The Klatchians advanced on the camp. There were the tents, and the ash
of fires. But there were no camels and horses, merely a long scuffed
trail leading off among the dunes.

Morale began to rise a little. Attacking a dangerous enemy who isn’t
there is one of the more attractive forms of warfare, and there was a
certain amount of assertion about how lucky the D’regs were to have run
away in time, and some extemporizing on the subject of what the soldiers
would have done to the D’regs if they’d caught them . . .

‘Who’s that?’ said the sergeant.

A figure appeared between the dunes, riding on a camel. His white robes
fluttered in the breeze.

He slid down when he reached the Klatchians, and waved at them.

‘Good morning, gentlemen! May I persuade you to surrender?’

‘Who are you?’

‘Captain Carrot, sir. If you would be kind enough to lay down your
weapons no one will get hurt.’

The commander looked up. Blobs were appearing along the tops of the
dunes. They rose, and turned out to be heads.

‘They’re . . . D’regs, sir!’ said the sergeant.

‘No. D’regs would be charging, sergeant.’

‘Oh, sorry. Shall I tell them to charge?’ said Carrot. ‘Is that what
you’d prefer?’

The D’regs were all along the dunes now. The climbing sun glittered off
metal.

‘Are you telling me,’ the commander began slowly, ‘that you can persuade
D’regs _not_ to charge?’

‘It was tricky, but I think they’ve got the idea,’ said Carrot.

The commander considered his position. There were D’regs on either side.
His troops were practically huddling together. And this red-headed,
blue-eyed man was smiling at him.

‘How do they feel about the merciful treatment of prisoners?’ he
ventured.

‘I think they could get the hang of it. If I insist.’

The commander glanced at the silent D’regs again.

‘Why?’ he said. ‘_Why_ aren’t they fighting us?’ he said.

‘My commander says he doesn’t want unnecessary loss of life, sir,’ said
Carrot. ‘That’s Commander Vimes, sir. He’s sitting on that dune up
there.’

‘_You_ can persuade armed D’regs not to charge and _you_ have a
commander?’

‘Yes, sir. He says this is a police action.’

The commander swallowed. ‘We give in,’ he said.

‘What, just like that, sir?’ said his sergeant. ‘Without a fight?’

‘_Yes_, sergeant. Without a fight. This man can make water run uphill
and _he_ has a commander. I love the idea of giving in without a fight.
I’ve fought for ten years and giving in without a fight is what I’ve
always wanted to do.’

Water dripped off the Boat’s metal ceiling and blobbed on to the paper
in front of Leonard of Quirm. He wiped it away. It might have been
boring, waiting in a small metal can under a nondescript jetty, but
Leonard had no concept of the term.

Absentmindedly, he jotted a brief sketch of an improved ventilation
system.

He started to watch his own hand. Almost without his guidance, taking
its instructions from somewhere else in his head, it drew a cutaway of a
much larger version of the Boat. Here, here and here . . . there could
be a bank of a hundred oars rather than pedals, each one manned – his
pencil caressed the paper – by a well muscled and not overdressed young
warrior. A boat that would pass unseen under other boats, take men
wherever they needed to go. _Here_ a giant saw, affixed to the roof, so
that when rowed at speed it could cut the hulls of enemy ships. And
_here_ and _here_ a tube . . .

He stopped and stared at his drawing for a while. Then he sighed and
started to tear it up.

Vimes watched from the dune. He couldn’t hear much from up here, but he
didn’t need to.

Angua sat down beside him. ‘It’s working, isn’t it?’ she said.

‘Yes.’

‘What’s he going to do?’

‘Oh, he’ll take their weapons and let ’em go, I suppose.’

‘Why do people follow him?’ said Angua.

‘Well, you’re his girlfriend, you ought—’

‘That’s different. I love him because he’s kind without thinking about
it. He doesn’t watch his own thoughts like other people do. When he does
good things it’s because he’s decided to do them, not because he’s
trying to measure up to something. He’s so simple. Anyway, I’m a wolf
living with people, and there’s a name for wolves that live with people.
If he whistled, I’d come running.’

Vimes tried not to show his embarrassment.

Angua smiled. ‘Don’t worry, Mr Vimes. You’ve said it yourself. Sooner or
later, we’re _all_ someone’s dog.’

‘It’s like hypnotism,’ said Vimes hurriedly. ‘People follow him to see
what’s going to happen next. They tell themselves that they’re just
going along with it for a while and can stop any time they want to, but
they never want to. It’s damn magic.’

‘No. Have you ever really watched him? I bet he’d found out everything
about Jabbar by the time he’d talked to him for ten minutes. I bet he
knows the name of every camel. And he’ll remember it all. People don’t
take that much interest in other people, usually.’ Her fingers idly
traced a pattern in the sand. ‘So he makes you feel important.’

‘Politicians do that—’ Vimes began.

‘Not the way he does, believe me. I expect Lord Vetinari remembers facts
about people—’

‘Oh, you’d better believe _that_!’

‘—but Carrot takes an _interest_. He doesn’t even think about it. He
makes space in his head for people. He takes an interest, and so people
think they’re interesting. They feel . . . better when he’s around.’

Vimes glanced down. Her fingers were drawing aimlessly in the sand
again. We’re all changing in the desert, he thought. It’s not like the
city, hemming your thoughts in. You can feel your mind expand to the
horizons. No wonder this is where religions start. And suddenly here I
am, probably not legally, just trying to do my job. Why? Because I’m too
damn stupid to stop and think before I give chase, that’s why. Even
Carrot knew better than to do that. _I’d_ have just chased after Ahmed’s
ship without a thought, but he was bright enough to report back to me
first. He did what a responsible officer ought to do, but me . . .

‘Vetinari’s terrier,’ he said aloud. ‘Chase first, and think about it
afterwards—’

His eye caught the distant bulk of Gebra. Out there was a Klatchian
army, and somewhere over _there_ was the Ankh-Morpork army, and he was
with a handful of people and no plan because he’d chased first and—

‘But I had to,’ he said. ‘Any copper wouldn’t have let a suspect like
Ahmed get—’

Once again he had the feeling that the problem he was facing wasn’t
really a problem at all. It was something very obvious. _He_ was the
problem. He wasn’t thinking right.

Come to think of it, he hadn’t really _thought_ at all.

He glanced down again at the trapped company. They had stripped down to
their loincloths and were looking very sheepish, as men generally do in
their underwear.

Carrot’s white robe still flapped in the breeze. He hasn’t been here a
day, thought Vimes, and already he’s wearing the desert like a pair of
sandals.

‘. . .  er . . . bingeley-bingeley beep?’

‘Is that your demon diary?’ said Angua.

Vimes rolled his eyes. ‘Yes. Although it seems to be talking about
someone else.’

‘. . .  er . . . three pee em,’ the demon muttered slowly, ‘. . .  day
not filled in . . . Check Wall Defences . . .’

‘See? It thinks I’m in Ankh-Morpork! It cost Sybil three hundred dollars
and it can’t even keep track of where I am.’

He flicked his cigar butt away and stood up.

‘I’d better get down there,’ he said. ‘After all, I _am_ the boss.’

He slithered his way down the dune and strolled towards Carrot, who
salaamed to him.

‘A salute would do, captain, thanks all the same.’

‘Sorry, sir. I think I got a bit carried away.’

‘Why’ve you made them strip off?’

‘Makes them a bit of a laughing stock when they return, sir. A blow to
their pride.’ He leaned closer and whispered, ‘I’ve let their commander
keep his clothes on, though. It doesn’t do to show up the officers.’

‘Really?’ said Vimes.

‘And some want to join us, sir. There’s Goriff’s lad and a few others.
They were just dragooned into the army yesterday. They don’t even know
why they’re fighting. So I said they could.’

Vimes took the captain aside. ‘Er . . . I don’t remember suggesting that
any of the prisoners joined us,’ he said quietly.

‘Well, sir . . . I thought, what with our army approaching, and since
quite a lot of these lads are from various corners of the empire and
don’t like the Klatchians any more than we do, I thought that a flying
column of guerrilla fighters—’

‘We aren’t soldiers!’

‘Er, I thought we _were_ soldiers—’

‘Yes, yes, all right. In a _way_ . . . but really we’re coppers, like
we’ve always been. We don’t kill people unless – ’

Ahmed? Everyone’s slightly on edge when he’s around, he worries people,
he gets information from all over the place, he seems to go where he
pleases, and he’s always around when there’s trouble— Damn damn
_damn_ . . .

He ran through the crowd until he reached Jabbar, who was watching
Carrot with the usual puzzled smile that Carrot caused in innocent
bystanders.

‘Tree dace,’ said Vimes. ‘Three days. That’s seventy-two hours!’

‘Yes, offendi?’ said Jabbar. It was the voice of someone who recognized
dawn, noon and sunset, and just let everything in between happen
whenever it liked.

‘So why’s he called 71-hour Ahmed? What’s so special about the extra
hour?’

Jabbar grinned nervously.

‘Did he _do_ something after seventy-one hours?’ said Vimes.

Jabbar folded his arms. ‘I will not say.’

‘He told you to keep us here?’

‘Yes.’

‘But not to kill us.’

‘Oh, I would not kill my friend Sir Sam Mule—’

‘And don’t give me all that eyeball rubbish,’ said Vimes. ‘He wanted
time to get somewhere and do something, right?’

‘I will not say.’

‘You don’t need to,’ said Vimes. ‘Because we are _leaving_. And if you
kill us . . . well, probably you can. But 71-hour Ahmed would not like
that, I expect.’

Jabbar looked like a man making a difficult decision.

‘He will be coming back!’ he said. ‘Tomorrow! No problem!’

‘I’m not waiting! And I don’t think he wants me killed, Jabbar. He wants
me alive. Carrot?’

Carrot hurried over. ‘Yes, sir?’

Vimes was aware that Jabbar was staring at him in horror.

‘We’ve lost Ahmed,’ he said. ‘Even Angua can’t pick up his trail with
the sand blowing all over the place. We’ve got no place here. We’re not
_needed_ here.’

‘But we _are_, sir!’ Carrot burst out. ‘We could help the desert
tribes—’

‘Oh, you want to stay and fight?’ said Vimes. ‘Against the Klatchians?’

‘Against the _bad_ Klatchians, sir.’

‘Ah, well, that’s the trick, isn’t it? When one of them comes screaming
at you waving a sword, how do you spot his moral character? Well, you
can stay if you like and fight for the good name of Ankh-Morpork. It
should be a pretty short fight. But I’m off. Jenkins probably hasn’t got
afloat again. Okay, Jabbar?’

The D’reg was staring at the desert sand between his feet.

‘You know where he is now, don’t you?’ Vimes prompted.

‘Yes.’

‘Tell me.’

‘No. I swore to him.’

‘But D’regs are oath-breakers. Everyone knows that.’

Jabbar gave Vimes a grin. ‘Oh, _oaths_. Stupid things. I gave him my
_word_.’

‘He won’t break it, sir,’ said Carrot. ‘D’regs are very particular about
things like that. It’s only when they swear on gods and things that
they’ll ever break an oath.’

‘I will not tell you where he is,’ said Jabbar. ‘But . . .’ he grinned
again, but there was no humour in it, ‘how brave are you, Mr Vimes?’

‘Stop _complaining_, Nobby.’

‘I’m not complaining. I’m just sayin’ these trousers are a bit draughty,
that’s all I’m saying.’

‘They look good on you, though.’

‘And what’re these tin bowls supposed to be doing?’

‘They’re supposed to be protecting the bits you haven’t got, Nobby.’

‘The way this breeze is blowing, I could do with some to protect the
bits I _have_.’

‘Just try and act ladylike, will you, Nobby?’

Which would be hard, Sergeant Colon had to admit. The lady for whom the
clothes had been made had been quite tall and somewhat full-figured,
whereas Nobby without his armour could have hidden behind a short stick
if you attached a toast rack to it about two-thirds of the way up. He
looked like a gauzy accordion with a lot of jewellery. In theory, the
costume would have been quite revealing, if Corporal Nobbs was something
you wished to see revealed, but there were so many billows and folds now
that all one could reliably say was that he was in there somewhere. He
was leading the donkey, which seemed to like him. Animals tended to like
Nobby. He didn’t smell wrong.

‘And them boots don’t work,’ Sergeant Colon went on.

‘Why not? You kept _yours_ on.’

‘Yeah, but I’m not supposed to be a flower of the desert, right? A moon
of someone’s delight shouldn’t kick up sparks when she walks, am I
right?’

‘They belonged to my gran, I ain’t leaving ’em around for anyone to
nick, and I ain’t mooning for anyone’s delight,’ said Nobby sulkily.

Lord Vetinari strode on ahead. The streets were already filling up.
Al-Khali liked to get the business of the day started in the cool of
dawn, before full day flamethrowered the landscape. No one paid the
newcomers any attention, although a few people did turn round to watch
Corporal Nobbs. Goats and chickens ambled out of the way as they passed.

‘Watch out for people trying to sell you dirty postcards, Nobby,’ said
Colon. ‘My uncle was here once and he said some bloke tried to sell him
a pack of dirty postcards for five dollars. Disgusted, he was.’

‘Yeah, ’cos you can get ’em in the Shades for two dollars,’ said Nobby.

‘That’s what he said. _And_ they were Ankh-Morpork ones. Trying to flog
us our own dirty postcards? I call that disgusting, frankly.’

‘Good morning, sultan!’ said a cheerful and somehow familiar voice. ‘New
in town, are we?’

All three of them turned to a figure that had magically appeared from
the mouth of an alleyway.

‘Indeed, yes,’ said the Patrician.

‘I could see you were! Everyone is, these days. And it is _your_ lucky
day, shah! I am here to help, right? You want something, I got it!’

Sergeant Colon had been staring at the newcomer. He said, in a faraway
voice, ‘Your name’s going to be something like . . . Al-jibla or
something, right?’

‘Heard about me, have you?’ said the trader jovially.

‘Sort of, yeah,’ said Colon slowly. ‘You’re amazingly . . . familiar.’

Lord Vetinari pushed him aside. ‘We are strolling entertainers,’ he
said. ‘We were hoping to get an engagement at the Prince’s palace . . .
Perhaps you could help?’

The man rubbed his beard thoughtfully, causing various particles to
cascade into the little bowls in his tray.

‘Dunno about the palace,’ he said. ‘What’s it you do?’

‘We practise juggling, fire-eating, that sort of thing,’ said Vetinari.

‘Do we?’ said Colon.

Al-jibla nodded at Nobby. ‘What does . . .’

‘. . .  she . . .’ said Lord Vetinari helpfully.

‘. . .  she do?’

‘Exotic dancing,’ said Vetinari, while Nobby scowled.

‘Pretty exotic, I should think,’ said Al-jibla.

‘You’d be amazed.’

A couple of armed men had drifted over to them. Sergeant Colon’s heart
sank. In those bearded faces he saw himself and Nobby, who at home would
always saunter over to anything on the street that looked interesting.

‘You are jugglers, are you?’ said one of them. ‘Let’s see you juggle,
then.’

Lord Vetinari gave them a blank look and then glanced down at the tray
around Al-jibla’s neck. Among the more identifiable foodstuffs were a
number of green melons.

‘Very well,’ he said, and picked up three of them.

Sergeant Colon shut his eyes.

After a few seconds he opened them again because a guard had said, ‘All
right, but anyone can do it with three.’

‘In that case perhaps Mr Al-jibla will throw me a few more?’ said the
Patrician, as the balls spun through his hands.

Sergeant Colon shut his eyes again.

After a short while a guard said, ‘Seven is pretty good. But it’s just
melons.’

Colon opened his eyes.

The Klatchian guard twitched his robe aside. Half a dozen throwing
knives glinted. And so did his teeth.

Lord Vetinari nodded. To Colon’s growing surprise he did not seem to be
watching the tumbling melons at all.

‘Four melons and three knives,’ he said. ‘If you would care to give the
knives to my charming assistant Beti . . .’

‘_Who_?’ said Nobby.

‘Oh? Why not seven knives, then?’

‘Kind sirs, that would be too simple,’ said Lord Vetinari.¹³ ‘I am but a
humble tumbler. Please let me practice my art.’

‘_Beti_?’ said Nobby, glowering under his veils.

Three fruits arced gently out of the green whirl and thumped on to
Al-jibla’s tray.

The guards looked carefully, and to Colon’s mind nervously, at the
cross-dressed figure of the cross corporal.

‘She’s not going to do any kind of dance, is she?’ one of them ventured.

‘No!’ snapped Beti.

‘Promise?’¹⁴

Nobby grabbed three of the knives and tugged them out of the man’s belt.

‘I’ll give them to his lor – to him, shall I, Beti?’ said Colon,
suddenly quite sure that keeping the Patrician alive was almost
certainly the only way to avoid a brief cigarette in the sunshine. He
was also aware that other people were drifting over to watch the show.

‘To me, please . . . Al,’ said the Patrician, nodding.

Colon tossed him the knives, slowly and gingerly. He’s going to try to
stab the guards, he thought. It’s a _ruse_. And then everyone’s going to
tear us apart.

Now the circling blur glinted in the sunlight. There was a murmur of
approval from the crowd.

‘Yet somehow dull,’ said the Patrician.

And his hands moved in a complex pattern that suggested that his wrists
must have moved through one another at least twice.

The tangled ball of hurtling fruit and cutlery leapt into the air.

Three melons dropped to the ground, cut cleanly in two.

Three knives thudded into the dust a few inches from their owner’s
sandals.

And Sergeant Colon looked up and into a growing, greenish, expanding—

The melon exploded, and so did the audience, but both their laughter and
the humour was slightly lost on Colon as he scraped over-ripe pith out
of his ears.

The survival instinct cut in again. Stagger around backwards, it said.
So he staggered around backwards, waving his legs in the air. Fall down
heavily, it said. So he sat down, and almost squashed a chicken. Lose
your dignity, it said; of all the things you’ve got, it’s the one you
can most afford to lose.

Lord Vetinari helped him up. ‘Our very lives depend on your appearing to
be a stupid fat idiot,’ he hissed, putting Colon’s fez back on his head.

‘I ain’t very good at acting, sir—’

‘Good!’

‘Yessir.’

The Patrician scooped up three melon halves and positively _skipped_
over to a stall that a woman had just set up, snatching an egg from a
basket as he went past. Sergeant Colon blinked again. This was not . . .
_real_. The Patrician didn’t do this sort of thing . . .

‘Ladies and gentlemen! You see – an egg! And here we have a – melon
rind! Egg, melon! Melon, egg! We put the melon over the egg!’ His hands
darted across the three halves, switching them at bewildering speed.
‘Round and round they go, just like that! Now . . . where’s the egg?
What about you, shah?’

Al-jibla smirked.

‘’s the one on the left,’ he said. ‘It always is.’

Lord Vetinari lifted the melon. The board below was eggless.

‘And you, noble guardsman?’

‘’s got to be the one in the middle,’ said the guard.

‘Yes, of course . . . oh dear, it isn’t . . .’

The crowd looked at the last melon. They were street people. They knew
the score. When the object can be under one of three things, and it’s
already turned out not to be under two of them, then the one place it
was certainly not going to be was under the third. Only some kind of
gullible fool would believe something like that. Of _course_ there was
going to be a trick. There always _was_ a trick. But you watched it, in
order to see a trick done well.

Lord Vetinari raised the melon nevertheless, and the crowd nodded in
satisfaction. Of _course_ it wasn’t there. It’d be a pretty poor day for
street entertainment if things were where they were supposed to be.

Sergeant Colon knew what was going to happen next, and he knew this
because for the last minute or so something had been pecking at his
head.

Aware that this was probably his moment, he raised his fez and revealed
a very small fluffy chick.

‘Have you got a towel? I am afraid it has just gone to the toilet on my
head, sir.’

There was laughter, some applause and, to his amazement, a tinkling of
coins around his feet.

‘And, finally,’ said the Patrician, ‘the beautiful Beti will do an
exotic dance.’

The crowd fell silent.

Then someone at the back said, ‘How much do we have to pay for her not
to?’

‘Right! I’ve just about had enough of this!’ Veils flying out behind
her, bangles jingling, elbows waving viciously and boots kicking up
sparks, the lovely Beti strode into the crowd. ‘Which of you said that?’

People shrank away from her. _Armies_ would have retreated. And there,
revealed like a jellyfish deserted by a suddenly ebbing tide, was a
small man about to fry in the wrath of the ascendant Nobbs.

‘I meant no offence, oh doe-eyed one—’

‘Oh? Pastry-faced, am I?’ Nobby flung out an arm in a crash of bracelets
and knocked the man over. ‘You’ve got a lot to learn about women, young
man!’ And then, because a Nobbs could never resist a prone target, the
petite Beti drew back a steel-capped boot—

‘Beti!’ snapped the Patrician.

‘Oh, right, yeah, _right_,’ said Nobby, with veiled contempt. ‘Everyone
can tell me what to do, right? Just because I happen to be the woman
around here I’m just supposed to accept it all, eh?’

‘No, you just ain’t supposed to kick him inna fork,’ hissed Colon,
pulling him away. ‘It don’t look good.’ Although he noted, the women in
the crowd seemed to be disappointed by the sudden curtailment of the
performance.

‘And there are many strange stories we can tell you!’ shouted the
Patrician.

‘Beti certainly could,’ murmured Colon, and was kicked sharply on his
ankle.

‘And many strange sights we can show you!’

‘Beti cert— Aargh!’

‘But for now we will seek the shade of yonder caravanserai . . .’

‘_What’re we doing?’_

‘_We’re going to the pub_.’

The crowd began to disperse, but with occasional amused glances back at
the trio.

One of the guards nodded at Colon. ‘Nice show,’ he said. ‘Especially the
bit where your lady didn’t remove any veils—’ He darted behind his
colleague as Nobby spun round like an avenging angel.

‘Sergeant,’ the Patrician whispered. ‘It is very important that we learn
the current whereabouts of Prince Cadram, do you understand? In taverns,
people talk. Let us keep our ears open.’

The tavern wasn’t Colon’s idea of a pub. For one thing, most of it had
no roof. Arched walls surrounded a courtyard. A grapevine grew out of a
huge cracked urn and had been teased overhead on trellises. There was
the gentle sound of tinkling water, and unlike the Mended Drum this was
not because the bar backed on to the privies but because of a small
fountain in the middle of the cobbles. And it was cool, much cooler than
in the street, even though the vine leaves scarcely hid the sky.

‘Didn’t know you could juggle, sir,’ Colon whispered to Lord Vetinari.

‘You mean you can’t, sergeant?’

‘Nossir!’

‘How strange. It’s hardly a skill, is it? One knows what the objects are
and where they want to go. After that it’s just a case of letting them
occupy the correct positions in time and space.’

‘You’re dead good at it, sir. Practise often, do you?’

‘Until today, I’ve never tried.’ Lord Vetinari looked at Colon’s
astonished expression. ‘After Ankh-Morpork, sergeant, a handful of
flying melons present a very minor problem indeed.’

‘I’m amazed, sir.’

‘And in politics, sergeant, it is always important to know where the
chicken is.’

Colon raised his fez. ‘Is this one still on my head?’

‘It seems to have gone to sleep. I wouldn’t disturb it, if I were you.’

‘’ere, you, juggler . . . she can’t come in here!’

They looked up. Someone with a face and apron that said ‘barman’ in
seven hundred languages was standing over them, a wine jug in each hand.

‘No women in here,’ he went on.

‘Why not?’ said Nobby.

‘No women asking questions, neither.’

‘Why not?’

‘’cos it is written, that’s why.’

‘Where’m I supposed to go, then?’

The barman shrugged. ‘Who knows where women go?’

‘Off you go, Beti,’ said the Patrician. ‘And . . . listen for
information!’

Nobby grabbed the cup of wine from Colon and gulped it down.

‘I dunno,’ he moaned, ‘I’ve only been a woman ten minutes and already I
hate you male bastards.’

‘I dunno what’s got into him, sir,’ whispered Colon as Nobby stamped
out. ‘He ain’t like this normally. I thought Klatchian women did what
they were told!’

‘Does _your_ wife do what she’s told, sergeant?’

‘Well, yeah, obviously, a man’s got to be the master in his own house,
that’s what I always say—’

‘So why are you, I hear, always putting up kitchen furniture?’

‘Well, obviously, you’ve got to listen to—’

‘In fact Klatchian history is full of famous examples of women who even
went to war with their men,’ said the Patrician.

‘What? On the same side?’

‘Prince Arkven’s wife Tistam used to ride into the battle with her
husband and, according to legend, killed ten thousand thousand men.’

‘That’s a lot of men.’

‘Legends are prone to inflation. However, I believe there is good
historical evidence that Queen Sowawondra of Sumtri had more than thirty
thousand people put to death during her reign. She could be quite
touchy, they say.’

‘You should hear my wife if I don’t put the plates away,’ said Sergeant
Colon gloomily.

‘Now we are integrated with the local population, sergeant,’ said the
Patrician, ‘we must find out what is happening. Although an invasion is
clearly planned, I feel sure Prince Cadram will have reserved some
forces in case of land attack. It would be nice to know where they are,
because that’s where he will be.’

‘Right.’

‘You think you can handle this?’

‘Yessir. I know Klatchians, sir. Don’t you worry about that.’

‘Here’s some money. Buy drinks for people. Mingle.’

‘Right.’

‘Not too many drinks, but as much mingling as you are capable of.’

‘I’m a good mingler, sir.’

‘Off you go, then.’

‘Sir?’

‘Yes?’

‘I’m a bit worried about . . . Beti, sir. Going off like that. Anything
might happen to hi . . . her.’ But he spoke with some hesitation. There
wasn’t much you could imagine happening to Corporal Nobbs.

‘I’m sure we shall hear about it if there are any problems,’ said the
Patrician.

‘You’re right there, sir.’

Colon sidled over to a group of men who were sitting in a rough circle
on the floor, talking quietly amongst themselves and eating from a large
dish.

He sat down. The men on either side of him obediently shuffled along.

Now then, how did you . . . ah, right . . . _anyone_ knew how Klatchians
talked . . .

‘Greetings, fellow brothers of the dessert,’ he said. ‘I don’t know
about you, but I could just do with a plate of sheep’s eyeballs, eh? I
bet you boys can’t wait to be back on your camels, I know I can’t. I
spit upon the defiling dogs of Ankh-Morpork. Anyone had any baksheesh
lately? You can call me Al.’

‘Excuse me, are you the lady who is with the clowns?’

Corporal Nobbs, who had been trudging along gloomily, looked up. He was
being addressed by a pleasant-faced young woman. A woman actually
talking to him by choice was a novelty. Smiling while doing so was
unheard of.

‘Er . . . yeah. Right. That’s me.’ He swallowed. ‘Beti.’

‘My name is Bana. Would you like to come and talk with us?’

Nobby looked past her. There were a number of women of varying ages
sitting around a large well. One of them waved at him shyly.

He blinked. This was uncharted territory. He looked down at his clothes,
which were already the worse for wear. His clothes always looked the
worse for wear five minutes after he’d put them on.

‘Oh, don’t worry,’ said the girl. ‘We know how it is. But you looked so
alone. And perhaps you can help us . . .’

They were among the group now. There were women of every legitimate
shape and size, and so far none of them had said ‘Yuk,’ an experience
hitherto unchronicled in Nobby’s personal history. In a detached,
light-headed way, Corporal Nobbs felt that he was entering Paradise, and
it was only an unfortunate detail that he’d come to via the wrong door.

‘We are trying to comfort Netal,’ said the girl. ‘Her betrothed won’t
marry her tomorrow.’

‘The swine,’ said Nobby.

One of the girls, eyes red with crying, looked up sharply.

‘He _wanted_ to,’ she sobbed. ‘But he’s been taken off to fight in
Gebra! All over some island no one’s heard of! And all my family are
here!’

‘Who took him off?’ said Nobby.

‘He took himself off,’ snapped an older woman. Clothing differences
aside, there was something hauntingly familiar about her, and Nobby
realized that if you cut her in half the words ‘mother-in-law’ would be
all the way through.

‘Oh, Mrs Atbar,’ said Netal, ‘he said it was his _duty_. Anyway, all the
boys have had to go.’

‘Men!’ said Nobby, rolling his eyes.

‘I expect you’d know a lot about the pleasures of men, then,’ said
Mother-in-Law sourly.

‘Mother!’

‘Who, me?’ said Nobby, forgetting himself for a moment. ‘Oh, yeah.
Lots.’

‘You _do_?’

‘Why not? Beer’s favourite,’ said Nobby. ‘But you can’t beat a good
cigar, as long as it’s free.’

‘Hah!’ Mother-in-Law picked up a basket of washing and stamped away,
followed by most of the older women. The others laughed. Even the
disappointed Netal smiled.

‘I _think_ that’s not what she meant,’ said Bana. To a chorus of
giggles, she leaned down and whispered in Nobby’s ear.

His expression did not change but it did seem to solidify.

‘Oh, _that_,’ he said.

There were some worlds of experience which Nobby had only contemplated
on a map, but he knew what she was talking about. Of course he’d
patrolled certain parts of the Shades in his time – the ones where young
ladies tended to hang around without very much to do, and probably
catching cold too – but those areas of police work that in other places
might be of interest to a Vice Squad now tended to be looked after by
the Guild of Seamstresses themselves. People who neglected to obey
the . . . no, not the law as such, call them the _unwritten rules_ . . .
as laid down by Mrs Palm and her committee of very experienced ladies¹⁵
attracted the attention of the Agony Aunts, Dotsie and Sadie, and might
or might not be seen again. Even Mr Vimes approved of the arrangement.
It didn’t cause paperwork.

‘Oh, yeah,’ said Nobby, still staring at some inner screen.

Of course, he _knew_ what . . .

‘Oh, _that_,’ he mumbled. ‘Well, I’ve seen a thing or two,’ he added.
Largely on postcards, he had to admit.

‘It must be wonderful to have so much freedom,’ said Bana.

‘Er . . .’

Netal burst out crying again. Her friends fluttered around her.

‘I don’t see why the men have to go off like this,’ said Bana. ‘My
betrothed has gone too.’

There was a cackle from a very old woman sitting by the well. ‘I can
tell you why, dears. Because it’s better than growing melons all day.
It’s better than women.’

‘Men think war is better than women?’

‘It’s always fresh, it’s always young, and you can make a good fight
last all day.’

‘But they get killed!’

‘Better to die in battle than in bed, they say.’ She cracked a toothless
grin. ‘But there are good ways for a man to die in bed, eh, Beti?’

Nobby hoped the glow of his ears wasn’t singeing his veil. Suddenly, he
felt he’d caught up with his future. Ten damn pence worth of it hit him
in the face.

‘’scuse me,’ he said. ‘Are any of you Nubilians?’

‘What are Nubilians?’ said Bana.

‘It’s a country round here,’ said Nobby. He added hopefully, ‘Isn’t it?’

Not a single face suggested that this was so.

Nobby sighed. His hand reached up to his ear for a cigarette end, but it
came down again empty.

‘I’ll tell you this, girls,’ he said. ‘I wish I’d settled for the
ten-dollar version. Don’t you just sometimes want to sit down and cry?’

‘You look even sadder than Netal,’ said Bana. ‘Isn’t there some way we
can cheer you up?’

Nobby stared at her for a moment, and then started to sob.

Everyone was staring at Colon, their food halfway to their lips.

‘Did I just hear him say that, Faifal? What do I want to be on a camel
for? I’m a plumber!’

‘He is the clown with the juggler, I think. The poor man is several
palms short of an oasis.’

‘I mean the bloody things spit and they’re a bugger to get up the stairs
with your toolbox—’

‘Now, come on, it’s not his fault, let’s show a little charity.’ The
speaker cleared his throat. ‘Good morning, friend,’ he said. ‘May we
invite you to share our couscous?’

Sergeant Colon peered at the bowl, and then dipped in a finger and
tasted it.

‘Hey, this is semolina! You’ve got _semolina_! It’s just ordinary
semol—’ He stopped, and coughed. ‘Yeah, right. Thanks. Got any
strawberry jam?’

The host looked at his friends. They shrugged.

‘We know not of this “strawberry hjam” of which you speak,’ he said
carefully. ‘We prefer it with lamb.’ He offered Colon a long wooden
skewer.

‘Oh, you gotta have strawberry jam,’ said Colon, carried away. ‘When we
were kids we’d stir it in and . . . and . . .’ He looked at their faces.
‘O’ course, that was back in Ur,’ he said.

The men nodded at one another. Suddenly it was all clear.

Colon belched loudly.

From the looks he got from everyone else, he was the only one who’d
heard of this common Klatchian custom.

‘So,’ he said, ‘where’s the army these days? Approximately?’

‘Why do you ask, o full-of-gas one?’

‘Oh, we thought we could make a bit of cash entertaining the troops,’
said Colon. He was immensely proud of this idea. ‘You know . . . a
smile, a song, a lack of exotic dancing. But that means we got to know
where they are, see?’

‘Excuse me, fat one, but can you understand what I am saying?’

‘Yes, it’s very tasty,’ Colon hazarded.

‘Ah, I thought so. So he’s a spy. But whose?’

‘Really? Who would be so stupid as to use a joke like this as a spy?’

‘Ankh-Morpork?’

‘Oh, come on! He’s pretending to be an Ankh-Morpork spy, perhaps. But
they’re cunning over there—’

‘You think? A people who make curry out of something called curry powder
and you think they’re clever?’

‘I reckon he’s from Muntab. They’re always watching us.’

‘And pretending to be from Ankh-Morpork?’

‘Well, if you were trying to look like a joke Morporkian pretending to
be Klatchian wouldn’t you look like that?’

‘But why’d he pretend to be from there?’

‘Ah . . . politics.’

‘Let’s call the Watch, then.’

‘Are you mad? We’ve been talking to him! They will be . . .
inquisitive.’

‘Good point. I know . . .’

Faifal gave Colon a big grin.

‘I did hear the entire army has marched away to En al Sams la Laisa,’ he
said. ‘But don’t tell anyone.’

‘Have they?’ Colon glanced at the other men. They were watching him with
curiously deadpan expressions.

‘Sounds like a massive place, with a name like that,’ he said.

‘Oh, huge,’ said his neighbour. One of the other men made a noise that
you might think was a suppressed chuckle.

‘It’s a long way, is it?’

‘No, very close. You’re practically on top of it,’ said Faifal. He
nudged a colleague, whose shoulders were shaking.

‘Oh, _right_. Big army, is it?’

‘Could easily be very big, yes.’

‘Fine. Fine,’ said Colon. ‘Er . . . anyone got a pencil? I could’ve
sworn I had one when—’

There was a noise outside the tavern. It was the sound of many women
laughing, which is always a disquieting noise to men.¹⁶ Customers peered
suspiciously through the vines.

Colon and the rest of the crowd looked around an urn at the group by the
well. An old lady was rolling on the ground, laughing, and various
younger ones were leaning against one another for support.

He heard one of them say, ‘What did he say again?’

‘He said, “That’s funny, it’s never done that when _I’ve_ tried it!”’

‘Yeah, _that’s_ true!’ cackled the old woman. ‘It never does!’

‘“That’s funny, it’s never done that when I’ve tried it”,’ Nobby
repeated.

Colon groaned. That was the voice and tone of Corporal Nobbs in
storytelling mode, when wood could scorch at ten yards.

‘’scuse me,’ he muttered, and forced his way through the press to the
gateway.

‘Have you heard the one about the ki . . . the sultan who was afraid his
wife . . . one of his wives . . . would be unfaithful to him while he
was away?’

‘We haven’t heard _any_ stories like _these_, Beti!’ Bana gasped.

‘Really? Oh, I’ve got a thousand and one of ’em. Well, anyway, he went
and saw the wise old blacksmith, right, and _he_ said—’

‘You can’t go round telling stories like that, cor— Beti,’ Colon panted
as he lumbered to a halt.

Nobby realized that a change had come over the group. Now he was
surrounded by women who were in the presence of a man. A known man, he
corrected himself.

Several of them were blushing. They hadn’t blushed before.

‘Why not?’ said Beti nastily.

‘You’ll offend people,’ said Colon uncertainly.

‘Er, we are not offended, sir,’ said Bana, in a small humble voice. ‘We
think Beti’s stories are very . . . instructive. Especially the one
about the man who went into the tavern with the very small musician.’

‘And that was pretty hard to translate,’ said Nobby, ‘because they don’t
really know what a piano _is_ in Klatch. But it turns out there’s this
kind of stringed—’

‘And it was very interesting about the man with his arms and legs in
plaster,’ said Netal.

‘Yeah, and they laughed even though they don’t have the same kind of
doorbells here,’ said Nobby. ‘Here, you don’t have to go—’

But the group around the well was dispersing. Water jugs were being
picked up and carried away. A kind of preoccupied busyness came over the
women.

Bana nodded at Beti. ‘Er . . . thank you. It’s been very . . .
interesting. But we must go. It was so kind of you to talk to us.’

‘Er, no, don’t go . . .’

A faint suggestion of perfume hung in the air.

Beti glared at Colon. ‘Sometimes I really want to give you a right ding
alongside the lughole,’ she growled. ‘My first bloody chance in _years_
and you—’

She stopped. There was a crowd of puzzled yet disapproving faces behind
Colon.

And things might have ended otherwise had it not been for the braying of
the donkey, from above.

The stolen donkey, easily pulling away from Nobby’s inexpert tether, had
wandered off in search of food. She vaguely associated this with the
doorway to her stable and therefore with doorways in general, and so had
wandered through the nearest open one.

There had been some narrow spiral stairs inside, but her stall was
pretty narrow and steps didn’t worry a donkey that was used to the
streets of Al-Khali.

It was only a disappointment when the steps came to an end and there was
_still_ no hay.

‘Oh no,’ said someone behind Colon. ‘There’s a donkey up the minaret
_again_.’

There were groans all round.

‘What’s wrong with that? What goes up must come down,’ said Colon.

‘You don’t know?’ said one of his dining companions. ‘You don’t have
_minarets_ in Ur?’

‘Er—’ said Colon.

‘We have plenty of donkeys,’ said Lord Vetinari. There was general
laughter, most of it directed at Colon.

One of the men pointed to the dim interior of the minaret.

‘Look . . . see?’

‘A very narrow, winding staircase,’ said the Patrician. ‘So . . . ?’

‘There’s nowhere to turn at the top, right? Oh, any fool can get a
donkey _up_ a minaret. But have you ever tried getting an animal to go
backwards down a narrow staircase in the dark? Can’t be done.’

‘There’s something about a rising staircase,’ said someone else. ‘It
attracts donkeys. They think there’s something at the top.’

‘We had to push the last one off, didn’t we?’ said one of the guards.

‘Right. It splashed,’ said his comrade in arms.

‘No one is pushing Valerie off’f _anything_,’ snarled Beti. ‘Any one of
you tries anything like that and, s’welp me, you’ll feel the wrong end
of—’ He stopped, and a wide horrible grin appeared behind the veil. ‘I
mean, I’ll give you a great big soppy _kiss_.’

Several men at the back of the crowd took to their heels.

‘There’s no need to get nasty,’ said the guard.

‘I _mean_ it!’ said Beti, advancing.

The cowering guard cringed. ‘Can’t you do anything with her, sirs?’

‘Us?’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘’fraid not. Oh dear . . . it’s going to be
like that business in Djelibeybi all over again, Al.’

‘Oh dear,’ said Colon, mugging loyally. The crowd, or at least that part
that thought itself sufficiently far away from Beti, started to grin.
This was street theatre.

‘I don’t know if they ever got that man down off the flagpole,’ Vetinari
went on.

‘Oh, _most_ of ’im, they did,’ said Colon.

‘Tell you what, tell you what,’ said the guard hurriedly, ‘suppose we
get a rope round it—’

‘—her—’ Beti growled.

‘Her, right, and then—’

‘You’d need at least three men up there and there ain’t no room!’

‘Sir, I’ve got an idea,’ whispered one of the guards.

‘I should make it quick,’ said Colon. ‘’cos there’s no stopping Beti
once she gets going.’

The guards held a whispered argument.

‘We’d get into trouble if we do that! You know all that stuff we were
told about the war effort! That’s why they were all confiscated!’

‘No one will miss it for five minutes!’

‘Yeah, but you want to tell the Prince we lost one?’

‘All right, but do you want to explain to her?’

They both looked at Beti.

‘And they’re easy to steer, after all,’ one whispered.

‘Valerie?’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘There is a problem?’ Beti demanded.

‘No! No. It’s a fine name for a donkey, N— Beti.’

‘No one is to do anything,’ said one of the guards. ‘We will return.’

‘What was all that about?’ said Colon, watching them go.

‘Oh, they’ve probably gone to get a carpet,’ said someone.

‘Very nice, but I don’t see how that’d help,’ said Beti.

‘A flying one.’

‘Oh, _right_,’ said Colon. ‘They’ve got one of those up at the
University—’

‘Ur has a university?’

‘Oh, indeed,’ said the Patrician. ‘How do you think Al learned what a
donkey looks like?’

Once again, laughter dispelled doubt. Colon grinned uncertainly.

‘I’m really getting good at this stupid idiot stuff, aren’t I?’ he said.
‘It just sort of happens!’

‘Marvellous,’ said Lord Vetinari.

There was another angry braying from far above.

‘Trouble is, they’re all locked up because of the war effort,’ said
someone behind them.

A piece of mud brick shattered on the ground nearby.

‘The way it’s thrashing around up there, it’s going to fall off anyway.’

‘Perhaps I should _persuade_ her to come down,’ said the Patrician.

‘Can’t be done, offendi. You can’t get past on the stairs, you can’t
turn it round, and it won’t come down backwards.’

‘I shall consider the situation,’ said the Patrician.

He ambled back into the tavern for a moment, and returned. They saw him
enter the door and they heard him climbing the staircase.

‘Should be good,’ said a man behind Colon.

After a while the braying stopped.

‘Can’t turn round, see. Far too narrow,’ said the elevated-donkey
expert. ‘Can’t turn round, won’t go backwards. Well-known fact.’

‘There’s always a know-all, right, Beti?’ said Colon.

‘Yeah. Always.’

The tower was full of silence. Several members of the crowd found their
attention drawn to it.

‘I mean, if you could get three or four men up the stairs, which you
can’t, you could sort of move it a leg at a time, if you didn’t mind
being kicked and bitten to death . . .’

‘All right, all right, back away from the tower, will you?’

The guards were back. One of them was carrying a rolled-up carpet.

‘All right, all right, give us room—’

‘I can hear hooves,’ said someone.

‘Oh, yeah, like our friend in the fez is getting the donkey down the
stairs?’

‘Hang on, I can hear them too,’ said Colon.

Now all eyes stared at the door.

Lord Vetinari emerged, holding a length of rope.

The voice behind Colon said, ‘All right, it’s just a bit of rope. He was
probably banging a couple of coconut shells together.’

‘You mean, ones that he found in the minaret?’

‘He had them with him, obviously.’

‘You mean, he carries coconut shells around?’

‘You can’t _turn_ a donkey round in— all right, that’s a fake donkey
head . . .’

‘It’s moving its ears!’

‘On a string, on a string – all right, it’s a donkey, okay, but it’s not
the _same_ donkey. It’s one he had in a hidden pocket . . . well, no
need to look at me like that. I’ve seen them do it with doves . . .’

Then even the unbeliever fell silent.

‘Donkey, minaret,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘Minaret, donkey.’

‘Just like that?’ said a guard. ‘How did you do it? It was a trick,
right?’

‘Of course it was a trick,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘I _knew_ it was just a trick.’

‘That’s right, it was just a trick,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘So . . . how did you do it, then?’

‘You mean you can’t spot it?’

The crowd craned to see.

‘Er . . . you had an inflatable donkey—’

‘Can you think of any reason why I should go around with an inflatable
donkey?’

‘Well, you—’

‘One that you wouldn’t mind explaining to your own dear mother?’

‘If you’re going to put it like that—’

‘’s easy,’ said Al-jibla. ‘There’s a secret compartment in the minaret.
Must be.’

‘No, you’ve got it all wrong, it’s just an _illusion_ of a donkey . . .
Well, all right, it’s a _good_ illusion . . .’

By now half the people were around the donkey and the others were
clustered in the doorway of the minaret, looking for secret panels.

‘I think, Al and Beti, this is where we walk away,’ said Lord Vetinari,
behind Colon. ‘Just down this little alley here. And when we turn that
corner, we run.’

‘What’ve we got to run for?’ said Beti.

‘Because I’ve just picked up the magic carpet.’

* * *

Vimes was already lost. Oh, there was the sun, but that was just a
_direction_. He could feel it on the side of his face.

And the camel rocked from side to side. There was no real way of judging
distance, except by haemorrhoids.

I’m blindfolded on the back of a camel ridden by a D’reg, who everyone
says are the most untrustworthy people in the world. But I’m almost
positive he’s not going to kill me.

‘So,’ he said, as he rocked gently from side to side, ‘you may as well
tell me. Why 71-hour Ahmed?’

‘He killed a man,’ said Jabbar.

‘And D’regs object to a little thing like that?’

‘In the man’s own tent! When he had been his guest for nearly tree dace!
If he had but waited an hour—’

‘Oh, I _see_. Definitely bad manners. Had the man done anything to
deserve it?’

‘Nothing! Although . . .’

‘Yes?’

‘The man _had_ killed El-Ysa.’ The D’reg’s tone suggested that this
wasn’t much of a mitigating circumstance, but that it ought to be
mentioned out of completeness.

‘Who was she?’

‘El-Ysa was a village. He poisoned a well. There had been a dispute over
religion,’ he added. ‘One thing led to another . . . but even so, to
break the tradition of hospitality . . .’

‘Yes, I can see that’s a terrible thing. Almost . . . impolite.’

‘The hour was important. Some things should not be done.’

‘You’re right there, at least.’

By mid-afternoon Jabbar let him take off the blindfold. Wind-carved
heaps of black rock stood out of the sand. Vimes thought it was the most
desolate place he’d ever seen.

‘They say once it was green,’ said Jabbar. ‘A well watered land.’

‘What happened?’

‘The wind changed.’

At sunset they reached a wadi between more wind-scoured rocks, and it
was only the length of the shadows, deepening the shallow indentations,
that began to give them back an ancient shape.

‘They’re buildings, aren’t they?’ said Vimes.

‘There was a city here, a long time ago. Did you not know?’

‘Why should I know?’

‘Your people built it. It was called Tacticum. After a warrior of
yours.’

Vimes looked at the crumbled walls and fallen pillars.

‘He had a city named after him . . .’ he said to no one in particular.

Jabbar nudged him. ‘Ahmed is watching you,’ he said.

‘I can’t see him anywhere.’

‘Of course. Get down. And I hope we meet again in whatever is your
paradise.’

‘Right, right . . .’

Jabbar turned the camel round. It left much faster than it had arrived.

Vimes sat on a rock for a while. There was no sound but the hissing of
the wind in the rocks and the cry of some bird, far away.

He thought he could hear his own heart beating.

‘Bingeley . . . bingeley . . . beep . . .’ The Dis-organizer sounded
worried and uncertain.

Vimes sighed. ‘Yes? Appointment with 71-hour Ahmed, eh?’

‘Er . . . no . . .’ said the demon. ‘Er . . . Klatchian fleet
sighted . . . er . . .’

‘Ships of the desert, eh?’

‘Er . . . beep . . . error code 746, divergent temporal
instability . . .’

Vimes shook the box. ‘Something wrong with you?’ he demanded. ‘You’re
still giving me someone else’s appointments, you idiot box!’

‘Er . . . the appointments are correct for Commander Samuel Vimes . . .’

‘That’s me!’

‘Which one of you?’ said the demon.

‘What?’

‘. . .  beep . . .’

It refused to say more. Vimes considered throwing it away, but Sybil
would be hurt if she found out. He thrust it back into his pocket and
tried to concentrate on the scenery again.

His seat might have been part of a pillar once. Vimes saw other pieces
some way away, and then realized that a heap of apparent rubble was a
fallen wall. He followed this, his footsteps echoing off the cliffs, and
realized that he was walking between old buildings, or where buildings
had been. Here was the wreck of some stairs, there the stump of a
pillar.

One was a little higher than the others. He pulled himself up and found,
on its flat top, two huge feet. A statue must have stood here. It
probably stood, if Vimes knew anything about statues, in some kind of
noble attitude. Now it had gone, and there were just feet, broken off at
the ankles. They weren’t exceptionally noble.

As he lowered himself again he saw, protected because this side was out
of the wind, some lettering carved deeply into the plinth. He tried to
make it out in the fading light:

‘AB HOC POSSUM VIDERE DOMUM TUUM’

Well . . . ‘domum tuum’ was ‘your house’, wasn’t it? . . . and ‘videre’
was ‘I see’ . . .

‘What?’ he said aloud. ‘“I can see your house from up here?” What kind
of a noble sentiment is that?’

‘I believe it was meant to be a boast and a threat, Sir Samuel,’ said
71-hour Ahmed. ‘Somewhat typical of Ankh-Morpork, I’ve always thought.’

Vimes stood very still. The voice had been right behind him.

And it _was_ Ahmed’s voice. But it lacked that hint of camel spit and
gravel that it had possessed in Ankh-Morpork. Now it was the drawl of a
gentleman.

‘It’s the echoes here,’ Ahmed went on. ‘I _could_ be anywhere. I could
have a crossbow aimed at you right _now_.’

‘You won’t fire it, though. We’ve both got too much at stake.’

‘Oh, there is honour among thieves, is there?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Vimes. Oh, well . . . time to see if he was dead
right or just dead. ‘Is there honour among policemen?’

Sergeant Colon’s eyes went big.

‘Swing my weight to one side?’ he said.

‘That’s how magic carpets are steered,’ said Lord Vetinari calmly.

‘Yes, but supposing I swing myself off?’

‘We’ll have a lot more room,’ said Beti unfeelingly. ‘C’mon, sarge, you
know how to throw your weight around.’

‘I ain’t throwing my weight _anywhere_,’ said Colon firmly. He was lying
full length on the carpet, both hands gripping it as hard as possible.
‘It’s not natural, just a bit of broadloom between you and certain
splash.’

The Patrician looked down. ‘We’re not over water, sergeant.’

‘I know what I meant, sir!’

‘Can we slow down a bit?’ said Beti. ‘The breeze is invading my privacy,
if you get my drift.’

Lord Vetinari sighed. ‘We’re not going very fast as it is. I suspect
this is a very old carpet.’

‘There’s a frayed bit here,’ said Beti.

‘Shut up,’ said Colon.

‘Look, I can poke my finger right through—’

‘Shut up.’

‘Notice how it kind of wobbles when you move?’

‘Shut up.’

‘Here, look, those palm trees down there look really small.’

‘Nobby, you’re scared of heights,’ said Colon. ‘I _know_ you’re scared
of heights.’

‘That’s sexual stereotyping!’

‘No, it’s not!’

‘Yes, it is! You’ll be expecting me to break my ankle a lot and scream
all the time next! It’s my job to prove to you that a woman can be as
good as a man!’

‘Practically identical in your case, Nobby. You’ve caught too much sun,
that’s what it is. You are not female, Nobby!’

Beti sniffed. ‘That’s just the sort of sexist remark I’d expect from
you.’

‘Well, you’re not!’

‘It’s the principle of the thing.’

‘Well, at least we now have transport,’ said Lord Vetinari, his tone
suggesting that the show was over. ‘Unfortunately, I had no time to find
out where the army is.’

‘Ah! I can help you there, sir!’ Colon tried to salute, and then made a
grab for the carpet again. ‘I found out by cunning, sir!’

‘Really?’

‘Yessir! It’s at a place called . . . er . . . En al Sams la Laisa,
sir.’

The carpet drifted onwards for a moment, in silence.

‘“The Place where the Sun Shineth Not”?’ said the Patrician.

There was more silence. Colon was trying not to look at anyone.

‘Is there a somewhere called Gebra?’ said Nobby, sulkily.

‘Yes, Be— corporal. There is.’

‘They’ve gone there. Of course, you’ve only got a woman’s word for it.’

‘Well done, corporal. We shall head up the coast.’

Lord Vetinari relaxed. In a busy and complex life he’d never met people
quite like Nobby and Colon. They talked all the time yet there was
something almost . . . _restful_ about them.

He watched the dusty horizon carefully as the ancient carpet curved
around. Under his arm was the metal cylinder Leonard had made for him.

Drastic times required drastic measures.

‘Sir?’ said Colon, his voice muffled by the carpet.

‘Yes, sergeant?’

‘I’ve got to know . . . How _did_ you . . . you know . . . get the
donkey down?’

‘Persuasion, sergeant.’

‘What? Just talking?’

‘Yes, sergeant. Persuasion. And, admittedly, a sharp stick.’

‘Ah! I _knew_—’

‘The trick of getting donkeys down from minarets’, said the Patrician,
as the desert unwound below them, ‘is always to find that part of the
donkey which seriously wishes to get down.’

The wind had settled. The bird up on the cliffs had shut down for the
night. All Vimes could hear was the sizzle of the little desert
creatures.

Then Ahmed’s voice said: ‘I am genuinely impressed, Sir Samuel.’

Vimes took a deep breath. ‘You know, you really fooled me,’ he said.
‘“May your loins be full of fruit.” That was a good one. I really
thought you were just—’ He stopped. But Ahmed continued:

‘—just another camel-driver with a towel on his head? Oh, dear. And
you’d been doing so well up to now, Sir Samuel. The Prince was very
impressed.’

‘Oh, come _on_. You were all but making suggestive comments about
melons. What was I supposed to think?’

‘Don’t fret, Sir Samuel. I consider it all a compliment. You can turn
round. I wouldn’t dream of harming you unless you do something . . .
foolish.’

Vimes turned. He could just make out a shape in the afterglow.

‘You were admiring this place,’ said Ahmed. ‘Tacticus’s men had it built
when he tried to conquer Klatch. It’s not really a city by today’s
standards, of course. It was really just making a point. “Here we are
and here we stay,” as it were. And then the wind changed.’

‘You murdered Snowy Slopes, didn’t you?’

‘The term is executed. I can show you the confession he signed
beforehand.’

‘Of his own free will?’

‘More or less.’

‘What?’

‘Let us say, I pointed out to him the alternatives to signing the
confession. I was kind enough to leave you the pad. After all, I wanted
to keep your interest. And don’t look like that, Sir Samuel. I need
you.’

‘How can you tell how I look?’

‘I can guess. The Assassins’ Guild had a contract on him in any case.
And by a happy chance I _am_ a Guild member.’

‘_You_?’ Vimes tried to bite down on the word. And then: why _not_ him?
Kids got sent a thousand miles to be taught in the Assassins’ Guild
school . . .

‘Oh, yes. The best years of my life, they tell me. I was in Viper House.
Up School! Up School! Right Up School!’ He sighed like a prince and spat
like a camel driver. ‘If I shut my eyes I can still recall the taste of
that peculiar custard we used to get on Mondays. Dear me, how it all
comes back . . . I remember every soggy street. Does Mr Dibbler still
sell his horrible sausages inna bun in Treacle Mine Road?’

‘Yes.’

‘Still the same old Dibbler, eh?’

‘Still the same sausages.’

‘Once tasted, never forgotten.’

‘True.’

‘No, don’t move too quickly, Sir Samuel. Otherwise I’m afraid I shall be
cutting your own throat. You don’t trust me, and I don’t trust you.’

‘Why did you drag me here?’

‘Drag you? I had to sabotage my own ship so you wouldn’t lose me!’

‘Yes, but . . . you . . . knew how I’d react.’ Vimes’s heart began to
sink. _Everyone_ knew how Sam Vimes would react . . .

‘Yes. Would you like a cigarette, Sir Samuel?’

‘I thought you sucked those damn cloves.’

‘In Ankh-Morpork, yes. Always be a little bit foreign wherever you are,
because everyone knows foreigners are a little bit stupid. Besides,
these are rather good.’

‘Fresh from the desert?’

‘Hah! Yes, _everyone_ knows Klatchian cigarettes are made from camel
dung.’ A match flared, and for a moment Vimes caught a glimpse of the
hooked nose as Ahmed lit the cigarette for him. ‘That is one area where,
I regret to say, prejudice has some evidence on its side. No, these are
all the way from Sumtri. An island where, it is said, the women have no
souls. Personally, I doubt it.’

Vimes could make out a hand, holding the packet. Just for a moment he
wondered if he could grab and—

‘How is your luck?’ said Ahmed.

‘Running out, I suspect.’

‘Yes. A man should know the length of his luck. Shall I tell you how I
know you are a good man, Sir Samuel?’ In the light of the rising moon
Vimes saw Ahmed produce a cigarette holder, insert one, and light up
almost fastidiously.

‘Do tell.’

‘After the attempt on the Prince’s life I suspected _everyone_. But you
suspected only your own people. You couldn’t bring yourself to think the
Klatchians might have done it. Because that’d line you up with the likes
of Sergeant Colon and all the rest of the
Klatchian-fags-are-made-of-camel-dung brigade.’

‘Whose policeman are you?’

‘I draw my pay, let us say, as the _wali_ of Prince Cadram.’

‘I shouldn’t think he’s very happy with you right now, then. You were
supposed to be guarding his brother, weren’t you?’ So was I, Vimes
thought. But what the hell . . .

‘Yes. And we thought the same way, Sir Samuel. You thought it was your
people, I thought it was mine. The difference is, I was right.
Khufurah’s death was plotted in Klatch.’

‘Oh, really? That’s what they _wanted_ the Watch to think—’

‘_No_, Sir Samuel. The important thing is what someone wanted _you_ to
think.’

‘Really? Well, you’ve got that wrong. All the stuff with the glass and
the sand on the floor, I saw through . . . that . . . straight . . .
away . . .’

His voice faded into silence.

After a while Ahmed said, almost sympathetically, ‘Yes, you did.’

‘Damn.’

‘Oh, in some ways you were right. Ossie _was_ paid in dollars,
originally. And then, later on, someone broke in, making sure they
dumped _most_ of the glass outside, and swapped the money. And
distributed the sand. I must say that I thought the sand was going a bit
too far, too. No one would be _that_ stupid. But they wanted to make
sure it looked like a bungled attempt.’

‘_Who was it?_’ said Vimes.

‘Oh, a small-time thief. Bob-Bob Hardyoyo. He didn’t even know why he
was doing it, except that someone was willing to pay him. I commend your
city, commander. For enough money, you can find someone to do
_anything_.’

‘_Someone_ must have paid him.’

‘A man he met in a pub.’

Vimes nodded glumly. It was amazing how many people were prepared to do
business with a man they’d met in a pub.

‘I can believe that,’ he said.

‘You see, if even the redoubtable Commander Vimes, who is known even to
some senior Klatchian politicians as an unbendingly honest and thorough
man, if somewhat lacking in intelligence . . . if even _he_ protested
that it was done by his own people – well, the world is watching. The
world would soon find out. Starting a war over a rock? Well . . . that
sort of thing makes countries uneasy. They’ve all got rocks off their
coast. But starting a war because some foreign dog had killed a man on a
mission of peace . . . that, I think, the world would understand.’

‘Lacking in intelligence?’ said Vimes.

‘Oh, don’t be too depressed, commander. That business with the fire at
the embassy. That was sheer bravery.’

‘It was bloody terror!’

‘Well, the dividing line is narrow. That was one thing I hadn’t
expected.’

In the rolling, clicking snooker table of Vimes’s mind the black ball
hit a pocket.

‘You _had_ expected the _fire_, then?’

‘The building should have been almost empty—’

Vimes moved. Ahmed was lifted off his feet and slammed against a pillar,
with both of Vimes’s hands around his neck.

‘That woman was trapped in there!’

‘It . . . was . . . necessary!’ said Ahmed hoarsely. ‘There . . .
had . . . to be a . . . diversion! His . . . life was . . . in danger, I
had to get him out! I did . . . not know . . . about the . . . woman
until too late . . . I give you my word . . .’

Through the red veil of anger Vimes became aware of a prickle in the
region of his stomach. He glanced down at the knife that had appeared
magically in the other man’s hand.

‘Listen to me . . .’ hissed Ahmed. ‘Prince Cadram ordered his brother’s
death . . . What better way to demonstrate the . . . perfidy of the
sausage-eaters . . . killing a peace-maker . . .’

‘His own brother? You expect me to believe that?’

‘Messages were sent to . . . the embassy . . . in code . . .’

‘To the old ambassador? I don’t believe _that_!’

Ahmed stood quite still for a moment.

‘No, you really don’t, do you?’ he said. ‘Be generous, Sir Samuel.
_Truly_ treat all men equally. Allow Klatchians the right to be scheming
bastards, hmm? In fact the ambassador is just a pompous idiot.
Ankh-Morpork has no monopoly on them. But his deputy sees the messages
first. He is . . . a young man of ambition . . .’

Vimes relaxed his grip. ‘Him? I _thought_ he was shifty as soon as I saw
him!’

‘I suspect that you thought he was Klatchian as soon as you saw him, but
I take your point.’

‘And you could read this code, could you?’

‘Oh, come now. Don’t you read Vetinari’s paperwork upside down when
you’re standing in front of his desk? Besides, I am Prince Cadram’s
policeman . . .’

‘So he’s your boss, right?’

‘Who is _your_ boss, Sir Samuel? When push comes to shove?’

The two men stood locked together. Ahmed’s breath wheezed.

Vimes stood back. ‘These messages . . . you’ve got them?’

‘Oh, yes. With his seal on them.’ Ahmed rubbed his neck.

‘Good grief. The originals? I’d have thought they’d be under lock and
key.’

‘They were. In the embassy. But in the fire many hands were needed to
carry important documents to safety. It was a very . . . _useful_ fire.’

‘A death warrant for his own brother . . . well, you can’t argue against
that in court . . .’

‘What court? The king _is_ the law.’ Ahmed sat down. ‘We are not like
you. You kill kings.’

‘The word is “execute”. And we only did it once, and that was a long
time ago,’ said Vimes. ‘Is _that_ why you brought me here? Why all this
drama? You could have come to see me in Ankh-Morpork!’

‘You are a suspicious man, commander. Would you have believed me?
Besides, I had to get Prince Khufurah out of there, before he, ahah,
“died of his wounds”.’

‘Where’s the Prince now?’

‘Close. And safe. He is safer in the desert than he would ever be in
Ankh-Morpork, I can assure you.’

‘And well?’

‘Getting better. He is being looked after by an old lady whom I trust.’

‘Your mother?’

‘Ye gods, no! My mother is a D’reg! She’d be terribly offended if I
trusted her. She’d say she hadn’t brought me up right.’

He saw Vimes’s expression this time. ‘You think I am an educated
barbarian?’

‘Let’s just say I’d have given Snowy Slopes a running start.’

‘Really? Look around you, Sir Samuel. Your . . . beat . . . is a city
you can walk across in half an hour. Mine is two million square miles of
desert and mountain. My companions are a sword and a camel and, frankly,
neither are good conversationalists, believe me. Oh, the towns and
cities have their guards, of a sort. They are uncomplicated thinkers.
But it is my job to go into the waste places and chase bandits and
murderers, five hundred miles from anyone who would be on my side, so I
must inspire dread and strike the first blow because I will not have a
chance to strike a second one. I am an honest man of a sort, I think. I
survive. I survived seven years in an Ankh-Morpork public school
patronized by the sons of gentlemen. Compared to that, life among the
D’regs holds no terrors, I assure you. And I administer justice swiftly
and inexpensively.’

‘I heard about how you got your name . . .’

Ahmed shrugged. ‘The man had poisoned the water. The only well for
twenty miles. That killed five men, seven women, thirteen children and
thirty-one camels. And some of them were very valuable camels, mark you.
I had evidence from the man who sold him the poison and a trustworthy
witness who had seen him near the well on the fateful night. Once I had
testimony from his servant, why wait even an hour?’

‘Sometimes we have trials,’ said Vimes brightly.

‘Yes. Your Lord Vetinari decides. Well, five hundred miles from anywhere
the law is me.’ Ahmed waved a hand. ‘Oh, no doubt the man would suggest
there were mitigating circumstances, that he had an unhappy childhood or
was driven by Compulsive Well-Poisoning Disorder. But I have a
compulsion to behead cowardly murderers.’

Vimes gave up. The man had a point. The man had a whole sword.

‘Different strokes for different folks,’ he said.

‘I find the one at shoulder height generally suffices,’ said Ahmed.
‘Don’t grimace, it was a joke. I knew the Prince was plotting and I
thought: this is not right. Had he killed some Ankh-Morpork lord, that
would just be politics. But this . . . I thought, why do I chase stupid
people into the mountains when I am part of a big crime? The Prince
wants to unite the whole of Klatch. Personally, I like the little tribes
and countries, even their little wars. But I don’t mind if they fight
Ankh-Morpork because they want to, or because of your horrible personal
habits, or your unthinking arrogance . . . there’s a lot of reasons for
fighting Ankh-Morpork. A lie isn’t one of them.’

‘I know what you mean,’ said Vimes.

‘But what can I do alone? Arrest my Prince? I am his policeman, as you
are Vetinari’s.’

‘No. I’m an officer of the law.’

‘All I know is, there must be a policeman, even for kings.’

Vimes looked pensively at the moonlit desert.

Somewhere out there was the Ankh-Morpork army, what there was of it. And
somewhere waiting was the Klatchian army. And thousands of men who might
have quite liked one another had they met socially would thunder towards
one another and start killing, and after that first rush you had all the
excuses you needed to do it again and again . . .

He remembered listening, when he was a kid, to old men in his street
talking about war. There hadn’t been many wars in his time. The city
states of the Sto Plains mainly tried to bankrupt one another, or the
Assassins’ Guild sorted everything out on a one-to-one basis. Most of
the time people just bickered, and while that was pretty annoying it was
a lot better than having a sword stuck in your liver.

What he remembered most, among the descriptions of puddles filled with
blood and the flying limbs, was the time one old man said, ‘An’ if your
foot caught in something, it was always best not to look and see what it
was, if’n you wanted to hold on to your dinner.’ He’d never explained
what he meant. The other old men seemed to know. Anyway, nothing could
have been worse than the explanations Vimes thought of for himself. And
he remembered that the three old men who spent most of their days
sitting on a bench in the sun had, between them, five arms, five eyes,
four and a half legs and two and three-quarter faces. And seventeen ears
(Crazy Winston would bring out his collection for a good boy who looked
suitably frightened).

‘He _wants_ to start a war . . .’ Vimes had to open his mouth because
otherwise there was no room to get his head around such a crazy idea.
This man who everyone said was honest, noble and good _wanted_ a war.

‘Oh, certainly,’ said Ahmed. ‘Nothing unites people like a good war.’

How could you deal with someone who thought like that? Vimes asked
himself. A mere murderer, well, you had a whole range of options. He
could deal with a mere murderer. You had criminals and you had
policemen, and there was a sort of see-saw there which balanced out in
some strange way. But if you took a man who’d sit down and _decide_ to
start a war, what in the name of seven hells could you balance him with?
You’d need a policeman the size of a country.

You couldn’t blame the soldiers. They’d just joined up to be pointed in
the right direction.

Something clicked against the fallen pillar. Vimes glanced down and
pulled the baton out of his pocket. It glinted in the moonlight.

What damn good was something like this? All it really meant was that he
was allowed to chase the little criminals, who did the little crimes.
There was nothing he could do about the crimes that were so big you
couldn’t even see them. You _lived_ in them. So . . . safer to stick to
the little crimes, Sam Vimes.

‘ALL RIGHT, MY SONS! LET ’EM HAVE IT RIGHT UP THE JOGRAPHY!’

Figures bounded over the fallen pillars.

There was a metallic whirr as Ahmed unsheathed his sword.

Vimes saw a halberd coming towards him – an Ankh-Morpork halberd! – and
street reaction took over. He didn’t waste time sneering at someone
stupid enough to use a pike on a foot soldier. He dodged the blade,
caught the shaft, and pulled it so hard that its owner stumbled right
into his upswinging boot.

Then he jerked away, struggling to untangle his sword from the
unfamiliar robes. He ducked another shadowy figure’s wild slice and
managed to make an elbow connect with something painful.

As he rose he looked into the face of a man with an upraised sword –

—there was a silken sound—

—and the man swayed backwards, his head looking surprised as it fell
away from the body.

Vimes dragged his headdress off.

‘I’m from Ankh-Morpork, you stupid sods!’

A huge figure rose in front of him, a sword in each hand.

‘I’LL CUT YER TONKER OFF’F YER YER GREASY— Oh, is that you, Sir Samuel?’

‘Huh? Willikins?’

‘Indeed, sir.’ The butler straightened up.

‘_Willikins?_’

‘Do excuse me one moment, sir KNOCK IT OFF YOU MOTHERLOVIN SONS OF
BITCHES I had no apprehension of your presence, sir.’

‘This one’s fightin’ back, sarge!’

Ahmed had his back to a pillar. A man already lay at his feet. Three
others were trying to get close enough to the _wali_ while staying away
from the whirling wall he was creating with his sword.

‘Ahmed! These are on our side!’ Vimes yelled.

‘Oh, really? Pardon _me_.’

Ahmed lowered his sword and removed the cigarette holder from his mouth.
He nodded at one of the soldiers who had been trying to attack him and
said, ‘Good morning to you.’

‘’ere, are you one of ours, too?’

‘No, I’m one of—’

‘He’s with me,’ Vimes snapped. ‘How come you’re here, Willikins?
_Sergeant_ Willikins, I see.’

‘We were on patrol, sir, and were attacked by some Klatchian gentlemen.
After the ensuing unpleasantness—’

‘—you should’ve seen ’im, sir. ’e bit one bastard’s nose right orf!’ a
soldier supplied.

‘It is true that I endeavoured to uphold the good name of Ankh-Morpork,
sir. Anyway, after we—’

‘—and one bloke, sarge, stabbed ’im right in the—’

‘Please, Private Bourke, I am apprising Sir Samuel of events,’ said
Willikins.

‘Sarge ort to get a medal, sir!’

‘Those few of us who survived tried to get back, sir, but we had to
conceal ourselves from other patrols and were just considering lying up
until dawn in this edifice when we espied you and this gentleman here.’

Ahmed was watching him with his mouth open.

‘How many were in this Klatchian patrol, sergeant?’ he said.

‘Nineteen men, sir.’

‘That’s a very precise count, in this light.’

‘I was able to enumerate them subsequently, sir.’

‘You mean they were all killed?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Willikins calmly. ‘However, we ourselves lost five men,
sir. Not including Privates Hobbley and Webb, sir, who regrettably seem
to have passed away as a result of this unfortunate misunderstanding.
With your permission, sir, I will remove them.’

‘Poor devils,’ said Vimes, aware that it was not enough but that nothing
else would be, either.

‘The fortunes of war, sir. Private Hobbley, Ginger to his friends, was
nineteen and lived in Ettercap Street, where until recently he made
bootlaces.’ Willikins took the dead man’s arms and pulled. ‘He was
courting a young lady called Grace, a picture of whom he was kind enough
to show me last night. A maid at Lady Venturi’s, I was given to
understand. If you would be good enough to pass me his head, sir, I will
get on with things SMUDGER WHO TOLD YOU TO SIT DOWN GET ON YORE FEET
RIGHT NOW GET OUT YORE SHOVEL TAKE OFF YORE HELMET SHOW SOME RESPECT GET
DIGGINGHA!’

A cloud of smoke rolled past Vimes’s ear.

‘I know what you are thinking,’ said Ahmed. ‘But this _is_ war, Sir
Samuel. Wake up and smell the blood.’

‘But . . . one minute they’re alive—’

‘Your friend here knows how it works. You don’t.’

‘He’s a butler!’

‘So? It’s kill or be killed, even for butlers. You’re not a natural
warrior, Sir Samuel.’

Vimes thrust the baton in his face.

‘I’m not a natural _killer_! See this? See what it says? I’m supposed to
keep the peace, I am! If I kill people to do it, I’m reading the wrong
manual!’

Willikins appeared silently, hefting the other corpse. ‘I was not
privileged to know much about this young man,’ he said, as he carried
him behind a rock. ‘We called him Spider, sir,’ he went on,
straightening up. ‘He played the harmonica rather badly and spoke
longingly of home. Will you be taking tea, sir? Private Smith is having
a brew-up. Er . . .’ The butler coughed politely.

‘Yes, Willikins?’

‘I hardly like to broach the subject, sir . . .’

‘Broach it, man!’

‘Do you have such a thing as a biscuit about you, sir? I hesitate to
provide tea without biscuits, but we have not eaten for two days.’

‘But you were on patrol!’

‘Forage party, sir.’ Willikins looked embarrassed.

Vimes was bewildered. ‘You mean Rust didn’t even wait to take on food?’

‘Oh, yes, sir. But as it transpired—’

‘We knew there was somethin’ wrong when the mutton barrels started to
explode,’ muttered Private Bourke. ‘The biscuits was pretty lively too.
Turned out bloody Rust’d bought a lot of stuff even a rag’ead wouldn’t
eat—’

‘And we eat _anything_,’ said 71-hour Ahmed solemnly.

‘PRIVATE BOURKE YOU ORRIBLE MAN SPEAKIN OF YORE COMMANDIN OFFICER LIKE
THAT YOU WILL BE ON A CHARGE I apologize, sir, but we are feeling a
little faint.’

‘Long time between noses, eh?’ said 71-hour Ahmed.

‘Ahahaha, sir,’ said Willikins.

Vimes sighed. ‘Willikins . . . when you’ve finished, I want you and your
men to come with me.’

‘Very good, sir.’

Vimes nodded at Ahmed.

‘And you too,’ he said. ‘Push has come to shove.’

The hot wind flapped the banners. The sunlight sparkled off the spears.
Lord Rust surveyed his army and found that it was good. But small.

He leaned towards his adjutant.

‘Let us not forget, though, that even General Tacticus was outnumbered
ten to one when he took the Pass of Al-Ibi,’ he said.

‘Yes, sir. Although I believe his men were all mounted on elephants,
sir,’ said Lieutenant Hornett. ‘And had been well provisioned,’ he added
meaningfully.

‘Possibly, possibly. But then Lord Pinwoe’s cavalry once charged the
full might of the Pseudopolitan army and are renowned in song and
story.’

‘But they were all killed, sir!’

‘Yes, yes, but it was a famous charge, nevertheless. And every child
knows, do they not, the story of the mere one hundred Ephebians who
defeated the entire Tsortean army? A total victory, hey? Hey?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said the adjutant glumly.

‘Oh, you admit it?’

‘Yes, sir. Of course, some commentators believe the earthquake helped.’

‘At least you will admit that the Seven Heroes of Hergen beat the
Big-Footed People although outnumbered by a hundred to one?’

‘Yes, sir. That was a nursery story, sir. It never really happened.’

‘Are you calling my nurse a liar, boy?’

‘No, sir,’ said Lieutenant Hornett hurriedly.

‘Then you’ll concede that Baron Mimbledrone _single-handedly_ beat the
armies of the Plum Pudding Country and ate their Sultana?’

‘I envy him, sir.’ The lieutenant looked at the lines again. The men
were very hungry, although Rust would probably have called them sleek.
Things would have been even worse if it hadn’t been for the fortuitous
shower of boiled lobsters on the way over. ‘Er . . . you don’t think,
sir, since we have a little time in hand, we should look to the
disposition of the men, sir?’

‘They look well disposed to me. Plucky men, eager to be at the fray!’

‘Yes, sir. I meant . . . more . . . well . . . positioned, sir.’

‘Nothing wrong with ’em, man. Beautifully lined up! Hey? A wall of steel
poised to thrust at the black heart of the Klatchian aggressor!’

‘Yes, sir. But – and I realize this is a _remote_ chance, sir – it might
be that while we’re thrusting at the heart of the Klatchian aggressor—’

‘—black heart—’ Rust corrected him.

‘—black heart of the Klatchian aggressor, sir, the arms of the Klatchian
aggressor, those companies _there_ and _there_, sir, will sweep around
in the classic pincer movement.’

‘The thrusting wall of steel served us magnificently in the second war
with Quirm!’

‘We lost that one, sir.’

‘But it was a damn close-run thing!’

‘We still lost, sir.’

‘What did you do as a civilian, lieutenant?’

‘I was a surveyor, sir, and I can read Klatchian. That’s why you made me
an officer.’

‘So you don’t know how to fight?’

‘Only how to count, sir.’

‘Pah! Show a little courage, man. Although I’ll wager you won’t need to.
No stomach for a battle, Johnny Klatchian. Once he tastes our steel,
he’ll be off!’

‘I certainly hear what you say, sir,’ said the adjutant, who had been
surveying the Klatchian lines and had formed his own opinion about the
matter.

His opinion was this: the main force of the Klatchian army had, in
recent years, been fighting everyone. That suggested, to his
uncomplicated mind, that by now the surviving soldiers were the ones who
were in the habit of being alive at the end of battles. And were also
very experienced at facing all kinds of enemies. The stupid ones were
dead.

The current Ankh-Morpork army, on the other hand, had never faced an
enemy at all, although day-to-day experience of living in the city might
count for something there, at least in the rougher areas. He believed,
along with General Tacticus, that courage, bravery and the indomitable
human spirit were fine things which nevertheless tended to take second
place to the _combination_ of courage, bravery, the indomitable human
spirit _and_ a six-to-one superiority of numbers.

It had all sounded straightforward in Ankh-Morpork, he thought. We were
going to sail into Klatch and be in Al-Khali by teatime, drinking
sherbet with pliant young women in the Rhoxi. The Klatchians would take
one look at our weapons and run away.

Well, the Klatchians had taken a good look this morning. So far they
hadn’t run. They appeared to be sniggering a lot.

Vimes rolled his eyes. It worked . . . but _how_ did it work?

He’d heard plenty of good speakers, and Captain Carrot was not among
them. He hesitated, lost the thread, repeated himself and in general
made a mess of the whole thing.

And yet . . .

And yet . . .

He watched the faces that were watching Carrot. There were the D’regs,
and some of the Klatchians who had stayed behind, and Willikins and his
reduced company. They were listening.

It was a kind of magic. He told people they were good chaps, and they
knew they weren’t good chaps, but the way he told it made them believe
it for a while. Here was someone who thought you were a noble and worthy
person, and somehow it would be unthinkable to disappoint them. It was a
mirror of a speech, reflecting back to you what you wanted to hear. And
he meant it all.

Even so, men occasionally glanced up at Vimes and Ahmed and he could see
them thinking, in their separate ways, ‘It must be all right if they’re
in on it.’ That, he was ashamed to realize, was one of the advantages of
armies. People looked to other people for orders.

‘This is a trick?’ said Ahmed.

‘No. He doesn’t know any tricks like that,’ said Angua. ‘He really
doesn’t. Uh-oh . . .’

There was a scuffle in the ranks.

Carrot strode forward and reached down, bringing up Private Bourke and a
D’reg, each man held by the collar in one big fist.

‘What’s going on, you two?’

‘He called me the brother of a pig, sir!’

‘Liar! You called _me_ a greasy dishcloth-head!’

Carrot shook his head. ‘And you were both doing so well, too,’ he said
sadly. ‘There really is no call for this. Now I want you, Hashel, and
_you_, Vincent, to shake hands, right? And apologize, yes? We’ve all had
a rather trying time, but I know you’re both fine fellows underneath it
all—’

Vimes heard Ahmed murmur, ‘Oh, well, _now_ it’s all over . . .’

‘—so if you’ll just shake hands we’ll say no more about it.’

Vimes glanced at 71-hour Ahmed. The man was wearing a sort of waxen
grin.

The two scufflers very gingerly touched hands, as if they were expecting
a spark to leap the gap.

‘And now you, Vincent, apologize to Mr Hashel . . .’

There was a reluctant ‘’ry’.

‘And we’re sorry for what?’ Carrot prompted.

‘. . .  sorry for calling him a greasy dishcloth-head . . .’

‘Well said. And _you_, Hashel, apologize to Private Bourke.’

The D’reg’s eyes scurried around their sockets, looking to find a way
out that would allow their body to come too. Then he gave up.

‘’ry . . .’

‘For . . . ?’

‘’ry for calling him a brother of a pig . . .’

Carrot lowered both men.

‘Good! I’m sure you’ll get along splendidly once you get to know each
other—’

‘I didn’t just see that, did I?’ said Ahmed. ‘I didn’t just see him talk
like a little schoolteacher to Hashel who, I happen to know, once hit a
man so hard his nose ended up in one of his ears?’

‘Yes, you did,’ said Angua. ‘And now watch them.’

When the rest of the men turned their attention back to Carrot the
scufflers looked at one another, as unfortunates who had both been
through the same baptism of fiery embarrassment.

Private Bourke gingerly offered Hashel a cigarette.

‘It only works around him,’ said Angua. ‘But it _does_ work.’

Let it go on working, Vimes prayed.

Carrot walked over to a kneeling camel and climbed into the saddle.

‘That’s “Evil Brother-in-Law of a Jackal”,’ said Ahmed. ‘Jabbar’s camel!
It bites everyone who tries to ride it!’

‘Yes, but this is Carrot.’

‘It even bites Jabbar!’

‘And you notice how he knew how to get on a camel?’ said Vimes. ‘How he
wears the robes? He’s _fitting in_. The boy was raised in a dwarf mine.
It took him about a month to know my own damn city better than I do.’

The camel rose. Now the flag, Vimes thought, give him the flag. When you
go to war, there’s got to be a flag.

On cue, Constable Shoe passed up the spear with the tightly rolled cloth
around it. The constable looked proud. He’d stitched the thing in
conditions of great secrecy half an hour before. One thing about a
zombie, you always knew someone who had a needle and thread.

But don’t unfurl it, Vimes thought. Don’t let them see it. It’s enough
for them to know they’re marching under a flag.

Carrot brandished the spear.

‘And I promise you this,’ he shouted, ‘if we succeed, no one will
remember. And if we fail, no one will forget!’

Probably one of the worst rallying cries, Vimes thought, since General
Pidley’s famous ‘Let’s all get our throats cut, boys!’ but it got a huge
cheer. And once again he speculated that there was magic going on at
some bone-deep level. People followed Carrot out of curiosity.

‘All right, you’ve got an army, I suppose,’ said Ahmed. ‘And now?’

‘I’m a policeman. So are you. There’s going to be a crime. Saddle up,
Ahmed.’

Ahmed salaamed. ‘I am happy to be led by a white officer, offendi.’

‘I didn’t mean—’

‘Have you ever ridden a camel before, Sir Samuel?’

‘No!’

‘Ah?’ Ahmed smiled faintly. ‘Then just give it a prod to get started.
And when you want to stop, hit it very hard with the stick and shout
“Huthuthut!”’

‘You hit it with a stick to make it stop?’

‘Is there any other way?’ said 71-hour Ahmed.

His camel looked at Vimes, and then spat in his eye.

* * *

Prince Cadram and his generals surveyed the distant enemy, from
horseback. The various Klatchian armies were drawn up in front of Gebra.
Compared to them, the Ankh-Morpork regiments looked like a group of
tourists who had missed their coach.

‘Is that _all_?’ he said.

‘Yes, sire,’ said General Ashal. ‘But, you see, they believe that
fortune favours the brave.’

‘That is a reason to field such a contemptible little army?’

‘Ah, sire, but they believe that we will turn and run as soon as we
taste some cold steel.’

The Prince looked back at the distant banners. ‘Why?’

‘I couldn’t say, sire. It appears to be an item of faith.’

‘Strange.’ The Prince nodded to one of his bodyguards. ‘Fetch me some
cold steel.’

After some hurried discussion a sword was handed up very gingerly,
handle first. The prince peered at it, and then licked it with
theatrical care. The watching soldiers laughed.

‘No,’ he said at last. ‘No, I have to say that I don’t feel the least
apprehensive. Is this as cold as steel gets?’

‘Lord Rust was probably being metaphorical, sire.’

‘Ah. He is the sort who would be. Well, let us go forward and meet him.
We must be civilized, after all.’

He urged his horse forward. The generals fell in behind him.

The prince leaned down towards General Ashal again.

‘And why are we going out to meet him before battle commences?’

‘It’s a . . . it’s a goodwill gesture, sire. Warriors honouring one
another.’

‘But the man’s a complete incompetent!’

‘Indeed, sire.’

‘And we’re about to set thousands of our countrymen against one another,
aren’t we?’

‘Indeed, sire.’

‘So what does the maniac want to do? Tell me there’s no hard feelings?’

‘Broadly speaking, sire . . . yes. I understand the motto of his old
school was “It matters not that you won or lost, but that you took
part.”’

The Prince’s lips moved as he tried this out once or twice. Finally he
said: ‘And, knowing this, people still take orders from him?’

‘It would seem so, sire.’

Prince Cadram shook his head. We can learn from Ankh-Morpork, his father
had said. Sometimes we can learn what not to do. And so he’d set out to
learn.

First he’d learned that Ankh-Morpork had once ruled quite a slice of
Klatch. He’d visited the ruins of one of its colonies. And so he’d found
out the name of the man who had been audacious enough to do this, and
had got agents in Ankh-Morpork to find out as much about him as
possible.

General Tacticus, he’d been called. And Prince Cadram had read a lot and
remembered everything, and ‘tactics’ had been very, very useful in the
widening of the empire. Of course, this had its own drawbacks. You had a
border, and across the border came bandits. So you sent a force to quell
the bandits, and in order to stamp them out you had to take over their
country, and soon you had another restless little vassal state to rule.
And now _that_ had a border, over which came, sure as sunrise, a fresh
lot of raiders. So your new _tax-paying_ subjects were demanding
protection from their brother raiders, neglecting to pay their taxes,
and doing a little light banditry on the side. And so once again you
stretched your forces, whether you wanted to or not . . .

He sighed. For the serious empire-builder there was no such thing as a
final frontier. There was only another problem. If only people would
understand . . .

Nor was there such a thing as a game of war. General Tacticus knew that.
Learn about your opposite number, _yes_, and respect his abilities if he
had them, certainly. But never pretend that afterwards you were going to
meet up for a drink and charge-by-charge replay.

‘He could well be insane, sire,’ the general went on.

‘Oh, good.’

‘However, I’m told that he recently referred to Klatchians as the finest
soldiers in the world, sire.’

‘Really?’

‘He added “when led by white officers”, sire.’

‘Oh?’

‘And we are offering him breakfast, sire. It would be most impolite of
him to refuse.’

‘_What_ a good idea. Have we got an adequate supply of sheeps’ eyes?’

‘I took the liberty of telling the cooks to save some up for this very
eventuality, sire.’

‘Then we must see he gets them. After all, he will be our honoured
guest. Well, let us do this thing properly. Please try to look as if you
hate the taste of cold steel.’

The Klatchians had set up an open-sided tent on the sand between the two
armies. In the welcome shade a low table had been laid. Lord Rust and
his company were already waiting, and had been for more than half an
hour.

They stood up and bowed awkwardly as Prince Cadram entered. Around the
tent the Klatchian and Ankh-Morpork honour guards eyed one another
suspiciously, every man trying to get the drop on the others.

‘Tell me . . . do any of you gentlemen speak Klatchian?’ said Prince
Cadram, after the lengthy introductions.

Lord Rust’s grin stayed fixed. ‘Hornett?’ he hissed.

‘I’m not quite certain what he said, sir,’ said the lieutenant
nervously.

‘I thought you knew Klatchian!’

‘I can read it, sir. That’s not the same . . .’

‘Oh, don’t worry,’ said the Prince. ‘As we say in Klatch, this clown’s
in charge of an army?’

Around the tent, the Klatchian generals suddenly went poker-faced.

‘Hornett?’

‘Er . . . something about . . . to own, to control . . . er . . .’

Cadram smiled at Lord Rust. ‘I’m not entirely familiar with this
custom,’ he said. ‘You often meet your enemies before battle?’

‘It is considered honourable,’ said Lord Rust. ‘I believe that on the
night before the famous Battle of Pseudopolis officers from both sides
attended a ball at Lady Selachii’s, for example.’

The Prince glanced questioningly at General Ashal, who nodded.

‘Really? Obviously we have so much to learn. As the poet Mosheda says, I
can’t believe this man.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said Lord Rust. ‘Klatchian is a very poetic language.’

‘Excuse me, sir,’ said Lieutenant Hornett.

‘What is it, man?’

‘There’s . . . er . . . something going on . . .’

There was a column of dust in the distance. Something was approaching
fast.

‘One moment,’ said General Ashal.

He came back from his saddle with an ornate metal tube, covered in the
curly Klatchian script. He squinted into one end and pointed the other
at the cloud.

‘Mounted men,’ he said. ‘Camels _and_ horses.’

‘That’s a Make-Things-Bigger device, isn’t it?’ said Lord Rust. ‘My
word, you _are_ up to date. They were invented only last year.’

‘I didn’t buy this, my lord. I inherited it from my grandfather—’ The
general looked through the eyepiece again. ‘About forty men, I’d say.’

‘Dear me,’ murmured Prince Cadram. ‘Reinforcements, Lord Rust?’

‘They’ve . . . the rider in the lead is holding a . . . a banner, I
think, still rolled up—’

‘Certainly not, sire!’ said Lord Rust. Behind him, Lord Selachii rolled
his eyes.

‘—ah, now he’s unfurling it . . . it’s . . . a _white_ flag, sire.’

‘Someone wishes to surrender?’

The general lowered his telescope. ‘It doesn’t . . . I don’t . . . they
seem to be in a great hurry to do so, sire.’

‘Send a squad to apprehend them,’ said Prince Cadram.

‘We will do so too,’ added Lord Rust hurriedly, nodding to the
lieutenant.

‘Ah, a joint effort,’ said the Prince.

A few seconds later groups of men detached themselves from each army and
rode out on an interception course.

Everyone saw the sudden glints of sunlight from the approaching cloud.
Weapons had been drawn.

‘Fighting under a flag of surrender? That’s . . . _immoral_!’ said Lord
Rust.

‘Novel, certainly,’ said the Prince.

The three companies would have met, had it not been that even experts
find it hard to judge how much ground a running camel can cover. By the
time both commanders realized they should start to turn, they should
have already been turning.

‘It seems your people misjudged things, sire,’ said Lord Rust.

‘I _knew_ I should have had them led by white officers,’ said the
Prince. ‘But . . . oh dear, it seems your men have been equally
unlucky—’

He stopped. Some confusion had resulted. The foray parties had their
instructions, but no one had told them what to do if they ran into the
other foray party. And it was composed, after all, of men they were
about to fight, and everyone knew they were treacherous greasy towel
heads or perfidious untrustworthy sausage-eating madmen. And this was a
battlefield. And everyone was frightened and, therefore, angry. And
everyone was armed.

Sam Vimes heard the shouting behind him but had other things on his mind
at this point. It is impossible to ride a running camel without
concentrating on your liver and kidneys, in the hope that they won’t be
pounded out of your body.

The thing’s legs weren’t moving right, he was sure. Nothing on normal
legs could be jolting him around so much. The horizon jerked backwards
and forwards and up and down.

What was it Ahmed had said?

Vimes hit the camel hard and yelled, ‘Huthuthut!’

It accelerated. The jolts ran together, so that his body was no longer
being jolted but was in effect in a permanent state of jolt.

Vimes thrashed it again and tried to yell, ‘Huthuthut!’ although the
word came out more like ‘Hngngngn!’ In any case, the camel found some
extra knees somewhere.

There was more shouting behind him. Turning his head as much as he
dared, he saw several of his accompanying D’regs falling behind. He was
certain he heard Carrot yell, but he couldn’t be certain because of his
own screaming.

‘Stop, you bastard!’ he yelled.

The tent was coming up fast. Vimes slapped the stick down again and
hauled on the reins and, clearly now judging with special camel
sensitivity that this was the most embarrassing moment to stop, the
camel stopped. Vimes slid forward, flung his arms round a neck that was
apparently thatched with old doormats, and half fell, half dropped on to
the sand.

Other camels were thudding to a halt around him. Carrot grabbed his arm.

‘Are you all right, sir? That was amazing! You really impressed the
D’regs, screaming defiance like that! And you were still shouting for
the camel to go faster when it was already galloping!’

‘Gngn?’

The guards around the tent were hesitating, but that wouldn’t last long.

The wind caught the white flag on Carrot’s lance, making it snap.

‘Sir, this _is_ all right, isn’t it? I mean, usually a white flag—’

‘Might as well show what we’re fighting for, eh?’

‘I suppose so, sir.’

D’regs had surrounded the tent. The air was full of dust and screams.

‘What happened back there?’

‘A bit of fracas, sir. Our—’ Carrot hesitated and then corrected
himself. ‘That is, Ankh-Morpork soldiers and Klatchians have started
fighting, sir. And the D’regs are fighting both of them.’

‘What, before the battle’s officially declared? Can’t you get
disqualified for that?’

Vimes looked back at the guards and pointed to the flag.

‘You know what this flag is?’ he said. ‘Well, I want you to—’

‘Aren’t you Mr Vimes?’ said one of the Morporkians. ‘And that’s Captain
Carrot, isn’t it?’

‘Oh, hello, Mr Smallplank,’ said Carrot. ‘Feeding you well, are they?’

‘Yessir!’

Vimes rolled his eyes. That was Carrot again, _knowing_ everyone. And
the man had called him ‘sir’ . . .

‘We just need to go through,’ said Carrot. ‘We won’t be a minute.’

‘Well, sir, these tow—’ Smallplank hesitated. Certain words didn’t come
so easily when the subjects were standing very close to you, looking
very big and tooled up. ‘These Klatchians are on guard too, you see—’

A stream of blue smoke was blown past Vimes’s ear.

‘Good morning, gentlemen,’ said 71-hour Ahmed. He had a D’reg crossbow
in each hand. ‘You will note that the soldiers behind me are also well
armed? Good. My name is 71-hour Ahmed. I will shoot the last man to drop
his weapons. You have my word on it.’

The Morporkians looked puzzled. The Klatchians began to whisper
urgently.

‘Put ’em down, boys,’ said Vimes.

The Morporkians threw their swords down hurriedly. The Klatchians
dropped theirs very shortly afterwards.

‘A tie between the gentleman on the left and the tall one with the
squint,’ said 71-hour Ahmed, raising both crossbows.

‘Hey,’ said Vimes, ‘you can’t—’

The bows twanged. The men dropped, yelling.

‘However,’ said Ahmed, handing the bows to a D’reg behind him, who
handed him another loaded one, ‘out of deference to the sensibilities of
Commander Vimes here, I’m settling for one in the thigh and one in the
toes. We are, after all, on a mission of peace.’

He turned to Vimes. ‘I’m sorry, Sir Samuel, but it’s important that
people know where they stand with me.’

‘These two don’t,’ said Vimes.

‘They’ll live.’

Vimes moved closer to the _wali_.

‘_Huthuthut?_’ he hissed. ‘You told me that it meant—’

‘I thought it would prove a good example to all if you were in the
lead,’ Ahmed whispered. ‘The D’regs will always follow a man who is in a
hurry for the fray.’

Lord Rust stepped out into the sunlight and glared at Vimes.

‘Vimes? What the hell are you doing?’

‘Not turning a blind eye, my lord.’

Vimes pushed past and into the shade. There was Prince Cadram, still
seated. And there were a lot of armed men. These, he noted almost in
passing, didn’t have the look of ordinary soldiers. They had the much
tougher look of loyal bodyguards.

‘So,’ said the Prince, ‘you come in here armed, under a flag of peace?’

‘Are you Prince Cadram?’ said Vimes.

‘And you, too, Ahmed?’ said the Prince, ignoring Vimes.

Ahmed nodded, and said nothing.

Oh, not now, thought Vimes. Tough as leather and vicious as a wasp, but
now he’s in the presence of his king . . .

‘You’re under arrest,’ he said.

The Prince made a little sound between a cough and a laugh.

‘I’m _what_?’

‘I am arresting you for conspiracy to murder your brother. And there may
be other charges.’

The Prince put his hands over his face for a moment and then pulled them
down towards his chin, in the action of a tired man endeavouring to come
to grips with a trying situation.

‘Mr—?’ he began.

‘Sir Samuel Vimes, Ankh-Morpork City Watch,’ said Vimes.

‘Well, Mr Samuel, when I raise my hand the men behind me will cut you
d—’

‘I will kill the first man that moves,’ said Ahmed.

‘Then the second man that moves will kill _you_, traitor!’ shouted the
Prince.

‘They’ll have to move _very_ fast,’ said Carrot, drawing his sword.

‘Any volunteers to be the third man?’ said Vimes. ‘Anyone?’

General Ashal moved, but only very gently, holding up a hand. The
bodyguards relaxed slightly.

‘What was that . . . _lie_ you uttered about a murder?’ he said.

‘Have you gone mad, Ashal?’ said the Prince.

‘Oh, sire, before I can disbelieve these pernicious lies, I do need to
know what they are.’

‘Vimes, you _have_ gone insane,’ said Rust. ‘You can’t arrest the
commander of an army!’

‘Actually, Mr Vimes, I think we could,’ said Carrot. ‘And the army, too.
I mean, I don’t see why we _can’t_. We could charge them with behaviour
likely to cause a breach of the peace, sir. I mean, that’s what warfare
_is_.’

Vimes’s face split in a manic grin. ‘I _like_ it.’

‘But in fairness our – that is, the Ankh-Morpork army – are also—’

‘Then you’d better arrest them too,’ said Vimes. ‘Arrest the lot of ’em.
Conspiracy to cause an affray,’ he started to count on his fingers,
‘going equipped to commit a crime, obstruction, threatening behaviour,
loitering with intent, loitering _within_ tent, hah, travelling for the
purposes of committing a crime, malicious lingering and carrying
concealed weapons.’

‘I don’t think that one—’ Carrot began.

‘_I_ can’t see ’em,’ said Vimes.

‘Vimes, I _order_ you to come to your senses this minute!’ roared Lord
Rust. ‘Have you been out in the sun?’

‘That’s one count of offensive behaviour to his lordship as well,’ said
Vimes.

The Prince was still staring at Vimes.

‘You seriously think that you can _arrest_ an army?’ he said. ‘Perhaps
you think you have a _bigger_ army?’

‘Don’t need one,’ said Vimes. ‘Power at a point, that’s what Tacticus
says. And here it’s the one right on the end of Ahmed’s crossbow. That
wouldn’t frighten a D’reg, but you . . . I reckon you don’t think like
them. Tell your men to stand down. I want the order to go out right
now.’

‘Even Ahmed would not shoot his prince in cold blood,’ said Prince
Cadram.

Vimes snatched the crossbow. ‘I wouldn’t ask him to!’ He took aim. ‘Give
that order!’

The Prince stared at him.

‘Count of three!’ shouted Vimes.

General Ashal leaned down and whispered something to the Prince. The
man’s expression stiffened and he glanced back at Vimes again.

‘That’s right,’ said Vimes. ‘It runs in the family.’

‘It would be murder!’

‘Would it? In wartime? I’m from Ankh-Morpork. Aren’t I supposed to be at
war with you? Can’t be murder if there’s a war on. That’s written down
somewhere.’

The general leaned down and whispered.

‘One,’ said Vimes.

Now there was a hurried argument.

‘Two.’

‘Myprincewishesmetosay—’ the general began.

‘All right, slow down,’ said Vimes.

‘If it makes you any happier, I will send out the order,’ said the
general. ‘Let the messengers leave.’

Vimes nodded and lowered the bow. The Prince shifted uneasily.

‘And the Ankh-Morpork army will stand down as well,’ said Vimes.

‘But, Vimes, you’re on _our_ side—’ Rust began.

‘Bloody hell, I’m going to shoot _someone_ today and it could just be
you, Rust,’ Vimes snarled.

‘Sir?’ Lieutenant Hornett tugged at his commander’s jacket. ‘May I have
a word?’

Vimes heard them whispering, and then the young man left.

‘All right, we are all disarmed,’ said Rust. ‘We are all “under arrest”.
And now, commander?’

‘I ought to read them their rights, sir,’ said Carrot.

‘What are you talking about?’ said Vimes.

‘The men out there, sir.’

‘Oh. Yeah. Right. Do it, then.’

Oh gods, I arrested an entire battlefield, Vimes thought. And you can’t
_do_ that.

But I’ve _done_ it. And we’ve only got six cells back at the Yard, and
we keep the coal in one of them.

You can’t _do_ it.

Was this the army that invaded your country, ma’am? No, officer, they
were taller than that . . .

How about this one? I’m not sure – get them to march up and down a
bit . . .

Carrot’s voice could be heard outside, slightly muffled:

‘_Now . . . can you all hear me? You gentlemen in the back there? Anyone
who can’t hear me, please raise . . . all right, has anyone got a
megaphone? Some cardboard I could roll up? In that case I’ll
shout_ . . .’

‘What now?’ said the Prince.

‘I’m taking you back to Ankh-Morpork—’

‘I don’t think so. That would be an act of war.’

‘You are making a mockery of the whole business, Vimes!’ said Lord Rust.

‘So long as I’m doing something right, then.’ Vimes nodded at Ahmed.

‘Then you can answer for your crime here, sire,’ he said.

‘In what court?’ said the Prince.

Ahmed leaned closer to Vimes. ‘What was your plan from here on?’ he
whispered.

‘I never thought we’d get this far!’

‘Ah. Well . . . it has been interesting, Sir Samuel.’

Prince Cadram smiled at Vimes. ‘Would you like some coffee while you are
considering your next move?’ he said. He gestured to an ornate silver
pot on the table.

‘We’ve got proof,’ Vimes said. But he could feel the world dropping
away. The point about burning your boats is that you shouldn’t be
standing on them when you drop the match.

‘Really? Fascinating. And to whom will you show this proof, Sir Samuel?’

‘We’ll have to find a court.’

‘Intriguing. A court in Ankh-Morpork, perhaps? Or a court here?’

‘Someone told me that the world watches,’ said Vimes.

There was silence except for the muffled sounds of Carrot, outside, and
the occasional buzz of a fly.

‘. . .  _bingeley-bingeley beep_ . . .’ The Dis-organizer’s voice had
lost its chirpy little edge, and sounded sleepy and bewildered.

Heads turned.

‘. . .  _Seven eh em . . . Organize Defenders at River Gate . . . Seven
twenty-five . . . Hand-to-Hand Fighting in Peach Pie Street . . . Seven
forty-eight eight eight . . . Rally Survivors in Sator Square . . .
Things To Do Today: Build Build Build Barricades_ . . .’

He was aware of surreptitious movement behind him, and then slight
pressure. Ahmed was standing back to back with him.

‘What is that thing talking about?’

‘Search me. Sounds like it’s in a different world, doesn’t it . . . ?’

He could feel events racing towards a distant wall. Sweat filled his
eyes. He couldn’t remember when he’d last had a proper sleep. His legs
twinged. His arms ached, pulled down by the heavy bow.

‘. . .  _bingeley . . . Eight oh two eh em, Death of Corporal
Littlebottombottom . . . Eight oh three eh em . . . Death of Sergeant
Detritus . . . Eight oh threethreethree eh em and seven seconds
seconds . . . Death of Constable Visit . . . Eight oh three eh em and
nineninenine seconds . . . Death of death of death of_ . . .’

‘They say that in Ankh-Morpork one of your ancestors killed a king,’
said the Prince. ‘And he also came to no good end.’

Vimes wasn’t listening.

‘. . .  _Death of Constable Dorfl . . . Eight oh three eh em and
fourteenteenteen seconds_ . . .’

The figure in the throne seemed to take up the whole world.

‘. . .  _Death of Captain Carrot Ironfoundersson . . . beep_ . . .’

And Vimes thought: _I nearly didn’t come. I nearly stayed in
Ankh-Morpork_.

He had always wondered how Old Stoneface had felt, that frosty morning
when he picked up the axe that had no legal blessing because the King
wouldn’t recognize a court even if a jury could be found, that frosty
morning when he prepared to sever what people thought was a link between
men and deity—

‘. . .  _beep . . . Things To Do Today Today Today: Die_ . . .’

The sensation flowed into his veins like fresh warm blood. It was the
feeling that you got when the law ran out, and you looked into a mocking
face on the other side of it and you decided that you couldn’t go on
living if you did not step over the line and do one clean thing—

There was shouting outside. He blinked away the sweat.

‘Ah . . . Commander Vimes . . .’ said a voice somewhere back over the
border.

He kept his aching gaze sighted along the bow. ‘Yes?’

A hand darted down and grabbed the arrow out of its groove. Vimes
blinked. His finger automatically squeezed the trigger. The string
slammed back with a _thunk_. And the look on the Prince’s face, he knew,
would keep him warm on cold nights, if there were ever cold nights
again.

He’d heard them all die. But they _weren’t_ dead. And yet the damn thing
had sounded so . . . accurate . . .

Lord Vetinari dropped the arrow fastidiously, like a society lady who
has had to handle something sticky.

‘Well done, Vimes. I see you’ve got the donkey up the minaret. Good
morning, gentlemen.’ He gave the company a happy smile. ‘I see I am not
too late.’

‘Vetinari?’ said Rust, seeming to wake up. ‘What are you doing here?
This is a battlefield—’

‘I wonder.’ The Patrician gave him a very brief smile of his very own.
‘Outside there seem to be a lot of men sitting around. Many of them seem
to be having what I believe is known in military parlance as a brew-up.
And Captain Carrot is organizing a football match.’

‘He’s _what_?’ said Vimes, lowering the bow. Suddenly the world had to
be real again. If Carrot was doing something as dumb as that, things
were normal.

‘Quite a large number of fouls so far, I’m afraid. But I wouldn’t call
it a battlefield.’

‘Who’s winning?’

‘Ankh-Morpork, I believe. By two hacked shins and a broken nose.’

For the first time in ages Vimes felt a little pang of patriotism.
Everything else in life was in the privy, but when it came to gouging
and kicking he knew which side he was on.

‘Besides,’ Vetinari went on, ‘I believe quite a large number of people
are technically under arrest. And clearly a state of war is not, in
practical fact, in being. It is merely a state of football. Therefore, I
believe, I am, shall we say . . . back. Excuse me, sire, but this won’t
take a moment.’

He held up a metal cylinder and began to unscrew the end.

For some reason Vimes felt inclined to take a few steps away from it.
‘What’s that?’

‘I thought this might become necessary,’ said Vetinari. ‘It took some
preparation, but I am certain it will work. I hope they’re readable. We
did our best to keep the damp off them.’

A thick roll of paper dropped out onto the floor.

‘Commander, have you nothing you should be doing?’ he added.
‘Refereeing, perhaps?’

Vimes picked up the roll and read the first few lines.

‘Whereas . . . heretofore, etc, etc . . . City of Ankh-Morpork . . .
_Surrender_?’

‘What?’ said Rust and the Prince together.

‘Yes, surrender,’ said Vetinari cheerfully. ‘A little piece of paper and
it’s all over. I think you’ll find it all in order.’

‘You can’t—’ Rust began.

‘You can’t—’ said the Prince.

‘Unconditionally?’ said General Ashal sharply.

‘Yes, I think so,’ said Vetinari. ‘We give up all claim to Leshp in
favour of Klatch, we withdraw all troops from Klatch and our citizens
from the island, and as for reparations . . . shall we say a quarter of
a million dollars? Plus various favourable trade arrangements,
most-favoured-nation status and so on and so on. It’s all here. Feel
free to read it at your leisure.’

He passed the document over the head of the Prince and into the hands of
the general, who flicked through the pages.

‘But we haven’t _got_—’ Vimes began. Perhaps I _did_ get killed, he
thought. I’m on the other side, or someone hit me very hard on the head
and this is all some kind of mirage—

‘It’s a forgery!’ snapped the Prince. ‘It’s a trick!’

‘Well, sire, this man certainly does appear to be Lord Vetinari and
these do seem to be the official seals of Ankh-Morpork,’ said the
general. ‘“Whereas . . . whereby . . . without prejudice . . .
ratification within four days . . . way of trade” . . . yes, this does,
I have to say, look genuine.’

‘I won’t accept it!’

‘I see, sire. It does, though, appear to cover all the points which in
your speech last week you—’

‘I _certainly_ wouldn’t accept it!’ Rust shouted. He waved a finger
under Vetinari’s nose. ‘You’ll be banished for this!’

But we haven’t _got_ that money, Vimes repeated, but this time to
himself. We’re a very rich city, but we haven’t got any actual money.
The wealth of Ankh-Morpork is in its people, we’re told. And you
couldn’t remove it with big pliers.

He felt the wind change.

And Vetinari watching him.

And there was something about General Ashal. A certain hunger . . .

‘I agree with Rust,’ he said. ‘This is dragging the good name of
Ankh-Morpork in the mud.’ To his mild surprise he managed to say that
without smiling.

‘We lose nothing, sire,’ General Ashal insisted. ‘They withdraw from
Klatch and Leshp—’

‘Damned if we will!’ screamed Lord Rust.

‘Right! And have everyone know we’ve been _beaten_?’ said Vimes.
‘_Outwitted?_’

He looked at the Prince, whose gaze was hunting from man to man, but
occasionally staring at nothing, as if he was watching some inner
vision.

‘A quarter of a million is not enough,’ the Prince said.

Lord Vetinari shrugged. ‘We can discuss it.’

‘There is much that I need to buy.’

‘Things of a sharp metallic nature, no doubt,’ said Vetinari. ‘Of
course, if we are talking about goods rather than money, there is room
for . . . flexibility . . .’

And now we’re going to arm him too, Vimes thought.

‘You’ll be out of the city in a week!’ Rust screamed.

Vimes thought the general smiled briefly. Ankh-Morpork without
Vetinari . . . ruled by people like Rust. His future was looking bright
indeed.

‘The surrender _will_ need to be ratified and formally witnessed,
however,’ said Ashal.

‘May I suggest Ankh-Morpork?’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘No. On neutral territory, of course,’ said the general.

‘But where, between Ankh-Morpork and Klatch, is there such a thing?’
said Vetinari.

‘I suppose . . . there _is_ Leshp,’ said the general thoughtfully.

‘What a good idea,’ said the Patrician. ‘That would not have occurred to
me.’

‘The place is ours anyway!’ snapped the Prince.

‘_Will_ be, sire. Will be,’ said the general soothingly. ‘We will take
possession. Quite legally. While the world watches.’

‘And that’s it? What about my arrest?’ said Vimes. ‘I’m not going to—’

‘These are matters of state,’ said Vetinari. ‘And there are . . .
diplomatic considerations. I am afraid the good ordering of
international affairs cannot hinge upon your concerns over the doings of
one man.’

Once again Vimes felt that the words he was hearing were not the words
that were being said.

‘I won’t—’ he began.

‘There are larger issues here.’

‘But—’

‘Sterling work, nevertheless.’

‘There are big crimes and little crimes, is that it?’ said Vimes.

‘Why don’t you take some well-earned rest, Sir Samuel? You are,’
Vetinari flashed one of his lightning-fast smiles, ‘a man of action. You
deal in swords, and chases, and facts. Now, alas, it is the time for the
men of words, who deal in promises and mistrust and opinions. For you
the war is over. Enjoy the sunshine. I trust we shall all be returning
home shortly. I would like you to stay, Lord Rust . . .’

Vimes realized that he’d been switched off. He spun round and marched
out of the tent.

Ahmed followed him. ‘That’s your master, is it?’

‘No! He’s just the man who pays my wages!’

‘Often hard to know the difference,’ said Ahmed sympathetically.

Vimes sat down on the sand. He wasn’t certain how he’d been managing to
stand up. There was some kind of a future now. He hadn’t the faintest
idea what was in it, but there _was_ one. There hadn’t been one five
minutes ago. He wanted to talk now. That way, he didn’t have to think
about the Dis-organizer’s death roll. It had sounded so . . .
_accurate_ . . .

‘What’s going to happen to you?’ he said, to drive the thought out of
his mind. ‘When this is over, I mean. _Your_ boss isn’t going to be
pleased with you.’

‘Oh, the desert can swallow me.’

‘He’ll send people after you. He looks the type.’

‘The desert will swallow them.’

‘Without chewing?’

‘Believe it.’

‘It shouldn’t have to be like this!’ Vimes shouted, at the sky in
general. ‘You know? Sometimes I _dream_ that we could deal with the big
crimes, that we could make a law for countries and not just for people,
and people like him would have—’

Ahmed pulled him upright and patted him on the shoulder.

‘I know how it is,’ he said. ‘I dream too.’

‘You do?’

‘Yes. Generally of fish.’

There was a roar from the crowd.

‘Someone’s scored a convincing foul, by the sound of it,’ said Vimes.

They slid and staggered up the side of a dune, and watched.

Someone broke from the scrum and, punching and kicking, staggered
towards the Klatchian goal.

‘Isn’t that man your butler?’ said Ahmed.

‘Yes.’

‘One of your soldiers said he bit a man’s nose off.’

Vimes shrugged. ‘He’s got a very pointed look if I don’t use the sugar
tongs, I know that.’

A white figure marched authoritatively through the mill of players,
blowing a whistle.

‘And that man, I believe, is your king.’

‘No.’

‘Really? Then I am Queen Punjitrum of Sumtri.’

‘Carrot’s a copper, same as me.’

‘A man like that could inspire a handful of broken men to conquer a
country.’

‘Fine. Just so long as he does it on his day off.’

‘And he too takes orders from you? You are a remarkable man, Sir Samuel.
But you would not, I think, have killed the Prince.’

‘No. But you’d have killed me if I had.’

‘Oh, yes. Flagrant murder in front of witnesses. I am, after all, a
copper.’

They’d reached the camels. One looked round as Ahmed prepared to mount,
thought better of spitting at him, and hit Vimes instead. With great
precision.

Ahmed looked back at the footballers.

‘Up in Klatchistan the nomads play a game very similar to that,’ he
said. ‘But on horseback. The aim is to get the object round the goal.’

‘Object?’

‘Probably best just to think of it as an “object”, Sir Samuel. And now,
I think, I shall head that way. There are thieves in the mountains. The
air is clear up there. As you know, there is always work for policemen.’

‘You thinking of returning to Ankh-Morpork at any time?’

‘You’d like to see me there, Sir Samuel?’

‘It’s an open city. But be sure to call in at Pseudopolis Yard when you
arrive.’

‘Ah, and we can reminisce about old times.’

‘No. So you can hand over that sword. We’d give you a receipt and you
can pick it up when you leave.’

‘I’d take some persuading, Sir Samuel.’

‘Oh, I think I’d only ask once.’

Ahmed laughed, nodded at Vimes and rode away.

For a few minutes he was a shape at the base of a column of dust, and
then a shifting dot in the heat haze, and then the desert swallowed him.

The day wore on. Various Klatchian officials and some of the
Ankh-Morpork people were summoned to the tent. Vimes wandered close to
it a few times and heard the sound of voices raised in dispute.

Meanwhile, the armies dug in. Someone had already erected a crude
signpost, its arms pointing to various soldiers’ homes. Since these were
all in part of Ankh-Morpork the arms all pointed exactly the same way.

He found most of the Watch sitting out of the wind, while a wizened
Klatchian woman cooked quite a complicated meal over a small fire. They
all seemed to be fully alive, with the usual slight question mark in the
case of Reg Shoe.

‘Where’ve you been, Sergeant Colon?’ said Vimes.

‘Been sworn to secrecy about that, sir. By his lordship.’

‘Right.’ Vimes didn’t press the point. Getting information out of Colon
was like getting water out of a flannel. It could wait. ‘And Nobby?’

‘Right here, sir!’ The wizened woman saluted in a clash of bangles.

‘That’s _you_?’

‘Yessir! Doing the dirty work as per the woman’s role in life, sir,
despite the fact that there are less senior watchmen present, sir!’

‘Now then, Nobby,’ said Colon. ‘Cheery can’t cook, we can’t let Reg do
it because bits fall into the pan, and Angua—’

‘—doesn’t do cookery,’ said Angua. She was lying back on a rock with her
eyes closed. The rock was the slumbering shape of Detritus.

‘Anyway, you just started doing the cooking like you was expecting to
have to do it,’ said Colon.

‘Kebab, sir?’ said Nobby. ‘There’s plenty.’

‘You certainly got a lot of food from somewhere,’ said Vimes.

‘Klatchian quartermaster, sir,’ said Nobby, grinning beneath his veil.
‘Used my sexual wiles on him, sir.’

Vimes’s kebab stopped halfway to his mouth and dripped lamb fat onto his
legs. He saw Angua’s eyes slam open and stare in horror at the sky.

‘I told him I’d take my clothes off and scream if he didn’t give me some
grub, sir.’

‘That’d scare the daylights out of me, sure enough,’ said Vimes. He saw
Angua breathe out again.

‘Yeah, I reckon if I played my cards right I could be one of them fatal
femmies,’ said Nobby. ‘I’ve only got to wink at a man and he runs a
mile. Could be useful, that.’

‘I _told_ him he could change back into his uniform, but he says he
feels more comfortable like this,’ whispered Colon to Vimes. ‘I’m
getting a bit worried, to tell you the truth.’

I can’t handle this, Vimes thought. This isn’t in the book of rules.

‘Er . . . how can I explain this . . . ?’ he began.

‘I don’t want any of them in-you-endoes,’ said Nobby. ‘It’s a good idea
to walk a mile in someone else’s shoes, that’s all I’m saying.’

‘Well, so long as it’s just sh—’

‘I’ve just been gettin’ in touch with my softer side, all right? Seein’
the other man’s point of view, sort of thing, even if he’s a woman.’

He looked at their faces and waved his hands vaguely. ‘All right, all
right, I’ll put my uniform on after I’ve tidied up around the camp. Will
that make you all happy?’

‘Something smells nice!’

Carrot ran up, bouncing his football. He’d stripped to his waist. The
whistle bounced on its string around his neck.

‘I’ve declared half-time,’ he said, sitting down. ‘So I’ve sent some of
the lads into Gebra to get four thousand oranges. Shortly the combined
Ankh-Morpork regimental bands will put on a display of counter-marching
while playing a selection of military favourites.’

‘Have they _practised_ counter-marching?’ said Angua.

‘I don’t think so.’

‘Should be good, then.’

‘Carrot,’ said Vimes, ‘I don’t wish to pry, but how, in the middle of a
desert, did you find a football?’ And the voice in the back of his mind
insisted: you heard him die, you heard them all die . . . somewhere
else.

‘Oh, these days I carry a deflated one in my pack, sir. A very pacifying
object, a football. Are you all right, sir?’

‘Eh? What? Oh. Yes. Just a bit . . . tired. So who’s winning?’ Vimes
patted his pockets, and found his last cigar.

‘It’s broadly speaking a tie, sir. I had to send four hundred and
seventy-three men off, though. Klatch is now well ahead on fouls, I’m
sorry to say.’

‘Sport as a substitute for war, eh?’ said Vimes. He rootled in the ashes
of Nobby’s fire and pulled out a half-consumed . . . well, it helped to
think of it as a desert coal.

Carrot gave him a solemn look. ‘Yes, sir. No one’s using weapons. And
have you noticed how the Klatchian army is getting smaller? Some of the
chiefs from distant parts are taking their men away. They say there’s no
point in staying if there’s not going to be a war. I don’t think they
really wanted to be here in any case, to tell you the truth. And I don’t
think it’s going to be easy to get them to come back—’

There was shouting behind them. Men were coming out of the tent,
arguing. Lord Rust was among them. He looked around, talking to his
companions. Then he spotted Vimes and rocketed furiously towards him.

‘Vimes!’

Vimes looked up, hand halfway to his cigar.

‘We would have won, you know,’ growled Rust. ‘We would have won! But we
were betrayed on the brink of success!’

Vimes stared at him.

‘And it’s _your_ fault, Vimes! We’ll be the laughing stock of Klatch!
You know the value these people put on face, and we won’t have any!
Vetinari is _finished_! And so are you! And so is your stupid, mongrel,
_cowardly_ Watch! What do you say to that, Vimes? Eh?’

The watchmen sat like statues, waiting for Vimes to say something. Or
even move.

‘Eh? Vimes?’

Rust sniffed. ‘What’s that smell?’

Vimes slowly shifted his gaze to his fingers. Smoke was rising. There
was a faint sizzling.

He stood up and brought his fingers up in front of Rust’s face.

‘_Take it_,’ he said.

‘That’s . . . just some trick . . .’

‘Take it,’ said Vimes.

Mesmerized, Rust licked his fingers and gingerly took the ember. ‘It
doesn’t hurt—’

‘Yes, it does,’ said Vimes.

‘In fact it— Aargh!’

Rust jumped back, dropped the ember and sucked his blistered fingers.

‘The trick is not to mind that it hurts,’ said Vimes. ‘Now go away.’

‘You won’t last long,’ Rust sneered. ‘You wait until we’re back in the
city. You just wait.’ He strode off, holding his stricken hand.

Vimes went back and sat down by the fire. After a while he said:
‘Where’s he gone now?’

‘Back to the lines, sir. I think he’s ordering the men home.’

‘Can he see us?’

‘No.’

‘You sure?’

‘There’s too many people in the way, sir.’

‘You’re quite sure?’

‘Not unless he can see through camels, sir.’

‘Good.’ Vimes stuck his fingers in his mouth. Sweat was pouring down his
face. ‘Damn damn damn! Has anyone got any cold water?’

Captain Jenkins had got his ship afloat again. It had taken a lot of
digging, and some careful work with balks of timber and the assistance
of a Klatchian captain who had decided not to let patriotism stand in
the way of profit.

He and his crew were resting on the shore when a greeting rang out from
over them.

He squinted into the sun.

‘That . . . that can’t be Vimes, can it?’

The crew stared.

‘Let’s get aboard right _now_!’

A figure started down the face of the dune. It moved very fast, much
faster than a man could run on the shifting sand, and moved in a zig-zag
fashion. As it drew nearer, it turned out to be a man standing on a
shield.

It slid to a halt a few feet away from the astonished Jenkins.

‘Good of you to wait, captain!’ said Carrot. ‘Very many thanks! The
others will be down in a minute.’

Jenkins looked back to the top of the dune. There were other, darker
figures there now.

‘Those are D’regs!’ he shouted.

‘Oh, yes. Lovely people. Have you met them at all?’

Jenkins stared at Carrot. ‘Did you _win_?’ he said.

‘Oh, yes. On penalties, in the end.’

Green-blue light filtered through the tiny windows of the Boat.

Lord Vetinari pulled the steering levers until he was pretty certain
that they were heading towards a suitable ship and said:

‘What is it I can smell, Sergeant Colon?’

‘It’s Bet— It’s Nobby, sir,’ said Colon, pedalling industriously.

‘Corporal Nobbs?’

Nobby almost blushed. ‘I bought a bottle of scent, sir. For my young
lady.’

Lord Vetinari coughed. ‘What exactly do you mean by “your young lady”?’
he said.

‘Well, for when I get one,’ said Nobby.

‘Ah.’ Even Lord Vetinari sounded relieved.

‘On account of I expect I shall now, me having fully explored my sexual
nature and now feeling fully comfortable with meself,’ said Nobby.

‘You feel comfortable with yourself?’

‘Yessir!’ said Nobby happily.

‘And when you find this lucky lady, you will give her this bottle of—’

‘’s called “Kasbah Nights”, sir.’

‘Of course. Very . . . _floral_, isn’t it?’

‘Yessir. That’s ’cos of the jasmine and rare ungulants in it, sir.’

‘And yet at the same time curiously . . . _penetrative_.’

Nobby grinned. ‘Good value for money, sir. A little goes a long way.’

‘Not far enough, possibly?’

But Nobby rusted even irony. ‘I got it in the same shop that sarge got
the hump, sir.’

‘Ah . . . yes.’

There wasn’t very much space in the Boat, and most of it was taken up
with Sergeant Colon’s souvenirs. He’d been allowed a brief shopping
expedition ‘to take home something for the wife, sir, otherwise I’ll
never hear the last of it’.

‘Mrs Colon will like a stuffed camel hump, will she, sergeant?’ said the
Patrician doubtfully.

‘Yessir. She can put things on it, sir.’

‘And the set of nested brass tables?’

‘To put things on, sir.’

‘And the’ – there was a clanking – ‘set of goat bells, ornamental coffee
pot, miniature camel saddle and this . . . strange glass tube with
little bands of different coloured sand in it . . . what are these for?’

‘Conversation pieces, sir.’

‘You mean people will say things like “What are they for?”, do you?’

Sergeant Colon looked pleased with himself.

‘See, sir? We’re talking about ’em already.’

‘Remarkable.’

Sergeant Colon coughed and indicated with a tilt of his head the hunched
figure of Leonard, who was sitting in the stern with his head in his
hands.

‘He’s a bit quiet, sir,’ he whispered. ‘Can’t seem to get a word out of
him.’

‘He has a lot on his mind,’ said the Patrician.

The watchmen pedalled onwards for a while, but the close confines of the
Boat encouraged a confidentiality that would never have been found on
land.

‘Sorry to hear you’re getting the sack, sir,’ said Colon.

‘Really,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘You’d definitely get my vote, if we had elections.’

‘Capital.’

‘I think people _want_ the thumbscrew of firm government, myself.’

‘Good.’

‘Your predecessor, Lord Snapcase, now he _was_ mental. But, like I’ve
always said, people know where they stand with Lord Vetinari . . .’

‘Well done.’

‘They might not _like_ where they’re standing of course . . .’

Lord Vetinari looked up. They were under a boat now and it seemed to be
going in the right direction. He steered the Boat until he heard the
_thunk_ of hull hitting hull, and gave the auger a few turns.

‘Am I being sacked, sergeant?’ he said, sitting back.

‘Well, eh, I heard Lord Rust’s people say that if you rat . . .
rat . . .’

‘Ratify,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘Yeah, if you _ratify_ that surrender next week, they’ll get you exiled,
sir.’

‘A week is a long time in politics, sergeant.’

Colon’s face widened in what he thought of as a knowing grin. He tapped
the side of his nose.

‘Ah, _politics_,’ he said. ‘Ah, you should’ve _said_.’

‘Yeah, they’ll laugh at the other foot then, eh?’ said Nobby.

‘Got some secret plan, I’ll be bound,’ said Colon. ‘You know where the
chicken is all right.’

‘I can see there’s no fooling such skilled observers of the carnival
that is life,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘Yes, indeed, there is something I
intend to do.’

He adjusted the position of the camel-hump pouffe, which in fact smelled
of goat and was beginning to leak sand, and lay back.

‘I’m going to do nothing. Wake me up if anything interesting happens.’

Nautical things happened. The wind spun about so much that a
weather-cock might as well be harnessed to grinding corn. At one point
there was a fall of anchovies.

And Commander Vimes tried to sleep. Jenkins showed him a hammock, and
Vimes realized that this was another sheep’s eyeball. No one could
possibly sleep in something like that. Sailors probably kept them up for
show and had real beds tucked away somewhere.

He tried to make himself comfortable in the hold, and dozed while the
others talked in the corner. They were very politely keeping out of his
way.

‘—ordship wouldn’t give the whole thing away, would he? What were we
fighting for?’

‘He’ll have a hard job hanging on to the job after this, that’s for
sure. It’s dragging the good name of Ankh-Morpork in the mud, like Mr
Vimes said.’

‘For Ankh-Morpork, mud is _up_.’ That was Angua.

‘On der other han’, everyone is still breathin’.’ That was Detritus.

‘That’s a vitalist remark—’

‘Sorry, Reg. What you scratchin’ for?’

‘I think I picked up a filthy foreign disease.’

‘Sorry?’ Angua again. ‘What can a _zombie_ catch?’

‘Don’t like to say . . .’

‘You’re talking to someone who knows every brand of flea powder they
sell in Ankh-Morpork, Reg.’

‘Oh, if you must know . . . Mice, miss. It’s shameful. I keep myself
clean, but they just find a way—’

‘Have you tried everything?’

‘Excepting ferrets.’

‘If his lordship goes, who’ll take over?’ That was Cheery. ‘Lord Rust?’

‘He’d last five minutes.’

‘Maybe the guilds will get together and—’

‘They’ll fight like—’

‘—ferrets,’ said Reg. ‘The cure’s worse than the disease.’

‘Cheer up, there’ll still be a Watch.’ That was Carrot.

‘Yes, but Mr Vimes’ll be out on his ear. ’cos of politics.’

Vimes decided to keep his eyes closed.

A silent crowd was waiting on the quayside when the ship finally docked.
They watched Vimes and his men walk down the gangway. There were one or
two coughs, and then someone called out:

‘Say it ain’t so, Mr Vimes!’

At the foot of the gangplank Constable Dorfl saluted stiffly.

‘Lord Rust’s Ship Got In This Morning, Sir,’ the golem said.

‘Anyone seen Vetinari?’

‘No, sir.’

‘Afraid to show his face!’ someone shouted.

‘Lord Rust Said You Were To Do Your Duty, Damn You,’ said Dorfl. Golems
had a certain literalness of speech.

He handed Vimes a sheet of paper. Vimes grabbed it and read the first
few lines.

‘What’s this? “Emergency Council?” And this? . . . _Treason?_ Against
Vetinari? I’m not carrying this out!’

‘Can I see, sir?’ said Carrot.

It was Angua who noticed the wave, while the others were staring at the
warrant. Even in human form a werewolf’s ears are pretty sensitive.

She wandered back to the quayside and looked downriver.

A wall of white water a few feet high was running up the Ankh. As it
passed, boats were lifted and rocked.

It sloshed by her, sucking at the quay and making Jenkins’s boat dance
for a moment. There was a crash of crockery somewhere aboard.

Then it was gone, a line of surf heading towards the next bridge. For a
moment the air smelled not of the Ankh’s _eau de latrine_ but of sea
winds and salt.

Jenkins appeared out of his cabin and looked over the side.

‘What was that? The tide changing?’ Angua called up.

‘We came up on the tide,’ said Jenkins. ‘Beats me. One of those
phenomena, I expect.’

Angua went back to the group. Vimes was already red in the face.

‘It _has_ been signed by quite a lot of the major guilds, sir,’ Carrot
was saying. ‘In fact they’re all here except the Beggars and the
Seamstresses.’

‘Really? Well, piss on ’em! Who are they to give _me_ an order like
that?’

‘Angua saw the look of pain cross Carrot’s face.

‘Uh . . . _someone_ has to give us orders, sir. In a general sort of
way. We aren’t supposed to make up our own. That’s sort of . . . the
point.’

‘Yes . . . but . . . not like . . .’

‘And I suppose they represent the will of the people—’

‘That bunch? Don’t give me that rubbish! We’d have been _slaughtered_ if
we’d fought! And then we’d be in just the same position as we—’

‘This does look legal, sir.’

‘It’s . . . ridiculous!’

‘It’s not as if _we_ are accusing him, sir. We just have to make sure he
turns up at the Rats Chamber. Look, sir, you’ve had a very trying time—’

‘But . . . arrest Vetinari? I can’t—’

Vimes stopped, because his ears had caught up. And because that was the
point, wasn’t it? If you could arrest anyone, then that’s what you had
to do. You couldn’t turn round and say ‘but not _him_.’ Ahmed would
snigger. Old Stoneface would turn in all five of his graves.

‘I can, can’t I?’ he said, sadly. ‘Oh, all right. Put out a description,
Dorfl.’

‘That Will Not Be Necessary, Sir.’

The crowds moved aside as Lord Vetinari walked along the quay, with
Nobby and Colon behind him. At least, if it wasn’t Sergeant Colon it was
a very strangely deformed camel.

‘I think I caught quite a lot of that, commander,’ said Lord Vetinari.
‘Please do your duty.’

‘All you’ve got to do is to go to the palace, sir. Let’s—’

‘You’re not going to handcuff me?’

Vimes’s mouth dropped open. ‘Why should I do that?’

‘Treason is very nearly the ultimate crime, Sir Samuel. I think I should
_demand_ handcuffs.’

‘All right, if you insist.’ Vimes nodded at Dorfl. ‘Cuff him, then.’

‘You haven’t any shackles, by any chance?’ said Lord Vetinari, as Dorfl
produced a pair of handcuffs. ‘We may as well do this thing properly—’

‘No. We _don’t_ have any shackles.’

‘I was only trying to help, Sir Samuel. Shall we be going?’

The crowd weren’t jeering. That was almost frightening. They were just
waiting, like an audience watching to see how the trick was going to be
done. They parted again as the Patrician headed towards the centre of
the city. He stopped and turned.

‘What was the other thing . . . oh yes, I don’t have to be dragged on a
hurdle, do I?’

‘Only if you’re actually executed, my lord,’ said Carrot, cheerfully.
‘Traditionally, traitors are dragged to their place of execution on a
hurdle. And then you’re hung, drawn and quartered.’ Carrot looked
embarrassed. ‘I know about the hanging and quartering but I’m not sure
how you’re drawn, sir.’

‘Are you any good with a pencil, captain?’ said Lord Vetinari
innocently.

‘No, he’s not!’ said Vimes.

‘Do you actually _have_ a hurdle?’

‘_No!_’ snapped Vimes.

‘Oh? Well, I believe there’s a sports equipment shop in Sheer Street.
Just in case, Sir Samuel.’

A figure walked across the trampled sand near Gebra, and paused when a
voice very near ground level said, hopefully, ‘Bingeley-bingeley beep?’

The Dis-organizer felt itself being picked up.

WHAT KIND OF A THING ARE YOU?

‘I am the Dis-organizer Mk II, with many handy hard-to-use features,
Insert Name Here!’

SUCH AS?

Even the Dis-organizer’s tiny mind felt slightly uneasy. The voice it
was speaking to didn’t sound right.

‘I know what time it is everywhere,’ it ventured.

SO DO I.

‘Er . . . I can maintain an up-to-the-minute contacts directory . . .’
The Dis-organizer felt movements that suggested the new owner had
mounted a horse.

REALLY? I HAVE A GREAT MANY CONTACTS.

‘There you are, then,’ said the demon, trying to hold on to its rapidly
draining enthusiasm. ‘So I make a note of them, and when you want to
contact them again—’

THAT IS GENERALLY NOT NECESSARY. MOSTLY, THEY STAY CONTACTED.

‘Well . . . do you have many appointments?’ There were hoofbeats, and
then no sound but rushing wind.

MORE THAN YOU COULD POSSIBLY IMAGINE. NO . . . I THINK, PERHAPS, YOUR
TALENTS COULD BE BETTER EMPLOYED ELSEWHERE . . .

There was more rushing wind, and then a splash.

* * *

The Rats Chamber was crowded. Guild leaders were entitled to be there,
but there were plenty of other people who considered they had a right to
be in at the death too. There were even some of the senior wizards.
Everyone wanted to be able to say to their grandchildren ‘I was
there.’¹⁷

‘I feel certain I ought to be wearing more chains,’ said Vetinari, as
they paused in the doorway and looked at the assembled crowd.

‘Are you taking this seriously, sir?’ said Vimes.

‘Incredibly seriously, commander, I assure you. But if by some chance I
survive, I authorize you to buy some shackles. We must learn to do this
sort of thing properly.’

‘I shall keep them handy, I assure you.’

‘Good.’

The Patrician nodded at Lord Rust, who was flanked by Mr Boggis and Lord
Downey.

‘Good morning,’ he said. ‘Can we make this quick? It’s going to be a
busy day.’

‘It pleases you to _continue_ to make Ankh-Morpork a laughing stock,’
Rust began. His glance flicked to Vimes for a moment, and wrote him out
of the universe. ‘This is not a formal trial, Lord Vetinari. It is an
arraignment so that the charges may be known. Mr Slant tells me that it
will be many weeks before a full trial can be mounted.’

‘Expensive weeks no doubt. Shall we get on with it?’ said Vetinari.

‘Mr Slant will read the charges,’ said Rust. ‘But in a nutshell, as you
are well aware, Havelock, you are charged with treason. You surrendered
most ignobly—’

‘—but I did not—’

‘—and quite illegally waived all rights to our sovereignty of the
country known as Leshp—’

‘—but there is no such place.’

Lord Rust paused. ‘Are you quite sane, sir?’

‘The surrender terms were to be ratified on the island of Leshp, Lord
Rust. There is no such place.’

‘We _passed_ it on the way here, man!’

‘Has anyone looked recently?’

Angua tapped Vimes on the shoulder.

‘A strange wave came up the river just after we arrived, sir—’

There was some urgent conversation among the wizards, and Archchancellor
Ridcully stood up.

‘There seems to be a bit of a problem, your lordships. The Dean says it
really _isn’t_ there.’

‘It’s an _island_. Are you suggesting someone’s stolen it? Are you sure
you know where it is, man?’

‘We do know where it is, and it isn’t there. There’s just a lot of
seaweed and wreckage,’ said the Dean coldly. He stood up, holding a
small crystal ball in his hands. ‘We’ve been watching it most evenings.
For the fights, you know. Of course, the picture is pretty bad at this
distance—’

Rust stared at him. But the Dean was too large to be written out of the
scene.

‘But an entire island can’t just vanish,’ said Rust.

‘In theory they can’t just appear either, my lord, but this one did.’

‘Perhaps it’s sunk again,’ said Carrot.

Now Rust glared at Vetinari.

‘Did you know about this?’ he demanded.

‘How could I know something like that?’

Vimes watched the faces around the room.

‘You _do_ know something about this!’ said Rust. He glanced towards Mr
Slant, who was leafing hurriedly through a large volume.

‘All I know, my lord, is that Prince Cadram has, at a politically
dangerous time for him, given up a huge military advantage in exchange
for an island which seems to have sunk under the sea,’ said Lord
Vetinari. ‘The Klatchians are a proud people. I wonder what they will
think?’

And Vimes thought about General Ashal, standing beside Prince Cadram’s
throne. Klatchians like successful leaders, he thought. I wonder what
happens to the unsuccessful ones? I mean, look at what _we_ do when _we_
think—

Someone nudged him.

‘’s us, sir,’ said Nobby. ‘They said they didn’t have any hurdles but
they do a ping-pong table for ten dollars. There’s a small trampoline we
could drag him on but sarge thinks that’d be a bit ridiculous.’

Vimes walked out of the room, dragging Nobby with him, and pushed the
little man against the wall.

‘Where did you get to with Vetinari, corporal? And remember I know when
you tell me lies. Your lips move.’

‘We . . . we . . . we . . . just went on a little voyage, sir. He said I
wasn’t to say we went under the island, sir!’

‘So you— _Under_ Leshp?’

‘Nossir! We didn’t go down there! Stinking hole it was, too. Stunk of
rotten eggs, the whole bloody cave, and as big as the city, believe me!’

‘I bet you’re glad you didn’t go, then.’

Nobby looked relieved. ‘That’s right, sir.’

Vimes sniffed. ‘Are you using some kind of aft—’ – he corrected himself
– ‘some kind of insteadofshave, Nobby?’

‘No, sir?’

‘Something smells of fermented flowers.’

‘Oh, it’s just a souvenir I picked up in foreign parts, sir. It kind of
lingers, if you know what I mean.’

Vimes shrugged and went back into the Rats Chamber.

‘—and I resent most strongly the suggestion that I would have negotiated
with His Highness in the knowledge that . . . ah, Sir Samuel. The keys
to the handcuffs, please.’

‘You knew! You knew all the time!’ Rust shouted.

‘Is Lord Vetinari charged with anything?’ said Vimes.

Mr Slant was scrabbling through another volume. He looked quite
flustered, for a zombie. His grey-green shade was distinctly greener.

‘Not as such . . .’ he muttered.

‘But he _will_ be!’ said Lord Rust.

‘Well, when you find out what it is you be sure and let me know, and
I’ll go and arrest him for it,’ said Vimes, unlocking the handcuffs.

He was aware of cheering outside. Nothing stayed secret very long in
Ankh-Morpork. The damn island wasn’t there any more. And, somehow, it
had all worked out.

He met Vetinari’s eyes. ‘Piece of luck for you, eh?’ he said.

‘Oh, there’s always a chicken, Sir Samuel. If you look hard enough.’

The day turned out to be nearly as trying as war. At least one carpet
made the flight from Klatch, and there was a constant stream of messages
between the palace and the embassy. A crowd still hung around outside
the palace. Things were happening, and even if they did not know what
they were they weren’t going to miss them. If any history was going to
occur, they wanted to watch it.

Vimes went home. To his amazement, the door was answered by Willikins.
He had his sleeves rolled up and was wearing a long green apron.

‘You? How the hell did you get back so quickly?’ said Vimes. ‘Sorry. I
didn’t mean to be impolite—’

‘I inveigled myself on to Lord Rust’s ship in the general confusion,
sir. I did not wish to let things go to rack and ruin here. The
silverware is frankly disgusting, I am afraid. The gardener does not
have the least idea how to do it. Allow me to apologize in advance for
the shocking condition of the cutlery, sir.’

‘A few days ago you were biting people’s noses off!’

‘Ah, you must not believe Private Bourke, sir,’ said the butler, as
Vimes stepped in. ‘It was only one nose.’

‘And now you’ve hurried back to polish the silver?’

‘It does not do to let standards slip, sir.’ He stopped. ‘Sir?’

‘Yes?’

‘Did we win?’

Vimes looked into the round pink face.

‘Er . . . we didn’t lose, Willikins,’ he said.

‘We couldn’t let a foreign despot raise a hand to Ankh-Morpork, could
we, sir?’ said the butler. There was a slight tremble in his voice.

‘I suppose not . . .’

‘So it was right, what we did.’

‘I suppose so . . .’

‘The gardener was saying that Lord Vetinari put one over on the
Klatchians, sir . . .’

‘I don’t see why not. He’s done it with everyone else.’

‘That would be very satisfactory, sir. Lady Sybil is in the Slightly
Pink Drawing Room, sir.’

She was knitting inexpertly when Vimes came in, but rose and gave him a
kiss.

‘I heard the news,’ she said. ‘Well done.’ She looked him up and down.
As far as she could see, he was all there.

‘I’m not sure that we won . . .’

‘Getting you back alive counts as a win, Sam. Although of course I
wouldn’t say that in front of Lady Selachii.’ Sybil waved the knitting
at him. ‘She’s organized a committee to knit socks for our brave lads at
the front, but it turns out you’re back. And I haven’t even worked out
how to turn a heel yet. She’s probably going to be annoyed.’

‘Er . . . how long do you think my legs are?’

‘Um . . .’ She looked at the knitting. ‘Do you need ascarf?’

He kissed her again.

‘I’m going to have a bath and then something to eat,’ he said.

The water was only lukewarm. Vimes had some hazy idea that Sybil thought
that really hot baths might be letting the side down while there was a
war on.

He was lying with his nose just above the surface when he heard, with
the addition of that special _gloinggloing_ sound that comes from
listening with your ears underwater, some distant talking. Then the door
opened.

‘Fred’s here. Vetinari wants you,’ said Sybil.

‘Already? But we haven’t even _started_ dinner.’

‘I’m coming with you, Sam. He can’t keep on calling you out at all
hours, you know.’

Sam Vimes tried to look as serious as any man can when he’s holding a
loofah.

‘Sybil, I’m the Commander of the Watch and he’s the ruler of the city.
It’s not like going to complain to the teacher because I’m not doing
well in geography . . .’

‘I said I’m coming with you, Sam.’

The Boat slipped down its rails and into the water. A stream of bubbles
came up.

Leonard sighed. He had very carefully refrained from putting the cork
in. The current might roll it anywhere. He hoped it’d roll to the
deepest pit of the ocean, or even right over the Rim.

He walked unnoticed through the crowds until he came to the palace. He
let himself into the secret corridor and avoided the various traps
without thinking, since he himself had designed them.

He reached the door to his airy room and unlocked it. When he was inside
he locked it again, and pushed the key back under the door. And then he
sighed.

So that was the world, was it? Clearly a mad place, with madmen in it.
Well, from now on he’d be careful. It was clear that some men would try
to turn _anything_ into a weapon.

He made himself a cup of tea, a process slightly delayed while he
designed a better sort of spoon and a small device to improve the
circulation of the boiling water.

Then he sat back in his special chair and pulled a lever. Counterweights
dropped. Somewhere, water sloshed from one tank to another. Bits of the
chair creaked and slid into a comfortable position.

Leonard stared bleakly out of the skylight. A few seabirds turned lazily
in the blue square, circling, hardly moving their wings . . .

After a while, his tea growing cold, Leonard began to draw.

‘Lady Sybil? This _is_ an unexpected surprise,’ said Lord Vetinari.
‘Good evening, Sir Samuel, and may I say what a nice scarf you’re
wearing. And Captain Carrot. Please sit down. We have a lot of business
to finish.’

They sat.

‘Firstly,’ said Lord Vetinari, ‘I have just drafted a proclamation for
the town criers. The news is good.’

‘The war _is_ officially over, is it?’ said Carrot.

‘The war, captain, never happened. It was a . . . misunderstanding.’

‘Never happened?’ said Vimes. ‘People got killed!’

‘Quite so,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘And this suggests, does it not, that we
should try to understand one another as much as possible?’

‘What about the Prince?’

‘Oh, I am sure we can do business with him, Vimes.’

‘I don’t think so!’

‘Prince Khufurah? I thought you rather liked the man.’

‘What? What happened to the other one?’

‘He appears to have gone on a long visit to the country,’ said the
Patrician. ‘At some speed.’

‘You mean the kind of visit where you don’t even stop to pack?’

‘That kind of visit, yes. He seems to have upset people.’

‘Do we know which country?’ said Vimes.

‘Klatchistan, I believe – I’m sorry, did I say something funny?’

‘Oh, no. No. Just a thought crossed my mind, that’s all.’

Vetinari leaned back. ‘And so once again peace spreads her tranquil
blanket.’

‘I shouldn’t think the Klatchians are very happy, though.’

‘It is in the nature of people to turn on their leaders when they fail
to be lucky,’ Vetinari added, his expression not changing. ‘Oh, there
will no doubt be problems. We will just have to . . . discuss them.
Prince Khufurah is an amiable man. Very much like most of his ancestors.
A flask of wine, a loaf of bread and thou, or at least a selection of
thous, and he’d not be too interested in politics.’

‘They’re as clever as us,’ said Vimes.

‘We just have to stay ahead of them, then,’ said Vetinari.

‘A brain race, sort of,’ said Vimes.

‘Better than an arms race. Cheaper, too,’ said the Patrician. He flicked
through the papers in front of him. ‘Now then, what was – oh, yes. The
matter of traffic?’

‘Traffic?’ Vimes’s brain tried to do a u-turn.

‘Yes. Our ancient streets are becoming very congested these days. I hear
there is a carter in Kings’ Way who settled down and raised a family
while in the queue. And the responsibility for keeping the streets clear
is, in fact, one of the most ancient ones incumbent on the Watch.’

‘Maybe, sir, but these days—’

‘So you will set up a department, Vimes, to regulate matters. To deal
with things. Stolen carts and so on. And keeping the major crossroads
clear. And perhaps to fine carters who park for too long and impede the
flow. And so on. Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs would, I think, be
eminently fitted for this work which, I suspect, should easily be
self-financing. What is your opinion?’

A chance to be ‘self-financing’ and not get shot at, thought Vimes.
They’ll think they’ve died and gone to heaven.

‘Is this some sort of a reward for them, sir?’

‘Let us say, Vimes, that where one finds one has a square peg, one
should look for a square hole.’

‘I suppose that’s all right, sir. Of course, that means I’ll have to
promote someone—’

‘I am sure I can leave the details to you. A small bonus for each of
them would not be out of order. Ten dollars, say. Oh, there is one other
thing, Vimes. And I am particularly glad that Lady Sybil is here to hear
this. I am persuaded to change the title of your office.’

‘Yes?’

‘“Commander” is rather a mouthful. So I have been reminded that a word
that originally meant _commander_ was “Dux”.’

‘Dux Vimes?’ said Vimes. He heard Sybil gasp.

He was aware of a waiting hush around him, such as may be found between
the lighting of a fuse and the bang. He rolled the word over and over in
his mind.

‘_Duke_?’ he said. ‘Oh, _no_— Sybil, could you wait outside?’

‘Why, Sam?’

‘I need to discuss this very personally with his lordship.’

‘Have a row, you mean?’

‘A discussion.’

Lady Sybil sighed. ‘Oh, very well. It’s up to you, Sam. You know that.’

‘There are . . . associated matters,’ said Lord Vetinari, when the door
closed behind her.

‘No!’

‘Perhaps you should hear them.’

‘No! You’ve done this to me before! We’ve got the Watch set up, we’ve
almost got the numbers, the widows and orphans fund is so big the men
are queueing up for the dangerous beats, and the dartboard we’ve got is
nearly new! You can’t bribe me into accepting this time! There is
_nothing_ we want!’

‘Stoneface Vimes was a much-maligned man, I’ve always thought,’ said
Vetinari.

‘I’m not accepting— What?’ Vimes skidded in mid-anger.

‘I’ve always thought that, too,’ said Carrot loyally.

Vetinari stood up and went to stand by the window, looking down at Broad
Way with his hands behind his back.

‘The thought occurs that this might be time for . . . reconsideration of
certain ancient assumptions,’ said Vetinari.

The meaning enveloped Vimes like a chilly mist.

‘You’re offering to change history?’ he said. ‘Is that it? Rewrite the—’

‘Oh, my dear Vimes, history changes all the time. It is constantly being
re-examined and re-evaluated, otherwise how would we be able to keep
historians occupied? We can’t possibly allow people with their sort of
minds to walk around with time on their hands. The Chairman of the Guild
of Historians is in full agreement with me, I know, that the pivotal
role of your ancestor in the city’s history is ripe for fresh . . .
analysis.’

‘Discussed it with him, have you?’ said Vimes.

‘_Not yet_.’

Vimes opened and shut his mouth a few times. The Patrician went back to
his desk and picked up a sheet of paper.

‘And, of course, other details would have to be taken care of . . .’ he
said.

‘Such as?’ Vimes croaked.

‘The Vimes coat of arms would be resurrected, of course. It would have
to be. I know Lady Sybil was extremely upset when she found you weren’t
entitled to one. And a coronet, I believe, with knobs on—’

‘You can take that coronet with the knobs on and—’

‘—which I hope you will wear on formal occasions, such as, for example,
the unveiling of the statue which has for so long disgraced the city by
its absence.’

For once, Vimes managed to get ahead of the conversation.

‘Old Stoneface again?’ he said. ‘That part of it, is it? A statue to old
Stoneface?’

‘Well done,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘Not of you, obviously. Putting up a
statue to someone who tried to _stop_ a war is not very, um, statuesque.
Of course, if you had butchered five hundred of your own men out of
arrogant carelessness, we’d be melting the bronze already. No. I was
thinking of the first Vimes who tried to make a future and merely made
history. I thought perhaps somewhere in Peach Pie Street—’

They watched one another like cats, like poker players.

‘Top of Broad Way,’ Vimes said hoarsely. ‘Right in front of the palace.’

The Patrician glanced out of the window. ‘Agreed. I shall enjoy looking
at it.’

‘And right up close to the wall. Out of the wind.’

‘Certainly.’

Vimes looked nonplussed for a moment. ‘We lost people—’

‘Seventeen, caught in skirmishes of one sort or another,’ said Lord
Vetinari.

‘I want—’

‘Financial arrangements will be made for widows and dependants.’

Vimes gave up.

‘Well done, sir!’ said Carrot.

The new duke rubbed his chin.

‘But that means I’ll have to be married to a duchess,’ he said. ‘That’s
a big fat word, _duchess_. And Sybil’s never been very interested in
that sort of thing.’

‘I bow to your knowledge of the female psyche,’ said Vetinari. ‘I saw
her face just now. No doubt when she next takes tea with her friends,
who I believe include the Duchess of Quirm and Lady Selachii, she will
be entirely unmoved and not faintly smug in any way.’

Vimes hesitated. Sybil was an amazingly levelheaded woman, of course,
and this sort of thing . . . She’d left it entirely up to him, hadn’t
she? . . . This sort of thing wouldn’t . . . Well, of _course_ she
wouldn’t, she . . . Of course she would, wouldn’t she? She wouldn’t
swank, she’d just be very comfortable knowing that they knew that she
knew that they knew . . .

‘All right,’ he said, ‘but, look, I thought only a king could make
someone a duke. It’s not like all these knights and barons, that’s just,
well, political, but something like a duke needs a—’

He looked at Vetinari. And then at Carrot. Vetinari had said that he’d
been _reminded_ . . .

‘I’m sure, if ever there _is_ a king in Ankh-Morpork again, he will
choose to ratify my decision,’ said Vetinari smoothly. ‘And if there
never is a king, well, I see no practical problems.’

‘I’m bought and sold, aren’t I?’ said Vimes, shaking his head. ‘Bought
and sold.’

‘Not at all,’ said Vetinari.

‘Yes, I am. We all are. Even Rust. And all those poor buggers who went
off to get slaughtered. We’re not part of the big picture, right? We’re
just bought and sold.’

Vetinari was suddenly in front of Vimes, his chair hitting the floor
behind his desk.

‘Really? Men marched away, Vimes. And men marched back. How glorious the
battles would have been that they never had to fight!’ He hesitated, and
then shrugged. ‘And you say bought and sold? All right. But not, I
think, needlessly spent.’ The Patrician flashed one of those sharp,
fleeting little smiles to say that something that wasn’t very funny had
nevertheless amused him. ‘_Veni, vici_ . . . Vetinari.’

Seaweed floated away on aimless currents. Apart from the driftwood,
there was nothing to show that Leshp had ever been.

Seabirds wheeled. But their cries were more or less drowned out by the
argument going on just above sea level.

‘It is entirely our wood, you nodding acquaintance of a dog!’

‘Oh? Really? On your side of the island, is it? I don’t _think_ so!’

‘It floated up!’

‘How do you know we didn’t have some driftwood on our side of the
island? Anyway, _we’ve_ still got a barrel of fresh water, camel
breath!’

‘All right! We’ll share! You can have half the raft!’

‘Aha! Aha! Want to negotiate, eh, now we’ve got you over a barrel?’

‘Can we just say yes, Dad? I’m fed up with treading water!’

‘And you’ll have to do your share of the paddling.’

‘Of course.’

The birds glided and turned, white scribbles against the clear blue sky.

‘To Ankh-Morpork!’

‘To Klatch!’

Down below, as the sunken mountain of Leshp settled further onto the sea
bed, the Curious Squid jetted back along its curious streets. They had
no idea why, at enormous intervals, their city disappeared up into the
sky, but it never went away for very long. It was just one of those
things. Things happened, or sometimes they didn’t. The Curious Squid
just assumed that it all worked out, sooner or later.

A shark swam by. If anyone had risked placing an ear to its side, they
would have heard: ‘Bingeley-bingeley beep! Three pee em . . . Eat,
Hunger, Swim. Things To Do Today: Swim, Hunger, Eat. Three oh five pee
em: Feeding Frenzy . . .’

It wasn’t the most interesting of schedules, but it _was_ very easy to
organize.

Unusually, Sergeant Colon had put himself on the patrol roster. It was
good to get out in the cool air. And also, for some reason, the news had
got around that the Watch were somehow bound up with what seemed, in
some indefinable way, to have been a victory, which meant that a Watch
uniform was probably good for the odd free pint at the back door of the
occasional pub.

He patrolled with Corporal Nobbs. They walked with the confident tread
of men who had been places and seen things.

With a true copper’s instinct, the tread took them past Mundane Meals.
Mr Goriff was cleaning the windows. He stopped when he saw them and
darted inside.

‘Call that gratitude?’ sniffed Colon.

The man reappeared carrying two large packages.

‘My wife made this specially for you,’ he said. He added, ‘She said she
knew you’d be along.’

Colon pulled aside the waxed paper.

‘My word,’ he said.

‘Special _Ankh-Morpork_ curry,’ said Mr Goriff. ‘Containing yellow curry
powder, big lumps of swede, green peas and soggy sultanas the—’

‘—size of eggs!’ said Nobby.

‘Thank you very much,’ said Colon. ‘How’s your lad, then, Mr Goriff?’

‘He says you have set him an example and now he will be a watchman when
he grows up.’

‘Ah, right,’ said Colon happily. ‘That’ll please Mr Vimes. You just tell
him—’

‘In Al-Khali,’ said Goriff. ‘He is staying with my brother.’

‘Oh. Well . . . fair enough, then. Er . . . thanks for the curry,
anyway.’

‘What sort of example do you think he meant?’ said Nobby, as they
strolled away.

‘The good sort, obviously,’ said Colon, through a mouthful of mildly
spiced swede.

‘Yeah, right.’

Chewing slowly and walking even slower, they headed towards the docks.

‘I was gonna write Bana a letter,’ said Nobby, after a while.

‘Yeah, but . . . she thought you was a woman, Nobby.’

‘Right. So she saw, like, my inner self, shorn of . . .’ Nobby’s lips
moved as he concentrated, ‘shorn of surface thingy. That’s what Angua
said. Anyway, then I thought, well, her boyfriend’ll be coming back, so
I thought I’d be noble about it and give her up.’

‘’cos he might be a big stroppy bloke, too,’ said Sergeant Colon.

‘I never thought about that, sarge.’

They paced for a while.

‘It’s a far, far better thing I do now than I have ever done before,’
said Nobby.

‘Right,’ said Sergeant Colon. They walked on in silence for a while and
he added: ‘O’course, that’s not difficult.’

‘I still got the hanky she gave me, look.’

‘Very nice, Nobby.’

‘That’s genuine Klatchian silk, that is.’

‘Yeah, it looks very nice.’

‘I’m never going to wash it, sarge.’

‘You soppy old thing, Nobby,’ said Fred Colon.

He watched Corporal Nobbs blow his nose.

‘So . . . you’re going to stop using it, are you?’ he said, doubtfully.

‘It still bends, sarge. See?’ Nobby demonstrated.

‘Yeah, right. Silly of me to ask, really.’

Overhead, the weathervanes started to creak round.

‘Made me a lot more understanding about women, that experience,’ said
Nobby.

Colon, a much-married man, said nothing.

‘I met Verity Pushpram this afternoon,’ Nobby went on, ‘and I said how
about coming out with me tonight and I don’t mind about the squint at
all and I’ve got this expensive exotic perfume which’ll totally disguise
your smell, and she said bugger off and threw an eel at me.’

‘Not good, then,’ said Colon.

‘Oh, _yeah_, sarge, ’cos she _used_ to just _cuss_ when she saw me. And
I’ve still got the eel, and there’s a good feed off it, so I look upon
it as a very positive step.’

‘Could be. Could be. Just so long as you give someone that scent soon,
eh? Only even the people across the street are starting to complain.’

Their feet, moving like bees towards a flower, had found their way to
the waterfront. They looked up at the Klatchian’s Head, on its spike.

‘It’s only wooden,’ said Colon.

Nobby said nothing.

‘And it’s, like, part of our traditional heritage an’ that,’ Colon went
on, but hesitantly, as if he didn’t believe his own voice.

Nobby blew his nose again, an exercise which, with all its little
arpeggios and flourishes, went on for some time.

The sergeant gave in. Some things didn’t seem quite the same any more,
he had to admit. ‘I’ve never really liked the place. Let’s go to the
Bunch of Grapes then, all right?’

Nobby nodded.

‘Anyway, the beer here is frankly piss,’ said Colon.

Lady Sybil held her handkerchief in front of her husband.

‘Spit!’ she commanded.

Then she carefully cleaned a smut off his cheek.

‘There. Now you look very—’

‘—ducal,’ said Vimes gloomily. ‘I thought I’d done this once
already . . .’

‘They never actually had the Convivium after all that fuss,’ said Lady
Sybil, picking some microscopic lint off his doublet. ‘It’s got to be
held.’

‘You’d think if I’m a duke I wouldn’t have to wear all this damn silly
outfit, wouldn’t you?’

‘Well, I did point out that you could wear the official ducal regalia,
dear.’

‘Yes, I’ve seen it. White silk stockings are not _me_.’

‘Well, you’ve got the calves for them—’

‘I think I’ll stick with the commander’s costume,’ said Vimes quickly.

Archchancellor Ridcully hurried up. ‘Ah, we’re ready for you now, Lord
Vi—’

‘Call me Sir Samuel,’ said Vimes. ‘I can just about live with that.’

‘Well, we’ve found the Bursar in one of the attics, so I think we can
make a start. If you’d take your place . . .’

Vimes walked to the head of the procession, feeling every gaze on him,
hearing the whispers. Maybe you could get chucked out of the peerage?
He’d have to look that up. Although, considering what lords had got up
to in the past, it would have to be for something really, really awful.

Still, the drawings of the statue looked good. And he’d seen what was
going to go in the history books. Making history, it turned out, was
quite easy. It was what got written down. It was as simple as that.

‘Jolly good,’ Ridcully bellowed, above the buzz. ‘Now, if we all step
smartly and follow Lor— Com— Sir Samuel we ought to be back here for
lunch no later than half past one. Is the choir ready? No one is
treading on anyone else’s robes? Then orf we go!’

Vimes set out at the mandatory slow walking pace. He heard the
procession start up behind him. There were no doubt problems, as there
always are on civic occasions which have to involve the old and deaf and
the young and stupid. Several people were probably already walking in
the wrong direction.

As he stepped out into Sator Square there were the jeers and various
flatulent noises and murmurs of ‘Oozee then, oozee finkee izz?’ that are
the traditional crowd responses on these occasions. But there were one
or two cheers, too.

He tried to look straight ahead.

Silk stockings. With _garters_. Well, they were out. There were a lot of
things he’d do for Sybil, but if garters figured anywhere in the
relationship they weren’t going to be on him. And everyone said he had
to wear a purple robe lined with vermine. They could forget that, too.

He’d spent a desperate hour in the library, and all that stuff about the
gold knobs and silk stockings was so much marsh gas. Tradition? He’d
show them tradition. What the _original_ dukes wore, as far as he could
see, was good sensible chain mail with blood on it, preferably other
people’s—

There was a scream from the crowd. His head jerked round and he saw a
stout woman sitting on the ground, waving her arms.

‘’e stole my bag! And ’e never showed me ’is Thieves’ Guild badge!’

The procession shunted to a halt as Vimes stared at the figure legging
it across Sator Square.

‘You stop right there, Sidney Pickens!’ he yelled, and leapt forward.

And, of course, very few people _do_ know how Tradition is supposed to
go. There’s a certain mysterious ridiculousness about it by its very
nature – _once_ there was a reason why you had to carry a posy of
primroses on Soul Cake Tuesday, but _now_ you did it because . . .
that’s what was Done. Besides, the intelligence of that creature known
as a crowd is the square root of the number of people in it.

Vimes was running, so the University choir hurried after him. And the
people behind the choir saw the gap opening up and responded to the urge
to fill it. And then everyone was just running, because everyone else
was running.

There were occasional whimpers from those whose heart, lungs or legs
weren’t up to this kind of thing, and a bellow from the Archchancellor
who had tried to stand firm in the face of the frantic stampede and was
now having his head repeatedly trodden into the cobbles.

And apprentice thief Sidney Pickens ran because he’d taken one look over
his shoulder and seen the whole of Ankh-Morpork society bearing down on
him, and that sort of thing has a terrible effect on a growing lad.

And Sam Vimes ran. He tore off his cloak and whirled away his plumed
hat, and he ran and ran.

There would be trouble later on. People would ask questions. But that
was later on – for now, gloriously uncomplicated and wonderfully clean,
and hopefully with never an end, under a clear sky, in a world
untarnished . . . there was only the chase.

¹The palms are held at right angles to one another and flapped together
rather than clapped, while the flapper stares intently at the audience
as if to say ‘We’re going to have some applause here or else the whole
school is in detention.’

²Women always do this.

³The possibility that they were not guilty of anything was one that he
didn’t even think worthy of consideration.

⁴A term invented by the wizard Denephew Boot4a, who had found that by a
system of rewards and punishments he could train a dog, at the ringing
of a bell, to immediately eat a strawberry meringue.

4aHis parents, who were uncomplicated country people, had wanted a girl.
They were expecting to call her Denise.

⁵Plain clothes was the problem. Both the men had been used to uniforms
all their lives. Sergeant Colon’s only suit had been bought by a man two
stone lighter and ten years younger, so the buttons creaked under
tension, and Nobby’s idea of plain clothes was the
ribbon-and-bell-bedecked costume he wore as a leading member of the
Ankh-Morpork Folk Dance and Song Society. Small children had followed
them in the street to see where the show was going to be.

⁶Constable Visit-​The-​Ungodly-​With-​Explanatory-​Pamphlets was a good
copper, Vimes always said, and that was his highest term of praise. He
was an Omnian with his countrymen’s almost pathological interest in
evangelical religion and spent all his wages on pamphlets; he even had
his own printing press. The results were handed out to anyone interested
and everyone who wasn’t interested as well. Even Detritus couldn’t clear
a crowd faster than Visit, Vimes said. And on his days off he could be
seen tramping the streets with his colleague,
Smite-The-Unbeliever-With-Cunning-Arguments. So far they hadn’t made a
single convert. Vimes thought that Visit was probably a really nice man
underneath it all, but somehow he could never face the task of finding
out.

⁷And would not, therefore, be officially burgled. Ankh-Morpork had a
very direct approach to the idea of insurance. When the middle-man was
cut out, that wasn’t a figure of speech.

⁸It is a long-cherished tradition among a certain type of military
thinker that huge casualties are the main thing. If they are on the
other side then this is a valuable bonus.

⁹One of the universal rules of happiness is: always be wary of any
helpful item that weighs less than its operating manual.

¹⁰Thinking up good names was, oddly enough, one area where Leonard
Quirm’s genius tended to give up.

¹¹Except in the particular case of Sidney Lopsides, who was paid two
dollars a day from City funds to wear a sack over his head. It wasn’t
that he was spectacularly deformed, as such, it was merely that anyone
who saw him spent the rest of the day with an unnerving feeling that
they were upside down.

¹²Sidney Lopsides again.

¹³Jugglers will tell you that juggling with items that are identical is
always easier than a mixture of all shapes and sizes. This is even the
case with chainsaws, although of course when the juggler misses the
first chainsaw it is only the _start_ of his problems. Some more will be
along very shortly.

¹⁴ Corporal Nobbs’s appearance could best be summarized this way.

One of the minor laws of the narrative universe is that any homely
featured man who has, for some reason, to disguise himself as a woman
will apparently become attractive to some otherwise perfectly sane men
with, as the ancient scrolls say, hilarious results.

In this case the laws were fighting against the fact of Corporal Nobby
Nobbs, and gave up.

¹⁵And Mr Harris of the Blue Cat Club. His admission caused a lot of
argument in the Guild, who knew competition when they saw it, but Mrs
Palm overruled opposition on the basis, she said, that unnatural acts
were only natural.

¹⁶Usually because they suspect the joke’s on them.

¹⁷Although of course wizards aren’t allowed to, because they’re not
supposed to have grandchildren.


About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT was the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld® series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His fortieth Discworld novel, _Raising Steam_, was
published in 2013. His books have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he was the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
He died in March 2015.

www.terrypratchett.co.uk
@terryandrob


ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

THE DISCWORLD® SERIES

1. _The Colour of Magic_

2. _The Light Fantastic_

3. _Equal Rites_

4. _Mort_

5. _Sourcery_

6. _Wyrd Sisters_

7. _Pyramids_

8. _Guards! Guards!_

9. _Eric_ (illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. _Moving Pictures_

11. _Reaper Man_

12. _Witches Abroad_

13. _Small Gods_

14. _Lords and Ladies_

15. _Men at Arms_

16. _Soul Music_

17. _Interesting Times_

18. _Maskerade_

19. _Feet of Clay_

20. _Hogfather_

21. _Jingo_

22. _The Last Continent_

23. _Carpe Jugulum_

24. _The Fifth Elephant_

25. _The Truth_

26. _Thief of Time_

27. _The Last Hero_ (illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. _The Amazing Maurice and his Educated Rodents_ (for young adults)

29. _Night Watch_

30. _The Wee Free Men_ (for young adults)

31. _Monstrous Regiment_

32. _A Hat Full of Sky_ (for young adults)

33. _Going Postal_

34. _Thud!_

35. _Wintersmith_ (for young adults)

36. _Making Money_

37. _Unseen Academicals_

38. _I Shall Wear Midnight_ (for young adults)

39. _Snuff_

40. _Raising Steam_

OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD

_The Science of Discworld_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld III: Darwin’s Watch_ (with Ian Stewart and
Jack Cohen)

_The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day_ (with Ian Stewart and Jack
Cohen)

_Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion...So Far_ (with Stephen Briggs)

_Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_ (with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

_The Pratchett Portfolio_ (with Paul Kidby)

_The Discworld Almanak_ (with Bernard Pearson)

_The Unseen University Cut-Out Book_ (with Alan Batley and Bernard
Pearson)

_Where’s My Cow?_ (illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

_The Art of Discworld_ (with Paul Kidby)

_The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld_ (compiled by Stephen Briggs)

_The Folklore of Discworld_ (with Jacqueline Simpson)

_The World of Poo_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_Mrs Bradshaw’s Handbook_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_ (with the Discworld Emporium)

_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_ (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen
Player)

_The Discworld Mapp_ (with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

_A Tourist Guide to Lancre – a Discworld Mapp_ (with Stephen Briggs,
illustrated by Paul Kidby)

_Death’s Domain_ (with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS

_The Dark Side of the Sun_

_Strata_

_The Unadulterated Cat_ (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

_Good Omens_ (with Neil Gaiman)

SHORTER WRITING

_A Blink of the Screen_

_A Slip of the Keyboard_

WITH STEPHEN BAXTER

_The Long Earth_

_The Long War_

_The Long Mars_

_The Long Utopia_

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNG ADULTS

_The Carpet People_

_Truckers_

_Diggers_

_Wings_

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

_Nation_

_Dodger_

_Dodger’s Guide to London_

_Dragons at Crumbling Castle_

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

Transworld is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com

[image]

First published in Great Britain in 1997 by Victor Gollancz Ltd
Corgi edition published 1998
Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett 1997

Discworld® is a trademark registered by Terry Pratchett

Terry Pratchett has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the author of this work.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

A CIP catalogue for this book
is available from the British Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781407035086
ISBN 9780552154161

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
