
About the Book

_‘Anything you do in the past changes the future. The tiniest little
actions have huge consequences. You might tread on an ant now and it
might entirely prevent someone from being born in the future.’_

There’s nothing like the issue of evolution to get under the skin of
academics. Especially when those same academics are by chance or bad
judgement deposited at a critical evolutionary turning point when one
wrong move could have catastrophic results for the future. Unfortunately
in the hands of such an inept and cussed group of individuals, the
sensitive issue of causality is sadly only likely to receive the same
scant respect that they show to one another…


Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

The Last Continent

Footnotes

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright



THE LAST CONTINENT


A DISCWORLD® NOVEL

Terry Pratchett

Discworld is a world and a mirror of worlds.

This is not a book about Australia. No, it’s about somewhere entirely
different which just happens to be, here and there, a bit . . .
australian.

Still . . . no worries, right?

Against the stars a turtle passes, carrying four elephants on its shell.

Both turtle and elephants are bigger than people might expect, but out
between the stars the difference between huge and tiny is, comparatively
speaking, very small.

But this turtle and these elephants are, by turtle and elephant
standards, big. They carry the Discworld, with its vast lands,
cloudscapes, and oceans.

People don’t _live_ on the Disc any more than, in less hand-crafted
parts of the multiverse, they live on balls. Oh, planets may be the
place where their body eats its tea, but they _live_ elsewhere, in
worlds of their own which orbit very handily around the centre of their
heads.

When gods get together they tell the story of one particular planet
whose inhabitants watched, with mild interest, huge continent-wrecking
slabs of ice slap into another world which was, in astronomical terms,
right next door – _and then did nothing about it_ because that sort of
thing only happens in Outer Space. An _intelligent_ species would at
least have found someone to complain to. Anyway, no one seriously
believes in that story, because a race quite that stupid would never
even have discovered slood.¹

People believe in all sorts of other things, though. For example, there
are some people who have a legend that the whole universe is carried in
a leather bag by an old man.

They’re right, too.

Other people say: hold on, if he’s carrying the entire universe in a
sack, right, that means he’s carrying himself and the sack _inside_ the
sack, because the universe contains everything. Including him. And the
sack, of course. Which contains him and the sack already. As it were.

To which the reply is: well?

All tribal myths are true, for a given value of ‘true’.

It is a general test of the omnipotence of a god that they can see the
fall of a tiny bird. But only one god makes notes, and a few
adjustments, so that next time it can fall faster and further.

We may find out why.

We might find out why mankind is here, although that is more complicated
and begs the question ‘Where else should we be?’ It would be terrible to
think that some impatient deity might part the clouds and say, ‘Damn,
are you lot still here? I thought you discovered slood ten thousand
years ago! I’ve got ten trillion tons of ice arriving on Monday!’

We may even find out why the duck-billed platypus.²

Snow, thick and wet, tumbled on to the lawns and roofs of Unseen
University, the Discworld’s premier college of magic.

It was sticky snow, which made the place look like some sort of
expensive yet tasteless ornament, and it caked around the boots of
McAbre, the Head Bledlow, as he trudged through the cold, wild night.

Two other bledlows³ stepped out of the lee of a buttress and fell in
behind him on a solemn march towards the main gates.

It was an old custom, centuries old, and in the summer a few tourists
would hang around to watch it, but the Ceremony of the Keys went on
every night in every season. Mere ice, wind and snow had never stopped
it. Bledlows in times gone past had clambered over tentacled
monstrosities to do the Ceremony; they’d waded through floodwater,
flailed with their bowler hats at errant pigeons, harpies and dragons,
and ignored mere faculty members who’d thrown open their bedroom windows
and screamed imprecations on the lines of ‘Stop that damn racket, will
you? What’s the _point_?’ They’d never stopped, or even thought of
stopping. You couldn’t stop Tradition. You could only add to it.

The three men reached the shadows by the main gate, almost blotted out
in the whirling snow. The bledlow on duty was waiting for them.

‘Halt! Who Goes There?’ he shouted.

McAbre saluted. ‘The Archchancellor’s Keys!’

‘Pass, The Archchancellor’s Keys!’

The Head Bledlow took a step forward, extended both arms in front of him
with his palms bent back towards him, and patted his chest at the place
where some bledlow long buried had once had two breast pockets. Pat,
pat. Then he extended his arms by his sides and stiffly patted the sides
of his jacket. Pat, pat.

‘Damn! Could Have Sworn I Had Them A Moment Ago!’ he bellowed,
enunciating each word with a sort of bulldog carefulness.

The gatekeeper saluted. McAbre saluted.

‘Have You Looked In All Your Pockets?’

McAbre saluted. The gatekeeper saluted. A small pyramid of snow was
building up on his bowler hat.

‘I Think I Must Have Left Them On The Dresser. It’s Always The Same,
Isn’t It?’

‘You Should Remember Where You Put Them Down!’

‘Hang On, Perhaps They’re In My Other Jacket!’

The young bledlow who was this week’s Keeper of the Other Jacket stepped
forward. Each man saluted the other two. The youngest cleared his throat
and managed to say:

‘No, I Looked In . . . There This . . . Morning!’

McAbre gave him a slight nod to acknowledge a difficult job done well,
and patted his pockets again.

‘Hold On, Stone The Crows, They Were In This Pocket After All! What A
Muggins I Am!’

‘Don’t Worry, I Do The Same Myself!’

‘Is My Face Red! Forget My Own Head Next!’

Somewhere in the darkness a window creaked up.

‘Er, excuse me, gentlemen—’

‘Here’s The Keys, Then!’ said McAbre, raising his voice.

‘Much Obliged!’

‘I wonder if you could—’ the querulous voice went on, apologizing for
even thinking of complaining.

‘All Safe And Secure!’ shouted the gatekeeper, handing the keys back.

‘—perhaps keep it down a _little_—’

‘Gods Bless All Present!’ screamed McAbre, veins standing out on his
thick crimson neck.

‘Careful Where You Put Them This Time. Ha! Ha! Ha!’

‘Ho! Ho! Ho!’ yelled McAbre, beside himself with fury. He saluted
stiffly, went About Turn with an unnecessarily large amount of foot
stamping and, the ancient exchange completed, marched back to the
bledlows’ lodge muttering under his breath.

The window of the University’s little sanatorium shut again.

‘That man really makes me want to swear,’ said the Bursar. He fumbled in
his pocket and produced his little green box of dried frog pills,
spilling a few as he fumbled with the lid. ‘I’ve sent him no end of
memos. He says it’s traditional but, I don’t know, he’s so . . .
boisterous about it . . .’ He blew his nose. ‘How’s he doing?’

‘Not good,’ said the Dean.

The Librarian was very, very ill.

Snow plastered itself against the closed window.

There was a heap of blankets in front of the roaring fire. Occasionally
it shuddered a bit. The wizards watched it with concern.

The Lecturer in Recent Runes was feverishly turning over the pages of a
book.

‘I mean, how do we know if it’s old age or not?’ he said. ‘What’s old
age for an orang-utan? _And_ he’s a wizard. _And_ he spends all his time
in the Library. All that magic radiation the whole time. Somehow the flu
is attacking his morphic field, but it could be caused by _anything_.’

The Librarian sneezed.

And changed shape.

The wizards looked sadly at what appeared very much like a comfortable
armchair which someone had, for some reason, upholstered in red fur.

‘What can we do for him?’ said Ponder Stibbons, the Faculty’s youngest
member.

‘He might feel happier with some cushions,’ said Ridcully.

‘Slightly bad taste, Archchancellor, I feel.’

‘What? Everyone likes some comfy cushions when they’re feeling a little
under the weather, don’t they?’ said the man to whom sickness was a
mystery.

‘He was a table this morning. Mahogany, I believe. He seems to be able
to retain his colour, at least.’

The Lecturer in Recent Runes closed the book with a sigh. ‘He’s
certainly lost control of his morphic function,’ he said. ‘It’s not
surprising, I suppose. Once it’s been changed, it’ll change again much
more easily, I’m afraid. A well known fact.’

He looked at the Archchancellor’s frozen grin and sighed. Mustrum
Ridcully was notorious for not trying to understand things if there was
anyone around to do it for him.

‘It’s quite hard to change the shape of a living thing but once it’s
been done it’s a lot easier to do it next time,’ he translated.

‘Say again?’

‘He was a human before he was an ape, Archchancellor. Remember?’

‘Oh. Yes,’ said Ridcully. ‘Funny, really, the way you get used to
things. Apes and humans are related, accordin’ to young Ponder here.’

The other wizards looked blank. Ponder screwed up his face.

‘He’s been showing me some of the invisible writings,’ said Ridcully.
‘Fascinatin’ stuff.’

The other wizards scowled at Ponder Stibbons, as you would at a man
who’d been caught smoking in a firework factory. So _now_ they knew who
to blame. As usual . . .

‘Is that entirely _wise_, sir?’ said the Dean.

‘Well, I do happen to be the Archchancellor in these parts, Dean,’ said
Ridcully calmly.

‘A blindly obvious fact, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean. You could have
cut cheese with his tone.

‘Must take an interest. Morale, you know,’ said Ridcully. ‘My door is
always open. I see myself as a member of the team.’ Ponder winced again.

‘I don’t think I’m related to any apes,’ said the Senior Wrangler
thoughtfully. ‘I mean, I’d know, wouldn’t I? I’d get invited to their
weddings and so on. My parents would have said something like, “Don’t
worry about Uncle Charlie, he’s _supposed_ to smell like that,” wouldn’t
they? And there’d be portraits in—’

The chair sneezed. There was an unpleasant moment of morphic
uncertainty, and then the Librarian was sprawling in his old shape
again. The wizards watched him carefully to see what’d happen next.

It _was_ hard to remember the time when the Librarian had been a human
being. Certainly no one could remember what he’d looked like, or even
what his name had been.

A magical explosion, always a possibility in somewhere like the Library
where so many unstable books of magic are pressed dangerously together,
had introduced him to unexpected apehood years before. Since then he’d
never looked back, and often hadn’t looked down either. His big hairy
shape, swinging by one arm from a top shelf while he rearranged books
with his feet, had become a popular one among the whole University body;
his devotion to duty had been an example to everyone.

Archchancellor Ridcully, into whose head that last sentence had
treacherously arranged itself, realized that he was unconsciously
drafting an obituary.

‘Anyone called in a doctor?’ he said.

‘We got Doughnut Jimmy⁴ here this afternoon,’ said the Dean. ‘He tried
to take his temperature but I’m afraid the Librarian bit him.’

‘He bit him? With a thermometer in his mouth?’

‘Ah. Not exactly. There, in fact, you have rather discovered the reason
for his biting.’

There was a moment of solemn silence. The Senior Wrangler picked up a
limp black-leather paw and patted it vaguely.

‘Does that book say if monkeys have pulses?’ he said. ‘Is his nose
supposed to be cold, or what?’

There was a little sound, such as might be made by half a dozen people
all sharply drawing in their breath at once. The other wizards began to
edge away from their Senior Wrangler.

There was, for a few seconds, no other sound but the crackling of the
fire and the howl of the wind outside.

The wizards shuffled back.

The Senior Wrangler, in the astonished tones of someone still possessing
all known limbs, very slowly took off his pointy hat. This was something
a wizard would normally do only in the most sombre of circumstances.

‘Well, that’s it, then,’ he said. ‘Poor chap’s on his way home. Back to
the big desert in the sky.’

‘Er, rainforest, possibly,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Maybe Mrs Whitlow could make him some hot nourishing soup?’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes.

Archchancellor Ridcully thought about the housekeeper’s hot nourishing
soup. ‘Kill or cure, I suppose,’ he murmured. He patted the Librarian
carefully. ‘Buck up, old chap,’ he said. ‘Soon have you back on your
feet and continuing to make a valued contribution.’

‘Knuckles,’ said the Dean helpfully.

‘Say again?’

‘Knuckles, rather than feet.’

‘Castors,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Bad taste, that man,’ said the Archchancellor.

They wandered out of the room. From the corridor came their retreating
voices:

‘Looked very pale around the antimacassar, I thought.’

‘Surely there’s some sort of a cure?’

‘The old place won’t be the same without him.’

‘Definitely one of a kind.’

When they’d gone the Librarian reached up cautiously, pulled a piece of
blanket over his head, cuddled his hot-water bottle and sneezed.

Now there were _two_ hot-water bottles, one of them a lot bigger than
the other and with a teddy bear cover in red fur.

* * *

Light travels slowly on the Disc and is slightly heavy, with a tendency
to pile up against high mountain ranges. Research wizards have
speculated that there is another, much speedier type of light which
allows the slower light to be seen, but since this moves too fast to see
they have been unable to find a use for it.

This _does_ mean that, despite the Disc being flat, everywhere does not
experience the same time at, for want of a better term, the same time.
When it was so late at night in Ankh-Morpork that it was early in the
morning, elsewhere it was . . .

. . . but there were no hours here. There was dawn and dusk, morning and
afternoon, and presumably there was midnight and midday, but mainly
there was heat. And redness. Something as artificial and human as an
hour wouldn’t last five minutes here. It would be dried out and
shrivelled up in seconds.

Above all, there was silence. It was not the chilly, bleak silence of
endless space, but the burning organic silence you get when, across a
thousand miles of shimmering red horizons, everything is too tired to
make a sound.

But, as the ear of observation panned across the desert, it picked up
something like a chant, a reedy little litany that beat against the
all-embracing silence like a fly bumping against the windowpane of the
universe.

The rather breathless chanter was lost to view because he was standing
in a hole dug in the red earth; occasionally some earth was thrown up on
the heap behind him. A stained and battered pointy hat bobbed about in
time with the tuneless tune. The word ‘Wizzard’ had, perhaps, once been
embroidered on it in sequins. They had fallen off, but the word was
still there in brighter red where the hat’s original colour showed
through. Several dozen small flies orbited it.

The words went something like this:

‘Grubs! That’s what we’re going to eat! That’s why they call it grub!
And what’re we doing to get the grub? Why, we’re grubbing for it!
Hooray!’ Another shovelful of earth arced on to the heap, and the voice
said, rather more quietly: ‘I wonder if you can eat flies?’

They say the heat and the flies here can drive a man insane. But you
don’t have to believe that, and nor does that bright mauve elephant that
just cycled past.

Strangely enough, the madman in the hole was the only person currently
on the continent who might throw any kind of light on a small drama
being enacted a thousand miles away and several metres below, where the
opal miner known only to his mates as Strewth was about to make the most
valuable yet dangerous discovery of his career.

Strewth’s pick knocked aside the rock and dust of millennia, and
something gleamed in the candlelight.

It was green, like frosty green fire.

Carefully, his mind suddenly as frozen as the light under his fingers,
he picked away at the loose rock. The opal picked up and reflected more
and more light on to his face as the debris fell away. There seemed to
be no end to the glow.

Finally, he let his breath out in one go.

‘Strewth!’

If he’d found a little piece of green opal, say about the size of a
bean, he’d have called his mates over and they’d have knocked off for a
few beers. A piece the size of his fist would have had him pounding the
floor. But with this . . . He was still standing there, brushing it
gently with his fingers, when the other miners noticed the light and
hurried over.

At least . . . they started out hurrying. As they came closer, they
slowed to a kind of reverential walk.

No one said anything for a moment. The green light shone on their faces.

Then one of the men whispered: ‘Good on yer, Strewth.’

‘There isn’t enough money in all the world, mate.’

‘Watch out, it might just be a glaze . . .’

‘Still worth a mint. Go on, Strewth . . . get it out.’

They watched like cats as the pick pried loose more and more rock, and
found an edge. And another edge.

Now Strewth’s fingers began to shake.

‘Careful, mate . . . there’s a side of it . . .’

The men took a step back as the last of the obscuring earth was knocked
away. The thing _was_ oblong, although the bottom edge was a confusion
of twisted opal and dirt.

Strewth reversed his pick and laid the wooden handle against the glowing
crystal.

‘Strewth, it’s no good,’ he said. ‘I just _gots_ to know . . .’

He tapped the rock.

It echoed.

‘Can’t be hollow, can it?’ said one of the miners. ‘Never heard of
that.’

Strewth picked up a crowbar. ‘Right! Let’s—’

There was a faint _plink_. A large piece of opal broke away near the
bottom. It turned out to be no thicker than a plate.

It revealed a couple of toes, which moved very slowly inside their
iridescent shell.

‘Oh, _strewth_,’ said a miner, as they backed further away. ‘It’s
_alive_.’

Ponder _knew_ he should never have let Ridcully look at the invisible
writings. Wasn’t it a basic principle never to let your employer know
what it is you actually _do_ all day?

But no matter what precautions you took, sooner or later the boss was
bound to come in and poke around and say things like, ‘Is this where you
work, then?’ and ‘I thought I sent a memo out about people bringing in
potted plants,’ and ‘What d’you call that thing with the keyboard?’

And this had been particularly problematical for Ponder, because reading
the invisible writings was a delicate and meticulous job, suited to the
kind of temperament that follows Grand Prix Continental Drift and keeps
bonsai mountains as a hobby or even drives a Volvo. It needed
painstaking care. It needed a mind that could enjoy doing jigsaw puzzles
in a dark room. It did not need Mustrum Ridcully.

The hypothesis behind invisible writings was laughably complicated. All
books are tenuously connected through L-space and, therefore, the
content of any book ever written _or yet to be written_ may, in the
right circumstances, be deduced from a sufficiently close study of books
already in existence. Future books exist _in potentia_, as it were, in
the same way that a sufficiently detailed study of a handful of primal
ooze will eventually hint at the future existence of prawn crackers.

But the primitive techniques used hitherto, based on ancient spells like
Weezencake’s Unreliable Algorithm, had meant that it took years to put
together even the ghost of a page of an unwritten book.

It was Ponder’s particular genius that he had found a way around this by
considering the phrase, ‘How do you know it’s not possible until you’ve
tried?’ And experiments with Hex, the University’s thinking engine, had
found that, indeed, many things are not impossible _until_ they have
been tried.

Like a busy government which only passes expensive laws prohibiting some
new and interesting thing when people have actually found a way of doing
it, the universe relied a great deal on things _not_ being tried at all.

When something _is_ tried, Ponder found, it often does turn out to be
impossible very quickly, but takes a little while for this to really be
the case⁵ – in effect, for the overworked laws of causality to hurry to
the scene and pretend it has been impossible all along. Using Hex to
remake the attempt in minutely different ways at very high speed had
resulted in a high success rate, and he was now assembling whole
paragraphs in a matter of hours.

‘It’s like a conjurin’ trick, then,’ Ridcully had said. ‘You’re pullin’
the tablecloth away before all the crockery has time to remember to fall
over.’

And Ponder had winced and said, ‘Yes, exactly like that, Archchancellor.
Well done.’

And that had led to all the trouble with _How to Dynamically Manage
People for Dynamic Results in a Caring Empowering Way in Quite a Short
Time Dynamically_. Ponder didn’t know when this book would be written,
or even in which world it might be published, but it was obviously going
to be popular because random trawls in the depths of L-space often
turned up fragments. Perhaps it wasn’t even just one book.

And the fragments had been on Ponder’s desk when Ridcully had been
poking around.

Unfortunately, like many people who are instinctively bad at something,
the Archchancellor prided himself on how good at it he was. Ridcully was
to management what King Herod was to the Bethlehem Playgroup
Association.

His mental approach to it could be visualized as a sort of business
flowchart with, at the top, a circle entitled ‘Me, who does the telling’
and, connected below it by a line, a large circle entitled ‘Everyone
else’.

Until now this had worked quite well, because, although Ridcully was an
impossible manager, the University was impossible to manage and so
everything worked seamlessly.

And it would have continued to do so if he hadn’t suddenly started to
see the point in preparing career development packages and, worst of
all, job descriptions.

As the Lecturer in Recent Runes put it: ‘He called me in and asked me
what I did, exactly. Have you ever heard of such a thing? What sort of
question is that? This is a _university_!’

‘He asked _me_ whether I had any personal worries,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘I don’t see why I have to stand for that sort of thing.’

‘And did you see that sign on his desk?’ the Dean had said.

‘You mean the one that says, “The Buck Starts Here”?’

‘No, the other one. The one which says, “When You’re Up to Your Ass in
Alligators, Today Is the First Day of the Rest of Your Life.”’

‘And that means . . . ?’

‘I don’t think it’s supposed to _mean_ anything. I think it’s just
supposed to _be_.’

‘Be what?’

‘Pro-active, I think. It’s a word he’s using a lot.’

‘What does that mean?’

‘Well . . . in favour of activity, I suppose.’

‘Really? Dangerous. In my experience, inactivity sees you through.’

Altogether, it was not a happy university at the moment, and mealtimes
were the worst. Ponder tended to be isolated at one end of the High
Table as the unwilling architect of this sudden tendency on the part of
the Archchancellor to try to Weld Them Into A Lean Mean Team. The
wizards had no intention of being lean, but were getting as mean as
anything.

On top of that, Ridcully’s sudden interest in taking an interest meant
that Ponder had to explain something about his own current project, and
one aspect of Ridcully that had not changed was his horrible habit of,
Ponder suspected, deliberately misunderstanding things.

Ponder had long been struck by the fact that the Librarian, an ape – at
least generally an ape, although this evening he seemed to have settled
on being a small table set with a red-furred tea service – was, well, so
human shaped. In fact, so many things were pretty much the _same_ shape.
Nearly everything you met was really a sort of complicated tube with two
eyes and four arms or legs or wings. Oh, or they were fish. Or insects.
All right, spiders as well. And a few odd things like starfish and
whelks. But still there was a remarkably unimaginative range of designs.
Where were the six-armed, six-eyed monkeys pinwheeling through the
jungle canopy?

Oh, yes, octopussies too, but that was the point, they were really only
a kind of underwater spider . . .

Ponder had poked around among the University’s more or less abandoned
Museum of Quite Unusual Things, and noticed something rather odd.
Whoever had designed the skeletons of creatures had even less
imagination than whoever had done the outsides. At least the
outside-designer had tried a few novelties in the spots, wool and
stripes department, but the bone-builder had generally just put a skull
on a ribcage, shoved a pelvis in further along, stuck on some arms and
legs and had the rest of the day off. Some ribcages were longer, some
legs were shorter, some hands became wings, but they all seemed to be
based on one design, one size stretched or shrunk to fit all.

Not to his very great surprise, Ponder seemed to be the only one around
who found this at all interesting. He’d point out to people that fish
were amazingly fish-shaped, and they’d look at him as if he’d gone mad.

Palaeontology and archaeology and other skulduggery were not subjects
that interested wizards. Things are buried for a reason, they
considered. There’s no point in wondering what it was. Don’t go digging
things up in case they won’t let you bury them again.

The most coherent theory was one he recalled from his nurse when he was
small. Monkeys, she’d averred, were bad little boys who hadn’t come in
when called, and seals were bad little boys who’d lazed around on the
beach instead of attending to their lessons. She hadn’t said that birds
were bad little boys who’d gone too close to the cliff edge, and in any
case jellyfish would be more likely, but Ponder couldn’t help thinking
that, harmlessly insane though the woman had been, she might have had
just the glimmerings of a point . . .

He was spending most nights now watching Hex trawl the invisible
writings for any hints. In theory, because of the nature of L-space,
absolutely everything was available to him, but that only meant that it
was more or less impossible to find whatever it was you were looking
for, which is the purpose of computers.

Ponder Stibbons was one of those unfortunate people cursed with the
belief that if only he found out enough things about the universe it
would all, somehow, make sense. The goal is the Theory of Everything,
but Ponder would settle for the Theory of Something and, late at night,
when Hex appeared to be sulking, he despaired of even a Theory of
Anything.

And it might have surprised Ponder to learn that the senior wizards had
come to approve of Hex, despite all the comments on the lines of ‘In
_my_ day we used to do our _own_ thinking.’ Wizardry was traditionally
competitive, and, while UU was currently going through an extended
period of peace and quiet, with none of the informal murders that had
once made it such a terminally exciting place, a senior wizard always
distrusted a young man who was going places since traditionally his
route might be via your jugular.

Therefore there’s something comforting in knowing that some of the best
brains in the University, who a generation ago would be coming up with
some really exciting plans involving trick floorboards and exploding
wallpaper, were spending all night in the High Energy Magic Building,
trying to teach Hex to sing ‘Lydia the Tattooed Lady’, exulting at
getting a machine to do after six hours’ work something that any human
off the street would do for tuppence, then sending out for
banana-and-sushi pizza and falling asleep at the keyboard. Their seniors
called it technomancy, and slept a little easier in their beds in the
knowledge that Ponder and his students weren’t sleeping in _theirs_.

Ponder must have nodded off, because he was awakened just before 2 a.m.
by a scream and realized he was face down in half of his supper. He
pulled a piece of banana-flavoured mackerel off his cheek, left Hex
quietly clicking through its routine and followed the noises.

The commotion led him to the hall in front of the big doors leading to
the Library. The Bursar was lying on the floor, being fanned with the
Senior Wrangler’s hat.

‘As far as we can gather, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean, ‘the poor chap
couldn’t sleep and came down for a book—’

Ponder looked at the Library doors. A big strip of black and yellow tape
had been stuck across them, along with a sign saying: Danger, Do Notte
Enter in Any Circumʃtances. It was now hanging off, and the doors were
ajar. This was no surprise. Any true wizard, faced with a sign like ‘Do
not open this door. Really. We mean it. We’re not kidding. Opening this
door will mean the end of the universe,’ would _automatically_ open the
door in order to see what all the fuss was about. This made signs rather
a waste of time, but at least it meant that when you handed what was
left of the wizard to his grieving relatives you could say, as they
grasped the jar, ‘We _told_ him not to.’

There was silence from the darkness on the other side of the doorway.

Ridcully extended a finger and pushed one door slightly.

Behind it something made a fluttering noise and the doors were slammed
shut. The wizards jumped back.

‘Don’t risk it, Archchancellor!’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.
‘I tried to go in earlier and the whole section of Critical Essays had
gone critical!’

Blue light flickered under the doors.

Elsewhere, someone might have said, ‘It’s just books! Books aren’t
dangerous!’ But even _ordinary_ books are dangerous, and not only the
ones like _Make Gelignite the Professional Way_. A man sits in some
museum somewhere and writes a harmless book about political economy and
suddenly thousands of people who haven’t even read it are dying because
the ones who did haven’t got the joke. Knowledge is dangerous, which is
why governments often clamp down on people who can think thoughts above
a certain calibre.

And the Unseen University Library was a magical library, built on a very
thin patch of space-time. There were books on distant shelves that
hadn’t been written yet, books that never _would_ be written. At least,
not here. It had a circumference of a few hundred yards, but there was
no known limit to its radius.

And in a magical library the books leak, and learn from one another . .
.

‘They’ve started attacking anyone who goes in,’ moaned the Dean. ‘No one
can control them when the Librarian’s not here!’

‘But we’re a university! We _have_ to have a library!’ said Ridcully.
‘It adds _tone_. What sort of people would we be if we didn’t go into
the Library?’

‘Students,’ said the Senior Wrangler morosely.

‘Hah, I remember when I was a student,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘Old “Bogeyboy” Swallett took us on an expedition to find the
Lost Reading Room. Three weeks we were wandering around. Had to eat our
own boots.’

‘Did you find it?’ said the Dean.

‘No, but we found the remains of the previous year’s expedition.’

‘What did you do?’

‘We ate their boots, too.’

From beyond the door came a flapping, as of leather covers.

‘There’s some pretty vicious grimoires in there,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘They can take a man’s arm right off.’

‘Yes, but at least they don’t know about doorhandles,’ said the Dean.

‘They do if there’s a book in there somewhere called _Doorknobs for
Beginners_,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘They _read_ each other.’

The Archchancellor glanced at Ponder. ‘There likely to be a book like
that in there, Stibbons?’

‘According to L-space theory, it’s practically certain, sir.’

As one man, the wizards backed away from the doors.

‘We can’t let this nonsense go on,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’ve got to cure
the Librarian. It’s a magical illness, so we ought to be able to cook up
a magical cure, oughtn’t we?’

‘That would be exceedingly dangerous, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean.
‘His whole system is a mess of conflicting magical influences. There’s
no knowing what adding more magic would do. He’s already got a
freewheeling temporal gland.⁶ Any more magic and . . . well, I don’t
know what’ll happen.’

‘We’ll find out,’ said Ridcully brusquely. ‘We _need_ to be able to go
into the Library. We’d be doing this for the college, Dean. And Unseen
University is bigger than one man—’

‘—ape—’

‘—thank you, _ape_, and we must always remember that “I” is the smallest
letter in the alphabet.’

There was another thud from beyond the doors.

‘Actually,’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘I think you’ll find that,
depending on the font, “c” or even “u” are, in fact, even smaller. Well,
shorter, anyw—’

‘Of course,’ Ridcully went on, ignoring this as part of the University’s
usual background logic, ‘I suppose I _could_ appoint another librarian .
. . got to be a senior chap who knows his way around . . . hmm . . . now
let me see, do any names spring to mind? Dean?’

‘All right, all _right_!’ said the Dean. ‘Have it your own way. As
usual.’

‘Er . . . we can’t do it, sir,’ Ponder ventured.

‘Oh?’ said Ridcully. ‘Volunteering for a bit of bookshelf tidying
yourself, are you?’

‘I mean we _really_ can’t use magic to change him, sir. There’s a huge
problem in the way.’

‘There are no problems, Mister Stibbons, there are only opportunities.’

‘Yes, sir. And the opportunity here is to find out the Librarian’s
name.’

There was a buzz of agreement from the other wizards.

‘The lad’s right,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Can’t magic a
wizard without knowing his name. Basic rule.’

‘Well, we call him the Librarian,’ said Ridcully. ‘Everyone calls him
the Librarian. Won’t that do?’

‘That’s just a job description, sir.’

Ridcully looked at his wizards. ‘One of us must know his name, surely?
Good grief, I should hope we at least know our colleagues’ _names_.
Isn’t that so . . .’ He looked at the Dean, hesitated, and then said,
‘Dean?’

‘He’s been an ape for quite a while . . . Archchancellor,’ said the
Dean. ‘Most of his original colleagues have . . . passed on. Gone to the
great Big Dinner in the Sky. We were going through one of those periods
of droit de mortis.⁷’

‘Yes, but he’s got to be in the records _somewhere_.’

The wizards thought about the great cliffs of stacked paper that
constituted the University’s records.

‘The archivist has never found him,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Who’s the archivist?’

‘The Librarian, Archchancellor.’

‘Then at least he ought to be in the Year Book for the year he
graduated.’

‘It’s a very funny thing,’ said the Dean, ‘but a freak accident appears
to have happened to every single copy of the Year Book for that year.’

Ridcully noted his wooden expression. ‘Would it be an accident like a
particular page being torn out leaving only a lingering bananary aroma?’

‘Lucky guess, Archchancellor.’

Ridcully scratched his chin. ‘A pattern emerges,’ he said.

‘You see, he’s _always_ been dead set against anyone finding out his
name,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘He’s afraid we’ll try to turn him back
into a human.’ He looked meaningfully at the Dean, who put on an
offended expression. ‘_Some_ people have been going around saying that
an ape as Librarian is _unsuitable_.’

‘I merely expressed the view that it is against the traditions of the
University—’ the Dean began.

‘Which consist largely of niggling, big dinners and shouting damnfool
things about keys in the middle of the night,’ said Ridcully. ‘So I
don’t think we—’

The expressions on the faces of the other wizards made him turn around.

The Librarian had entered the hall. He walked very slowly, because of
the amount of clothing he’d put on; the sheer volume of coats and
sweaters meant that his arms, instead of being used as extra feet, were
sticking out very nearly horizontally on either side of his body. But
the most horrifying aspect of the shuffling apparition was the red
woolly hat.

It was jolly. It had a bobble on it. It had been knitted by Mrs Whitlow,
who was technically an extremely good needlewoman, but if she had a
fault it lay in failing to take into account the precise dimensions of
the intended recipient. Several wizards had on occasion been presented
with one of her creations, which often assumed they had three ankles or
a neck two metres across. Most of the things were surreptitiously given
away to charitable institutions. You can say this about Ankh-Morpork –
no matter how misshapen a garment, there will always be someone
somewhere it would fit.

Mrs Whitlow’s mistake here was the assumption that the Librarian, for
whom she had considerable respect, would like a red bobble hat with side
flaps that tied under his chin. Given that this would technically
require that they be tied under his groin, he’d opted to let them flap
loose.

He turned a sad face towards the wizards as he stopped outside the
Library door. He reached for the handle. He said, in a very weak voice,
‘’k,’ and then sneezed.

The pile of clothing settled. When the wizards pulled it away, they
found underneath a very large, thick book bound in hairy red leather.

‘Says _Ook_ on the cover,’ said the Senior Wrangler after a while, in a
rather strained voice.

‘Does it say who it’s by?’ said the Dean.

‘Bad taste, that man.’

‘I _meant_ that maybe it’d be his real name.’

‘Can we look inside?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘There may
be an index.’

‘Any volunteers to look inside the Librarian?’ said Ridcully. ‘Don’t all
shout.’

‘The morphic instability responds to the environment,’ said Ponder.
‘Isn’t that interesting? He’s near the Library, so it turns him into a
book. Sort of . . . protective camouflage, you could say. It’s as if he
evolves to fit in with—’

‘Thank you, Mister Stibbons. And is there a point to this?’

‘Well, I assume we _can_ look inside,’ said Ponder. ‘A book is meant to
be opened. There’s even a black leather bookmark, see?’

‘Oh, that’s a _bookmark_, is it?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
who had been watching it nervously.

Ponder touched the book. It was warm. And it opened easily enough.

Every page was covered with ‘ook’.

‘Good dialogue, but the plot is a little dull.’

‘Dean! I’d be obliged if you’d take this seriously, please!’ said
Ridcully. He tapped his foot once or twice. ‘Anyone got any more ideas?’

The wizards stared at one another and shrugged.

‘I suppose . . .’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Yes, Runes . . . Arnold, isn’t it?’

‘No, Archchancellor . . .’

‘Well, out with it anyway.’

‘I suppose . . . I know this sounds ridiculous, but . . .’

‘Go on, man. We’re almost all agog.’

‘I suppose there’s always . . . Rincewind.’

Ridcully stared at him for a moment. ‘Skinny fella? Scruffy beard?
Bloody useless wizard? Got that box on legs thingy?’

‘That’s right, Archchancellor. Well done. Er . . . he _was_ the Deputy
Librarian for a while, as I expect you remember.’

‘Not really, but do go on,’ he said.

‘In fact he was here when the Librarian . . . became the Librarian. And
I remember once, when we were watching the Librarian stamping four books
all at the same time, he said, “Amazing, really, when you think he was
born in Ankh-Morpork.” I’m sure if anyone knows the name of the
Librarian it’s Rincewind.’

‘Well, go and fetch him, then! I suppose you _do_ know where he is, do
you?’

‘Technically, yes, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder quickly. ‘But we’re not
sure quite where the place where he is _is_, if you follow me.’

Ridcully gave him another stare.

‘You see, we think he’s on EcksEcksEcksEcks, Archchancellor,’ said
Ponder.

‘EcksEcks—’

‘—EcksEcks, Archchancellor.’

‘I thought no one knew where that place was,’ said Ridcully.

‘_Exactly_, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. Sometimes you had to turn
facts in several directions until you found the right way to fit them
into Ridcully’s head.⁸

‘What’s he doing there?’

‘We don’t really know, Archchancellor. If you remember, we believe he
ended up there after that Agatean business . . .’

‘What did he want to go there for?’

‘I don’t think he exactly _wanted_ to,’ said Ponder. ‘Er . . . we sent
him. It was a trivial error in bi-locational thaumaturgy that anyone
could make.’

‘But _you_ made it, as I recall,’ said Ridcully, whose memory could
spring nasty surprises like that.

‘I _am_ a member of the team, sir,’ said Ponder, pointedly.

‘Well, if he doesn’t want to be there, and we need him here, let’s bring
him b—’

The rest of the sentence was drowned out not by a noise but by a sort of
bloom of quietness, which rolled over the wizards and was so oppressive
and soft that they couldn’t even hear their own heartbeats. Old Tom, the
University’s magical and tongueless bell, tolled out 2 a.m. by striking
the silences.

‘Er—’ said Ponder. ‘It’s not as simple as that.’

Ridcully blinked. ‘Why not?’ he said. ‘Bring him back by magic. We sent
him there, we can bring him back.’

‘Er . . . it’d take months to set it up properly, if you want him back
right here,’ said Ponder. ‘If we get it wrong he’ll end up arriving in a
circle fifty feet wide.’

‘That’s not a problem, is it? If we keep out of it he can land
anywhere.’

‘I don’t think you quite understand, sir. The signal to noise ratio of
any thaumic transfer over an uncertain distance, coupled with the Disc’s
own spin, will almost certainly result in a practical averaging of the
arriving subject over an area of a couple of thousand square feet at
least, sir.’

‘Say again?’

Ponder took a deep breath. ‘I mean he’ll end up arriving _as_ a circle.
Fifty feet wide.’

‘Ah. So he probably wouldn’t be very good in the Library after that,
then.’

‘Only as a very large bookmark, sir.’

‘All right, then, it’s down to sheer geography. Who’ve we got who knows
anything about geography?’

The miners emerged from the vertical shaft like ants leaving a burning
nest. There were thumps and thuds from below, and at one point Strewth’s
hat shot up into the air, turned over a few times and dropped back.

There was silence for a while and then, bits cracking off it like errant
pieces of shell on a newly hatched chick, the thing pulled itself out of
the shaft and . . .

. . . looked around it.

The miners, crouched behind various bushes and sheds, were quite certain
of this, even though the monster had no visible eyes.

It turned, its hundreds of little legs moving rather stiffly, as if
they’d spent too much time buried in the ground.

Then, weaving slightly, it set off.

And far away in the shimmering red desert, the man in the pointy hat
climbed carefully out of his hole. He held in both hands a bowl made of
bark. It contained . . . lots of vitamins, valuable protein and
essential fats. See? No mention of wriggling _at all_.

A fire was smouldering a little way away. He put the bowl down carefully
and picked up a large stick, stood quietly for a moment and then
suddenly began to hop around the fire, smacking the ground with the
stick and shouting, ‘Hah!’ When the ground had been subdued to his
apparent satisfaction he whacked at the bushes as if they had personally
offended him, and bashed a couple of trees as well.

Finally he advanced on a couple of flat rocks, lifted up each one in
turn, averted his eyes, shouted, ‘Hah!’ again and flailed blindly at the
ground beneath.

The landscape having been acceptably pacified, he sat down to eat his
supper before it escaped.

It tasted a little like chicken. When you are hungry enough, practically
anything can.

And eyes watched him from the nearby waterhole. They were not the tiny
eyes of the swarming beetles and tadpoles that made a careful
examination of every handful he drank a vital gastronomic precaution.
These were far older eyes, and currently without any physical component.

For weeks a man whose ability to find water was limited to checking if
his feet were wet had survived in this oven-ready country by falling
into waterholes. A man who thought of spiders as harmless little
creatures had experienced only a couple of nasty shocks when, by now,
this approach should have left him with arms the size of beer barrels
that glowed in the dark. The man had even hit the seashore once and
paddled in a little way to look at the pretty blue jellyfish, and it was
all the watcher could do to see that he got a mere light sting which
ceased to be agonizing after only a few days.

The waterhole bubbled and the ground trembled as if, despite the
cloudless sky, there was a storm somewhere.

Now it was three o’clock in the morning. Ridcully was good at doing
without other people’s sleep.

Unseen University was much bigger on the inside. Thousands of years as
the leading establishment of practical magic in a world where dimensions
were largely a matter of chance in any case had left it bulging in
places where it shouldn’t have places. There were rooms containing rooms
which, if you entered them, turned out to contain the room you’d started
with, which can be a problem if you are in a conga line.

And because it was so big it could afford to have an almost unlimited
number of staff on the premises. Tenure was automatic or, more
accurately, non-existent. You found an empty room, turned up for meals
as usual, and generally no one noticed, although if you were unfortunate
you might attract students. And if you looked hard enough in some of the
outlying regions of the University, you could find an expert on
_anything_.

You could even find an expert on finding an expert. The Professor of
Recondite Architecture and Origami Map Folding had been woken up, been
introduced to the Archchancellor, who had never set eyes on him before,
and had produced a map of the University which would probably be
accurate for the next few days and looked rather like a chrysanthemum in
the act of exploding.

Finally, the wizards reached a door and Ridcully glared at the brass
plate on it as if it had just been cheeky to him.

‘“Egregious Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography”,’ he said. ‘This
looks like the one.’

‘We must have walked _miles_,’ said the Dean, leaning against the wall.
‘I don’t recognize any of this.’

Ridcully glanced around. The walls were stone but had at some time been
painted in that very special institutional green that you get when an
almost-finished cup of coffee is left standing for a couple of weeks.
There was a board covered in balding and darker green felt on which had
been optimistically thumbtacked the word ‘Notices’. But from the looks
of it there had never been any notices and never would be, ever. There
was a smell of ancient dinners.

Ridcully shrugged, and knocked on the door.

‘I don’t remember him,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘I think I do,’ said the Dean. ‘Not a very promising boy. Had ears.
Don’t often see him around, though. Always has a suntan. Odd, that.’

‘He’s on the staff. If anyone knows anything about geography, he’s our
man.’ Ridcully knocked again.

‘Perhaps he’s out,’ said the Dean. ‘That’s where you mostly get
geography, outside.’

Ridcully pointed to a little wooden device by the door. There was one
outside every wizard’s study. It consisted of a little sliding panel in
a frame. Currently it was revealing the word ‘IN’ and, presumably, was
covering the word ‘OUT’, although you could never be sure with some
wizards.⁹

The Dean tried to slide the panel. It refused to budge.

‘He must come out _sometimes_,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Besides,
sensible men should be in bed at three a.m.’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said the Dean meaningfully.

Ridcully thumped on the door. ‘I demand that you open up!’ he shouted.
‘I am the Master of this College!’

The door moved under the blow, but not very much. It was blocked by what
turned out to be, after some strenuous shoving by all the wizards, an
enormous pile of paperwork. The Dean picked up a yellowing piece of
paper.

‘This is the memo saying I’ve been appointed as Dean!’ he said. ‘That
was years ago!’

‘Surely he must come out somet—’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Oh dear . .
.’

The same thought had occurred to the other wizards, too.

‘Remember poor old Wally Sluvver?’ murmured the Chair of Indefinite
Studies, looking around in some trepidation. ‘Three years of tutorials
_post mortem_.’

‘Well, the students _did_ say he was a bit quiet,’ said Ridcully. He
sniffed. ‘Doesn’t smell bad in _here_. Quite fresh, really. Pleasantly
salty. Aha . . .’

There was bright light under a door at the other end of the crowded and
dusty room, and the wizards could hear a gentle splashing.

‘Bath night. Good man,’ said Ridcully. ‘Well, we don’t have to disturb
him.’

He peered at the titles of the books that lined the room.

‘Bound to be a lot about EcksEcksEcksEcks somewhere here,’ he added,
pulling out a volume at random. ‘Come along. One man, one book each.’

‘Can we at least send out for some breakfast?’ grumbled the Dean.

‘Far too early for breakfast,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, some supper, then?’

‘Too late for supper.’

The Chair of Indefinite Studies took in the rest of the room. A lizard
scuttled across the wall and disappeared.

‘Bit of a mess in here, isn’t there?’ he said, glaring at the place
where the lizard had been. ‘Everything’s very dusty. What’s in all those
boxes?’

‘Says “Rocks” on this side,’ said the Dean. ‘Makes sense. If you’re
going to study the outdoors, do it in the warm.’

‘But what about all the fishing nets and coconuts?’

The Dean had to agree the point. The study _was_ a mess, even by the
extremely expansive standards of wizardry. Boxes of dusty rocks occupied
the little space that wasn’t covered with books and paper. They had been
variously labelled, with inscriptions like ‘Rocks from Lower Down’,
‘Other Rocks’, ‘Curious Rocks’ and ‘Probably Not Rocks’. Further boxes,
to Ponder’s rising interest, were marked ‘Remarkable Bones’, ‘Bones’ and
‘Dull Bones’.

‘One of those people who pokes his nose where it doesn’t belong, I
fancy,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, and sniffed. He sniffed
again, and looked down at the book he’d picked at random.

‘This is a pressed squid collection,’ he said.

‘Oh, is it any good? I used to collect starfish when I was a boy,’ said
Ponder.

The Lecturer in Recent Runes shut the book and frowned at him over the
top of it. ‘I daresay you did, young man. And old fossils too, I
expect.’

‘I always thought that old fossils might have a lot to teach us,’ said
Ponder. ‘Perhaps I was wrong,’ he added darkly.

‘Well, I for one have never believed all that business about dead
animals turning into stone,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘It’s
against all reason. What’s in it for them?’

‘So how do you explain fossils, then?’ said Ponder.

‘Ah, you see, I don’t,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, with a
triumphant smile. ‘It saves so much trouble in the long run. How do
skinless sausages hold together, Mister Stibbons?’

‘What? Eh? How should I know something like that?’

‘Really? You don’t know _that_ but you think you’re entirely qualified
to know how the whole universe was put together, do you? Anyway, you
don’t have to _explain_ fossils. They’re _there_. Why try to turn
everything into a big mystery? If you go around asking questions the
whole time you’ll never get _anything_ done.’

‘Well, what are we put here for?’ said Ponder.

‘There you go again,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Says here it’s girt by sea,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

He looked up at their stares.

‘This continent EcksEcksEcksEcks,’ he added, pointing at a page. ‘Says
here “Little is known about it save that it is girt by sea.”’

‘I’m glad to see _someone_ has their mind on the task in hand,’ said
Ridcully. ‘You two get on with some studyin’, please. Right, then,
Senior Wrangler . . . girt by sea, is it?’

‘Apparently.’

‘Well . . . it would be, wouldn’t it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Anything else?’

‘I used to know a Gert,’ said the Bursar. The terror of the Library had
sent his somewhat erratic sanity on a downward slide into the calm pink
clouds again.

‘Not . . . very much,’ said the Senior Wrangler, flicking through the
pages. ‘Sir Roderick Purdeigh spent many years looking for the alleged
continent and was very emphatic that it didn’t exist.’

‘Quite a jolly gel. Gertrude Plusher, I think her name was. Face like a
brick.’

‘Yes, but he once got lost in his own bedroom,’ said the Dean, thumbing
through another book. ‘They found him in the wardrobe.’

‘I wonder if it’s the same Gert?’ said the Bursar.

‘Could be, Bursar,’ said Ridcully. He nodded at the other wizards. ‘No
one’s to let him have any sugar or fruit.’

For a while there was no sound but the splash of water behind the door,
the turning of pages and the Bursar’s randomized humming.

‘According to this note in Wasport’s _Lives of the Very Dull People_,’
said the Senior Wrangler, squinting at the tiny script, ‘he met an old
fisherman who said in that country the bark fell off the trees in the
winter and the leaves stayed on.’

‘Yes, but they always make up that sort of thing,’ said Ridcully.
‘Otherwise it’s too boring. It’s no good coming home and just saying you
were shipwrecked for two years and ate winkles, is it? You have to put
in a lot of daft stuff about men who go around on one big foot and The
Land of Giant Plum Puddings and nursery rubbish like that.’

‘My word!’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, who had been engrossed in
a volume at the other end of the table. ‘It says here that the people on
the island of Slakki wear no clothes at all and the women are of
unsurpassed beauty.’

‘That sounds quite dreadful,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies
primly.

‘There are several woodcuts.’

‘I’m sure none of us wish to know that,’ said Ridcully. He looked around
at the rest of the wizards and repeated, in a louder voice, ‘I _said_
I’m sure _none_ of us wish to know _that_. Dean? Come right back here
and pick up your chair!’

‘There’s a mention of EcksEcksEcksEcks in Wrencher’s _Snakes of All
Nations_,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘It says the continent
has very few poisonous snakes . . . Oh, there’s a footnote.’ His finger
went down the page. ‘It says, “Most of them have been killed by the
spiders.” How very odd.’

‘Oh,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘It _also_ says here that “_The
denizens of Purdee Island also existeth inne a State of Nature_”’ – he
struggled with the ancient handwriting – ‘“_yette is in Fine Healthe &
of Good Bearing & Stature & is Trulee a . . . knobbly Savage_ . . .”’

‘Let me have a look at that,’ said Ridcully. The book was passed down
the table. The Archchancellor scowled.

‘It’s written “knoble”,’ he said. ‘_Noble_ savage. Means you . . . act
like a gentleman, don’tcher-know . . .’

‘What . . . go fox-hunting, bow to ladies, don’t pay your tailor . . .
That sort of thing?’

‘Shouldn’t think that chap owes his tailor very much,’ said Ridcully,
looking at the accompanying illustration. ‘All right, chaps, let’s see
what else we can find . . .’

‘He’s having rather a _long_ bath, isn’t he?’ said the Dean, after a
while. ‘I mean, I like to be as well scrubbed as the next man, but we’re
talking serious prunes here.’

‘Sounds like he’s sloshing about,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Sounds like the seaside,’ said the Bursar happily.

‘Try to keep up, will you, Bursar?’ said Ridcully wearily.

‘Actually . . .’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘there is a certain seagully
component, now that you mention it . . .’

Ridcully stood up, strode over to the bathroom door and held up his fist
to knock.

‘I _am_ the Archchancellor,’ he grumbled, lowering it. ‘I can open any
doors I damn well please.’ And he turned the handle.

‘There,’ he said, as the door swung back. ‘See, gentlemen? A perfectly
ordinary bathroom. Stone bath, brass taps, bath cap, humorous scrubbin’
brush in the shape of a duck . . . a perfectly ordinary bathroom. It is
not, let me make myself quite clear, some kind of tropical beach. It
doesn’t look remotely like a tropical beach.’

He pointed out of the bathroom’s open window, to where waves lapped
languorously against a tree-fringed strand under a brilliant blue sky.
The bathroom curtains flapped on a warm breeze.

‘_That_’s a tropical beach,’ he said. ‘See? No similarity at all.’

After his nourishing meal that contained masses of essential vitamins
and minerals and unfortunately quite a lot of taste as well, the man
with ‘Wizzard’ on his hat settled down for some housekeeping, or as much
as was possible in the absence of a house.

It consisted of chipping away at a piece of wood with a stone axe. He
appeared to be making a very short plank, and the speed with which he
was working suggested that he’d done this before.

A cockatoo settled in the tree above him to watch. Rincewind glared at
it suspiciously.

When the plank had apparently been smoothed to his satisfaction he stood
on it with one foot and, swaying, drew around the foot with a piece of
charcoal from the fire. He did the same with the other foot, and then
settled down to hack at the wood again.

The watcher in the waterhole realized that the man was making two
foot-shaped boards.

Rincewind took a length of twine from his pocket. He’d found a
particular creeper which, if you carefully peeled the bark off, would
give you a terrible spotted rash. What he’d actually been _looking_ for
was a creeper which, if you carefully peeled off the bark, would give
you a serviceable twine, and it had taken several more goes and various
different rashes to find out which one this was.

If you made a hole in the soles and fed a loop of twine through it, into
which a toe could be inserted, you ended up with some Ur-footwear. It
made you shuffle like the Ascent of Man but, nevertheless, had some
unexpected benefits. First, the steady flop-flop as you walked made you
sound like _two_ people to any dangerous creatures you were about to
encounter, which, in Rincewind’s recent experience, was any creature at
all. Second, although they were impossible to run _in_ they were easy to
run _out_ of, so that you were a smoking dot on the burning horizon
while the enraged caterpillar or beetle was still looking at your shoes
and wondering where the other person was.

He’d had to run away a lot. Every night he made a new pair of thonged
sandals, and every day he left them somewhere in the desert.

When he’d finished them to his satisfaction he took a roll of thin bark
from his pocket. Attached to it by a length of twine was a very precious
small stub of pencil. He’d decided to keep a journal in the hope that
this might help. He looked at the recent entries.

Probably Tuesday: hot, flies. Dinner: honey ants. Attacked by honey
ants. Fell into waterhole.

Wednesday, with any luck: hot, flies. Dinner: either bush raisins or
kangaroo droppings. Chased by hunters, don’t know why. Fell into
waterhole.

Thursday (could be): hot, flies. Dinner: blue-tongued lizard. Savaged by
blue-tongued lizard. Chased by different hunters. Fell off cliff,
bounced into tree, pissed on by small grey incontinent teddy bear,
landed in a waterhole.

Friday: hot, flies. Dinner: some kind of roots which tasted like sick.
This saved time.

Saturday: hotter than yesterday, extra flies. V. thirsty.

Sunday: hot. Delirious with thirst and flies. Nothing but nothing as far
as the eye can see, with bushes in it. Decided to die, collapsed, fell
down sand dune into waterhole.

He wrote very carefully and as small as possible: ‘Monday: hot, flies.
Dinner: moth grubs.’ He stared at the writing. It said it all, really.

Why didn’t people here like him? He’d meet some small tribe,
everything’d be friendly, he’d pick up a few tips, get to know a few
names, he’d build up a vocabulary, enough to chat about ordinary
everyday things like the weather – and then suddenly they’d be chasing
him away. After all, _everyone_ talked about the weather, didn’t they?

Rincewind had always been happy to think of himself as a racist. The One
Hundred Metres, the Mile, the Marathon – he’d run them all. Later, when
he’d learned with some surprise what the word actually _meant_, he’d
been equally certain he wasn’t one. He was a person who divided the
world quite simply into people who were trying to kill him and people
who weren’t. That didn’t leave much room for fine details like what
colour anyone was. But he’d be sitting by the campfire, trying out a
simple conversation, and suddenly people would get upset over nothing at
all and drive him off. You didn’t expect people to get nasty just
because you’d said something like, ‘My word, when did it last rain
here?’ did you?

Rincewind sighed, picked up his stick, beat the hell out of a patch of
ground, lay down and went to sleep.

Occasionally he screamed under his breath and his legs made running
motions, which just showed that he was dreaming.

The waterhole rippled. It wasn’t large, a mere puddle deep in a
bush-filled gully between some rocks, and the liquid it contained could
only be called water because geographers refuse to countenance words
like ‘souphole’.

Nevertheless it rippled, as though something had dropped into the
centre. And what was odd about the ripples was that they didn’t stop
when they reached the edge of the water but continued outwards over the
land as expanding circles of dim white light. When they reached
Rincewind they broke up and flowed around him, so that now he was the
centre of concentric lines of white dots, like strings of pearls.

The waterhole erupted. _Something_ climbed up into the air and sped away
across the night.

It zigzagged from rock to mountain to waterhole. And as the eye of
observation rises, the travelling streak briefly illuminates other dim
lines, hanging above the ground like smoke, so from above the whole land
appears to have a circulatory system, or nerves . . .

A thousand miles from the sleeping wizard the line struck ground again,
emerged in a cave, and passed across the walls like a searchlight.

It hovered in front of a huge, pointed rock for a moment and then, as if
reaching a decision, shot up again into the sky.

The continent rolled below it as it returned. The light hit the
waterhole without a splash but, once again, three or four ripples in
_something_ spread out across the turbid water and the surrounding sand.

Night rolled in again. But there was a distant thumping under the
ground. Bushes trembled. In the trees, birds awoke and flew away.

After a while, on a rock face near the waterhole, pale white lines began
to form a picture.

Rincewind had attracted the attention of at least one other watcher
apart from whatever it was that dwelt in the waterhole.

Death had taken to keeping Rincewind’s lifetimer on a special shelf in
his study, in much the way that a zoologist would want to keep an eye on
a particularly intriguing specimen.

The lifetimers of most people were the classic shape that Death thought
was right and proper for the task. They appeared to be large eggtimers,
although, since the sands they measured were the living seconds of
someone’s life, all the eggs were in one basket.

Rincewind’s hourglass looked like something created by a glassblower
who’d had the hiccups in a time machine. According to the amount of
actual sand it contained – and Death was pretty good at making this kind
of estimate – he should have died long ago. But strange curves and bends
and extrusions of glass had developed over the years, and quite often
the sand was flowing backwards, or diagonally. Clearly, Rincewind had
been hit by so much magic, had been thrust reluctantly through time and
space so often that he’d nearly bumped into himself coming the other
way, that the precise end of his life was now as hard to find as the
starting point on a roll of really sticky transparent tape.

Death was familiar with the concept of the eternal, ever-renewed hero,
the champion with a thousand faces. He’d refrained from commenting. He
met heroes frequently, generally surrounded by, and this was important,
the dead bodies of _very nearly_ all their enemies and saying, ‘Vot the
hell shust happened?’ Whether there was some arrangement that allowed
them to come back again afterwards was not something he would be drawn
on.

But he pondered whether, if this creature _did_ exist, it was somehow
balanced by the eternal coward. The hero with a thousand retreating
backs, perhaps. Many cultures had a legend of an undying hero who would
one day rise again, so perhaps the balance of nature called for one who
wouldn’t.

Whatever the ultimate truth of the matter, the fact now was that Death
did not have the slightest idea of when Rincewind was going to die. This
was very vexing to a creature who prided himself on his punctuality.

Death glided across the velvet emptiness of his study until he reached
the model of the Discworld, if indeed it was a model.

Eyeless sockets looked down.

SHOW, he said.

The precious metals and stones faded. Death saw ocean currents, deserts,
forests, drifting cloudscapes like albino buffalo herds . . .

SHOW.

The eye of observation curved and dived into the living map, and a
reddish splash grew in an expanse of turbulent sea. Ancient mountain
ranges slipped past, deserts of rock and sand glided away.

SHOW.

Death watched the sleeping figure of Rincewind. Occasionally its legs
would jerk.

HMM.

Death felt something crawling up the back of his robe, pause for a
minute on his shoulder, and leap. A small rodent skeleton in a black
robe landed in the middle of the image and started flailing madly at it
with his tiny scythe, squeaking excitedly.

Death picked up the Death of Rats by his cowl and held him up for
inspection.

NO, WE DON’T DO IT THAT WAY.

The Death of Rats struggled madly. SQUEAK?

BECAUSE IT’S AGAINST THE RULES, said Death. NATURE MUST TAKE ITS COURSE.

He glanced down at the image again as if a thought had struck him, and
lowered the Death of Rats to the floor. Then he went to the wall and
pulled a cord. Far away, a bell tolled.

After a while an elderly man entered, carrying a tray.

‘Sorry about that, master. I was cleaning the bath.’

I BEG YOUR PARDON, ALBERT?

‘I mean, that’s why I was late with your tea, sir,’ said Albert.

THAT IS OF NO CONSEQUENCE. TELL ME, WHAT DO YOU KNOW OF THIS PLACE?

Death’s finger tapped the red continent. His manservant looked closely.

‘Oh, _there_,’ he said. ‘“Terror Incognita” we called it when I was
alive, master. Never went there myself. It’s the currents, you know.
Many a poor sailorman has washed up on them fatal shores rather than get
carried right over the Rim, and regretted it, I expect. Dry as a
statue’s ti— Very dry, master, or so they say. And hotter’n a demon’s
joc— Very hot, too. But you must’ve been there yourself?’

OH, YES. BUT YOU KNOW HOW IT IS WHEN YOU’RE THERE ON BUSINESS AND
THERE’S HARDLY ANY TIME TO SEE THE COUNTRY . . .

Death pointed to the great spiral of clouds that turned slowly around
the continent, like jackals warily circling a dying lion which looked
done for but which might yet be capable of one last bite.

VERY STRANGE, he said. A PERMANENT ANTI-CYCLONE. AND INSIDE, A HUGE,
CALM LAND, THAT NEVER SEES A STORM. AND NEVER HAS A DROP OF RAIN.

‘Good place for a holiday, then.’

COME WITH ME.

The two of them, trailed by the Death of Rats, walked into Death’s huge
library. There were clouds here, up near the ceiling.

Death held out a hand. I WANT, he said, A BOOK ABOUT THE DANGEROUS
CREATURES OF FOURECKS—

Albert looked up and dived for cover, receiving only mild bruising
because he had the foresight to curl into a ball.

After a while Death, his voice a little muffled, said: ALBERT, I WOULD
BE SO GRATEFUL IF YOU COULD GIVE ME A HAND HERE.

Albert scrambled up and pulled at some of the huge volumes, finally
dislodging enough of them to allow his master to clamber free.

HMM . . . Death picked up a book at random and read the cover.

_DANGEROUS MAMMALS, REPTILES, AMPHIBIANS, BIRDS, FISH, JELLYFISH,
INSECTS, SPIDERS, CRUSTACEANS, GRASSES, TREES, MOSSES, AND LICHENS OF
TERROR INCOGNITA_, he read. His gaze moved down the spine. VOLUME 29C,
he added. OH. PART THREE, I SEE.

He glanced up at the listening shelves. POSSIBLY IT WOULD BE SIMPLER IF
I ASKED FOR A LIST OF THE _HARMLESS_ CREATURES OF THE AFORESAID
CONTINENT?

They waited.

IT WOULD APPEAR THAT—

‘No, wait, master. Here it comes.’

Albert pointed to something white zigzagging lazily through the air.
Finally Death reached up and caught the single sheet of paper.

He read it carefully and then turned it over briefly just in case
anything was written on the other side.

‘May I?’ said Albert. Death handed him the paper.

‘“Some of the sheep,”’ Albert read aloud. ‘Oh, well. Maybe a week at the
seaside’d be better, then.’

WHAT AN INTRIGUING PLACE, said Death. SADDLE UP THE HORSE, ALBERT. I
FEEL SURE I’M GOING TO BE NEEDED.

SQUEAK, said the Death of Rats.

PARDON? ‘He said, “No worries,” master,’ said Albert.

I CAN’T IMAGINE WHY.

Four huge blooms of silence rolled over the city as Old Tom so
emphatically did not strike the hour.

Several servants rumbled a trolley along the corridor. The
Archchancellor had given in. An early breakfast was on the way.

Ridcully lowered his tape measure.

‘Let’s try that again, shall we?’ he said. He stepped out of the window
and picked a seashell out of the sand. It was warm from the sun. Then he
pulled himself back into the bathroom and walked around to a door beside
the window.

It led to a dank, moss-grown light well, which allowed second-hand and
grubby daylight into these dismal floors. Even the snow hadn’t managed
to get more than a brushing of flakes down this far.

The window on this side glimmered in the light from the doorway like a
pool of very black oil.

‘Okay, Dean,’ he said. ‘Push your staff through. Now waggle it about.’

The wizards looked at the gently rippling surface. There should have
been several feet of solid wood sticking out of it.

‘Well, well, well,’ said the Archchancellor, going back in out of the
cold air. ‘Do you know, I’ve never actually seen one of these?’

‘Anyone remember Archchancellor Bewdley’s boots?’ said the Senior
Wrangler, helping himself to some cold mutton from the trolley. ‘He made
a mistake and got one of the things opened up in the left boot. Very
tricky. You can’t go walking around with one foot in another dimension.’

‘Well, no . . .’ said Ridcully, staring at the tropical scene and
tapping his chin thoughtfully with the seashell.

‘Can’t see what you’re treading in, for one thing,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘One opened up in one of the cellars once, all by itself,’ said the
Dean. ‘Just a round black hole. Anything you put in it just disappeared.
So old Archchancellor Weatherwax had a privy built over it.’

‘Very sensible idea,’ said Ridcully, still looking thoughtful.

‘We thought so too, until we found the other one that had opened in the
attic. Turned out to be the other side of the same hole. I’m sure I
don’t need to draw you a picture.’

‘I’ve never _heard_ of these!’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘The possibilities
are amazing!’

‘Everyone _says_ that when they first hear about them,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘But when you’ve been a wizard as long as I have, my boy,
you’ll learn that as soon as you find anything that offers amazing
possibilities for the improvement of the human condition it’s best to
put the lid back on and pretend it never happened.’

‘But if you could get one to open above another you could drop something
through the bottom hole and it’d come out of the top hole and fall
through the bottom hole again . . . It’d reach meteoritic speed and the
amount of power you could generate would be—’

‘That’s pretty much what happened between the attic and the cellar,’
said the Dean, taking a cold chicken leg. ‘Thank goodness for air
friction, that’s all I’ll say.’

Ponder waved his hand gingerly through the window and felt the sun’s
heat.

‘And no one’s ever _studied_ them?’ he said.

The Senior Wrangler shrugged. ‘Studied what? They’re just holes. You get
a lot of magic in one place, it kind of drops through the world like a
hot steel ball through pork dripping. If it comes to the edge of
something, it kind of fills it in.’

‘Stress points in the space-time continuinuinuum . . .’ said Ponder.
‘There must be hundreds of uses—’

‘Hah, yes, no wonder our Egregious Professor is always so suntanned,’
said the Dean. ‘I feel he’s been cheating. Geography should be hard to
get to. It shouldn’t be in your windowbox, is what I’m saying. You
shouldn’t get at it just by sneaking out of the University.’

‘Well, he hasn’t, really, has he?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘He’s
really just extended his study a bit.’

‘Do you think that _is_ EcksEcksEcksEcks, by any chance?’ said the Dean.
‘It certainly looks foreign.’

‘Well, there _is_ sea,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘But would you say
that it looks as if it is actually _girting_?’

‘It’s just . . . you know . . . sloshing.’

‘One would somehow imagine that sea that was girting something would
look more, well . . . defiant,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘You
know? Thundering waves and so on. Definitely sending a message to
outsiders that it was girting this coast and they’d better be jolly
respectful.’

‘Perhaps we could go right through and investigate,’ said Ponder.

‘Something dreadful’ll happen if we do,’ said the Senior Wrangler
gloomily.

‘It hasn’t happened to the Bursar,’ said Ridcully. The wizards crowded
around. There was a figure standing in the surf. Its robe was rolled up
above the knees. A few birds wheeled overhead. Palm trees waved in the
background.

‘My word, he must have snuck out while we weren’t looking,’ said the
Senior Wrangler.

‘Bursaar!’ Ridcully yelled.

The figure didn’t look round.

‘I don’t want to, you know, make _trouble_,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies, looking wistfully at the sundrenched beach, ‘but
it’s freezing cold in my bedroom and last night there was frost on my
eiderdown. I don’t see any harm in a quick stroll in the warm.’

‘We’re here to help the Librarian!’ snapped Ridcully. Faint snores were
coming from the volume entitled _Ook_.

‘My point exactly. The poor chap’d be a lot happier in those trees
there.’

‘You mean we could wedge him in the branches?’ said the Archchancellor.
‘He’s still _The Story of Ook_.’

‘You _know_ what I mean, Mustrum. A day at the seaside for him would be
better than a . . . a day at the seaside, as it were. Let’s get out
there, I’m freezing.’

‘Are you mad? There could be terrible monsters! Look at the poor chap
standing there in the surf! That sea’s probably teeming with—’

‘Sharks,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Right!’ said Ridcully. ‘And—’

‘Barracudas,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Marlins. Swordfish. Looks like
somewhere out near the Rim to me. Fishermen say there’s fish there
that’d take your arm off.’

‘Right,’ said Ridcully. ‘Right . . .’ There was a small but significant
change in his tone. Everyone knew about the stuffed fish on his walls.
Archchancellor Ridcully would hunt _anything_. The only cockerel still
crowing within two hundred yards of the University these days stood
under a cart to do it.

‘And that jungle,’ said the Senior Wrangler, sniffing. ‘Looks pretty
damn dangerous to me. Could be anything in it. Fatal. Could be tigers
and gorillas and elephants and pineapples. I wouldn’t go near it. I’m
with you, Archchancellor. Better to freeze here than look some rabid
man-eater in the eye.’

Ridcully’s own eyes were burning bright. He stroked his beard
thoughtfully. ‘Tigers, eh?’ he said. Then his expression changed.
‘_Pineapples?_’

‘Deadly,’ said the Senior Wrangler firmly. ‘One of them got my aunt. We
couldn’t get it off her. I _told_ her that’s not the way you’re supposed
to eat them, but would she listen?’

The Dean looked sidelong at his Archchancellor. It was the glance of a
man who also didn’t want another night in a frigid bedroom and had
suddenly worked out where the levers were.

‘That gets my vote, Mustrum,’ he said. ‘Catch me going through some hole
in space on to some warm beach with a sea teeming with huge fish and a
jungle full of hunting trophies.’ He yawned like a bad poker player.
‘No, it’s me for my nice freezing bed, I don’t know about you.
Archchancellor?’

‘I think—’ Ridcully began.

‘Yes?’

‘Clams,’ said the Senior Wrangler, shaking his head. ‘Looks just the
beach for the devils. You just ask my cousin. You’ll have to find a good
medium first, though. They shouldn’t ooze green, I said. They shouldn’t
bubble, I told him. But would he listen?’

The Archchancellor was currently amongst those who wouldn’t. ‘You think
that taking him out there would be just the thing for the Librarian, do
you?’ he said. ‘Just the tonic for the poor old chap, an hour or two
under that sun?’

‘But I expect we ought to be ready to protect him, eh, Archchancellor?’
the Dean said, innocently.

‘Why, yes, I really hadn’t thought of that,’ said Ridcully. ‘Hmm, yes.
Important point. Better get them to bring down my 500-pound crossbow
with the armour-piercing arrows and my home taxidermy outfit. And all
ten fishing rods. And all four tackle boxes. And the big set of scales.’

‘Good thinking, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean. ‘He may want to take a
swim when he’s feeling better.’

‘In that case,’ said Ponder, ‘I think I’ll get my thaumodalite and my
notebooks. It’s vital to work out where we are. It _could_ be
EcksEcksEcksEcks, I suppose. It looks very foreign.’

‘I suppose I’d better fetch my reptile press and my herbarium,’ said the
Chair of Indefinite Studies, who had got there eventually. ‘Much may be
learned from the plants here, I’ll wager.’

‘I shall certainly endeavour to make a study of any primitive
grass-skirted peoples hereabouts,’ added the Dean, with a lawnmower look
in his eyes.

‘What about you, Runes?’ said Ridcully.

‘Me? Oh, er . . .’ The Lecturer in Recent Runes looked wildly at his
colleagues, who were nodding frantically at him. ‘Er . . . this would be
a good time to catch up on my reading, obviously.’

‘Right,’ said Ridcully. ‘Because we are _not_, and I want to make this
very clear, we are not doing this in order to enjoy ourselves, is that
understood?’

‘What about the Senior Wrangler?’ said the Dean nastily.

‘Me? _Enjoy_ it? There might even be _prawns_ out there,’ said the
Senior Wrangler miserably.

Ridcully hesitated. The other wizards shrugged when he glanced at them.
‘Look, old chap,’ he said eventually, ‘I think I understood about the
clams, and I’ve got a _sort_ of mental picture about your granny and the
pineapple—’

‘—my aunt—’

‘—your aunt and the pineapple, but . . . What’s deadly about prawns?’

‘Hah, see how _you_ like a crate of them dropping off the crane on to
your head,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘My uncle didn’t, I can tell you!’

‘Okay, I think I understand. Important safety tip, everyone,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Avoid all crates. Understood? But we are _not_ here on some
kind of holiday! Do you all understand me?’

‘Absolutely,’ said the wizards in unison.

They all understood him.

Rincewind awoke with a scream, to get it over with.

_Then_ he saw the man watching him.

He was sitting cross-legged against the dawn. He was black. Not brown,
or blue-black, but black as space. This place baked people.

Rincewind pulled himself up and thought about reaching for his stick.
And then he thought again. The man had a couple of spears stuck in the
ground, and people here were good at spears, because if you didn’t get
efficient at hitting the things that moved fast you had to eat the
things that moved slowly. He was also holding a boomerang, and it wasn’t
one of those toy ones that came back. This was one of the big, heavy,
gently curved sort that didn’t come back because it was sticking in
something’s ribcage. You could laugh at the idea of wooden weapons until
you saw the kind of wood that grew here.

It had been painted with stripes of all colours, but it still looked
like a business item.

Rincewind tried to seem harmless. It required little in the way of
acting.

The watcher regarded him in that sucking silence that you just have to
fill. And Rincewind came from a culture where, if there was nothing to
say, you said something.

‘Er . . .’ said Rincewind. ‘Me . . . big-fella . . . fella . . . belong
. . . damn, what’s the—’ He gave up, and glanced at the blue sky.
‘Turned out nice again,’ he said.

The man seemed to sigh, stuck the boomerang into the strip of animal
skin that was his belt and, in fact, the whole of his wardrobe, and
stood up. Then he picked up a leathery sack, slung it over one shoulder,
took the spears and, without a backward glance, ambled off around a
rock.

This might have struck anyone else as rude, but Rincewind was always
happy to see any heavily armed person walking away. He rubbed his eyes
and contemplated the dismal task of subduing breakfast.

‘You want some grub?’ The voice was almost a whisper.

Rincewind looked around. A little way off was the hole from which last
night’s supper had been dug. Apart from that, there was nothing all the
way to the infinite horizon but scrubby bushes and hot red rocks.

‘I think I dug up most of them,’ he said, weakly.

‘Nah, mate. I got to tell you the secret of findin’ tucker in the bush.
There’s always a beaut feed if you know where to look, mate.’

‘How come you’re speaking my language, mystery voice?’ said Rincewind.

‘I ain’t,’ said the voice. ‘You’re listenin’ to mine. Got to feed you up
proper. Gonna sing you into a real bush-tucker finder, true.’

‘Lovely grub,’ said Rincewind.

‘Just you stand there and don’t move.’

It sounded as though the unseen voice then began to chant very quietly
through an unseen nose.

Rincewind was, after all, a wizard. Not a good one, but he was sensitive
to magic. And the chant was doing strange things.

The hairs on the back of his hands tried to crawl up his arms, and the
back of his neck began to sweat. His ears popped and, very gently, the
landscape began to spin around him.

He looked down at the ground. There were his feet. Almost certainly his
feet. And they were standing on the red earth and not moving at all.
Things were moving round him. He wasn’t dizzy but, by the look of it,
the landscape was.

The chanting stopped. There was a sort of echo, which seemed to happen
inside his head, as if the words had been merely the shadow of something
more important.

Rincewind shut his eyes for a while, and then opened them again.

‘Er . . . fine,’ he said. ‘Very . . . catchy.’

He couldn’t see the speaker, so he spoke with that careful politeness
you reserve for someone armed who is probably standing behind you.

He turned. ‘I expect you . . . er . . . had to go somewhere, did you?’
he said, to the empty air.

‘Er . . . hello?’

Even the insects had gone quiet.

‘Er . . . you haven’t noticed a box walking around on legs, have you? By
any chance?’

He tried to see if anyone could possibly be hiding behind a bush.

‘It’s not important, it’s just that it’s got my clean underwear in it.’

The boundless silence made an eloquent statement about the universe’s
views on clean underwear.

‘So . . . er . . . I’m going to know how to find food in the bush,
right?’ he ventured. He glared at the nearest trees. They didn’t look
any more fruitful than before. He shrugged.

‘What a strange person.’

He edged over to a flat stone and, with a stick raised in case of
resistance from anything below, pulled it up.

There was a chicken sandwich underneath.

It tasted rather like chicken.

A little way away, behind the rocks near the waterhole, a drawing faded
into the stone.

This was another desert, elsewhere. No matter where you were, this place
would always be _elsewhere_. It was one of those places further than any
conceivable journey, but possibly as close as the far side of a mirror,
or just a breath away.

There was no sun in the sky here, unless the whole sky was sun – it
glowed yellow. The desert underfoot was still red sand, but hot enough
to burn.

A crude drawing of a man appeared on a rock. Gradually, layer by layer,
it got more complex, as if the unseen hand was trying to draw bones and
organs and a nervous system and a soul.

And he stepped on to the sand and put down his bag which, here, seemed a
lot heavier. He stretched his arms and cracked his knuckles.

At least here he could talk normally. He daren’t raise his voice down
there in the shadow world, lest he raise mountains as well.

He said a word which, on the other side of the rock, would have shaken
trees and created meadows. It meant, in the true language of things
which the old man spoke, something like: Trickster. A creature like him
appears in many belief systems, although the jolly name can be
misleading. Tricksters have that robust sense of humour that puts a
landmine under a seat cushion for a bit of a laugh.

A black and white bird appeared, and perched on his head.

‘You know what to do,’ said the old man.

‘Him? What a wonga,’ said the bird. ‘I’ve been lookin’ at him. He’s not
even heroic. He’s just in the right place at the right time.’

The old man indicated that this was maybe the definition of a hero.

‘All right, but why not go and get the thing yerself?’ said the bird.

‘You’ve gotta have heroes,’ said the old man.

‘And I suppose I’ll have to help,’ said the bird. It sniffed, which is
quite hard to do through a beak.

‘Yep. Off you go.’

The bird shrugged, which _is_ easy to do if you have wings, and flew
down off the old man’s head. It didn’t land on the rock but flew into
it; for a moment there was a drawing of a bird, and then it faded.

Creators aren’t gods. They make places, which is quite hard. It’s men
that make gods. This explains a lot.

The old man sat down and waited.

Confront a wizard with the concept of a bathing suit and he’ll start to
get nervous. Why does it have to be so skimpy? he’ll ask. Where can I
put the gold embroidery? How can you have any kind of costume without at
least forty useful pockets? And occult symbols made out of sequins?
There appears to be no place for them. And where, when you get right
down to it, are the lapels?

There is also the concept of acreage. It is vitally important that as
large an amount of wizard as possible is covered, so that timid people
and horses are not frightened. There may be strapping young wizards with
copper-coloured skins and muscles as solid as a plank, but not after
sixty years of UU dinners. It gives senior wizards what they think is
called _gravitas_ but is more accurately called gravity.

Also, it takes heavy machinery to part a wizard from his pointy hat.

The Chair of Indefinite Studies looked sidelong at the Dean. They both
wore a variety of garments, in which red and white stripes predominated.

‘Last one into the water’s a man standing all by himself on the beach!’
he shouted.¹⁰

Out on a point of rock, surf washing over his bare feet, Mustrum
Ridcully lit his pipe and cast a line on the end of which was such a
fearsome array of spinners and weights that any fish it didn’t hook it
might successfully bludgeon.

The change of scenery seemed to be working on the Librarian. Within a
few minutes of being laid in the sunlight he’d sneezed himself back into
his old shape, and he now sat on the beach with a blanket around him and
a fern leaf on his head.

It was, indeed, a lovely day. It was warm, the sea murmured beautifully,
the wind whispered in the trees. The Librarian knew he ought to be
feeling better, but, instead, he was beginning to feel extremely uneasy.

He stared around him. The Lecturer in Recent Runes had gone to sleep
with his book carefully shading his eyes. It had originally been
entitled _Principles of Thaumic Propagation_ but, because of the action
of the sunlight and some specialized high-frequency vibrations from the
sand granules on the beach, the words on the cover now read _The Omega
Conspiracy_.¹¹

In the middle distance was the window. It hung in the air, a simple
square into a shadowy room. The Archchancellor hadn’t trusted the window
catch and had propped up the window with a piece of wood. A warning
label pinned to it showed that some thought had gone into the wording:
‘Do not remove this wood. Not even to see what happens. IMPORTANT!’

There appeared to be some forest behind the beach which rose a little
way up the side of a small yet quite pointy mountain, certainly not tall
enough to have snow on it.

Some of the trees lining the beach looked hauntingly familiar, and spoke
to the Librarian of home. This was strange, because he had been born in
Moon Pond Lane, Ankh-Morpork, next to the saddle-makers. But they spoke
to the home in his bones. He had an urge to climb . . .

But there was something _wrong_ with the trees. He looked down at the
pretty shells on the beach. There was something wrong with them, too.
Creepily, worryingly wrong.

A few birds wheeled overhead, and they were wrong. They were the right
shape, as far as he knew, and they seemed to be making the right noises.
But they were still _wrong_.

Oh, dear . . .

He tried to stop the sneeze as it gathered nasal momentum, but this is
impossible for anyone who wants to continue to go through life with
their eardrums.

There was a snort, a clattering sound, and the Librarian changed into
something suitable for the beach.

It is often said about desert environments that there is in fact a lot
of nutritious food around, if only you know what to look for.

Rincewind mused on this as he pulled a plate of chocolate-covered sponge
cakes from their burrow. They had dried coconut flakes on them.

He turned the plate cautiously.

Well, you couldn’t argue with it. He was finding food in the desert. In
fact, he was even finding dessert in the desert.

Perhaps it was some special talent hitherto undiscovered by the kind
people who had occasionally shared their food with him in the last few
months. They hadn’t eaten this sort of thing. They’d ground up seeds and
dug up skinny yams and eaten things with more eyeballs than the Watch
had found after that business with Medley the Medical Kleptomaniac.

So something was going _right_ for him. Out here in the red-hot
wilderness something wanted him to stay _alive_. This was a worrying
thought. No one ever wanted him alive for something _nice_.

This was Rincewind after several months: his wizardly robe was quite
short now. Bits had been torn off or used as string or, after some
particularly resistant _hors d’oeuvres_, as bandages. It showed his
knees, and wizards are nowhere near championship standard at knees. They
tend to appear, as the book might put it, a knobbly savage.

But he’d kept his hat. He’d woven a new wide brim for it, and he’d had
to restore the crown once or twice with fresh bits of robe, and most of
the sequins had been replaced with bits of shell stitched on with grass,
but it was still his hat, the same old hat. A wizard without a hat was
just a sad man with a suspicious taste in clothes. A wizard without a
hat wasn’t anyone.

Although this particular wizard had a hat, he didn’t have keen enough
eyes to see the drawing appear on a red rock half hidden in the scrub.

It started off like a bird. Then, without at any time being other than
smears of ochre and charcoal that had been there for years, it began to
change shape . . .

He set off towards the distant mountains. They’d been in view for
several days. He hadn’t the faintest idea if they represented a sensible
direction but at least they _were_ one.

The ground shivered underfoot. It had been doing that once or twice a
day for a while, and that was another odd thing, because this didn’t
look like volcano country. This was the kind of country where, if you
watched a large cliff for a few hundred years, you might see a rock drop
off and you’d talk about it for ages. Everything about it said that it
had got over all the more energetic geological exercises a long time ago
and was a nice quiet country which, in other circumstances, a man might
be at home in.

He became aware after a while that a kangaroo was watching him from the
top of a small rock. He’d seen the things before, bounding away through
the bushes. They didn’t usually hang around when there were humans
about.

This one was stalking him. They were vegetarian, weren’t they? It wasn’t
as though he was wearing green.

Finally it sprang out of the bushes and landed in front of him.

It brushed one ear with a paw, and gave Rincewind a meaningful look.

It brushed the other ear with the other paw, and wrinkled its nose.

‘Yes, fine, good,’ said Rincewind. He started to edge away, and then
stopped. After all, it was just a big . . . well, rabbit, with a long
tail and the kind of feet you normally see associated with red noses and
baggy pants.

‘I’m not frightened of you,’ he said. ‘Why should I be frightened of
you?’

‘Well,’ said the kangaroo, ‘I _could_ kick your stomach out through your
neck.’

‘Ah. You can talk?’

‘You’re a quick one,’ said the kangaroo. It rubbed an ear again.

‘Something wrong?’ said Rincewind.

‘No, that’s the kangaroo language. I’m trying it out.’

‘What, one scratch for “yes”, one for “no”? That sort of thing?’

The kangaroo scratched an ear, and then remembered itself. ‘Yep,’ it
said. It wrinkled its nose.

‘And that wrinkling?’ said Rincewind.

‘Oh, that means “Come quick, someone’s fallen down a deep hole,”’ said
the kangaroo.

‘That one gets used a lot?’

‘You’d be amazed.’

‘And . . . what’s kangaroo for “You are needed for a quest of the utmost
importance”?’ said Rincewind, with guileful innocence.

‘You know, it’s funny you should ask that—’

The sandals barely moved. Rincewind rose from them like a man leaving
the starting blocks, and when he landed his feet were already making
running movements in the air.

After a while the kangaroo came alongside and accompanied him in a
series of easy bounds.

‘Why are you running away without even listening to what I have to say?’

‘I’ve had long experience of being me,’ panted Rincewind. ‘I _know_
what’s going to happen. I’m going to be dragged into things that
shouldn’t concern me. And you’re just a hallucination caused by rich
food on an empty stomach, so don’t you try to stop me!’

‘Stop you?’ said the kangaroo. ‘When you’re heading in the right
direction?’

Rincewind tried to slow down, but his method of running was very
efficiently based on the idea that stopping was the last thing he’d do.
Legs still moving, he ran out over the empty air and plunged into the
void.

The kangaroo looked down and, with a certain amount of satisfaction,
wrinkled its nose.

‘Archchancellor!’

Ridcully awoke, and sat up. The Lecturer in Recent Runes was hurrying
up, out of breath.

‘The Bursar and I went for a walk along the beach,’ he said. ‘And can
you guess where we ended up?’

‘In Kiddling Street, Quirm,’ said Ridcully tartly, brushing an exploring
beetle off his beard. ‘That little bit by the teashop, with the trees in
it.’

‘That’s astonishing, Archchancellor. Because, you know, in fact, we
_didn’t_. We wound up back here. We’re on a tiny island. Were you having
a rest?’

‘A few moments’ cogitating,’ said Ridcully. ‘Any idea where we are yet,
Mister Stibbons?’

Ponder looked up from his notebook. ‘I won’t be able to work that out
precisely until sundown, sir. But I think we’re pretty close to the
Rim.’

‘And I think we found where the Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography
has been camping,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. He rummaged in a
deep pocket. ‘There was a camp, and a fireplace. Bamboo furniture and
whatnot. Socks on a washing line. And this.’

He pulled out the remains of a small notebook. It was standard UU issue.
Ridcully would never let anyone have a new one until they’d filled up
every page on both sides.

‘It was just lying there,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘I’m
afraid ants have been eating it.’

Ridcully flicked it open and read the first page. ‘“Some interesting
observations on Mono Island,”’ he said. ‘“A most singular place.”’

He flicked through the rest of the book. ‘Just a list of plants and
fishes,’ he said. ‘Doesn’t look all that special to _me_, but then I
ain’t a geography man. Why’s he callin’ it Mono Island?’

‘It means One Island,’ said Ponder.

‘Well, you’ve just told me it _is_ one island,’ said Ridcully. ‘Anyway,
I can see several more out there. Severe lack of imagination, I
suggest.’ He tucked the notebook into his robe. ‘Right, then. No sign of
the chap himself?’

‘Strangely, no.’

‘Probably went swimming and was eaten by a pineapple,’ said Ridcully.
‘How’s the Librarian doing, Mister Stibbons? Comfortable, is he?’

‘You should know, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘You’ve been sitting on him for
three-quarters of an hour.’

Ridcully looked down at the deckchair. It was covered with red fur.
‘This is—?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘I thought perhaps our geography man had brought it with him.’

‘Not, er, with the black toenails, sir.’

Ridcully peered further. ‘Should I get up, do you think?’

‘Well, he _is_ a deckchair, sir. So being sat on is a perfectly normal
activity for him, I suppose.’

‘We must find a cure, Stibbons. This is too strange—’

‘Coo-ee, gentlemen!’

There was activity in front of the window. It centred around a vision in
pink, although admittedly the sort of vision associated with the more
erratic kind of hallucinogen.

In theory there is no dignified way for a lady of a certain age to climb
through a window, but nevertheless this one was attempting it. In fact
she moved with more than dignity, which is something that is given away
free with kings and bishops; what she had was respectability, which is
home-made out of cast iron. However, at some point she would have to
show a bit of ankle, and she was wedged awkwardly on the sill while
trying to prevent this from happening.

The Senior Wrangler coughed. If he had been wearing a tie he would have
straightened it.

‘Ah,’ said Ridcully. ‘The inestimable Mrs Whitlow. Someone go and give
her a hand, Stibbons.’

‘I’ll help,’ said the Senior Wrangler, just a little faster than he
meant.¹²

The University’s housekeeper turned and spoke to someone unseen beyond
the window and then turned back, her shouting-at-subordinates expression
briefly visible before it was eclipsed by her much sunnier
talking-to-wizards one.

The Chair of Indefinite Studies had once upset the Senior Wrangler by
saying that the housekeeper had a face full of chins, but there _was_ a
glossiness about her that put some people in mind of a candle that had
been kept in the warm for too long. There wasn’t anything approaching a
straight line anywhere on Mrs Whitlow, until she found that something
hadn’t been dusted properly, when you could use her lips as a ruler.

Most of the Faculty walked in dread of her. She had strange powers that
they couldn’t quite get a grip on, like the ability to get the beds made
and the windows washed. A wizard who could wield a staff crackling with
power against dreadful monsters from some ghastly region was
nevertheless quite capable of picking up a feather duster by the wrong
end and seriously injuring himself with it. At Mrs Whitlow’s whim
people’s clothes got washed and socks got darned.¹³ If anyone annoyed
her, they found their study spring-cleaned more often than was good for
them, and since to a wizard his room is as personal an item as his
trouser pockets this was a terrible vengeance.

‘Ai just thought you gentlemen would like a morning snack,’ she said, as
the wizards helped her down. ‘So Ai took the liberty of getting the gels
to put together a cold collation. Ai’ll just go and fetch it . . .’

The Archchancellor stood up hastily. ‘Well done, Mrs Whitlow.’

‘Er . . . a morning snack?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘It looks like
mid-afternoon to me . . .’ His tone made it clear that if Mrs Whitlow
wanted it to be the morning, he wasn’t going to cause any trouble.

‘Speed of light crossing the Disc,’ said Ponder. ‘We _are_ close to the
Rim, I’m sure. I’m trying to remember how you tell the time by looking
at the sun.’

‘I should leave it for a while,’ said the Senior Wrangler, squinting
under his hand. ‘It’s too bright to see the numbers at the moment.’

Ridcully nodded happily. ‘I’m sure we could all do with a snack,’ he
said. ‘Something suitable for the beach, perhaps.’

‘Cold pork and mustard,’ said the Dean, waking up.

‘Possibly some beer,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘And have we got any of those pies, you know, the ones with the egg
inside them?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Although I must say
I’ve always thought that it was rather cruel to the chicken—’

There was a soft little sound, very similar to the one you get, aged
around seven, when you stick your finger in your mouth and flick it out
again quickly and think it is incredibly funny.

Ponder turned his head, dreading the sight he was about to see.

Mrs Whitlow had a tray of cutlery in one hand and was prodding
ineffectually at the air with the stick that she held in the other.

‘Ai only moved it to get things through,’ she said. ‘Now Ai can’t seem
to quate find where the silly thing is supposed to go.’

Where there had been a dark rectangle opening into the geographer’s
dingy study, there was now only waving palms and sunlit sand. Strictly
speaking, it could be said to be an improvement. It depended on your
point of view.

Rincewind surfaced, gasping for breath. He’d fallen into a waterhole.

It was in . . . well, it looked as though once there had been a cave,
and the roof had collapsed. There was a big circle of blue right above
him.

Rocks had fallen down here, and sand had blown in, and seeds had taken
root. Cool, damp and green . . . the place was a little oasis, tucked
away from the sun and the wind.

He pulled himself out of the water and looked around while he drained
off. Vines had grown among the rocks. A few small trees had managed to
take root in the crack. There was even a little bit of a beach. By the
look of the stains on the rocks, the water had once been a lot higher.

And there . . . Rincewind sighed. Wasn’t that just typical? You got some
quiet little beauty spot miles from anywhere, and there was _always_
some graffiti artist ready to spoil it. It was like that time when he
was hiding out in the Morpork Mountains, and right in the back of one of
the deepest caves some vandal had drawn loads of stupid bulls and
antelopes. Rincewind had been so disgusted he’d wiped them off. _And_
they’d left lots of old bones and junk lying around. Some people had no
idea how to behave.

Here, they’d covered the rock walls with drawings in white, red and
black. Animals again, Rincewind noticed. They didn’t even look
particularly realistic.

He stopped, water dripping off him, in front of one. Someone had
probably wanted to draw a kangaroo. There were the ears and the tail and
the clown feet. But they looked alien, and there were so many lines and
cross-hatchings that the figure seemed . . . odd. It looked as though
the artist hadn’t just wanted to draw a kangaroo from the outside but
had wanted to show the inside as well, and then had wanted to show the
kangaroo last year and today and next week and also what it was
thinking, all at the same time, and had set out to do the whole thing
with some ochre and a stick of charcoal.

It seemed to move in his head.

He blinked, but it still hurt. His eyes seemed to want to wander off in
different directions.

Rincewind hurried further along the cave, ignoring the rest of the
paintings. The piled rubble of the collapsed ceiling reached nearly to
the surface, but there was space on the other side, going on into
darkness. It looked as though he was in a piece of tunnel that had
collapsed.

‘You walked right past it,’ said the kangaroo.

He turned. It was standing on the little beach.

‘I didn’t see you get down here,’ said Rincewind. ‘How did you get down
here?’

‘Come on, I’ve got to show you something. You can call me Scrappy, if
you like.’

‘Why?’

‘We’re mates, ain’t we? I’m here to _help_ you.’

‘Oh, dear.’

‘Can’t make it alone across this land, mate. How d’you think you’ve
survived so far? Water’s bloody hard to find out here these days.’

‘Oh, I don’t know, I just keep falling into—’

Rincewind stopped.

‘Yeah,’ said the kangaroo. ‘Strike you as odd, does it?’

‘I thought I was just naturally lucky,’ said Rincewind. He thought about
what he’d just said. ‘I must have been crazy.’

There weren’t even flies down here. There was the occasional faint
ripple on the water, and that wasn’t comforting, since there wasn’t
apparently anything to stir the surface. Up above, the sun was torching
the ground and the flies swarmed like, well, flies.

‘Why isn’t there anyone else here?’ he said.

‘Come and see,’ said the kangaroo.

Rincewind raised his hands and backed away. ‘Are we talking teeth and
stings and fangs?’

‘Just look at that painting there, mate.’

‘What, the one of the kangaroo?’

‘Which one’s that, mate?’

Rincewind looked along the wall. The kangaroo picture wasn’t where he
remembered it.

‘I could’ve sworn—’

‘_That_’s the one I want you to look at, over there.’

Rincewind looked at the stone. What it showed, outlined in red ochre,
were dozens of hands.

He sighed. ‘Oh, right,’ he said, wearily. ‘I see the problem. Exactly
the same thing happens to me.’

‘What’re you talking about, mister?’

‘It’s just the same with me when I try to take snaps with an
iconograph,’ said Rincewind. ‘You set up a nice picture, the demon
paints away, and when you look at it, whoops, you had your thumb in the
way. I must have got a dozen pictures of my thumb. No, I can see your
lad there, doing his painting, in a bit of a hurry, got his brush all
ready then, splosh, he’d forgotten to take his hand off the—’

‘No. It’s the painting _underneath_ I’m talking about, mister.’

Rincewind looked closer. There _were_ fainter lines there, which you’d
think were just flaws in the rock if you weren’t looking. Rincewind
squinted. Other lines seemed to fit . . . Yes, someone had painted
figures . . . They were . . .

He blew away some sand.

Yes, they were . . .

. . . curiously familiar . . .

‘Yes,’ said Scrappy, his voice apparently coming from a distance. ‘Look
a bit like you, don’t they . . . ?’

‘But they’re—’ he began. He straightened up. ‘How long have these
paintings been here?’

‘Well, lessee,’ said the kangaroo. ‘Out of the sun and the weather,
nothing to disturb ’em . . . Twenty thousand years?’

‘That’s not right!’

‘Nah, true, prob’ly thirty thousand, in a nice sheltered spot like
this.’

‘But these are . . . That’s my . . .’

‘O’ course, when I say thirty thousand years,’ said the kangaroo, ‘I
mean it depends how you look at it. Even them hand paintings on the
top’ve been there five thousand years, see. And those faint ones . . .
Oh, yes, got to be pretty old, tens of thousands of years, except—’

‘Except what?’

‘They weren’t here last week, mate.’

‘You’re saying they’ve been here for ages . . . but not for very long?’

‘See? I knew you was clever.’

‘And now you’re going to tell me what the hell you’re talking about?’

‘Right.’

‘Excuse me, I’ll just find something to eat.’

Rincewind lifted up a rock. There were a couple of jam sandwiches
underneath.

The wizards were civilized men of considerable education and culture.
When faced with being inadvertently marooned on a desert island they
understood immediately that the first thing to do was place the blame.

‘It really was very clear!’ shouted Ridcully, waving his hand
frantically in the air at the place where the window had been. ‘And I
put a sign on it!’

‘Yes, but you’ve got a “Do Not Disturb” sign nailed to your study door,’
said the Senior Wrangler, ‘and you still expect Mrs Whitlow to bring you
your tea in the mornings!’

‘Gentlemen, please!’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘We’ve got to sort some
things out right now!’

‘Yes indeed!’ roared the Dean. ‘And it was _his_ fault! The sign wasn’t
large enough!’

‘I mean we have to—’

‘There are _ladies_ present!’ snapped the Senior Wrangler.

‘La_dy_.’ Mrs Whitlow uttered the word carefully and with deliberation,
like a gambler putting down a winning hand. She stood primly watching
them. Her expression said: I’m not worried, because with all these
wizards around nothing bad can happen.

The wizards adjusted their attitudes.

‘Ai _do_ apologize if Ai’ve done something wrong,’ she said.

‘Oh, not, not _wrong_,’ said Ridcully quickly. ‘Not exactly _wrong_. As
such.’

‘Anyone could have done it,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘I could hardly
read the lettering myself.’

‘And, taking the broad view, it’s certainly better to be stuck out here
in the fresh air and sunshine than in that stuffy study,’ Ridcully went
on.

‘That’s quite a _broad_ view, sir,’ said Ponder doubtfully.

‘And we’ll be back home in two shakes of a lamb’s tail,’ said Ridcully,
beaming.

‘Unfortunately, this doesn’t look a very agricultural sort of—’ Ponder
began.

‘Figure of speech, Mister Stibbons, figure of speech.’

‘The sun’s going down, sir,’ Ponder persisted. ‘Which means it’ll be
night time soon.’

Ridcully looked nervously at Mrs Whitlow, and then at the sun.

‘Is there a problem?’ said Mrs Whitlow.

‘Oh, good heavens, no!’ said Ridcully hastily.

‘Ai notice the little hole in the wall doesn’t seem to have come back,’
said Mrs Whitlow.

‘We, er—’

‘It’s a little prank, is it?’ the housekeeper went on. ‘Ai’m sure you
gentlemen will have your fun, and no mistake.’

‘Yes, that’s—’

‘But Ai should be grateful if you would send me back now,
Archchancellor. We’re doing the laundry this afternoon, and Ai’m afraid
we’re having a lot of trouble with the Dean’s sheets.’

The Dean suddenly knew how a mosquito feels in the beam of a
searchlight.

‘We’ll sort this out directly, never fear, Mrs Whitlow,’ said Ridcully,
not taking his eyes off the wretched Dean. ‘In the meantime, why don’t
you take a seat and enjoy the rather wonderful sheets, I mean sunshine?’

There was a clack as the deckchair folded itself up. Then it sneezed.

‘Ah, back with us again, Librarian,’ Ridcully went on, as the orang-utan
sprawled in the sand. ‘Help him up, please, Mister Stibbons. A word to
the rest of you, please. If you’ll excuse us a moment, Mrs Whitlow?
Faculty meeting . . .’

The wizards went into a huddle.

‘It was tomato sauce, all right?’ said the Dean hurriedly. ‘I just
happened to be having a snack in bed and you know how that stuff
stains!’

‘I’m sure we’re not at all interested in the state of your sheets,
Dean,’ said Ridcully.

‘No, indeed,’ said the Senior Wrangler brightly.

‘Not us,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, slapping the Dean on the
back.

‘We have to get back,’ said Ridcully. ‘We can’t spend the night alone
with Mrs Whitlow. It wouldn’t be decent.’

‘I don’t see why anyone should make a fuss about a bit of tomato sauce.
I at least cleaned all the beans off—’

‘Well, we’re not actually alone, are we? Not as such,’ said the Lecturer
in Recent Runes. ‘I mean, there’s seven of us, not including the
Librarian.’

‘Yes, but we’re all alone _together_,’ said Ridcully urgently. ‘There
could be Talk.’

‘What about?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, who sometimes lagged
behind.

‘_You_ know,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Seven men and one
woman . . . It doesn’t bear thinking about . . .’

‘Well, I for one will certainly veto any suggestion about ordering
another six women,’ said the Chair firmly.

‘Perhaps the hole will open again?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I doubt it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Ponder says that our coming through
probably altered the thaumostatic balance. What do you think, Dean?’

‘Just tomato sauce,’ said the Dean. ‘It could have happened to anyone.’

‘I meant about our being marooned on this island,’ said Ridcully. ‘Any
ideas, anyone? We must tackle this as a team.’

‘What shall we tell Mrs Whitlow?’ whispered the Senior Wrangler. ‘She
thinks this is a _prank_.’

‘Senior Wrangler, we are elderly, wise and experienced wizards,’ said
Ridcully. ‘_Students_ are prankers.’

‘Pranksters, possibly,’ mumbled Ponder Stibbons.

‘Whatever. _We_ do not indulge in _pranks_.’

‘With us it’s a fully fledged gold-embossed cock-up or nothing,’ said
the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘I don’t see why people are making such a fuss about a bit of tomato
sauce that hardly even shows up,’ muttered the Dean.

‘No one brought any suitable spells?’ said Ridcully.

‘At four in the morning? For the beach?’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘Of course not.’

‘Then we shall have to fall back on our own resources. There’s bound to
be a ship along sooner or later. The point _is_, gentlemen,’ he added,
‘that we are the product of a university education. I’m quite sure
primitive people have no difficulties surviving in a place like this,
and think of all the things we have that our rude forefathers lacked.’

‘Mrs Whitlow, for a start,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘She wouldn’t put up with rudeness of any sort,’ the Senior Wrangler
agreed.

‘Do you know anything about boats, Dean? I believe you got a Brown for
rowing when you were slimmer,’ said Ridcully. ‘Please note that this
question did not raise the matter of sheets in any way.’

‘Well, indeed, boat-building is not a difficult task,’ said the Dean,
surfacing. ‘Even primitive people can build boats, and we _are_
civilized men, after all.’

‘Then you’re head of the Boat-Building Committee,’ said Ridcully.
‘Senior Wrangler can help you. The rest of you fellows had better see if
there’s any fresh water. And food. Knock down a few coconuts. That sort
of thing.’

‘And what will you do, Archchancellor?’ said the Senior Wrangler
nastily.

‘I shall be the Protein Acquisition Committee,’ said Ridcully, waving
his fishing rod.

‘You going to stand here and fish again? What good’s that going to do?’

‘It might result in a fish dinner, Senior Wrangler.’

‘Has anyone got any tobacco?’ said the Dean. ‘I’m dying for a smoke.’

The wizards went off about their tasks, complaining and blaming one
another.

And just inside the forest, in the leafy debris, roots unfolded and a
number of very small plants began to grow like hell . . .

‘This is the last continent,’ said Scrappy. ‘It was . . . put together
last, and . . . differently.’

‘Looks pretty _old_ to me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Ancient. Those hills look
as old as the hills.’

‘They were made thirty thousand years old,’ said the kangaroo.

‘Come on! They look _millions_ of years old!’

‘Yep. Thirty thousand years ago they were made a million years ago. Time
here is,’ the kangaroo shrugged, ‘not the same. It was . . . glued
together differently, right?’

‘Search me,’ said Rincewind. ‘I’m a man sitting here listening to a
kangaroo. I’m not arguing.’

‘I’m trying to find words you might understand,’ said the kangaroo
reproachfully.

‘Good, keep going, you’ll get there. Want a jam sandwich? It’s
gooseberry.’

‘No. Strictly herbivore, mate. Listen—’

‘Unusual, gooseberry jam. I mean, you don’t often see it. Raspberry and
strawberry, yes, even blackcurrant. I shouldn’t think more than one jar
of jam in a hundred is gooseberry. Sorry, do go on.’

‘You’re taking this seriously, are you?’

‘Am I smiling?’

‘Have you ever noticed how time goes slower in big spaces?’

The sandwich stopped halfway to Rincewind’s mouth. ‘Actually, that _is_
true. But it only _seems_ slower.’

‘So? When this place was made there wasn’t much space and time left over
to work with, see? He had to bodge them together to make them work
harder. Time happens to space and space happens to time—’

‘You know, I think there could be plum in it, too?’ said Rincewind, with
his mouth full. ‘And maybe some rhubarb. You’d be amazed how often they
do that sort of thing. You know, stuff cheaper fruit in. I met this man
in an inn once, he worked for a jam-maker in Ankh-Morpork, and he said
they put in any old rubbish and some red dye, and I said what about the
raspberry pips, and he said they make them out of wood. Wood! He said
they’d got a machine for stamping ’em out. Can you believe that?’

‘Will you stop talking about jam and be sensible for a moment!’

Rincewind lowered the sandwich. ‘Good grief, I hope not,’ he said. ‘I’m
sitting in a cave in a country where everything bites you and it never
rains and I’m talking, no offence, to a herbivore that smells of a
carpet in a house where there are a lot of excitable puppies, and I’ve
suddenly got this talent for finding jam sandwiches and inexplicable
fairy cakes in unexpected places, and I’ve been shown something very odd
in a picture on some old cave wall, and suddenly said kangaroo tells me
time and space are all wrong and wants me to be _sensible_? What, when
you get right down to it, is in it for me?’

‘Look, this place wasn’t finished, right? It wasn’t fitted in . . .
turned around . . .’ The kangaroo looked at Rincewind as if reading his
mind, which was the case. ‘You know like with a jigsaw puzzle? The last
piece is the right shape but you have to turn it round to fit? Right?
Now think of the piece as a bloody big continent that’s got to be turned
around through about nine dimensions and you’re home and . . .’

‘Dry?’ said Rincewind.

‘Bloody right!’

‘Er . . . I know this may seem like a foolish question,’ said Rincewind,
trying to dislodge a gooseberry pip from a tooth cavity, ‘but why me?’

‘It’s your fault. You arrived here and suddenly things had always been
wrong.’

Rincewind looked back towards the wall. The earth trembled again.

‘Can you hop that past me again?’ he said.

‘Something went wrong in the past.’

The kangaroo looked at Rincewind’s blank, jam-smeared expression, and
tried again.

‘Your arrival caused a wrong note,’ it ventured.

‘What in?’

The creature waved a paw vaguely.

‘All this,’ it said. ‘You could call it a bloody multi-dimensional
knuckle of localized phase space, or maybe you could just call it the
song.’

Rincewind shrugged. ‘I don’t mind putting my hand up to killing a few
spiders,’ he said. ‘But it was me or them. I mean some of those come at
you at _head_ height—’

‘You changed history.’

‘Oh, come _on_, a few spiders don’t make that much difference, some of
them were using their webs as _trampolines_, it was a case of “boing”
and next moment—’

‘No, not history from now on, history that’s already happened,’ said the
kangaroo.

‘I’ve changed things that already happened long ago?’

‘Right.’

‘By arriving here I changed what’s _already happened_?’

‘Yep. Look, time isn’t as straightforward as you think—’

‘I never thought it was,’ said Rincewind. ‘And I’ve been round it a few
times . . .’

The kangaroo waved a paw expansively. ‘It’s not just that things in the
future can affect things in the past,’ he said. ‘Things that didn’t
happen but might have happened can . . . affect things that really
happened. Even things that happened and shouldn’t have happened and were
removed still have, oh, call ’em shadows in time, things left over which
interfere with what’s going on. Between you and me,’ it went on,
waggling its ears, ‘it’s all just held together by spit now. No one’s
ever got round to tidying it up. I’m always amazed when tomorrow follows
today, and that’s the truth.’

‘Me too,’ said Rincewind. ‘Oh, me too.’

‘Still, no worries, eh?’

‘I think I’ll lay off the jam,’ said Rincewind. He put the sandwich
down. ‘Why me?’

The kangaroo scratched its nose. ‘’s got to be someone,’ it said.

‘And what’m I supposed to do?’ said Rincewind.

‘Wind it into the world.’

‘There’s a _key_?’

‘Might be. Depends.’

Rincewind turned and looked at the rock pictures again, the pictures
that hadn’t been there a few weeks ago and then suddenly had always been
there.

Figures holding long sticks. Figures in long robes. The artist had done
a pretty good job of drawing something quite unfamiliar. And in case
there was any doubt, you only had to look at what was on their heads.

‘Yeah. We call them _The Pointy-Heads_,’ said the kangaroo.

‘He’s started catching fish,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘That means
he’ll come over all smug and start asking what plans we’ve got for
making a boat at any minute, you know what he’s like.’

The Dean looked at some sketches he’d made on a rock.

‘How hard can it be to build a boat?’ he said.

‘People with bones in their noses build boats. And we are the end
product of thousands of years of enlightenment. Building a boat is _not_
beyond men like us, Senior Wrangler.’

‘Quite, Dean.’

‘All we have to do is search this island until we find a book with a
title like _Practical Boat-building for Beginners_.’

‘Exactly. It’ll be plain sailing after that, Dean. Ahaha.’

He glanced up, and swallowed hard. Mrs Whitlow was sitting on a log in
the shade, fanning herself with a large leaf.

The sight stirred things in the Senior Wrangler. He was not at all sure
what they were, but little details like the way something creaked when
she moved twanged bits of the Senior Wrangler as well.

‘You all right, Senior Wrangler? You look as if the heat is getting to
you.’

‘Just a little . . . warm, Dean.’

The Dean looked past him as he loosened his collar. ‘Well, _they_
haven’t been long,’ he said.

The other wizards were walking down the beach. One advantage of a long
wizarding robe is that it can be held like an apron, and the Chair of
Indefinite Studies was bulging at the front even more than usual.

‘Found anything to eat?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Er . . . yes.’

‘Fruit and nuts, I suppose,’ grumbled the Dean.

‘Er . . . yes, and then again, no,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.
‘Um . . . it’s rather odd . . .’

The Chair of Indefinite Studies let his burden spill out on to the sand.
There were coconuts, other nuts of various sizes, and assorted hairy or
knobbly vegetable things.

‘All rather primitive,’ said the Dean. ‘And probably poisonous.’

‘Well, the Bursar’s been eating things like there’s no tomorrow,’ said
the Lecturer in Recent Runes. The Bursar burped happily.

‘That doesn’t mean there will be,’ said the Dean. ‘What’s up with you
fellows? You keep looking at one another.’

‘Er . . . we’ve tasted a few things too, Dean,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘Ah, I see the gatherers have returned!’ roared Ridcully happily,
walking towards them. He waved three fish on a string. ‘Anything
resembling potatoes in there, chaps?’

‘You’re not going to believe any of this,’ mumbled the Lecturer in
Recent Runes. ‘You’re going to accuse us of trickery.’

‘What are you talking about?’ said the Dean. ‘They don’t look very
tricky to _me_.’

The Chair of Indefinite Studies gave a sigh. ‘Have a coconut,’ he said.

‘Do they go off bang or something?’

‘No, nothing like that at all.’

The Dean picked up a nut, gave it a suspicious look, and banged it on a
stone. It fell into two exact halves.

There was no milk to spill out. Inside the husk was a brown inner shell,
full of soft white fibres.

Ridcully picked up a bit of it and sniffed. ‘I don’t believe this,’ he
said. ‘That’s not natural.’

‘So?’ said the Dean. ‘It’s a coconut full of coconut. What’s odd about
that?’

The Archchancellor broke off a piece of the shell and handed it over. It
was soft and slightly crumbly.

The Dean tasted it. ‘Chocolate?’ he said.

Ridcully nodded. ‘Dairy milk, by the taste of it. With a creamy coconut
filling.’

‘Thaf’s nod poffible,’ said the Dean, his cheeks bulging.

‘Spit it out, then.’

‘I think I might perhaps try a _little_ more,’ said the Dean,
swallowing. ‘In a spirit of enquiry, you understand.’

The Senior Wrangler picked up a knobbly bluish nut about the size of a
fist and tapped it experimentally. It shattered but was held together
because of the gooey contents.

The smell was very familiar. A careful taste confirmed it. The wizards
regarded the nut’s innards in shocked silence.

‘It’s even got the blue veins,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Yes, we know, we tried one,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies
weakly. ‘And, after all, there _is_ such a thing as a bread fruit—’

‘I’ve heard of it,’ said Ridcully. ‘And I might believe there’s such a
thing as a nat’rally chocolate-covered coconut, because chocolate’s a
kind of potato—’

‘A bean, possibly,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Whatever. But I damn well don’t believe there’s such a thing as a
mature Lancre Blue runny cheese nut!’ He prodded the thing.

‘But nature _does_ come up with some very funny coincidences,
Archchancellor,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Why, I myself,
as a child, once dug up a carrot which, ahaha, most amusingly looked
just like a man with a—’

‘Er . . .’ said the Dean.

It was only a little sound, but it had a certain portentous quality.
They turned to look at him.

He’d been peeling away the yellowing husk from something like a small
bean pod. What he now held—

‘Hah, yes, good joke,’ said Ridcully. ‘_They_ certainly don’t grow on—’

‘I didn’t do anything! Look, it’s still got bits of pith and stuff on
it!’ said the Dean, waving the thing wildly.

Ridcully took it, sniffed it, held it up to his ear and shook it, and
then said quietly: ‘Show me where you found it, will you?’

The bush was in a small clearing. Dozens of the little green shoots hung
down between its tiny leaves. Each was tipped by a flower, but the
flowers were curling up and falling off. The crop was ripe.

Multi-coloured beetles zoomed away from the bush as the Dean selected a
pod and peeled it open, revealing a slightly damp white cylinder. He
examined it for a few seconds, then put one end in his mouth, took a box
of matches from a pocket in his hat, and lit up.

‘Quite a smooth smoke,’ he said. His hand shook slightly as he took the
cigarette out of his mouth and blew a smoke ring. ‘Cork filter, too,’ he
said.

‘Er . . . well, both tobacco and cork are naturally occurring vegetable
products,’ quavered the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Chair?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘Shut up, will you?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor.’

Ponder Stibbons broke open a cork tip. There was a tiny ring of what
well might have been—

‘Seeds,’ he said. ‘But that can’t be right, because—’

The Dean, wreathed in blue smoke, had been staring at the nearby vines.

‘Has it occurred to anyone else that those pods are remarkably
rectangular?’ he said.

‘Go for it, Dean,’ said Ridcully.

A brown outer husk was pulled aside.

‘Ah,’ said the Dean. ‘Biscuits. Just the thing with cheese.’

‘Er . . .’ said Ponder. He pointed.

Just beyond the bush a couple of boots lay on the ground.

Rincewind ran his fingers over the cave wall.

The ground shook again.

‘What’s causing that?’ he said.

‘Oh, some people say it’s an earthquake, some say it’s the country
drying up, others say it’s a giant snake rushing through the ground,’
said Scrappy.

‘Which is it?’

‘The wrong sort of question.’

They definitely _looked_ like wizards, thought Rincewind. They had that
basic cone shape familiar to anyone who had been to Unseen University.
They were holding staffs. Even with the crude materials available to
them the ancient artists had managed to portray the knobs on the ends.

But UU hadn’t even _existed_ thirty thousand years ago . . .

Then he noticed, for the first time, the drawing right at the end of the
cave. There were a lot of the ochre handprints on top of it, almost –
and the thought expanded in his mind in a sneaky way – as though someone
had thought that they could hold it down on to the rock, prevent it –
this was a silly thought, he knew – prevent it from getting _out_.

He brushed away some dust.

‘Oh, _no_,’ he mumbled.

It was an oblong box. The artist hadn’t got the hang of conventional
perspective, but there was no doubt that he’d tried to paint hundreds of
little legs.

‘That’s my Luggage!’

‘Always the same, right?’ said Scrappy, behind him. ‘You arrive okay and
your luggage ends up somewhere else.’

‘Thousands of years in the past?’

‘Could be a valuable antique.’

‘It’s got my clothes in it!’

‘They’ll probably be back in style, then.’

‘You don’t understand! It’s a _magical_ box! It’s supposed to end up
where I am!’

‘It probably _is_ where you are. Just not when.’

‘What? Oh.’

‘I told you time and space were all stirred up, didn’t I? You wait till
you’re on your journey. There’s places where there’s several times
happening at once and places where there’s hardly any time at all, and
times when there’s hardly any place. You’ve got to sort it out, right?’

‘What, like shuffling cards?’ said Rincewind. He made a mental note
about ‘on your journey’.

‘Yep.’

‘That’s impossible!’

‘Y’know, I’d have said so too. But you _will_ do it. Now, you’ll have to
concentrate about this bit, right?’ Scrappy took a deep breath. ‘I know
you’re going to do it because you’ve already done it.’

Rincewind put his head in his hands.

‘I _told_ you about time and space here being mixed up,’ said the
kangaroo.

‘I’ve already saved the country, have I?’

‘Yep.’

‘Oh, good. Well, that wasn’t so difficult. I don’t want much – a medal,
perhaps, the grateful thanks of the population, maybe a small pension
and a ticket home . . .’ He looked up. ‘I’m not going to get any of
that, though, am I?’

‘No, because—’

‘—I haven’t already done it _yet_?’

‘Exactly! You’re getting the hang of it! You have to go and do what we
know you’re going to do because you’ve already done it. In fact, if you
hadn’t done it already I wouldn’t be here to make sure it gets done. So
you’d better do it.’

‘Facing terrible dangers?’

The kangaroo waved a paw. ‘Slightly terrible,’ it said.

‘And go for many miles over parched and trackless terrain?’

‘Well, yeah. We haven’t got any of the other sort.’

Rincewind brightened up slightly. ‘And I’ll meet comrades whose
strengths and skills will be a great help to me?’

‘Don’t bet on it.’

‘Any chance of a magic sword?’

‘What would _you_ do with a magic sword?’

‘Fair enough. Fair enough. Forget the magic sword. But I’ve got to have
_something_. Cloak of invisibility, potion of strength, something like
that . . .’

‘That stuff’s for people who know how to use them, mister. You’ll have
to rely on your native wit.’

‘I’ve got _nothing_? What sort of quest is that? Can’t you give me any
hints?’

‘You may have to drink some beer,’ said the kangaroo. It cringed back
for a moment, as if confident of facing a storm of objections.

Rincewind said: ‘Oh. Right. Well, I know how to do that. What direction
am I supposed to go?’

‘Oh, you’ll find it.’

‘And when I get to where I’m going, what am I supposed to do?’

‘It’ll . . . be obvious, right?’

‘And how will I know I’ve done it?’

‘The Wet will come back.’

‘The wet _what_?’

‘It’ll rain.’

‘I thought it never rained here,’ said Rincewind.

‘See? I knew you were smart.’

The sun was setting. The rocks around the edge of the cave glowed red.
Rincewind stared at them for a while, and reached a brave decision.

‘I’m not the man to shirk when the fate of whole countries is in the
balance,’ he said. ‘I will make a start at dawn to complete this task
which I have already completed, by hoki, or my name isn’t Rincewand!’

‘Rincewind,’ said the kangaroo.

‘Indeed!’

‘Well said, mate. Then I should get some sleep, if I were you. Could be
a busy day tomorrow.’

‘I’ve not been found wanting when duty calls,’ said Rincewind. He
reached into a hollow log and, after some rummaging around, pulled out a
plate of egg and chips. ‘See you at dawn, then.’

Ten minutes later he stretched out on the sand with the log as his
pillow, and looked up at the purple sky. Already a few stars were coming
out.

Now, there was something . . . Oh, yes. The kangaroo was lying down on
the other side of the waterhole.

Rincewind raised his head. ‘You said something about when “he” created
this place, and you talked about “him” . . .’

‘Yep.’

‘Only . . . I’m pretty sure I’ve met the Creator. Short bloke. Does all
his own snowflakes.’

‘Yeah? And when did _you_ meet _him_?’

‘When he was making the world, as a matter of fact.’ Rincewind decided
to refrain from mentioning that he’d dropped a sandwich into a rockpool
at the time. People don’t like to hear that they may have evolved from
somebody’s lunch. ‘I get around quite a lot,’ he added.

‘Are you coming the raw prawn?’

‘What? Oh, no. Certainly not. Coming a raw prawn? Not me. That’s
something I never do. Or even cooked prawns. Or crustaceans of any sort,
especially in rockpools. Not me. Er . . . what was it that you actually
meant?’

‘Well, he didn’t create this place,’ said Scrappy, ignoring him. ‘This
was done after.’

‘Can that happen?’

‘Why not?’

‘Well, it’s not like, you know, building on over the stables, is it?’
said Rincewind. ‘Someone just wanders along when a world’s all finished
and slings down an extra continent?’

‘Happens all the time, mate,’ said Scrappy. ‘Bloody hell, yeah. Why not,
anyway? If other creators go around leaving ruddy great empty oceans,
someone’s _bound_ to fill ’em up, right? Does a world good, too, having
a fresh look, new ideas, new ways.’

Rincewind stared up at the stars. He had a mental vision of someone
walking from world to world, sneaking in extra lands when no one was
looking.

‘Yes indeed,’ he said. ‘I for one would not have thought of making all
the snakes deadly, and all the spiders deadlier than the snakes. And
putting pockets on everything? Great idea.’

‘There you go, then,’ said Scrappy. He was hardly visible now, as the
dark filled up the cave.

‘Made a lot of them, has he?’

‘Yep.’

‘Why?’

‘So’s maybe at least one of them won’t get mucked up. Always puts
kangaroos on ’em, too. Sort of a signature, you might say.’

‘Does this Creator have a name?’

‘Nope. He’s just the man who carries the sack that contains the whole
universe.’

‘A leather sack?’

‘Sounds like him,’ the kangaroo agreed.

‘The whole universe in one small sack?’

‘Yep.’

Rincewind settled back. ‘I’m glad I’m not religious,’ he said. ‘It must
be very complicated.’

After another five minutes he began to snore. After half an hour he
moved his head slightly. The kangaroo didn’t seem to be around.

With almost super-Rincewind speed he was upright and scrambling up the
fallen rocks, over the lip of the cave and into the dark oven of the
night.

He sighted on a random star and got into his stride, ignoring the bushes
that lashed at his bare legs.

Hah!

He was not going to be found wanting when duty called. He did not intend
to be found at all.

In the cave the water in the pool rippled under the starlight, the
expanding circles lapping against the sand.

On the wall was an ancient drawing of a kangaroo, in white and red and
yellow. The artist had tried to achieve on stone what might better have
been attempted with eight dimensions and a large particle accelerator;
he’d tried to include not just the kangaroo _now_ but also the kangaroo
in the past, and the kangaroo in the future and, in short, not what the
kangaroo looked like but what the kangaroo _was_.

Among other things, as it faded, it was grinning.

Among the complexities that made up the intelligent biped known to the
rest of the world as Mrs Whitlow was this: there was no such thing as an
informal meal in Mrs Whitlow’s world. If Mrs Whitlow made sandwiches
even just for _herself_ she would put a sprig of parsley on the top. She
placed a napkin on her lap to drink a cup of tea. If the table could
have a vase of flowers and a placemat with a tasteful view of something
nice, so much the better.

It was unthinkable that she should eat a meal balanced on her knees. In
fact it was unthinkable to think of Mrs Whitlow as having knees,
although the Senior Wrangler had to fan himself with his hat
occasionally. So the beach had been scoured to find enough bits of
driftwood to make a very rough table, and some suitable rocks to use as
seats.

The Senior Wrangler dusted one off with his hat. ‘There we are, Mrs
Whitlow . . .’

The housekeeper frowned. ‘Ai’m really sure it’s Not Done for the staff
to eat with the gentlemen,’ she said.

‘Be our guest, Mrs Whitlow,’ said Ridcully.

‘Ai really can’t. It does not Do to get ideas above one’s station,’ said
Mrs Whitlow. ‘Ai would never be able to look you in the face again, sir.
Ai hope Ai know my Place.’

Ridcully looked blank for a moment, and then said quietly: ‘Faculty
meeting, gentlemen?’

The wizards went into another huddle a little way along the beach.

‘What are we supposed to do about _that_?’

‘I think it’s very commendable of her. Her world is Below Stairs, after
all.’

‘Yes, very well, but it’s not as if there’re any stairs on this island.’

‘Could we build some?’

‘We can’t let the poor woman sit off by herself somewhere, that is my
point.’

‘We spent _ages_ on that table!’

‘And did you notice something about the driftwood, Archchancellor?’

‘Looked like perfectly ordinary wood to _me_, Stibbons. Branches,
treetrunks and whatnot.’

‘That’s the strange thing, sir, because—’

‘It’s very simple, Ridcully. I hope that, as gentlemen, we know how to
treat a woman—’

‘La_dy_.’

‘Let me just say that was unnecessarily sarcastic, Dean,’ said Ridcully.
‘Very well. If the Prophet Ossory won’t go to the mountain, the mountain
must go to the Prophet Ossory. As they say in Klatch.’

He paused. He knew his wizards.

‘I believe, in fact, that it’s in Omnia that—’ Ponder began.

Ridcully waved a hand. ‘Something like that, anyway.’

And that is why Mrs Whitlow dined alone at the table, while the wizards
sat around the fire a little way away, except that very frequently one
of them would lumber over to offer her some choice bit of nature’s
bounty.

It was obvious that starvation would not be a problem on this island,
although dyspepsia and gout might be.

Fish was the main course. Frenzied searching had failed to locate a
steak bush so far but _had_ found, in addition to numerous more
conventional fruits, a pasta bush, a sort of squash that contained
something very much like custard and, to Ridcully’s disgust, a
pineapple-like plant the fruit of which was, when the husk had been
stripped away, a large plum pudding.

‘Obviously it’s not _really_ a plum pudding,’ he protested. ‘We just
think it’s like a plum pudding because it tastes exactly like a . . .
plum pudding . . .’ His voice trailed off.

‘It’s got plums and currants in it,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Pass the
custard squash, will you?’

‘My point is that we only _think_ they look like currants and plums—’

‘No, we also think they _taste_ like currants and plums,’ said the
Senior Wrangler. ‘Look, Archchancellor, there’s no mystery. Obviously
wizards have been here before. This is the result of perfectly ordinary
magic. Perhaps our lost geographer did a bit of experimenting. Or it’s
sourcery, perhaps. Some of the things that got created in the old days,
well, a cigarette bush is very small beer by comparison, eh?’

‘Talking of small beer . . .’ said the Dean, waving his hand, ‘pass me
the rum, will you?’

‘Mrs Whitlow doesn’t approve of strong liquor,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

The Dean glanced at the housekeeper, who was daintily eating a banana, a
feat which is quite hard to do.

He put down the coconut shell. ‘Well, she . . . I am . . . I don’t see .
. . well, damn it all, that’s all I’ve got to say.’

‘Or bad language,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘I vote we take some of those bees back with us,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘Marvellous little creatures. No footling around
being content with making boring honey. You just reach up and pick one
of these handy little wax containers and bob’s your uncle.’

‘She takes all the peel off slowly before she eats it. Oh, dear . . .’

‘Are you all right, Senior Wrangler? Is the heat getting to you?’

‘What? Eh? Hmm? Oh, nothing. Yes. Bees. Wonderful things.’

They glanced up at a couple of the bees, who were busying themselves
around a flowering bush in the last of the light. They were leaving
little black smoke trails.

‘Shooting around like little rockets,’ said the Archchancellor.
‘Amazing.’

‘I’m still worried about those boots,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘You’d
think the man had been pulled right out of them.’

‘It’s a tiny island, man,’ said Ridcully. ‘All we’ve seen is birds, a
few little squeaky things and a load of insects. You don’t get big
fierce animals on islands you can practically throw a stone across. He
must’ve just . . . felt a bit carefree. It’s a bit hot for boots here,
anyway.’

‘So why haven’t we seen him?’

‘Hah! He’s probably lying low,’ said the Dean. ‘Ashamed to face us.
Keeping a nice sunny island in your study is against University rules.’

‘Is it?’ said Ponder. ‘I’ve never seen it mentioned. How long has it
been a rule?’

‘Ever since I’ve had to sleep in a freezing bedroom,’ said the Dean,
darkly. ‘Pass the bread-and-butter-pudding fruit, will you?’

‘Ook,’ said the Librarian.

‘Ah, nice to see you your old shape, old chap,’ said Ridcully. ‘Try and
keep it up for longer this time, eh?’

‘Ook.’

The Librarian was sitting behind a pile of fruit. Normally he wouldn’t
question such a perfect piece of positioning, but now even the bananas
were bothering him. There was the same sensation of _wrongness_. There
were long yellow ones, and stubby ones, and red ones, and fat brown
ones—

He stared at the remains of the fish. There was a big silver one, and a
fat red one, and a small grey one, and a flat one a bit like a plaice—

‘Obviously some sourcerer landed here and wanted to make the place more
homely,’ the Senior Wrangler was saying, but he sounded far off. The
Librarian was counting.

The plum-pudding plant, the custard-squash vine, the chocolate coconut—
He turned his head to look at the trees. And now he knew what he was
looking for, he couldn’t see it anywhere.

The Senior Wrangler stopped talking as the ape scrambled to his knuckles
and sped back to the high-tide line. The wizards watched in silence as
he scrabbled through the heaped-up seashells. He came back with a double
handful, which he dropped triumphantly in front of the Archchancellor.

‘Ook!’

‘What’s that, old chap?’

‘_Ook!_’

‘Yes, very pretty, but what’s—’

‘OOK!’

The Librarian seemed to remember what kind of intellects he was dealing
with. He held up a finger and looked at Ridcully enquiringly. ‘Ook?’

‘Still not quite with you—’

Two fingers went up. ‘Ook ook?’

‘Not sure I fully—’

‘Ook ook ook!’

Ponder Stibbons looked at the three fingers now raised. ‘I think he’s
counting, sir.’ The Librarian handed him a banana.

‘Ah, the old “How Many Fingers Am I Holding Up?” game,’ said the Dean.
‘But usually we all have to have a bit more to drink first—’

The Librarian waved his hand at the fish, at the meal, at the shells and
at the background of trees. One finger stabbed at the sky.

‘Ook!’

‘It’s all one to you?’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s one big place? It’s one to
remember?’

The Librarian opened his mouth again, and then sneezed.

A very large red seashell lay on the sand.

‘Oh, dear,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘That’s interesting,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘He’s turned
into quite a good specimen of the giant conch. You can get a marvellous
sound out of one of them if you blow in the pointy end . . .’

‘Volunteers?’ said the Dean, almost under his breath.

‘Oh, dear,’ said Ponder again.

‘What’s up with you?’ said the Dean.

‘There’s only one,’ said Ponder. ‘That’s what he was trying to tell us.’

‘One what?’ said Ridcully.

‘Of everything, sir. There’s only one of everything.’

It was, he thought later, a good dramatic line. People ought to have
looked at one another in growing and horrified realization and said
things like, ‘By George, you know, he’s right!’ But these were wizards,
capable of thinking very big thoughts in very small chunks.

‘Don’t be daft, man,’ said Ridcully. ‘There’s millions of the damn
shells, for a start.’

‘_Yes_, sir, but look, they’re all _different_, sir. All the trees we
found . . . there was only one of each sort, sir. Lots of banana trees,
but they all produce different types of bananas. There was only one
cigarette tree, wasn’t there?’

‘Lots of bees, though,’ said Ridcully.

‘But only one swarm,’ said Ponder.

‘_Millions_ of beetles,’ said the Dean.

‘I don’t think I’ve seen two _alike_, sir.’

‘Well, that’s _interesting_,’ said Ridcully, ‘but I don’t see—’

‘One of anything doesn’t _work_, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘It can’t breed.’

‘Yes, but they’re only _trees_, Stibbons.’

‘Trees need males and females too, sir.’

‘They do?’

‘Yes, sir. Sometimes they’re different bits of the same tree, sir.’

‘_What?_ You sure?’

‘Yes, sir. My uncle grew nuts, sir.’

‘Keep it down, boy, keep it down! Mrs Whitlow might hear you!’

Ponder was taken aback. ‘What, sir? But . . . well . . . she is _Mrs_
Whitlow, sir . . .’

‘What’s that got to do with the price of feet?’

‘I mean . . . presumably there was a _Mr_ Whitlow, sir?’

Ridcully’s face went wooden for a moment and his lips moved as he tried
out various responses. Finally he settled, weakly, for: ‘That’s as
maybe, but it all sounds pretty _mucky_ to me.’

‘I’m afraid that’s nature for you, sir.’

‘I used to like walking through the woods on a nice spring morning,
Stibbons. You mean to say the trees were at it like knives the whole
time?’

Ponder’s horticultural knowledge found itself a little exhausted at this
point. He tried to remember what he could about his uncle, who’d spent
most of his life up a ladder.

‘I, er, think camel-hair brushes are sometimes involved—’ he began, but
Ridcully’s expression told him that this wasn’t a welcome fact, so he
went on, ‘Anyway, sir, ones don’t work. And there’s another thing, sir.
Who smokes the cigarettes? I mean, if the bush just hopes that butts are
going to be dropped around the place, who does it think is going to
smoke them?’

‘What?’

Ponder sighed. ‘The point about fruit, sir, is that it’s a kind of lure.
A bird’ll eat the fruit and then, er, drop the seeds somewhere. It’s the
way the plant spreads its seeds around. But we’ve only seen birds and a
few lizards on this island, so how—’

‘Ah, I see what you mean,’ said Ridcully. ‘You’re thinking: what kind of
bird stops flyin’ around for a quick smoke?’

‘A puffin,’ said the Bursar.

‘Glad to see you’re still with us, Bursar,’ said Ridcully, without
looking round.

‘Birds don’t smoke, sir. You’ve got to ask yourself what’s in it for the
bush, you see? If there were _people_ here, well, I suppose you _might_
get a sort of nicotine tree eventually, because they’d smoke the
cigarettes – I mean,’ he corrected himself, because he prided himself on
his logical thought, ‘these things that _look_ like cigarettes, and stub
them out around the place, thus spreading the seeds which are in the
filter. Some seeds need heat to germinate, sir. But if there aren’t any
people, the bush doesn’t make any sense.’

‘_We’re_ people,’ said the Dean. ‘And I like a smoke after supper.
Everyone knows that.’

‘Yes, but with respect, sir, we’ve only been here a couple of hours and
I doubt whether the news has spread all the way to small islands,’ said
Ponder patiently, and with, as it turned out, one hundred per cent
inaccuracy. ‘That’s probably not long enough for one to evolve.’

‘Are you tellin’ me’, said Ridcully, like a man with something on his
mind, ‘that you think when you eat an apple you’re helping it to . . .’
He stopped. ‘It was bad enough about the trees.’ He sniffed. ‘I shall
stick to eating fish. At least they make their own arrangements. At a
decent distance, I understand. And you know what _I_ think about
evolution, Mister Stibbons. If it happens, and frankly I’ve always
considered it a bit of a fairy story, it _has_ to happen fast. Look at
lemmings, for one thing.’

‘Lemmings, sir?’

‘Right. The little blighters keep chargin’ over cliffs, right? And how
many have ever changed into birds on the way down, eh? Eh?’

‘Well, none, of cou—’

‘There’s my point,’ said Ridcully triumphantly. ‘And it’s no good one of
them on the way down thinking, “Hey, maybe I should waggle my claws a
bit,” is it? No, what it ought to do is decide really positively about
growing some real wings.’

‘What, in a couple of seconds? While they’re plunging towards the
rocks?’

‘Best time.’

‘But lemmings don’t just turn into birds, sir!’

‘Lucky for them if they could, though, eh?’

There was a roar, far off in the little jungle. It sounded rather like a
foghorn.

‘Are you _sure_ there aren’t any dangerous creatures on this island?’
said the Dean.

‘I think I saw some prawns,’ said the Senior Wrangler nervously.

‘No, the Archchancellor was right, it’s far too small,’ said Ponder,
trying to dismiss the thought of flying lemmings. ‘It couldn’t possibly
support anything that could hurt us, sir. After all, what would it eat?’

Now they could all hear something crashing through the trees.

‘Us?’ said the Dean hesitantly.

A creature blundered out on to the sunset sands. It was large and seemed
to be mainly head – one huge, reptilian head that looked almost as big
as the body below it. It walked on two long hind legs. There was a tail,
but given the amount of teeth now showing at the other end the wizards
weren’t inclined to take in too much additional detail.

The creature sniffed the air and roared again.

‘Ah,’ said Ridcully. ‘The solution to the mystery of the disappearing
geographer, I suspect. Well done, Senior Wrangler.’

‘I think I’ll just—’ the Dean began.

‘Stay still, sir!’ hissed Ponder. ‘A lot of reptiles can’t see you if
you don’t move!’

‘I can assure you, at the speed _I_ intend _nothing_ is going to see me
. . .’

The monster turned its head this way and that, and began to lumber
forward.

‘Can’t see things that don’t move?’ said the Archchancellor. ‘You mean
we just have to wait for it to walk into a tree?’

‘Mrs Whitlow’s still sitting there!’ said the Senior Wrangler.

She was in fact spreading some runny cheese on a biscuit in a ladylike
fashion.

‘I don’t think she’s seen it!’

Ridcully rolled up his sleeve. ‘I think a round of fireballs,
gentlemen,’ he said.

‘Hold on,’ said Ponder. ‘This may be an endangered species.’

‘So is Mrs Whitlow.’

‘But do we have the _right_ to wipe out what—’

‘Absolutely,’ said Ridcully. ‘If its creator had meant it to survive he
would have given it a fireproof skin. That’s your evolution for you,
Stibbons.’

‘But perhaps we ought to study it . . . ?’

The thing was beginning to get up speed now. It was amazing how fast it
could move, considering how big it was.

‘Er . . .’ said Ponder nervously.

Ridcully raised his arm.

The creature stopped, jerked into the air, and then went flat, like a
rubber ball that had been stepped on, and indeed when it sprang back
into shape it was with a noise akin to the sound made when a bad
conjuror is having trouble twisting the back legs on to the balloon
animal. Insofar as it had an expression at all, it looked more
astonished than hurt. Little flashes of lightning crackled around it. It
went flat again, rolled up into a cylinder, twisted into a range of
interesting but probably painful shapes, shrank to a ball the size of a
grapefruit and then, with a final and rather sad little noise that might
well have been spelled _prarp_, dropped back on to the sand.

‘Now _that_ was pretty good,’ said Ridcully. ‘Which of you fellows did
that?’

The wizards looked at one another.

‘Not us,’ said the Dean. ‘It was going to be fireballs all the way.’

Ridcully nudged Ponder. ‘Go on, then,’ he said. ‘Study it.’

‘Er . . .’ Ponder looked at the bewildered creature on the sand. ‘Er . .
. the subject appears to have turned into a large chicken.’

‘Good, well done,’ said Ridcully, as if to wrap things up. ‘Shame to
waste this fireball, then.’

He hurled it.

* * *

It was a road.

At least, it was a long flat piece of desert with wheel ruts in it.
Rincewind stared at it.

A road. Roads went somewhere. Sooner or later they went _everywhere_.
And when you got there, you generally found walls, buildings, harbours .
. . boats. And incidentally a shortage of talking kangaroos. That was
practically one of the hallmarks of civilization.

It wasn’t that he was _against_ anyone saving the world, or whatever
subset of it apparently wanted saving. He just felt that it didn’t need
saving by him.

Which way to go? He picked a direction at random and jogged along for a
while, as the sun came up.

After a while there was a cloud of dust in the dawn, coming closer.
Rincewind stood hopefully by the track.

What eventually appeared at the inverted apex of the cloud was a cart,
pulled by a string of horses. The horses were black. So was the cart.
And it didn’t seem to be slowing down.

Rincewind waved his hat in the air, just as the horses came past.

After a while the dust settled. He got back on to his feet and walked
unsteadily through the bushes until he found the cart where it had come
to rest. The horses watched him warily.

It wasn’t a huge cart to be pulled by eight horses, but both they and
the cart were covered with so much wood, leather and metal they probably
didn’t have much energy to spare. Spikes and studs covered every
surface.

The reins led not to the usual seat, but into holes in the front of the
cart itself. This was roofed over with more wood and ironmongery – bits
of old stove, hammered-out body armour, saucepan lids, and tin cans that
had been stamped flat and nailed on.

Above the slot where the reins went in was something like a piece of
bent stovepipe, poking through the cart’s roof. It had a watchful look.

‘Er . . . hello?’ said Rincewind. ‘Sorry if I scared your horses . . .’

In the absence of any reply he climbed up an armoured wheel and looked
at the top of the cart. There was a round lid that had been pushed open.

Rincewind didn’t even consider looking inside. That’d mean his head
would be outlined against the sky, a sure way of getting your body
outlined against the dirt.

A twig cracked behind him.

He sighed, and got down slowly, taking great care not to turn around.

‘I surrender totally,’ he said, raising his hands.

‘That’s right,’ said a level voice. ‘This is a crossbow, mate. Let’s
have a look at your ugly mug.’

Rincewind turned. There was no one behind him.

Then he looked down.

The crossbow was almost vertical. If it were fired, the bolt would go
right up his nose.

‘A dwarf?’ he said.

‘You’ve got something against dwarfs?’

‘Who, me? No! Some of my best friends would be dwarfs. If I had any
friends, I mean. Er. I’m Rincewind.’

‘Yeah? Well, I’m short-tempered,’ said the dwarf. ‘Most people call me
Mad.’

‘Just “Mad”? That’s an . . . unusual name.’

‘It ain’t a name.’

Rincewind stared. There was no doubt that his captor _was_ a dwarf. He
didn’t have the traditional beard or iron helmet, but there were other
little ways that you could tell. There was the chin that you could break
coconuts on, the fixed expression of ferocity, and the certain
bullet-headedness that meant its owner could go through walls face
first. And, of course, if all else failed, the fact that the top of it
was about level with Rincewind’s stomach was a clue. Mad wore a leather
suit but, like the cart, it had metal riveted on to it wherever
possible. Where there weren’t rivets there was weaponry.

The word ‘friend’ jumped into the forefront of Rincewind’s brain. There
are many reasons for being friends with someone. The fact that he’s
pointing a deadly weapon at you is among the top four.

‘Good description,’ said Rincewind. ‘Easy to remember.’

The dwarf cocked his head on one side and listened.

‘Blast, they’re catching me up.’ He looked back up at Rincewind and
said, ‘Can you fire a crossbow?’ in a way that indicated that answering
‘no’ was a good way to contract immediate sinus trouble.

‘Absolutely,’ said Rincewind.

‘Get on the cart, then. Y’know, I’ve been travellin’ this road for years
and this is the first time anyone’s ever dared to hitch a lift?’

‘Amazing,’ said Rincewind.

There was not much room under the hatch, and most of it was taken up by
more weapons. Mad pushed Rincewind aside, grasped the reins, peered into
the periscope stovepipe and urged the horses into motion.

Bushes scraped against the wheels and the horses dragged back on to the
track and began to get up speed.

‘Beaut, aren’t they?’ said Mad. ‘They can outrun anything, even with the
armour.’

‘This is certainly a very . . . _original_ cart,’ said Rincewind.

‘Got a few modifications of my own,’ said Mad. He grinned evilly. ‘You a
wizard, mister?’

‘Broadly speaking, yes.’

‘Any good?’ Mad was loading another crossbow.

Rincewind hesitated. ‘No,’ he said.

‘Lucky for you,’ said Mad. ‘I’d have killed you if you were. Can’t stand
wizards. Bunch of wowsers, right?’

He grasped the handles of the bent stovepipe and swivelled it around.

‘Here they come,’ he muttered.

Rincewind peered over the top of Mad’s head. There was a piece of mirror
in the bend of the pipe. It showed the road behind, and half a dozen
dots under another cloud of red dust.

‘Road gang,’ said Mad. ‘After my cargo. Steal anything, they will. All
bastards are bastards, but some bastards is _bastards_.’ He pulled a
handful of nosebags from under the seat. ‘Right, you get up on top with
a couple of crossbows, and I’ll fix the supercharger.’

‘What? You want me to start _shooting_ at people?’

‘You want _me_ to start shooting at people?’ said Mad, pushing him up
the ladder.

Rincewind crawled out on to the top of the cart. It was swaying and
bouncing. Red dust choked him and the wind tried to blow his robe over
his head.

He hated weapons, and not just because they’d so often been aimed at
him. You got into _more_ trouble if you had a weapon. People shot you
instantly if they thought you were going to shoot them. But if you were
unarmed, they often stopped to talk. Admittedly, they tended to say
things like, ‘You’ll _never_ guess what we’re going to _do_ to you,
pal,’ but that took _time_. And Rincewind could do a lot with a few
seconds. He could use them to live longer in.

The dots in the distance were other carts, designed for speed rather
than cargo. Some had four wheels, some had two. One had . . . just one,
a huge one between narrow shafts, with a tiny saddle on top. The rider
looked as though he’d bought his clothes in the scrapmetal yards of
three continents and, where they wouldn’t fit, had strapped on a
chicken.

But not one as big as the chicken pulling his wheel. It was bigger than
Rincewind and most of what wasn’t leg was neck. It was covering the
ground as fast as a horse.

‘What the hell’s _that_?’ he yelled.

‘Emu!’ shouted Mad, who was now hanging among the harnesses. ‘Try and
pick it off, they’re a good feed!’

The cart jolted. Rincewind’s hat whirled away into the dust.

‘Now I’ve lost my hat!’

‘Good! Bloody awful hat!’

An arrow twanged off a metal plate by Rincewind’s foot.

‘And they’re _shooting_ at me!’

A cart rattled out of the dust. The man beside the driver whirled
something around his head. A grapnel bit into the woodwork by
Rincewind’s other foot and ripped off a metal plate.

‘And they’re—’ he began.

‘You’ve got a bow, right?’ yelled Mad, who was balancing on the back of
one of the horses. ‘And find something to hold onta, they’re gonna go at
any minute—’

The cart had been moving at the gallop, but now it suddenly shot forward
and almost jolted Rincewind right off. Smoke poured out of the axles.
The landscape blurred.

‘What the hell is that?’

‘Supercharger!’ shouted Mad, pulling himself on to the cart inches from
the frantically pounding hooves. ‘Secret recipe! Now hold ’em off,
right, ’cos someone’s gotta steer!’

The emu emerged from the dust cloud with a few of the faster carts
rattling behind it. An arrow buried itself in the cart right between
Rincewind’s legs.

He flung himself flat on the swaying roof, held out the crossbow, shut
his eyes and fired.

In accordance with ancient narrative practice, the shot ricocheted off
someone’s helmet and brought down an innocent bird some distance away,
whose only role was to expire with a suitably humorous squawk.

The man driving the emu drew alongside. From under a familiar hat with
‘Wizzard’ dimly visible in the grime he gave Rincewind a grin. Every
tooth had been sharpened to a point, and the front six had ‘Mother’
engraved on them.

‘G’day!’ he shouted cheerfully. ‘Hand over your cargo and I promise you
that you won’t be killed all in one go.’

‘That’s my hat! Give me back my hat!’

‘You’re a wizard, are you?’ The man stood up on the saddle, balancing
easily as the wheel bounced over the sand. He waved his hands over his
head.

‘Look at me, mates! I’m a bloody wizard! Magic, magic, magic!’

A very heavy arrow, trailing a rope, smashed into the back of the cart
and stuck fast. There was a cheer from the riders.

‘You give me back my hat or there’ll be trouble!’

‘Oh, there’s gonna be trouble _anyway_,’ said the rider, aiming his
crossbow. ‘Tell you what, why not turn me into somethin’ _bad_? Oh, I’m
all afrai—’

His face went green. He pitched backwards. The crossbow bolt hit the
driver of the cart beside him, which veered wildly into the path of
another, which swerved and crashed into a camel. That meant the carts
behind were suddenly faced with a pile-up which, together with the
absence of brakes on any vehicle, immediately got bigger. Part of it was
kicking people as well.

Rincewind, hands over his head, watched until the last wheel had rolled
away, and then walked unsteadily along the swaying cart to where Mad was
leaning on the reins.

‘Er, I think you can slow down now, Mr Mad,’ he ventured.

‘Yeah? Killed ’em all, didja?’

‘Er . . . not all of them. Some of them just ran away.’

‘You kiddin’ me?’ The dwarf looked round. ‘Stone me, you ain’t! Here,
pull that lever as hard as you can!’

He waved at a long metal rod beside Rincewind, who tugged it obediently.
Metal screamed as the brakes locked against the wheels.

‘Why’re they going so fast?’

‘It’s a mixture of oats and lizard glands!’ shouted Mad, against the
red-hot squealing. ‘Gives ’em a big jolt!’

The cart had to circle for a few minutes until the adrenalin wore off,
and then they went back along the track to look at the wreckage.

Mad swore again. ‘What _happened_?’

‘He shouldn’t’ve stolen my hat,’ Rincewind mumbled.

The dwarf jumped down and kicked a broken cartwheel.

‘You did this to people because they stole your _hat_? What do you do if
they spit in your eye, blow up the country?’

‘’s my hat,’ said Rincewind sullenly. He wasn’t at all sure what _had_
happened. He wasn’t any good at magic, that he knew. The only curses of
his that stood a chance of working were on the lines of ‘May you get
rained on at some time in your life,’ and ‘May you lose some small item
despite the fact that you put it there only a moment ago.’ Going pale
green . . . he looked down . . . oh, yes, and slightly yellow in
blotches, now . . . was not the usual effect.

Mad wandered purposefully among the wreckage. He picked up a few weapons
and tossed them aside.

‘Want the camel?’ he said. The creature was standing a little way off,
eyeing him suspiciously. It looked quite unscathed, having been the
cause of considerable scathe in other people.

‘I’d really rather stick my foot in a bacon slicer,’ said Rincewind.

‘Sure? Well, hitch it onta the cart, it’ll fetch a good price in
Dijabringabeeralong,’ said Mad. He looked at a home-made repeating
crossbow, grunted and tossed it aside. Then he looked at another cart
and his face brightened.

‘Ah! _Now_ we’re cooking with charcoal!’ he said. ‘It’s our lucky day,
mate!’

‘Oh. A bag of hay,’ said Rincewind.

‘Give us a hand to get it on the wagon, willya?’ said Mad, unbolting the
rear of his own cart.

‘What’s so special about hay?’

The cart opened. It was full of hay.

‘Life or death out here, mate. There’s people’d slit yew from here to
breakfast for a bale of hay. Man without hay is a man without a horse,
and out here a man without a horse is a corpse.’

‘Sorry? I went through all that for a load of _hay_?’

Mad waggled his eyebrows conspiratorially. ‘_And_ two sacks of oats in
the secret compartment, mate.’ He slapped Rincewind on the back. ‘An’ to
think I thought yew was some back-stabbin’ drongo I ort to toss over the
rail! Turns out you’re as mad as me!’

There are times when it does not pay to declare one’s sanity, and
Rincewind realized that he’d be mad to do so now. Anyway, he could talk
to kangaroos and find cheese and chutney rolls in the desert. There were
times when you had to look wobbly facts in the face.

‘Mental as anything,’ he said, with what he hoped was disarming modesty.

‘Good bloke! Let’s load up their weapons and grub and get goin’!’

‘What do we want their weapons for?’

‘Fetch a good price.’

‘And what about the bodies?’

‘Nah, worthless.’

While Mad was nailing salvaged bits of scrap metal to his cart,
Rincewind sidled over to the green and yellow corpse . . . and, oh yes,
large black areas now . . . and, using a stick, levered his hat from its
head.

A small eight-legged ball of angry black fur sprang out and locked its
fangs on to the stick, which began to smoulder. He put it down very
carefully, grabbed the hat and ran.

Ponder sighed.

‘I _wasn’t_ questioning your authority, Archchancellor,’ he said. ‘I
just feel that if a huge monster evolves into a chicken right in front
of you, the considered response should not be to eat the chicken.’

The Archchancellor licked his fingers. ‘What would you have done, then?’
he said.

‘Well . . . studied it,’ said Ponder.

‘So did we. Post-mortem examination,’ said the Dean.

‘Minutely,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, happily. He belched.
‘Pardon _me_, Mrs Whitlow. Will you have a little more br . . .’ He
caught Ridcully’s steely glance, and went on, ‘. . . front part of the
chicken, Mrs Whitlow?’

‘And we’ve discovered that it’ll no longer be any menace to visiting
wizards,’ said Ridcully.

‘It’s just that I think proper research should involve more than having
a look to see if you can find a sage-and-onion bush,’ said Ponder. ‘You
saw how quickly it changed, didn’t you?’

‘Well?’ said the Dean.

‘That can’t be natural.’

‘_You’re_ the one who says things naturally change into other things,
Mister Stibbons.’

‘But not _that_ fast!’

‘Have you ever _seen_ any of this evolution happening?’

‘Well, of course not, no one has ever—’

‘There you are, then,’ said Ridcully, in a closing-the-argument voice.
‘That might be the normal speed. As I said, it makes perfect sense.
There’s no point in turning into a bird a bit at a time, is there? A
feather here, a beak there . . . You’d see some damn stupid creatures
wandering around, eh?’ The other wizards laughed. ‘Our monster probably
simply thought, Oh, there’s too many of them, perhaps I’d better turn
into something they’d like.’

‘Enjoy,’ said the Dean.

‘Sensible survival strategy,’ said Ridcully. ‘Up to a point.’

Ponder rolled his eyes. These things always sounded fine when he worked
them out in his head. He’d read some of the old books, and sit and think
for _ages_, and a little theory would put itself together in his head in
a row of little shiny blocks, and then when he let it out it’d run
straight into the Faculty and one of them, one of them, would always ask
some bloody _stupid_ question which he couldn’t quite answer at the
moment. How could you ever make any progress against minds like that? If
some god somewhere had said, ‘Let there be light,’ they’d be the ones to
say things like ‘Why? The darkness has always been good enough for
_us_.’

Old men, that was the trouble. Ponder was not totally enthusiastic about
the old traditions, because he was well into his twenties and in a
moderately important position and therefore, to some of the mere
striplings in the University, a target. Or would have been, if they
weren’t getting that boiled eyeball feeling by sitting up all night
tinkering with Hex.

He wasn’t interested in promotion, anyway. He’d just be happy if people
_listened_ for five minutes, instead of saying, ‘Well done, Mister
Stibbons, but we tried that once and it doesn’t work,’ or, ‘We probably
haven’t got the funding,’ or, worst of all, ‘You don’t get proper
fill-in-nouns these days – remember old “nickname”
ancient-wizard-who-died-fifty-years-ago-who-Ponder-wouldn’t-possibly-be-able-to-remember?
Now _there_ was a chap who knew his fill-in-nouns.’

Above Ponder, he felt, were a lot of dead men’s shoes. And they had
living men’s feet in them, and were stamping down hard.

They never bothered to learn anything, they never bothered to remember
anything apart from how much better things used to be, they bickered
like a lot of children and the only one who ever said anything sensible
said it in orang-utan.

He prodded the fire viciously.

The wizards had made Mrs Whitlow a polite rude hut out of branches and
big woven leaves. She bade them goodnight and demurely pulled some
leaves across the entrance behind her.

‘A very respectable lady, Mrs Whitlow,’ said Ridcully. ‘I think I’ll
turn in myself, too.’

There were already one or two sets of snores building up around the
fire.

‘I think someone ought to stand guard,’ said Ponder.

‘Good man,’ muttered Ridcully, turning over.

Ponder gritted his teeth and turned to the Librarian, who was
temporarily back in the land of the bipedal and was sitting gloomily
wrapped in a blanket.

‘At least I expect this is a home from home for you, eh, sir?’

The Librarian shook his head.

‘Would _you_ be interested in hearing what else is odd about this
place?’ said Ponder.

‘Ook?’

‘The driftwood. No one listens to me, but it’s _important_. We must have
dragged loads of stuff for the fire, and it’s all natural timber, do you
notice that? No bits of plank, no old crates, no tatty old sandals. Just
. . . ordinary wood.’

‘Ook?’

‘That means we must be a long way off the normal shipping . . . oh, no .
. . don’t . . .’

The Librarian wrinkled his nose desperately.

‘Quickly! Concentrate on having arms and legs! I mean living ones!’

The Librarian nodded miserably, and sneezed.

‘Awk?’ he said, when his shape had settled down again.

‘Well,’ said Ponder sadly. ‘At least you’re animate. Possibly rather
large for a penguin, though. I _think_ it’s your body’s survival
strategy. It keeps trying to find a stable shape that works.’

‘Awk?’

‘Funny it can’t seem to do anything about the red hair . . .’

The Librarian glared at him, shuffled a little way along the beach, and
sagged into a heap.

Ponder looked around the fire. _He_ seemed to be the man on watch, if
only because no one else intended to do it. Well, wasn’t that a
surprise.

Things twittered in the trees. Phosphorescence glimmered on the sea. The
stars were coming out.

He looked up at the stars. At least you could depend—

And, suddenly, he saw what _else_ was wrong.

‘Archchancellor!’

So how long have you been mad? No, not a good start, really . . . It was
quite hard to know how to open the conversation.

‘So . . . I didn’t expect dwarfs here,’ Rincewind said.

‘Oh, the family blew in from NoThingfjord when I was a kid,’ said Mad.
‘Meant to go down the coast a bit, storm got up, next thing we’re
shipwrecked and up to our knees in parrots. Best thing that could’ve
happened. Back there I’d be down some freezing cold mine picking bits of
rock out of the walls but, over here, a dwarf can stand tall.’

‘Really,’ said Rincewind, his face carefully blank.

‘But not too bloody tall!’ Mad went on.

‘Certainly not.’

‘So we settled down, and now my dad’s got a chain of bakeries in
Bugarup.’

‘Dwarf bread?’ said Rincewind.

‘Too right! That’s what kept us going across thousands of miles of
shark-infested ocean,’ said Mad. ‘If we hadn’t had that sack of dwarf
bread we’d—’

‘—never have been able to club the sharks to death?’ said Rincewind.

‘Ah, you’re a man who knows your breads.’

‘Big place, Bugarup? Has it got a harbour?’

‘People say so. Never been back there. I like the outdoor life.’

The ground trembled. The trees by the track shook, even though there was
no wind.

‘Sounds like a storm,’ said Rincewind.

‘What’s one of them?’

‘You know,’ said Rincewind. ‘Rain.’

‘Aw, strain the flaming cows, you don’t believe all _that_ stuff, do
you? My granddad used to go on about that when he’d been at the beer.
It’s just an old story. Water falling out of the sky? Do me a favour!’

‘It never does that here?’

‘Course not!’

‘Happens quite a lot where I come from,’ said Rincewind.

‘Yeah? How’s it get up into the sky, then? Water’s heavy.’

‘Oh, it . . . it . . . I think the sun sucks it up. Or something.’

‘How?’

‘I don’t know. It just happens.’

‘And then it drops out of the sky?’

‘Yes!’

‘For free?’

‘Haven’t you ever _seen_ rain?’

‘Look, _everyone_ knows all the water’s deep underground. That’s only
sense. It’s heavy stuff, it leaks down. I never seen it floating around
in the air, mate.’

‘Well, how do you think it got on the ground in the first place?’

Mad looked astonished. ‘How do mountains get on the ground?’ he said.

‘What? They’re just there!’

‘Oh, so _they_ don’t drop out of the sky?’

‘Of course not! They’re much heavier than air!’

‘And water isn’t? I’ve got a coupla drums of it under the cart and you’d
sweat to lift ’em.’

‘Aren’t there any rivers here?’

‘_Course_ we’ve got rivers! This country’s got everything, mate!’

‘Well, how do you think the water gets into them?’

Mad looked genuinely puzzled. ‘What’d we want water in the rivers for?
What’d it do?’

‘Flow out to sea—’

‘Bloody waste! That’s what you let it do where you come from, is it?’

‘You don’t _let_ it, it . . . happens . . . it’s what rivers do!’

Mad gave Rincewind a long hard look. ‘Yep. And they call _me_ mad,’ he
said.

Rincewind gave up. There wasn’t a cloud in the sky. But the ground shook
again.

* * *

Archchancellor Ridcully glared at the sky as if it was doing this to
upset him personally.

‘What, not _one_?’ he said.

‘Technically, not a single familiar constellation,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies frantically. ‘We’ve counted three thousand, one
hundred and ninety-one constellations that _could_ be called the
Triangle, for example, but the Dean says some of them don’t count
because they use the same stars—’

‘There’s not a single star _I_ recognize,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

Ridcully waved his hands in the air. ‘They change a _bit_ all the time,’
he said. ‘The Turtle swims through space and—’

‘Not this fast!’ said the Dean.

The dishevelled wizards looked up at the rapidly crowding night.

Discworld constellations changed frequently as the world moved through
the void, which meant that astrology was cutting-edge research rather
than, as elsewhere, a clever way of avoiding a proper job. It was
amazing how human traits and affairs could so reliably and continuously
be guided by a succession of big balls of plasma billions of miles away,
most of whom have never even heard of humanity.

‘We’re marooned on some other world!’ moaned the Senior Wrangler.

‘Er . . . I don’t think so,’ said Ponder.

‘You’ve got a better suggestion, I suppose?’

‘Er . . . you see that big patch of stars over there?’

The wizards looked at the large cluster twinkling near the horizon.

‘Very pretty,’ said Ridcully. ‘Well?’

‘I think it’s what _we_ call the Small Boring Group of Faint Stars. It’s
about the right shape,’ said Ponder. ‘And I know what you’re going to
say, sir, you’re going to say, “But they’re just a blob in the sky, not
a patch on the blobs we used to get,” sir, but, you see, that’s what
they might have looked like when Great A’Tuin was much closer to them,
thousands of years ago. In other words, sir,’ Ponder drew a deep breath,
in dread of everything that was to come, ‘I think we’ve travelled
backwards in time. For thousands of years.’

And that was the other side of the odd thing about wizards. While they
were quite capable of spending half an hour arguing that it could not
possibly be Tuesday, they’d take the outrageous in their pointy-shoed
stride. The Senior Wrangler even looked relieved.

‘Oh, is _that_ it?’ he said.

‘Bound to happen eventually,’ said the Dean. ‘It’s not written down
anywhere that these holes connect to the same time, after all.’

‘Going to make gettin’ back a bit tricky,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er . . .’ Ponder began. ‘It might not be so simple as that,
Archchancellor.’

‘You mean as simple as finding a way to move through time and space?’

‘I mean there might not be any _there_ to go back _to_,’ said Ponder. He
shut his eyes. This was going to be difficult, he _knew_ it.

‘Of course there is,’ said Ridcully. ‘We were there only this morn— Only
yesterday. That is to say, yesterday thousands of years in the future,
naturally.’

‘But if we’re not careful we might alter the future, you see,’ said
Ponder. ‘The mere presence of us in the past might alter the future. We
might _already_ have altered history. It’s vital that I tell you this.’

‘He’s got a point, Ridcully,’ said the Dean. ‘Was there any of that rum
left, by the way?’

‘Well, there isn’t any history happening here,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s
just an odd little island.’

‘I’m afraid tiny actions anywhere in the world may have huge
ramifications, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘We certainly don’t want any ramifications. Well, what’s your point?
What do you advise?’

It had been going so well. They almost seemed up to speed. This may have
been what caused Ponder to act like the man who, having so far fallen a
hundred feet without any harm, believes that the last few inches to the
ground will be a mere formality.

‘To use the classic metaphor, the important thing is not to kill your
own grandfather,’ he said, and smacked into the bedrock.

‘What the hell would I want to do that for?’ said Ridcully. ‘I quite
liked the old boy.’

‘No, of course, I mean accidentally,’ said Ponder. ‘But in any case—’

‘Really? Well, as you know, I accidentally kill people every day,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Anyway, I don’t see him around—’

‘It’s just an illustration, sir. The problem is cause and effect, and
the point is—’

‘The point, Mister Stibbons, is that you suddenly seem to think everyone
comes over all fratricidal when they go back in time. Now, if I’d met
_my_ grandfather I’d buy him a drink and tell him not to assume that
snakes won’t bite if you shout at them in a loud voice, information
which he might come to thank me for in later life.’

‘Why?’ said Ponder.

‘Because he would _have_ some later life,’ said Ridcully.

‘No, sir, no! That’d be worse than shooting him!’

‘It would?’

‘Yes, sir!’

‘I think there may be one or two steps in your logic that I have failed
to grasp, Mister Stibbons,’ said the Archchancellor coldly. ‘I suppose
you’re not intending to shoot your own grandfather, by any chance?’

‘Of course not!’ snapped Ponder. ‘I don’t even know what he looked like.
He died before I was born.’

‘Ah-_hah_!’

‘I didn’t mean—’

‘Look, we’re a lot further back in time than that,’ said the Dean.
‘Thousands of years, he says. No one’s grandfather is alive.’

‘That’s a lucky escape for Mister Stibbons senior, then,’ said Ridcully.

‘_No_, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Please! What I was trying to get across, sir,
is that _anything_ you do in the past changes the future. The tiniest
little actions can have huge consequences. You might . . . tread on an
ant now and it might entirely prevent someone from being born in the
future!’

‘Really?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir!’

Ridcully brightened up. ‘That’s not a bad wheeze. There’s one or two
people history could do without. Any idea how we can find the right
ants?’

‘No, sir!’ Ponder struggled to find a crack in his Archchancellor’s
brain into which could be inserted the crowbar of understanding, and for
a few vain seconds thought he had found one. ‘Because . . . the ant you
tread on might be your own, sir!’

‘You mean . . . I might tread on an ant and this’d affect history and I
wouldn’t be born?’

‘Yes! Yes! That’s _it_! That’s _right_, sir!’

‘How?’ Ridcully looked puzzled. ‘I’m not descended from ants.’

‘Because . . .’ Ponder felt the sea of mutual incomprehension rising
around him, but he refused to drown. ‘Well . . . er . . . well,
supposing it . . . bit a man’s horse, and he fell off, and he was
carrying a very important message, and because he didn’t get there in
time there was a terrible battle, and one of your ancestors got killed –
no, sorry, I mean didn’t get killed—’

‘How did this ant get across the sea?’ said Ridcully.

‘Clung to a piece of driftwood,’ said the Dean promptly. ‘It’s amazing
what can get even on to remote islands by clinging to driftwood.
Insects, lizards, even small mammals.’

‘And then got up the beach and all the way to this battle?’ said
Ridcully.

‘Bird’s leg,’ said the Dean. ‘Read it in a book. Even fish eggs get
transported from pond to pond on a bird’s leg.’

‘Pretty determined ant, then, really,’ said Ridcully, stroking his
beard. ‘Still, I must admit stranger things have happened.’

‘Practically every day,’ said the Senior Wrangler. Ponder beamed. They
had successfully negotiated an extended metaphor.

‘Only one thing I don’t understand, though,’ Ridcully added. ‘_Who’ll
tread on the ant?_’

‘What?’

‘Well, it’s obvious, isn’t it?’ said the Archchancellor. ‘If I tread on
this ant, then _I_ won’t exist. But if I don’t exist, then I can’t have
done it, so I won’t, so I will. See?’ He prodded Ponder with a large,
good-natured finger. ‘You’ve got some brains, Mister Stibbons, but
sometimes I wonder if you really try to apply logical thought to the
subject in hand. Things that happen stay happened. It stands to reason.
Oh, don’t look so downcast,’ he said, mistaking – possibly innocently –
Ponder’s expression of futile rage for shameful dismay. ‘If you get
stuck with any of this compl’cated stuff, my door’s always open.¹⁴ I
_am_ your Archchancellor, after all.’

‘Excuse me, _can_ we tread on ants or not?’ said the Senior Wrangler
peevishly.

‘If you like.’ Ridcully swelled with generosity. ‘Because, in fact,
history already _depends_ on your treading on any ants that you happen
to step on. Any ants you tread on, you’ve already trodden on, so if you
do it again it’ll be for the first time, because you’re doing it now
because you did it then. Which is also now.’

‘Really?’

‘Yes indeed.’

‘So we should have worn bigger boots?’ said the Bursar.

‘Try to keep up, Bursar.’

Ridcully stretched and yawned. ‘Well, that seems to be it,’ he said.
‘Let’s try to get back to sleep, shall we? It’s been rather a long day.’

Someone _was_ keeping up.

After the wizards got back to sleep, a faint light, like burning marsh
gas, circled over them.

He was an omnipresent god, although only in a small area. And he was
omnicognizant, but just enough to know that while he did indeed know
everything it wasn’t the _whole_ Everything, just the part of it that
applied to his island.

Damn! He’d _told_ himself the cigarette tree would cause trouble. He
should have stopped it the moment it started growing. He’d never meant
it to get out of _hand_ like this.

Of course, it had been a shame about the other . . . pointy creature,
but it hadn’t been _his_ fault, had it? Everything had to eat. Some of
the things that were turning up on the island were surprising even him.
And some of them never stayed stable for five minutes together.

Even so, he allowed himself a little smirk of pride. Two hours between
the one called the Dean dying for a smoke and the bush evolving, growing
and fruiting its first nicotine-laden crop. That was evolution in
_action_.

Trouble was, now they’d start poking around and asking questions.

The god, almost alone among gods, thought questions were a good thing.
He was in fact _committed_ to people questioning assumptions, throwing
aside old superstitions, breaking the shackles of irrational prejudice
and, in short, exercising the brains their god had given them, except of
course they hadn’t been given them by any god, lord knows, so what they
really ought to do was exercise those brains developed over millennia in
response to the external stimuli and the need to control those hands
with their opposable thumbs, another damn good idea that he was very
proud of. Or would have been, of course, if he existed.

However, there were limits. Freethinkers were fine people, but they
shouldn’t go around thinking just _anything_.

The light vanished and reappeared, still circling, in the sacred cave on
the mountain. Technically, he knew, it wasn’t in fact sacred, since you
needed believers to make a place sacred and this god didn’t actually
want believers.

Usually, a god with no believers was as powerful as a feather in a
hurricane, but for some reason he’d not been able to fathom he was able
to function quite happily without them. It may have been because he
believed so fervently in himself. Well, obviously not in _himself_,
because belief in gods was irrational. But he did believe in what he
did.

He considered, rather guiltily, making a few more thunder lizards in the
hope that they might eat the intruders before they got too nosey, but
then dismissed the thought as being unworthy of a modern,
forward-thinking deity.

There were racks and racks of seeds in this part of the cave. He
selected one from among the pumpkin family, and picked up his tools.

These were unique. Absolutely no one else in the world had a screwdriver
that small.

A green shoot speared up from the forest litter in response to the first
light of dawn, unfolded into two leaves, and went on growing.

Down among the rich compost of fallen leaves, white shoots writhed like
worms. This was no time for half-measures. Somewhere far down, a
questing tap root found water.

After a few minutes, the bushes around the by now large and moving plant
began to wilt.

The lead shoot dragged itself onwards, towards the sea. Tendrils just
behind the advancing stem wound around handy branches. Larger trees were
used as support, bushes were uprooted and tossed aside and a tap root
sprouted to take possession of the newly vacated hole.

The god hadn’t had much time for sophistication. The plant’s
instructions had been put together from bits and pieces lying around,
things he knew would work.

At last the first shoot crossed the beach and reached the sea. Roots
drove into the sand, leaves unfolded, and the plant sprouted one
solitary female flower. Small male ones had already opened along the
stem.

The god hadn’t programmed this bit. The whole problem with evolution,
he’d told himself, was that it wouldn’t obey orders. Sometimes, matter
thinks for itself.

A thin prehensile tendril bunched itself for a moment, then sprang up
and lassoed a passing moth. It curved back, dipped the terrified insect
waist deep in the pollen of a male flower, then coiled back with
whiplash speed and slam-dunked it into the embracing petals of the
female.

A few seconds later the flower dropped off and the small green ball
below it began to swell, just as the horizon began to blush with the
dawn. _Argo nauticae uniquo_ was ready to produce its first, and only,
fruit.

There was a huge windmill, squeaking around on top of a metal tower. A
sign attached to the tower read: ‘Dijabringabeeralong: Check your
Weapons.’

‘Yep, still got all mine, no worries,’ said Mad, urging the horses
forward.

They crossed a wooden bridge, although Rincewind couldn’t see why anyone
had bothered to build it. It seemed a lot of effort just to cross a
stretch of dry sand.

‘Sand?’ said Mad. ‘That’s the Lassitude River, that is!’

And, indeed, a small boat went past. It was being towed by a camel and
was making quite good time on its four wide wheels.

‘A boat,’ said Rincewind.

‘Never seen one before?’

‘Not one being pedalled, no,’ said Rincewind, as a tiny canoe went past.

‘They’d hoist the sail if the wind was right.’

‘But . . . this might sound a strange question . . . Why is it a boat
shape?’

‘It’s the shape boats are.’

‘Oh, right. I thought it’d be a _good_ reason like that. How did the
camels get here?’

‘They cling to driftwood, people say. The currents wash a lot of stuff
up, down on the coast.’

Dijabringabeeralong was coming into view. It was just as well there had
been the sign, otherwise they might have ridden through it without
noticing. The architecture was what is known professionally as
‘vernacular’, a word used in another field to mean ‘swearing’ and this
was quite appropriate. But then, Rincewind thought, it’s as hot as hell
and it never rains – all you need a house for is to mark some kind of
boundary between inside and outside.

‘You said this was a big town,’ he said.

‘It’s got a whole street. _And_ a pub.’

‘Oh, that’s a _street_, is it? And that logpile is a pub?’

‘You’ll like it. It’s run by Crocodile.’

‘Why do they call him Crocodile?’

A night sleeping on the sand hadn’t helped the Faculty very much. And
the Archchancellor didn’t help even more. He was an early-morning man
_as well_ as being, most unfairly, a late-night man. Sometimes he went
from one to the other without sleeping in between.

‘Wake up, you fellows! Who’s game for a brisk trot around the island?
There’ll be a small prize for the winner, eh?’

‘Oh, my gods,’ moaned the Dean, rolling over. ‘He’s doing press-ups.’

‘I certainly wouldn’t want anyone to think I’m advocating a return to
the bad old days,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, trying to
dislodge some sand from his ear, ‘but once upon a time we used to kill
wizards like him.’

‘Yes, but we also used to kill wizards like us, Chair,’ said the Dean.

‘Remember what we’d say in those days?’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘“Never trust a wizard over sixty-five”? Whatever happened?’

‘We got past the age of sixty-five, Senior Wrangler.’

‘Ah, yes. And it turned out that we were trustworthy after all.’

‘Good thing we found out in time, eh?’

‘There’s a crab climbing that tree,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
who was lying on his back and staring straight upwards. ‘An actual
crab.’

‘Yes,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘They’re called Tree-climbing Crabs.’

‘Why?’

‘I had this book when I was a little lad,’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies. ‘It was about this man who was shipwrecked on an island such as
this and he thought he was all alone and then one day he found a
footprint in the sand. There was a woodcut,’ he added.

‘One footprint?’ said the Dean, sitting up, clutching his head.

‘Well . . . yes, and when he saw it he knew that he—’

‘—was alone on an island with a crazed one-legged long-jump champion?’
said the Dean. He was feeling testy.

‘Well, _obviously_ he found some other footprints later on . . .’

‘I wish _I_ was on a desert island all alone,’ said the Senior Wrangler
gloomily, watching Ridcully running on the spot.

‘Is it just me,’ the Dean asked, ‘or are we marooned thousands of miles
and thousands of years from home?’

‘Yes.’

‘I thought so. Is there any breakfast?’

‘Stibbons found some soft-boiled eggs.’

‘What a useful young man he is,’ the Dean groaned. ‘Where did he find
them?’

‘On a tree.’

Bits of last night came back to the Dean.

‘A soft-boiled-egg tree?’

‘Yes,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Nicely runny. They’re quite good with
breadfruit soldiers.’

‘You’ll be telling me next he found a spoon tree . . .’

‘Of course not.’

‘Good.’

‘It’s a bush.’ The Senior Wrangler held up a small wooden spoon. It had
a few small leaves still attached to it.

‘A bush that fruits spoons . . .’

‘Young Stibbons said it makes perfect sense, Dean. After all, he said,
we’d picked them because they’re useful, and then spoons are always
getting lost. Then he burst into tears.’

‘He’s got a point, though. Honestly, this place is like Big Rock Candy
Mountain.’

‘I vote we leave it as soon as possible,’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies. ‘We’d better have a serious look at this boat idea today. I
don’t want to meet another of those horrible lizards.’

‘One of everything, remember?’

‘Then probably there’s a worse one.’

‘Building some sort of boat can’t be very hard,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘Even quite primitive people manage it.’

‘Now _look_,’ snapped the Dean, ‘we’ve searched _everywhere_ for a
decent library on this island. There simply isn’t one! It’s ridiculous.
How is anyone supposed to get anything done?’

‘I suppose . . . we could . . . _try_ things?’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘You know . . . see what floats, that sort of thing.’

‘Oh, well, if you want to be _crude_ about it . . .’

The Chair of Indefinite Studies looked at the Dean’s face and decided it
was time to lighten the atmosphere.

‘I was, aha, just wondering,’ he said, ‘as a little mental exercise . .
. if you were marooned on a desert island, eh, Dean . . . what kind of
music would you like to listen to, eh?’

The Dean’s face clouded further. ‘I think, Chair, that I would like to
listen to the music in the Ankh-Morpork Opera House.’

‘Ah. Oh? Yes. Well . . . very . . . very . . . very direct thinking
there, Dean.’

Rincewind grinned glassily. ‘So . . . you’re a crocodile, then.’

‘Thif worrying you?’ said the barman.

‘No! No! Don’t they call you anything else, though?’

‘Well . . . there’f a nickname they gave me . . .’

‘Oh, yes?’

‘Yeah. Crocodile Crocodile. But in here moft people call me Dongo.’

‘And . . . er . . . this stuff? What do you call _this_?’

‘We call it beer,’ said the crocodile. ‘What do _you_ call it?’

The barman wore a grubby shirt and a pair of shorts, and until he’d seen
a pair of shorts tailored for someone with very short legs and a very
long tail Rincewind hadn’t realized what a difficult job tailoring must
be.

Rincewind held the beer glass up to the light. And that was the point.
You could see light all the way through it. _Clear_ beer. Ankh-Morpork
beer was technically ale, that is to say, gravy made from hops. It had
texture. It had flavour, even if you didn’t always want to know what of.
It had body. It had dregs. You could eat the last half-inch of it with a
spoon.

This stuff was thin and sparkly and looked as though someone had already
drunk it. Tasted all right, though. Didn’t sit on your stomach the way
the beer at home did. Weak stuff, of course, but it never did to insult
someone else’s beer.

‘Pretty good,’ he said.

‘Where’d you blow in from?’

‘Er . . . I floated here on a piece of driftwood.’

‘Was there room with all the camels?’

‘Er . . . yes.’

‘Good on yer.’

Rincewind needed a map. Not a geographical map, although one of those
would be a help, but one that showed him where his head was at. You
didn’t usually get crocodiles serving behind a bar, but everyone else in
this cavern of a place seemed to think it was perfectly normal. Mind
you, the people in the bar included three sheep in overalls and a couple
of kangaroos playing darts.

And they weren’t _exactly_ sheep. They looked more like, well . . .
human sheep. Sticking-out ears, white curls, a definite sheepish look,
but standing upright, with hands. And he was pretty sure that there was
no way you could get a cross between a human and a sheep. If there was,
people would definitely have found out by now, especially in the more
isolated rural districts.

Something similar had happened with the kangaroos. There were the pointy
ears and they definitely had snouts, but now they were leaning on the
bar drinking this thin, strange beer. One of them was wearing a stained
vest with the legend ‘Wagga Hay – it’s the Rye Grass!’ just visible
under the dirt.

In short, Rincewind had the feeling he wasn’t looking at animals at all.
He took another sip of the beer.

He couldn’t raise the subject with Crocodile Dongo. There was a
philosophical wrongness about drawing a crocodile’s attention to the
fact that there were a couple of kangaroos in the bar.

‘Youse wanta nother beer?’ said Dongo.

‘Yeah, right,’ said Rincewind.

He looked at the sign on the beer pump. It was a picture of a grinning
kangaroo. The label said: Roo Beer.

He raised his eyes to a torn poster on the wall. It also advertised Roo
Beer. There was the same kangaroo, holding a pint of said beer and
wearing the same knowing grin.

It looked familiar, for some reason.

‘I can’t help nossisting . . .’ He tried again. ‘I can’t help
_noticing_’, he said, ‘that some people in this barrardifferentshap from
other p’ple.’

‘Well, old Hollowlog Joe over there’f put on a bit of weight lately,’
said Dongo, polishing a glass.

Rincewind looked down at his legs. ‘Whose legsare dese?’

‘You okay, mifter?’

‘Prob’ly been bitten by so’thing,’ said Rincewind. A sudden urgent need
gripped him.

‘It’f out the back,’ said Dongo.

‘Out back in the outback,’ said Rincewind, staggering forward.
‘Hahahaha—’

He walked into an iron pillar, which picked him up in a fist and held
him at arm’s length. He looked along the arm to a large angry face and
an expression that said a lot of beer was looking for a fight and the
rest of the body was happy to go along with it.

Rincewind was muzzily aware that in his case a lot of beer wanted to run
away. And at a time like this, it’s always the beer talking.

‘I bin _lisnin_’ to you. Where’re you from, mister?’ said the giant’s
beer.

‘Ankh-M’pork . . .’ At a time like this, why lie?

The bar went quiet.

‘An’ you’re gonna come here and make a lot of cracks about us all
drinkin’ beer and fightin’ and talkin’ funny, right?’

Some of Rincewind’s beer said, ‘No worries.’

His captor pulled him so they were face to face. Rincewind had never
seen such a huge nose.

‘An’ I expect you don’t even know that we happen to produce some
partic’ly fine wines, our Chardonnays bein’ ’specially worthy of
attention and compet’tively priced, not to mention the rich, firmly
structur’d Rusted Dunny Valley Semillons, which are a tangily refreshin’
discovery for the connesewer . . . _yew bastard?_’

‘Jolly good, I’ll have a pint of Chardonnay, please.’

‘You takin’ the piss?’

‘No, I’d like to leave it here—’

‘How about you putting my mate down?’ said a voice.

Mad was in the doorway. There was a general scuffle to get out of the
way.

‘Oh, you looking for a fight too, stubby?’ Rincewind was dropped as the
huge creature turned to face the dwarf, fists clenching.

‘I don’t look for them. I just walk into pubs and there they are,’ said
Mad, pulling out a knife. ‘Now, you going to leave him alone, Wally?’

‘You call _that_ a knife?’ The giant unsheathed one that’d be called a
sword if it had been held in a normal-sized hand. ‘_This_ is what _I_
call a knife!’

Mad looked at it. Then he reached his hand around behind his back, and
it came back holding something.

‘Really? No worries. _This_’, he said, ‘is what I call a crossbow.’

‘It’s a log,’ said Ridcully, inspecting the boat-building committee’s
work to date.

‘Rather more than a log—’ the Dean began.

‘Oh, you’ve made a mast and tied the Bursar’s bathrobe to it, I can see
that. It’s a log, Dean. There’s roots on one end and bits of branch at
the other. You haven’t even hollowed it out. It’s a log.’

‘It took us all _hours_,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘And it _does_ float,’ the Dean pointed out.

‘I think the term is more like wallows,’ said Ridcully. ‘And we’d all
get on it, would we?’

‘This is the one-man version,’ said the Dean. ‘We thought we’d test it
out and then try it with a lot of them together . . .’

‘Like a raft, you mean?’

‘I suppose so,’ said the Dean, with considerable reluctance. He would
have preferred a more dynamic name for it. ‘Obviously these things take
time.’

The Archchancellor nodded. He was impressed, in a strange way. The
wizards had succeeded in recapitulating, in a mere day, a technological
development that had probably taken mankind several hundred years. They
might be up to coracles by Tuesday.

‘Which of you is going to test it?’ he said.

‘We thought perhaps the Bursar could assist at this point in the
development programme.’

‘Volunteered, has he?’

‘We’re sure he will.’

In fact the Bursar was some distance away, wandering aimlessly but
happily through the beetle-filled jungle.

The Bursar was, as he would probably be the first to admit, not the most
mentally stable of people. He would probably be the first to admit that
he was a tea-strainer.

But he was, as it were, only insane on the outside. He’d never been very
interested in magic as a boy, but he had been good at numbers, and even
somewhere like Unseen University needed someone who could add up. And he
had indeed survived many otherwise exciting years by locking himself in
a room somewhere and conscientiously adding up, while some very serious
division and subtraction was going on outside.

Those were still the days when magical assassination was still a
preferred and legal route to high office, but he’d been quite safe
because no one had wanted to be a bursar.

Then Mustrum Ridcully had been appointed, and he’d put a stop to the
whole business by being unkillable and had been, in his own strange way,
a modernizer. And the senior wizards had gone along with him because he
tended to shout at them if they didn’t and it was, after some
exhilarating times in the University’s history, something of a relief to
enjoy your dinner without having to watch someone else eat a bit of it
first or having to check your shape the moment you got out of bed.

But it was hell for the Bursar. Everything about Mustrum Ridcully rasped
across his nerves. If people were food, the Bursar would have been one
of life’s lightly poached eggs, but Mustrum Ridcully was a rich suet
pudding with garlic gravy. He spoke as loudly as most people shouted. He
stamped instead of walking. He roared around the place, and lost
important bits of paper which he then denied he’d ever seen, and shot
his crossbow at the wall when he was bored. He was aggressively
cheerful. Never sick himself, he tended to the belief that sickness in
other people was caused by sloppy thinking. And he had no sense of
humour. And he told jokes.

It was odd that this affected the Bursar so much, since he did not have
a sense of humour either. He was proud of it. He was not the kind of man
to laugh. But he did know, in a mechanical sort of way, how jokes were
supposed to go. Ridcully told jokes like a bullfrog did accountancy.
They never added up.

So the Bursar found it much more satisfying to live inside his own head,
where he didn’t have to listen and where there were clouds and flowers.
Even so, something must have filtered in from the world outside, because
occasionally he’d jump up and down on an ant, just in case he was
supposed to. Part of him rather hoped that one of the ants was, in some
unimaginably distant way, related to Mustrum Ridcully.

It was while he was thus engaged in changing the future that he noticed
what looked like a very thick green hosepipe on the ground.

‘Hmm?’

It was slightly transparent and seemed to be pulsating rhythmically.
When he put his ear to it he heard a sound like _gloop_.

Mildly deranged though he was, the Bursar had the true wizard’s instinct
to amble aimlessly into dangerous places, so he followed the throbbing
stem.

Rincewind awoke, because sleep was so hard with someone kicking him in
the ribs.

‘Wzt?’

‘You want I should pour a bucket of water on yez?’

Rincewind recognized the chatty tones. His eyes unglued. ‘Oh, not you!
You’re a figment of my imagination!’

‘I should kick you in the ribs again, then?’ said Scrappy.

Rincewind pulled himself upright. It was dawn, and he was lying in some
bushes out behind the pub.

Memory played its silent movie across the tattered sheets of his
eyelids.

‘There was a fight . . . Mad shot that . . . that . . . shot him with a
_crossbow_!’

‘Only through the foot so’s he’d stand still to be hit. Wombats can’t
hold their drink, that’s their trouble.’

More recollections flickered across the smoky darkness of Rincewind’s
brain. ‘That’s right, there were _animals_ drinking in there!’

‘Yes and no,’ said the kangaroo. ‘I _tried_ to explain . . .’

‘I’m all ears,’ said Rincewind. His eyes glazed for a moment. ‘No, I’m
not, I’m all bladder. Back in a minute.’

The buzz of flies and a sort of universal smell drew Rincewind into a
nearby hut. Some people would have liked to think of it as ‘the
bathroom’, although not after going inside.

He came out again, hopping up and down urgently. ‘Er . . . there’s a
great big spider on the toilet seat . . .’

‘What’re you gonna do, wait till it’s finished? Fan it with yer hat!’

It was odd, Rincewind thought as he shooed the spider out, that a human
being would, er, use the bathroom behind a bush in the middle of a
thousand miles of howling wilderness but would fight for a dunny if
there was one available.

‘And stay out,’ he muttered, when he was confident the spider was out of
earshot.

But the human brain often feels incapable of concentrating on the job in
hand, and Rincewind found his gaze wandering. And here, as in private
places everywhere, men had found the urge to draw on the walls.

Perhaps it was the way the light hit the ancient woodwork, but under the
usual minutiae from people who needed people, and drawings done from
overheated hope rather than memory, was a deeply scored drawing of men
in pointy hats.

He sidled out thoughtfully and edged away through the bushes.

‘No worries,’ said the kangaroo, so close to his ear that Rincewind was
quite pleased that he’d already relieved himself.

‘I don’t believe it!’

‘You’ll see them everywhere. They’re built in. They find their way into
people’s thoughts. You can’t outrun your destiny, mate.’

Rincewind didn’t even bother to argue.

‘You’re going to have to sort this out,’ said Scrappy. ‘You’re the
cause.’

‘I’m not! Things happen to _me_, not the other way around!’

‘I could disembowel you with a kick, you know. Would you like to see?’

‘Er . . . no.’

‘Haven’t you noticed that by running away you end up in more trouble?’

‘Yes, but, you see, you can run away from _that_, too,’ said Rincewind.
‘That’s the beauty of the system. Dead is only for once, but running
away is for ever.’

‘Ah, but it is said that a coward dies a thousand deaths, while a hero
dies only one.’

‘Yes, but it’s the _important_ one.’

‘Aren’t you ashamed?’

‘No. I’m going home. I’m going to find this city called Bugarup, find a
boat, and go home.’

‘Bugarup?’

‘Don’t tell me the place doesn’t exist.’

‘Oh, no. It’s a big place. And that’s where you’re going?’

‘And don’t try to stop me!’

‘I can see you’ve made up your mind,’ said Scrappy.

‘Read my lips!’

‘Your moustache is in the way.’

‘Read my beard, then!’

The kangaroo shrugged. ‘In that case, I’ve got no choice but to carry on
helping you, I suppose.’

Rincewind drew himself up. ‘I’ll find my own way,’ he said.

‘You don’t _know_ the way.’

‘I’ll ask someone!’

‘What about food? You’ll starve.’

‘Ahah, that’s where you’re wrong!’ Rincewind snapped. ‘I’ve got this
amazing power. Watch!’

He lifted up a nearby stone, extracted what was underneath, and
flourished it.

‘See? Impressed, eh?’

‘Very.’

‘Ahah!’

Scrappy nodded. ‘I’ve never seen anyone do that with a scorpion before.’

The god was sitting high up in a tree working on a particularly
promising beetle when the Bursar ambled past far below.

Well, at _last_. One of them had found it!

The god had spent some time watching the wizards’ attempts at
boat-building, although he had been unable to fathom out what it was
they were trying to do. As far as he could tell, they were showing some
interest in the fact that wood floated. Well, it did float, didn’t it?

He threw the beetle into the air. It hummed into life at the top of the
arc and flew away, a smear of iridescence among the treetops.

The god drifted out of his tree and followed the Bursar.

The god hadn’t made up his mind about these creatures yet, but the
island was, unfortunately and against all his careful planning, throwing
up all sorts of odd things. These were obviously social creatures, with
some of the individuals designed for specific tasks. The hairy red one
was designed for climbing trees, and the dreamy ant-stamping one for
walking into them. Possibly the reasons for this would become apparent.

‘Ah, Bursar!’ said the Dean heartily. ‘How would you like a brief trip
around the lagoon?’

The Bursar looked at the soaking log and sought for words. Sometimes,
when he really needed to, it was possible to get Mr Brain and Mr Mouth
all lined up together.

‘I had a boat once,’ he said.

‘Well done! And here’s another one, just for—’

‘It was green.’

‘Really? Well, we can—’

‘I’ve found another green boat,’ said the Bursar. ‘It’s floating in the
water.’

‘Yes, yes, I’m sure you have,’ said Ridcully kindly. ‘A big boat with
lots of sails, I expect. Now then, Dean—’

‘Just one sail,’ said the Bursar. ‘And a bare naked lady on the front.’

Hovering immanently, the god cursed. He’d never _intended_ the
figurehead. Sometimes, he really wanted to just break down and cry.

‘Bare naked lady?’ said the Dean.

‘Settle down, Dean,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘He’s probably just had
too many dried frog pills.’

‘It’s going up and down in the water,’ said the Bursar. ‘Up and down, up
and down.’

The Dean looked at their own creation. Contrary to all expectations,
_it_ did not go up and down in the water. It stayed exactly where it was
and the water went up and down over it.

‘This _is_ an island,’ he said. ‘I suppose someone could have sailed
here, couldn’t they? What kind of bare naked lady? A dusky one?’

‘Really, Dean!’

‘Spirit of enquiry, Senior Wrangler. Important bio-geographical
information.’

The Bursar waited until his brain came around again. ‘Green,’ he
volunteered.

‘That is not a natural colour for a human being, clothed or not,’ said
the Senior Wrangler.

‘She might be seasick,’ said the Dean. There was only the vaguest of
wistful longings in his head, but he did not want to let go of it.

‘Going up and down,’ said the Bursar.

‘I suppose we could have a look,’ said the Dean.

‘What about Mrs Whitlow? She hasn’t been out of her hut yet.’

‘She can come too if she likes,’ said the Dean.

‘I don’t think we can expect Mrs Whitlow to go looking at a bare naked
lady, even if this one _is_ green,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Why not? She must have seen at least one. Not green, of course.’

The Senior Wrangler drew himself up. ‘There’s no call for that sort of
imputation,’ he said.

‘What? Well, obviously she—’

The Dean stopped. The big leaves on Mrs Whitlow’s hut were pushed aside,
and she emerged.

It was probably the flower in her hair. That was certainly the crowning
glory. But she’d also done things to her dress.

There was, for a start, less of it.

Since the word is derived from an island that did not exist on the
Discworld, the wizards had never heard of a bikini. In any case, what
Mrs Whitlow had sewn together out of her dress was a lot more
substantial than a bikini. It was more a _newzealand_ – two quite large
respectable halves separated by a narrow channel. She’d also tied some
of the spare cloth around her waist, sarong style.

In short, it was a very proper item of clothing. But it _looked_ as if
it wasn’t. It was as if Mrs Whitlow was wearing a figleaf six feet
square. It was still just a figleaf.

‘Ai thought this might be a _leetle_ more suitable for the heat,’ she
said. ‘Of course, Ai wouldn’t _dream_ of wearing it in the University,
but since we appear to be here for a little while Ai remembered a
picture Ai saw of Queen Zazumba of Sumtri. Is there anywhere Ai could
have a bath, do you think?’

‘Mwaaa,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

The Dean coughed. ‘There’s a little pool in the jungle.’

‘With waterlilies in it,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Pink
ones.’

‘Mwaaa,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘And there’s a waterfall,’ said the Dean.

‘Mwaaa.’

‘And a soap bush, as a matter of fact.’

They watched her walk away.

‘Up and down, up and down,’ said the Bursar.

‘A fine figure of a woman,’ said Ridcully. ‘She walks differently
without her shoes on, doesn’t she? Are you all right, Senior Wrangler?’

‘Mwaa?’

‘I think the heat’s getting to you. You’ve gone very red.’

‘I’m a mwaa . . . I’m . . . gosh, it _is_ hot, isn’t it . . . ? I think
perhaps I should have a dip too . . .’

‘In the lagoon,’ said Ridcully, meaningfully.

‘Oh, the salt’s very bad for the skin, Archchancellor.’

‘Quite so. Nevertheless. Or you can go looking for the pool when Mrs
Whitlow comes back.’

‘I find it rather insulting, Archchancellor, that you should appear to
think that—’

‘Well done,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now, shall we go and look at this boat?’

Half an hour later all the wizards were assembled on the opposite shore.

It _was_ green. And it bobbed up and down. It was clearly a ship, but
built perhaps by someone who’d had a very detailed book of ship-building
which nevertheless didn’t have any pictures in it. There was a
blurriness of the detail. The figurehead, for example, was certainly
vaguely female, although to the Dean’s disappointment it had the same
detail as a half-sucked jellybaby.

It put the Senior Wrangler in mind of Mrs Whitlow, although currently
rocks, trees, clouds and coconuts also reminded him of Mrs Whitlow.

And then there was the sail. It was, without a shadow of a doubt, a
leaf. And once you realized that it _was_ a leaf, then a certain marrow
or pumpkin quality about the rest of the vessel began to creep over you.

Ponder coughed. ‘There are some plants which rely for propagation on
floating seeds,’ he said, in a small voice. ‘The common coconut, for
example, has . . .’

‘Does it have a figurehead?’ said Ridcully.

‘Er, one variety of mangrove fruit has a sort of keel which . . .’

‘And a sail with what looks very much like rigging?’ said Ridcully.

‘Er . . . no . . .’

‘And what are those flowers on the top?’ Ridcully demanded. Where a
crow’s nest would be was a cluster of trumpet-shaped flowers, like green
daffodils.

‘Who cares?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘It’s a ship, even if
it _is_ a giant pumpkin, and it looks as though there’s room for all of
us.’ He brightened up. ‘Even if it _is_ a bit of a squash,’ he added.

‘It has appeared very fortuitously,’ said Ridcully. ‘I wonder why?’

‘I said, “Even if it _is_ a bit of a squash,”’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘Because, a squash, you see, is another name for—’

‘Yes, I know,’ said Ridcully, looking thoughtfully at the bobbing
vessel.

‘I was only attempting to—’

‘Thank you for sharing, Chair.’

‘Actually it does look pretty roomy,’ said the Dean, ignoring the
Chair’s pained expression. ‘I vote we load up with provisions and go.’

‘Where to?’ said Ridcully.

‘Somewhere where fearsome reptiles don’t suddenly turn into birds!’ the
Dean snapped.

‘You’d prefer it the other way around?’ said Ridcully. He started to
wade out into the water until, armpit deep, he was able to bang on the
side of the hull with his staff.

‘I think you are being a little obtuse, Mustrum,’ said the Dean.

‘Really? How many types of carnivorous plants are there, Mister
Stibbons?’

‘Dozens, sir.’

‘And they eat prey up to—?’

‘No upper limit in the case of the Sapu tree of Sumtri, sir. The
Sledgehammer Plant of Bhangbhangduc takes the occasional human victim
who doesn’t see the mallet hidden in the greenery. There’s quite a few
that can take anything up to rat size. The Pyramid Strangler Vine really
only preys on other more stupid plants, but—’

‘I just think that there’s something very odd about a boat-shaped plant
turning up just when we want a boat,’ said Ridcully. ‘I mean, chocolate
coconuts, _yes_, and even filter-tipped cigarettes, but a boat with a
figurehead?’

‘It’s not a proper boat without a figurehead,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Yes, but how does it know that?’ said Ridcully, wading ashore again.
‘Well, I’m not falling for it. I want to know what’s going on here.’

‘_Damn!_’

They all heard the voice – thin, reedy and petulant. It came from
everywhere around them.

Small soft white lights appeared in the air, spun around one another
with increasing speed, and then imploded.

The god blinked, and rocked back and forth as he tried to steady
himself.

‘Oh, my goodness,’ he said. ‘What _do_ I look like?’

He held up a hand in front of his face and flexed his fingers
experimentally.

‘Ah.’

The hand patted his face, his bald head, and lingered for a moment on
the long white beard. He seemed puzzled.

‘What’s this?’ he said.

‘Er . . . a beard?’ said Ponder.

The god looked down at his long white robe. ‘Oh. Patriarchality? Oh,
well . . . let me see, now . . .’

He seemed to pull himself together, focused his gaze on Ridcully, and
his huge white eyebrows met like angry caterpillars.

‘Begone from This Place Or I Will Smite Thee!’ he commanded.

‘Why?’

The god looked taken aback. ‘Why? You can’t ask why in this situation!’

‘Why not?’

The god looked slightly panicky. ‘Because . . . Thou Must Go from This
Place Lest I Visit Thee with Boils!’

‘Really? Most people would bring a bottle of wine,’ said Ridcully.

The god hesitated. ‘What?’ he said.

‘Or cake,’ said the Dean. ‘Cake is a good present if you’re visiting
someone.’

‘It depends on what _kind_ of cake,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Sponge
cake, I’ve always thought, is a bit of an insult. Something with a bit
of marzipan is to be preferred.’

‘Begone from this place lest I visit you with cake?’ said the god.

‘It’s better than boils,’ said Ridcully.

‘Provided it’s not sponge,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

The problem faced by the god was that, while he had never encountered
wizards before, the wizards had in their student days met, more or less
on a weekly basis, things that threatened them horribly as a matter of
course. Boils didn’t hold much of a menace when rogue demons had wanted
to rip your head off and do terrible things down the hole.

‘Listen,’ said the god, ‘I happen to be the god in these parts, do you
understand? I am, in fact, omnipotent!’

‘_I’d prefer that, what is it, you know, the cake with the pink and
yellow squares_—’ muttered the Senior Wrangler, because wizards tend to
follow a thought all the way through.

‘You’re a bit small, then,’ said the Dean.

‘_And the sugary marzipan on the outside, marvellous stuff_ …’

The god finally realized what else had been bothering him. Scale was
always tricky in these matters. Being three feet high was not adding
anything to his authority.

‘Damn!’ he said again. ‘Why am I so small?’

‘Size isn’t everything,’ said Ridcully. ‘People always smirk when they
say that. I can’t think why.’

‘You’re absolutely right!’ snapped the god, as if Ridcully had triggered
an entirely new train of thought. ‘Look at amoebas, except that of
course you can’t because they’re so small. Adaptable, efficient and
practically immortal. Wonderful things, amoebas.’ His little eyes misted
over. ‘Best day’s work I ever did.’

‘Excuse me, sir, but exactly what _kind_ of god are you?’ said Ponder.

‘And is there cake or not?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

The god glared up at him. ‘I beg your pardon?’ he said.

‘I meant, what is it that you’re the god _of_ ?’ said Ponder.

‘I _said_, what about this cake you’re supposed to have?’ said the
Senior Wrangler.

‘Senior Wrangler?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘Cake is not the issue here.’

‘But he said—’

‘Your comments have been taken on board, Senior Wrangler. And they will
be thrown over the side as soon as we leave harbour. Do continue, god,
please.’

For a moment the god looked in a thunderbolt mood, and then sagged. He
sat down on a rock.

‘All that smiting talk doesn’t really work, does it?’ he said gloomily.
‘You don’t have to be nice about it. I could tell. I _could_ give you
boils, you understand, it’s just that I can’t really see the point. They
clear up after a while, anyway. And it _is_ rather bullying people,
isn’t it? To tell you the truth, I’m something of an atheist.’

‘Sorry?’ said Ridcully. ‘You are an _atheist_ god?’

The god looked at their expressions. ‘Yes, I know,’ he said. ‘It’s a bit
of a bottomer, isn’t it?’ He stroked his long white beard. ‘Why exactly
have I got this?’

‘You didn’t shave this morning?’ said Ridcully.

‘I mean, I simply tried to appear in front of you in a form that you
recognize as godly,’ said the god. ‘A long beard and a nightshirt seem
to be the thing, although the facial hair is a little puzzling.’

‘It’s a sign of wisdom,’ said Ridcully.

‘Said to be,’ said Ponder, who’d never been able to grow one.

‘Wisdom: insight, acumen, learning,’ said the god thoughtfully. ‘Ah. The
length of the hair improves the operation of the cognitive functions?
Some sort of cooling arrangement, perhaps?’

‘Never really thought about it,’ said Ridcully.

‘The beard gets longer as more wisdom is acquired?’ said the god.

‘I’m not sure it’s actually a case of cause and effect,’ Ponder
ventured.

‘I’m afraid I don’t get about as much as I should,’ said the god sadly.
‘To be frank, I find religion rather offensive.’ He heaved a big sigh
and seemed to look even smaller. ‘Honest, I really do try but there are
some days when life just gets me down . . . Oh, excuse me, liquid seems
to be running out of my breathing tubes . . .’

‘Would you like to blow your nose?’ said Ponder.

The god looked panicky. ‘Where to?’

‘I mean, you sort of hold . . . Look, here’s my handkerchief, you just
sort of put it over your nose and sort of . . . well, snuffle into it.’

‘Snuffle,’ said the god. ‘Interesting. And what a curiously white leaf.’

‘No, it’s a cotton handkerchief,’ said Ponder. ‘It’s . . . made.’ He
stopped there. He knew that handkerchiefs _were_ made, and cotton was
involved, and he had some vague recollection of looms and things, but
when you got right down to it you obtained handkerchiefs by going into a
shop and saying, ‘I’d like a dozen of the reinforced white ones, please,
and how much do you charge for embroidering initials in the corners?’

‘You mean . . . created?’ said the god, suddenly very suspicious. ‘Are
you gods too?’

Beside his foot a small shoot pushed through the sand and began to grow
rapidly.

‘No, no,’ said Ponder. ‘Er . . . you just take some cotton and . . .
hammer it flat, I think . . . and you get handkerchiefs.’

‘Oh, then you’re tool-using creatures,’ said the god, relaxing a little.
The shoot near his foot was already a plant now, and putting out leaves
and a flowerbud.

He blew his nose loudly.

The wizards drew closer. They were not, of course, afraid of gods, but
gods tended to have uncertain tempers and a wise man kept away from
them. However, it’s hard to be frightened of someone who’s having a good
blow.

‘You’re really the god in these parts?’ said Ridcully.

The god sighed. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I thought it would be so easy, you
know. Just one small island. I could start all over again. Do it
_properly_. But it’s all going completely wrong.’ Beside him the little
plant opened a nondescript yellow flower.

‘Start all over again?’

‘Yes. You know . . . godliness.’ The god waved a hand in the direction
of the Hub.

‘I used to work over there,’ he said. ‘Basic general godding. You know,
making people out of clay, old toenails, and so on? And then sitting on
mountaintops and casting thunderbolts and all the rest of it. Although,’
he leaned forward and lowered his voice, ‘very few gods can actually do
that, you know.’

‘Really?’ said Ridcully, fascinated.

‘Very hard thing to steer, lightning. Mostly we waited until a
thunderbolt happened to hit some poor soul and then spake in a voice of
thunder and said it was his fault for being a sinner. I mean, they were
bound to have done _something_, weren’t they?’ The god blew his nose
again. ‘Quite depressing, really. Anyway . . . I suppose the rot set in
when I tried to see if it was possible to breed a more inflammable cow.’

He looked at the questioning expressions.

‘Burnt offerings, you see. Cows don’t actually burn all that well.
They’re naturally rather soggy creatures and frankly everyone was
running out of wood.’

They carried on staring at him. He tried again.

‘I really couldn’t see the point of the whole business, to tell you the
truth. Shouting, smiting, getting angry all the time . . . don’t think
anyone was getting anything out of it, really. But the worst part . . .
You know the worst part? The worst part was that if you actually
_stopped_ the smiting, people wandered off and worshipped someone else.
Hard to believe, isn’t it? They’d say things like, “Things were a lot
better when there was more smiting,” and, “If there was more smiting,
it’d be a lot safer to walk the streets.” Especially since all that’d
_really_ happened was that some poor shepherd who just happened to be in
the wrong place during a thunderstorm had caught a stray bolt. And then
the priests would say, “Well, we all know about shepherds, don’t we, and
now the gods are angry and we could do with a much bigger temple, thank
you.”’

‘Typical priestly behaviour,’ sniffed the Dean.

‘But they often _believed_ it!’ the god almost wailed. ‘It was really
_so_ depressing. I think that before we made humanity, we broke the
mould. There’d be a bad weather front, a few silly shepherds would
happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time, and next thing you
know it was standing room only on the sacrificial stones and you
couldn’t see for the smoke.’ He had another good blow on a piece of
Ponder’s handkerchief that had so far remained dry. ‘I mean, I _tried_.
God knows I tried, and since that’s me, I know what I’m talking about.
“Thou Shalt Lie Down Flat in Thundery Weather,” I said. “Thou Shalt Site
the Midden a Long Way from the Well,” I said. I even told them, “Thou
Shalt Really Try to Get Along with One Another.”’

‘Did it work?’

‘I can’t say for sure. Everyone was slaughtered by the followers of the
god in the next valley who told them to kill everyone who didn’t believe
in him. Ghastly fellow, I’m afraid.’

‘And the flaming cows?’ said Ridcully.

‘The what?’ said the god, sunk in misery.

‘The more inflammable cow,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, yes. Another good idea that didn’t work. I just thought, you know,
that if you could find the bit in, say, an oak tree which says “Be
inflammable” and glue it into the bit of the cow which says “Be soggy”
it’d save a lot of trouble. Unfortunately, that produced a sort of bush
that made distressing noises and squirted milk, but I could see the
_principle_ was sound. And frankly, since my believers were all dead or
living in the next valley by then I thought, to hell with it all, I’d
come back here and get to grips with it and do it all more _sensibly_.’
He brightened up a bit. ‘You know, it’s amazing what you get if you
break even the common cow down into very small bits.’

‘Soup,’ said Ridcully.

‘Because, sooner or later, _everything_ is just a set of instructions,’
the god went on, apparently not listening.

‘That’s just what I’ve always said!’ said Ponder.

‘Have you?’ said the god, peering at him. ‘Well, anyway . . . that’s how
it all began. I thought it would be a much better idea to create
creatures that could change their own instructions when they needed to,
you see . . .’

‘Oh, you mean evolution,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Do I?’ The god looked thoughtful. ‘“Changing over time . . .” Yes,
that’s actually quite a good word, isn’t it? Evolution. Yes, I suppose
that’s what I do. Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem to be working
properly.’

Beside him, there was a pop. The little plant had fruited. Its pod had
sprung open and there appeared to be, bunched up like a chrysanthemum, a
fresh white hankie.

‘You see?’ he said. ‘That’s the sort of thing I’m up against. Everything
is so completely _selfish_ about it.’ He took the handkerchief in an
absentminded way, blew his nose on it, crumpled it up, and dropped it on
the ground.

‘I’m sorry about the boat,’ he continued. ‘It was a bit of a rush job,
you see. I just didn’t want anyone upsetting everything, but I really
don’t believe in smiting, so I thought that _since_ you wanted to leave
here I should help you do so as soon as possible. I think I did rather a
good job, in the circumstances. It’ll find new land automatically, I
think. So why didn’t you go?’

‘The bare naked lady on the front was a bit of a giveaway,’ said
Ridcully.

‘The what?’ The god peered in the direction of the boat. ‘These eyes are
not particularly efficient . . . Oh, dear, yes. The figure. Morphic
bloody resonance again. Will you _stop_ doing that!’

The handkerchief plant had just put forth another fruit. The god
narrowed his eyes, pointed his finger and incinerated it.

As one man the wizards stepped back.

‘I stop concentrating for five minutes and everything loses any sense of
discipline,’ said the god. ‘Everything wants to make itself damn
_useful_! I can’t think why!’

‘Sorry? Am I getting this right? You’re a _god_ of _evolution_?’ said
Ponder.

‘Er . . . is that wrong?’ said the god anxiously.

‘But it’s been happening for ages, sir!’

‘Has it? But I only started a few years ago! Do you mean someone else is
doing it?’

‘I’m afraid so, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘People breed dogs for fierceness and
racehorses for speed and . . . well, even my uncle can do amazing things
with his nuts, sir—’

‘And everyone knows that you can cross a river with a bridge, ahaha,’
said Ridcully.

‘Can you?’ said the god of evolution seriously. ‘I’d have thought that
you simply get some very soggy wood. Oh dear.’

Ridcully winked at Ponder Stibbons. Gods were often not good at humour,
and this one was even worse than Ridcully.

‘We’re back in time, Mister Stibbons,’ he said. ‘It may not have
happened already _yet_, eh?’

‘Oh. Yes,’ said Ponder.

‘Anyway, two gods of evolution wouldn’t be a bad thing, would they?’
said Ridcully. ‘Makes it a lot more interestin’. The one who’s best at
it would win.’

The god stared at him with his mouth open. Then he shut it just enough
to mouth Ridcully’s words to himself, snapped his fingers, and vanished
in a puff of little white lights.

‘_Now_ you’ve done it,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘No cake for _you_,’ said the Bursar.

‘All I said was the one who’s best at it would win,’ said Ridcully.

‘Actually, he didn’t look upset,’ said Ponder. ‘He looked as if he’d
suddenly realized something.’

Ridcully looked up at the small mountain in the centre of the island,
and appeared to reach a decision.

‘All right, we’ll leave,’ he said. ‘The reason this island’s so odd is
that some rather daft god is messing around with it. That’s a pretty
good explanation as far as I’m concerned.’

‘But, sir—’ Ponder began.

‘See that little vine just by the Senior Wrangler there? It’s only been
growing for the last ten minutes,’ said the Dean.

It looked like a small cucumber vine, except that the fruits were yellow
and oblong.

‘Pass me your penknife, Mister Stibbons,’ said Ridcully.

Ridcully sliced the fruit in half. It wasn’t fully ripe yet, but the
pattern of pink and yellow squares was clearly visible, surrounded by a
layer of something sticky and sweet.

‘But I only _thought_ about that cake ten minutes ago!’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Seems perfectly logical to _me_,’ said Ridcully, ‘I mean, here we are,
wizards, we move about, we want to leave the island . . . What will we
take with us? Anyone?’

‘Food, obviously,’ said Ponder. ‘But—’

‘Right! If _I_ was a vegetable, I’d want to make myself useful in a
hurry, yes? No good hanging around for a thousand years just growing
bigger seeds! No fear! All those other plants might come up with a
better idea in the meantime! No, you see an opportunity and you _go_ for
it! There might not be another boat along for years!’

‘Millennia,’ said the Dean.

‘Even longer,’ Ridcully agreed. ‘Survival of the fastest, eh? So I
suggest we load up and go, gentlemen.’

‘What, just like that?’ said Ponder.

‘Certainly. Why not?’

‘But . . . but . . . but think of the things we could learn here!’ said
Ponder. ‘The possibilities are breathtaking! At last there’s a god who’s
actually got the right idea! At last we can get some answers to all the
important questions! We could . . . we can . . . Look, we can’t just
_go_. I mean, not _go_! I mean . . . we’re wizards, aren’t we?’

He was aware that he had their full attention, something that wizards
did not often give. Usually they defined ‘listening’ as a period in
which you worked out what you were going to say next. It was
disconcerting.

Then the spell broke. The Senior Wrangler shook his head. ‘Curious way
of looking at things,’ he said, turning away. ‘So . . . I vote we take
plenty of those cheese nuts, Archchancellor.’

‘Good provisioning is the essence of successful exploration,’ said the
Dean. ‘Quite a roomy vessel, too, so we needn’t stint.’

Ridcully pulled himself aboard via a trailing tendril, and sniffed.

‘Smells rather like pumpkin,’ he said. ‘Always liked pumpkin. A very
versatile vegetable.’

Ponder put a hand over his eyes. ‘Oh, really?’ he said, wearily. ‘A
group of Unseen University wizards are seriously considering putting to
sea on an edible boat?’

‘Fried, boiled, a good base for a soup stock and, of course, excellent
in pies,’ said the Archchancellor happily. ‘Also the seeds are a tasty
snack.’

‘Good with butter,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘I suppose
there isn’t a butter plant anywhere, is there?’

‘There will be soon,’ said the Dean. ‘Give us a hand up, will you,
Archchancellor?’

Ponder exploded. ‘I don’t _believe_ this!’ he said. ‘You’re turning your
back on an astonishing god-given opportunity—’

‘Absolutely, Mister Stibbons,’ said Ridcully, from above. ‘No offence
meant, of course, but if the choice is a trip on the briny deep or
staying on a small island with someone trying to create a more
inflammable cow then you can call me Salty Sam.’

‘Is this the poop deck?’ said the Dean.

‘I hope not,’ said Ridcully briskly. ‘You see, Stibbons—’

‘Are you sure?’ said the Dean.

‘I’m sure, Dean. You _see_, Stibbons, when you’ve had a little more
experience in these matters you’ll learn that there’s nothing more
dangerous than a god with too much time on his hands—’

‘Except an enraged mother bear,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘No, they’re far more dangerous.’

‘Not when they’re really close.’

‘If it _was_ the poop deck, how would we know?’ said the Dean.

Ponder shook his head. There were times when the desire to climb the
thaumaturgical ladder was seriously blunted, and one of them was when
you saw what was on top.

‘I . . . I just don’t know what to say,’ he said. ‘I am frankly
astonished.’

‘Well done, lad. So run along and get some bananas, will you? Green ones
will keep better. And don’t look so upset. When it comes to gods, I have
to say, you can give me one of the make-out-of-clay-and-smite-’em
brigade any day of the week. That’s the kind of god you can deal with.’

‘The practically human sort,’ said the Dean.

‘Exactly.’

‘Call me overly picky,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, ‘but I’d
prefer not to be around a god who might suddenly decide I’d run faster
with three extra legs.’

‘Exactly. Is there something wrong, Stibbons? Oh, he’s gone. Oh well, no
doubt he’ll be back. And . . . Dean?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘I can’t help thinking you’re working up to some sort of horrible joke
about a poop deck. I’d prefer not, if it’s all the same to you.’

‘You all right, mate?’

No one in the world had ever been so pleased to see Crocodile Crocodile
before.

Rincewind let himself be pulled upright. His hand, against all
expectation, was _not_ blue and three times its normal size.

‘That bloody kangaroo . . .’ he muttered, using the hand to wave away
the eternal flies.

‘What kangaroo waf that, mate?’ said the crocodile, helping him back
towards the pub.

Rincewind looked around. There were just the normal components of the
local scenery – dry-looking bushes, red dirt and a million circling
flies.

‘The one I was talking to just now.’

‘I was juft fweeping up and I faw you dancing around yellin’,’ said
Crocodile. ‘I didn’t fee no kangaroo.’

‘It’s probably a _magic_ kangaroo,’ said Rincewind wearily.

‘Oh, _right_, a _magic_ kangaroo,’ said Crocodile. ‘No worrieth. I think
maybe I’d better make you up the cure for drinking too much beer, mate.’

‘What’s the cure?’

‘More beer.’

‘How much beer _did_ I have last night, then?’

‘Oh, about twenty pinth.’

‘Don’t be silly, no one can even _hold_ that much beer!’

‘Oh, you didn’t hang on to much of it at all, mate. No worrieth. We like
a man who can’t hold hif beer.’

In the fetid fleapit of Rincewind’s brain the projectionist of memory
put on reel two. Recollection began to flicker. He shuddered.

‘Was I . . . singing a song?’ he said.

‘Too right. You kept pointing to the Roo Beer pofter and finging . . .’
Crocodile’s huge jaws moved as he tried to remember, ‘“Tie my kangaroo
up.” Bloody good fong.’

‘And then I . . . ?’

‘Then you loft all your money playing Two Up with Daggy’s shearing
gang.’

‘That’s . . . I . . . there were these two coins, and the bloke’d toss
them in the air, and you . . . had to bet on how they’d come down . . .’

‘Right. And you kept bettin’ they wouldn’t come down at all. Faid it was
bound to happen fooner or later. You got good odds, though.’

‘I lost _all_ the money Mad gave me?’

‘Yep.’

‘How was I paying for my beer, then?’

‘Oh, the blokes were queueing up to buy it for you. They faid you were
better than a day at the races.’

‘And then I . . . there was something about sheep . . .’ He looked
horrified. ‘Oh, no . . .’

‘Oh, yeah. You faid, “Ftrain the fraying crones, a dollar a time for
giving fheep a haircut? I could do a beaut foft job like that with my
eyes fhut, too right no flaming worries by half bonza fhoot through ye
gods this if good beer . . .”’

‘Oh, gods. Did anyone hit me?’

‘Nah, mate, they reckoned you were a good sport, ’specially when you
wagered five hundred fquids that you could beat their best man at
shearin’.’

‘I couldn’t’ve done that, I’m not a betting man!’

‘Well, I am, and if you’ve been fhootin’ a line I wouldn’t give tuppence
for your chances, Rinfo.’

‘Rinso?’ said Rincewind weakly. He looked at his beerglass. ‘What’s in
this stuff?’

‘Your mate Mad faid you were this big wizard and could kill people just
by pointing at ’em and shoutin’,’ said Crocodile. ‘I wouldn’t mind
feein’ that.’

Rincewind looked up desperately and his eye caught the Roo Beer poster.
It showed some of the damn silly trees they had here, and the arid red
earth and – nothing else.

‘Huh?’

‘What’s that?’ said Crocodile.

‘What happened to the kangaroo?’ Rincewind said hoarsely.

‘What kangaroo?’

‘There was a kangaroo on that poster last night . . . wasn’t there?’

Crocodile peered at the poster. ‘I’m better at smell,’ he admitted at
last. ‘But I got to admit, it smells like it’s gorn.’

‘Something very strange is going on here,’ said Rincewind. ‘This is a
very strange country.’

‘We’ve got an opera house,’ Crocodile volunteered. ‘That’s _cultcher_.’

‘And ninety-three words for being sick?’

‘Yeah, well, we’re a very . . . vocal people.’

‘Did I really bet five hundred . . . What was it?’

‘Squids.’

‘. . . squids I haven’t got?’

‘Yup.’

‘So I’ll probably get killed if I lose, right?’

‘No worries.’

‘I wish people’d stop saying that—’

He caught sight of the poster again. ‘That kangaroo’s back!’

Crocodile turned around awkwardly, walked up to the poster and sniffed.
‘Could be,’ he said cautiously.

‘And it’s facing the wrong way!’

‘Take it easy, mate!’ said Crocodile Dongo, looking concerned.

Rincewind shuddered. ‘You’re right,’ he said. ‘It’s the heat and the
flies getting to me. It must be.’

Dongo poured him another beer. ‘Ah well, beer’s good for the heat,’ he
said. ‘Can’t do anythin’ about the bloody flies, though.’

Rincewind started to nod, and stopped. He removed his hat and looked at
it critically. Then he waved a hand up and down in front of his face,
temporarily dislodging a few flies. Finally, he looked thoughtfully at a
row of bottles.

‘Got any string?’ he said.

After a few experiments, and some mild concussion, Dongo advanced the
opinion that it’d be better with just the corks.

The Luggage was lost. Usually, it could find its way anywhere in time
and space, but trying to do that now was like a man trying to keep his
footing on two moving walkways heading in opposite directions, and it
simply couldn’t cope. It knew it had been stuck underground for a long
time, but it _also_ knew that it had been stuck underground for about
five minutes.

The Luggage had no brain as such, even though an outsider might well get
the impression that it could think. What it _did_ do was react, in quite
complex ways, to its environment. Usually this involved finding
something to kick, as is the case with most sapient creatures.

Currently it was ambling along a dusty track. Occasionally its lid would
snap at flies, but without much enthusiasm. Its opal coating glowed in
the sunlight.

‘Oaaw! Isn’t that _pretty_! Fetch it here, you two!’

It paid no attention to the brightly coloured cart that stopped a little
way along the track. It was possibly aware at some level that people had
got out and were staring at it, but it didn’t resist when they appeared
to reach a decision and lifted it on to the cart. It didn’t know where
it had to go, and since it also didn’t know where this cart was going
perhaps it would take it there.

It waited a decent while after it had been put down, and then took in
its surroundings. It had been stacked up by a lot of other boxes and
suitcases, which was comforting. After five minutes spent being
underground for millions of years the Luggage felt that it was due some
quality time.

And it didn’t even resist when someone opened its lid and filled it up
with shoes. Quite large shoes, the Luggage noticed, and many of them
with interesting heels and inventive ways with silk and sequins. They
were clearly ladies’ shoes. That was good, the Luggage thought (or
emoted, or reacted). Ladies tended to lead quieter lives.

The purple cart rumbled off. Painted crudely on the back were the words:
Petunia, The Desert Princess.

* * *

Rincewind looked hard at the shears that the head shearer was waving.
They looked sharp.

‘You know what we do to people who go back on a bet round here?’ said
Daggy, the gang boss.

‘Er . . . but I was drunk.’

‘So were we. So what?’

Rincewind looked out across the sheep pens. He knew what sheep were, of
course, and had come into contact with them on many occasions, although
normally in the company of mixed vegetables. He’d even had a toy stuffed
lamb as a child. But there is something hugely unlovable about sheep, a
kind of mad, eye-rolling brainlessness smelling of damp wool and panic.
Many religions extol the virtues of the meek, but Rincewind had never
trusted them. The meek could turn very nasty at times.

On the other hand . . . they were covered in wool, and the shears looked
pretty keen. How hard could it be? His radar told him that trying and
failing was probably a lot less of a crime than not trying at all.

‘Can I have a trial run?’ he said.

A sheep was dragged out of the pens and flung down in front of him.

Rincewind gave Daggy what he hoped was the smile of one craftsman to
another, but smiling at Daggy was like throwing meringues against a
cliff.

‘Er, can I have a chair and a towel and two mirrors and a comb?’ he
said.

Daggy’s look of intense suspicion deepened. ‘What’s this? What d’you
want all that for?’

‘Got to do it properly, haven’t I?’

* * *

_Away out of sight at the back of the shearing shed, on the sun-bleached
boards, the outline of a kangaroo began to form. And then, the white
lines drifting across the wood like wisps of cloud across a clear sky,
it began to change shape_ . . .

Rincewind hadn’t had a proper haircut in a long time, but he knew how it
was done.

‘So . . . have you had your holidays this year, then?’ he said, clipping
away.

‘Mnaaarrrhh!’

‘What about this weather, eh?’ Rincewind said, desperately.

‘Mnaaarrrhh!’

The sheep wasn’t even trying to struggle. It was an old one, with fewer
teeth than feet, and even in the very limited depths of its extremely
shallow mind it knew that this wasn’t how shearing was supposed to go.
Shearing was supposed to be a brief struggle followed by glorious cool
freedom back in the paddock. It wasn’t supposed to include searching
questions about what it thought of this weather or enquiries as to
whether it required something for the weekend, especially since the
sheep had no concept of the connotations of the term ‘weekend’ or, if it
came to that, of the word ‘something’ either. People weren’t supposed to
splash lavender water in its ear.

The shearers watched in silence. There was quite a crowd of them,
because they’d gone and fetched everyone else on the station. They knew
in their souls that here was something to tell their grandchildren.

Rincewind stood back, looked critically at his handiwork, and then
showed the sheep the back of its head in the mirror, at which point the
creature cracked, managed to get its feet under it and made a run for
the paddock.

‘Hey, wait till I take the curlers out!’ Rincewind shouted after it.

He became aware of the shearers watching him. Finally one of them said,
in a stunned voice, ‘That’s sheep-shearing where yew come from, is it?’

‘Er . . . what did you think?’ said Rincewind.

‘It’s a bit slow, innit?’

‘How fast was I supposed to go?’

‘Weell, Daggy here once did nearly fifty in an hour. That’s what you’ve
got to beat, see? None of that fancy rubbish. Just short back, front,
top and sides.’

‘Mind yew,’ said one of the shearers, wistfully, ‘that was a beautiful
lookin’ sheep.’

There was an outbreak of bleating from the sheep corrals.

‘Ready to give it a _real_ go, Rinso?’ said Daggy.

‘Ye gawds, what’s _that_?’ said one of his mates.

The fence shattered. A ram stood in the gap, shaking its head to
dislodge bits of post from its horns. Steam rose from its nostrils.

Most of the things Rincewind had associated with sheep, apart from the
gravy and mint sauce, had to do with . . . sheepishness. But this was a
ram, and the word association was suddenly . . . _rampage_. It pawed the
ground. It was a lot bigger than the average sheep. In fact, it seemed
to fill Rincewind’s entire future.

‘That’s not one of _mine_!’ said the flock’s owner.

Daggy placed his shears in Rincewind’s other hand and patted him on the
back.

‘This one’s yours, mate,’ he said, and backed away. ‘You’re here to show
us how it’s done, eh, mate?’

Rincewind looked down at his feet. They weren’t moving. They remained
firmly fixed to the ground.

The ram advanced, snorting and looking Rincewind in the bloodshot eye.

‘Okay,’ it whispered, when it was very close. ‘You just make with the
shears and the sheep’ll do the rest. No worries.’

‘Is that _you_?’ said Rincewind, glancing at the distant ring of
watchers.

‘Hah, good one. Ready? They’ll do what I do. They’re like sheep, okay?’

The shearers watched as wool fell like rain.

‘That’s somethin’ you don’t often see,’ said one of them. ‘Them standin’
on their heads like that . . .’

‘The cartwheels is good,’ said another shearer, lighting his pipe. ‘I
mean, for sheep.’

Rincewind just hung on to the shears. They had a life of their own. The
sheep flung themselves against the clippers as if in a real hurry to get
into something more comfortable. Fleeces curled around his ankles, then
around his knees, rose above his waist . . . and then the shears were
slicing the air, and sizzling as they cooled down.

Several dozen dazed sheep were watching him very suspiciously. So were
the sheep-shearers.

‘Er . . . have we started the competition yet?’ he said.

‘You just sheared thirty sheep in two minutes!’ roared Daggy.

‘Is that good?’

‘Good? No one takes two minutes for thirty sheep.’

‘Well, I’m _sorry_, but I can’t go any faster.’

The shearers went into a huddle. Rincewind looked around for the ram,
but it didn’t seem to be there any more.

Finally, something seemed to have been settled. The shearers approached
him in the cautious, oblique way of men trying to hang back and walk
forward at the same time.

Daggy stepped forward, but only comparatively; in fact, his mates had
all, without discussion, taken one step backwards in the choreography of
caution.

‘G’day!’ he said nervously.

Rincewind gave him a friendly wave, and it was only halfway through when
he remembered that he was still holding the shears. Daggy hadn’t
forgotten about them.

‘Er . . . we ain’t got five hundred squids till we get paid—’

Rincewind wasn’t certain how to deal with this. ‘No worries,’ he said.
This covered most things.

‘. . . so if yew’re gonna be around . . .’

‘I just want to get to Bugarup as soon as possible,’ said Rincewind.

Daggy kept smiling but turned around and went into another huddle with
the rest of the shearers. Then he turned back.

‘. . . maybe we could sell a few things . . .’

‘I’m not bothered about the money, actually,’ said Rincewind loudly.
‘Just point me in the direction of Bugarup. No worries.’

‘Yew don’t _want_ the money?’

‘No worries.’

There was another huddle. Rincewind heard hissed comments of ‘Get him
outta here right _now_.’

Daggy turned back. ‘I got a horse you can have,’ he said. ‘It’s worth a
squid or two.’

‘No worries.’

‘And then you’ll be able to ride away . . . ?’

‘She’ll be right. No worries.’

It was an amazing phrase. It was practically magical all by itself. It
just . . . made things better. A shark’s got your leg? No worries.
You’ve been stung by a jellyfish? No worries! You’re dead? She’ll be
right! No worries! Oddly enough, it seemed to work.

‘No worries,’ he said again.

‘Got to be worth a squid or two, that horse,’ Daggy said again.
‘Practically a bloody racehorse.’

There was some sniggering from the crowd.

‘No worries?’ said Rincewind.

Daggy looked for a moment as if he was entertaining the suggestion that
maybe the horse was worth more than five hundred squid, but Rincewind
was still dreamily holding on to the shears and he thought better of it.

‘Get you to Bugarup in no time, that horse,’ he said.

‘No worries.’

A couple of minutes later it was obvious even to Rincewind’s
inexperienced eye that while you could race this horse, it wouldn’t be
sensible to race it against other horses. At least, ones that were
alive. It was brown, stubby, mostly a thatch of mane, with hooves the
size of soup bowls, and it had the shortest legs Rincewind had ever seen
on anything with a saddle. The only way you could fall off would be to
dig a hole in the ground first. It looked ideal. It was Rincewind’s kind
of horse.

‘No worries,’ he said. ‘Actually . . . one _small_ worry.’

He dropped the shears. The shearers took a step back.

Rincewind went over to the corral and looked down at the ground, which
was churned from the hoofprints of the sheep. Then he looked at the back
of the shearing shed. For a moment he was sure there was the outline of
a kangaroo . . .

The shearers approached him cautiously as he banged on the sun-bleached
planks, shouting, ‘I know you’re in there!’

‘Er, that’s what we call wood,’ said Daggy. ‘Woo-od,’ he added, for the
hard-of-thinking. ‘Made into a wa-all.’

‘Did you see a kangaroo walk into this wall?’ Rincewind demanded.

‘Not us, boss.’

‘It was a sheep at the time!’ Rincewind added. ‘I mean, it’s normally a
kangaroo but I’ll swear it turned into that sheep!’

The shearers shuffled uneasily.

‘You’re not going to say anything about woolly jumpers, are you?’ said
one, almost timorously.

‘What? What’s knitwear got to do with it?’

‘That’s a mercy, anyway,’ the small shearer mumbled.

‘You know, it’s been doing that _all the time_,’ said Rincewind. ‘I
_thought_ there was something wrong with that beer poster!’

‘Something wrong with the beer, too?’

‘I’m not putting up with any more kangaroo nonsense. I’m off home,’ said
Rincewind. ‘Where’s that horse?’

It was standing where they’d left it. He waved a finger at it.

‘And no talking!’ he said, as he swung his leg over it. This simply
resulted in him standing over the horse.

He was sure that somewhere under the overhanging mane something
sniggered.

‘Yew got to kinda sag down,’ said Daggy. ‘And then you kinda lift your
legs kinda up.’

Rincewind did so. It was like sitting on an armchair.

‘You _sure_ this is a horse?’

‘Won it in a game of Two Up from a bloke from Goolalah,’ said Daggy.
‘Got to be tough, coming from the mountains. They breeds ’em special to
be sure-footed. He said it won’t fall off _anything_.’

Rincewind nodded. His type of horse, all right. The quiet, dependable
type.

‘Which way’s Bugarup?’

The men pointed.

‘Right. Thank you. Giddyup . . . What’s this horse called?’

Daggy seemed to think for a moment and then said, ‘Snowy.’

‘Why Snowy? That’s an odd name for a horse.’

‘I . . . used to have a dog called Snowy.’

‘Oh, right. That makes sense. Sense for here, anyway. I suppose. Well .
. . g’day, then.’

The shearers watched him go, which, at Snowy’s pace, took some time.

‘Had to get rid of him,’ said Daggy. ‘He could put us on the dole in a
day.’

One of the men said, ‘Why din’t you tell him about the drop-bears over
that way?’

‘He’s a wizard, ain’t he? He’ll find out.’

‘Yeah, but only when they bloody drop on his head.’

‘Quickest way,’ said Daggy.

‘Daggy?’

‘Yup?’

‘How long did you say you’d had that horse?’

‘Ages. Won it off a bloke.’

‘Right?’

‘Right.’

‘Right . . .’

‘What?’

‘Only . . . did yew always have it ages half an hour ago?’

Daggy’s wide brow furrowed a little. He took off his hat and wiped his
head with his arm. He looked at the disappearing horse, and then at the
sheds, and then at the other men. Several times he started to speak,
shut his mouth before he could get the first word out, and glared around
him again.

‘Yew all _know_ I’ve had it for bloody ages, right?’ he demanded.

‘’s right.’

‘Ages.’

‘Won it off’f a bloke.’

‘Right. Yeah. Right. You must’ve done.’

Mrs Whitlow sat on a rock, combing her hair. A bush had sprouted several
twigs with rows of blunt, closely set thorns just when she needed them.

Large, pink and very clean, she relaxed by the water like an amplified
siren. Birds sang in the trees. Sparkling beetles hummed to and fro
across the water.

If the Senior Wrangler had been present someone could have scraped him
up and carried him away in a bucket.

Mrs Whitlow did not feel in any danger. The wizards were around, after
all. She was mildly worried that the maids would be getting lazy since
she wasn’t there, but she could look forward to making their lives a
living hell when she got back. The possibility of not getting back never
entered her head.

A lot of things never entered Mrs Whitlow’s head. She’d decided a long
time ago that the world was a lot nicer that way.

She had a very straightforward view of foreign parts, or at least those
more distant than her sister’s house in Quirm where she spent a week’s
holiday every year. They were inhabited by people who were more to be
pitied than blamed because, really, they were like children.¹⁵ And they
acted like savages.¹⁶

On the other hand, the scenery was nice and the weather was warm and
nothing smelled very bad. She was definitely feeling the benefit, as
she’d put it.

Not to put too fine a point on it, Mrs Whitlow had left her corsets off.

The thing that the Senior Wrangler insisted on calling the ‘melon boat’
was, even the Dean admitted, very impressive.

There was a big space below deck, dark and veined and lined with curved
black boards, very like giant sunflower seeds.

‘Boat seeds,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Probably make good ballast.
Senior Wrangler, don’t eat the wall, please.’

‘I thought perhaps we could do with more cabin space,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Cabins possibly, staterooms no,’ said Ridcully, heaving himself back on
to the deck.

‘Avast shipmate!’ shouted the Dean, throwing a bunch of bananas on to
the boat and climbing up behind them.

‘Quite so. How do we sail this vegetable, Dean?’

‘Oh, Ponder Stibbons knows all about that sort of thing.’

‘And where is he?’

‘Didn’t he go off to fetch some bananas?’

They looked down at the beach, where the Bursar was stockpiling seaweed.

‘He did seem a bit . . . upset,’ said Ridcully.

‘Can’t imagine why.’

Ridcully glanced up at the central mountain, glowing in the afternoon
sun.

‘I suppose he wouldn’t have done anything stupid, would he?’ he said.

‘Archchancellor, Ponder Stibbons is a fully trained wizard!’ said the
Dean.

‘Thank you for that very concise and definite answer, Dean,’ said
Ridcully. He leaned down into the cabin. ‘Senior Wrangler! We’re going
to look for Stibbons. And we ought to go and fetch Mrs Whitlow, too.’

There was a shriek from below. ‘Mrs Whitlow! How could we have forgotten
her!’

‘In your case, only by having a cold bath, Senior Wrangler.’

* * *

As horses went, this one went slowly. It moved in a stolid,
I-can-do-this-all-day manner that clearly said the only way you get me
to go faster will be to push me off a cliff. It had a curious gait,
somewhere faster than a trot but slower than a canter. The effect was a
jolting slightly out of synchronization with the moment of inertia in
any known human organ, causing everything inside Rincewind to bounce off
everything else. Also, if he forgot for a second and lowered his legs,
Snowy went on without him, and this meant that he had to run ahead and
stand there like a croquet hoop until he caught him up.

But Snowy didn’t bite, buck, roll over or gallop insanely away, which
were the traits Rincewind had hitherto associated with horses. When
Rincewind stopped for the night the horse wandered off a little way and
ate a bush covered with leaves the thickness, smell and apparent
edibility of linoleum.

He camped beside what he had heard called a ‘billybong’, which was just
an expanse of churned earth with a tiny puddle of water welling up in
the middle. Little green and blue birds were clustered around it,
cheeping happily in the late afternoon light. They scattered when
Rincewind lay down to drink, and scolded him from the trees.

When he sat up, one of them landed on his finger.

‘Who’s a pretty boy, then?’ said Rincewind.

The noise stopped. Up on the branches the birds looked at one another.
There wasn’t much room in their heads for a new idea, but one had just
turned up.

The sun dropped towards the horizon. Rincewind poked very cautiously
inside a hollow log and found a ham sandwich and a plate of cocktail
sausages.

Up in the trees the budgerigars were in a huddle.

One of them said, very quietly, ‘Wh . . . ?’

Rincewind lay back. Even the flies were merely annoying. Things began to
sizzle in the bushes. Snowy went and drank from the tiny pool with a
noise like an inefficient suction pump trying to deal with an unlucky
turtle.

It was, nevertheless, very peaceful.

Rincewind sat bolt upright. He knew what was about to happen when things
were peaceful.

Up in the darkening branches a bird muttered, ‘. . . pre’y b’y . . . ?’

He relaxed, but only a little.

‘. . . ’sa prit’ b’y . . . ?’

Suddenly the birds stopped.

A branch creaked.

The drop-bear . . . dropped.

It was a close relative of the koala, although this doesn’t mean very
much. After all, the closest relative of the common elephant is about
the size and shape of a rabbit. The drop-bear’s most notable feature was
its posterior, thick and heavily padded to provide the maximum shock to
the victim with the minimum shock to the bear. The initial blow rendered
the prey unconscious, and then the bears could gather round to feed. It
was a magnificent method of killing, since in other respects the bears
were not very well built to be serious predators, and it was therefore
particularly unfortunate for this bear that it chose, on this night, to
drop on a man who might well have had ‘Victim’ written all over him but
also had ‘Wizzard’ written on his hat, and that this hat, most
significantly, came to a point.

Rincewind lumbered to his feet and ran into a few trees while he tried,
with both hands on the brim, to lift his hat off his head. He managed it
at last, stared in horror at the bear and its peculiarly confused
expression, and shook it off and into the bushes. There were thumps
around him as more bears, disoriented by this turn of events, hit the
ground and bounced wildly.

In the trees the budgerigars woke up and, the simple message by now
having had time to work its way into their brain cells, shrieked, ‘Who’s
a pri’y boy, den?’ A madly tumbling bear whirled past Rincewind’s face.

Rincewind turned and ran towards Snowy, landing astride the horse’s
back, or where its back would have been had it been taller. Snowy
obediently broke into his arrhythmical trot and headed into the
darkness.

Rincewind looked down, swore and ran after his horse.

He held on tight as Snowy ran on like some small engine, leaving the
bouncing bears behind, and didn’t slow down until he was well away along
the track and among bushes that were shorter than he was. Then he slid
off.

What a bloody country!

There was a flurry of wings in the night and suddenly the bush was full
of little birds.

‘Wh’sa pri’ boyden?’

Rincewind waved his hat at them and screamed a little, just to relieve
his feelings. It didn’t work. The budgerigars thought this was some sort
of entertainment.

‘Bug’roff!’ they twittered.

Rincewind gave up, stamped on the ground a few times, and tried to
sleep.

When he awoke, it was to a sound very much like a donkey being sawn in
half. It was a kind of rhythmic scream of pain, anguished and forlorn,
setting the teeth of the world on edge.

Rincewind raised his head cautiously over the scrub.

A windmill was spinning in the breeze, turning this way and that as
stray gusts batted its tail fin.

Rincewind was seeing more of these, dotted across the landscape, and
thought: If all the water’s underground, that’s a good idea . . .

There was a mob of sheep hanging around the base of this one. They
didn’t back off, but watched him carefully as he approached. He saw why.
The trough below the pump was empty. The fan was spinning, grinding out
its mournful squeak, but no water was coming out of the pipe.

The thirsty sheep looked up at him.

‘Er . . . don’t look at me,’ he mumbled. ‘I’m a wizard. We’re not
supposed to be good at machinery.’

No, but we _are_ supposed to be good at magic, said an accusing voice in
his head.

‘Maybe I can see if something’s come loose, though. Or something,’ he
muttered.

Impelled by the vaguely accusing woolly stares, he clambered up the
rickety tower and tried to look efficient. There didn’t seem to be
anything wrong, except that the metallic groaning was getting louder.

‘Can’t see any—’

Something that had finally been tortured beyond endurance broke,
somewhere down in the tower. It shook, and the windmill spun free,
dragging a broken rod which smashed heavily on the windmill’s casing
with every revolution.

Rincewind half fell, half slid back down to the ground.

‘Seems to be a bit of a technical fault,’ he mumbled. A lump of cast
iron smashed into the sand by his feet. ‘Probably needs to be seen to by
a qualified artificer. Probably invalidates the warranty if I mess
around—’

A cracking noise from overhead made him dive for cover, which in this
case was a rather surprised sheep. When the racket had died away the
windmill’s fan was bowling over through the scrub. As for the rest of
it, if there had ever been any user-serviceable parts inside they very
clearly weren’t in there any more.

Rincewind took off his hat to mop his brow, but he wasn’t quick enough.
A pink tongue rasped across his forehead like damp sandpaper.

‘Ow! Good grief! You lot really are thirsty, aren’t you . . . ?’ He
pulled the hat back on, right down to his ears just to be on the safe
side. ‘I could do with a drink myself, to tell the truth . . .’

He managed, after pushing a few sheep aside, to find a piece of broken
windmill.

Wading with some difficulty through the press of silent bodies, he made
his way to an area that was a little lower than the surrounding scrub,
and contained a couple of trees whose leaves looked slightly fresher
than the rest.

‘Ow! G’d gr’f!’ chattered the birds around him.

Two or three feet should do it, he thought as he shovelled the red soil
aside. Amazing, really, all this water underground when it never rained
at all. The whole place must be floating on water.

At three feet down the soil was barely damp. He sighed, and kept going.

He was more than chest deep before a trickle oozed out between his toes.
The sheep fought for the damp soil as he threw it up to the surface. As
he watched, the puddle sank into the ground.

‘Hey, come back!’

‘H’y, c’m bik!’ screamed the birds in the bushes.

‘Shut up!’

‘Sh’tup! Wh’spr’boyden?’

He flailed at the ground with his makeshift shovel in an effort to catch
up, and overtook the descending water after another few inches. He
splashed on until he was knee deep, dragged his hat through the muddy
liquid, pulled himself out of the hole and ran, water dribbling over his
feet, until he could tip it into the trough.

The sheep clustered around it, struggling silently to get at the film of
moisture.

Rincewind got two more hatfuls before the water sank out of sight.

He wrenched the ladder off the stricken windmill, threw it down the hole
and jumped in after it. Damp soil fountained out as he dug, and each
dripping lump attracted a mass of flies and small birds as soon as it
hit the ground.

He managed another dozen or so hatfuls before the hole was deeper than
the ladder. By now some cattle had lumbered up to the trough as well,
and it was impossible to see the water for heads. The sound was that of
a straw investigating the suds of the biggest milkshake in the world.

Rincewind took a final look down the hole, and as he did so the last
drop of water winked out of sight.

‘Weird country,’ he muttered.

He wandered over to where Snowy was standing patiently in the sparse
shade of a bush.

‘You’re not thirsty?’ he said.

Snowy snorted and shook his mane.

‘Oh, well. Maybe you’ve got a bit of camel in you. You certainly can’t
be all horse, I know that.’

Snowy moved aimlessly sideways and trod on Rincewind’s foot.

By noon the track crossed another one, which was much wider. Hoofprints
and wheel ruts suggested that it got a lot of traffic. Rincewind
brightened up, and followed it through thickening trees, glad of the
shade.

He passed another groaning windmill surrounded by a cluster of patiently
waiting cattle.

There were more bushes and the land was rising into ancient, crumbling
hills of orange rock. At least it gets the wind up here, he thought. Ye
gods, is a drop of rain too much to ask? You can’t never have any rain.
_Everywhere_ gets rained on sometimes. It has to drop out of the sky in
order to get underground in the first place, doesn’t it?

He stopped when he heard the sound of many hoofbeats on the track behind
him.

A mob of riderless horses appeared round the bend at full gallop. As
they swept past Rincewind he saw one horse out in front of the others,
built on the sleekest lines he’d ever seen, a horse that moved as though
it had a special arrangement with gravity. The pack divided and flowed
around Rincewind as if he were a rock in a stream. Then they were just a
disappearing noise in a cloud of red dust.

Snowy’s nostrils flared, and the jolting increased as he speeded up.

‘Oh, yes?’ said Rincewind. ‘Not a chance, mate. You can’t play with the
big boys. No worries.’

The cloud of dust had barely settled before there were more hoofbeats
and a bunch of horsemen came around the curve. They galloped past
without taking any notice of Rincewind, but a rider at the rear slowed
down.

‘You seen a mob of horses go by, mate?’

‘Yes, mate. No worries, no worries, no worries.’

‘A big brown colt leadin’ ’em?’

‘Yes, mate. No worries, no worries.’

‘Old Remorse says he’ll give a hundred squids to the man who catches
him! No chance of that, it’s canyon country ahead!’

‘No worries?’

‘What’s that you’re riding, an ironing board?’

‘Er, excuse me,’ Rincewind began, as the man set off in pursuit, ‘but is
this the right road to Bugar—?’

The dust swirled across the road.

‘What happened to the well known Ecksian reputation for good-hearted
friendliness, eh?’ shouted Rincewind to empty air.

He heard shouts and the cracking of whips from the trees on the high
slopes as he wound into the hills. At one point the wild horses burst
out on to the track again, not even noticing him in their flight, and
this time Snowy ambled off the track and followed the trail of broken
bushes.

Rincewind had learned that hauling on the reins only had the effect of
making his arms ache. The only way to stop the little horse when he
didn’t want to be stopped was probably to get off, run ahead, and dig a
trench in front of him.

Once again the riders came up behind Rincewind and thudded past, foam
streaming from the horses’ mouths.

‘Excuse me. Am I on the right road for—?’

And they were gone.

He caught up with them ten minutes later in a thicket of mountain ash,
milling around uncertainly while their leader shouted at them.

‘I say, can anyone tell me—’ he ventured.

Then he saw why they had stopped. They’d run out of forwards. The ground
fell away into a canyon, a few patches of grass and a handful of bushes
clinging to the very nearly sheer drop.

Snowy’s nostrils flared and, without even pausing, he continued down the
slope.

He should have skidded, Rincewind saw. In fact he should have dropped.
The slope was almost vertical. Even mountain goats would only try it
roped together. Stones bounced around him and a few of the larger ones
managed to hit him on the back of the neck, but Snowy trotted downwards
at the same deceptive speed that he used on the flat. Rincewind settled
for hanging on and screaming.

Halfway down, he saw the wild herd gallop along the canyon, skid around
a rock and disappear between the cliffs.

Snowy reached the bottom in a shower of pebbles and paused for a moment.

Rincewind risked opening an eye. The little horse’s nostrils flared
again as it looked down the narrow canyon. It stamped a hoof
uncertainly. Then it looked at the vertiginous far wall, only a few
metres away.

‘Oh, _no_,’ moaned Rincewind. ‘Please, no . . .’ He tried to untangle
his legs but they had met right under the horse’s stomach and twisted
their ankles together.

He _must_ be able to do something to gravity, he told himself, as Snowy
trotted up the cliff as though it wasn’t a wall but merely a sort of
vertical floor. The corks on his hat brim banged against his nose.

And ahead . . . _above_ . . . was an overhang . . .

‘No, _please_, no, please don’t . . .’

He shut his eyes. He felt Snowy draw to a halt, and breathed a sigh of
relief. He risked a look down, and the huge hooves were indeed standing
on solid, flat rock.

There were no corks hanging in front of Rincewind’s hat.

In dread and slowly mounting terror, he turned his eyes to what they’d
always thought of as upwards.

There was solid rock above him, as well. Only it was a long way up, or
down. And the corks were all hanging upwards, or downwards.

Snowy was standing on the underside of the overhang, apparently enjoying
the view. He flared his nostrils again, and shook his mane.

He’ll fall off, Rincewind thought. Any minute now he’ll realize he’s
upside down and he’ll fall off and from this height a horse’ll _splat_.
On _top_ of me.

Snowy appeared to reach a decision, and set off again, around the curve
of the overhang.

The corks swung back and hit Rincewind in the face but, hey, all the
trees had the green bits pointing up, except that they were the grey
bits.

Rincewind looked across the chasm at the horsemen.

‘G’day!’ he said, waving his hat in the air as Snowy set off again. ‘I
think I’m about to have a technicolour snake!’ he added, and threw up.

‘’ere, mistah?’ someone shouted back.

‘Yes?’

‘That was a chunder!’

‘Right! No worries!’

It turned out that this piece of land was only a narrow spur between
canyons. Another sheer drop loomed up, or down. But to Rincewind’s
relief the horse turned aside at the brink and trotted along the edge.

‘Oh, no, please . . .’

A tree had fallen down and bridged the gulf. It was very narrow, but
Snowy wheeled on to it without slowing.

Both ends of the tree drummed up and down on the lip of the cliff.
Pebbles began to fall away. Snowy bounced across the gap like a small
ball and stepped off on the far side just before the treetrunk teetered
and dropped on to the rocks.

‘Please, no . . .’

There wasn’t a cliff here, just a long slope of loose rocks. Snowy
landed among them, and flared his nostrils as the entire slope of scree
began to move.

Rincewind saw the herd gallop past in the narrow canyon bottom, far
below.

Large rocks bounded alongside him as the horse continued down in his own
personal landslide. One or two jumped and bounced ahead, smashing on to
the canyon floor just behind the last of the herd.

Numb with fear and the shaking, Rincewind looked further along the
canyon. It was blind. The end was another cliff . . .

Stone piled into stone, building a rough wall across the canyon floor.
As the last boulder slammed into place Snowy landed on top of it, almost
daintily.

He looked down at the penned herd, milling in confusion, and flared his
nostrils. Rincewind was pretty sure horses couldn’t snigger, but this
one radiated an air of sniggerruity.

It was ten minutes later that the horsemen rode up. By then the herd was
almost docile.

They looked at the horses. They looked at Rincewind, who grinned
horribly and said, ‘No worries.’

Very slowly, he didn’t fall off Snowy. He simply swivelled sideways,
with his feet still twisted together, until his head banged gently on
the ground.

‘That was bloody great riding, mate!’

‘Could someone separate my ankles, please? I fear they may have fused
together.’

A couple of the riders dismounted and, after some effort, pulled him
free.

The leader looked down at him. ‘Name your price for that little battler,
mate!’ said Remorse.

‘Er . . . three . . . er . . . squids?’ said Rincewind, muzzily.

‘What? For a wiry little devil like that? He’s got to be worth a coupla
hundred at least!’

‘Three squids is all I’ve got . . .’

‘I reckon a few of them rocks hit him on the head,’ said one of the
stockmen who were holding Rincewind up.

‘I mean I’ll _buy_ him off’f _you_, mister,’ said Remorse, patiently.
‘Tell you what – two hundred squids, a bag of tucker and we’ll set you
right on the road to . . . Where was it he wanted to go, Clancy?’

‘Bugarup,’ murmured Rincewind.

‘Oh, you don’t wanna go to Bugarup,’ said Remorse. ‘Nothing in Bugarup
but a bunch of wowsers and pooftahs.’

‘’s okay, I _like_ parrots,’ mumbled Rincewind, who was just hoping that
they would let him go so that he could hold on to the ground again. ‘Er
. . . what’s Ecksian for going mad with terrified fatigue and collapsing
in a boneless heap?’

The men looked at one another.

‘Isn’t that “snagged as a wombat’s tonker”?’

‘No, no, no, that’s when you chuck a twister, isn’t it?’ said Clancy.

‘What? Strewth, no. Chucking a twister’s when . . . when you . . . yeah,
it’s when you . . . yeah, it’s when your nose . . . Hang on, that’s
“bend a smartie” . . .’

‘Er—’ said Rincewind, clutching his head.

‘What? “Bend a smartie” is when your ears get blocked underwater.’
Clancy looked uncertain, and then seemed to reach a decision. ‘Yeah,
that’s right!’

‘Nah, that’s “gonging like a possum’s armpit”, mate.’

‘Excuse me—’ said Rincewind.

‘That ain’t right. “Gonging like a possum’s armpit” is when you crack a
crusty. When your ears are stuffed like a Mudjee’s kettle after a week
of Fridays, that’s “stuck up like Morgan’s mule”.’

‘No, you’re referrin’ to “happier than Morgan’s mule in a choccy
patch”—’

‘You mean “as _fast_ as Morgan’s mule after it ate Ma’s crow pie”.’

‘How fast was that? Exactly?’ said Rincewind.

They all stared at him.

‘Faster’n an eel in a snakepit, mate!’ said Clancy. ‘Don’t you
understand plain language?’

‘Yeah,’ said one of the men, ‘he might be a fancy rider but I reckon
he’s dumber than a—’

‘_Don’t anyone say anything!_’ shouted Rincewind. ‘I’m feeling a lot
better, all right? Just . . . all right, all right?’ He straightened his
ragged robe and adjusted his hat. ‘Now, if you could just set me on the
right road to Bugarup, I will not trespass further on your time. You may
keep Snowy. He can bed down on a ceiling somewhere.’

‘Oh, no, mister,’ said Remorse. He reached into a shirt pocket, pulled
out a bundle of notes and licked his thumb to count off twenty. ‘I
always pays me debts. You want to stay with us a while first? We could
use another rider and it’s tough going on the road by yourself. There’s
bush rangers about.’

Rincewind rubbed his head again. Now that his various bodily organs had
wobbled their way back into their approximate positions he could get
back to general low-key generalized dread.

‘They won’t have to worry about me,’ he mumbled. ‘I promise not to light
fires or feed the animals. Well, I say _promise_ – most of the time
they’re trying to feed off me.’

Remorse shrugged.

‘Just so long as there’s no more of those damn dropping bears,’ said
Rincewind.

The men laughed.

‘Drop-bears? Who’s been feedin’ you a line about drop-bears?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘There’s no such thing as drop-bears! Someone must’ve seen you coming,
mate!’

‘Huh? They’ve got . . . they went,’ Rincewind waved his arm, ‘boing . .
. all over the place . . . great big teeth . . .’

‘I reckon he madder’n Morgan’s mule, mate!’ said Clancy.

The group went silent.

‘How mad is that, then?’ said Rincewind.

Clancy leaned on his saddle and looked nervously at the other men. He
licked his lips. ‘Well, it’s . . .’

‘Yes?’

‘Well, it’s . . . it’s . . .’ His face twisted up. ‘It’s . . .’

‘Ver’ . . . ?’ Rincewind hinted.

‘Ver’ . . .’ Clancy mumbled, clutching the syllable like a lifeline.

‘Hmm?’

‘Ver . . . ry . . .’

‘Keep going, keep going . . .’

‘Ver . . . ry . . . mad?’ said Clancy.

‘Well done! See? So much easier,’ said Rincewind. ‘Someone mentioned
something about food?’

Remorse nodded to one of the men, who handed Rincewind a sack.

‘There’s beer and veggies and stuff and, ’cos you’re a good sport, we’re
giving you a tin of jam, too.’

‘Gooseberry?’

‘Yep.’

‘And I’m wondering about your hat,’ said Remorse. ‘Why’s there all corks
round it?’

‘Knocks the flies out,’ said Rincewind.

‘That works, does it?’

‘Course not,’ said Clancy. ‘If’n it does, someone’d have thought of it
by now.’

‘Yes. Me,’ said Rincewind. ‘No worries.’

‘Makes you look a bit of a drongo, mate,’ said Clancy.

‘Oh, good,’ said Rincewind. ‘Which way’s Bugarup?’

‘Just turn left at the bottom of the canyon, mate.’

‘That’s all?’

‘You can ask again when you meet the bush rangers.’

‘They’ve got some sort of cabin or station, have they?’

‘They’ve . . . Well, just remember they’ll find you if you get lost.’

‘Really? Oh, well, I suppose that’s part of their job. Good day to you.’

‘G’day.’

‘No worries.’

The men watched Rincewind until he was out of sight.

‘Didn’t seem very bothered, did he?’

‘He’s a bit gujeroo, if you ask me.’

‘Clancy?’

‘Yes, boss?’

‘You made that one up, didn’t you . . . ?’

‘Well . . .’

‘You bloody did, Clancy.’

Clancy looked embarrassed, but then rallied. ‘All right, then,’ he said
hotly. ‘What about that one you used yesterday, “as busy as a one-armed
carpenter in Smackaroo”?’

‘What about it?’

‘I looked it up in the atlas and there’s no such place, boss.’

‘There damn well is!’

‘There isn’t. Anyway, no one’d employ a one-armed carpenter, would they?
So he wouldn’t be busy, would he?’

‘Listen, Clancy—’

‘He’d go fishing or something, wouldn’t he?’

‘Clancy, we’re supposed to be carving a new language out of the
wilderness here—’

‘Probably’d need someone to help him bait the line, but—’

‘Clancy, will you shut up and go and get the horses?’

It took twenty minutes to roll enough of the rocks away, and five
minutes after that Clancy reported back.

‘Can’t find the little bastard, boss. And we looked underneath all the
others.’

‘It couldn’t have got past us!’

‘Yes it could, boss. You saw it goin’ up those cliffs. Probably miles
away by now. You want I should go after that bloke?’

Remorse thought about it, and spat. ‘No, we got the colt back. That’s
worth the money.’ He stared reflectively down the canyon.

‘You all right, boss?’

‘Clancy, after we get back to the station, go on into town and call in
at the Pastoral Hotel and bring back as many corks as they’ve got,
willya?’

‘Think it’ll work, boss? He was as weird as . . .’ Clancy was pulled up
by the look in his boss’s eye. ‘He was pretty weird,’ he said.

‘Weird, yeah. But smart, too. No flies on him.’

Behind them, in the jumble of rocks and bushes at the end of the canyon,
a drawing of a small horse became a drawing of a kangaroo and then faded
into the stone.

The worst thing about losing your temper with Mustrum Ridcully was that
he never noticed when you did.

Wizards, when faced with danger, would immediately stop and argue
amongst themselves about exactly what kind of danger it was. By the time
everyone in the party understood, either it had become the sort of
danger where your options are so very, very clear that you instantly
take one of them or die, or it had got bored and gone away. Even danger
has its pride.

When he was a boy, Ponder Stibbons had imagined that wizards would be
powerful demi-gods able to change the whole world at the flick of a
finger, and then he’d grown up and found that they were tiresome old men
who worried about the state of their feet and, in harm’s way, would even
bicker about the origin of the phrase ‘in harm’s way’.

It had never struck him that evolution works in all kinds of ways. There
were still quite deep scars in old buildings that showed what happened
when you had the _other_ kind of wizard.

His footsteps took him, almost without his being aware, along the gently
winding path up the mountain. Strange creatures peered at him from the
undergrowth on either side. Some of them looked like—

Wizards think in terms of books, and, now, one crept out from the
shelves of Ponder’s memory. It had been given to him when he was small.
In fact, he’d still got it somewhere, filed away in a cardboard box.¹⁷

It had consisted of lots of small pages on a central spiral. Each one
showed the head, body or tail of some bird, fish or animal. It was
possible for the sufficiently bored to shuffle and turn them so that you
got, say, a creature with the head of a horse, the body of a beetle and
the tail of a fish. The cover promised ‘hours of fun’ although, after
the first three minutes, you couldn’t help wondering what kind of person
could make that kind of fun last for hours, and whether suffocating him
as kindly as possible now would save the Serial Crimes Squad a lot of
trouble in years to come. Ponder, however, had hours of fun.

Some of the creat— _things_ in the undergrowth looked like the pages of
that book. There were birds with beaks as long as their bodies. There
were spiders the size of hands. Here and there the air shimmered like
water. It resisted very gently as Ponder tried to walk through it, and
then let him pass, but the birds and insects didn’t seem inclined to
follow him.

There were beetles everywhere.

Eventually, by easy stages, the winding path reached the top of the
mountain. There was a tiny valley there, just below the peak. At the far
end was a large cave mouth, lit by a blue glow within.

A large beetle sang past Ponder’s ear.

The cave mouth opened into a cavern, filled with misty blue fog. There
was a suggestion of complex shadows. And there were sounds – whistles,
little zipping noises, the occasional thud or clang that suggested work
going on somewhere in the mist.

Ponder brushed aside a beetle that had landed on his cheek and stared at
the shape right in front of him.

It was the front half of an elephant.

The other half of the elephant, balancing against all probability on the
two legs at the rear end, stood a few yards away. In between was . . .
the rest of the elephant.

Ponder Stibbons told himself that if you cut an elephant in half and
scooped out the middle, what you would get would be . . . well, mess.
There wasn’t much mess here. Pink and purple tubes had uncoiled neatly
on to a workbench. A small stepladder led up into another complexity of
tubes and bulky organs. There was a general feel of methodical work in
progress. This wasn’t the horror of an elephant in an explosive death.
This was an elephant under construction.

Little clouds of white light spiralled in from all corners of the
cavern, spun for a moment, and became the god of evolution, who was
standing on the stepladder.

He blinked at Ponder. ‘Oh, it’s you,’ he said. ‘One of the pointy
creatures. Can you tell me what happens when I do this?’

He reached inside the echoing depths of the front half. The elephant’s
ears flapped.

‘The ears flapped,’ squeaked Ponder.

The god emerged, beaming. ‘It’s amazing how difficult that is to
achieve,’ he said. ‘Anyway . . . what do you think of it?’

Ponder swallowed. ‘It’s . . . very good,’ he managed. He took a step
back, bumped into something, and turned and looked into the gaping maw
of a very large shark. It was in the middle of another . . . well, he
had to think of it as a sort of biological scaffolding. It rolled an eye
at him. Behind it, a much bigger whale was being assembled.

‘It is, isn’t it?’ said the god.

Ponder tried to concentrate on the elephant. ‘Although—’ he said.

‘Yes?’

‘Are you sure about the wheels?’

The god looked concerned. ‘You think they’re too small? Not quite
suitable for the veldt?’

‘Er, probably not . . .’

‘It’s very hard to design an organic wheel, you know,’ said the god
reproachfully. ‘They’re little masterpieces.’

‘You don’t think just, you know, moving the legs about would be
simpler?’

‘Oh, we’d never get anywhere if I just copied earlier ideas,’ said the
god. ‘Diversify and fill all niches, that’s the ticket.’

‘But is lying on your side in a mud hole with your wheels spinning a
very _important_ niche?’ said Ponder.

The god looked at him, and then stared glumly at the half-completed
elephant.

‘Perhaps if I made the tyres bigger?’ he said, hopefully yet in a
hopeless voice.

‘I don’t think so,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, you’re probably right.’ The little god’s hands twitched. ‘I don’t
know, I do _try_ to diversify, but sometimes it’s so difficult . . .’

Suddenly he ran across the crowded cave towards a huge pair of doors at
the far end, and flung them open.

‘I’m sorry, but I just have to do one,’ said the god. ‘They calm me
down, you know.’

Ponder caught up. The cave beyond the doors was bigger than this one,
and brilliantly lit. The air was full of small, bright things, hovering
in their millions like beads on invisible strings.

‘Beetles?’ said Ponder.

‘There’s nothing like a beetle when you’re feeling depressed!’ said the
god. He’d stopped by a large metal desk and was feverishly opening
drawers and pulling out boxes. ‘Can you pass me that box of antennae?
It’s just on the shelf there. Oh yes, you can’t beat a beetle when
you’re feeling down. Sometimes I think it’s what it’s all about, you
know.’

‘What _all_?’ said Ponder.

The god swept an arm in an expansive gesture. ‘Everything,’ he said
cheerfully. ‘The whole thing. Trees, grass, flowers . . . What did you
think it was all for?’

‘Well, I didn’t think it was for beetles,’ said Ponder. ‘What about,
well, what about the elephant, for a start?’

The god already had a half-finished beetle in one hand. It was green.

‘Dung,’ he said triumphantly. No head, when screwed on to a body, ought
to make a sound like a cork being pushed into a bottle, but the beetle’s
did in the hands of the god.

‘What?’ said Ponder. ‘That’s rather a lot of trouble to go to just for
dung, isn’t it?’

‘That’s ecology for you, I’m afraid,’ said the god.

‘No, no, that can’t be right, surely?’ said Ponder. ‘What about the
higher lifeforms?’

‘Higher?’ said the god. ‘You mean like . . . birds?’

‘No, I mean like—’ Ponder hesitated. The god had seemed remarkably
incurious about the wizards, possibly because of their lack of
resemblance to beetles, but he could see a certain amount of theological
unpleasantness ahead.

‘Like . . . apes,’ he said.

‘Apes? Oh, very amusing, certainly, and obviously the beetles have to
have something to entertain them, but . . .’ The god looked at him, and
a celestial penny seemed to drop. ‘Oh dear, you don’t think _they’re_
the purpose of the whole business, do you?’

‘I’d rather assumed—’

‘Dear me, the purpose of the whole business, you see, is in fact to _be_
the whole business. Although,’ he sniffed, ‘if we can do it all with
beetles I shan’t complain.’

‘But surely the purpose of— I mean, wouldn’t it be nice if you ended up
with some creature that started to _think_ about the universe—?’

‘Good gravy, I don’t want anything poking around!’ said the god testily.
‘There’s enough patches and stitches in it as it is without some clever
devil trying to find more, I can assure you. No, the gods on the
mainland have got _that_ right at least. Intelligence is like legs – too
many and you trip yourself up. Six is about the right number, in my
view.’

‘But surely, ultimately, one creature might—’

The god let go of his latest creation. It whirred up and along the rows
and rows of beetles and slotted itself in between two that were almost,
but not exactly, quite like it.

‘Worked that one out, have you?’ he said. ‘Well, of course you’re right.
I can see you have quite an efficient brain— Damn.’

There was a little sparkle in the air and a bird appeared alongside the
god. It was clearly alive but entirely stationary, hanging in frozen
flight. A flickering blue glow hovered around it.

The god sighed, reached into a pocket and pulled out the most
complex-looking tool Ponder had ever seen. The bits that you could see
suggested that there were other, even stranger bits that you couldn’t
and that this was probably just as well.

‘However,’ he said, slicing the bird’s beak off, the blue glow simply
closing over the hole, ‘if I’m going to get any serious work done I’m
really going to have to find some way of organizing the whole business.
All I’m faced with these days is bills.’

‘Yes, it must be quite expens—’

‘Big bills, short bills, bills for winkling insects out of bark, bills
for cracking nuts, bills for eating fruit,’ the god went on. ‘They’re
supposed to do their own evolving. I mean, that’s the whole point. I
shouldn’t have to be running around _all_ the time.’ The god waved his
hand in the air and a sort of display stand of beaks appeared beside
him. He selected one that, to Ponder, hardly looked any different from
the one he’d removed, and used the tool to attach it to the hanging
bird. The blue glow covered it for a moment, and then the bird vanished.
In the moment that it disappeared, Ponder thought he saw its wings begin
to move.

And in that moment he knew that, despite the apparent beetle fixation,
_here_ was where he’d always wanted to be, at the cutting edge of the
envelope in the fast lane of the state of the art.

He’d become a wizard because he’d thought that wizards knew how the
universe worked, and Unseen University had turned out to be stifling.

Take that business with the tame lightning. It had demonstrably
_worked_. He made the Bursar’s hair stand on end and sparks crackle out
of his fingers, and that was by using only _one_ cat and a couple of
amber rods. His perfectly reasonable plan to use several thousand cats
tied to a huge wheel that would rotate against hundreds of rods had been
vetoed on the ridiculous grounds that it would be too noisy. His
carefully worked out scheme to split the thaum, and thus provide endless
supplies of cheap clean magic, had been quite unfairly sat upon because
it was felt that it might make the place untidy. And that was even after
he had presented figures to prove that the chances of the process
completely destroying the entire world were no greater than being
knocked down while crossing the street, and it wasn’t his fault he said
this just before the six-cart pile-up outside the University.

_Here_ was a chance to do something that made sense. Besides, he thought
he could see where the god was going wrong.

‘Excuse me,’ he said, ‘but do you need an assistant?’

‘Frankly, the whole thing is getting out of hand,’ said the god, who was
a wizard-class non-listener. ‘It’s really getting to the point where I
need an—’

‘I say, this is a pretty amazing place!’

Ponder rolled his eyes. You could say that for wizards. When they walked
into a place that was pretty amazing, they’d _tell_ you. Loudly.

‘Ah,’ said the god, turning around, ‘this is the rest of your . . .
swarm, isn’t it?’

‘I’d better go and stop them,’ said Ponder as the wizards fanned out
like small boys in an amusement arcade, ready to press anything in case
there was a free game left. ‘They poke things and then say, “What does
this do?”’

‘Don’t they ask what things do _before_ they poke them?’

‘No, they say you’ll never find out if you don’t give them a poke,’ said
Ponder darkly.

‘Then why do they ask?’

‘They just do. And they bite things and then say, “I wonder if this is
poisonous,” with their mouths full. And you know the really annoying
thing? It never is.’

‘How odd. Laughing in the face of danger is not a survival strategy,’
said the god.

‘Oh, they don’t laugh,’ said Ponder gloomily. ‘They say things like,
“You call _that_ dangerous? It’s not a patch on the kind of danger you
used to get when we were lads, eh, Senior Wrangler, what what? Remember
when old ‘Windows’ McPlunder . . .”’ He shrugged.

‘When old “Windows” McPlunder what?’ said the god.

‘I don’t know! Sometimes I think they make up the names! Dean, I really
don’t think you should do that!’

The Dean turned away from the shark, whose teeth he’d been examining.

‘Why not, Stibbons?’ he said. Behind him, the jaw snapped shut.

Only the Archchancellor’s legs were visible in the exploded elephant.
There were muffled noises from inside the whale; they sounded very much
like the Lecturer in Recent Runes saying, ‘Look at what happens when I
twist this bit . . . See, that purple bit wobbles.’

‘Amazin’ piece of work,’ said Ridcully, emerging from the elephant.
‘Very good wheels. You paint these bits before assembly, do you?’

‘It’s not a kit, sir,’ said Ponder, taking a kidney out of his hands and
wedging it back in. ‘It’s a real elephant under construction!’

‘Oh.’

‘Being _made_, sir,’ said Ponder, since Ridcully didn’t seem to have got
the message. ‘Which is not _usual_.’

‘Ah. How are they normally made, then?’

‘By other elephants, sir.’

‘Oh, yes . . .’

‘Really? Are they?’ said the god. ‘How? Those trunks are pretty nimble,
even if I say so myself, but not really very good for delicate work.’

‘Oh, not made like that, sir, obviously. By . . . you know . . . sex . .
.’ said Ponder, feeling a blush start.

‘Sex?’

Then Ponder thought: Mono Island. Oh _dear_ . . .

‘Er . . . males and females . . .’ he ventured.

‘What are they, then?’ said the god. The wizards paused.

‘Do go on, Mister Stibbons,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘We’re all ears.
Especially the elephant.’

‘Well . . .’ Ponder knew he was going red. ‘Er . . . well, how do you
get flowers and things at the moment?’

‘I make them,’ said the god. ‘And then I keep an eye on them and see how
they function and then when they wear out I make an improved version
based on experimental results.’ He frowned. ‘Although the plants seem to
be acting very oddly these days. What’s the point of these seeds they
keep making? I try to discourage it but they don’t seem to listen.’

‘I think . . . er . . . they’re trying to invent sex, sir,’ said Ponder.
‘Er . . . sex is how you can . . . they can . . . creatures can . . .
they can make the next . . . creatures.’

‘You mean . . . elephants can make more elephants?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘My word! Really?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘How do they go about that? Calibrating the ear-waggling is particularly
time-consuming. Do they use special tools?’

Ponder saw that the Dean was staring straight up at the ceiling, while
the other wizards were also finding something apparently fascinating to
look at that meant they could avoid one another’s gaze.

‘Um, in a way,’ said Ponder. He knew that a sticky patch lay ahead and
decided to give up. ‘But really I don’t know much about—’

‘And workshops, presumably,’ said the god. He took a book from his
pocket and a pencil from behind his ear. ‘Do you mind if I make notes?’

‘They . . . er . . . the female . . .’ Ponder tried.

‘Female,’ said the god obediently, writing this down.

‘Well, she . . . one popular way . . . she . . . sort of makes the next
one . . . inside her.’

The god stopped writing. ‘Now I _know_ that’s not right,’ he said. ‘You
can’t make an elephant inside an elephant—’

‘Er . . . a smaller version . . .’

‘Ah, once again I have to point out the flaw. After a few such
constructions you’d end up with an elephant the size of a rabbit.’

‘Er, it gets bigger later . . .’

‘Really? How?’

‘It sort of . . . builds itself . . . er . . . from the inside . . .’

‘And the other one, the one that is not the, uh, female? What is its
part in all this? Is your colleague ill?’

The Senior Wrangler hammered the Dean hard on the back.

‘It’s all right,’ squeaked the Dean, ‘. . . often have . . . these . . .
coughing fits . . .’

The god scribbled industriously for a few seconds, and then stopped and
chewed the end of his pencil thoughtfully.

‘And all this, er, this _sex_ is done by unskilled labour?’ he said.

‘Oh, yes.’

‘No quality control of any description?’

‘Er, no.’

‘How does _your_ species go about it?’ said the god. He looked
questioningly at Ponder.

‘It . . . er . . . we . . . er . . .’ Ponder stuttered.

‘We avoid it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Nasty cough you’ve got there, Dean.’

‘Really?’ said the god. ‘That’s very interesting. What do you do
instead? Split down the middle? That works beautifully for amoebas, but
giraffes find it extremely difficult, I do know that.’

‘What? No, we concentrate on higher things,’ said Ridcully. ‘And take
cold baths, healthy morning runs, that sort of thing.’

‘My goodness, I’d better make a note of that,’ said the god, patting his
robe. ‘How does the process work, exactly? Do the females accompany you?
These higher things . . . How high, precisely? This is a _very_
interesting concept. Presumably extra orifices are required?’

‘What? Pardon?’ said Ponder.

‘Getting creatures to make themselves, eh? I thought this whole seed
business was just high spirits but, yes, I can see that it would save a
lot of work, a _lot_ of work. Of course, there’d have to be some extra
effort at the design stage, certainly, but afterwards I suppose it’d
practically run itself . . .’ The god’s hand blurred as he wrote, and he
went on, ‘Hmm, drives and imperatives, they’re going to be vital . . .
er . . . How does it work with, say, trees?’

‘You just need Ponder’s uncle and a paintbrush,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Sir!’ said Ponder hotly.

The god gave them both a look of intelligent bewilderment, like a man
who had just heard a joke told in a completely foreign language and
isn’t sure if the speaker has got to the punchline yet. Then he
shrugged.

‘The only thing I think I don’t quite understand’, he said, ‘is why any
creature would want to spend time on all this . . .’ he peered at his
notes, ‘this _sex_, when they could be enjoying themselves . . . Oh
dear, your associate seems to be choking this time, I’m afraid . . .’

‘Dean!’ shouted Ridcully.

‘I can’t help noticing’, said the god, ‘that when _sex_ is being
discussed your faces redden and you tend to shift uneasily from one foot
to the other. Is this some sort of signal?’

‘Erm. . .’

‘If you could just tell me how it all works . . .’

Embarrassment filled the air, huge and pink. If it were rock, you could
have carved great hidden rose-red cities in it.

Ridcully smiled a petrified smile. ‘Excuse us,’ he said. ‘Faculty
meeting, gentlemen?’

Ponder watched the wizards go into a huddle. He could hear a few phrases
above the susurration.

‘_. . . my father said, but of course I didn’t believe . . . never
raised its ugly head . . . Dean, will you shut up? We can’t very well .
. . cold showers, really . . ._’

Ridcully turned back and flashed the stony smile again. ‘Sex is, er, not
something we talk about,’ he said.

‘Much,’ said the Dean.

‘Oh, I see,’ said the god. ‘Well, a practical demonstration would be so
much more comprehendable.’

‘Er, we weren’t, er . . . planning a . . .’

‘Coo-eee! There you are, gentlemen!’

Mrs Whitlow entered the cave. The wizards went suddenly quiet, sensing
in their wizardly minds that the introduction of Mrs Whitlow at this
point was an electric fire in the swimming pool of life.

‘Oh, another one of you,’ said the god brightly. He focused. ‘Or a
different species, perhaps?’

Ponder felt that he had to say something. Mrs Whitlow was giving him a
Look.

‘Mrs, er, Whitlow is, er, a lady,’ he said.

‘Ah, I shall make a note of it,’ said the god. ‘And what sort of thing
do _they_ do?’

‘They’re, um, the same species as, er, us,’ said Ponder, miserably. ‘Um
. . . the . . . um . . .’

‘Weaker sex,’ Ridcully supplied.

‘Sorry, you’ve lost me there,’ said the god.

‘Er . . . she’s, um, er, a . . . of the female persuasion,’ said Ponder.

The god smiled happily. ‘Oh, how very convenient,’ he said.

‘Excuse _me_,’ said Mrs Whitlow, in as sharp a tone as she cared to use
around the wizards, ‘but will someone introduce this gentleman to me?’

‘Oh, yes, of course,’ said Ridcully. ‘Do excuse me. God, this is Mrs
Whitlow. Mrs Whitlow, this is God. A god. God of this island, in fact.
Uh . . .’

‘Charmed, Ai’m sure,’ said Mrs Whitlow. In Mrs Whitlow’s book, gods were
socially very acceptable, at least if they had proper human heads and
wore clothes; they rated above High Priests and occupied the same level
as Dukes.

‘Should Ai kneel?’ she said.

‘Mwaaa,’ whimpered the Senior Wrangler.

‘Genuflection of any sort is _not_ required,’ said the god.

‘He means no,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, as you wish,’ said Mrs Whitlow. She extended a hand.

The god grasped it and waggled her thumb backwards and forwards.

‘_Very_ practical,’ he said. ‘Opposable, I see. I think I should make a
note of this. Do you brachiate? Are you bipedal by habit? Oh, I notice
your eyebrows go up, too. Is this a signal of some sort? I also note
that you are a different shape from the others and don’t have a beard. I
assume that means you are less wise?’

Ponder saw Mrs Whitlow’s eyes narrow and her nostrils flare.

‘Is there some sort of problem, sirs?’ she said. ‘Ai followed your
footprints to that funny boat, and this was the only other path, so—’

‘We were discussing sex,’ said the god enthusiastically. ‘It sounds very
exciting, don’t you think?’

The wizards held their breath. This was going to make the Dean’s sheets
look very minor.

‘It’s _not_ a subject on which Ai would venture an opinion,’ said Mrs
Whitlow carefully.

‘Mwaa,’ squeaked the Senior Wrangler.

‘No one seems to want to _tell_ me,’ said the god irritably. A spark
leapt from his fingers and blew a very small crater in the floor, and
that seemed to shock him as much as it did the wizards.

‘Oh dear, what _can_ you think of me? I’m so sorry!’ he said. ‘I’m
afraid it’s a sort of natural reaction if I get a bit, you know . . .
testy.’

Everyone looked at the crater. The rock bubbled gently by Ponder’s feet.
He didn’t dare move his sandal, just in case he fainted.

‘That was just . . . testy, was it?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, it may have been more . . . vexed, I suppose,’ said the god. ‘I
can’t really help it, it’s a god-given reflex. I’m afraid as a . . .
well, species, we’re not good with, you know, defiance. I’m so sorry. So
sorry.’ He blew his nose, and sat down on a half-finished panda. ‘Oh,
dear. There I go again . . .’ A tiny bolt of lightning flashed off his
thumb and exploded. ‘I hope it’s not going to be the city of Quint all
over again. Of course, you know what happened there . . .’

‘I’ve never heard of the city of Quint,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, I suppose you wouldn’t have,’ said the god. ‘That’s the whole
point, really. It wasn’t _much_ of a city. It was mostly made of mud.
Well, I _say_ mud. Afterwards, of course, it was mainly ceramics.’ He
turned a wretched face to them. ‘You know those days you get when you
just snap at everyone?’

Out of the corner of his eye Ponder had noticed that the wizards, in a
rare show of unanimity, were shuffling sideways, very slowly, towards
the door.

A much bigger thunderbolt blew a hole in the floor near the cave
entrance.

‘Oh dear, where _can_ I put my face?’ said the god. ‘It’s all
subconscious, I’m afraid.’

‘Could you get treatment for premature incineration?’

‘Dean! This is _not_ the time!’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor.’

‘If only they hadn’t turned up their noses at my inflammable cows,’ said
the god, sparks fizzing off his beard. ‘All right, I would agree that on
hot days, in certain rare circumstances, they would spontaneously
combust and burn down the village, but is that any excuse for
ingratitude?’

Mrs Whitlow had been giving the god a long, cool stare. ‘What exactly is
it you wish to know?’ she said.

‘Huh?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, Ai mean no offence, but Ai for one would like to get out of here
without mai hair on fire,’ said the housekeeper.

The god looked up. ‘This male and female concept seems really rather
promising,’ he said, sniffing. ‘But no one seems to want to go into
detail . . .’

‘Oh, _that_,’ said Mrs Whitlow. She glanced at the wizards, and then
gently pulled the god to his feet. ‘If you will excuse me for one
moment, gentlemen . . .’

The wizards watched them in even more shock than had attended the
lightning display, and then the Chair of Indefinite Studies pulled his
hat over his eyes.

‘I daren’t look,’ he said, and added, ‘What are they doing?’

‘Er . . . just talking . . .’ said Ponder.

‘Talking?’

‘And she’s . . . sort of . . . waving her hands about.’

‘Mwaa!’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Quick, someone, give him some air,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now she’s
_laughing_, isn’t she?’

Both the housekeeper and the god looked around at the wizards. Mrs
Whitlow nodded her head as if to reassure him that what she’d just told
him was true, and they both laughed.

‘_That_ looked more like a snigger,’ said the Dean severely.

‘I’m not sure I actually approve of this,’ said Ridcully, haughtily.
‘Gods and mortal women, you know. You hear stories.’

‘Gods turning themselves into bulls,’ said the Dean.

‘Swans, too,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Showers of gold,’ said the Dean.

‘Yes,’ said the Chair. He paused for a second. ‘You know, I’ve often
wondered about that one—’

‘What’s she describing now?’

‘I think I’d rather not know, quite frankly.’

‘Oh, look, someone _please_ do something for the Senior Wrangler, will
you?’ said Ridcully. ‘Loosen his clothing or something!’

They heard the god shout, ‘It _what_?’ Mrs Whitlow glanced around at the
wizards and appeared to lower her voice.

‘Did anyone ever meet _Mr_ Whitlow?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Well . . . no,’ said the Dean. ‘Not that I remember. I suppose we’ve
all assumed that he’s dead.’

‘Anyone know what he died of?’ Ridcully went on. ‘Ah, quieten down . . .
they’re coming back . . .’

The god nodded cheerfully at them as he approached.

‘Well, _that_’s all sorted out,’ he said, rubbing his hands together. ‘I
can’t wait to see how it works in practice. You know, if I’d sat here
for a hundred years I’d never have . . . well, really, no one could
seriously believe . . . I mean . . .’ He started to chuckle at their
frozen faces. ‘That bit where he . . . and then she . . . Really, I’m
amazed that anyone stops laughing long enough to . . . Still, I can see
how it could work, and it certainly opens the door to some very
interesting possibilities indeed . . .’

Mrs Whitlow was looking intently at the ceiling. There was perhaps just
a hint in her stance and the way her rather expressive bosom moved that
she was trying not to laugh. It was disconcerting. Mrs Whitlow never
usually laughed at anything.

‘Ah? Oh?’ said Ridcully, edging towards the door. ‘Really? Well done,
then. So, I expect you don’t need us any more, eh? Only we’ve got a boat
to catch . . .’

‘Yes, certainly, don’t let me hold you up,’ said the god, waving a hand
vaguely. ‘You know, the more I think about it, the more I can see that
“sex” will solve practically all my problems.’

‘Not everyone can say that,’ said Ridcully gravely. ‘Are you, er . . .
joining us, Mrs, er, Whitlow?’

‘Certainly, Archchancellor.’

‘Er . . . jolly good. Well done. Ahem. And you, of course, Mister
Stibbons . . .’

The god had wandered over to a workbench and was rummaging in boxes. The
air glittered. Ponder looked up at the whale. It was clearly alive but .
. . not at the moment. His gaze swept across the
elephant-under-construction and past mysteriously organic-looking
gantries, where shimmering blue light surrounded shapes as yet
unrecognized, although one did appear to contain half a cow.

He carefully removed an exploring beetle from his ear. The point was, if
he left now he’d always wonder . . .

‘I think I’d like to stay,’ he said.

‘Good . . . er . . .’ said the god, without looking around.

‘Man,’ said Ponder.

‘Good man,’ said the god.

‘Are you _sure_?’ said Ridcully.

‘I don’t think I’ve ever had a holiday,’ said Ponder. ‘I’d like to apply
for time off to do research, sir.’

‘But we’re lost in the past, man!’

‘Basic research, then,’ said Ponder firmly. ‘There’s just so much to
learn here, sir!’

‘Really?’

‘You’ve only got to look around, sir!’

‘Well, I suppose I can’t stop you if your mind’s made up,’ said the
Archchancellor. ‘We’ll have to dock your pay, of course.’

‘I don’t think I’ve ever been paid, sir,’ said Ponder.

The Dean nudged Ridcully and whispered in his ear.

‘And we need to know how the boat works,’ Ridcully went on.

‘What? Oh, it shouldn’t be a problem,’ said the god, looking up from his
bench. ‘It’ll find somewhere with a different biogeographical signature,
you see. It’s all automatic. No sense in coming back to where you
started from!’ He waved a beetle leg in the air. ‘There’s a new
continent going up turnwise of here. The boat’ll probably head straight
for a landmass that size.’

‘New?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, yes. I’ve never been interested in that sort of thing myself, but
you can hear the construction noises all night. It’s certainly causing a
mess.’

‘Stibbons, are you _sure_ you want to stay?’ the Dean demanded.

‘Er, yes . . .’

‘I’m sure Mister Stibbons will uphold the fine traditions of the
University!’ said Ridcully heartily.

Ponder, who knew all about the traditions of the University, nodded very
slightly. His heart was pounding. He hadn’t even felt like this when
he’d first worked out how to program Hex.

At last he’d found his proper place in the world. The future beckoned.

Dawn was breaking when the wizards ambled back down the mountain.

‘Not a bad god, I thought,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘As gods go.’

‘That was good coffee he made us,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘And didn’t he grow the bush fast, once we explained what coffee was,’
said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

They strolled on. Mrs Whitlow was walking some way ahead, humming to
herself. The wizards took care to remain at a respectful distance. They
were aware that in some kind of obscure way she’d won, although they
hadn’t a clue what the game was.

‘Funny of young Ponder to want to stay,’ said the Senior Wrangler,
desperately trying to think of anything except a vision in pink.

‘The god seemed happy about it,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘He
did say that designing sex was going to involve redesigning practically
everything else.’

‘I used to make snakes out of clay when I was a little boy,’ said the
Bursar happily.

‘Well done, Bursar.’

‘Doing the feet was the hard part.’

‘I can’t help thinking, though, that we may have . . . tinkered with the
past, Archchancellor,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I don’t see how,’ said Ridcully. ‘After all, the past happened before
we got here.’

‘Yes, but now we’re here, we’ve changed it.’

‘Then we changed it before.’

And that, they felt, pretty well summed it up. It is very easy to get
ridiculously confused about the tenses of time travel, but most things
can be resolved by a sufficiently large ego.

‘It’s jolly impressive to think that a University man will be helping to
create a whole new approach to designing lifeforms,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies.

‘Indeed, yes,’ said the Dean. ‘Who says education is a bad thing, eh?’

‘I can’t imagine,’ said Ridcully. ‘Who?’

‘Well, if they did, we could point to Ponder Stibbons and say, look at
him, worked hard at his studies, paid attention to his tutors, and now
he’s sitting on the right hand of a god.’

‘Won’t that make it rather difficult for—’ the Lecturer in Recent Runes
began, but the Dean got there first.

‘That means on the right-hand _side_ of the god, Runes,’ he said.
‘Which, I suspect, makes him an angel. Technically.’

‘Surely not. He’s scared of heights. Anyway, he’s made of flesh and
blood, and I’m sure angels have to be made of . . . light or something.
He _could_ be a saint, though, I suppose.’

‘Can he do miracles, then?’

‘I’m not sure. When we left they were talking about redesigning male
baboons’ behinds to make them more attractive.’

The wizards thought about this for a while.

‘That’d be a miracle in _my_ book, certainly,’ said Ridcully.

‘Can’t say that’s how I’d choose to spend an afternoon, though,’ said
the Senior Wrangler, in a thoughtful voice.

‘According to the god it’s all to do with making creatures _want_ to
have . . . to engage in . . . to get to grips with making a new
generation, when they could otherwise be spending their time in more . .
. profitable activity. Apparently, a lot of animals will need a complete
rebuild.’

‘From the bottom up. Ahaha.’

‘Thank you for your contribution, Dean.’

‘So exactly how does it work, then?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘A female
baboon sees a male baboon and says, “My word, that’s a very colourful
bottom and no mistake, let us engage in . . . nuptial activity”?’

‘I must say I’ve often wondered about that sort of thing myself,’ said
the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Take frogs. Now, if I was a lady frog
looking for a husband, I’d want to know about, well, size of legs,
competence at catching flies—’

‘Length of tongue,’ said Ridcully. ‘Dean, will you _please_ take
something for that cough?’

‘Quite so,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Has he got a good pond,
and so on. I can’t say I’d base my choice on his ability to inflate his
throat to the same size as his stomach and go _rabbit, rabbit_.’

‘I believe it’s _ribbit, ribbit_, Runes.’

‘Are you sure?’

‘I believe so, yes.’

‘Which ones go _rabbit, rabbit_, then?’

‘Rabbits, I believe.’

‘Oh. Yes. Constantly, as I recall.’

‘I’ve always thought sex was really a rather tasteless way of ensuring
the continuity of the species,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, as
they reached the beach. ‘I’m sure there could be something better. It’s
all very . . . old-fashioned, to my mind. And far too energetic.’

‘Well, I’m generally in agreement, but what would you suggest instead?’
said Ridcully.

‘Bridge,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies firmly.

‘Really? Bridge?’

‘You mean the game with cards?’ said the Dean.

‘I don’t see why not. It can be extremely exciting, very sociable, and
requires no special equipment.’

‘But you do need _four_ people,’ Ridcully pointed out.

‘Ah, yes. I had not considered that. Yes, I can see that there could be
problems. All right, then. How about . . . croquet? You can do that with
two. Indeed, I’ve often enjoyed a quiet knock-about all by myself.’

Ridcully let a little more space come between him and the Chair of
Indefinite Studies.

‘I fail to see how it could be utilized for the purpose of procreation,’
he said carefully. ‘Recreation, yes, I’ll grant you that. But not
procreation. I mean, how would it work?’

‘_He_’s the god,’ sniffed the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘He’s
supposed to sort out the details, isn’t he?’

‘But you think women would really decide to spend their life with a man
just because he can swing a big mallet?’ said the Dean.

‘I suppose, when you come to think about it, that’s no more ridic—’
Ridcully began, and then stopped. ‘I think we should leave this
subject,’ he said.

‘I played croquet with him only last week,’ hissed the Dean to Ridcully,
as the Chair wandered off. ‘I shan’t be happy now until I’ve had a good
bath!’

‘We’ll lock up his mallets when we get back, depend upon it,’ Ridcully
whispered.

‘He’s got books and books about croquet in his room, did you know that?
Some of them have got _coloured illustrations_!’

‘What of?’

‘Famous croquet strokes,’ said the Dean. ‘I think we ought to take his
mallet away.’

‘Close to what I was thinking, Dean. Close,’ said Ridcully.

Once a moderately jolly wizard camped by a dried-up waterhole under the
shade of a tree that he was completely unable to identify. And he swore
as he hacked and hacked at a can of beer, saying, ‘What kind of _idiots_
put beer in _tins_?’

By the time he managed to make a hole with a sharp stone the beer came
out as high-speed froth, but he fielded as much as he could.

Apart from the beer, though, things were looking up. He’d checked the
trees for drop-bears and, best of all, there was no sign of Scrappy.

He managed to pierce another tin, more carefully this time, and sucked
thoughtfully at the contents.

What a country! Nothing was exactly what it turned out to be, even the
sparrows talked, or at least tried to say, ‘Who’s a pretty boy, then?’
and it never ever rained. And all the water hid underground, so they had
to pump it out with windmills.

He’d passed another one as he left the canyon country. This one was
still managing a trickle of water, but it had dried up to an occasional
drip even as he watched it.

Damn! He should’ve picked up some water to take away while he was there.

He looked at the food in the sack. There was a loaf of bread the size
and weight of a cannonball, and some vegetables. But at least they were
recognizable vegetables. There was even a potato.

He held it up against the sunset.

Rincewind had eaten in many countries on the Disc, and sometimes he’d
been able to complete an entire meal before having to run away. And
they’d always lacked something. Oh, people did great things with spices
and olives and yams and rice and whatnot, but what he’d come to crave
was the humble potato.

Time was when a plate of mash or chips would have been his for the
asking. All he’d needed to do was wander down to the kitchens and ask.
Food was always available for the asking at Unseen University, you could
say that for the place, even if you said it with your mouth full. And,
ridiculous though it sounded now, he’d hardly ever done that. The dish
of potatoes’d come past at mealtimes and he’d probably have a spoonful
but, sometimes, he wouldn’t! He’d . . . let . . . the . . . dish . . .
go . . . by. He’d have rice instead. Rice! All very nutritious in its
way, but basically only grown where potatoes would’ve floated to the
surface.

He’d remember those times, sometimes, usually in his sleep, and wake up
shouting, ‘Will you pass the potatoes, please!’

Sometimes he remembered the melted butter. Those were the bad days.

He placed the potato reverentially on the ground and tipped out the rest
of the bag. There was an onion and some carrots. A tin of . . . tea, by
the smell of it, and a little box of salt.

A flash of inspiration struck him with all the force and brilliance that
ideas have when they’re travelling through beer.

Soup! Nutritious and simple! You just boiled everything up! And, yes, he
could use one of the empty beer tins, and make a fire, and chop up the
vegetables, and the damp patch over there suggested there was water . .
.

He walked unsteadily over to have a look. There was a circular
depression in the ground that looked as though it might have been some
sort of pond once, and there was the usual cluster of slightly healthier
than usual trees which you got in such places, but there was no sign of
any water and he was too tired to dig.

Then another insight struck him at the speed of beer. Beer! It was only
water, really, with stuff in it. Wasn’t it? And most of what was in it
was yeast, which was practically a medicine and definitely a food. In
fact, when you thought about it, beer was only a kind of runny bread, in
_fact_, it’d be _better_ to use some of the beer in the soup! Beer soup!
A few brain cells registered their doubt, but the rest of them grabbed
them by the collar and said hoarsely, people cooked chicken in wine,
didn’t they?

It took him some time to hack one end off a tin, but eventually he had
it standing in the fire with the chopped-up vegetables floating in the
froth. A few more doubts assailed him at this point, but they were
elbowed aside, especially when the smell that floated up made his mouth
water and he’d opened another tin of beer as a pre-prandial appetizer.

After a while he poked the vegetables with a stick. They were still
pretty hard, even though a lot of the beer seemed to have boiled away.
Was there something else he hadn’t done?

Salt! Yes, that was it! Salt, marvellous stuff. He’d read where you went
totally up the pole if you didn’t have any salt for a couple of weeks.
That was probably why he was feeling so odd at the moment. He fumbled
for the salt box and dropped a pinch in the tin.

It was a medicinal herb, salt. Good for wounds, wasn’t it? And back in
the really old days, hadn’t soldiers been paid in salt? Wasn’t that
where the word _salary_ came from? _Must_’ve been good, then. You went
on a forced march all week, building your road as you went, then you
fought the maddened blue-painted tribesmen of the Vexatii, and you
force-marched all the way back home, and on Friday the centurion would
turn up with a big sack and say, ‘Well done, lads! Here’s some salt!’

It was amazing how well his mind was working.

He peered at the salt box again, shrugged, and tipped it all in. When
you thought about it like that, salt must really be an amazing food. And
he hadn’t had any for weeks, so that was probably why his eyesight was
acting up and he couldn’t feel his legs.

He topped up the beer, too.

He lay back with his head on a rock. Keep out of trouble and don’t get
involved, that was the important thing. Look at those stars up there,
with nothing to do all the time but sit there and shine. No one ever
told _them_ what to do, the lucky bastards . . .

He woke up shivering. Something horrible had crawled into his mouth, and
it was no great relief to find out that it was his tongue. It was
chilly, and the horizon suggested dawn.

There was also a pathetic sucking noise.

Some sheep had invaded his camp during the night. One of them was trying
to get its mouth around an empty beer tin. It stopped when it saw that
he had woken up, and backed away a bit, but not too far, while fixing
him with the penetrating gaze of a domesticated animal reminding its
domesticator that they had a deal.

His head ached.

There had to be some water _somewhere_. He lurched to his feet and
blinked at the horizon. There were . . . windmills and things, weren’t
there? He remembered the stricken windmills from yesterday. Well, there
was bound to be some water around, no matter what anyone said. Ye gods,
he was _thirsty_.

His gummed-up gaze fell upon last night’s magnificent experiment in
cookery. Yeasty vegetable soup, what a _wonderful_ idea. Exactly the
sort of idea that sounds really good around one o’clock in the morning
when you’ve had too much to drink.

Now he remembered, with a shudder, some of the great wheezes he’d had on
similar occasions. Spaghetti and custard, that’d been a good one.
Deep-fried peas, that’d been another triumph. And then there’d been the
time when it had seemed a really good idea to eat some flour and yeast
and then drink some warm water, because he’d run out of bread and after
all that was what the stomach _saw_, wasn’t it? The thing about
late-night cookery was that it _made sense at the time._ It always had
some logic behind it. It just wasn’t the kind of logic you’d use around
midday.

Still, he’d have to eat _something_ and the dark brown goo that half
filled the tin was the only available food in this vicinity that didn’t
have at least six legs. He didn’t even think about eating mutton. You
couldn’t, when it was looking at you so pathetically.

He poked the goo with the stick. It gripped the wood like glue.

‘Gerroff!’

A blob eventually came loose. Rincewind tasted it, gingerly. It was just
possible that if you mixed yeasty beer and vegetables together you’d
get—

No, what you got was salty-tasting beery brown gunk.

Odd, though . . . It was kind of horrible, but nevertheless Rincewind
found himself having another taste.

Oh, _gods_. Now he was _really_ thirsty.

He picked up the tin and staggered off towards some trees. That’s where
you found water . . . you looked at where the trees were and, tired or
not, you dug down.

It took him half an hour to squash an empty beer tin and use it to dig a
hole waist deep. His toes felt damp.

Another half an hour took him to shoulder depth and a pair of wet
ankles.

Say what you like – that brown muck was good stuff. It was the runny
equivalent of dwarf bread. You didn’t really believe what your mouth
said you’d just tasted, so you had some more. Probably full of
nourishing vitamins and minerals. Most things you couldn’t believe the
taste of generally were . . .

By the time he raised his head he was surrounded by sheep, eyeing him
cautiously in between longing glances into the damp depths.

‘It’s no good you lot looking at me like that,’ he said. They paid no
attention. They carried on looking at him.

‘It’s not _my_ fault,’ Rincewind muttered. ‘I don’t care what any
kangaroo says. I just arrived here. I’m not responsible for the
_weather_, for heaven’s sake.’

They went on looking. He cracked. Practically anyone will crack before a
sheep cracks. A sheep hasn’t got much that’s crackable.

‘Oh, hell, maybe I can rig up some kind of bucket and pulley
arrangement,’ he said. ‘It’s not as though I’ve got any appointments
today.’

He was digging a bit further, in the hope of getting deep enough before
the water ran away completely, when he heard someone whistling.

He looked up, through the legs of the sheep. A man was creeping down
across the dried-up waterhole, whistling tunelessly between his teeth.
He’d failed to notice Rincewind because his gaze was fixed so intently
on the milling sheep. He dropped the pack he’d been carrying, pulled out
a sack, sidled towards a sheep all by itself, and leapt. It barely had
time to bleat.

As he was stuffing it into the sack a voice said: ‘That probably belongs
to someone, you know.’

The man looked around hurriedly. The voice was coming from a group of
sheep.

‘I reckon you could get into serious trouble, stealing sheep. You’ll
regret it later on, I’m sure. Probably someone really cares about that
sheep. Come on, let it go.’

The man stared around wildly. ‘I mean, think about it,’ the voice went
on. ‘You’ve got this nice country here, parrots and everything, and
you’re going to spoil it all by stealing someone’s sheep that they’ve
worked so hard to grow. I bet you wouldn’t like to be remembered as a
sheep-stealer— Oh.’

The man had dropped the sack and was running away very fast.

‘Well, you didn’t have to waltz off like that, I was only trying to
appeal to your better nature!’ said Rincewind, pulling himself up out of
the hole.

He cupped his hands. ‘And you’ve forgotten your camping stuff!’ he
shouted, after the disappearing dust.

The sack baa-ed.

Rincewind picked it up, and a noise behind him made him look round.
There was another man watching him from the back of a horse. He was
glaring.

Behind him were three men wearing identical helmets and jerkins and
humourless expressions that had ‘watchman’ written all over them in slow
handwriting. And all three were pointing crossbows at him.

That bottomless feeling that he had once again wandered into something
that didn’t concern him and was going to find it hard to wander out
again grew within Rincewind.

He tried to smile.

‘G’day!’ he said. ‘No worries, eh? I must say I’m really glad to see you
drongos and no two ways about it!’

Ponder Stibbons cleared his throat.

‘Where would you like me to start?’ he said. ‘I could probably finish
off the elephant . . .’

‘How are you at slime?’

Ponder hadn’t considered a future as a slime designer, but everyone had
to start somewhere.

‘Fine,’ he said. ‘Fine.’

‘Of course, slime just splits down the middle,’ said the god, as they
walked along rows of glowing, life-filled cubes while beetles sizzled
overhead. ‘Not a lot of future in that, really. It works all right for
lower lifeforms but, frankly, it’s a bit embarrassing for the more
complicated creatures and positively lethal for horses. No, sex is going
to be very, very useful, Ponder. It’ll keep everything on its toes. And
_that_ will give us time to work on the _big_ project.’

Ponder sighed. Ah . . . he _knew_ there had to be a big project. _The_
big project. A god wasn’t going to do all this sort of thing just to
make life better for inflammable cows.

‘Could I help with that?’ he said. ‘I’m sure I could make a
contribution.’

‘Really? I thought perhaps animals and birds would be more up your . . .
up your . . .’ The god waved his hands vaguely. ‘Up whatever you walk
on. Where you live.’

‘Well, yes, but they’re a bit limited, aren’t they?’ said Ponder.

The god beamed. There’s nothing like being near a happy god. It’s like
giving your brain a hot bath.

‘Exactly!’ he said. ‘Limited! The very word! Each one stuck in some
desert or jungle or mountain, relying on one or two foods, at the mercy
of every vagary of the universe and wiped out by the merest change of
climate. What a terrible waste!’

‘That’s right!’ said Ponder. ‘What you need is a creature that is
resourceful and adaptable, am I right?’

‘Oh, very well put, Ponder! I can see you’ve turned up at just the right
time!’ A pair of huge doors swung open in front of them, revealing a
circular room with a shallow pyramid of steps in the centre. At the
summit was another cloud of blue mist, in which occasional lights flared
and died.

The future unrolled in front of Ponder Stibbons. His eyes were so bright
that his glasses steamed, that he could probably scorch holes in thin
paper. Oh, _right_ . . . what more could any natural philosopher dream
of? He’d got the theories, now he could do the practice.

And this time it’d be done _properly_. To hell with messing up the
future! That’s what the future was _for_. Oh, he’d been against it, that
was true, but it’d been . . . well, when someone else was thinking of
doing it. But now he’d got the ear of a god, and maybe some intelligence
could be applied to the task of creating intelligence.

For a start, it ought to be possible to put together the human brain so
that long beards _weren’t_ associated with wisdom, which would instead
be seen to reside in those who were young and skinny and required
glasses for close work.

‘And . . . you’ve finished this?’ he said, as they climbed the steps.

‘Broadly, yes,’ said the god. ‘My greatest achievement. Frankly, it
makes the elephants look very flimsy by comparison. But there’s plenty
of fine detail left to do, if you think you’re up to it.’

‘It’d be an honour,’ said Ponder.

The blue mist was right in front of him. By the look of the sparks,
something very important was happening in there.

‘Do you give them any instructions before you let them out?’ he said,
his breathing shallow.

‘A few simple ones,’ said the god. He waved a wrinkled hand, and the
glowing ball began to contract. ‘Mostly they work things out
themselves.’

‘Of course, of course,’ said Ponder. ‘And I suppose if they go wrong we
could always put them right with a few commandments.’

‘Not really necessary,’ said the god, as the blue ball vanished and
revealed the pinnacle of creation. ‘I find very simple instructions are
quite sufficient. You know . . . “Head for dark places,” that sort of
thing. There! Isn’t it perfect? What a piece of work! The sun will burn
out, the seas will dry up, but this chap will be there, you mark my—
Hello? Ponder?’

The Dean wet a finger and held it up. ‘We have the wind on our starboard
beam,’ he said.

‘That’s good, is it?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Could be, could be. Let’s hope it can take us to this continent he
mentioned. I’m getting nervous of islands.’

Ridcully finished hacking through the stem of the boat and threw it
overboard.

At the top of the green mast the trumpet-like blooms appeared to tremble
in the wind. The leaf sail creaked slowly into a different position.

‘I’d say this was a miracle of nature’, said the Dean, ‘if we hadn’t
just met the person who did it. Rather spoils it, that.’

While wizards were not generally adventurous, they did understand that a
vital part of any great undertaking is the securing of adequate
provisions, which is why the boat was noticeably heavier in the water.

The Dean selected a natural cigar, lit it, and made a face. ‘Not the
best,’ he said. ‘Rather green.’

‘We’ll just have to rough it,’ said Ridcully. ‘What _are_ you doing,
Senior Wrangler?’

‘Just preparing a little tray for Mrs Whitlow. A few choice things.’

The wizards glanced towards the crude awning they’d erected towards the
prow. It wasn’t that she’d actually _asked_ for it. It was simply that
she’d made some remark about how hot the sun was, as anyone might, and
suddenly wizards were getting in each other’s way as they vied with one
another to cut poles and weave palm leaves. Perhaps never has so much
intellectual effort gone into building a sunshade, which might have
accounted for the wobble.

‘I thought it was _my_ turn to do that,’ said the Dean, coldly.

‘No, Dean, you took her the fruit drink, if you remember,’ said the
Senior Wrangler, cutting a cheese nut into dainty segments.

‘That was just one small drink!’ the Dean snapped. ‘You’re doing a whole
tray. Look, you’ve even done a flower arrangement in a coconut shell!’

‘Mrs Whitlow likes that sort of thing,’ said the Senior Wrangler calmly.
‘But she did say it was still a bit warm, so possibly you can fan her
with a palm leaf while I peel these grapes for her.’

‘Once again it is left to me to point out the elementary unfairness,’
said the Dean. ‘Merely waving a leaf is a very menial activity compared
to removing grape skins, and I happen to outrank you, Senior Wrangler.’

‘Indeed, Dean? And exactly how do you work that out?’

‘It’s not my _opinion_, man, it’s written into the Faculty structure!’

‘Of where, precisely?’

‘Have you gone totally Bursar? Unseen University, of course!’

‘And where is that, exactly?’ said the Senior Wrangler, carefully
arranging some lilies in a pleasing design.

‘Ye gods, man, it’s . . . it’s . . .’ The Dean flapped a hand in the
direction of the horizon, and his voice trailed off as certain facts of
time and space bore in on him.

‘I’ll leave you to work it out, shall I?’ said the Senior Wrangler,
getting off his knees and raising the tray reverentially.

‘I’ll help!’ shouted the Dean, lumbering to his feet.

‘It’s very light, I assure you—’

‘No, no, I can’t let you do it all by yourself!’

Each holding the tray with one hand, and trying to push the other man
away with the spare hand, they lurched forward, leaving a trail of spilt
coconut milk and petals.

Ridcully rolled his eyes. It must be the heat, he thought. He turned to
the Chair of Indefinite Studies, who was trying to tie a short log to a
long stick with a piece of creeper.

‘I was just thinking’, he said, ‘that everyone’s gone a little bit mad
except me and you . . . Er, what are you doing there?’

‘I was just wondering whether Mrs Whitlow might like a game of croquet,’
said the Chair. He waggled his eyebrows conspiratorially.

The Archchancellor sighed and wandered off along the deck. The Librarian
had gone back to being a deckchair as a suitable mode for shipboard
life, and the Bursar had gone to sleep on him.

The big leaf moved slightly. Ridcully got the feeling that the green
trumpets on the mast were _sniffing_.

The wizards were already a little way from shore, but he saw the column
of dust come down the track. It stopped at the beach and became a dot,
which plunged into the sea.

The sail creaked again, and flapped as the wind grew.

‘Ahoy there!’ shouted Ridcully.

The distant figure waved for a moment and then continued swimming.

Ridcully filled his pipe and watched with interest as Ponder Stibbons
caught up with the boat.

‘Very well swum, if I may say so,’ he said.

‘Permission to come aboard, sir?’ said Ponder, treading water. ‘Could
you throw down a creeper?’

‘Why, certainly.’

The Archchancellor puffed his pipe as the wizard climbed aboard.
‘Possibly a record time over that distance, Mister Stibbons.’

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Ponder, dripping water on the deck.

‘And may I congratulate you on being properly dressed. You are wearing
your pointy hat, which is the _sine qua non_ of a wizard in public.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘It is a good hat.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘They say a wizard without his hat is undressed, Mister Stibbons.’

‘So I have heard, sir.’

‘But in your case, I must point out, you are _with_ your hat but you are
still, in a very real sense, undressed.’

‘I thought the robe would slow me down, sir.’

‘And, while it is good to see you, Stibbons, albeit rather more of you
than I would usually care to contemplate, I am moved to ask why you are,
in fact, here.’

‘I suddenly felt it would be unfair to deprive the University of my
services, sir.’

‘Really? A sudden rush of nostalgia for the old alma mater, eh?’

‘You could say that, sir.’

Ridcully’s eyes twinkled behind the smoke and, not for the first time,
Ponder suspected that the man was sometimes rather cleverer than he
appeared. It would not be hard.

The Archchancellor shrugged, removed his pipe, and poked around inside
it to remove a particularly obstructive clinker.

‘The Senior Wrangler’s bathing costume is around somewhere,’ he said. ‘I
should put it on, if I were you. I suspect that offending Mrs Whitlow at
the moment will get you hanged. All right? And if there is anything you
want to talk about, my door is always open.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘Right now, of course, I don’t have a door.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘Imagine it as being open, nevertheless.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

After all, Ponder thought as he slipped gratefully away, the wizards of
UU were merely crazy. Not even the Bursar was _insane_.

Even now, if he closed his eyes, he could still see the God of Evolution
beaming so happily as the cockroach stirred.

Rincewind rattled the bars. ‘Don’t I get a trial?’ he shouted.

After a while a warder wandered along the corridor. ‘Wha’d’yew want a
trial for, mister?’

‘What? Well, call me Mister Silly, but it might just prove that I wasn’t
trying to steal the damn sheep, mightn’t it?’ said Rincewind. ‘I was in
fact _rescuing_ it. If only you people would track down the thief, he’d
tell you!’

The warder leaned against the wall and stuck his hands in his belt.

‘Yeah, well, it’s a funny thing,’ he said, ‘but, y’know, we searched and
searched and put up notices and everything but, funny thing, yew’ll
never believe this, the bastard hasn’t had the decency to come forward?
Makes yew despair of human nature, eh?’

‘So what’s going to happen to me?’

The warder scratched his nose. ‘Gonna hang you by the neck until you’re
dead, mate. Tomorrow morno.’

‘You couldn’t perhaps just hang me by the neck until I’m sorry?’

‘No, mate. Got to be dead.’

‘Good grief, it was only a sheep when all’s said and done!’

The warder grinned widely. ‘Ah, a lot of men have gone to the gallows
sayin’ that in the past,’ he said. ‘’s’matterofact, you’re the first
sheep-stealer we’ve had here for _years._ All our big heroes have been
sheep-stealers. You’re gonna get a big crowd.’

‘Baah!’

‘Maybe a flock, too,’ said the warder.

‘That’s another thing,’ said Rincewind. ‘Why’s this sheep in my cell?’

‘Evidence, mate.’

Rincewind looked down at the sheep. ‘Oh. Well, no worries, then.’

The warder wandered off. Rincewind sat down on the bunk.

Well, he could look on the bright side, couldn’t he? This was
_civilization_. He hadn’t seen much of it, what with being tied across
the back of a horse and everything, but what he’d been able to see was
full of ruts and hoofprints and smelled pretty bad, which civilization
often does. They were going to hang him in the morning. This building
was the first one made of stone he’d seen in this country. They had
watchmen, even. They were going to hang him in the morning. There were
the sounds of carts and people filtering in through the high window.
They were going to hang him in the morning.

He gazed around the cell. It looked as though whoever’d built it had
unaccountably forgotten to include any useful trapdoors.

Trapdoors . . . Now there was a word he shouldn’t think about.

He’d been in nastier places than this. Much, much nastier. And that made
it worse, because he’d been up against nasty, weird and magical things
which suddenly seemed a lot easier to contemplate than the fact that he
was held in some stone box and in the morning some perfectly nice people
who he might quite like if he met them in a bar were going to march him
out and make him stand on a really unsafe floor in a very tight collar.

‘Baah!’

‘Shut up.’

‘Baah?’

‘Couldn’t you have had a bath, or a dip or something? It’s a bit
agricultural in here.’

The wall, now his eyes had become accustomed to the gloom, was covered
with scrawls, and in particular those little wicket gate tallies drawn
by prisoners who were counting the days. They were going to hang him in
the morning, so that was one chore he wouldn’t have to . . . Shut up,
shut up.

Now he came to look closer, most of the counts went up to one.

He lay back with his eyes closed. Of course he’d get rescued, he’d
_always_ got rescued. Although, come to think of it, always in
circumstances that put him in such a lot more danger than a prison cell
usually held.

Well, he’d been in enough cells. There were ways to handle these things.
The important thing was to be direct. He got up and banged on the bars
until the warder sauntered along the corridor.

‘Yes, mate?’

‘I just want to get things sorted out,’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s not as
though I’ve got time to waste, okay?’

‘Yep?’

‘Is there any chance that you’re going to fall asleep in a chair
opposite this cell with your keys fully exposed on a table in front of
you?’

They looked at the empty corridor.

‘I’d have to get someone to help me bring a table down here,’ said the
warder doubtfully. ‘Can’t see it happening, mister. Sorry.’

‘Right. Okay.’ Rincewind thought for a moment. ‘All right . . . Is my
dinner likely to be brought in by a young lady carrying, and this is
important, _carrying a tray covered with a cloth_?’

‘No, ’cos I do the cooking.’

‘Right.’

‘Bread and water is what I’m good at.’

‘Right, just checking.’

‘’ere, that sticky brown stuff they brought in with you is top stuff on
bread, mister.’

‘Be my guest.’

‘I can feel the vitamins and minerals doing me a power of good.’

‘No worries. Now . . . ah, yes. Laundry. Are there any big laundry
baskets around, which will happily get tipped down a chute to the
outside world?’

‘Sorry, mister. There’s an old washerwoman comes in to collect it.’

‘Really?’ Rincewind brightened. ‘Ah, a _washerwoman_. Big lady, bulky
dress, possibly wears a hood which can be pulled down to cover a lot of
her face?’

‘Yep, pretty much.’

‘Well then, is she due in—?’

‘She’s my mum,’ said the warder.

‘Right, fine . . .’

They looked at one another.

‘I reckon that about covers it, then,’ said Rincewind. ‘I hope you
didn’t mind me asking.’

‘Bless yew, no! No worries! Happy to help. Worked out what yew’re gonna
say on the gallows, have yer? Only some of the ballad-writers want to
know, if yew wouldn’t mind.’

‘Ballads?’

‘Oh, _yeah_. There’s three so far and I reckon there’ll be ten by
tomorra.’

Rincewind rolled his eyes. ‘How many of them have put “too-ra-la,
too-ra-la addity” in the chorus?’ he asked.

‘All of them.’

‘Oh, gods . . .’

‘And yew wouldn’t mind changin’ your name, would yew? Only they’re
sayin’ “Rincewind” is a bit tricky to turn a line on. “Concernin’ of a
bush ranger, Rincewind was his name . . .”’s got the wrong sort of sound
. . .’

‘Well, I’m sorry. Perhaps you’d better let me go, then?’

‘Ha, nice one. Now, if you want my advice, you’ll keep it short when
yew’re up on the gallows,’ said the warder. ‘The best Famous Last Words
are the shortest. Something simple gen’rally works best. Go easy on the
swearin’.’

‘Look, all I did was steal a sheep! And I didn’t even do that! What’s
everyone so _excited_ about?’ said Rincewind desperately.

‘Oh, very notorious crime, sheep-stealing,’ said the warder cheerfully.
‘Strikes a chord. Little man battlin’ against the forces of brutal
authority. People like that. You’ll be remembered in song ’n’ story,
’specially if yew come up with some good Last Words, like I said.’ The
warder hitched up his belt. ‘To tell you the truth, a lot of people
these days haven’t even _seen_ a bloody sheep, but hearing that
someone’s stolen one makes ’em feel proper Ecksians. It even does _me_
good to have a proper criminal in the cells for once, instead of all
these bloody politicians.’

Rincewind sat down on the bunk again, with his head in his hands.

‘O’ course, a famous escape is nearly as good as gettin’ hanged,’ said
the warder, in the manner of someone trying to keep up someone else’s
spirits.

‘Really,’ said Rincewind.

‘Yew ain’t asked if the little grille in the floor there leads into the
sewers,’ the warder prompted.

Rincewind peered between his fingers. ‘Does it?’

‘We ain’t got any sewers.’

‘Thank you. You’ve been very helpful.’

The warden strolled off again, whistling.

Rincewind lay back on the bunk and closed his eyes again.

‘Baah!’

‘Shut up.’

‘’scuse me, mister . . .’

Rincewind groaned and sat up again. This time the voice was coming from
the high, small, barred window.

‘Yes, what is it?’

‘Yew know when you was caught?’

‘Well? What about it?’

‘Er . . . what kind of a tree were you under?’ Rincewind looked up at
the narrow square of blue the prisoner calls the sky. ‘What kind of
question is that to ask me?’

‘It’s for the ballad, see? Only it’d help if it was a name with three
syllables . . .’

‘How do I know? I didn’t stop for a bit of botany!’

‘All right, all right, fair enough,’ said the hidden speaker. ‘But would
you mind telling me what you was doing just before you stole the sheep?’

‘I didn’t steal the sheep!’

‘Right, right, okay . . . What was you doing just before you didn’t
steal the sheep . . . ?’

‘I don’t know, I can’t remember!’

‘Were you boiling your billy, by any chance?’

‘I’m not admitting to that! The way you people talk, that could mean
_anything_!’

‘Means cookin’ something up in a tin.’

‘Oh. Well, yes, I had been doing that, as it happens.’

‘Good on yer!’ Rincewind thought he heard the sound of scribbling.
‘Shame you didn’t die at the end, but you’re gonna get hung so that’s
all right. Got a beaut tune for this one, you just can’t stop whistling
it . . . Well, of course _you_ will, no worries.’

‘Thank you for that.’

‘Reckon you might be as famous as Tinhead Ned, mate.’

‘Really.’ Rincewind went and lay down on his bunk again.

‘Yeah. They used to lock him up in that very cell you’re in now, in
fact. And he always escaped. No one knows how, ’cos that’s a bloody good
lock and he didn’t bend any bars. He said they’d never build a jail that
could hold him.’

‘Thin fellow, was he?’

‘Nope.’

‘So he had a key or something.’

‘Nope. Got to go now, mate. Oh, yeah, I remember. Er, do you think your
ghost will be heard if people pass by the billybong, or not?’

‘What?’

‘It’d be helpful if it did. Makes a good last verse. Top stuff.’

‘I don’t know!’

‘We-ell, I’ll say it will, shall I? No one’s gonna go back and check.’

‘Don’t let me stand in your way, then.’

‘Bonza. I’ll get these songsheets printed up in time for the hanging,
don’t you worry about that.’

‘I won’t.’

Rincewind lay back. Tinhead Ned again. That was just a joke, he could
spot it. It was some kind of torture, telling him that anyone had ever
escaped from a cell like this. They wanted him to run around rattling
bars and things, but even he could see they were well set in and very
heavy and the lock was bigger than his head.

He was just lying back on the bunk again when the warder turned up.

There were a couple of men with him. Rincewind was pretty sure there
weren’t any trolls here, because it was probably too hot for them and
anyway there wouldn’t be enough room for them on the driftwood, what
with all those camels, but these men definitely had the heavy-set look
of men who occupy the kind of job where the entrance examination is
‘What is your name?’ and they scrape through on the third try.

The warder was wearing a big grin and carrying a tray. ‘Got some dinnah
for you,’ he said.

‘I won’t tell you anything, no matter how much you feed me,’ Rincewind
warned.

‘You’ll like this,’ the warder urged, pushing the tray forward. There
was a covered bowl on it. ‘I done it special for you. It’s a regional
speciality, mate.’

‘I thought you said bread and water’s what you’re good at.’

‘Well, yeah . . . but I had a bash at this anyway . . .’

Rincewind watched gloomily as the warder lifted the cover.¹⁸

It looked fairly inoffensive, but they often did. It looked, in fact,
like—

‘Pea soup?’ he said.

‘Yep.’

‘The leguminous vegetable? Comes in pods?’

‘Yep.’

‘I thought I’d better check that point.’

‘No worries.’

Rincewind looked down at the knobbly green surface. Was it just possible
that someone had invented a regional speciality you could eat?

And then something rose out of the depths. For a moment Rincewind
thought it was a very small shark. It bobbed to the surface and then
settled back down, while the soup slopped over it.

‘What was _that_?’

‘Meat pie floater,’ said the warder. ‘Meat pie floating in pea soup.
Best bloody supper on earth, mate.’

‘Ah, _supper_,’ said Rincewind, as realization dawned. ‘This is another
one of those late-night, after-the-pub foods, right? And what kind of
meat is in it? No, forget I asked, it’s a stupid question. I know this
sort of food. If you have to ask “What kind of meat is in it?” you’re
too sober. Ever tried spaghetti and custard?’

‘Can you sprinkle coconut on top of it?’

‘Probably.’

‘Thanks, mate, I’ll surely give it a go,’ said the warder. ‘Got some
other good news for you, too.’

‘You’re letting me out?’

‘Oh, you wouldn’t want that, a hard-bitten larrikin like yourself. Nah,
Greg and Vince here will be coming back later to put you in irons.’

He stepped aside. The wall-shaped men were holding a length of chain,
several shackles and a small but very, very heavy-looking ball.

Rincewind sighed. One door closes, he thought, and another door slams
shut. ‘This is good, is it?’ he said.

‘Oh, yew’ll get an extra verse for that, for sure,’ said the warder. ‘No
one’s been hung in irons since Tinhead Ned.’

‘I thought there wasn’t a prison cell that could hold him,’ said
Rincewind.

‘Oh, he could get _out_ of ’em,’ said the warder. ‘He just couldn’t run
very far.’

Rincewind eyed the metal ball. ‘Oh, gods . . .’

‘Vince says how much do you weigh, ’cos he has to add the chains to your
weight to get the drop right,’ said the warder.

‘Does that matter?’ said Rincewind in a hollow voice. ‘I mean, I die
anyway, don’t I?’

‘Yeah, no worries there, but if he gets it wrong, see, you either end up
with a neck six feet long or, you’ll laugh about this, your head flies
off like a perishin’ cork!’

‘Oh, good.’

‘With Larrikin Larry we had to search the roof all arvo!’

‘Marvellous. All arvo, eh?’ said Rincewind. ‘Well, you won’t have that
problem with me. I shall be elsewhere when I’m being hanged.’

‘That’s what we like to hear!’ said the warder, punching him jovially in
the elbow. ‘A battler to the end, eh?’

There was a rumbling from Mt Vince.

‘And Vince says he’ll be very privileged if you’d care to spit in his
eye when he puts the rope aroun’ your neck,’ the warder went on.
‘That’ll be something to show his grandchildren—’

‘Will you all please go away!’ Rincewind shouted.

‘Ah, you’ll be wanting some time to plot your getaway,’ said the warder
knowingly. ‘No worries. We’ll be leavin’ you alone, then.’

‘Thank you.’

‘Until about five a.m.’

‘Good,’ said Rincewind gloomily.

‘Got any requests for your last breakfast?’

‘Something that takes a really really long time to prepare?’ said
Rincewind.

‘That’s the spirit!’

‘Go away!’

‘No worries.’

The men walked off, but the warder strolled back after a while as if he
had something on his mind.

‘There _is_ something that you ought to know about the hanging, though,’
he said. ‘Might brighten up your night.’

‘Yes?’

‘We’ve got a special humanitarian tradition if the trapdoor sticks three
times.’

‘Yes?’

‘Sounds a bit odd, but it’s happened once or twice, believe it or not.’

A tiny green shoot rose from the blackened branches of hope.

‘And what’s the tradition?’ said Rincewind.

‘It’s on account of it being heartless to have a man standing there more
than three times, knowing that at any second his—’

‘Yes, yes—’

‘—and then all his—’

‘Yes—’

‘—and the worst part to my mind is where your—’

‘Yes, I understand! And so . . . after the third time . . . ?’

‘He’s allowed back into his cell while we get a carpenter in to repair
the trapdoor,’ said the warder. ‘We even give him his dinner, if it’s
gone on a long time.’

‘And?’

‘Well, when the carpenter’s given it a good test, then we take him out
again and hang him.’ He saw Rincewind’s expression. ‘No need to look
like that. ’s better than having to stand around in the cold all
morning, isn’t it? That wouldn’t be nice.’

When he’d gone, Rincewind sat and stared at the wall.

‘Baa!’

‘Shut up.’

So it was down to this, then. One brief night left, and then, if these
clowns had anything to do with it, happy people would be wandering the
streets to see where his head had come down. There was no justice!

G’DAY, MATE.

‘Oh, no. _Please_.’

I JUST THOUGHT I SHOULD ENTER INTO THE SPIRIT OF THE THING. A VERY
CONVIVIAL PEOPLE, AREN’T THEY? said Death. He was sitting beside
Rincewind.

‘You just can’t wait, can you?’ said Rincewind bitterly.

NO WORRIES.

‘So this is really it, then. I was _supposed_ to have saved this
country, you know. And I’m going to really die.’

OH, YES. THIS IS CERTAIN, I’M AFRAID.

‘It’s the stupidity of it that gets me. I mean, think of all the times
I’ve nearly died in the past. I could’ve been flamed by dragons, right?
Or eaten by huge things with tentacles. Or even had every single
particle of my body fly off in a different direction.’

YOU HAVE CERTAINLY HAD AN INTERESTING LIFE.

‘Is it true that your life passes before your eyes before you die?’

YES.

‘Ghastly thought, really.’ Rincewind shuddered. ‘Oh, _gods_, I’ve just
had another one. Suppose I _am_ just about to die and _this_ is my whole
life passing in front of my eyes?’

I THINK PERHAPS YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND. PEOPLE’S WHOLE LIVES _DO_ PASS IN
FRONT OF THEIR EYES BEFORE THEY DIE. THE PROCESS IS CALLED ‘LIVING’.
WOULD YOU LIKE A PRAWN?

Rincewind looked down at the bucket on Death’s lap.

‘No, thank you. I really don’t think so. They can be pretty deadly. And
I must say it’s a bit much of you to come here and gloat and eat prawns
at me.’

I BEG YOUR PARDON?

‘Just because I’m being hanged in the morning, I mean.’

ARE YOU? THEN I SHALL LOOK FORWARD TO HEARING HOW YOU ESCAPED. I’M DUE
TO MEET A MAN IN . . . IN . . . Death’s eyesockets glowed as he
interrogated his memory. AH, YES . . . INSIDE A CROCODILE. SEVERAL
HUNDRED MILES AWAY, I BELIEVE.

‘What? Then why are you here?’

OH, I THOUGHT YOU MIGHT LIKE TO SEE A FRIENDLY FACE. AND NOW I THINK I
HAD BETTER BE GOING. Death stood up. VERY PLEASANT CITY IN MANY
RESPECTS. TRY TO SEE THE OPERA HOUSE WHILE YOU’RE HERE.

‘Hang on . . . I mean, hold on, you told me I was certainly going to
die!’

EVERYONE IS. EVENTUALLY.

The wall opened and closed around Death as if it wasn’t there, which
was, from his lengthy perspective, quite true.

‘But _how_? I can’t walk through—’ Rincewind began.

He sat down again. The sheep cowered in the corner.

Rincewind looked at the untouched meat pie floater and gave the pie a
prod. It sank slowly beneath the vivid green soup.

The sounds of the city filtered in.

After a while the pie rose again like a forgotten continent, sending a
very small wave slopping against the edge of the bowl.

Rincewind lay back on the thin blanket and stared at the ceiling.
Someone had even been writing on that, too. In fact . . .

[image]

Slowly, as if being raised by invisible strings, Rincewind turned and
looked at the door.

The hinges were massive. They weren’t screwed into the doorframe so that
some clever prisoner might unscrew them. They were huge iron hooks,
hammered into the stone itself, so that two heavy rings welded on to the
door could drop right down on them. What was the man talking about?

He walked over and examined the lock closely. It drove a huge metal rod
into the frame on its side and looked quite unpickable.

Rincewind stared at the door for some time. Then he rubbed his hands
together and, gritting his teeth, tried to lift the door on the hinge
side. Yes, there was just enough play . . .

It was possible to lift the rings off the spikes.

Then, if you pulled slightly and took a knee-wobbling step _this_ way,
you could yank the lock’s rod out of its hole and the entire door into
the cell.

And then a man could walk through and carefully rehang the door again
and quietly wander away.

And that, Rincewind thought as he carefully manoeuvred the door back on
to the hinges, was exactly what a stupid person would do.

At moments like this cowardice was an exact science. There were times
that called for mindless, terror-filled panic, and times that called for
measured, considered, _thoughtful_ panic. Right now he was in a place of
safety. It was, admittedly, the death cell, but the point was that it
was perhaps the one place in this country where nothing bad was going to
happen for a little while. The Ecksians didn’t look like the kind of
people who went in for torture, although it was always possible they
might make him eat some more of their food. So, for the moment, he had
_time_. Time to plan ahead, to consider his next move, to apply his
intellect to the problem at hand.

He stared at the wall for a moment, and then stood up and gripped the
bars.

Right. That seemed to be about long enough. Now to run like hell.

The green deck of the melon boat had been divided into a male and female
section, for the sake of decency. This meant that most of the deck was
occupied by Mrs Whitlow, who spent a lot of the time sunbathing behind a
screen. Her privacy was assured by the wizards themselves, since at
least three of them would probably kill any of the others who ventured
within ten feet of the palm leaves.

There was definitely what Ponder’s aunt, who’d raised him, would have
called An Atmosphere.

‘I still think I ought to climb the mast,’ he protested.

‘Ah! A peeping tom, eh?’ snarled the Senior Wrangler.

‘No, I just think it would be a good idea to see where the boat is
going,’ said Ponder. ‘There’re some big black clouds ahead.’

‘Good, we could do with the rain,’ snapped the Chair of Indefinite
Studies.

‘In which case, I shall be honoured to make Mrs Whitlow a suitable
shelter,’ said the Dean.

Ponder walked back to the stern, where the Archchancellor was gloomily
fishing.

‘Honestly, you’d think Mrs Whitlow was the only woman in the world,’ he
said.

‘Do you think she might be?’ said Ridcully.

Ponder’s mind raced, and hit some horrible speed bumps in his
imagination. ‘Surely not, sir!’ he said.

‘We don’t _know_, Ponder. Still, look on the bright side. We may all be
drowned.’

‘Er . . . sir? Have you _looked_ at the horizon?’

The everlasting storm was seven thousand miles long but only a mile
wide, a great turning, boiling mass of enraged air circling the last
continent like a family of foxes circling a henhouse.

The clouds were mounded up all the way to the edge of the atmosphere –
and they were ancient clouds now, clouds that had rolled around their
tortured circuit for years, building up personality and hatred and,
above all, voltage.

It was not a storm, it was a battle. Mere gales, a few hundred miles
long, fought amongst themselves within the cloud wall. Lightning forked
from thunderhead to thunderhead, rain fell and flashed into steam half a
mile from the ground.

The air glowed.

And below, emerging from the ocean of potentiality in a rainstorm so
thunderous that it was no more than a descending sea, rose the last
continent.

On the wall of the deserted cell in Bugarup Gaol, among the scratches
and stick drawings and tallies of a man’s last few days, a drawing of a
sheep became a drawing of a kangaroo and then faded completely into the
stone.

‘So?’ said the Dean. ‘We’re in for a bit of a blow?’

The grey line filled the immediate future like a dental appointment.

‘I think it might be a lot worse,’ said Ponder.

‘Well, let’s steer somewhere else, then.’

‘There’s no rudder, sir. And we don’t know where anywhere else _is_. And
we’re low on water anyway.’

‘Don’t they say that a big bank of cloud means there’s land ahead?’ said
the Dean.

‘Bloody big land, then. EcksEcksEcksEcks, do you think?’

‘I hope so, sir.’ Above Ponder, the sail flapped and billowed. ‘Wind’s
freshening, sir. I think the storm’s sucking the air towards it. And . .
. there’s something else, I think. I wish I hadn’t left my thaumometer
on the beach, sir, because I think there’s a very high level of
background magic in this area.’

‘What makes you say this, boy?’ said the Dean. ‘Well, for one thing
everyone seems to be getting a bit tense, and wizards tend to get stro—
to get touchy in the presence of large amounts of magic,’ said Ponder.
‘But my suspicions were first aroused when the Bursar developed
planets.’

There were two of them, orbiting his head at a height of a few inches.
As was so often the case with magical phenomena, they possessed virtual
unreality and passed unscathed through him and one another. They were
slightly transparent.

‘Oh dear, Mugroop’s Syndrome,’ said Ridcully. ‘Cerebral manifestation.
Better than a canary down a coalmine, a sign like that.’

A little sub-routine in Ponder’s head began a short countdown.

‘Remember old “Dicky” Bird?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘He—’

‘Three! No, I don’t, as a matter of fact. Do tell!’ Ponder heard himself
bark, louder than he would have done even if he _had_ meant to vocalize
his thoughts.

‘Indeed I shall, Mister Stibbons,’ said the Chair calmly. ‘He was very
susceptible to high magical fields, and if his mind wandered, as it
might do when he was dozing off, sometimes around his head there’d be,
hehehe, there’d be these little—’

‘Yes, certainly,’ said Ponder, quickly. ‘We’ll have to be very careful
to keep an eye open for unusual behaviour.’

‘Among wizards?’ said Ridcully. ‘Mister Stibbons, unusual behaviour is
perfectly ordinary for wizards.’

‘People acting out of character, then!’ Ponder shouted. ‘Talking sense
for two minutes together, perhaps! Acting like normal civilized people
instead of a herd of self-regarding village idiots!’

‘Stibbons, it’s not like you to take _that_ tone,’ said Ridcully.

‘That’s what I mean!’

‘Now then, Mustrum, go easy on him, we’re all under a lot of stress,’
said the Dean.

‘Now _he’s_ doing it!’ Ponder yelled, pointing a shaking finger. ‘The
Dean is normally _never_ nice! Now he’s being aggressively reasonable!’

Historians have pointed out that it is in times of plenty that people
feel like going to war. In times of famine they’re simply trying to find
enough to eat. When they’ve just enough to go round they tend to be
polite. But when a banquet is spread before them, it’s time to argue
over the place settings.¹⁹

And Unseen University, as even wizards realized at somewhere just below
the top level of their minds, existed not to further magic but, in a
very creative way, to suppress it. The world had seen what happened when
wizards got their hands on enormous amounts of magical power. It had
happened a long time ago and there were still some areas where you
didn’t go, if you wanted to walk out on the same kind of feet that you’d
had when you went in.

Once upon a time the plural of ‘wizard’ was ‘war’.

But the great, open ingenious purpose of UU was to be the weight on the
arm of magic, causing it to swing with grave majesty like a pendulum
rather than spin with deadly purpose like a morningstar. Instead of
hurling fireballs at one another from fortified towers the wizards
learned to snipe at their colleagues over the interpretation of Faculty
Council minutes, and long ago were amazed to find that they got just as
much vicious fun out of it. They consumed big dinners, and after a
really good meal and a fine cigar even the most rabid Dark Lord is
inclined to put his feet up and feel amicable towards the world,
especially if it’s offering him another brandy. And slowly, and by
degrees, they absorbed the most important magical power of all, which is
the one that persuades you to stop using all the others.

The trouble is that it’s easy to abstain from sweets when you’re not
standing knee deep in treacle and it’s raining sugar.

‘There does indeed seem to be a certain . . . tang in the air,’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes. Magic tastes like tin.

‘Hold on a moment,’ said Ridcully. He reached up, pulled open one of the
many drawers in his wizarding hat, and removed a cube of greenish glass.

‘Here we are,’ he said, handing it to Ponder.

Ponder took the thaumometer and peered into it.

‘Never used it myself,’ Ridcully said. ‘Wetting a finger and holding it
up has always been good enough for me.’

‘It’s not working!’ said Ponder, tapping the thaumometer as the ship
rocked under them. ‘The needle’s . . . Oow!’

He dropped the cube, which was molten by the time it hit the deck.

‘That’s impossible!’ he said. ‘These things are good up to a million
thaums!’

Ridcully licked his finger and held it up. It sprouted a halo of purple
and octarine.

‘Yep, that’s about right,’ he said. ‘There’s not that much magic
anywhere any more!’ shouted Ponder.

There was a gale behind the boat now. Ahead, the wall of storm was
widening and seemed to be a lot blacker.

‘How much magic does it take to create a continent?’ said Ridcully.

They looked up at the clouds. And further up.

‘We’d better batten down the hatches,’ said the Dean.

‘We don’t have any hatches.’

‘Batten down Mrs Whitlow at least. Get the Bursar and the Librarian
somewhere safe—’

They hit the storm.

Rincewind dropped into an alley and reflected that he’d been in far
worse prisons. The Ecksians were a friendly lot, when not drunk or
trying to kill you or both. What Rincewind looked for in a good gaol
were guards who, instead of ruining everyone’s night by prowling around
the corridors, got together in one room with a few tins and a pack of
cards and relaxed. It made it so much more . . . friendly. And, of
course, easier to walk past.

He turned – and there _was_ the kangaroo, huge and bright and outlined
against the sky. Rincewind shrank back for a moment and then realized
that it was nothing but an advertising sign on the roof of a building
some way off and further down the hill. Someone had rigged up lamps and
mirrors below it.

It had a hat on, with some stupid holes for its ears to stick out, and
it wore a vest as well, but it was certainly _the_ kangaroo. No other
kangaroo could possibly smirk like that. And it was holding a tin of
beer.

‘Where did you drift in from, curly?’ said a voice behind him.

It was a very familiar voice. It had a sort of complaining wheedle in
it. It was a voice that kept looking out of the corners of its eyes and
was always ready to dodge. It was a voice you could have used to open a
bottle of whine.

He turned. And the figure in front of him, except for a few details, was
as familiar as the voice.

‘You _can’t_ be called Dibbler,’ said Rincewind.

‘Why not?’

‘Because— Well, how did you get _here_?’

‘What? I just came up Berk Street,’ said the figure. It had a large hat,
and large shorts, and large boots, but in every other respect it was the
double of the man who, in Ankh-Morpork, was always there after the pubs
shut to sell you one of his very special meat pies. Rincewind had a
theory that there was a Dibbler everywhere.

Suspended from the neck of this one was a tray. On the front of the tray
was written ‘Dibbler’s Café de Feet.’

‘I reckoned I’d better get up to the gaol early for a good pitch,’ said
Dibbler. ‘Always gives the crowd an appetite, a good hanging. Can I
interest you in anything, mate?’

Rincewind looked at the end of the alley. The streets were quite busy.
As he watched, a couple of guards strolled by.

‘Such as what?’ he said suspiciously, drawing back into the shadows.

‘Got some good broadsheet ballads about the notorious outlaw they’re
gonna top . . . ?’

‘No, thank you.’

‘Souvenir piece of the rope they’re gonna hang him with? Authentic!’

Rincewind looked at the short length of thick string being dangled
hopefully in front of him. ‘Some people might say that had a hint of
clothesline about it,’ he said.

Dibbler gave the string a look of extreme interest. ‘Obviously we had to
unravel it a bit, mate,’ he said.

‘And some people might pick holes in the suggestion that you could,
philosophically speaking, sell lengths of the rope _before_ the
hanging?’

Dibbler paused, his smile not moving. Then he said, ‘It’s the rope,
right? Three-quarter-inch hemp, the usual stuff. Authentic. Probably
even from the same ropemaker. Come on, all I’m looking for here is a
fair go. Probably it’s a pure fluke this ain’t the actual bit that’s
gonna go round his neck—’

‘That’s only half an inch thick. Look, I can _see_ the label, it says
“Hill’s Clothesline Co.”’

‘Does it?’

Once again Dibbler appeared to be looking at his product for the first
time. But the traditions of the Dibbler clan would never let a mere
disastrous fact get in the way of a spiel.

‘It’s still rope,’ he averred. ‘Authentic rope. No? No worries. How
about some authentic native art?’

He rummaged in his crowded tray and held up a square of cardboard.
Rincewind gave it an appraising look.

He’d seen something like this out in the red country, although he’d not
been certain that it was art in the way Ankh-Morpork understood it. It
was more like a map, a history book and a menu all rolled together. Back
home, people tied a knot in their handkerchief to remind them of things.
Out in the hot country there weren’t any handkerchiefs, so people tied a
knot in their thoughts.

They didn’t paint very many pictures of a string of sausages.

‘’s called _Sausage and Chips Dreaming_,’ said Dibbler.

‘I don’t think I’ve seen one like that,’ said Rincewind. ‘Not with the
sauce bottle in it as well.’

‘So what?’ said Dibbler. ‘Still native. Genuine picture of traditional
city tucker, done by a native. A fair go, that’s all I ask.’

‘Ah, suddenly I think I understand. The native in this case, perhaps,
being you?’ said Rincewind.

‘Yep. Authentic. You arguing?’

‘Oh, come _on_.’

‘What? I was born over there in Treacle Street, Bludgeree, and so was my
dad. And my granddad. And his dad. I didn’t just step off the driftwood
like some people I might mention.’ His ratty little face darkened.
‘Coming over here, taking our jobs . . . What about the little man, eh?
All I’m askin’ for is a fair go.’

For a moment Rincewind contemplated handing himself over to the Watch.

‘Nice to hear someone siding with the rights of the indigenous
population,’ he muttered, checking the street again.

‘Indigenous? What do they know about a day’s work? Nah, they can go back
where they came from too,’ said Dibbler. ‘They don’t _want_ to work.’

‘Good thing for you, though, I can see that,’ said Rincewind. ‘Otherwise
they’d be taking your job, right?’

‘The way I see it, I’m more indigenous than them,’ said Fair Go,
pointing an indignant thumb at himself. ‘I _earned_ my indigenuity, I
did.’

Rincewind sighed. Logic could take you only so far, then you had to get
out and hop. ‘A fair go, that’s what you want,’ he said. ‘Am I right?’

‘Yep!’

‘So . . . is there anyone who you don’t want to go back where they came
from?’

Fair Go Dibbler gave this some deep consideration. ‘Well, me,
_obviously,_’ he said. ‘And my mate Duncan, ’cos Duncan’s me mate. And
Mrs Dibbler, of course. And some of the blokes down at the fish and chip
shop. Lots of people, really.’

‘Well, I’ll tell you what,’ said Rincewind. ‘I _definitely_ want to go
back where I came from.’

‘Good on yer!’

‘Your socio-political analysis is certainly working on me.’

‘Beaut!’

‘And maybe you can show me how? Like, where the docks are?’

‘Well, I _would_,’ said Dibbler, obviously torn. ‘Only there’s going to
be this hanging in a few hours and I want to get the meat pies warmed
up.’

‘As a matter of fact, I heard the hanging had been cancelled,’ said
Rincewind, conspiratorially. ‘The bloke escaped.’

‘Never!’

‘He certainly did!’ said Rincewind. ‘I’m not pulling your raw prawn.’

‘Did he have any last words?’

‘“Goodbye,” I think.’

‘You mean he wasn’t in a famous last-stand shoot-out with the Watch?’

‘Apparently not.’

‘What kind of escape is that?’ said Fair Go. ‘That’s no way to behave. I
didn’t have to come up here, I gave up a good spot at the Galah for
this. ’s not a good hanging without a meat pie.’ He leaned closer and
gave a furtive look both ways before continuing: ‘Say what you like, the
Galah’s good for business. Their money’s the same as anyone else’s,
that’s what I say.’

‘Well . . . yes. Obviously. Otherwise it’d be . . . different money,’
said Rincewind. ‘_So_, since your night’s ruined, why not just show me
where the docks are?’

There was still some uncertainty in Dibbler’s stance. Rincewind
swallowed. He’d faced spiders, angry men with spears and bears that
dropped on you out of trees, but now the continent was presenting him
with its most dangerous challenge.

‘Tell you what,’ he said, ‘I’ll . . . I’ll even . . . _buy_ . . .
something off you?’

‘The rope?’

‘Not the rope. Not the rope. Um . . . I know this may seem a somewhat
esoteric question, but what’s in the meat pies?’

‘Meat.’

‘And what kind of meat?’

‘Ah, you want one of the _gourmet_ meat pies, then?’

‘Oh, I _see_. That’s where you say what’s in them?’

‘Yup.’

‘Before or after the customers have bitten into them?’

‘Are you suggesting that my pies ain’t right?’

‘Let us say I’m inching my way to the possibility that they might be,
shall we? All right, I’ll try a _gourmet_ pie.’

‘Good on yer.’ Dibbler removed a pie from the little heated section of
his tray.

‘Now . . . what’s the meat? Cat?’

‘Do you mind? Mutton’s cheaper’n cat,’ said Dibbler, upending the pie
into a dish.

‘Well, that’s—’ Rincewind’s face screwed up. ‘Oh, no, you’re pouring pea
soup all over it too. Why does everyone always pour pea soup over it!’

‘No worries, mate. Puts a lining on your stomach,’ said Dibbler,
producing a red bottle.

‘And what’s _that_?’

‘The _cut de grass_, mate.’

‘You’re tipping a meat pie into a dish of pea soup and now you want me
to eat it with . . . with tomato sauce on it?’

‘Pretty colours, ain’t they?’ said Fair Go, handing Rincewind a spoon.

Rincewind prodded the pie. It rebounded gently off the side of the dish.

Well, now . . . He’d eaten Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler’s
sausages-in-a-bun, and Disembowel-Meself-Honourably Dibhala’s
funny-coloured antique eggs. And he’d survived, although there had been
a few minutes when he’d hoped he wouldn’t. He’d eaten Al-Jiblah’s highly
suspicious cous-cous, drunk the terrible yak-butter tea made by
May-I-Never-Achieve-Enlightenment Dhiblang, forced down the topless,
bottomless smorgasbord of Dib Diblossonson and tried not to chew the
lumps of unmentionable blubber purveyed by
May-I-Be-Kicked-In-My-Own-Ice-Hole Dibooki (his stomach heaved at the
memory of that – after all, it was one thing to butcher dead beached
whales and quite another just to leave them there until they exploded
into bite sized chunks of their own accord). As for the green beer made
by Swallow-Me-Own-Blowdart Dlang-Dlang . . .

He’d drunk and eaten all these things. Everywhere in the world, someone
turned up out of some strange primal mould to sell him a really dreadful
regional delicacy. And this was just a pie, after all. How bad could it
be? No, put it another way . . . _How much worse_ could it be?

He swallowed a mouthful.

‘Good, eh?’ said Fair Go.

‘My gods,’ said Rincewind.

‘They’re not just any mushy peas,’ said Fair Go, slightly disconcerted
by the fact that Rincewind was staring wildly at nothing. ‘They’re
mushed by a champion pea musher.’

‘Good _grief_ . . .’ said Rincewind.

‘Are you all right, mister?’

‘It’s . . . everything I expected . . .’ said Rincewind.

‘Now, mister, it ain’t that bad—’

‘You’re certainly a Dibbler.’

‘What kind of thing is that to say?’

‘You put pies upside down in runny peas and then put sauce on them.
Someone actually sat down one day, after midnight if I’m any judge, and
thought that would be a good idea. No one will ever believe _this_ one.’
Rincewind looked at the submerged pie. ‘That’s going to make the story
about the land of the giant walking plum puddings look _very_ tame, I
don’t mind telling you. No wonder you people drink so much beer . . .’²⁰

He stepped out into the flickering lamplight of the street, shaking his
head.

‘You actually _eat_ the pies here,’ he said mournfully, and looked up
into the face of the warder. There were several watchmen behind him.

‘That’s him!’

Rincewind nodded cheerfully. ‘G’day!’ he said.

Two little thuds were his home-made sandals bouncing on the street.

* * *

The sea steamed and crackling balls of lightning zipped across its
surface like drops of water on a hotplate.

The waves were too big to be waves, but about the right size for
mountains. Ponder looked up from the deck only once, just as the boat
began to slide down a trough that gaped like a canyon.

Next to him, and gripping his leg, the Dean groaned.

‘You know about this sort of thing, Ponder,’ he growled, as they hit the
trough and then began the stomach-twisting climb to the next crest. ‘Are
we going to die?’

‘I . . . don’t think so, Dean . . .’

‘Pity . . .’

Rincewind heard whistles blowing behind him by the time he reached the
corner, but he never let that sort of thing worry him.

This was a city! Cities were so much easier. He was a creature of
cities. There were so many places to—

Whistles started blowing up ahead as well.

The crowds were thicker here, and most people were heading in the same
direction. But Rincewind _liked_ crowds to run through. As the pursued,
he had novelty on his side and could shoulder his way past the
unsuspecting, who _then_ turned around and milled about and complained
and were definitely not in the right frame of mind to greet the people
following him. Rincewind could run through a crowd like a ball on a
bagatelle board, and always got an extra go.

Downhill was best. That’s where they generally put docks, so as to have
them close to the water.

Dodging and ducking across the streets brought him, suddenly, to the
waterside. There were a few boats there. They were on the small side for
a stowaway, but—

There were running footsteps in the dark!

These watchmen were too good!

This wasn’t how it was supposed to go!

They weren’t supposed to double-back. They weren’t supposed to _think_.

He ran in the only direction left, along the waterfront.

There was a building there. At least, it . . . well, it had to be a
building. No one could have left an open box of tissues that big.

Rincewind felt that a building should be a box with a pointed lid on it,
basically, and it should be the approximate colour of whatever the local
mud was. On the other hand, as the philosopher Ly Tin Wheedle once
remarked, it is never wise to object to the decor of a hidey-hole.

He bounded up the steps and circled around the strange white building.
It seemed to be some kind of music hall. Opera, by the sound of it,
although it was a damn funny place to sing opera, you couldn’t imagine
ladies with horns in a building that looked about to set sail, but no
time to wonder about that, there was a door with some rubbish bins
outside it and here was the door _open_ . . .

‘You from the agency, mate?’

Rincewind peered into the steam.

‘An’ I hope you can do puddings, ’cos cheffy’s banging his head on the
wall,’ went on a figure emerging from the wisps. It was wearing a tall
white hat.

‘No worries,’ said Rincewind, hopefully. ‘Ah, this is a _kitchen_, is
it?’

‘You pullin’ my leg?’

‘Only I thought it was some kind of opera house or something—’

‘Best bloody opera house in the world, mate. Come on, this way . . .’

It wasn’t a very big kitchen and, like most of the ones Rincewind had
been in, it was full of men working very hard at cross purposes.

‘The boss upstairs only decided to throw a big dinner for the prima
donna,’ said the cook, forcing his way through the throng. ‘And all of a
sudden Charley sees the pudding staring him in the face.’

‘Ah, right,’ said Rincewind, on the basis that sooner or later he’d be
given a clue.

‘Boss says, you can do the pudding for her, Charley.’

‘Just like that, eh?’

‘He sez, it ought to be the best one yet, Charley.’

‘No worries?’

‘He sez, the great Nunco invented the Strawberry Sackville for Dame
Wendy Sackville, and the famous chef Imposo created the Apple Glazier
for Dame Margyreen Glazier, and your own father, Charley, honoured Dame
Janeen Ormulu with the Orange Ormulu and tonight, Charley, it’s your big
chance.’ The cook shook his head as he reached a table where a small man
in a white uniform was sobbing uncontrollably into his hands. There was
a stack of empty beer cans in front of him. ‘Poor bastard’s been on the
beer ever since, and we thought we’d better get someone in. I’m a steak
and prawns man, myself.’

‘So, you want me to make a pudding? Named after an opera singer?’ said
Rincewind. ‘That’s the tradition, is it?’

‘Yeah, and you’d better not let Charley down, mate. It’s not _his_
fault.’

‘Oh, well . . .’ Rincewind thought about puddings. Basically it was just
fruit and cream and custard, wasn’t it? And cakes and stuff. He couldn’t
see where the problem lay.

‘No worries,’ he said. ‘I think I can knock up something right away.’

The kitchen became silent as the scurrying cooks stopped to watch him.

‘First,’ said Rincewind, ‘what fruit have we got?’

‘Peaches was all we could find at this time of night.’

‘No worries. And we’ve got some cream?’

‘Yep. Of course.’

‘Fine, fine. Then all I need to know is the name of the lady in question
. . .’

He felt the silence open up. ‘She’s a beaut singer, mind you,’ said a
cook, in a defensive tone of voice.

‘Good. And her name?’ said Rincewind.

‘Er . . . that’s the trouble, see,’ said another cook.

‘Why?’

Ponder opened his eyes. The water was calm, or at least calmer than it
had been. There were even patches of blue sky above, although cloud
banks were criss-crossing the air as if each were in possession of its
own bag of wind.

His mouth tasted as though he’d been sucking a tin spoon.

Around him, some of the wizards managed to push themselves to their
knees. The Dean frowned, removed his hat, and pulled out a small crab.

‘’s a good boat,’ he murmured.

The green mast stem still stood, although the leaf sail looked ragged.
Nevertheless, the boat was tacking nicely against the wind off—

—the continent. It was a red wall, glowing under the thunder light.

Ridcully got uncertainly to his feet and pointed to it. ‘Not far now!’
he said.

The Dean actually growled. ‘I’ve just about had enough of that
insufferable cheerfulness,’ he said. ‘So just shut up, will you?’

‘Enough of that. I am your Archchancellor, Dean,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, let’s just talk about that, shall we?’ said the Dean, and Ponder
saw the nasty gleam in his eye.

‘This is hardly the time, Dean!’

‘Exactly on what basis are you giving orders, Ridcully? You’re the
Archchancellor of what, precisely? Unseen University doesn’t even
_exist_! Tell him, Senior Wrangler!’

‘I don’t have to if I don’t want to,’ sniffed the Senior Wrangler.

‘What? What?’ snapped the Dean.

‘I don’t believe I have to take orders from you, Dean!’

When the Bursar climbed up on deck a minute later the boat was already
rocking. It was hard to say how many factions there were, since a wizard
is capable of being a faction all by himself, but there were broadly two
sides, both liaisons being as stable as an egg on a seesaw.

What amazed Ponder Stibbons, when he thought about it later, was that no
one had yet resorted to using magic. The wizards had spent a lot of time
in an atmosphere where a cutting remark did more damage than a magic
sword and, for sheer malign pleasure, a well structured memo could do
more real damage than a fireball every time. Besides, no one had their
staff, and no one had any spells handy, and in those circumstances it’s
easier to hit someone, although in the case of wizards non-magical
fighting usually means flailing ineffectually at the opponent while
trying to keep out of his way.

The Bursar’s fixed smile faded a little.

‘I got three per cent more than you in my finals!’

‘Oh, and how do you know that, Dean?’

‘I looked up the paper when you were appointed Archchancellor!’

‘What? After forty years?’

‘An examination is an examination!’

‘Er . . .’ the Bursar began.

‘Ye gods, that’s petty! That’s just the sort of thing I’d expect from a
student who even had a separate pen for red ink!’

‘Hah! At least I didn’t spend all my time drinking and betting and
staying out at all hours!’

‘Hah! _I_ bloody well did, yes, and I learned the ways of the world and
I still got nearly as many marks as you in spite of a prize-winning
hangover, you puffed-up barrel of lard!’

‘Oh? Oh? It’s personal remarks now, is it?’

‘Absolutely, Two-chairs! Let’s have some personal remarks! We always
said that walking behind you made people seasick!’

‘I wonder if at this point . . .’ said the Bursar.

The air crackled around the wizards. A wizard in a foul temper attracts
magic like overripe fruit gets flies.

‘You think I’d make a better Archchancellor, don’t you, Bursar?’ said
the Dean.

The Bursar blinked his watery eyes. ‘I, er, the two of you . . . er . .
. many good points . . . er . . . perhaps this is the time to, er, make
a common cause . . .’

They spent just a moment considering this.

‘Well said,’ said the Dean.

‘Got a point,’ said Ridcully.

‘Because, you know, I’ve _never_ liked the Lecturer in Recent Runes very
much . . .’

‘Smirks all the time,’ Ridcully agreed. ‘Not a member of the team.’

‘Oh, really?’ The Lecturer in Recent Runes put on a particularly evil
smirk. ‘At least I got higher marks than you and am noticeably thinner
than the Dean! Although a great many things are! Tell them, Stibbons!’

‘That’s _Mister_ Stibbons, fatman!’ Ponder heard the voice. He knew it
was his. He felt as though he was hypnotized. He could stop any time he
liked, it was just that he didn’t quite feel like it.

‘Could I just, er, say . . .’ the Bursar tried.

‘Shut up, Bursar!’ roared Ridcully.

‘Sorry, sorry. Sorry . . .’

Ridcully waved a finger at the Dean. ‘Now you listen to me . . .’

A crimson spark leapt off his hand, left a trail of smoke past the
Dean’s ear, and hit the mast, which exploded.

The Dean took a deep breath, and when the Dean took a deep breath
appreciably less air was left in the atmosphere. It was let out with a
roar.

‘_You dare fire magic at me?_’

Ridcully was staring at his hand. ‘But I . . . I . . .’

Ponder finally managed to force the words out between teeth that were
trying to clamp together.

‘Er agic’s egecting ug!’

‘What? What are you gurgling about, man?’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

‘I’ll show you _magic_, you pompous clown!’ screamed the Dean, raising
both hands.

‘It’s the magic talking!’ Ponder managed, grabbing one arm. ‘You don’t
want to blow the Archchancellor to little pieces, Dean!’

‘Yes, I damn well do!’

‘Excuse me, Ai don’t wish to intrude . . .’ Mrs Whitlow’s head appeared
at the hatchway.

‘What is it, Mrs Whitlow?’ yelled Ponder, as a blast from the Dean’s
hand sizzled over his head.

‘Ai know you are engaged on University business, but should there be all
these cracks? The water is coming in.’

Ponder looked down. The deck creaked under his feet.

‘We’re sinking . . .’ he said. ‘You _stupid old_—’ He bit down on the
words. ‘The boat is cracking up as fast as we are! Look, it’s going
yellow!’

The green was leaching from the deck like sunlight from a stormy sky.

‘It’s _his_ fault!’ the Dean screamed.

Ponder raced to the side. There were crackling noises all around him.

The important thing was to settle his mind and be calm and, possibly,
think of nice things like blue skies and kittens. Preferably ones which
weren’t about to drown.

‘Listen,’ he said, ‘if we don’t sink our differences they’ll sink us,
understand? The boat’s . . . ripening or something. And we’re a long way
from land, do you _understand_? And there could be sharks down there.’

He looked down. He looked up.

‘_There’s sharks down there!_’ he shouted.

The boat tilted as the wizards joined him.

‘_Are_ they sharks, do you think?’ said Ridcully.

‘Could be tuna,’ said the Dean. Behind them the remains of the sail fell
away.

‘How can you reliably tell the difference?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘You could count their teeth on the way down,’ sighed Ponder. But at
least no one was throwing magic around any more. You could take the
wizards out of Unseen University, but you couldn’t take the University
out of the wizards.

The boat listed still further as Mrs Whitlow looked over the side.

‘What happens if we fall in the water?’ she said.

‘We must devise a plan,’ said Ridcully. ‘Dean, form a working party to
consider our survival in unknown, shark-infested waters, will you?’

‘Should we swim for the shore?’ said Mrs Whitlow. ‘Ai was good at
swimming as a gel.’

Ridcully gave her a warm smile. ‘All in good time, Mrs Whitlow,’ he
said. ‘But your suggestion has been taken aboard.’

‘It’s going to be the only thing that is, in a minute,’ said Ponder.

‘And what exactly will _your_ role be, Archchancellor?’ the Dean
snarled.

‘I have defined your objectives,’ said Ridcully. ‘It is up to you to
consider the options.’

‘In that case,’ said the Dean, ‘I move that we abandon ship.’

‘What for?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘The sharks?’

‘That is a secondary problem,’ said the Dean.

‘That’s right,’ said Ponder, ‘we can always vote to abandon shark.’

The ship lurched suddenly. The Senior Wrangler struck a heroic pose.

‘I will save you, Mrs Whitlow!’ he cried, and swept her off her feet.
Or, at least, made the effort. But the Senior Wrangler was lightly built
for a wizard and Mrs Whitlow was a fine figure of a woman and,
furthermore, the wizard’s grip was limited by the fact that there were
very few areas of Mrs Whitlow that he dared actually touch. He did his
best with some outlying regions and managed to lift her slightly. All
this did was transfer the entire weight of wizard _and_ housekeeper to
the Senior Wrangler’s quite small feet, which went through the deck like
a steel bar.

The boat, dry as tinder now, soft as wood punk, fell apart very gently.

The water was extremely cold. Spray filled the air as they struggled. A
piece of wreckage hit Ponder on the head and pushed him under, into a
blue world where his ears went _gloing-gloing_.

When he struggled to the surface again this noise turned out to be an
argument. Once again, the sheer magic of Unseen University triumphed.
When treading water in a circle of sharks, a wizard will always consider
other wizards to be the most immediate danger.

‘Don’t blame _me_! He was . . . well, I think he was asleep!’

‘You _think_?’

‘He was a mattress. A red one!’

‘He’s the only Librarian we’ve got! How could you be so thoughtless!’
shouted Ridcully. He took a deep breath, and dived.

‘Abandon sea!’ shouted the Bursar cheerfully.

Ponder shuddered as something big and black and streamlined rose out of
the water in front of him. It sank back into the foam and flopped over.

Other shapes were bobbing to the surface all around the frantically
treading wizards. The Dean tapped one.

‘Well, these sharks don’t seem anything like as dangerous as I
expected,’ he said.

‘They’re the seeds out of the boat!’ said Ponder. ‘Get on top of them,
quickly!’

He was sure that something had brushed his leg. In those circumstances,
a man finds unexpected agility. Even the Dean managed to get aboard a
board, after a revolving, foamy period when man and seed fought for
supremacy.

Ridcully surfaced in a shower of spray. ‘It’s no good!’ he spluttered.
‘I went down as far as I could. There’s no sign of him!’

‘Try and get on a seed, Archchancellor, do,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

Ridcully flailed at a passing shark. ‘They won’t attack you if you make
a lot of noise and splash around,’ he said.

‘I thought that’s when they _will_ attack you, sir,’ Ponder called out.

‘Ah, an interesting practical experiment,’ said the Dean, craning to
watch.

Ridcully hauled himself on to one of the seeds. ‘What a mess. I suppose
we can float to land, though,’ he said. ‘Er . . . where’s Mrs Whitlow,
gentlemen?’

They looked around.

‘Oh, no . . .’ the Senior Wrangler moaned. ‘She’s swimming for the shore
. . .’

They followed his gaze, and could just see a hairdo moving jerkily yet
determinedly towards the shore in what Ridcully would probably have
referred to as a chest stroke.

‘I don’t call _that_ very practical,’ said the Dean.

‘What about the sharks?’

‘Well, they’re swimming around under _us_, in fact,’ said the Senior
Wrangler, as the seeds rocked.

Ponder looked down. ‘They appear to be leaving now that we’re not
dangling our legs in the water,’ he said. ‘They’re heading . . . for the
shore, too. ’

‘Well, she knew the risks when she got the job,’ said the Dean.

‘What?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Are you saying that before you apply
for the job of housekeeper of a university you should seriously consider
being eaten by sharks on the shores of some mysterious continent
thousands of years before you are born?’

‘She didn’t ask many questions at the interview, I know that.’

‘Actually, we are worrying unduly,’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies. ‘Sharks have a very undeserved reputation as man-eaters. There
is not a single authenticated case of a shark attacking anyone, despite
what you may have heard. They are sophisticated and peaceful creatures
with a rich family life and, far from being ominous harbingers of doom,
have reputedly even befriended the occasional lost traveller. As hunters
they are of course very efficient, and a full-grown shark can bring down
even a moose with . . . er . . .’

He looked at their faces.

‘Er . . . I think I might perhaps have got them confused with wolves,’
he mumbled. ‘I have, haven’t I?’

They nodded, in unison.

‘Er . . . sharks are the other ones, aren’t they?’ he went on. ‘The
vicious and merciless killers of the sea that don’t even stop to chew?’

They nodded again.

‘Oh dear. Where can I put my face . . . ?’

‘Some distance from a shark,’ said Ridcully briskly. ‘Come on,
gentlemen. That’s our housekeeper! Do you wish to make your own beds in
future? Fireballs again, I think.’

‘She’s gone too far away—’

A red shape rocketed out of the sea beside Ridcully, curled through the
air and slid below the surface again like a razorblade cutting into
silk.

‘What was that? Who of you did that?’ he said.

A bow wave ripped its way to the cluster of triangular fins like a
bowling ball heading down an alley. Then the water erupted.

‘Ye gods, look at the way it’s going at those sharks!’

‘Is it a monster?’

‘It’s a dolphin, surely . . .’

‘With red hair?’

‘Surely it’s not—’

A stricken shark barrelled past the Senior Wrangler. Behind it the water
exploded again into the big red grin of the only dolphin ever to have a
leathery face and orange hair all over its body.

‘Eek?’ said the Librarian.

‘Well done, old chap!’ shouted Ridcully across the water. ‘I said you
wouldn’t let us down!’

‘No, actually you didn’t, sir, you said you thought—’ Ponder began.

‘Good choice of shape, too,’ Ridcully continued loudly. ‘Now, if you can
sort of nudge us all together, then perhaps you could push us towards
the shore? Are we all still here? Where’s the Bursar?’

The Bursar was a small dot away on the right, paddling dreamily along.

‘Well, he’ll get there,’ said Ridcully. ‘Come on, let’s get on to dry
land.’

‘That sea,’ said the Senior Wrangler nervously, staring ahead as the
seeds were jockeyed towards the shore like a string of overloaded
barges, ‘that sea . . . Does it look as though it’s _girting_ to you?’

‘Certainly a very _big_ sea,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘You
know, I don’t think it’s just the rain that’s making the roaring. There
may be a spot of surf.’

‘A few waves won’t do us any harm,’ said Ridcully. ‘At least water is
soft.’

Ponder felt the board underneath him rise and fall as a long swell
passed. An odd shape for a seed, he had to admit. Of course, nature paid
a lot of attention to seeds, equipping them with little wings and sails
and flotation chambers and other devices necessary to give them an edge
over all the other seeds. _These_ were just flattish versions of the
Librarian’s current shape, which was obviously intended for moving
through water very fast.

‘Er . . .’ he said, to the universe in general. It meant: I wonder if
we’ve really _thought_ about this.

‘Can’t see any rocks ahead,’ the Dean observed.

‘Girting,’ mused the Senior Wrangler, as if the word was nagging at him.
‘That’s a very _definite_ sort of word, isn’t it? Has a certain martial
sort of sound.’

It occurred to Ponder that water is not _exactly_ soft. He’d never been
much of a one for sports when he was a boy, but he remembered playing
with the other local lads and joining in all their games, such as Push
Poncy Stibbons Into the Nettles or Tie Up Stibbo and Go Home for Tea,
and there had been the time at the old swimming hole when they’d thrown
him in off the top of the cliff. And it had _hurt_.

The flotilla gradually caught up with Mrs Whitlow, who was holding on to
a floating tree and treading water. The tree already had its fair share
of occupants – birds, lizards and, for some reason, a small camel trying
to make itself comfortable in the branches.

The swell was heavier now. There was a deep, continuous booming
underlying the noise of the rain.

‘Ah, Mrs Whitlow,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘And what a nice tree. Even
got leaves on, look.’

‘We’ve come to save you,’ said the Dean, in the face of the evidence.

‘I think it might be a good idea if Mrs Whitlow hung on to a seed,’ said
Ponder. ‘I really think that really might be a really good idea. I think
the waves might be . . . slightly big . . .’

‘Girting,’ said the Senior Wrangler, morosely. He looked towards the
beach, and it wasn’t ahead of them any more.

It was _down there_. It was at the bottom of a green hill. And the green
was made of water. And, for some reason, it was getting taller.

‘Look,’ said Rincewind. ‘Why can’t you tell me her name? Presumably lots
of people know it. I mean, it must be put on the posters and so on. It’s
only a name, isn’t it? I don’t see the problem.’

The cooks looked at one another. Then one coughed and said, ‘She’s . . .
her name’s . . . Dame Nellie . . . Butt.’

‘But what?’

‘Her name _is_ Butt.’

Rincewind’s lips moved silently. ‘Oh,’ he said.

The cooks nodded.

‘Has Charley drunk all the beer, do you think?’ Rincewind said, sitting
down.

‘Maybe we can find some bananas, Ron,’ said another cook.

Rincewind’s eyes unfocused and his lips moved again. ‘Did you tell
Charley that?’ he said at last.

‘Yep. Just before he broke down.’

There was the sound of running feet outside. One of the cooks looked out
of the window.

‘It’s just the Watch. Probably after some poor bastard . . .’

Rincewind moved back slightly so that he was not obvious from the
window.

Ron shuffled his feet. ‘I reckon if we went and saw Idle Ahmed and got
him to open up his shop we might get some—’

‘Strawberries?’ said Rincewind. The cooks shuddered. There was another
sob from Charley.

‘All his life he’s been waiting for this,’ said a cook. ‘I call it
bloody unfair. Remember when that little soprano left to marry that
drover? He was miserable all week.’

‘Yeah. Lisa Delight,’ said Ron. ‘A bit wobbly in mid-range but
definitely showin’ promise.’

‘He was really pinning his hopes on her. He said a name like that’d even
work with rhubarb.’

Charley howled.

‘I think . . .’ said Rincewind, slowly and thoughtfully.

‘Yes?’

‘I think I can see a way.’

‘You _can_?’ Even Charley raised his head.

‘Well, you know how it is, the outsider sees most of the game . . .
Let’s go with the peaches, the cream, a bit of ice cream if you can make
it, maybe a dash of brandy . . . Let’s see, now . . .’

‘Coconut flakes?’ said Charley, looking up.

‘Yes, why not?’

‘Er . . . some tomato sauce, maybe?’

‘I think not.’

‘You’d better get a move on, they’re halfway through the last act,’ said
Ron.

‘She’ll be right,’ said Rincewind. ‘Okay . . . halve the peaches, put
them in a bowl with the other things, and then add the brandy and
_voilà_.’

‘That some kind of foreign stuff?’ said Charley. ‘I don’t think we’ve
got any of that wollah.’

‘Just add twice as much brandy, then,’ said Rincewind. ‘And there it
_is_.’

‘Yeah, but what’s it _called_?’ said Ron.

‘I’m coming to that,’ said Rincewind. ‘Bowl, please, Charley. Thank
you.’ He held it aloft. ‘Gentlemen . . . I give you . . . the Peach
_Nellie_.’

A saucepan bubbled on a stove. Apart from that insistent little noise,
and the distant strains of the opera, the room fell silent.

‘What do you think?’ said Rincewind brightly.

‘It’s . . . different . . .’ said Charley. ‘I’ll grant you that.’

‘But it’s not exactly _commemorative_, is it?’ said Ron. ‘The world is
full of Nellies.’

‘On the other hand, would you prefer it if everyone remembered the
alternative?’ said Rincewind. ‘Do you want to be associated in any way
with the Peach Bu—’

There was a howl as Charley burst into tears again.

‘Put like that, it doesn’t sound too bad,’ said Ron. ‘Peach Nellie . . .
yeah.’

‘You could use bananas,’ said Rincewind.

Ron’s lips moved silently. ‘Nah,’ he said. ‘Let’s go with the peaches.’

Rincewind brushed himself off. ‘Glad to be of service,’ he said. ‘Tell
me. How many ways are there out of here?’

‘Busy night for everyone, what with the Galah and everything,’ said Ron.
‘Not my taste, of course, but it does bring in the visitors.’

‘Yeah, and the hanging in the morning,’ said Charley.

‘I was planning to miss that,’ said Rincewind. ‘Now, if you’ll just—’

‘I for one hope he escapes,’ said Charley.

‘I’m with you on that,’ said Rincewind. Heavy boots walked past the door
and stopped. He could hear distant voices.

‘They say he fought a dozen policemen,’ said Ron.

‘Three,’ said Rincewind. ‘It was three. I heard. Someone told me. Not a
dozen. Three.’

‘Oh, gotta be more than three, gotta be a _lot_ more than three for a
bold bush ranger like that one. Rinso, they call him.’

‘I heard where this bloke arrived from Dijabringabeeralong and said
Rinso sheared a hundred sheep in five minutes.’

‘I don’t believe that,’ said Rincewind.

‘They _say_ he’s a wizard but that can’t be true ’cos you never catch
one of them doin’ a proper job of work.’

‘Well, in fact—’

‘All right, but a bloke who works up at the gaol says he’d got this
strange brown stuff which gives him enormous strength!’

‘It was only beer soup!’ shouted Rincewind. ‘I mean,’ he added, ‘that’s
what I heard.’

Ron gave him a lopsided look. ‘You look a _bit_ like a wizard,’ he said.

Someone knocked heavily on the door.

‘You’re wearing those dresses they wear,’ Ron went on, without taking
his eyes off Rincewind. ‘Go and open the door, Sid.’

Rincewind backed away, reached behind him to a table laden with knives,
and found his fingers closing on a handle.

Yes, he hated the idea of weapons. They always, always, upped the ante.
But they did impress people.

The door opened. Several men peered in, and one of them was the gaoler.

‘That’s him!’

‘I warn you, I’m a desperate man,’ Rincewind said, bringing his hand
around. Most of the cooks dived for cover.

‘That’s a ladle, mate,’ said a watchman, kindly. ‘But bloody plucky, all
the same. Good on yer. What do you think, Charley?’

‘I reckon it’s never going to be said that a bold larrikin like him was
run to earth in a kitchen of mine,’ said Charley. He picked up a cleaver
in one hand and the dish of Peach Nellie in the other. ‘You nip out the
other door, Rinso, and we’ll talk to these policemen.’

‘Suits us,’ said the watchman. ‘’s not a proper last stand, just having
a punch-up in a kitchen . . . We’ll give you a count to ten, all right?’

Once again Rincewind felt that he hadn’t been given the same script as
everyone else.

‘You mean you’ve got me cornered and you aren’t going to arrest me?’ he
said.

‘We-ell, it wouldn’t look good in the ballad, would it?’ said the guard.
‘You’ve got to think about these things.’ He leaned on the doorway.
‘Now, there’s the old Post Office in Grurt Street. I reckon a man could
hold out for two, maybe three days there, no worries. Then you could run
out, we shoot you full of arrows, you utter some famous last words . . .
kids’ll be learnin’ about you in school in a hundred years’ time, I’ll
bet. And look at yourself, willya?’ He stepped forward, ignoring the
deadly ladle, and prodded Rincewind’s robe. ‘How many arrows is that
going to stop, eh?’

‘You’re all mad!’

Charley shook his head. ‘Everyone likes a battler, mister. That’s the
Ecksian way. Go down fighting, that’s the ticket.’

‘We heard about you takin’ on that road gang,’ said the guard. ‘Bloody
good job. Man who’d do a job like that ain’t gonna be hanged, he gonna
want to make a famous last stand.’

The men had all entered the kitchen now. The doorway was clear.

‘Has anyone ever had a Famous Last Run?’ said Rincewind.

‘No. What’s one of them?’

‘G’day!’

As he sped away along the darkened waterfront he heard the shout behind
him.

‘That’s the ticket! We’ll count to ten!’

He glanced up as he ran and saw that the big sign over the brewery
seemed to be dark. And then he realized that something was hopping along
just behind him.

‘Oh, no! Not _you_!’

‘G’day,’ said Scrappy, drawing level.

‘Look at the mess you’ve got me into!’

‘Mess? You were gonna be hanged! Now you’re enjoying the healthy fresh
air in a god’s own country!’

‘And I’m going to be shot full of arrows!’

‘So? You can _dodge_ arrows. This place needs a hero. Champion shearer,
road warrior, bush ranger, sheep-stealer, horse rider . . . all you need
now is to be good at some damn silly bat and ball game that no one’s
invented yet and maybe build a few tall buildings with borrowed money
and you’d have a full house. They ain’t gonna kill _you_ in a hurry.’

‘That’s not much comfort! Anyway, I didn’t do any of that stuff— Well, I
mean I _did_, but—’

‘It’s what people think that matters. Now they believe you waltzed out
of a locked cell.’

‘All I did was—’

‘Doesn’t matter! The number of gaolers who want to shake you by the
hand, well, I reckon they wouldn’t get around to hanging you by
lunchtime!’

‘Listen, you giant jumping rat, I’ve made it to the docks, okay? I can
outrun them! I can lie low! I know how to stow away, throw up, get
discovered, be thrown over the side, stay afloat for two days by
clinging on to an old barrel and eating plankton sieved through my
beard, carefully negotiate the treacherous coral reef surrounding an
atoll and survive by eating yams!’

‘That’s a very special talent you got there,’ said the kangaroo,
bounding over a ship’s hawser. ‘How many Ecksian ships have you ever
seen in Ankh-Morpork? Busiest port in the world, ain’t it?’

Rincewind slowed. ‘Well . . .’

‘It’s the currents, mate. Get more’n ten miles off’f the coast here and
there ain’t one captain in a hundred who can stop his ship going right
over the Rim. They stick very close inshore.’

Rincewind stopped. ‘You mean this whole place is a _prison_?’

‘Yep. But the Ecksians say this is the best bloody place in the world,
so there’s no point in going anywhere else anyway.’

There were shouts behind him. The guards here didn’t take so long
counting to ten as most guards did.

‘What’re you going to do now?’ said Rincewind. The kangaroo had gone.

He ducked down a side street and found his way completely blocked. Carts
filled the street from edge to edge. Gaily decorated carts.

Rincewind paused. He had always been the foremost exponent of the _from_
rather than the _to_ of running. He could have _written_ ‘The From of
Running’. But just occasionally a certain subtle sense told him that the
_to_ was important.

For one thing, a lot of the people standing and chatting around the
carts were wearing leather.

You could make a lot of arguments in favour of leather. It was
long-lasting, practical and hard-wearing. People like Cohen the
Barbarian found it so hard-wearing and long-lasting that their old
loincloths had to be removed by a blacksmith. But the people here didn’t
look as if these were the qualities that they’d been looking for in the
boutique. They’d asked questions like: How many studs has it got? How
shiny is it? Has it got holes cut out in unusual places?

But still, one of the most basic rules for survival on any planet is
never to upset someone wearing black leather.²¹ Rincewind sidled
politely past them, giving them a friendly nod and a wave whenever he
saw one looking in his direction. For some reason, this caused more of
them to take an interest in him.

There were groups of ladies, too, and there was no doubt that if
EcksEcksEcksEcks was where a man could stand tall, so could a woman.
Some of them were nevertheless very pretty, in an overstated kind of
way, although the occasional moustache looked out of place, but
Rincewind had been to foreign parts and knew that things could be a bit
lush in the more rural regions.

There were more sequins than you usually saw. More feathers, too.

Then it dawned on him in a great rush of relief.

‘Oh, this is a _carnival_, right?’ he said aloud. ‘This is the Galah
they keep talking about.’

‘Pardon you?’ said a lady in a spangly blue dress, who was changing the
wheel on a large purple cart.

‘These are carnival floats, aren’t they?’ said Rincewind.

The woman gritted her teeth, rammed the new wheel into place and then
released the axle. The cart bounced down on to the cobbles.

‘Damn, I think I broke a nail on that,’ she said. She glanced at
Rincewind. ‘Yeah, this is _the_ carnival. That dress has seen better
days, hasn’t it? Nice moustache, shame about the beard. It’d look good
with a tint.’

Rincewind glanced back down the street. The floats and the press of
people were hiding him from view, but this wouldn’t last long.

‘Er . . . could you help me, madam?’ he said. ‘Er . . . the Watch are
after me.’

‘They can be so tiresome like that.’

‘There was a misunderstanding over a sheep.’

‘There so often is, mate.’ She looked Rincewind up and down. ‘You don’t
look like a country boy, I must say.’

‘Me? I get nervous when I see a blade of grass, miss.’

She stared at him. ‘You . . . haven’t been here very long, have you,
Mister . . . ?’

‘Rincewind, ma’am.’

‘Well, get on the cart, Mister Rincewind. My name’s Letitia.’ She held
out a rather large hand. He shook it, and then tried surreptitiously to
massage some blood back into his fingers as he scrambled up.

The purple cart had been decorated with huge swathes of pink and
lavender, and what looked like roses made out of paper. Boxes, also
covered in cloth, had been set up in the centre to give a sort of raised
dais.

‘What d’you think?’ said Letitia. ‘The girls worked all arvo.’

The scheme was a bit too feminine for Rincewind’s taste, but he’d been
brought up to be polite. He snuggled down, as far out of view as
possible.

‘Very nice,’ he said. ‘Very gay.’

‘Glad you think so.’

Up ahead somewhere a band started to play. There was a stirring as
people got on to the floats or formed up to march. A couple of women
climbed up into the purple cart, all sequins and long gloves, and stared
at Rincewind.

‘What the—’ one began.

‘Darleen – we have to talk,’ said Letitia, from the front of the cart.

Rincewind watched them go into a huddle. Occasionally one of them would
raise her head and give him an odd look, as if she was reassuring
herself that he was here.

Fine big girls they had here, though. He wondered where they got their
shoes from.

Rincewind was not intensively familiar with women. Quite a lot of his
life that hadn’t been spent at high speed had been passed within the
walls of Unseen University, where women were broadly put in the same
category as wallpaper or musical instruments – interesting in their way,
and no doubt a small but important part of the proper structure of
civilization but not, when you got right down to it, essential.

On these occasions when he had spent some time in the intimate company
of a woman, it was generally when she was trying to either cut his head
off or persuade him to a course of action that would probably get
someone else to do it. When it came to women he was not, as it were,
capable of much fine-tuning. A few neglected instincts were telling him
that something was out of place, but he couldn’t work out what it was.

The one addressed as Darleen strode down the cart with a decisive and
rather aggressive air. Rincewind pulled his hat off respectfully.

‘Are you coming the raw prawn?’ she demanded.

‘Me? Certainly not, miss. No prawns at all. If I can just lie low until
we’re a few streets away, that’s all I ask—’

‘You know what this is, don’t you?’

‘Yes, miss. The carnival.’ Rincewind swallowed. ‘No worries there.
Everyone likes dressing up, don’t they?’

‘But are you tellin’ me you really think . . . I mean we . . . What are
you staring at my hair for?’

‘Er . . . I was wondering how you get it so sparkly. Are you on the
stage at all?’

‘We’re moving, girls,’ Letitia called back. ‘Remember . . . pretty
smiles. Leave him alone, Darleen, you don’t know where he’s been.’

The third woman, the one the others had called Neilette, was watching
him curiously, and Rincewind felt that there was something not right
about her. Her hair _wasn’t_ drab, but it certainly appeared to be when
compared with that of her colleagues. She didn’t seem to have enough
make-up. She seemed, in short, slightly out of place.

Then he caught sight of a watchman ahead, and flung himself below the
edge of the cart. A gap in the boards gave him a view, as the cart
turned the corner, of the waiting crowds.

He’d been to quite a number of carnivals, although not usually on
purpose. He’d even attended Fat Lunchtime in Genua, generally regarded
as the biggest in the world, although he vaguely recalled that he’d been
hanging upside down under one of the floats in order to escape pursuers,
but right now he couldn’t quite remember why he’d been chased and it was
never wise to stop and ask. Although Rincewind had covered quite a lot
of the Disc in his life, most of his recollections were like that – a
blur. Not through forgetfulness, but because of speed.

This looked like the usual audience. A real carnival procession should
only take place after the pubs have been open for a good long time. It
adds to the spontaneity. There were cheers, whistles, jeers and
catcalls. Up ahead, people were blowing horns. Dancers whirled past
Rincewind’s peephole.

He sat back and pulled a swathe of taffeta over his head. This sort of
thing always took up a lot of Watch time, what with pickpockets and so
on. He’d wait until they were in whatever bit of wasteground these
things always ended up in, and drop quietly out of sight.

He glanced down.

These ladies were certainly into shoes in a big way. They had
_hundreds_.

Hundreds of shoes, all lined up, peeking out from under a heap of
women’s clothing. Rincewind looked away. There was probably something
morally wrong about staring at women’s clothes without women in them.

His head turned back and looked at the shoes again. He was sure that
several of them had moved—

A bottle shattered near his head. Glass showered around him. Up above,
Darleen uttered a word he’d never have expected on the lips of a lady.

Rincewind raised his head cautiously and another bottle bounced off his
hat.

‘Some hoonies having a bit of fun,’ said Darleen, through gritted teeth.
‘There’s always some joker— _oh really_?’

‘Give us a kiss, mister?’ said a young man who’d leapt on to the edge of
the cart, waving a beer can happily.

Rincewind had seen some serious fighters in action, but no one had ever
swung a punch like Darleen. Her eyes narrowed, her fist seemed to travel
in a complete circle, it met the man’s chin about halfway round and when
he disappeared from the wizard’s view he was still rising.

‘Will you look at that?’ Darleen demanded, waving her hand at Rincewind.
‘Ripped! These evening gloves cost a fortune, the bastard!’ A beer can
sailed past her ear. ‘Didja see who threw that? Didja? I saw yer, yer
mazza! I’ll stick my hand down yer throat and pull yer trousers up!’

The crowd roared their appreciation and derision at the same time.
Rincewind caught sight of watchmen’s helmets heading purposefully
towards them.

‘Er . . .’ he said. ‘Hey, that’s him! That’s Rinso the bush ranger!’
someone yelled, pointing.

‘It wasn’t bushes, it was just a sheep!’

Rincewind wondered who’d said that, and realized it was him. And there
was no escape. And the watchmen were looking up at him. And there was
_really_ no escape. The street was packed. There was another fight
further up the procession. There were no nearby alleyways, the
fugitive’s friend. And the watchmen were fighting their way through the
throng, with great difficulty. And the crowd were having the time of
their lives. And the huge kangaroo beer sign gleamed overhead.

This was it, then. Time for a Famous Last Stand.

‘What?’ he said aloud. ‘It’s _never_ time for a Famous Last Stand!’

He turned to Letitia. ‘I should just like to thank you for trying to
help me,’ he said. ‘It’s a pleasure to meet some real ladies for once.’

They looked at one another.

‘The pleasure’s all ours,’ said Letitia. ‘Such a change to meet a real
gentleman, isn’t it, girls?’

Darleen kicked a fishnet leg at a man trying to climb on the cart,
causing with a stiletto heel what bromide in your tea is reputed to take
several weeks to achieve.

‘Too bloody true,’ she said.

Rincewind leapt from the cart, landed on someone’s shoulder, jumped
again very briefly on to someone’s head. It worked. Provided you kept
moving, it really worked. A few hands grabbed at him and one or two cans
were thrown, but there were also plenty of cries of ‘Good on yer!’ and
‘That’s the way!’

At last there was an alley. He jumped down from the last obliging
shoulder and changed leg gear, and then found that the best way to
describe the alley was as a cul-de-sac. The worst way was as an alley
with three or four watchmen in it, who’d ducked in for a smoke.

They gave him that look of harassed policemen everywhere which said
that, as an unwelcome intruder into their brief smoko, he was
_definitely_ going to be guilty of something. And then light dawned in
the face of their sergeant.

‘That’s him!’

Out in the street people started yelling and screaming. These were not
the beery shouts of the carnival. People were in real pain out there.
They were also pressing in so tightly that there was no way out.

‘I can explain everything,’ said Rincewind, half aware of the growing
noise. ‘Well . . . most things. Some things, certainly. A few things.
Look, about this sheep—’

Something brilliant passed over his head and landed on the cobbles
between him and the guards.

It looked rather like a table wearing an evening dress, and it had
hundreds of little feet.

They were wearing high heels.

Rincewind rolled into a ball and put his hands over his head, trying to
block his ears until the noise had died away.

* * *

At the very edge of the sea, the surf bubbled and sucked at the sand. As
the wavelet drew back it flowed around the splintered bulk of a tree.

The drifting wood’s cargo of crabs and sand fleas waited for their
moment and slid off cautiously, scuttling ashore ahead of the next wave.

The rain banged into the beach, running in miniature canyons of
crumbling sand on its way to the sea. The crabs surged across these like
a homesteaders’ stampede, rushing to mark out territory on the endless,
virgin beach.

They followed the salty tideline of weed and shells, scrambling over one
another in their search for a space where a crab can proudly stand
sideways and start a new life and eat the heady sand of freedom.

A few of them investigated a grey, sodden pointy hat that was tangled in
seaweed, and then ran on to a more promising heap of soaked cloth which
offered even more interesting holes and crevices.

One of them tried to climb into Ponder Stibbons’s nose, and was snorted
out again.

Ponder opened an eye. When he moved his head, the water filling his ears
made a ringing noise.

The history of the last few minutes was complicated. He could remember
rushing along a tube of green water, if such a thing were possible, and
there had been several periods where the air and the sea and Ponder
himself had been very closely entwined. Now he felt as though someone
had, with great precision, hit every part of his body with a hammer.

‘Get off, will you!’

Ponder reached up and pulled another crab out of his ear, and realized
that he had lost his glasses. They were probably rolling at the bottom
of the sea by now, frightening lobsters. So here he was, on an alien
shore, and he’d be able to see everything really clearly provided
everything was meant to be a blur.

‘Am I dead this time?’ It was the Dean’s voice, from a little further
away along the beach.

‘No, you’re _still_ alive, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Damn. Are you sure?’

There were other groans as bits of tidal debris turned out to be wizards
mixed with seaweed.

‘Are we all here?’ said Ridcully, trying to get to his feet.

‘I’m sure I’m not,’ moaned the Dean.

‘I don’t see . . . Mrs Whitlow,’ said Ridcully. ‘Or the Bursar . . .’

Ponder sat up.

‘There’s . . . oh, dear . . . well, there’s the Bursar . . .’

Out at sea a huge wave was building up. It towered higher and higher.
And the Bursar was on top of it.

‘Bursar!’ Ridcully screamed.

The distant figure stood up on the seed and waved.

‘He’s standing up,’ said Ridcully. ‘Is he supposed to stand up on those
things? He’s not supposed to stand up, is he? I’m sure he shouldn’t be
standing up. YOU’RE NOT SUPPOSED TO STAND UP, BURSAAAR! How . . . That’s
not supposed to happen, is it?’

The wave curled, but the Bursar seemed to be skimming down the side of
it, skidding along the huge green wet wall like a man on one ski.

Ridcully turned to the other wizards. ‘He can’t do that, can he? He’s
walking up and down on it. Can he do that? The wave’s curling over and
he’s just sliding gently along the . . . Oh, no . . .’

The foaming crest curled over the speeding wizard.

‘That’s it, then,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er . . . no . . .’ said Ponder.

The Bursar reappeared further along the beach, expelled from the
collapsing tube of water like an arrow from a bow. The wave crashed over
behind him, striking the shore as if it had just offended it.

The seed changed direction, cruised gently over the backwash and
crunched to a halt on the sand.

The Bursar stepped off. ‘Hooray,’ he said. ‘My feet are wet. What a nice
forest. Time for tea.’

He picked up the seed and rammed it point first in the sand. Then he
wandered away up the beach.

‘How did he do that?’ said Ridcully. ‘I mean, the man’s crazier than a
ferret! Damn good Bursar, of course.’

‘Possibly the lack of mental balance means there’s nothing to impede
physical stability?’ said Ponder wearily.

‘You think so?’

‘Not really, sir. I just said it for something to say.’ Ponder tried to
massage some life back into his legs, and started to count under his
breath.

‘Is there anything to _eat_ here?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Four,’ said Ponder.

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘What? Oh, it was just some counting I was doing, sir. No, sir. There’s
probably fish and lobsters in the sea, but the land looks pretty bare to
me.’

It did. Reddish sand stretched away through the greyish drizzle to
bluish mountains. The only greenishness was the Dean’s face and,
suddenly, the shoots winding out of the Bursar’s surfing seed. Leaves
unfolded in the rain, tiny flowers opened with little plopping noises.

‘Well, at least we’ll have another boat,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I doubt it, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘The god wasn’t very good at breeding
things.’ And, indeed, the swelling fruit was not looking very
boat-shaped.

‘You know, I still think it would help if we thought of all this as a
valuable opportunity,’ said Ridcully.

‘That’s true,’ said the Dean, sitting up. ‘It’s not many times in your
life you get the chance to die of hunger on some bleak continent
thousands of years before you’re born. We should make the most of it.’

‘I meant that pitting ourselves against the elements will bring out the
best in us and forge us into a go-getting and hard-hitting team,’ said
Ridcully. This view got no takers.

‘I’m _sure_ there must be _something_ to eat,’ mumbled the Chair of
Indefinite Studies, looking around aimlessly. ‘There usually is.’

‘After all, nothing is beyond men like us,’ said Ridcully.

‘That’s true,’ said Ponder. ‘Oh gods, yes. That’s true.’

‘And at least a wizard can always make a decent fire.’

Ponder’s eyes opened wide. He rose in one movement aimed at Ridcully,
but was still airborne when the Archchancellor tossed a small fireball
at a heap of driftwood. By the time the glowing ball was halfway to the
wood Ponder had hit Ridcully in the back, so that both of them were
sprawled on the wet sand when the world went _whooph_.

When they looked up the heap of driftwood was a blackened crater.

‘Well, thank you,’ said the Dean, behind them. ‘I feel lovely and dry
now, and I never did like my eyebrows all that much.’

‘High thaumic field, sir,’ Ponder panted. ‘I _did_ say.’

Ridcully stared at his hands. ‘I was going to light my pipe with one . .
.’ he muttered. He held the hand away from him. ‘It was only a Number
Ten,’ he said.

The Dean stood up, brushing away some tufts of burnt beard.

‘I’m not sure I believe what I just saw,’ he said, and pointed a finger
at a nearby rock.

‘No, sir, I don’t think you—’

Most of the rock was lifted off the ground and landed a hundred yards
away. The rest of it sizzled in a red-hot puddle.

‘Can I have a go?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Sir, I really think—’

‘Oh, well done, Senior Wrangler,’ said the Dean, as another rock
fractured into fragments.

‘Ye gods, you were _right_, Stibbons,’ said Ridcully. ‘The magic field
here is _huge_!’

‘Yes, sir, but I really don’t think we should be using it, sir!’ Ponder
shrieked.

‘We’re wizards, young man. Using magic is what wizarding is all about.’

‘No, sir! _Not_ using magic is what wizarding is all about!’

Ridcully hesitated.

‘This is fossil magic, sir!’ said Ponder, speaking fast. ‘It’s what’s
being used to create this place! We could do untold damage if we’re not
careful!’

‘All right, all right, no one do anything for a moment,’ said Ridcully.
‘Now . . . what are you talking about, Mister Stibbons?’

‘I don’t think the place is properly, well, _finished_, sir. I mean,
there’re no plants or animals, are there?’

‘Nonsense. I saw a camel a little while ago.’

‘Yes, sir, but that came with us. And there’s seaweed and crabs on the
beach and they got washed up too. But where are the trees and bushes and
grasses?’

‘Interesting,’ said Ridcully. ‘Place is as bald as a baby’s bottom.’

‘Still under construction, sir. The god _did_ say it was being built.’

‘Unbelievable, really,’ said Ridcully. ‘A whole continent being created
out of nothing?’

‘Exactly, sir.’

‘Gazillions of thaums of magic pouring into the world.’

‘You’ve got it, sir.’

‘Whole mountains and cliffs and beaches where once there was nothing,
style of thing.’

‘That’s right, sir.’

‘Bit of a miracle, you could say.’

‘I certainly would, sir.’

‘Unimaginably vast amounts of magic doing their stuff.’

‘Astonishing, sir.’

‘So I expect no one will miss a little bit, eh?’

‘_No!_ That’s not how it works, sir! If we use it, it’s like . . . like
treading on ants, sir! This isn’t like . . . finding an old staff in a
cupboard and using up the magic that’s left. This is the real primal
energy! _Anything_ we do might well have an effect.’

The Dean tapped him on the shoulder. ‘Then here we are, young Stibbons,
stuck on this forsaken shore. What do you suggest? We’re thousands of
years from home. Perhaps we should just sit and wait? That Rincewind
fellow’s bound to be along in a few millennia?’

‘Er, Dean . . .’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Yes?’

‘Are you standing behind Stibbons there, or are you sitting on this rock
over here?’

The Dean looked at himself, sitting on the rock.

‘Oh, blast,’ he muttered. ‘Temporal discontinuity again.’

‘Again?’ said Ponder.

‘We had a patch of it in Room 5b once,’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘Ridiculous. You had to cough before you went in, in case you were
already there. Anyway, _you_ shouldn’t be surprised, young man. Enough
magic distorts all physical la—’

The Senior Wrangler vanished, leaving only a pile of clothes.

‘Took a while to take hold,’ said Ridcully. ‘I remember when—’

His voice suddenly rose in pitch. Ponder spun around and saw a small
heap of clothing with a pointed hat on top of it.

He raised the hat gingerly. A pink face under a mop of curls looked up
at him.

‘Bugger!’ squeaked Ridcully. ‘How old am I, mister?’

‘Er . . . you look about six, sir,’ said Ponder. His back twinged.

The small worried face crinkled up. ‘I want my mum!’ The little nose
sniffed. ‘Was that me who just said that?’

‘Er, yes . . .’

‘You can keep on top of it if you concentrate,’ the Archchancellor
squeaked. ‘It resets the tempor— I wanna sweetie! – it resets the
temporal gl— I wanna sweetie, oh, you wait till I get me home, I’ll give
me such a smack – it resets the body’s clo— where’s Mr Pootle? – it
resets the body’s clock – wanna wanna Mr Pootle! – don’t worry, I think
I’ve got the hang of it—’

The wail behind Ponder made him turn around. There were more piles of
clothing where the wizards had been. He pulled aside the Dean’s hat just
as a faint _bloop_ suggested that Mustrum Ridcully had managed to regain
full possession of his years again.

‘That the Dean, Stibbons?’

‘Could be, sir. Er . . . some of them have _gone_, sir!’

Ridcully looked unflustered. ‘Temporal gland acting up in the high
field,’ he said. ‘Probably decided that since it’s thousands of years
ago they’re not here. Don’t worry, they’ll come back when it works it
out . . .’

Ponder suddenly felt breathless. ‘And . . . hwee . . . think this one’s
the Lecturer in Recent Runes . . . hwee . . . of course . . . hwee . . .
all babies look the . . . hwee . . . same.’

There was another wail from under the Senior Wrangler’s hat.

‘Bit of a . . . hwee . . . kindergarten here, sir,’ Ponder wheezed. His
back creaked when he tried to stand upright.

‘Oh, they’ll probably come back if they don’t get fed,’ said Ridcully.
‘It’s you that’ll be the problem, lad. I mean, _sir_.’

Ponder held his hands up in front of him. He could see the veins through
the pale skin. He could nearly see the bones.

Around him the piles of clothing rose again as the wizards clambered
back to their proper age.

‘How . . . old . . . hwee . . . I . . . ha . . . look?’ he panted. ‘Like
someone who shouldn’t . . . hwee . . . start reading a long book?’

‘A long sentence,’ said Ridcully cheerfully, holding him up. ‘How old do
you feel? In yourself?’

‘I . . . hwee . . . ought to feel . . . hwee . . . about twenty-four,
sir,’ Ponder groaned. ‘I actually . . . hwee . . . feel like a
twenty-four-year-old who has been hit by eighty years travelling at . .
. hwee . . . high speed.’

‘Hold on to that thought. Your temporal gland knows how old you are.’

Ponder tried to concentrate, but it was hard. Part of him wanted to go
to sleep. Part of him wanted to say, ‘Hah, you call _this_ a temporal
disturbance? You should’ve seen the temporal disturbances we will have
been used to be going to get in _my_ day.’ A pressing part of him was
threatening that if he didn’t find a toilet it would make its own
arrangements.

‘You’ve kept your hair,’ said the Senior Wrangler, encouragingly.

Ponder heard himself say, ‘Remember old “Cruddy” Trusset? Now _there_
was a wizard who had . . . good . . . hair . . .’ He tried to get a
grip. ‘He’s still alive, isn’t he?’ he wheezed. ‘He’s the same age as
me. Oh, _no_ . . . now I’m remembering only yesterday as if it was . . .
hwee . . . seventy years ago!’

‘You can get over it,’ said Ridcully. ‘You’ve got to make it clear
you’re not accepting it, you see. The important thing is not to panic.’

‘I _am_ panicking,’ squeaked Ponder. ‘I’m just doing it very slowly!
Why’ve I got this horrible feeling that I’m . . . hwee . . . falling
forward all the . . . hwee . . . time?’

‘Oh, that’s just apprehensions of mortality,’ said Ridcully. ‘Everyone
gets that.’

‘And . . . hwee . . . now I think my memory’s going . . .’

‘What makes you think that?’

‘Think what? Speak up, you . . . hwee . . . man . . .’

Something exploded somewhere behind Ponder’s eyeballs and lifted him off
the ground. For a moment he felt he had jumped into icy water.

The blood flowed back to his hands.

‘Well done, lad,’ said Ridcully. ‘Your hair’s going brown again, too.’

‘Ow . . .’ Ponder slumped to his knees. ‘It was like wearing a lead
suit! I never want to go through _that_ again!’

‘Suicide’s your best bet, then,’ said Ridcully.

‘Is this going to happen _again_?’

‘Probably. At least once, anyway.’

Ponder got to his feet with a steely look in his eyes. ‘Then let’s find
whoever’s building this place and ask them to send us home,’ he growled.

‘They might not want to listen,’ said Ridcully. ‘Deities can be touchy.’

Ponder shook his sleeves to leave his hands free. For a wizard, this was
equivalent to checking the functioning of a pump-action shotgun.

‘Then we’ll insist,’ he said.

‘Really, Stibbons? What about protection of the magical ecology?’

Ponder turned on him a look that would have opened a strongroom.
Ridcully was in his seventies and spry even for wizards, who tended to
live well into their second century if they survived their first fifty
years. Ponder wasn’t sure how old _he’d_ been, but he’d definitely
thought he could hear a blade being sharpened. It was one thing to know
you were on a journey, and quite, quite another to see your destination
on the horizon.

‘It can get stuffed,’ he said.²²

‘Well thought out, Mister Stibbons! I can see we’ll make a wizard of you
yet. Ah, the Dean’s . . . oh . . .’

The Dean’s clothes billowed up but did not, as it were, inflate to their
old size. The hat in particular was big enough to rock on the Dean’s
ears, which were redder and stuck out more than Ponder remembered.

Ridcully raised the hat.

‘Push off, granddad,’ said the Dean.

‘Ah,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Thirteen years old, I’d say. Which
explains a lot. Well, Dean, help us with the others, will you?’

‘Why should I?’ The adolescent Dean cracked his knuckles. ‘Hah! I’m
young again and soon you’ll be _dead_! I’ve got my whole life ahead of
me!’

‘Firstly, you’ll spend it here, and secondly, Dean, _you_ think it’s
going to be jolly good fun being the Dean in a thirteen-year-old body,
don’t you, but within a minute or two you’ll start forgetting it all,
you see? The old temporal gland can’t allow you to remember being
fourteen when you’re not even thirteen yet, you follow me? You’d know
this stuff, Dean, if you weren’t forgetting. You’ll have to go through
it _all_ over again, Dean . . . ah . . .’

The brain has far less control over the body than the body does over the
brain. And adolescence is not a good time. Nor is old age, for that
matter, but at least the spots have cleared up, some of the more
troublesome glands have settled down and you’re allowed to take a nap in
the afternoons and twinkle at young women. In any case, the Dean’s body
hadn’t experienced too much old age yet, whereas every junior spot, ache
and twinge was firmly embossed on the morphic memory. Once, it decided,
was enough.

The Dean expanded. Ponder noticed that his head in particular swelled up
to fit his ears.

The Dean rubbed his spot-free face. ‘Five minutes wouldn’t have been
bad,’ he complained. ‘What was _that_ all about?’

‘Temporal uncertainty,’ said Ridcully. ‘You’ve seen it before, didn’t
you realize? What were you thinking of?’

‘Sex.’

‘Oh, yes, of course . . . silly of me, really.’ Ridcully looked along
the deserted beach. ‘Mister Stibbons thinks we can—’ he began. ‘Ye gods!
There _are_ people here!’

A young woman was walking towards them. Swaying, anyway.

‘My word,’ said the Dean. ‘I suppose this isn’t Slakki, by any chance?’

‘I thought they wore grass skirts . . .’ said Ridcully. ‘What’s she
wearing, Stibbons?’

‘A sarong.’

‘Looks right enough to me, haha,’ said the Dean.

‘Certainly makes a man wish he was fifty years younger,’ said the Chair
of Indefinite Studies.

‘Five minutes younger would do for me,’ said the Dean. ‘Incidentally,
did any of you notice that rather clever inadvertent joke just then?
Stibbons said it was “a sarong” and I—’

‘What’s that she’s carrying?’ said Ridcully.

‘—no, listen, you see, I misheard him, in fact, and I—’

‘Looks like . . . coconuts . . .’ said Ponder, shading his eyes.

‘This is a bit more _like_ it,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘—because actually I _thought_ he said, “It’s wrong,” you see—’

‘Certainly _a_ coconut,’ said Ridcully. ‘I’m not complaining, of course,
but aren’t these sultry maids generally black-haired? Red doesn’t seem
very typical.’

‘—so _I_ said—’

‘I _suppose_ you’d get coconuts here?’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘They float, don’t they?’

‘—and, listen, when Stibbons said “sarong”, I thought he—’

‘Something familiar about her,’ Ridcully mused.

‘Did you see that nut in the Museum of Quite Unusual Things?’ said the
Senior Wrangler. ‘Called the coco-de-mer and . . .’ he permitted himself
‘. . . ha, very curious shape, you know, you’ll never guess who it used
to put me in mind of . . .’

‘It _can’t_ be Mrs Whitlow, can it?’ said Ponder.

‘As a matter of fact, I must admit that it—’

‘Well, _I_ thought it was mildly amusing, anyway,’ said the Dean.

‘It _is_ Mrs Whitlow,’ said Ridcully.

‘More of a nut, really, but—’

It dawned on the Senior Wrangler that the sky was a different colour on
his personal planet. He turned around, looked, said, ‘Mwaaa . . .’ and
fell gently to the sand.

‘Ai don’t quate know what’s happened to Mister Librarian,’ said Mrs
Whitlow, in a voice that made the Senior Wrangler twitch even in his
swoon.

The coconut opened its eyes. It looked as if it had just seen something
truly horrific, but this is a normal expression for baby orang-utans and
in any case it was looking at the Dean.

‘Eek!’ it said.

Ridcully coughed. ‘Well, at least he’s the right shape,’ he said. ‘And,
er, you, Mrs Whitlow? How do you feel?’

‘Mwaa . . .’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Very well indeed, thank you,’ said Mrs Whitlow. ‘This country agrees
with me. I don’t know whether it was the swim, but Ai haven’t felt quate
so buoyant in years. But Ai looked around and there was this dear little
ape just sitting there.’

‘Ponder, would you mind just throwing the Senior Wrangler in the sea for
a moment?’ said Ridcully. ‘Nowhere too deep. Don’t worry if it steams.’
He took Mrs Whitlow’s spare hand.

‘I don’t want to worry you, dear Mrs Whitlow,’ he said, ‘but I think
something is shortly going to come as a big shock to you. First of all,
and please don’t misunderstand me, it might be a good idea to loosen
your clothing.’ He swallowed. ‘Slightly.’

The Bursar had experienced some changes of age as he wandered through
the wet but barren land, but to a man capable of being a vase of flowers
for an entire afternoon this was barely a mild distraction.

What had caught his eye was a fire. It was burning bits of driftwood,
and the flames were edged with blue from the salt.

Close to it was a sack made of some sort of animal skins.

The damp earth beside the Bursar stirred and a tree erupted, growing so
fast that the rain steamed off the unfolding leaves. This did not
surprise him. Few things did. Besides, he’d never seen a tree growing
before, so he did not know how fast it was supposed to go.

Then several more trees exploded around him. One grew so fast that it
went all the way from sapling to half-rotten trunk in a few seconds.

And it seemed to the Bursar that there were other people here. He
couldn’t see them or hear them, but something in his bones sensed them.
However, the Bursar was also quite accustomed to the presence of people
who couldn’t be seen or heard by anyone else, and had spent many a
pleasant hour in conversation with historical figures and, sometimes,
the wall.

All in all the Bursar was, depending on your outlook, the most or least
suitable person to encounter deity on a first-hand basis.

An old man walked around a rock and was halfway to the fire before he
noticed the wizard.

Like Rincewind, the Bursar had no room in his head for racism. As a skin
colour black came as quite a relief compared to some of the colours he’d
seen, although he’d never seen anyone quite so black as the man now
staring at him. At least, the Bursar assumed he was staring. The eyes
were so deep set that he couldn’t be sure.

The Bursar, who had been properly brought up, said, ‘Hooray, there’s a
rosebush?’

The old man gave him a rather puzzled nod. He walked over to the dead
tree and pulled off a branch, which he pushed into the fire. Then he sat
down and watched it as though watching wood char was the most engrossing
thing in the world.

The Bursar sat down on a rock and waited. If the game was patience, then
two could play at it.

The old man kept glancing up at him. The Bursar kept smiling. Once or
twice he gave the man a little wave.

Finally the burning branch was pulled out of the fire. The old man
picked up the leather sack in his other hand and walked off among the
rocks. The Bursar followed him.

There was an overhang here under a small cliff, shielding a stretch of
vertical rock from the rain. It was the kind of tempting surface that
would, in Ankh-Morpork, have already been covered so thickly with so
many posters, signs and graffiti that if you’d removed the wall the
general accretion would still have stood up.

Someone had drawn a tree. It was the simplest drawing of a tree the
Bursar had ever seen since he’d been old enough to read books that
weren’t mainly pictures, but it was also in some strange way the most
accurate. It was simple because something complex had been rolled up
small; as if someone had drawn trees, and started with the normal green
cloud on a stick, and refined it, and refined it some more, and looked
for the little twists in a line that said _tree_ and refined _those_
until there was just one line that said TREE.

And now when you looked at it you could hear the wind in the branches.

The old man reached down beside him and took up a flat stone with some
white paste on it. He drew another line on the rock, slightly like a
flattened V, and smeared it with mud.

The Bursar burst out laughing as the wings emerged from the painting and
whirred past him.

And again he was aware of a strange effect in the air. It reminded him
of . . . yes . . . old ‘Rubber’ Houser, that was his name, dead now, of
course, but remembered by many of his contemporaries as the inventor of
the Graphical Device.

The Bursar had joined the University when likely wizards started their
training early, somewhere after the point where they learned to walk but
before they started to push over girls in the playground. The writing of
lines in detention class was a familiar punishment and the Bursar, like
everyone else, toyed with the usual practice of tying several pens to a
ruler in a group attempt to write lines in threes. But Houser, a
reflective sort of boy, had scrounged some bits of wood and stripped a
mattress of its springs and devised the four-, sixteen- and eventually
the thirty-two-line writing machine. It had got so popular that boys
were actually breaking rules in order to have a go on it, at threepence
a time to use it and a penny to help wind it up. Of course, more time
was spent setting it up than was ever saved by using it, but this is the
case in many similar fields and is a sign of Progress. The experiments
tragically came to an end when someone opened a door at the wrong moment
and the entire pent-up force of Houser’s experimental prototype 256-line
machine propelled him backwards out of a fourth-floor window.

Except for the absence of screams, the hand tracing its infinitely
simple lines on the rock brought back memories of Houser. There was a
sense of something small being done that was making something happen
that was huge.

He sat and watched. It was, he remembered later whenever he was in a
state to remember anything, one of the happiest times of his life.

* * *

When Rincewind lifted his head a watchman’s helmet was spinning gently
on the ground.

To his amazement the men themselves were still there, although they were
lying around in various attitudes of unconsciousness or at least, if
they had sense, _feigned_ unconsciousness. The Luggage had a cat’s
tendency to lose interest in things that didn’t fight back even after
you’d kicked them a few times.

Shoes littered the ground, too. The Luggage was limping around in a
circle.

Rincewind sighed, and stood up. ‘Take the shoes off. They don’t suit
you,’ he said.

The Luggage stood still for a moment, and then the rest of the shoes
clattered against the wall.

‘And the dress. What would those nice ladies think if they saw you
dressing up like this?’

The Luggage shrugged off the few sequinned tatters that remained.

‘Turn around, I want to see your handles. No, I said turn around. Turn
around _properly_, please. Ah, I thought so . . . I said turn _around_.
Those earrings . . . they don’t do anything for you at all, you know.’
He leaned closer. ‘Is that a stud? Have you had your lid pierced?’

The Luggage backed away. Its manner indicated very clearly that while it
might give in on the shoes, the dress and even the earrings, the battle
over the stud would go to the finish.

‘Well . . . all right. Now give me my clean underwear, you could make
shelves out of the stuff I’m wearing.’

The Luggage opened its lid.

‘Good, now I— Is that my underwear? Would I be seen _dead_ in something
like that? Yes, as a matter of fact I suspect I would. _My_ underwear,
please. It’s got my name inside, although I must admit I can’t quite
remember why I thought that was necessary.’

The lid shut. The lid opened.

‘Thank you.’

It was no use wondering how it was done, or for that matter why the
laundry returned freshly ironed.

The watchmen were still very wisely remaining unconscious, but out of
habit Rincewind went behind a stack of old boxes to change. He was the
sort of person who’d go behind a tree to change if he was on a desert
island all alone.

‘You noticed something odd about this alley?’ he said, over the top of
the boxes. ‘There’re no drainpipes. There’re no gutters. They’ve never
heard of rain here. I suppose you are the Luggage, aren’t you, and not
some kangaroo in disguise? Why am I asking? Ye gods, these feel good.
Right, let’s go—’

The Luggage opened its lid again, and a young woman looked up at
Rincewind.

‘Who are—? Oh, you’re the blind man,’ she said.

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘Sorry . . . Darleen said you must be blind. Well, actually she said you
must be bloody blind. Can you give me a hand out?’

It dawned on Rincewind that the girl clambering out of the Luggage was
Neilette, the third member of Letitia’s crew and the one who’d seemed
quite plain compared to the others and certainly a lot less . . . well,
noisy wasn’t quite the word. Probably the word was ‘expansive’. They
filled the space around them to capacity. Take Darleen, a lady he’d last
seen holding a man daintily by the collar so that she could punch him in
the face. When she walked into a room, there’d be no one in it unaware
that she had done so.

Neilette was just . . . ordinary. She brushed some dirt off her dress,
and sighed.

‘I could see there was going to be another fight so I hid in Trunkie,’
she said.

‘Trunkie, eh?’ said Rincewind. The Luggage had the decency to look
embarrassed.

‘Sooner or later there’s always a fight where Darleen goes,’ said
Neilette. ‘You’d be amazed the things she can do with a stiletto heel.’

‘I think I’ve seen one of them,’ said Rincewind. ‘Don’t tell me the
others. Um, can I help you? Only me and Trunkie here’ – he gave the
Luggage a kick – ‘were heading off, weren’t we, _Trunkie_?’

‘Oh, don’t kick her, she’s been so useful,’ said Neilette.

‘Really?’ said Rincewind. The Luggage turned around slowly so that he
couldn’t see the expression on its lock.

‘Oh, yes. I reckon the miners in Cangoolie would’ve . . . been very
unpleasant to Letitia if Trunkie hadn’t stepped in.’

‘Stepped on, I expect.’

‘How did you know that?’

‘Oh, the L— Trunkie is mine. We got separated.’

Neilette tried to arrange her hair. ‘It’s all right for the others,’ she
said. ‘They just have to change wigs. Beer might be a good shampoo, but
not when it’s still in the tinnie.’ She sighed. ‘Oh, well. I suppose
I’ll have to find a way home, now.’

‘Where do you live?’

‘Worralorrasurfa. It’s Rimwards.’ She sighed again. ‘Back to life in the
banana-bending factory. So much for showbusiness!’

Then she burst into tears and sat down heavily on the Luggage.

Rincewind didn’t know whether he should go into the ‘pat, pat, there,
there’ routine. If she was like Darleen, he might lose an arm. He made
what he hoped was a soothing yet non-aggressive mumble.

‘I mean, I know I can’t sing very well and I can’t dance but, frankly,
neither can Letitia and Darleen. When Darleen sings “Prancing Queen” you
could slice bread with it. Not that they’ve been unkind,’ she added
quickly, polite even in the throes of woe, ‘but really there’s got to be
more to life than getting beer thrown at you every night and being
chased out of town.’

Rincewind felt confident enough to venture a ‘there, there’. He didn’t
risk a ‘pat, pat’.

‘Really I only did it because of Noelene dropping out,’ Neilette sobbed.
‘And I’m about the same height and Letitia couldn’t find anyone else in
time and I needed the money and she said it would be okay provided
people didn’t notice my hands were so small . . .’

‘Noelene being—?’

‘My brother. I _told_ him, trying for the surf championship is fine, and
ballgowns are fine, but both together? I don’t think so. Did you know
what a nasty rash you can get from being rolled across coral? And next
morning Letitia had this tour organized and, well, it seemed a good idea
at the time.’

‘Noelene . . .’ Rincewind mused. ‘That’s an unusual name for a . . .’

‘Darleen said you wouldn’t understand.’ Neilette stared into the middle
distance. ‘I think my brother worked in the factory too long,’ she
mused. ‘He always was very impressionable. Anyway, I—’

‘Oh, I get it, he’s a _female impersonator_,’ said Rincewind. ‘Oh, I
know about _those_. Old pantomime tradition. A couple of balloons, a
straw wig and a few grubby jokes. Why, when I was a student, at
Hogswatch parties old Farter Carter and Really Pants would put on a turn
where—’

He was aware that she was giving him one of those long, slow looks.

‘Tell me,’ she said. ‘Do you get about much?’

‘You’d be amazed,’ said Rincewind.

‘And you meet all kinds of people?’

‘Generally the nastier kind, I have to admit.’

‘Well, some men . . .’ Neilette stopped. ‘Really Pants? That was
someone’s _name_?’

‘Not exactly. He was called Ronald Pants, so of course when anyone heard
that they said—’

‘Oh, is that all?’ said Neilette. She stood up and blew her nose. ‘I
told the others I’d leave when we got to the Galah, so they’ll
understand. Being a . . . female impersonator is no job for a woman,
which is what I am, incidentally. I’d hoped it was obvious, but in your
case I thought I’d better mention it. Can you get us out of here,
Trunkie?’

The Luggage wandered over to the wall at the end of the alley and kicked
it until there was a decent-sized hole. On the way back it clogged a
watchman who was unwise enough to stir.

‘Er, I call him the Luggage,’ said Rincewind helplessly.

‘Really? We call her Trunkie.’

The wall opened up into a dark room. Crates were packed against the
walls, covered with cobwebs.

‘Oh, we’re in the old brewery,’ said Neilette. ‘Well, the new one,
really. Let’s find a door.’

‘Good idea,’ said Rincewind, eyeing the spider-webs. ‘_New_ brewery?
Looks pretty old to me . . .’

Neilette rattled a door. ‘Locked,’ she said. ‘Come on, we’ll find
another one. Look, it’s the new brewery because we built it to replace
the one over the river. But it never worked. The beer went flat, or
something. They all said it was haunted. _Everyone_ knows that, don’t
they? We went back to the old brewery. My dad lost nearly all his
money.’

‘Why?’

‘He owned it. Just about broke his heart, that did. He left it to me,’
she tried another door, ‘because, well, he never got on with Noelene,
what with the, well, you know, or rather, obviously you don’t . . . but
it ruined the business, really. And Roo Beer used to be the best there
was.’

‘Can’t you sell it? The site, I mean.’

‘Here? A place where beer goes flat within five seconds? Can’t give it
away.’

Rincewind peered up at the big metal vats. ‘Perhaps it was built on some
old religious site,’ he said. ‘That sort of thing can happen, you know.
Back home there was this fish restaurant that got built on a—’

Neilette rattled another unbudging door. ‘That’s what everyone thought,’
she said. ‘But apparently Dad asked all the local tribes and they said
it wasn’t. They said it wasn’t any kind of sacred site. They said it was
an unsacred site. Some chief went to prison to see the prime minister
and said, “Mate, your mob can dig it all up and drop it over the edge of
the world, no worries.”’

‘Why did he have to go to prison?’

‘We put all our politicians in prison as soon as they’re elected. Don’t
you?’

‘Why?’

‘It saves time.’ She tried an unrelenting handle. ‘Damn! And the windows
are too high . . .’

The ground trembled. Metal jangled, somewhere in the darkness. Dust
moved in strange little waves across the floor.

‘Oh, not _again_,’ said Neilette.

Now not only the dust moved. Tiny shapes scuttled across it, flowed
around Rincewind’s feet and sped under the locked door.

‘The spiders are leaving!’ said Neilette.

‘Fine by me!’ said Rincewind.

This time the tremor made the wall creak.

‘It’s never been this bad,’ Neilette muttered. ‘Find a ladder, we’ll
give the windows a go.’

Above them a ladder parted company from the wall and folded itself into
a metal puzzle on the floor.

‘This may not seem a good time to ask,’ said Rincewind, ‘but are you a
kangaroo, by any chance?’

Far above them metal creaked and went on creaking, in a long-drawn wail
of inorganic pain. Rincewind looked up, and saw the dome of the brewery
gently dissolve into a hundred falling pieces of glass.

And, dropping through the middle of it, some of its lamps still burning,
the grinning shape of the Roo Beer kangaroo.

‘Trunkie! Open up!’ Neilette yelled.

‘No—’ Rincewind began, but she grabbed him and dragged him and in front
of him was an opening lid . . .

The world went dark.

There was wood underneath him. He tapped it, very carefully. And wood in
front of him. And w—

‘Excuse _me_.’

‘We’re _inside_ the Luggage?’

‘Why not? That’s how we got out of Cangoolie last week! Y’know, I think
it may be a _magic_ box.’

‘Do you _know_ some of the things that have been inside it?’

‘Letitia kept her gin in it, I know that.’

Rincewind felt upwards, gingerly.

Maybe the Luggage had more than one inside. He’d suspected as much.
Maybe it was like one of those conjuror’s boxes where, after you’d put a
penny in, the drawer miraculously slid around and it had gone. Rincewind
had been given one of those as a toy when he was a kid. He’d lost almost
two dollars before he gave up and threw the thing away . . .

His fingers touched what might have been a lid, and he pushed upwards.

They were still in the brewery. This came as some relief, considering
where you might end up if you got into the Luggage. There was still the
bowel-disturbing rumble, punctuated by clangs and tinkles as bits of
rusted metal crashed down with lethal intent.

The big kangaroo sign was well alight.

In the smoke that rose from it were some pointy hats.

That is, the curls swirling and billowing around holes in the air looked
very much like the three-dimensional silhouettes of a group of wizards.

Rincewind stepped out of the Luggage. ‘Oh, no, no, no,’ he mumbled. ‘I
only got here a couple of months ago. It’s not my fault!’

‘They look like ghosts,’ said Neilette. ‘Do you _know_ them?’

‘No! But they’re all mixed up with these earthquakes! And something
called The Wet, whatever that was!’

‘That’s just some old story, isn’t it? Anyway, Mister Wizard, it might
have escaped your notice that the place is filling up with smoke! Which
way did we come in?’

Rincewind looked around desperately. Smoke obscured everything.

‘Has this place got cellars?’ he said.

‘Yeah! I used to play Mothers and Mothers with Noelene in them when we
were kids. Look for hatches in the floor!’

And it was three minutes later that the ancient wooden hatchcover in the
alley finally gave way under the Luggage’s insistent pounding. Several
rats poured out, followed by Rincewind and Neilette.

No one paid them any attention. A column of smoke was rising over the
city. Watchmen and citizens were already forming a bucket chain and men
with a battering ram were trying to break open the brewery’s main doors.

‘We’re well out of that,’ Rincewind observed. ‘Oh, boy, yes.’

‘Hey, what’s going on? Where’s the bloody water gone?’

The cry came from a man working the handle of a pump out on the street,
just as the pump gave a groan and the handle went limp. A watchman
grabbed his arm.

‘There’s another one in the yard over there! Get a wiggle on, mate!’

A couple of men tried the other pump. It made a choking noise, spat out
a few drops of water and some damp rust, and gave up.

Rincewind swallowed. ‘I think the water’s gone,’ he said, flatly.

‘What do you mean, _gone_?’ said Neilette. ‘There’s _always_ water. Huge
great seas of it underground!’

‘Yes, but . . . it doesn’t get filled up much, does it? It doesn’t rain
here.’

‘There you go aga—’ She stopped. ‘What’s it you know? You’re looking
shifty, Mister Wizard.’

Rincewind stared glumly up at the tower of smoke. There were twirling,
tumbling sparks in it, rising in the heat and showering down over the
city. Everything will be bone dry, he thought. It doesn’t rain here. It—
Hang on . . .

‘How do you know I’m a wizard?’ he said.

‘It’s written on your hat,’ she said. ‘Badly.’

‘You know what a wizard _is_? This is a serious question. I’m not
pushing a prawn.’

‘Everyone knows what a wizard is! We’ve got a university full of the
useless mongrels!’

‘And you can show me where this is, can you?’

‘Find it yourself!’ She tried to stride off through the milling crowd.
He ran after her.

‘Please don’t go! I need someone like you! As an interpreter!’

‘What do you mean? We speak the same language!’

‘Really? Stubbies here are really short shorts or small beer bottles.
How often do newcomers confuse the two?’

Neilette actually smiled. ‘Not more than once.’

‘Just take me to this university of yours, will you?’ said Rincewind. ‘I
think I can feel a Famous Last Stand coming on.’

There was a brief scream of metal overhead and a windmill fan crashed
down into the street.

‘And we’d better be quick,’ he added. ‘Otherwise all there’ll be to
drink is beer.’

The Bursar laughed again as a series of little charcoal dots extended
their legs, formed up and marched down the stone and across the sand in
front of him. Behind him the trees were already loud with birdsong—

And then, sadly, with wizards as well.

He could hear the voices in the distance and, while wizards are always
questioning the universe, they mainly direct the questions at other
wizards and don’t bother to listen to the answers.

‘—_certainly saw no trees when we arrived_.’

‘_Probably we didn’t see them because of the rain, and the Senior
Wrangler didn’t see them because of Mrs Whitlow. And get a grip on
yourself, will you, Dean? I’m sure you’re getting young again! No one’s
impressed!_’

‘_I think I must just be naturally youthful, Archchancellor_.’

‘_Nothing to be proud of there! And please, someone, stop the Senior
Wrangler getting a grip on hims— Oh, looks like someone’s had a picnic_
. . .’

The painter seemed engrossed in his work, and paid them no attention at
all.

‘_I’m sure the Bursar went this way_—’

A little red mud coloured a complex curve and there, as if it had always
been there, was a creature with the body of a giant rabbit, the
expression of a camel and a tail that a lizard would be proud of. The
wizards appeared around the rock just in time to see it scratch its
ears.

‘Ye gods, what’s _that_?’

‘Some sort of rat?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Hey, look, Bursar’s found one of the locals . . .’ The Dean ambled
across to the painter, who was watching the wizards with his mouth open.
‘Good morning, fellow. What’s that thing called?’

The painter followed the pointing finger. ‘Kangaroo?’ he said. The voice
was a whisper, on the very cusp of hearing, but the ground trembled.

‘Kangaroo, eh?’

‘That might not be what it’s called, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘He might just
be saying, “I don’t know.”’

‘Can’t see why not. He looks the sort of chap you find in this sort of
place,’ said the Dean. ‘Deep tan. Shortage of trousers. The sort of
fellow who’d know what the wildlife is called, certainly.’

‘He just drew it,’ said the Bursar.

‘Oh, did he? Very good artists, some of these chaps.’

‘He’s not Rincewind, is he?’ said Ridcully, who seldom bothered to
remember faces. ‘I know he’s a bit on the dark side, but a few months in
the sun’d bake anyone.’

The other wizards drew together and looked around for any nearby sign of
mobile rectangularity.

‘No hat,’ said Ponder, and that was that.

The Dean peered at the rock wall. ‘Quite good drawings for native art,’
he said. ‘Interesting . . . lines.’

The Bursar nodded. As far as he could see, the drawings were simply
alive. They might be coloured earth on rock, but they were as alive as
the kangaroo that’d just hopped away.

The old man was drawing a snake now. One wiggly line.

‘I remember seeing some of those palaces the Tezumen built in the
jungle,’ said the Dean, watching him. ‘Not an ounce of mortar in the
whole place and the stones fit together so well you couldn’t stick a
knife between them. Hah, they were about the only things the Tezumen
_didn’t_ stick a knife between,’ he added. ‘Odd people, really. Very big
on wholesale human sacrifice and cocoa. Not an obvious combination, to
my mind. Kill fifty thousand people and then relax with a nice cup of
hot chocolate. Excuse me, I used to be quite good at this.’

To the horror even of Ridcully the Dean took the piece of frayed twig
out of the painter’s hand and dabbed it gently on the rock.

‘See? A dot for the eye,’ said the Dean, handing it back.

The painter gave him a sort of smile. That is, he showed his teeth. Like
many other beings on astral planes of all kinds, he was puzzled by the
wizards. They were people with the family-sized self-confidence that
seems to be able to get away with anything. They generated an
unconscious field which said that _of course_ they should be there, but
no one was to worry or fuss around tidying up the place on their account
and just get on with what they were doing. The more impressionable
victims were left with the feeling that they had clipboards and were
awarding marks.

Behind the Dean a snake wriggled away.

‘Anyone feel anything odd?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘My
fingers tingled. Did any of you do any magic just then?’

The Dean picked up a burnt twig. The painter’s mouth dropped open as the
wizard drew a scratching line on the stone.

‘I think you might be offending him,’ said Ponder.

‘Nonsense! A good artist is always prepared to learn,’ said the Dean.
‘Interesting thing, these fellows never seem to get the idea of
perspective—’

The Bursar thought, or received the thought: that’s because perspective
is a lie. If I know a pond is round then why should I draw it oval? I
will draw it round because round is true. Why should my brush lie to you
just because my eye lies to me?

It sounded like quite an angry thought.

‘What’s that you’re drawing, Dean?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘What does it look like? A bird, of course.’

The voice in the Bursar’s head thought: but a bird must fly. Where are
the wings?

‘This one’s standing on the ground. You don’t see the wings,’ said the
Dean, and then looked puzzled at having answered a question no one had
asked. ‘Blast! You know, it’s harder than it looks, drawing on a rock .
. .’

I _always_ see the wings, thought the voice in the Bursar’s head. The
Bursar fumbled for his dried frog pill bottle. The voices were never
usually this _precise_.

‘Very _flat_ bird,’ said Ridcully. ‘Come on, Dean, our friend here isn’t
very happy. Let’s go and work out a really good boat spell . . .’

‘Looks more like a weasel to me,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘You’ve got
the tail wrong.’

‘The stick slipped.’

‘A duck’s fatter than that,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘You
shouldn’t try to show off, Dean. When was the last time you saw a duck
that didn’t have peas round it?’

‘Last week, actually!’

‘Yes, we had crispy duck. With plum sauce, I now recall. Here, let me
have a go . . .’

‘Now you’ve given it three legs!’

‘I did _ask_ for the stick! You snatched it away!’

‘Now look,’ said Ridcully. ‘I’m a man who knows his ducks, and what
you’ve got there is laughable. Give me that . . . thank _you_. You do a
beak like _this_ . . .’

‘That’s on the wrong end and it’s too big.’

‘You think _that_’s a beak?’

‘Look, all three of you are barking up the wrong tree here. Give me that
stick . . .’

‘Ah, but, you see, ducks don’t bark! Hah! There’s no need to snatch like
that—’

Unseen University was built of stone – so built out of stone that in
fact there were many places where it was hard to tell where wild rock
ended and domesticated stone began.

It was hard to imagine what else you could build a university out of. If
Rincewind had set out to list possible materials he wouldn’t have
included corrugated iron sheets.

In response to some sort of wizardly ancestral memory, though, the
sheets around the gates had been quite expertly bent and hammered into
the shape of a stone arch. Over it, burned into the thin metal, were the
words: NULLUS ANXIETAS.

‘I shouldn’t be surprised, should I?’ he said. ‘No worries.’

The gates, which were also made of corrugated iron nailed to bits of
wood by a man using second-hand nails, were firmly shut. A crowd of
people were hammering on them.

‘Looks like a lot of other people have the same idea,’ said Neilette.

‘There’ll be another way in,’ said Rincewind, walking away. ‘There’ll be
an alley . . . Ah, there it is. Now, these aren’t stone walls, so there
won’t be removable bricks, which means . . .’ He prodded at the tin
sheets, and one of them wobbled. ‘Ah, yes. A loose sheet which swings
aside so you can get back in after hours.’

‘How did you know that?’

‘This is a university, isn’t it? Come on.’

A message had been chalked beside the loose sheet.

‘“_Nulli Sheilae sanguineae_,”’ Rincewind read aloud. ‘But your name’s
not Sheila, so we’re probably okay.’

‘If it means what I think it means, it means they don’t allow women,’
said Neilette. ‘You should’ve brought Darleen.’

‘Sorry?’

‘Forget I mentioned it.’

Somewhat to Rincewind’s surprise there was a short, pleasant lawn on the
other side of the fence, illuminated by the light from a large low
building. _All_ the buildings were low but had big wide roofs, giving
the effect you might get if someone stepped on a lot of square
mushrooms. If they had been painted, it had been an historical event,
probably coming somewhere between Fire and the Invention of the Wheel.

There _was_ a tower. It was about twenty feet high.

‘I don’t call _this_ much of a university,’ said Rincewind. He allowed
himself a touch of smugness. ‘Twenty feet high? I could pi— I could spit
from the top of it. Oh well . . .’

He made for the doorway, just as the light grew a lot brighter and was
tinted with octarine, the eighth colour that was intimately associated
with magic. The doors themselves were shut fast.

He banged on them, making them rattle. ‘Fraternal greetings, brothers!’
he shouted. ‘I bring you— Good grie—’

The world simply changed. One moment he was standing in front of a
rusting door and the next he was in a circle with half a dozen wizards
watching him.

He caught his balance.

‘Well, full marks for effort,’ he managed. ‘Where I come from, and you
can call me Mister Boring if you like, we just open the door.’

‘Stone the crows, but we’re getting good at this,’ said a wizard.

And they _were_ wizards. Rincewind was in no doubt of it. They had
proper pointy hats, although the brims were larger than anything he’d
seen without flying buttresses. Their robes weren’t much more than waist
length, and below them they wore shorts, long grey socks, and big
leather sandals. A lot of this was not the typical wizarding outfit as
he’d grown up to understand it, but they were still wizards. They had
that unmistakable hot-air-balloon-about-to-take-off look.

The apparent leader of the group nodded at Rincewind.

‘Good evening, Mister Boring. I must say you got here a lot quicker than
we expected.’

Rincewind felt intuitively that saying ‘I was just outside the door’ was
not a good idea.

‘Er, I had an assisted passage,’ he said.

‘He doesn’t look very demonic,’ said a wizard. ‘Remember that last one
we called up? Six eyes and three—’

‘The really good ones can disguise themselves, Dean.’

‘Then this one must be a bloody genius, Archchancellor.’

‘Thank you very much,’ said Rincewind.

The Archchancellor nodded at him. He was, of course, elderly, with a
face that looked as though it had been screwed up and then smoothed out,
and a short, greying beard. There was something oddly _familiar_ that
Rincewind couldn’t quite place.

‘We’ve called you up, Boring,’ said the man, ‘because we want to know
what’s happened to the water.’

‘It’s all gone, has it?’ said Rincewind. ‘Thought so.’

‘It can’t _go_,’ said the Dean. ‘It’s _water_. There’s always water, if
you go down deep enough.’

‘But if we go any deeper we’re going to give an elephant a bloody nasty
shock,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘So we—’

There was a clang as the doors hit the floor. The wizards backed away.

‘What the hell’s _that_?’ said one of them.

‘Oh, that’s my Luggage,’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s made out of—’

‘Not the box on legs! Isn’t that a _woman_?’

‘Don’t ask him, he’s not very quick at that sort of thing,’ said
Neilette, stepping in behind the Luggage. ‘Sorry, but Trunkie got
impatient.’

‘We can’t have women in the University!’ shouted the Dean. ‘They’ll want
to drink _sherry_!’

‘No worries,’ said the Archchancellor, waving a hand irritably. ‘What’s
happened to the water, Boring?’

‘It’s all been used up, I suppose,’ said Rincewind.

‘So how can we get some more?’

‘Why does everyone ask me? Don’t you have some rainmaking spells or
something?’

‘There’s that word again,’ said the Dean. ‘Water sprinkling out of the
sky, eh? I’ll believe that when I see it!’

‘We tried making one of these – what were they called? Big white bags of
water? The things some of the sailors say they see in the sky?’

‘Clouds.’

‘Right. They don’t stay up, Boring. We threw one off the tower last week
and it hit the Dean.’

‘I’ve never believed those old stories,’ said the Dean. ‘And I reckon
you mongrels waited till I was walking past.’

‘You don’t have to make them, they just happen,’ said Rincewind. ‘Look,
I don’t know how to make it rain. I thought any halfway decent wizard
knew how to do a rainmaking spell,’ he added, as someone who wouldn’t
know where to start.

‘Really?’ said the Archchancellor, with dangerous brightness.

‘No offence meant,’ said Rincewind hurriedly. ‘I’m sure this is a very
good university, considering. Obviously it’s not a _real_ one, but it’s
amazingly good in the circumstances.’

‘What’s wrong with it?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Well . . . your tower’s a little bit on the small side, isn’t it? I
mean, even compared to the buildings around here? Not that there’s—’

‘I think we ought to show Mister Boring our tower,’ said the
Archchancellor. ‘I don’t think he’s taking us seriously.’

‘I’ve seen it,’ said Rincewind.

‘From the top?’

‘No, obviously not from the top—’

‘We haven’t got time for this, Archchancellor,’ said a small wizard.
‘Let’s send this wozza back to Hell and find something better.’

‘Excuse _me_?’ said Rincewind. ‘By “Hell” do you mean some hot red
place?’

‘Yes!’

‘Really? How do Ecksians know when they’ve got there? The beer’s
warmer?’

‘No more arguing. This one turned up very fast when we did the
summoning, so this is the one we need,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Come
along, Boring. This won’t take a minute.’

Ponder shook his head and wandered over to the fire. Mrs Whitlow was
sitting demurely on a rock. In front of her, getting as close to the
fire as possible, was the Librarian. He was still extremely small. Maybe
his temporal gland had to take longer to work itself out, Ponder
thought.

‘What are the gentlemen doing?’ said Mrs Whitlow. She had to raise her
voice above the argument, but Mrs Whitlow would still have said, ‘Is
there some difficulty?’ if she saw the wizards out on the lawn throwing
fireballs at the monsters from the Dungeon Dimensions. She liked to be
told these things.

‘They’ve found a man drawing the most _alive-_looking pictures I’ve ever
seen,’ said Ponder. ‘So now they’re trying to teach him Art. By
committee.’

‘The gentlemen always take an interest,’ said Mrs Whitlow.

‘They always interfere,’ said Ponder. ‘I don’t know what it is about
wizards, they can’t just _watch_. So far they’re arguing about how to
draw a duck and frankly I don’t think a duck has four legs, which is
what it’s got so far. Honestly, Mrs Whitlow, they’re like kittens in a
feather-plucking shed . . . What’s that?’

The Librarian had tipped up the leather bag lying by the fire and was
testing the contents for taste, in the way of young mammals everywhere.

He picked up a flat, bent piece of wood, painted in lines of many
colours – far more pigments than the old man had been using to paint,
and Ponder wondered why. He tested it for palatability, banged it on the
ground in a vaguely hopeful way, and threw it away. Then he pulled out a
flat oval of wood on a piece of string, and tried chewing the string.

‘Is that a yo-yo?’ said Mrs Whitlow.

‘We used to call them bullroarers when I was a kid,’ said Ponder. ‘You
whirl it around over your head to make a funny noise.’ He waved his hand
vaguely in the air.

‘Eeek?’

‘Ooh, isn’t that sweet? He’s trying to do what you do!’

The Librarian tried to whirl the string, wrapped it round his face and
hit himself on the back of the head.

‘Oh, the poor little thing! Take it off him, Mister Stibbons, do.’

The Librarian bared some small fangs as Ponder unwound the string.

‘I hope he’s going to grow up soon,’ he said. ‘Otherwise the Library
will be filled up with cardboard books about bunnies . . .’

It really _was_ a very stubby tower. The base was stonework, but about
halfway the builders had got fed up and resorted to rusted tin sheets
nailed on to a wooden framework. One rickety ladder led up.

‘Very impressive,’ sighed Rincewind.

‘The view’s even better from the top. Go on up.’

The ladder shook under Rincewind’s weight until he pulled himself up on
to the planks, where he lay down and panted. Must be the beer and the
excitement, he told himself. One short ladder shouldn’t do this to me.

‘Bracing air up here, isn’t it?’ said the Archchancellor, walking to the
edge and waving a hand towards the city.

‘Oh, certainly,’ said Rincewind, tottering towards the corrugated
battlements. ‘Why, I expect you can see all the way to the gr—Aaargh!’

The Archchancellor grabbed him and pulled him back.

‘That’s— It’s—’ Rincewind gasped.

‘Want to go back down again?’

Rincewind glared at the wizard and inched his way carefully back to the
stairs. He looked down, ready at an instant’s notice to draw his head
back, and carefully counted the steps.

Then he walked back gingerly to the parapet and risked looking over the
edge.

There was the fiery speck of the burning brewery. There was Bugarup, and
its harbour . . .

Rincewind raised his gaze.

There was the red desert, glittering under the moonlight.

‘How high is this?’ he croaked.

‘On the outside? About half a mile, we think,’ said the Archchancellor.

‘And on the inside?’

‘You climbed it. Two storeys.’

‘You’re trying to tell me you’ve got a tower that’s taller at the top
than it is at the _bottom_?’

‘Good, isn’t it?’ said the Archchancellor happily.

‘That’s . . . very clever,’ said Rincewind.

‘We’re a clever country—’

‘Rincewind!’

The voice came from below. Rincewind looked very carefully down the
steps. It was one of the wizards.

‘Yes?’ he said.

‘Not you,’ snapped the wizard. ‘I want the Archchancellor!’

‘I’m Rincewind,’ said Rincewind.

The Archchancellor tapped him on the shoulder. ‘That’s a coincidence,’
he said. ‘So am I.’

Ponder very carefully handed the bullroarer back to the little
Librarian.

‘There, you can have it,’ he said. ‘I’m giving it to _you_ and, in
return, perhaps _you_ can take your teeth out of my leg.’

From the other side of the rock came the voice of reason: ‘There’s no
need to fight, gentlemen. Let’s vote on it: now, all those who think a
duck has webbed feet, raise your hands . . .’

The Librarian swung the thing a few more times.

‘Doesn’t seem to be a very good one,’ said Ponder. ‘Not much of a noise
. . . honestly, how much longer are they going to be?’

. . . _whum_ . . .

‘Eek!’

‘Yes, yes, very good . . .’

_. . . whum . . . whum . . . whUUMMMMM . . ._

Ponder looked up as yellow light spread across the plain.

There was a circle of blue sky opening above. The rain was stopping.

‘Eek?’

It occurred to Ponder to wonder what a little old man was doing painting
pictures in a bare landscape on a whole new continent . . .

And then there was darkness.

The old man smiled with something like satisfaction, and turned away
from the drawing he’d just completed. It had a lot of pointy hats in it,
and it had faded right into the rock.

And he was as happy as anything, and had drawn all the spiders and
several possums before he found out what was missing.

He never even knew about the very strange and unhappy duck-billed
creature that slid silently into the river a little way off.

‘Got to be at least some kind of cousins,’ said the Archchancellor.
‘It’s not a common name. Have another beer.’

‘I had a look through the Unseen records once,’ said Rincewind morosely.
‘They never had a Rincewind before.’ He upended the can of beer and
finished the dregs. ‘Never had a _relative_ before, come to that. Never
ever.’ He pulled the top off another can. ‘No one to do all those little
things relatives are s’posed to do, like . . . like . . . like send you
some horrible cardigan at Hogswatch, stuff like that.’

‘You got a first name? Mine’s Bill.’

‘’s a good name, Bill Rincewind. Dunno if I’ve even _got_ a first name.’

‘What do people usually call you, mate?’

‘Well, they usually say, “Stop him!”’ said Rincewind, and took a deep
draught of beer. ‘Of course, that’s just a nickname. When they want to
be formal they shout “Don’t let him get away!”’

He squinted at the can. ‘’s much better than that other stuff,’ he said.
‘What’s this say? “Funnelweb”? ’s a funny name for a beer.’

‘You’re reading the list of ingredients,’ said Bill.

‘Really?’ mumbled Rincewind. ‘Where was I?’

‘Pointy hats. Water running out. Talking kangaroos. Pictures coming
alive.’

‘That’s right,’ said the Dean. ‘If that’s what you’re like sober, we
want to see what effect the beer has.’

‘Y’see, when the sun’s up,’ said Archchancellor Bill, ‘I’ve got to go
down to the prison and see the prime minister and explain why we don’t
know what’s happened to the water. Anything you can do to assist would
be very useful. Give him another tinnie, Dean. People’re already banging
on the gates. Once the beer runs out, we’re in strife.’

Rincewind felt that he was in a warm amber haze. He was among wizards.
You could tell by the way they bickered all the time. And, somehow, the
beer made it easier to think.

A wizard leaned over his shoulder and put an open book in front of him.

‘This is a copy of a cave painting from Cangoolie,’ he said. ‘We’ve
often wondered what the blobs are above the figures . . .’

‘That’s rain,’ said Rincewind, after a glance.

‘You mentioned this before,’ said Bill. ‘Little drops of water flying
through the air, right?’

‘Dropping,’ Rincewind corrected him. ‘And it doesn’t hurt?’

‘Nope.’

‘Water’s heavy. Can’t say the idea of big white bags of the stuff
floating around over our heads appeals.’

Rincewind had never studied meteorology, although he had been an
end-user all his life.

He waved his hands vaguely. ‘They’re like . . . steam,’ he said, and
hiccuped. ‘’s right. Lovely fluffy steam.’

‘They’re _boiling_?’

‘No, no. Nono. Ver’ cold, clouds. Sometimes they come down ver’ low,
they even touch the ground.’

The wizards looked at one another.

‘Y’know, we’re making some bloody good beer these days,’ said Bill.

‘Clouds sound bloody dangerous to me,’ said the Dean. ‘We don’t want
them knocking over trees and buildings, do we?’

‘Ah, but. But. They’re _soft_, see? Like smoke.’

‘But you said they weren’t hot!’

Rincewind suddenly saw the perfect explanation.

‘Have you ever huffed on a cold mirror?’ he said, beaming.

‘Not on a regular basis, but I know what you mean.’

‘Well, basically, that’s clouds! Can I have another beer? It’s amazing,
it doesn’t feem to have any essect on me, no matter how much I dnirk.
Helps me think clearerer.’

Archchancellor Rincewind drummed his fingers on the table. ‘You and this
rain stuff – you’ve got to be connected, yes? We’ve run out of water and
you turn up . . .’

Rincewind burped. ‘Got to put something right, too,’ he said. ‘Pointy
hats, all floating in the air . . .’

‘Where did you last see them?’

‘In the brewery with no beer in it. Said it’s haunted, haha. Pointy hat
haunting, hahah . . .’

Bill stared at him. ‘_Right_,’ he said. He looked at the forlorn figure
of his distant cousin, now very close up. ‘Let’s get down there.’ He
glanced at Rincewind again and seemed to think for a moment.

‘And we’ll take some beer,’ he added.

Ponder Stibbons tried to think, but his thoughts seemed to be going very
slowly. Everything was dark and he couldn’t move but, somehow, it wasn’t
too bad. It felt like those treasured moments in bed when you’re just
awake enough to know that you’re still nicely asleep.

It’s amazing how time passes.

There was a huge bucket chain now, stretching all the way from the
harbour to the brewery. Despite the tangily refreshing oak spiciness of
their Chardonnays, the Ecksians weren’t the kind of people to let a
brewery burn. It didn’t matter that there was no beer in it. There was a
principle at stake.

The wizards marched through the crowd to a chorus of mutters and the
occasional jeer from someone safely tucked away at the back.

Smoke and steam came out of the main doorway, which had been burst open
by a battering ram.

Archchancellor Rincewind stepped inside, dragging his happily smiling
relative with him.

The smouldering Roo Beer sign, reduced to a metal skeleton, still lay in
the middle of the floor.

‘He kept waving at it and going on about pointy hats,’ Neilette
volunteered.

‘Test it for magic, Dean,’ said Archchancellor Rincewind.

The Dean waved a hand. Sparks flew up. ‘Nothing there,’ he said. ‘I said
we—’

For a moment some pointed shapes hung in the air, and then vanished.

‘That’s not _magic_,’ said one of the wizards. ‘That’s ghosts.’

‘Everyone _knows_ this place is haunted. Evil spirits, they say.’

‘Should’ve stuck to beer,’ said Archchancellor Rincewind.

Neilette pointed to the trapdoor. ‘But it doesn’t go anywhere,’ she
said. ‘There’s a hatch to the outside and some storerooms and that’s
about it.’

The wizards looked down.

Below was utter darkness. Something small skittered away on what sounded
very much like more than four legs. There was the smell of very old,
very stale beer.

‘No worries,’ said Rincewind, waving a tin expansively. ‘I’ll go down
first, shall I?’

This was _fun_.

There was a rusted ladder bolted to the wall below him. It creaked under
his weight, and gave way when he was a few feet from the cellar floor,
dropping him on to the stones. The wizards heard him laugh.

Then he called up: ‘Do any of you know someone called Dibbler?’

‘What – old Fair Go?’ said Bill.

‘’s right. He’ll be outside selling stuff to the crowd, right?’

‘Very likely.’

‘Can someone go and get me one of his floating meat pies with extra
tomato sauce? I could really do with one.’

The Dean looked at Archchancellor Rincewind. ‘How much beer did he
drink?’

‘Three or four tinnies. He must be allergic, poor bastard.’

‘I reckon I could even eat two,’ Rincewind called up.

‘_Two?_’

‘No worries. Anyone got a torch? It’s dark down here.’

‘Do you want the gourmet pies or the ordinary?’ said the Dean.

‘Oh, the ordinary will do me. No swank, eh?’

‘Poor bastard,’ said Bill, and sorted through his small change.

It was indeed dark in the cellars, but enough dim light filtered through
the trapdoor for Rincewind to make out huge pipes in the gloom.

It was obvious that some time after the brewery had been closed, but
before people had got around to securely locking every entrance, the
cellars had been employed by young people as such places are when you
live with your parents, the house is too small, and no one has got
around to inventing the motorcar.

In short, they’d written on the walls. Rincewind could make out careful
inscriptions telling posterity that, for example, B. Smoth Is A Pozza.
While he didn’t know what a pozza was, he was quite, quite sure that B.
Smoth didn’t want to be called one. It was amazing how slang seemed to
radiate its meaning even in another language.

There was a thump behind him as the Luggage landed on the stone floor.

‘Me old mate Trunkie,’ said Rincewind. ‘No worries!’

Another ladder was eased down and the wizards, with some care, joined
him. Archchancellor Rincewind was holding a staff with a glowing end.

‘Found anything?’ he said.

‘Well, yes. I wouldn’t shake hands with anyone called B. Smoth,’ said
Rincewind.

‘Oh, the Dean’s not a bad bloke when you get to know him—What’s up?’

Rincewind pointed to the far end of the room.

There, on a door, someone had drawn some pointy hats, in red. They
glistened in the light.

‘My word. Blood,’ said Rincewind.

His cousin ran a finger over it. ‘It’s ochre,’ he said. ‘Clay . . .’

The door led to another cellar. There were a few empty barrels, some
broken crates, and nothing else except musty darkness.

Dust whirled up on the floor from the draught of their movement, in a
series of tiny, inverted whirlwinds. Pointy hats again.

‘Hmm, solid walls all round,’ said Bill. ‘Better pick a direction,
mate.’

Rincewind had a drink, shut his eyes and pointed a finger at random.

‘That way!’

The Luggage plunged forward and struck the brickwork, which fell away to
reveal a dark space beyond.

Rincewind stuck his head through. All the builders had done was wall up
and square off a part of a cave. From the feel of the air, it was quite
a large one.

Neilette and the wizards climbed through behind him.

‘I’m sure this place wasn’t here when the brewery was built!’ said
Neilette.

‘It’s big,’ said the Dean. ‘How’d it get made?’

‘Water,’ said Rincewind.

‘You what? Water makes great big holes in rock?’

‘Yes. Don’t ask me why— What was that?’

‘What?’

‘Did you hear something?’

‘You said, “What was that?”’

Rincewind sighed. The cold air was sobering him up.

‘You really are wizards, aren’t you?’ he said. ‘Real honest-to-goodness
wizards. You’ve got hats that’re more brim than point, the whole
university’s made of tin, you’ve got a tiny tower which is, I must
admit, good grief, a lot taller on the outside, but you’re wizards all
right, and will you now, please, _shut up_?’

In the silence there was, very faintly, a _plink_.

Rincewind stared into the depths of the cave. The light from the staffs
only made them worse. It cast shadows. Darkness was just darkness, but
_anything_ could be hiding in shadows.

‘These caves must’ve been explored,’ he said. It was a hope rather than
a statement. History here was rather a rubbery thing.

‘Never heard of ’em,’ said the Dean.

‘Points again, look,’ said Bill, as they advanced.

‘Just stalactites and stalagmites,’ said Rincewind. ‘I don’t know how it
works, but water drips on stuff and leaves piles of stuff. Takes
thousands of years. Perfectly ordinary.’

‘Is this the same kind of water that floats through the sky _and_ gouges
out big caves in rocks?’ said the Dean.

‘Er . . . yes . . . er, obviously,’ said Rincewind.

‘It’s good luck for us we only have the drinking and washing sort,
then.’

‘Had,’ said Rincewind.

There were hurrying feet behind them and a junior wizard ran up, holding
a plate covered with a lid.

‘Got the last one!’ he said. ‘It’s a _gourmet_ pie, too.’

He lifted the lid. Rincewind stared, and swallowed. ‘Oh dear . . .’

‘What’s up?’

‘Have you got some more of that beer? I think I might be losing . . .
concentration . . .’

His cousin stepped forward, ripping the top off a can of Funnelweb.

‘Cartwright, you cover that pie up and keep it warm. Rincewind, you
drink this.’

They watched him drain the tin.

‘Right, mate,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘How about a nice meat pie
upside down in a big bowl of mushy green peas covered with tomato
sauce?’

He looked at the colour change on Rincewind’s face, and nodded.

‘You need another tin,’ he said firmly.

They watched him drink this.

‘Okay,’ said the Archchancellor after a while. ‘Now, Rincewind, how
about a nice one of Fair Go’s pie floaters, eh? Meat pie in pea soup and
tomato sauce?’

Rincewind’s face twitched a bit as amber blessings shut down vital
protective systems.

‘Sounds . . . good,’ he said. ‘Maybe with some coconut on the top?’

The wizards relaxed.

‘So now we know,’ said Archchancellor Rincewind. ‘We’ve got to keep you
just drunk enough so that Dibbler’s pies sound tasty, but not so drunk
that it causes lasting brain damage.’

‘That’s a very narrow window we’ve got there,’ said the Dean.

Bill looked up at the roof, where the shadows danced among the
stalactites, unless they were stalagmites.

‘This is right under the city,’ he said. ‘How come we’ve never heard of
it?’

‘Good question,’ said the Dean. ‘The men who built the cellar must’ve
seen it.’

Rincewind tried to think. ‘It wasn’t here then,’ he said.

‘You said these stalag things took thousands of—’

‘They probably weren’t here last month but now they’ve been here for
thousands of years,’ said Rincewind. He hiccuped. ‘It’s like your
tower,’ he said. ‘Taller onna outside.’

‘Huh?’

‘Prob’ly only works here,’ said Rincewind. ‘The more geography you’ve
got, the less hist’ry, ever notice that? More space, less time. I bet it
only took a second or two for this place to be here for thousands of
years, see? Shorter on the _outside_. Makes serfect pense.’

‘I don’t think I’ve drunk enough beer to understand that,’ said the
Dean.

Something nudged him in the back of the legs. He looked down at the
Luggage. It was one of its habits to come up so close behind people
that, when they looked down, they felt seriously over-feeted.

‘Or this,’ he added.

The wizards grew quieter as Rincewind led them onward. He wasn’t sure
who was leading him. Still, no worries.

Contrary to the usual procedures it began to grow lighter, although the
proliferation of luminous fungi or iridescent crystals in deep caves
where the torchlessly improvident hero needs to _see_ is one of the most
obvious intrusions of narrative causality into the physical universe. In
this case, the rocks were glowing, not from some mysterious inner light
but simply as though the sun were shining on them, just after dawn.

There are other imperatives that operate on the human brain. One says:
the bigger the space, the softer the voice, and refers to the natural
tendency to speak very, very quietly when stepping into somewhere huge.
So when Archchancellor Rincewind stepped out into the _big_ cave he
said, ‘Strewth, it’s bloody big!’ in a low whisper.

The Dean, however, shouted, ‘Coo-eee!’ because there’s always one.

Stalactites crowded the cave here, too, and in the very centre a
gigantic stalactite had almost touched its mirror-image stalagmite. The
air was chokingly hot.

‘This isn’t right—’ said Rincewind.

_Plink_.

They spotted the source of the noise eventually. A tiny trickle was
making its way down the side of the stalactite and forming droplets that
fell a few feet to the stalagmite.

Another drop formed while they watched, and hung there.

One of the wizards clambered up the dry slope and peered at it.

‘It’s not moving,’ he said. ‘The trickle’s drying up. I think . . . it’s
evaporating.’

The Archchancellor turned to Rincewind. ‘Well, we’ve followed you this
far, mate,’ he said. ‘What now?’

‘I think I could do with another b—’

‘There’s none left, mate.’

Rincewind looked desperately around the cave, and then at the huge
translucent mass of limestone in front of him.

It was definitely pointy. It was also in the centre of the cave. It had
a certain _inevitability_ about it.

Odd, really, that something like this would form down here, shining away
like a pearl in an oyster. The ground trembled again. Up there, people
would already be getting thirsty, cursing the windmills as only an
Ecksian could curse. The water was gone and that was very bad, and when
the beer ran out people would _really_ get angry . . .

The wizards were all waiting for him to _do_ something.

All right, start with the rock. What did he know about rocks and caves
in these parts?

There was a curious freedom at a time like this. He was going to be in
real trouble whatever he did, so he might as well give this a try . . .

‘I need some paint,’ he said.

‘What for?’

‘For what I need,’ said Rincewind.

‘There’s young Salid,’ said the Dean. ‘He’s a bit of an arty blager.
Let’s go and kick his door down.’

‘And bring some more beer!’ Rincewind called after them.

Neilette patted Rincewind on the shoulder. ‘Are you going to do some
magic?’ she said.

‘I don’t know if it counts as magic here,’ said Rincewind. ‘If it
doesn’t work, stand well back.’

‘Is it going to be dangerous, then?’

‘No, I might have to start running without looking where I’m going. But
. . . this rock’s warm. Have you noticed?’

She touched it. ‘I see what you mean . . .’

‘I was just thinking . . . Supposing someone was in a country who
shouldn’t be there? What would it do?’

‘Oh, the Watch would catch him, I expect.’

‘No, no, not the people. What would the _land_ do? I think I need
another drink, it made more sense then . . .’

‘Okay, here we are, we couldn’t find much, but there’s some whitewash
and some red paint and a tin of stuff which might be black paint or it
could be tar oil.’ The wizards hurried up. ‘Not much in the way of
brushes, though.’

Rincewind picked up a brush that looked as though it had once been used
to whitewash a very rough wall and then to clean the teeth of some large
creature, possibly a crocodile.

He’d never been any good at art, and this is a distinction quite hard to
achieve in many education systems. Basic artistic skills and a
familiarity with occult calligraphy are part of a wizard’s early
training, yet in Rincewind’s fingers chalk broke and pencils shattered.
It was probably due to a deep distrust of getting things down on paper
when they were doing all right where they were.

Neilette handed him a tin of Funnelweb. Rincewind drank deeply and then
dipped the brush in what might have been black paint and essayed a few
upturned Vs on the rock, and some circles under the lines, with three
dots in a V and a friendly little curve in each one.

He took another deep draught of the beer and saw what he was doing
wrong. It was no good trying to be strictly true to life here; what he
had to go for was an _impression_.

He sloshed wildly at the stone, humming madly under his breath.

‘Anyone guess what it is yet?’ he said, over his shoulder.

‘Looks a bit modern to me,’ said the Dean.

But Rincewind was into the swing of it now. Any fool could just copy
what he saw, except possibly Rincewind, but surely the whole point was
to try to paint a picture that moved, that definitely expressed the,
the, the—

Definitely expressed it, anyway. You went the way the paint and the
colour wanted you to go.

‘You know,’ said Neilette, ‘the way the light falls on it and everything
. . . it could be a group of wizards . . .’

Rincewind half closed his eyes. Perhaps it _was_ the way that the
shadows moved, but he had to admit he’d done a really good job. He
slapped some more paint on.

‘Looks like they’re almost coming out of the stone,’ said someone behind
him, but the voice sounded muffled.

He felt as though he was falling into a hole. He’d had the sensation
before, although usually it _was_ when he was falling into a hole. The
walls were fuzzy, as though they were streaking past him at a tremendous
rate. The ground shook.

‘Are we moving?’ he said.

‘Feels like it, doesn’t it?’ said Archchancellor Rincewind. ‘But we’re
standing still!’

‘Moving while standing still,’ muttered Rincewind, and giggled. ‘That’s
a good one!’ He squinted happily at the beer can. ‘Y’know,’ he said, ‘I
can’t stomach more than a pint or two of the ale we have at home but
this stuff is like drinking lemonade! Has anyone got that meat pie—’

As loudly as a thunderstorm under the bed but as softly as two soufflés
colliding, past and present ran into one another.

They contained a lot of people.

‘What’s this?’

‘Dean?’

‘Yes?’

‘You’re not the Dean!’

‘How dare you say that! Who are you!’

‘Ook!’

‘Stone the cows, there’s a _monkey_ in here!’

‘No! No! _I_ didn’t say that! _He_ said that!’

‘Archchancellor?’

‘Yes?’

‘Yes?’

‘What? How many of you are there?’

The darkness became a deep purple, shading to violet.

‘_Will you all stop shouting and listen to me!_’

To Rincewind’s amazement, they did.

‘Look, the walls are getting closer! This place is trying not to exist!’

And, having done his duty to the community, he turned and ran over the
shaking rock floor.

After a couple of seconds the Luggage passed him, which was always a bad
sign.

He heard the voices behind him. Wizards had a hard job accepting the
term ‘clear and present danger’. They liked the kind you could argue
about. But there is something about a rapidly descending ceiling that
intrudes into the awareness of even the most quarrelsome.

‘I’ll save you, Mrs Whitlow!’

‘Up the tunnel!’

‘How fast are those walls closing in, would you say?’

‘Shut up and run!’

Now Rincewind was passed by a large red, furry kangaroo. The Librarian’s
erratic morphism, having briefly turned him into a red stalactite as an
obviously successful shape for surviving in caves, had finally taken on
board the fact that it would make for a terminally lengthy survival in a
cave that was rapidly getting smaller, and had flipped into a local
morphic field built for speed.

Man, Luggage and kangaroo piled through the hole into the cellar and
ended in a heap against the opposite side.

There was a rumbling behind them and wizards and women were fired out
into the cellar with some speed, several of them landing on Rincewind.
Behind the wall, the rock groaned and creaked, expelling these alien
things in what, Rincewind thought, was a geological chunder.

Something flew out of the hole and hit him on the ear, but this was only
a minor problem compared to the meat pie, which came out trailing mushy
peas and tomato sauce and hit him in the mouth.

It wasn’t, actually, all that bad.

The ability to ask questions like ‘Where am I and who is the “I” that is
asking?’ is one of the things that distinguishes mankind from, say,
cuttlefish.²³

The wizards from Unseen University, being perhaps the intellectual cream
or certainly the cerebral yoghurt of their generation, passed through
this stage within minutes. Wizards are very adept at certain ideas. One
minute you’re arguing over the shape of a duck’s head and the next there
are people telling you you’ve been inside a rock for thousands of years
because time goes slower on the inside. This presents no great problem
for a man who has found his way to the lavatory at Unseen University.²⁴

There were more important questions as they sat round the table in BU.

‘Is there anything to eat?’ said Ridcully.

‘It’s the middle of the night, sir.’

‘You mean we missed _dinner_?’

‘Thousands of years of dinners, Archchancellor.’

‘Really? Better start catching up, then, Mister Stibbons. Still . . .
nice little place you’ve got here . . . archchancellor.’

Ridcully pronounced the word very carefully in order to accentuate the
lower case ‘a’.

Archchancellor Rincewind gave him a fraternal nod. ‘Thank you.’

‘For a colony, of course. I daresay you do your best.’

‘Why, thank you, Mustrum. I’d be happy to show you our tower later on.’

‘It does look rather small.’

‘So people say.’

‘Rincewind, Rincewind . . . name rings a faint bell . . .’ said
Ridcully.

‘We came looking for Rincewind, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder, patiently.

‘Is he? Done well for himself, then. Fresh air made a man of him, I
see.’

‘No, sir. Ours is the skinny one with the bad beard and the floppy hat,
sir. You remember? The one sitting over there.’

Rincewind raised a hand diffidently. ‘Er. Me,’ he said.

Ridcully sniffed. ‘Fair enough. What’s that thing you’re playing with,
man?’

Rincewind held up the bullroarer. ‘It came with you out of the cave,’ he
said. ‘What were you doing with it?’

‘Oh, some toy the Librarian found,’ said Ponder.

‘All sorted out, then,’ said Ridcully. ‘I say, this beer’s good, isn’t
it? Very drinkable. Yes, I’m sure there’s a lot we can learn from one
another, archchancellor. You from us rather more than us from you, of
course. Perhaps we could set up a student exchange, that sort of thing?’

‘Good idea.’

‘You can have six of mine in exchange for a decent lawnmower. Ours has
broken.’

‘The Arch— the _arch_chancellor is trying to say that getting back might
be rather hard, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘Apparently things ought to have
changed now we’re here. But they haven’t.’

‘Your Rincewind seemed to think that bringing you blokes here would make
it rain,’ said Bill. ‘But it hasn’t.’

_. . . whumm . . ._

‘Oh, do stop playing with that thing, Rincewind,’ said Ridcully. ‘Well .
. . Bill, it’s obvious, isn’t it? As more experienced wizards than you,
we naturally know plenty of ways of making it rain. No problem there.’

_. . . whumm . . ._

‘Look, lad, take that thing outside, will you?’

The Librarian was sitting at the top of the tin tower, with a leaf over
his head.

‘Something odd, see?’ said Rincewind, dangling the bullroarer from its
string. ‘I’ve only got to wiggle my hand a bit and it swings right
round.’

‘. . . ook . . .’

The Librarian sneezed.

‘. . . awk . . .’

‘Er . . . now you’re some sort of large bird . . .’ said Rincewind. ‘You
_are_ in a bad way, aren’t you? Still, once I tell them your name . . .’

The Librarian changed shape and moved fast. There was a very short
period of time in which a lot happened.

‘Ah,’ said Rincewind calmly when it seemed to be over. ‘Well, let us
start with what we know. I can’t see. The reason I can’t see is that my
robe is hanging over my eyes. From this I can deduce that I am upside
down. You are gripping my ankles. Correction, one ankle, so obviously
you are holding me upside down. We are at the top of the tower. This
means . . .’

He fell silent.

‘All right, let’s start again,’ he said. ‘Let’s start by me not telling
anyone your name.’

The Librarian let go.

Rincewind dropped a few inches on to the planks of the tower.

‘You know, that was a really mean trick you just did,’ he said.

‘Ook.’

‘We’ll say no more about it, shall we?’

Rincewind looked up at the big, empty sky. It _ought_ to be raining.
He’d done everything he was supposed to do, hadn’t he? And all that had
happened was that the Faculty of UU was down there being condescending
about everything. It wasn’t even as if they could _do_ a rainmaking
spell. For one of those to work you needed some rain around to start
with. In fact, it was prudent to make sure that some heavy-looking
clouds were being blown in your direction.

And if it wasn’t raining then probably those terrible currents they
talked about were still around, too.

It wasn’t a _bad_ country. They were big on hats. They were big on _big_
hats. He could save up and buy a farm on the Never-Never and watch
sheep. After all, they fed themselves and they made more sheep. All you
had to do was pick the wool off occasionally. The Luggage’d probably
settle down to being a sheepdog.

Except . . . that there wasn’t any more water. No more sheep, no more
farms. Mad, and Crocodile Crocodile, the lovely ladies Darleen and
Letitia, Remorse and his horses, all those people who’d shown him how to
find the things you could eat without throwing up too often . . . all
drying up, and blowing away . . .

Him, too.

G’DAY.

‘Ook?’

‘Oh, _no_ . . .’ Rincewind moaned.

THROAT A BIT PARCHED?

‘Look, you’re not supposed to—’

IT’S ALL RIGHT, I HAVE AN APPOINTMENT DOWN IN THE CITY. THERE’S BEEN A
FIGHT OVER THE LAST BOTTLE OF BEER. HOWEVER, LET ME ASSURE YOU OF MY
PERSONAL ATTENTION AT ALL TIMES.

‘Well, thank you. When it’s time to stop living, I will certainly make
Death my number one choice!’

Death faded.

‘The cheek of him, turning up like that! We’re not dead yet,’ shouted
Rincewind to the burning sky. ‘There’s lots we could do! If we could get
to the Hub we could cut loose a big iceberg and tow it here and that’d
give us plenty of water . . . if we could get to the Hub! Where there’s
hope there’s life, I’ll have you know! I’ll find a way! Somewhere
there’s a way of making rain!’

Death had gone.

Rincewind swung the bullroarer menacingly. ‘And don’t come back!’

‘Ook!’

The Librarian gripped Rincewind’s arm, and sniffed the air.

Then Rincewind caught the smell too.

Rincewind spoke a fairly primitive language, and it had no word for
‘that smell you get after rain’ other than ‘that smell you get after
rain’. Anyone trying to describe the smell would have to flounder among
words like moisture, heat, vapour and, with a following wind,
exhalation.

Nevertheless, there was the smell you get after rain. In this burning
land, it was like a brief jewel in the air.

Rincewind whirled the piece of wood again. It made noise out of all
proportion to the movement, and there was that smell again.

He turned it over. It was still just a wooden oval. There weren’t any
markings on it.

He gripped the end of the string and whirled the thing experimentally a
few more times.

‘Did you notice that when it did this—’ he began.

It wouldn’t stop. He couldn’t lower his arm.

‘Er . . . I think it wants to be spun,’ he said.

‘Ook!’

‘You think I should?’

‘Ook!’

‘That’s very helpful. Oooh—’

The Librarian ducked.

Rincewind spun. He couldn’t see the wood now because the string was
getting longer with each turn. A blur curved through the air some way
from the tower, getting further away with each spin.

The sound of it was a long-drawn-out drone.

When it was well out over the city it exploded in a thunderclap. But
something still whirled on the end of the line, like a tight silver
cloud, throwing out a trail of white particles that made a spiral that
sped out wider and wider.

The Librarian was flat on his face with his hands over his head.

Air roared up the side of the tower, carrying dust, wind, heat and
budgerigars. Rincewind’s robe flapped around his chin.

Letting go was unthinkable. He wasn’t even sure if he could, until it
wanted him to.

Thin as smoke now, the spiral drifted out into the heat haze.

(. . . and out over the red desert and the unheeding kangaroos, and as
the tail of it flew out over the coast and into the wall of storms the
warring airs melted peacefully together . . . the clouds stopped their
stately spin around the last continent, boiled up in confusion and
thunderheads, reversed their direction and began to fall _inwards_ . .
.)

And the string whipped out of Rincewind’s hand, stinging his fingers.
The bullroarer flew away, and he didn’t see it fall.

This may have been because he was still pirouetting, but at last gravity
overcame momentum and he fell full length on the boards.

‘I think my feet have caught fire,’ he muttered.

The dead heat hung on the land like a shroud. Clancy the stockman wiped
the sweat off his brow very thoroughly, and wrung out the rag into an
empty jam tin. The way things were going, he’d be glad of it. Then,
carrying the tin with care, he climbed back down the windmill’s ladder.

‘The bore’s fine, boss, there’s just no bloody water,’ he said.

Remorse shook his head. ‘Look at them horses,’ he said. ‘Look at the way
they’re lying down, willya? That’s not good. This is it, Clancy. We’ve
battled through thick and thin, and this is too thick altogether by
half. We may as well cut their poor bloody throats for the meat that’s
on ’em—’

A gust of wind took his hat off for him, and blew a lash of scent across
the wilted mulga bushes. A horse raised his head.

Clouds were pouring across the sky, rolling and boiling across each
other like waves on a beach, so black that in the middle they were blue,
lit by occasional flashes.

‘What the hell’s _that_?’ said Clancy.

The horse stood up awkwardly and stumbled to the rusted trough under the
windmill.

Under the clouds, dragging across the land, the air shimmered silver.

Something hit Remorse’s head.

He looked down. Something went ‘plut’ in the red dust by his boot,
leaving a little crater.

‘That is _water_, Clancy,’ he said. ‘It’s bloody _water_ dropping out of
the bloody _sky_!’

They stared at one another with their mouths open as, around them, the
storm hit and the animals stirred and the red dust turned into mud which
spattered them up to their waists.

This was no ordinary rainstorm. This was The Wet.

As Clancy said later, the second best bloody thing that happened that
day was that they were near high ground.

The _best_ bloody thing was that, with all the corks on their hats, they
were able to find the bloody things later on.

There’d been debate about having this year’s regatta in
Dijabringabeeralong, given the drought. But it was a tradition. A lot of
people came into town for it. Besides, the organizers had discussed it
long and hard all the previous evening in the bar of the Pastoral Hotel
and had concluded that, no worries, she’ll be right.

There were classes for boats pulled by camels, boats optimistically
propelled by sails and, a high spot of the event, skiffs propelled by
the simple expedient of the crew cutting the bottoms out, gripping the
sides and running like hell. It always got a good laugh.

It was while two teams were trotting upriver in the semi-final that the
spectators noticed the black cloud pouring over Semaphore Hill like
boiling jam.

‘Bushfire,’ said someone.

‘Bushfire’d be white. Come on . . .’

That was the thing about fire. If you saw one, everyone went to put it
out. Fire spread like wildfire.

But as they turned away there was a scream from the riverbed.

The teams rounded the bend neck and neck, carrying their boats at a
record-breaking speed. They reached the slipway, collided in their
efforts to get up it, made it to the top locked together, and collapsed
in splinters and screams.

‘Stop the regatta!’ panted one of the coxes. ‘The river . . . the river
. . .’

But by then everyone could see it. Around the bend, travelling slowly
because it was pushing in front of it a huge logjam of bushes, carts,
rocks and trees, was the flood.

It thundered past and the mobile dam slid on, scything the river bottom
free of all obstruction. Behind it foaming water filled the river from
bank to bank.

They cancelled the regatta. A river full of water made a mockery of the
whole idea.

The university’s gates had burst open and now the angry mob was in the
grounds and hammering on the walls.

Above the din, the wizards searched feverishly through the books.

‘Well, have you got something like Maxwell’s Impressive Separator?’ said
Ridcully.

‘What’s that do?’ said Archchancellor Rincewind.

‘Unmixes two things, like . . . sugar and sand, for example. Uses
nanny’s demons.’

‘Nano-demons, possibly,’ murmured Ponder wearily.

‘Oh, like Bonza Charlie’s Beaut Sieve? Yeah, we’ve got that.’

‘Ah, parallel evolution. Fine. Dig it out, man.’

Archchancellor Rincewind nodded at one of the wizards, and then broke
into a grin.

‘Are you thinking about it working on salt?’ he said.

‘Exactly! One spell, one bucket of seawater, no more problem . . .’

‘Er, that’s not _exactly_ true,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Sounds perfect to me, man!’

‘It takes a great deal of magic, sir. And the demons take about a
fortnight per pint, sir.’

‘Ah. A significant point, Mister Stibbons.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘However, just because it wouldn’t work does not mean it was a _bad_
idea – I wish they’d stop that shouting!’

The shouting outside stopped.

‘Perhaps they heard you, sir,’ said Ponder.

_Pang. Pang, pang . . ._

‘Are they throwing stuff on to the roof?’ said Archchancellor Rincewind.

‘No, that’s probably just rain,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now, I suppose you’ve
tried evaporating—’

He realized that no one was listening. Everyone was looking up.

Now the individual thuds had merged into a steady hammering and from
outside came the sound of wild cheering.

The wizards struggled in the doorway and finally fought their way
outside, where water was pouring off the roof in a solid sheet and
cutting a channel in the lawn.

Archchancellor Rincewind stopped abruptly and reached out to the water
like a man not sure if the stove is hot.

‘Out of the sky?’ he said. He pushed his way out through the liquid
curtain. Then he took off his hat and held it upside down to catch the
rain.

The crowd had filled the university grounds and spilled out into the
surrounding streets. Every face was turned upwards.

‘And those dark things?’ Archchancellor Rincewind called out.

‘They _are_ the clouds, archchancellor.’

‘There’s a hell of a lot of them!’

There were. They piled up over the tower in an enormous, spreading black
thunderhead.

A couple of people looked down long enough to see the group of soaked
wizards, and there were some cheers. And suddenly they were the new
centre of attention, and being picked up and carried shoulder high.

‘They think we did it!’ shouted Archchancellor Rincewind, as he was
borne aloft.

‘Who’s to say we didn’t?’ shouted Ridcully, tapping the side of his nose
conspiratorially.

‘Er . . .’ someone began.

Ridcully didn’t even look round. ‘Shut up, Mister Stibbons,’ he said.

‘Shutting up, sir.’

‘Can you hear that thunder?’ said Ridcully, as a rumble rolled across
the city. ‘We’d better take cover . . .’

The clouds above the tower were rising like water against a dam. Ponder
said afterwards the fact that the BU tower was very short and extremely
tall at the same time might have been the problem, since the storm was
trying to go around it, over it and through it, all at the same time.

From the ground the clouds seemed to open up slowly, leaving a glowing,
spreading chimney filled with the blue haze of electrical discharges . .
.

. . . and pounced. One solid blue bolt hit the tower at every height all
at once, which is technically impossible. Pieces of wood and corrugated
iron roared into the air and rained down across the city.

Then there was just a sizzling, and the rushing of the rain.

The crowd stood up again, cautiously, but the fireworks were over.

‘And that’s what we call lightning,’ said Ridcully.

Archchancellor Rincewind got up and tried to brush mud off his robe,
then found out why you cannot do this.

‘It’s not usually as big as that, though,’ Ridcully went on.

‘Oh. Good.’

There was a clank from the steaming debris where the tower had stood,
and a sheet of metal was pushed aside. Slowly, with much mutual aid and
many false starts, two blackened figures emerged. One of them was still
wearing a hat, which was on fire although the rain was putting out the
flames.

Leaning against one another, weaving from side to side, they approached
the wizards.

One of them said, ‘Ook,’ very quietly and fell backwards.

The other one looked blearily at the two archchancellors, and saluted.
This caused a spark to leap from its fingers and burn its ear.

‘Er, Rincewind,’ it said.

‘And what have _you_ been up to while we’ve been doing all this hard
work, pray?’ said Ridcully.

Rincewind looked around, very slowly. Occasional little blue streaks
crackled in his beard.

‘Well, that all seemed to go pretty well, really. All things
considered,’ he said, and fell full length into a puddle.

It rained. After that, it rained. Then it rained some more. The clouds
were stacked like impatient charter flights over the coast, low on fuel,
jockeying for position, and raining. Above all, raining.

Floodwater roared down the rocks and scoured out the ancient muddy
waterholes. A species of tiny shrimps whose world for thousands of years
had been one small hole under a stone were picked up and carried
wholesale into a lake that was spreading faster than a man could run.
There had been fewer than a thousand of them. There were a _lot_ more
next day. Even if the shrimps had been able to count how many, they were
far too busy to bother.

In the new estuaries, rich in sudden silt and unexpected food, a few
fish began the experiment of a salt-free diet. The mangroves started
their stop-motion conquests of the new mudbanks.

It went on raining.

Then it rained some more.

After that, it rained.

It was some days later.

The ship rose and fell gently by the dock. The water around it was red
with suspended silt in which a few leaves and twigs floated.

‘A week or two to NoThingfjord and we’re practically home,’ said
Ridcully.

‘Practically on the same continent, anyway,’ said the Dean.

‘Quite an int’resting long vacation, really,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘Probably the longest ever,’ said Ponder. ‘Did Mrs Whitlow like her
stateroom?’

‘I for one will quite enjoy bunking down in the hold,’ said the Senior
Wrangler loyally.

‘The bilges, actually,’ said Ponder. ‘The hold’s full. Of opals, beer,
sheep, wool and bananas.’

‘Where’s the Librarian?’ said Ridcully.

‘In the hold, sir.’

‘Yes, I suppose it was silly of me to ask. Still, nice to see him his
old self again.’

‘I think it may have been the lightning, sir. He’s certainly very lively
now.’

And Rincewind sat on the Luggage, down on the dock.

Somehow, he felt, something should be happening. The worst time in your
life was when nothing much was going on, because that meant that
something bad was about to hit you. For some strange reason.

He could be back in the University Library in a month or so, and then
ho! for a life of stacking books. One dull day after another, with
occasional periods of boredom. He could hardly wait. Every minute not
being a minute wasted was, well, a minute wasted. Excitement? That could
happen to other people.

He’d watched the merchants loading the ship. It was pretty low in the
water, because there would be so many Ecksian things the rest of the
world wanted. Of course, it’d come back light, because it was hard to
think of any bloody thing it could bloody import that was better than
any bloody thing in EcksEcksEcksEcks.

There were even a few more passengers willing to see the world, and most
of them were young.

‘Hey, aren’t you one of the foreign wizards?’

The speaker was a young man carrying a very large knapsack topped by a
bedroll. He seemed to be the impromptu leader of a small group of
similarly overloaded people, with wide, open faces and slightly worried
expressions.

‘You can tell, can’t you?’ said Rincewind. ‘Er . . . you wanted
something?’

‘D’yew think we can buy a cart in this place NoThingfjord?’

‘Yes, I should think so.’

‘Only me and Clive and Shirl and Gerleen were thinkin’ of picking one up
and driving to—’ He looked around.

‘Ankh-Morpork,’ said Shirl.

‘Right, and then selling it, and gettin’ a job for a while, having a
look round, y’know . . . for a while. That’d be right?’

Rincewind glanced at the others trooping up the gangplank. Since the
invention of the dung beetle, which had in fact happened not too far
away, it was probable that no creature had ever carried so much weight.

‘I can see it catching on,’ he said.

‘No worries!’

‘But . . . er . . .’

‘Yes, mate?’

‘Do you mind not humming that tune? It was only a sheep, and I didn’t
even steal it . . .’

Someone tapped him on the shoulder. It was Neilette. Letitia and Darleen
were standing behind her, grinning. It was ten in the morning. They were
wearing sequinned evening gowns.

‘Budge up,’ she said, and settled down beside him. ‘We just thought . .
. well, we’ve come to say, you know, thanks and everything. Letitia and
Darleen are coming in with me and we’re going to open up the brewery
again.’

Rincewind glanced up at the ladies.

‘I’ve had enough beer thrown at me, I ought to know something about it,’
said Letitia. ‘Although I do think we could make it a more attractive
colour. It’s so . . .’ she waved a large, be-ringed hand irritably, ‘. .
. aggressively _masculine_.’

‘Pink would be nice,’ said Rincewind. ‘And you could put in a pickled
onion on a stick, perhaps.’

‘Bloody good suggestion!’ said Darleen, slapping him so hard on the back
that his hat fell over his eyes.

‘You wouldn’t like to stay?’ said Neilette. ‘You look like someone with
ideas.’

Rincewind considered this attractive proposition, and then shook his
head.

‘It’s a nice offer, but I think I ought to stick to what I do best,’ he
said.

‘But everyone says you’re no good at magic!’ said Neilette.

‘Er . . . yes, well, being no good at magic _is_ what I do best,’ said
Rincewind. ‘Thanks all the same.’

‘At least let me give you a big wet sloppy kiss,’ said Darleen, grabbing
his shoulders. Out of the corner of his eye Rincewind saw Neilette’s
foot stamp down.

‘All right, all right!’ said Darleen, letting go and hopping away. ‘It
wasn’t as if I was going to bite him, miss!’

Neilette gave Rincewind a peck on the cheek.

‘Well, drop in whenever you’re passing,’ she said.

‘Certainly will!’ said Rincewind. ‘I’ll look for the pubs with the mauve
umbrellas outside, shall I?’

Neilette gave him a wave and Darleen made an amusing gesture as they
walked away, almost bumping into a group of men in white. One of them
shouted, ‘Hey, there he is . . . Sorry, ladies . . .’

‘Oh, hello, Charley . . . Ron . . .’ said Rincewind, as the chefs bore
down on him.

‘Heard you wuzzas was leavin’,’ said Ron. ‘Wouldn’t be fair to let you
go without shaking you by the hand, Charley said.’

‘The Peach Nellie went down a treat,’ said Charley, beaming broadly.

‘Glad to hear it,’ said Rincewind. ‘Good to see you looking so
cheerful.’

‘It gets better!’ said Ron. ‘There’s a new soprano just been taken on
and she’s a winner if I’m any judge and . . . no, Charley, _you_ tell
him her name . . .’

‘Germaine Trifle,’ said Charley. A wider grin would have resulted in the
top of his head slipping off.

‘I’m very happy for you,’ said Rincewind. ‘Start whipping that cream
right now, y’hear?’

Ron patted him on the shoulder. ‘We could always do with another hand in
the kitchens,’ he said. ‘Just say the word, mate.’

‘Well, it’s very kind of you, and when I pull another tissue out of a
box I’ll always remember you blokes at the Opera House, but—’

‘There he is!’

The gaoler and the captain of the guard were jogging along the quay. The
gaoler was waving encouragingly at him.

‘Nah, nah, it’s all right, you don’t have to run!’ he shouted. ‘We’ve
got a pardon for you!’

‘Pardon?’ said Rincewind.

‘That’s right!’ The gaoler reached him, and fought for breath. ‘Signed .
. . by . . . the prime minister,’ he managed. ‘Says you’re a . . . good
bloke and we’re not to . . . hang you . . .’ He straightened up. ‘Mind
you, we wouldn’t do that anyway, not now. Best bloody escape we’ve ever
bloody had since Tinhead Ned!’

Rincewind looked down at the writing on the official lined prison
notepaper.

‘Oh. Good,’ he said weakly. ‘At least someone thinks I didn’t steal the
damn thing.’

‘Oh, everyone _knows_ you stole it,’ said the gaoler happily. ‘But after
that escape, we-ell . . . and that chase, eh? Bluey here says he’s never
seen anyone run like you, and that’s a fact!’

The guard punched Rincewind playfully on the arm. ‘Good on yer, mate,’
he said, grinning. ‘But we’ll catch yer next time!’

Rincewind looked blankly at the pardon. ‘You mean I’m getting this for
being a good sport?’

‘No worries!’ said the gaoler. ‘And there’s a queue of farmers sayin’ if
you want to steal one of _their_ sheep next time that’d be bonza, just
so long as they get a verse in the ballad.’

Rincewind gave up. ‘What can I say?’ he said. ‘You keep one of the best
condemned cells I’ve ever stayed in, and I’ve been in a few.’ He looked
at the glow of admiration in their faces and decided that, since fortune
had been kind, it was time to give something back. ‘Er . . . I’d take it
kindly, though, if you’d never ever redecorate that cell.’

‘No worries. Here, I thought we ought to give you this,’ said the
gaoler, handing him a little giftwrapped package. ‘Got no use for it
now, eh?’

Rincewind unwrapped the hempen rope.

‘I’m lost for words,’ he said. ‘How thoughtful. I’m bound to find lots
of uses for it. And what’s this . . . _sandwiches_?’

‘Y’know that sticky brown stuff you made? Well, all the lads tried it
and they all went “yukk” and then they all wanted some more, so we tried
cooking up a batch,’ said the gaoler. ‘I was thinking of going into
business. You don’t mind, do you?’

‘No worries. Be my guest.’

‘Good on yer!’

Someone else wandered up as he watched them hurry away.

‘I heard you were going back,’ said Bill Rincewind. ‘Want to stay on
here? I had a word with your Dean. He gave you a bloody good reference.’

‘Did he? What did he say?’

‘He said if I could get you to do any work for me I’d be lucky,’ said
Bill.

Rincewind looked around at the city, glistening under the rain.

‘It’s a nice offer,’ he said. ‘But . . . oh, I dunno . . . all this sun,
sea, surf and sand wouldn’t be good for me. Thanks all the same.’

‘You sure?’

‘Yes.’

Bill Rincewind held out his hand. ‘No worries,’ he said. ‘I’ll send you
a card at Hogswatch, and some bit of clothing that doesn’t fit properly.
I’d better get back to the university now, I’ve got all the staff up on
the roof mending the leaks . . .’

And that was it.

Rincewind sat for a while watching the last of the passengers get
aboard, and took a final look around the rain-soaked harbour. Then he
stood up.

‘Come on, then,’ he said.

The Luggage followed him up the gangplank, and they went home.

It rained.

The flood gurgled along ancient creek beds and overflowed, spreading out
in a lacework of gullies and rivulets.

Further rain ensued.

Near the centre of the last continent, where waterfalls streamed down
the flanks of a great red rock that steamed with the heat of a
ten-thousand-year summer, a small naked boy sat in the branches of a
tree along with three bears, several possums, innumerable parrots and a
camel.

Apart from the rock, the world was a sea.

And someone was wading through it. He was an old man, carrying a leather
bag on his back.

He stopped, waist deep in swirling water, and looked up at the sky.

Something was coming. The clouds were twisting, spinning, leaving a
silvery hole all the way up to the blue sky, and there was a sound that
you might get if you took a roll of thunder and stretched it out thin.

A dot appeared, growing bigger. The man raised a skinny arm and,
suddenly, it was holding an oval of wood that trailed a cord, which hit
his hand with a _slap_.

The rain stopped.

The last few drops hammered out a little rhythm that said: now we know
where you are, we’ll be coming back . . .

The boy laughed.

The old man looked up, caught sight of him, and grinned. He tucked the
bullroarer into the string around his waist and took up a boomerang
painted in more colours than the boy had ever seen in one place
together.

The man tossed it up and caught it a couple of times and then, glancing
sideways to make sure his audience was watching him, he hurled it.

It rose into the sky and went on climbing, long past the point where any
normal thing should have started to fall back. It grew bigger, too. The
clouds parted to let it through. And then it stopped, as if suddenly
nailed to the sky.

Like sheep which, having been driven to a pasture, can now spread out at
their leisure, the clouds began to drift. Afternoon sunlight sliced
through into the still waters. The boomerang hung in the sky, and the
boy thought he would have to find a new word for the way the colours
glowed.

In the meantime, he looked down at the water and tried out the word he’d
been taught by his grandfather, who’d been taught it by _his_
grandfather, and which had been kept for thousands of years for when it
would be needed.

It meant _the smell after rain_.

It had, he thought, been well worth waiting for.

THE END

1 Much easier to discover than fire, and only slightly harder to
discover than water.

2 Not why is it _anything_. Just why it is.

3 A cross between a porter and a proctor. A bledlow is not chosen for
his imagination, because he usually doesn’t have any.

4 Ankh-Morpork’s leading vet, generally called in by people faced with
ailments too serious to be trusted to the general medical profession.
Doughnut’s one blind spot was his tendency to assume that every patient
was, to a greater or lesser extent, a racehorse.

5 In the case of cold fusion, this was longer than usual.

6 Wizards are certain of the existence of the temporal gland, although
not even the most invasive alchemist has ever found where it is located
and current theory is that it has a non-corporeal existence, like a sort
of ethereal appendix. It keeps track of how old your body is, and is so
susceptible to the influence of a high magical field that it might even
work in reverse, absorbing the body’s normal supplies of chrononine. The
alchemists say it is the key to immortality, but they say that about
orange juice, crusty bread and drinking your own urine. An alchemist
would cut his own head off if he thought it’d make him live longer.

7 Broadly speaking, the acceleration of a wizard through the ranks of
wizardry by killing off more senior wizards. It is a practice currently
in abeyance, since a few enthusiastic attempts to remove Mustrum
Ridcully resulted in one wizard being unable to hear properly for two
weeks. Ridcully felt that there was indeed room at the top, and he was
occupying all of it.

8 Sometimes Ponder thought his skill with Hex was because Hex was very
clever and very stupid at the same time. If you wanted it to understand
something, you had to break the idea down into bite-sized pieces and
make absolutely sure there was no room for any misunderstanding. The
quiet hours with Hex were often a picnic after five minutes with the
senior wizards.

9 The Lecturer in Creative Uncertainty, for example, held rather smugly
that he was in a state of _both_ in-ness and outness until such time as
anyone knocked on his door and collapsed the field, and that it was
impossible to be categorical before that event. Logic is a wonderful
thing but doesn’t always beat actual thought.

10 Wizards also enjoy a bit of fun but never have much of a chance to
develop the appropriate vocabulary.

11 This isn’t magic. It is a simple universal law. People always expect
to use a holiday in the sun as an opportunity to read those books
they’ve always meant to read, but an alchemical combination of sun,
quartz crystals and coconut oil will somehow metamorphose any improving
book into a rather thicker one _with a name containing at least one
Greek word or letter_ (_The Gamma Imperative, The Delta Season, The
Alpha Project_ and, in the more extreme cases, even _The Mu Kau Pi
Caper_). Sometimes a hammer and sickle turn up on the cover. This is
probably caused by sunspot activity, since they are invariably the wrong
way round. It’s just as well for the Librarian that he sneezed when he
did, or he might have ended up a thousand pages thick and crammed with
weapons specifications.

12 The Senior Wrangler had once walked past Mrs Whitlow’s rooms when the
door was open, and he’d caught sight of the bare, headless, armless
dressmaker’s dummy that she used to make all her own clothes. He’d had
to go and lie down quietly after that and, ever since, had thought about
Mrs Whitlow in a special way.

13 Wizards lack the HW chromosome in their genes. Feminist researchers
have isolated this as the one which allows people to see the washing-up
in the sinks before the life forms growing there have actually invented
the wheel. Or discovered slood.

14 There’s a certain type of manager who is known by his call of ‘My
door is always open’ and it is probably a good idea to beat yourself to
death with your own CV rather than work for him. In Ridcully’s case,
however, he meant, ‘My door is always open because then, when I’m bored,
I can fire my crossbow right across the hall and into the target just
above the Bursar’s desk.’

15 That is to say, she secretly considered them to be vicious, selfish
and untrustworthy.

16 Again, when people like Mrs Whitlow use this term they are not, for
some inexplicable reason, trying to suggest that the subjects have a
rich oral tradition, a complex system of tribal rights and a deep
respect for the spirits of their ancestors. They are implying the kind
of behaviour more generally associated, oddly enough, with people
wearing a full suit of clothes, often with the same insignia.

17 Ponder had been that kind of child. He still had all the pieces for
every game he’d ever been given. Ponder had been the kind of boy who
carefully reads the label on every Hogswatch present before opening it,
and notes down in a small book, who it is from, and has all the
thank-you letters written by teatime. His parents had been impressed
even then, realizing that they had given birth to a child who would
achieve great things or, perhaps, be hunted down by a righteous
citizenry by the time he was ten.

18 Any seasoned traveller soon learns to avoid anything wished on them
as a ‘regional speciality’, because all the term means is that the dish
is so unpleasant the people living everywhere else will bite off their
own legs rather than eat it. But hosts still press it upon distant
guests anyway: ‘Go on, have the dog’s head stuffed with macerated
cabbage and pork noses – it’s a _regional speciality_.’

19 In fact it’s the view of the more thoughtful historians, particularly
those who have spent time in the same bar as the theoretical physicists,
that the entirety of human history can be considered as a sort of
blooper reel. All those wars, all those famines caused by malign
stupidity, all that determined, mindless repetition of the same old
errors, are in the great cosmic scheme of things only equivalent to Mr
Spock’s ears falling off.

20 There is no such thing as an edible, nay delicious, meat pie floater,
its mushy peas of just the right consistency, its tomato sauce piquant
in its cheekiness, its pie filling tending even towards named parts of
the animal. There are platonic burgers made of beef instead of cow lips
and hooves. There are fish ’n’ chips where the fish is more than just a
white goo lurking at the bottom of a batter casing and you can’t use the
chips to shave with. There are hot dog fillings which have more in
common with meat than mere pinkness, whose lucky consumers don’t apply
mustard _because that would spoil the taste_. It’s just that people can
be trained to _prefer_ the other sort, and seek it out. It’s as if
Machiavelli had written a cookery book.
     Even so, there is no excuse for putting pineapple on pizza.

21 This is why protesters against the wearing of animal skins by humans
unaccountably fail to throw their paint over Hell’s Angels.

22 It would be nice to say that this experience taught Ponder a valuable
lesson and that he was a lot more considerate towards old people
afterwards, and this was true for about five minutes.

23 Although of course it’s not the most obvious thing and there are, in
fact, some beguiling similarities, particularly the tendency to try to
hide behind a big cloud of ink in difficult situations.

24 The one on the first floor, with the curious gravitational anomaly.


About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT is the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld® series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His novels have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he is the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
Worldwide sales of his books now stand at 70 million, and they have been
translated into thirty-seven languages.

For more information about Terry Pratchett and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

[The Discworld series]

[Have you read them all?]

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC
(illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE &
HIS EDUCATED RODENTS (for younger readers)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN (for younger readers)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY (for younger readers)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD!

35. WINTERSMITH (for younger readers)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT (for younger readers)

39. SNUFF

----------OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD----------

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III:
DARWIN’S WATCH
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION
(with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK
(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO
(with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK
(with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK
(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW?
(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD
(with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD
(compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD
(with Jacqueline Simpson)

THE WORLD OF POO

----------DISCWORLD MAPS----------

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE –
A DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN
(with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

----------NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS----------

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT
(illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS
(with Neil Gaiman)

THE LONG EARTH
(with Stephen Baxter)

--NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNGER READERS--

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND*

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

*www.ifnotyouthenwho.com

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

THE LAST CONTINENT
A CORGI BOOK: 9780552146142
VERSION 1.0 EPUB ISBN: 9781407035123

Originally published in Great Britain by Doubleday,
a division of Transworld Publishers

PRINTING HISTORY
Doubleday edition published 1998
Corgi edition published 1999

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett 1998

Discworld® is a trade mark registered by Terry Pratchett

The right of Terry Pratchett to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright
Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All the characters in this book are fictitious, and any resemblance to
actual persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at: www.randomhouse.co.uk
