
Contents

Cover

About the Book

Introducing Discworld

Title Page

Introduction

Chapter 1: The Big Snow

Chapter 2: Miss Treason

Chapter 3: The Secret of Boffo

Chapter 4: Snowflakes

Chapter 5: Miss Treason’s Big Day

Chapter 6: Feet and Sprouts

Chapter 7: On with the Dance

Chapter 8: The Horn of Plenty

Chapter 9: Green Shoots

Chapter 10: Going Home

Chapter 11: Even Turquoise

Chapter 12: The Pike

Chapter 13: The Crown of Ice

Author’s Note

Read On

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright


About the Book

Tiffany Aching is a trainee witch, now working for the seriously scary
Miss Treason. But when Tiffany witnesses the Dark Dance – the crossover
from summer to winter – she does what no one has ever done before and
leaps into the dance. Into the oldest story there is. And draws the
attention of the Wintersmith himself.

Now the spirit of winter is in love with her. He gives her roses and
icebergs and showers her with snowflakes, which is tough when you’re
thirteen, but also just a little bit . . . cool. But if Tiffany doesn’t
work out how to deal with him, there will never be another springtime .
. .

THE THIRD BOOK IN THE TIFFANY ACHING SEQUENCE


INTRODUCING DISCWORLD

The Discworld series is a continuous history of a world not totally
unlike our own, except that it is a flat disc carried on the backs of
four elephants astride a giant turtle floating through space, and that
it is peopled by, among others, wizards, dwarfs, policemen, thieves,
beggars, vampires and witches. Within the history of Discworld there are
many individual stories, which can be read in any order, but reading
them in sequence can increase your enjoyment through the accumulation of
all the fine detail that contributes to the teeming imaginative
complexity of this brilliantly conceived world.

[image]

[image]

I N T R O D U C T I O N

A FEEGLE GLOSSARY,
ADJUSTED FOR THOSE OF A DELICATE DISPOSITION

(A Work In Progress By Miss Perspicacia Tick)

_Bigjobs_: human beings

_Big Man:_ chief of the clan (usually the husband of the kelda)

_Blethers:_ rubbish, nonsense

_Boggin:_ to be desperate, as in ‘I’m boggin for a cup of tea.’

_Bunty:_ a weak person

_Carlin:_ old woman

_Cludgie:_ the privy

_Crivens!:_ a general exclamation that can mean anything from ‘My
goodness!’ to ‘I’ve just lost my temper and there is going to be
trouble.’

_Dree your/my/his/her weird:_ facing the fate that is in store for
you/me/him/her

_Een:_ eyes

_Eldritch:_ weird, strange. Sometimes means oblong, too, for some
reason.

_Fash:_ worry, upset

_Geas:_ a very important obligation, backed up by tradition and magic.
Not a bird.

_Gonnagle:_ the bard of the clan, skilled in musical instruments, poems,
stories and songs

_Hag:_ a witch, of any age

_Hag o’ hags:_ a very important witch

_Hagging/Haggling:_ anything a witch does

_Hiddlins:_ secrets

_Kelda:_ the female head of the clan, and eventually the mother of most
of it. Feegle babies are very small, and a kelda will have hundreds in
her lifetime.

_Lang syne:_ long ago

_Last World:_ The Feegles believe that they are dead. This world is so
nice, they argue, that they must have been really good in a past life
and then died and ended up here. Appearing to die here means merely
going back to the Last World, which they believe is rather dull.

_Mudlin:_ useless person

_Pished:_ I am assured that this means ‘tired’.

_Schemie:_ an unpleasant person

_Scuggan:_ a really unpleasant person

_Scunner:_ a generally unpleasant person

_Ships:_ woolly things that eat grass and go baa. Easily confused with
the other kind.

_Spavie:_ see Mudlin

_Special Sheep Liniment:_ probably moonshine whisky, I am very sorry to
say. No one knows what it’d do to sheep, but it is said that a drop of
it is good for shepherds on a cold winter’s night and for Feegles at any
time at all. Do not try to make this at home.

_Spog:_ a leather pouch, worn on the front of his belt, where a Feegle
keeps his valuables and uneaten food, interesting insects, useful bits
of twig, lucky dirt and so on. It is not a good idea to fish around in a
spog.

_Steamie:_ only found in the big Feegle mounds in the mountains, where
there’s enough water to allow regular bathing; it’s a kind of sauna.
Feegles on the Chalk tend to rely on the fact that you can only get so
much dirt on you before it starts to fall off of its own accord.

_Waily:_ a general cry of despair

[image]


CHAPTER 1
THE BIG SNOW

When the storm came, it hit the hills like a hammer. No sky should hold
as much snow as this, and because no sky could, it fell; fell in a wall
of white.

There was a small hill of snow where there had been, a few hours ago, a
little cluster of thorn trees on an ancient mound. This time last year
there had been a few early primroses; now there was just snow.

Part of the snow moved. A piece about the size of an apple rose up, with
smoke pouring out around it. A hand no larger than a rabbit’s paw waved
the smoke away.

A very small, but very angry blue face, with the lump of snow still
balanced on top of it, looked out at the sudden white wilderness.

‘Ach, crivens!’ it grumbled. ‘Will ye no’ look at this? ’Tis the work o’
the wintersmith! Noo there’s a scunner that willnae tak’ “no” fra’ a
answer!’

Other lumps of snow were pushed up. More heads peered out.

‘Oh waily, waily, waily!’ said one of them. ‘He’s found the big wee hag
again!’

The first head turned towards this head, and said, ‘Daft Wullie?’

‘Yes, Rob?’

‘Did I no’ tell ye to lay off that waily business?’

‘Aye, Rob, ye did that,’ said the head addressed as Daft Wullie.

‘So why did ye just do it?’

‘Sorry, Rob. It kinda bursted oot.’

‘It’s so dispiritin’.’

‘Sorry, Rob.’

Rob Anybody sighed. ‘But I fear ye’re right, Wullie. He’s come for the
big wee hag, right enough. Who’s watchin’ over her doon at the farm?’

‘Wee Dangerous Spike, Rob.’

Rob looked up at clouds so full of snow that they sagged in the middle.

‘OK,’ he said, and sighed again. ‘It’s time fra’ the Hero.’

He ducked out of sight, the plug of snow dropping neatly back into
place, and slid down into the heart of the Feegle mound.

It was quite big inside. A human could just about stand up in the
middle, but they would then bend double with coughing because the middle
was where there was a hole to let smoke out.

All around the inner wall were tiers of galleries, and every one of them
was packed with Feegles. Usually the place was awash with noise, but now
it was frighteningly quiet.

Rob Anybody walked across the floor to the fire, where his wife Jeannie
was waiting. She stood up straight and proud, like a kelda should, but
close up it seemed to him that she had been crying. He put his arm
around her.

‘All right, ye probably ken what’s happenin’,’ he told the blue and red
audience looking down on him. ‘This is nae common storm. The wintersmith
has found the big wee hag – now then, settle doon!’

He waited until the shouting and sword-rattling had died down, then went
on:

‘We cannae fight the wintersmith for her! That’s her road! We cannae
walk it for her! But the hag o’ hags has set us on another path! It’s a
dark one, and dangerous!’

A cheer went up. Feegles liked the idea of this, at least.

‘Right!’ said Rob, satisfied at this. ‘Ah’m awa’ tae fetch the Hero!’

There was a lot of laughter at this, and Big Yan, the tallest of the
Feegles, shouted, ‘It’s tae soon. We’ve only had time tae gi’e him a
couple o’ heroing lessons! He’s still nae more than a big streak o’
nothin’!’

‘He’ll be a hero for the big wee hag and that’s an end o’ it,’ said Rob
sharply. ‘Noo, off ye go, the whole boilin’ o’ ye! Tae the chalk pit!
Dig me a path tae the Underworld!’

It had to be the wintersmith, Tiffany Aching told herself, standing in
front of her father in the freezing farmhouse. She could feel it out
there. This wasn’t normal weather even for midwinter, and this was
springtime. It was a challenge. Or perhaps it was just a game. It was
hard to tell, with the wintersmith.

Only it can’t be a game because the lambs are dying. I’m only just
thirteen, and my father, and a lot of other people older than me, want
me to do something. And I can’t. The wintersmith has found me again. He
is here now, and I’m too weak.

It would be easier if they were bullying me, but no, they’re begging. My
father’s face is grey with worry and he’s begging. _My father is begging
me._

Oh no, he’s taking his hat off. He’s _taking off his hat_ to speak to
me!

They think magic comes free, when I snap my fingers. But if I can’t do
this for them now, what good am I? I can’t let them see I’m afraid.
Witches aren’t allowed to be afraid.

And this is my fault. I: I started all this. I must finish it.

Mr Aching cleared his throat.

‘… And, er, if you could … er, magic it away, uh, or something? For us …
?’

Everything in the room was grey, because the light from the windows was
coming through snow. No one had wasted time digging the horrible stuff
away from the houses. Every person who could hold a shovel was needed
elsewhere, and still there were not enough of them. As it was, most
people had been up all night, walking the flocks of yearlings, trying to
keep the new lambs safe … in the dark, in the snow …

_Her_ snow. It was a message to her. A challenge. A summons.

‘All right,’ she said. ‘I’ll see what I can do.’

‘Good girl,’ said her father, grinning with relief.

No, not a good girl, thought Tiffany. I brought this on us.

‘You’ll have to make a big fire, up by the sheds,’ she said aloud. ‘I
mean a big fire, do you understand? Make it out of anything that will
burn and you must keep it going. It’ll keep trying to go out, but you
must keep it going. Keep piling on the fuel, whatever happens. _The fire
must not go out!_’

She made sure that the ‘not!’ was loud and frightening. She didn’t want
people’s minds to wander. She put on the heavy brown woollen cloak that
Miss Treason had made for her and grabbed the black pointy hat that hung
on the back of the farmhouse door. There was a sort of communal grunt
from the people who’d crowded into the kitchen, and some of them backed
away. We want a witch now, we need a witch now, but – we’ll back away
now, too.

That was the magic of the pointy hat. It was what Miss Treason called
‘boffo’.

Tiffany Aching stepped out into the narrow corridor that had been cut
through the snow-filled farmyard where the drifts were more than twice
the height of a man. At least the deep snow kept off the worst of the
wind, which was made of knives.

A track had been cleared all the way to the paddock, but it had been
heavy-going. When there is fifteen feet of snow everywhere, how can you
clear it? Where can you clear it to?

She waited by the cart sheds while the men hacked and scraped at the
snow banks. They were tired to the soul by now; they’d been digging for
hours.

The important thing was—

But there were lots of important things. It was important to look calm
and confident, it was important to keep your mind clear, it was
important not to show how pants-wettingly scared you were …

She held out a hand, caught a snowflake and took a good look at it. It
wasn’t one of the normal ones, oh no. It was one of his special
snowflakes. That was nasty. He was taunting her. Now, she could hate
him. She’d never hated him before. But he was killing the lambs.

She shivered, and pulled the cloak around her.

‘This I choose to do,’ she croaked, her breath leaving little clouds in
the air. She cleared her throat and started again. ‘This I choose to do.
If there is a price, this I choose to pay. If it is my death, then I
choose to die. Where this takes me, there I choose to go. I choose. This
I choose to do.’

It wasn’t a spell, except in her own head, but if you couldn’t make
spells work in your own head you couldn’t make them work at all.

Tiffany wrapped her cloak around her against the clawing wind and
watched dully as the men brought straw and wood. The fire started
slowly, as if frightened to show enthusiasm.

She’d done this before, hadn’t she? Dozens of times. The trick was not
that hard when you got the feel of it, but she’d done it with time to
get her mind right and, anyway, she’d never done it with anything more
than a kitchen fire to warm her freezing feet. In theory it should be
just as easy with a big fire and a field of snow, right?

Right?

The fire began to roar up. Her father put his hand on her shoulder.
Tiffany jumped. She’d forgotten how quietly he could move.

‘What was that about choosing?’ he said. She’d forgotten what good
hearing he had, too.

‘It’s a … witch thing,’ she answered, trying not to look at his face.
‘So that if this … doesn’t work, it’s no one’s fault but mine.’ And this
is my fault, she added to herself. It’s unfair, but no one said it
wasn’t going to be.

Her father’s hand caught her chin and gently turned her head round. How
soft his hands are, Tiffany thought. Big man’s hands but soft as a
baby’s, because of the grease on the sheep’s fleeces.

‘We shouldn’t have asked you, should we …’ he said.

Yes, you should have asked me, Tiffany thought. The lambs are dying
under the dreadful snow. And I should have said no, I should have said
I’m not that good yet. But the lambs are dying under the dreadful snow!

There will be other lambs, said her Second Thoughts.

But these aren’t those lambs, are they? These are the lambs that are
dying, here and now. And they’re dying because I listened to my feet and
dared to dance with the wintersmith.

‘I can do it,’ she said.

Her father held her chin and stared into her eyes.

‘Are you sure, jiggit?’ he said. It was the nickname her grandmother had
had for her – Granny Aching, who never lost a lamb to the dreadful snow.
He’d never used it before. Why had it risen up in his mind now?

‘Yes!’ She pushed his hand away, and broke his gaze before she burst
into tears.

‘I … haven’t told your mother this yet,’ said her father, very slowly,
as if the words required enormous care, ‘but I can’t find your brother.
I think he was trying to help. Abe Swindell said he saw him with his
little shovel. Er … I’m sure he’s all right, but … keep an eye open for
him, will you? He’s got his red coat on.’

His face, with no expression at all, was heartbreaking to see. Little
Wentworth, nearly seven years old, always running after the men, always
wanting to be one of them, always trying to help … how easily a small
body could get overlooked … The snow was still coming fast. The horribly
wrong snowflakes were white on her father’s shoulders. It’s these little
things you remember when the bottom falls out of the world, and you’re
falling—

That wasn’t just unfair; that was … cruel.

Remember the hat you wear! Remember the job that is in front of you!
Balance! Balance is the thing. Hold balance in the centre, hold the
balance …

Tiffany extended her numb hands to the fire, to draw out the warmth.

‘Remember, don’t let the fire go out,’ she said.

‘I’ve got men bringing up wood from all over,’ said her father. ‘I told
’em to bring all the coal from the forge, too. It won’t run out of
feeding, I promise you!’

The flame danced and curved towards Tiffany’s hands. The trick was, the
trick, the trick … was to fold the heat somewhere close, draw it with
you and … balance. Forget everything else!

‘I’ll come with—’ her father began.

‘No! Watch the fire!’ Tiffany shouted, too loud, frantic with fear. ‘You
will do what I say!’

I am not your daughter today! her mind screamed. I am your witch! _I_
will protect _you_!

She turned before he could see her face and ran through the flakes,
along the track that had been cut towards the lower paddocks. The snow
had been trodden down into a lumpy, hummocky path, made slippery with
fresh snow. Exhausted men with shovels pressed themselves into the snow
banks on either side rather than get in her way.

She reached the wider area where other shepherds were digging into the
wall of snow. It tumbled in lumps around them.

‘Stop! Get back!’ her voice shouted, while her mind wept.

The men obeyed quickly. The mouth that had given that order had a pointy
hat above it. You didn’t argue with that.

Remember the heat, the heat, remember the heat, balance, balance …

This was witching cut to the bone. No toys, no wands, no boffo, no
headology, no tricks. All that mattered was how good you were.

But sometimes you had to trick yourself. She wasn’t the Summer Lady and
she wasn’t Granny Weatherwax. She needed to give herself all the help
she could.

She pulled the little silver horse out of her pocket. It was greasy and
stained, and she’d meant to clean it, but there had been no time, no
time …

Like a knight putting on his helmet, she fastened the silver chain
around her neck.

She should have practised more. She should have listened to people. She
should have listened to herself.

She took a deep breath and held out her hands on either side of her,
palms up. On her right hand, a white scar glowed.

‘Thunder on my right hand,’ she said. ‘Lightning in my left hand. Fire
behind me. Frost in front of me.’

She stepped forward until she was only a few inches away from the snow
bank. She could feel its coldness already pulling the heat out of her.
Well, so be it. She took a few deep breaths. This I choose to do …

‘Frost to fire,’ she whispered.

In the yard, the fire went white and roared like a furnace.

The snow wall spluttered, and then exploded into steam, sending chunks
of snow into the air. Tiffany walked forward slowly. Snow pulled back
from her hands like mist at sunrise. It melted in the heat of her,
becoming a tunnel in the deep drift, fleeing from her, writhing around
her in clouds of cold fog.

Yes! She smiled desperately. It was true. If you had the perfect centre,
if you got your mind right, you could balance. In the middle of the
see-saw is a place that never moves …

Her boots squelched over warm water. There was fresh green grass under
the snow, because the awful storm had been so late in the year. She
walked on, heading to where the lambing pens were buried.

_Her father stared at the fire. It was burning white-hot, like_ _a
furnace, eating through the wood as if driven by a gale. It was
collapsing into ashes in front of his eyes_ …

Water was pouring around Tiffany’s boots.

Yes! But don’t think about it! Hold the balance! More heat! Frost to
fire!

There was a bleat.

Sheep could live under the snow, at least for a while. But as Granny
Aching used to say, when the gods made sheep they must’ve left their
brains in their other coat. In a panic, and sheep were always just an
inch from panicking, they’d trample their own lambs.

Now ewes and lambs appeared, steaming and bewildered as the snow melted
around them, as if they were sculptures left behind.

Tiffany moved on, staring straight ahead of her, only just aware of the
excited cries of the men behind her. They were following her, pulling
the ewes free, cradling the lambs …

Her father yelled at the other men. Some of them were hacking at a farm
cart, throwing the wood down into the white-hot flames. Others were
dragging furniture up from the house. Wheels, tables, straw bales,
chairs – the fire took everything, gulped it down, and roared for more.
And there wasn’t any more.

No red coat. No red coat! Balance, balance. Tiffany waded on, water and
sheep pouring past her. The tunnel ceiling fell in a splashing and
slithering of slush. She ignored it. Fresh snowflakes fell down through
the hole and boiled in the air above her head. She ignored that, too.
And then, ahead of her … a glimpse of red.

Frost to fire! The snow fled, and there he was. She picked him up, held
him close, sent some of her heat into him, felt him stir, whispered: ‘It
weighed at least forty pounds! At least forty pounds!’

He coughed, and opened his eyes. Tears falling like melting snow, she
ran over to a shepherd and thrust the boy into his arms.

‘Take him to his mother! _Do it now!_’ The man grabbed the boy and ran,
frightened of her fierceness. Today she was their witch!

Tiffany turned back. There were more lambs to be saved.

Her father’s coat landed on the starving flames, glowed for a moment,
then fell into grey ashes. The other men were ready; they grabbed the
man as he went to jump after it and pulled him back, kicking and
shouting.

The flint cobbles had melted like butter. They spluttered for a moment,
then froze.

The fire went out.

Tiffany Aching looked up, into the eyes of the wintersmith.

And up on the roof of the cart shed the small voice belonging to Wee
Dangerous Spike said, ‘Ach, crivens!’

All this hasn’t happened yet. It might not happen at all. The future is
always a bit wobbly. Any little thing, like the fall of a snowflake or
the dropping of the wrong kind of spoon, can send it spinning off along
a new path. Or perhaps not.

Where it all _began_ was last autumn, on the day with a cat in it …

[image]


CHAPTER 2
MISS TREASON

This is Tiffany Aching, riding a broomstick though the mountain forests
a hundred miles away. It’s a very old broomstick and she’s flying it
just above the ground; it’s got two smaller broomsticks stuck on the
back like trainer wheels, to stop it tipping up. It belongs,
appropriately, to a very old witch called Miss Treason, who’s even worse
at flying than Tiffany and is 113 years old.

Tiffany is slightly more than one hundred years younger than that,
taller than she was even a month ago, and not as certain of anything at
all as she was a year ago.

She is training to be a witch. Witches usually wear black, but as far as
she could tell the only reason that witches wore black was because
they’d always worn black. This did not seem a good enough reason, so she
tended to wear blue or green. She didn’t laugh with scorn at finery,
because she’d never seen any.

You couldn’t escape the pointy hat, though. There was nothing magical
about a pointy hat except that it said that the person underneath it was
a witch. People paid attention to a pointy hat.

Even so, it was hard to be a witch in the village where you’d grown up.
It was hard to be a witch to people who knew you as ‘Joe Aching’s girl’
and had seen you running around with only your vest on when you were two
years old.

Going away had helped. Most people Tiffany knew hadn’t been more than
ten miles away from the spot where they were born, so if you’d gone to
mysterious foreign parts, that made you a bit mysterious, too. You came
back slightly different. A witch needed to be different.

Witching was turning out to be mostly hard work and really short on
magic of the ‘zap! glingle-glingle-glingle’ variety. There was no school
and nothing that was exactly like a lesson. But it wasn’t wise to try to
learn witching all by yourself, especially if you had a natural talent.
If you got it wrong you could go from ignorant to cackling in a week …

When you got right down to it, it was all about cackling. No one ever
talked about this, though. Witches said things like ‘You can never be
too old, too skinny or too warty’, but they never mentioned the
cackling. Not properly. They watched out for it, though, all the time.

It was all too easy to become a cackler. Most witches lived by
themselves (cat optional) and might go for weeks without ever seeing
another witch. In those times when people hated witches, they were often
accused of talking to their cats. Of course they talked to their cats.
After three weeks without an intelligent conversation that wasn’t about
cows, you’d talk to the _wall_. And that was an early sign of cackling.

‘Cackling’, to a witch, didn’t just mean nasty laughter. It meant your
mind drifting away from its anchor. It meant you losing your grip. It
meant loneliness and hard work and responsibility and other people’s
problems driving you crazy a little bit at a time, each bit so small
that you’d hardly notice it, until you thought that it was normal to
stop washing and wear a kettle on your head. It meant you thinking that
the fact you knew more than anyone else in your village made you better
than them. It meant thinking that right and wrong were negotiable. And,
in the end, it meant you ‘going to the dark’, as the witches said. That
was a bad road. At the end of that road were poisoned spinning-wheels
and gingerbread cottages.

What stopped this was the habit of visiting. Witches visited other
witches all the time, sometimes travelling quite a long way for a cup of
tea and a bun. Partly this was for gossip of course, because witches
love gossip, especially if it’s more exciting than truthful. But mostly
it was to keep an eye on one another.

Today, Tiffany was visiting Granny Weatherwax, who was in the opinion of
most witches (including Granny’s own) the most powerful witch in the
mountains. It was all very polite. No one said, ‘Not gone bats, then?’
or, ‘Certainly not! I’m as sharp as a spoon!’ They didn’t need to. They
understood what it was all about, so they talked of other things. But
when she was in a mood, Granny Weatherwax could be hard work.

She sat silently in her rocking-chair. Some people are good at talking,
but Granny Weatherwax was good at silence. She could sit so quiet and
still that she faded. You forgot she was there. The room became empty.

It upset people. It was probably meant to. But Tiffany had learned
silence, too, from Granny Aching, her real grandmother. Now she was
learning that if you made yourself really quiet you could become almost
invisible.

Granny Weatherwax was an expert.

Tiffany thought of it as the ‘I’m not here’ spell, if it was a spell.
She reasoned that everyone had something inside them that told the world
they were there. That was why you could often sense when someone was
behind you, even if they were making no sound at all. You were receiving
their ‘I am here!’ signal.

Some people had a very strong one. They were the people who got served
first in shops. Granny Weatherwax had an ‘I am here’ signal that bounced
off the mountains when she wanted it to; when she walked into a forest,
all the wolves and bears ran out the other side.

She could turn it off, too.

She was doing that now. Tiffany was having to concentrate to see her.
Most of her mind was telling her that there was no one there at all.

Well, she thought, that’s about enough of that. She coughed. Suddenly,
Granny Weatherwax had always been there.

‘Miss Treason is very well,’ said Tiffany.

‘A fine woman,’ said Granny. ‘Oh, yes.’

‘She has her funny ways,’ said Tiffany.

‘We’re none of us perfect,’ said Granny.

‘She’s trying some new eyes,’ said Tiffany.

‘That’s good.’

‘They’re a couple of ravens …’

‘It’s just as well,’ said Granny.

‘Better than the mouse she usually uses,’ said Tiffany.

‘I expect they are.’

There was a bit more of this, until Tiffany began to get annoyed at
doing all the work. There was such a thing as common politeness, after
all. Oh well, she knew what to do about it now.

‘Mrs Earwig’s written another book,’ she said.

‘I heard,’ said Granny. The shadows in the room maybe grew a little
darker.

Well, that explained the sulk. Even thinking about Mrs Earwig made
Granny Weatherwax angry. Mrs Earwig was all wrong to Granny Weatherwax.
She wasn’t born locally, which was almost a crime to begin with. She
wrote books, and Granny Weatherwax didn’t trust books. And Mrs Earwig
(pronounced ‘Ahwij’, at least by Mrs Earwig) believed in shiny wands and
magical amulets and mystic runes and the power of the stars, while
Granny Weatherwax believed in cups of tea, dry biscuits, washing every
morning in cold water and, well, she believed mostly in Granny
Weatherwax.

Mrs Earwig was popular among the younger witches, because if you did
witchcraft her way you could wear so much jewellery that you could
barely walk. Granny Weatherwax wasn’t popular with anyone much—

– except when they needed her. When Death was standing by the cradle or
the axe slipped in the woods and blood was soaking into the moss, you
sent someone hurrying to the cold, gnarly little cottage in the
clearing. When all hope was gone, you called for Granny Weatherwax,
because she was the best.

And she always came. Always. But popular? No. Need is not the same as
like. Granny Weatherwax was for when things were _serious_.

Tiffany did like her, though, in an odd kind of way. She thought Granny
Weatherwax liked her, too. She let Tiffany call her Granny to her face,
when all the other young witches had to call her Mistress Weatherwax.
Sometimes Tiffany thought that if you were friendly to Granny Weatherwax
she tested you to see how friendly you would stay. Everything about
Granny Weatherwax was a test.

‘The new book is called _First Flights in Witchcraft_,’ she went on,
watching the old witch carefully.

Granny Weatherwax smiled. That is, her mouth went up at the corners.

‘Hah!’ she said. ‘I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again, you can’t
learn witchin’ from books. Letice Earwig thinks you can become a witch
by goin’ shoppin’.’ She gave Tiffany a piercing look, as if she was
making up her mind about something. Then she said: ‘An’ I’ll wager she
don’t know how to do _this_.’

She picked up her cup of hot tea, curling her hands around it. Then she
reached out with her other hand and took Tiffany’s hand.

‘Ready?’ said Granny. ‘For wha—?’ Tiffany began, and then she felt her
hand get hot. The heat spread up her arm, warming it to the bone.

‘Feelin’ it?’

‘Yes!’

The warmth died away. And Granny Weatherwax, still watching Tiffany’s
face, turned the teacup upside down.

The tea dropped out in one lump. It was frozen solid.

Tiffany was old enough not to say, ‘How did you do that?’ Granny
Weatherwax didn’t answer silly questions or, for that matter, many
questions at all.

‘You moved the heat,’ she said. ‘You took the heat out of the tea and
moved it through you to me, yes?’

‘Yes, but it never touched me,’ said Granny triumphantly. ‘It’s all
about balance, do you see? Balance is the trick. Keep the balance and—’
She stopped. ‘You’ve ridden on a see-saw? One end goes up, one end goes
down. But the bit in the middle, right in the middle, that stays where
it is. Up-ness and down-ness go right through it. Don’t matter how high
or low the ends go, it keeps the balance.’ She sniffed. ‘Magic is mostly
movin’ stuff around.’

‘Can I learn that?’

‘I dare say. It’s not hard, if you get your mind right.’

‘Can you teach me?’

‘I just have. I showed you.’

‘No, Granny, you just showed me how to do it, not … _how_ to do it!’

‘Can’t tell you that. I know how I do it. How you do it’ll be different.
You’ve just got to get your mind right.’

‘How do I do that?’

‘How should I know? It’s your mind,’ snapped Granny. ‘Put the kettle on
again, will you? My tea’s gone cold.’

There was something almost spiteful about all this, but that was Granny.
She took the view that if you were capable of learning, you’d work it
out. There was no point in making it easy for people. Life wasn’t easy,
she said.

‘An’ I see you’re still wearing that trinket,’ said Granny. And she
didn’t like trinkets, a word she used to mean anything metal a witch
wore that wasn’t there to hold up, shut or fasten. That was ‘shoppin’’.

Tiffany touched the little silver horse she wore around her neck. It was
small, simple and meant a lot to her.

‘Yes,’ she said calmly. ‘I still am.’

‘What have you got in that basket?’ Granny said now, which was unusually
rude. Tiffany’s basket was on the table. It had a present in it, of
course. Everyone knew you took a small present along when you went
visiting, but you were supposed to be surprised when you were given it,
and say things like, ‘Ooo, you shouldn’t have.’

‘I brought you something,’ said Tiffany, swinging the big black kettle
onto the fire.

‘You’ve got no call to be bringing me presents, I’m sure,’ said Granny
sternly.

‘Yes, well,’ said Tiffany, and left it at that.

Behind her, she heard Granny lift the lid of the basket. There was a
kitten in it.

‘Her mother is Pinky, the Widow Cable’s cat,’ said Tiffany, to fill the
silence.

‘_You shouldn’t have_,’ growled the voice of Granny Weatherwax.

‘It was no trouble.’ Tiffany smiled at the fire.

‘I can’t be havin’ with cats.’

‘She’ll keep the mice down,’ said Tiffany, still not turning round.

‘Don’t have mice.’

Nothing for them to eat, thought Tiffany. Aloud, she said, ‘Mrs Earwig’s
got six big black cats.’ In the basket, the white kitten would be
staring up at Granny Weatherwax with the sad, shocked expression of all
kittens. You test me, I test you, Tiffany thought.

‘I don’t know what I shall do with it, I’m sure. It’ll have to sleep in
the goat shed,’ said Granny Weatherwax. Most witches had goats.

The kitten rubbed up against Granny’s legs and went ‘meep’.

When she left, later on, Granny Weatherwax said goodbye at the door and
very carefully shut the kitten outside.

Tiffany went across the clearing to where she’d tied up Miss Treason’s
broomstick.

But she didn’t get on, not yet. She stepped back up against a holly
bush, and went quiet until she wasn’t there any more, until everything
about her said: I’m not here.

Everyone could see pictures in the fire and in clouds. You just turned
that the other way around. You turned off that bit of yourself that said
you were there. You dissolved. Anyone looking at you would find you very
hard to see. Your face became a bit of leaf and shadow, your body a
piece of tree and bush. The other person’s mind would fill in the gaps.

Looking like just another piece of holly bush, she watched the door. The
wind had got up, warm but worrisome, shaking the yellow and red leaves
off the sycamore trees and whirring them around the clearing. The kitten
tried to bat a few of them out of the air and then sat there, making sad
little mewling noises. Any minute now, Granny Weatherwax would think
Tiffany had gone and would open the door and—

‘_Forgot something?_’ said Granny, by her ear.

She _was_ the bush.

‘Er … it’s very sweet. I just thought you might, you know, grow to like
it,’ said Tiffany, but she was thinking: Well, she could have got there
if she ran, but why didn’t I see her? Can you run and hide at the same
time?

‘Never you mind about me, my girl,’ said the witch. ‘You run along back
to Miss Treason and give her my best wishes, right now. But’ – and her
voice softened a little – ‘that was good hiding you did just then.
There’s many as would not have seen you. Why, I hardly heard your hair
growin’!’

When Tiffany’s stick had left the clearing, and Granny Weatherwax had
satisfied herself in other little ways that she had really gone, she
went back inside, carefully ignoring the kitten again.

After a few minutes, the door creaked open a little. It may have been
just a draught. The kitten trotted inside …

All witches were a bit odd. Tiffany had got used to odd, so that odd
seemed quite normal. There was Miss Level, for example, who had two
bodies, although one of them was imaginary. Mistress Pullunder, who bred
pedigree earthworms and gave them all names … well, she was hardly odd
at all, just a bit peculiar, and anyway earthworms were quite
interesting in a basically uninteresting kind of way. And there had been
Old Mother Dismass, who suffered from bouts of temporal confusion, which
can be quite strange when it happens to a witch; her mouth never moved
in time with her words, and sometimes her footsteps came down the stairs
ten minutes before she did.

But when it came to odd, Miss Treason didn’t just take the cake, but a
packet of biscuits too, with sprinkles on the top, and also a candle.

Where to start, when things were wall to wall odd …

Miss Eumenides Treason had gone blind when she was sixty years old. To
most people that would have been a misfortune, but Miss Treason was
skilled at Borrowing, a particular witch talent.

She could use the eyes of animals, reading what they saw right out of
their minds.

She’d gone deaf when she was seventy-five, too, but she’d got the hang
of it by now and used any ears she could find running around.

When Tiffany had first gone to stay with her, Miss Treason had used a
mouse for seeing and hearing, because her old jackdaw had died. It was a
bit worrying to see an old woman striding around the cottage with a
mouse in her outstretched hand, and very worrying if you said something
and the mouse was swung around to face you. It was amazing how creepy a
little pink wriggly nose could be.

The new ravens were a lot better. Someone in one of the local villages
had made the old woman a perch that fitted across her shoulders, one
bird on each side, and with her long white hair the effect was very,
well, witchy, although a bit messy down the back of her cloak by the end
of the day.

Then there was her clock. It was heavy and made of rusty iron by someone
who was more blacksmith than watchmaker, which was why it went
CLONK-CLANK instead of _tick-tock_. She wore it on her belt and could
tell the time by feeling the stubby little hands.

There was a story in the villages that the clock was Miss Treason’s
heart, which she’d used ever since her first heart died. But there were
lots of stories about Miss Treason.

You had to have a high threshold for odd to put up with her. It was
traditional that young witches travelled around and stayed with older
witches, to learn from a lot of experts in exchange for what Miss Tick
the witch-finder called ‘some help with the chores’, which meant ‘doing
all the chores’. Mostly, they left Miss Treason’s after one night.
Tiffany had stuck it out for three months so far.

Oh … and sometimes, when she was looking for a pair of eyes to look
through, Miss Treason would creep into yours. It was a strange prickly
sensation, like having someone invisible looking over your shoulder.

Yes … perhaps Miss Treason didn’t just take the cake, a packet of
biscuits with sprinkles on the top, and a candle, but also the trifle,
the sandwiches and a man who made amusing balloon animals afterwards.

She was weaving at her loom when Tiffany came in. Two beaks turned to
face her.

‘Ah, child,’ said Miss Treason, in a thin, cracked voice. ‘You have had
a good day.’

‘Yes, Miss Treason,’ said Tiffany obediently.

‘You have seen the girl Weatherwax and she is well.’ _Click-clack_ went
the loom. CLONK-CLANK went the clock.

‘Quite well,’ said Tiffany. Miss Treason didn’t ask questions. She just
told you the answers. The girl Weatherwax, Tiffany thought, as she
started to get their supper. But Miss Treason was very old.

And very scary. It was a fact. You couldn’t deny it. She didn’t have a
hooked nose and she did have all her teeth, even if they were yellow,
but after that she was a picture-book wicked witch. And her knees
clicked when she walked. And she walked very fast, with the help of two
sticks, scuttling around like a big spider. That was another strange
thing: the cottage was full of cobwebs, which Miss Treason ordered
Tiffany never to touch, but you never saw a spider.

Oh, and there was the thing about black, too. Most witches liked black,
but Miss Treason even had black goats and black chickens. The walls were
black. The floor was black. If you dropped a stick of liquorice, you’d
never find it again. And, to Tiffany’s dismay, she had to make her
cheeses black, which meant painting the cheeses with shiny black wax.
Tiffany was an excellent cheese-maker and it did keep them moist, but
Tiffany distrusted black cheeses. They always looked as though they were
plotting something.

And Miss Treason didn’t seem to need sleep. She hadn’t got much use for
night and day, now. When the ravens went to bed she’d summon up an owl,
and weave by owl-sight. An owl was particularly good, she said, because
it’d keep turning its head to watch the shuttle of the loom.
_Click-clack_ went the loom, and CLONK-CLANK went the clock, right back
at it.

Miss Treason, with her billowing black cloak and bandaged eyes and wild
white hair …

Miss Treason with her two sticks, wandering the cottage and garden in
the dark and frosty night, smelling the memory of flowers …

All witches had some particular skill, and Miss Treason delivered
Justice.

People would come from miles around to bring her their problems:

I know it’s my cow but he says it’s his!

She says it’s her land but my father left it to me!

… and Miss Treason would sit at the click-clacking loom with her back to
the room full of anxious people. The loom worried them. They watched it
as though they were afraid of it, and the ravens watched them.

They would stutter out their case, um-ing and ah-ing, while the loom
rattled away in the flickering candlelight. Oh, yes … the candlelight …

The candle-holders were two skulls. One had the word ENOCHI carved on
it; the other had the word ATHOOTITA.

The words meant ‘GUILT’ and ‘INNOCENCE’. Tiffany wished she didn’t know
that. There was no way that a girl brought up on the Chalk should know
that, because the words were in a foreign language, and an ancient one,
too. She knew them because of Dr Sensibility Bustle, D.M. Phil., B.El
L., Patricius Professor of Magic at Unseen University, who was in her
head.

Well, a tiny part of him, at least.

A couple of summers ago she had been taken over by a hiver, a … thing
that had been collecting minds for millions of years. Tiffany managed to
get it out of her head, but a few fragments had stayed tangled up in her
brain. One of these was a tiny lump of ego and a tangle of memories that
were all that remained of the late Dr Bustle. He wasn’t much trouble,
but if she looked at anything in a foreign language she could read it –
or, rather, hear Dr Bustle’s reedy voice translating it for her. (That
seemed to be all that was left of him, but she tried to avoid getting
undressed in front of a mirror.)

The candles had dripped wax all over the skulls, and people would keep
glancing at them the whole time they were in the room.

And then, when all the words had been said, the loom would stop with a
shock of sudden silence, and Miss Treason would turn round in her big
heavy chair, which had wheels on it, and remove the black blindfold from
her pearly grey eyes and say:

‘I have heard. Now I shall see. I shall see what is true.’

Some people would actually run away at this point, when she stared at
them in the light from the skulls. Those eyes that could not see your
face could somehow see your mind. When Miss Treason was looking right
through you, you could only be truthful or very, very stupid.

So no one ever argued with Miss Treason.

Witches were not allowed to be paid for using their talents, but
everyone who came to have a dispute settled by Miss Treason brought her
a present, usually food but sometimes clean used clothing, if it was
black, or a pair of old boots if they were her size. If Miss Treason
gave judgement against you, it was really not a good idea (everyone
said) to ask for your present back, as being turned into something small
and sticky often offends.

They said if you lied to Miss Treason you would die horribly within a
week. They said that kings and princes came to see Miss Treason at
night, asking questions about great affairs of state. They said that in
her cellar was a heap of gold, guarded by a demon with skin like fire
and three heads that would attack anyone it saw and eat their noses.

Tiffany suspected that at least two of these beliefs were wrong. She
knew the third one wasn’t true, because one day she’d gone down into the
cellar (with a bucket of water and a poker, just in case) and there was
nothing there but piles of potatoes and carrots. And a mouse, watching
her carefully.

Tiffany wasn’t scared, much. For one thing, unless the demon was good at
disguising itself as a potato, it probably didn’t exist. And the other
was that although Miss Treason looked bad and sounded bad and smelled
like old locked wardrobes, she didn’t feel bad.

First Sight and Second Thoughts, that’s what a witch had to rely on:
First Sight to see what’s really there, and Second Thoughts to watch the
First Thoughts to check that they were thinking right. Then there were
the Third Thoughts, which Tiffany had never heard discussed and
therefore kept quiet about; they were odd, seemed to think for
themselves, and didn’t usually turn up very often. Now they were telling
her that there was more to Miss Treason than met the eye.

And then one day, when she was dusting, Tiffany knocked over the skull
called Enochi.

… and suddenly, Tiffany knew a lot more about Miss Treason than Miss
Treason probably wanted anyone to know.

Tonight, as they were eating their stew (with black beans), Miss Treason
said, ‘The wind is rising. We must go soon. I would not trust the stick
above the trees on a night like this. There may be strange creatures
about.’

‘Go? We’re going out?’ Tiffany asked. They never went out in the
evenings, which was why the evenings always felt a hundred years long.

‘Indeed we are. They will be dancing tonight.’

‘Who will?’

‘The ravens will not be able to see and the owl will get confused,’ Miss
Treason went on. ‘I will need to use your eyes.’

‘Who will be dancing, Miss Treason?’ said Tiffany. She liked dancing,
but no one seemed to dance up here.

‘It is not far, but there will be a storm.’

So that was it; Miss Treason wasn’t going to tell. But it sounded
interesting. Besides, it would probably be an education to see anyone
that Miss Treason thought was strange.

Of course, it did mean Miss Treason would put her pointy hat on. Tiffany
hated this bit. She’d have to stand in front of Miss Treason and stare
at her, and feel the little tingle in her eyes as the ancient witch used
her as a kind of mirror.

The wind was roaring in the woods like a big dark animal by the time
they’d finished supper. It barged the door out of Tiffany’s hands when
she opened it and blew around the room, making the cords hum on the
loom.

‘Are you sure about this, Miss Treason?’ she said, trying to push the
door shut.

‘Don’t you say that to me! You will not say that to me! The dance must
be witnessed! I have never missed the dance!’ Miss Treason looked
nervous and edgy. ‘We must go! And you must wear black.’

‘Miss Treason, you _know_ I don’t wear black,’ said Tiffany.

‘Tonight is a night for black. You will wear my second-best cloak.’

She said it with a witch’s firmness, as if the idea of anyone disobeying
had never crossed her mind. She was 113 years old. She’d had a lot of
practice. Tiffany didn’t argue.

It’s not that I have anything against black, Tiffany thought as she
fetched the second-best cloak, but it’s just not me. When people say
witches wear black they actually mean that old ladies wear black.
Anyway, it’s not as if I’m wearing pink or something …

After that she had to wrap Miss Treason’s clock in pieces of blanket, so
that the CLONK-CLANK became CLONK-CLANK. There was no question of
leaving it behind. Miss Treason always kept the clock close to her.

While Tiffany got herself ready, the old woman wound the clock up with a
horrible graunching noise. She was always winding it up; sometimes she
stopped to do it in the middle of a judgement, with a room full of
horrified people.

There was no rain yet, but when they set out the air was full of twigs
and flying leaves. Miss Treason sat side-saddle on the broom, hanging on
for dear life, while Tiffany walked along towing it by means of a piece
of clothesline.

The sunset sky was still red and a gibbous moon was high, but the clouds
were being whipped across it, filling the woods with moving shadows.
Branches knocked together, and Tiffany heard the creak and crash as,
somewhere in the dark, one fell to the ground.

‘Are we going to the villages?’ Tiffany yelled above the din.

‘No! Take the path through the forest!’ shouted Miss Treason.

Ah, thought Tiffany, is this the famous ‘dancing about without your
drawers on’ that I’ve heard so much about? Actually, not very much
about, because as soon as anyone mentions it, someone else tells them to
shut up, so I really haven’t heard much about it at all, but haven’t
heard in a very meaningful way.

It was something people thought witches did, but witches didn’t think
they did it. Tiffany had to admit she could see why. Even hot summer
nights weren’t all that warm, and there were always hedgehogs and
thistles to worry about. Besides, you just couldn’t imagine someone like
Granny Weatherwax dancing about without— Well, you just couldn’t imagine
it, because if you did, it would make your head explode.

The wind died down as she took the forest track, still towing the
floating Miss Treason. But the wind had brought cold air with it and
then left it behind. Tiffany was glad of the cloak, even if it was
black.

She trudged on, taking different tracks when Miss Treason told her to,
until she saw firelight through the trees, in a little dip in the land.

‘Stop here and help me down, girl,’ said the old witch. ‘And listen
carefully. There are rules. One, you will not talk; two, you will look
only at the dancers; three, _you will not move until the dance is
finished_. I will not tell you twice!’

‘Yes, Miss Treason. It’s very cold up here.’

‘And will get colder.’

They headed for the distant light. What good is a dance you can only
watch? Tiffany wondered. It didn’t sound like much fun.

‘It isn’t meant to be fun,’ said Miss Treason.

Shadows moved across the firelight, and Tiffany heard the sound of men’s
voices. Then, as they reached the edge of the sunken ground, someone
threw water over the fire.

There was a hiss, and a cloud of smoke and steam rose among the trees.
It happened in a moment, and left a shock behind. The only thing that
had seemed alive here had died.

Dry fallen leaves crunched under her feet. The moon, in a sky swept
clean now of clouds, made little silver shapes on the forest floor. It
was some time before Tiffany realized that there were six men standing
in the middle of the clearing. They must have been wearing black;
against the moonlight, they looked like man-shaped holes into nothing.
They were in two lines of three, facing each other, but were so still
that after a while Tiffany wondered if she was imagining them.

There was the thud of a drumbeat: _bom_ … _bom_ … _bom_.

It went on for half a minute or so, and then stopped. But in the silence
of the cold woods the beat went on inside Tiffany’s head, and perhaps
that wasn’t the only head it thundered in, because the men were gently
nodding their heads, to keep the beat.

They began to dance.

The only noise was of their boots hitting the ground as the shadow men
wove in and out. But then Tiffany, her head full of the silent drum,
heard another sound. Her foot was tapping, all by itself.

She’d heard this beat before, she’d seen men dancing like this. But it
had been on warm days in bright sunshine. They’d worn little bells on
their clothes!

‘This is a Morris dance!’ she said, not quite under her breath.

‘Shush!’ hissed Miss Treason.

‘But this isn’t the right—’

‘Be silent!’

Blushing and angry in the dark, Tiffany took her eyes off the dancers
and defiantly looked around the clearing. There were other shadows
crowding in, human or at least human-shaped, but she couldn’t see them
clearly and maybe that was just as well.

It was getting colder, she was sure. White frost was crackling across
the leaves.

The beat went on. But it seemed to Tiffany that it wasn’t alone now, but
had picked up other beats, and echoes from inside her head.

Miss Treason could shush all she liked. It was a Morris dance. But it
was out of time!

The Morris men came to the village some time in May. You could never be
sure when, because they had to call at lots of villages along the Chalk,
and every village had a pub, which slowed them down.

They carried sticks and wore white clothes with bells on them, to stop
them creeping up on people. No one likes an unexpected Morris dancer.
Tiffany would wait outside the village with the other children and dance
behind them all the way in.

And then they used to dance on the village green to the beat of a drum,
banging their sticks together in the air, and then everyone would go to
the pub and summer would come.

Tiffany hadn’t been able to work out how that last bit happened. The
dancers danced, and then summer came – that was all anybody seemed to
know. Her father said that there had once been a year when the dancers
hadn’t turned up, and a cold wet spring had turned into a chilly autumn,
with the months between being filled with mists and rain and frosts in
August.

The sound of the drums filled her head now, making her feel dizzy. They
were wrong; there was something wrong—

And then she remembered the seventh dancer, the one they called the
Fool. He was generally a small man, wearing a battered top hat and
bright rags sewn all over his clothes. Mostly he wandered around holding
out the hat and grinning at people until they gave him money for beer.
But sometimes he’d put the hat down and whirl off into the dancers.
You’d expect there to be a massive collision of arms and legs, but it
never happened. Jumping and twirling among the sweating men, he always
managed to be where the other dancers weren’t.

The world was moving around her. She blinked. The drums in her head were
like thunder now, and there was one beat as deep as oceans. Miss Treason
was forgotten. So were the strange, mysterious crowd. Now there was only
the dance itself.

It twisted in the air like a living thing. But there was a space in it,
moving around. It was where she should be, she knew it. Miss Treason had
said no, but that had been a long time ago and how could Miss Treason
understand? What could she know? When did _she_ last dance? The dance
was in Tiffany’s bones now, calling to her. Six dancers were not enough!

She ran forward and jumped into the dance.

The eyes of the dancing men glared at her as she skipped and danced
between them, always being where they weren’t. The drums had her feet,
and they went where the beat sent them.

And then …

… there was someone else there.

It was like the feeling of someone behind her – but it was also the
feeling of someone in front of her, and beside her, and above her, and
below her, all at once.

The dancers froze, but the world spun. The men were just black shadows,
darker outlines in the darkness. The drumbeats stopped and there was one
long moment as Tiffany turned gently and silently, arms out, feet not
touching the ground, her face turned towards stars that were as cold as
ice and sharp as needles. It felt … wonderful.

A voice said: ‘Who Are You?’ It had an echo, or perhaps two people had
said it at almost the same time.

The beat came back, suddenly, and six men crashed into her.

A few hours later, in the small town of Dogbend, down on the plains, the
citizens threw a witch in the river, with her arms and legs tied
together.

This sort of thing never happened in the mountains, where witches had
respect, but down on the wide plains there were still people dumb enough
to believe the nastier stories. Besides, there wasn’t much to do in the
evenings.

However, it probably wasn’t often that the witch was given a cup of tea
and some biscuits before her ducking.

It had happened here because the people of Dogbend Did It By The Book.

The book was called: _Magavenatio Obtusis_.1

The townspeople didn’t know how the book had arrived. It had just turned
up one day, on a shelf in one of the shops.

They knew how to read, of course. You had to have a certain amount of
reading and writing to get on in the world, even in Dogbend. But they
didn’t trust books much, or the kind of people who read them.

This one, though, was a book on how to deal with witches. It looked
pretty authoritative, too, without too many long (and therefore
untrustworthy) words, like ‘marmalade’. At last, they told one another,
this is what we need. This is a sensible book. OK, it isn’t what you’d
expect, but remember that witch last year? We ducked her in the river
and then tried to burn her alive? Only she was too soggy, and got away?
Let’s not go through that again!

They paid particular attention to this bit:

It is very important, having caught your witch, not to harm her in any
way (yet!). On no account set fire to her! This is an error beginners
often fall into. It just makes them mad and they come back even
stronger. As everyone knows, the other way to get rid of a witch is to
throw her into a river or pond.

This is the best plan:

First, imprison her overnight in a moderately warm room and give her as
much soup as she asks for. Carrot and lentil might do, but for best
results we recommend leek and potato made with a good beef stock. This
has been proven to seriously harm her magical powers. Do not give her
tomato soup: it will make her very powerful.

To be on the safe side, put a silver coin in each of her boots. She will
not be able to pull them out because they will burn her fingers.

Provide her with warm blankets and a pillow. This will trick her into
going to sleep. Lock the door and see that no one enters.

About one hour before dawn, go into the room. Now, you might think the
way to do this would be to rush in shouting. NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER
FROM THE TRUTH. Tiptoe in gently, leave a cup of tea by the sleeping
witch, tiptoe back to the doorway and cough quietly. This is important.
If awakened suddenly, she could get very nasty indeed.

Some authorities recommend a chocolate biscuit with the tea; others say
that a ginger biscuit will be enough. If you value your life, do not
give her a plain biscuit, because sparks will fly out of her ears. When
she awakes, recite this powerful mystic rune, which will stop her
turning into a swarm of bees and flying away:

ITI SAPIT EYI MA NASS

When she has finished the tea and biscuits, tie her hands and feet with
rope using No. 1 Bosun’s knots and throw her in the water. IMPORTANT
SAFETY NOTE: do this before it starts getting light. Do not stay to
watch!

Of course, this time some people did. And what they saw was the witch
sinking and not coming up again, while her wicked pointy hat floated
away. Then they went home for breakfast.

In this particular river, nothing much happened for several minutes
more. Then the pointy hat started to move towards a thick patch of
reeds. It stopped there, and rose very slowly. A pair of eyes peered out
from underneath the brim …

When she was sure that there was no one about, Miss Perspicacia Tick,
teacher and witch-finder, crawled up the bank on her stomach and then
legged it away at high speed into the woods just as the sun came up.
She’d left a bag with a clean dress and some fresh underwear stuck in a
badger’s sett, along with a box of matches (she never carried matches in
her pocket if there was a danger of being caught, in case it gave people
ideas).

Well, she thought, as she dried out in front of a fire, things could
have been worse. Thank goodness the village still had someone left who
could read, or else she would have been in a pretty pickle. Maybe it was
a good idea that she’d had the book printed in big letters.

It was in fact Miss Tick who had written _Witch-hunting for Dumb
People_, and she made sure that copies of it found their way into those
areas where people still believed that witches should be burned or
drowned.

Since the only witch ever likely to pass through these days was Miss
Tick herself, it meant that if things did go wrong she’d get a good
night’s sleep and a decent meal before being thrown into the water. The
water was no problem at all to Miss Tick, who had been to the Quirm
College for Young Ladies, where you had to have an icy dip every morning
to build Moral Fibre. And a No. 1 Bosun’s knot was very easy to undo
with your teeth, even underwater.

Oh, yes, she thought, as she emptied her boots, and she’d got two silver
sixpences, too. Really, the people of the village of Dogbend were
getting very stupid indeed. Of course, that’s what happened when you got
rid of your witches. A witch was just someone who knew a bit more than
you did. That’s what the name meant. And some people didn’t like anyone
who knew more than they did, so these days the wandering teachers and
the travelling librarians steered clear of the place. The way things
were going, if the people of Dogbend wanted to throw stones at anyone
who knew more than them, they’d soon have to throw them at the pigs.

The place was a mess. Unfortunately, there was a girl aged eight there
who was definitely showing promise, and Miss Tick dropped in sometimes
to keep an eye on her. Not as a witch, obviously, because although she
liked a cold dip in the morning, you could have too much of a good
thing. She disguised herself as a humble apple-seller, or a
fortune-teller. (Witches don’t usually do fortune-telling, because if
they did they’d be too good at it. People don’t want to know what’s
really going to happen, only that it’s going to be nice. But witches
don’t add sugar.)

Unfortunately the spring on Miss Tick’s stealth hat had gone wrong while
she was walking down the main street and the point had popped up. Even
Miss Tick hadn’t been able to talk her way out of that one. Oh well,
she’d have to make other arrangements now. Witch-finding was always
dangerous. You had to do it, though. A witch growing up all alone was a
sad and dangerous child …

She stopped, and stared at the fire. Why had she just thought about
Tiffany Aching? Why now?

Working quickly, she emptied her pockets and started a shamble.

Shambles worked. That was about all you could say about them for
certain. You made them out of some string and a couple of sticks and
anything you had in your pocket at the time. They were a witch’s
equivalent of those knives with fifteen blades and three screwdrivers
and a tiny magnifying glass and a thing for extracting earwax from
chickens.

You couldn’t even say precisely what they did, although Miss Tick
thought they were a way of knowing what things the hidden bits of your
own mind somehow knew. You had to make a shamble from scratch every
time, and only from things in your pockets. There was no harm in having
interesting things in your pockets, though, just in case.

After less than a minute Miss Tick had crafted a shamble, out of:

One twelve-inch ruler

One bootlace

One piece of second-hand string

Some black cotton

One pencil

One pencil-sharpener

One small stone with a hole in it

One matchbox containing a mealworm called Roger, along with a scrap of
bread for him to eat, because every shamble must contain something
living

About half a packet of Mrs Sheergold’s

Lubricated Throat Lozenges

A button

It looked like a cat’s cradle, or maybe the tangled strings of a very
strange puppet.

Miss Tick stared at it, waiting for it to read her. Then the ruler swung
round, the throat sweets exploded in a little cloud of red dust, the
pencil shot away and stuck in Miss Tick’s hat and the ruler was covered
in frost.

That was not supposed to happen.

Miss Treason sat downstairs in her cottage and watched Tiffany sleeping
in the low bedroom above her. She did this through a mouse, which was
sitting on the tarnished brass bedstead. Beyond the grey windows (Miss
Treason hadn’t bothered to clean them for fifty-three years and Tiffany
hadn’t been able to shift all the dirt), the wind howled among the
trees, even though it was mid-afternoon.

He’s looking for her, she thought, as she fed a piece of ancient cheese
to another mouse on her lap. But he won’t find her. She is safe here.

Then the mouse looked up from the cheese. It had heard something.

‘I told yez! She’s here somewhere, fellas!’

‘I dinnae see why we cannae just talk tae the ol’ hag. We get along fine
wi’ hags.’

‘Mebbe, but this one is a terrrrrible piece o’ work. They say she’s got
a fearsome demon in her tattie cellar.’

Miss Treason looked puzzled. ‘Them?’ she whispered to herself. The
voices were coming from beneath the floor. She sent the mouse scurrying
across the boards and into a hole.

‘I dinnae want to disappoint ye, but we’s in a cellar right here, and
it’s full o’ tatties.’

After a while a voice said: ‘So where izzit?’

‘Mebbe it’s got the day off?’

‘What’s a demon need a day off for?’

‘Tae gae an’ see its ol’ mam an’ dad, mebbe?’

‘Oh, aye? Demons have mams, do they?’

‘Crivens! Will ye lot stop arguin’! She might hear us!’

‘Nae, she’s blind as a bat and deaf as a post, they say.’

Mice have very good hearing. Miss Treason smiled as the hurrying mouse
came out in the rough old stone wall of the cellar, near the floor.

She looked though its eyes. It could see quite well in the gloom, too.

A small group of little men were creeping across the floor. Their skins
were blue and covered with tattoos and dirt. They all wore very grubby
kilts, and each one had a sword, as big as he was, strapped to his back.
And they all had red hair, a real orange-red, with scruffy pigtails. One
of them wore a rabbit skull as a helmet. It would have been more scary
if it hadn’t kept sliding over his eyes.

In the room above, Miss Treason smiled again. So they’d heard of Miss
Treason? But they hadn’t heard enough.

As the four little men squirmed through an old rat hole to get out of
the cellar, they were watched by two more mice, three different beetles
and a moth. They tiptoed carefully across the floor, past an old witch
who was clearly asleep – right up until she banged on the arms of her
chair and bellowed:

‘_Jings! I see you there, ye wee schemies!_’

The Feegles reacted in instant panic, colliding with one another in
shock and awe.

‘I dinnae remember tellin’ ye tae move!’ shouted Miss Treason. Grinning
horribly.

‘Oh, waily, waily, waily! She’s got the knowin’ o’ the speakin’!’
someone sobbed.

‘Ye’re Nac Mac Feegles, right? But I didnae ken the clan markin’s. Calm
doon, I ain’t gonna deep-fry ye. You! What’s your name?’

‘Ah’m Rob Anybody, Big Man o’ the Chalk Hill clan,’ said the one with
the rabbit-skull helmet. ‘And—’

‘Aye? Big Man, are ye? Then ye’ll do me the courtesy an’ tak’ off yon
bony bonnet ’ere ye speak tae me!’ said Miss Treason, enjoying herself
no end. ‘An’ stannit up straight! I will have nae slouchin’ in this
hoose!’

Instantly, all four Feegles stood to rigid attention.

‘Right!’ said Miss Treason. ‘An’ who are the rest o’ yez?’

‘This is my brother Daft Wullie, miss,’ said Rob Anybody, shaking the
shoulder of the Feegle who was an instant wailer. He was staring in
horror at Enochi and Athootita.

‘An’ the other two of you … I mean, twa o’ ye?’ said Miss Treason. ‘You,
there. I mean ye. Ye have the mousepipes. Are ye a gonnagle?’

‘Aye, mistress,’ said a Feegle who looked neater and cleaner than the
others, although it had to be said that there were things living under
old logs that were cleaner and neater than Daft Wullie.

‘And your name is … ?’

‘Billy Bigchin, mistress.’

‘You’re staring hard at me, Billy Bigchin,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Are ye
afraid?’

‘No, mistress, I wuz admirin’ ye. I’ does my heart good tae see a witch
so … witchy.’

‘It does, does it?’ said Miss Treason suspiciously. ‘Are ye sure ye’re
no’ afraid o’ me, Mr Billy Bigchin?’

‘No, mistress. But I will be if it makes ye happy,’ said Billy
carefully.

‘Hah!’ said Miss Treason. ‘Well, I see we have— hae a clever one here.
Who is your big friend, Mr Billy?’

Billy elbowed Big Yan in the ribs. Despite his size, which for a Feegle
was huge, he was looking very nervous. Like a lot of people with big
muscles, he got edgy about people who were strong in other ways.

‘He’s Big Yan, mistress,’ Billy Bigchin supplied, while Big Yan stared
at his feet.

‘I see he’s got a necklace o’ big teeth,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Human
teeth?’

‘Aye, mistress. Four, mistress. One for every man he’s knocked out.’

‘Are you talking about human men?’ asked Miss Treason in astonishment.

‘Aye, mistress,’ said Billy Bigchin. ‘Mostly he drops on ’em heid first
oot o’ a tree. He has a verrae tough heid,’ he added, in case this
wasn’t clear.

Miss Treason sat back. ‘And now you will kindly explain why ye were
creepin’ aboot here in my hoose,’ she said. ’Come along, now!’

There was a tiny, tiny pause before Rob Anybody said happily, ‘Oh, weel,
that’s easy. We wuz huntin’ the haggis.’

‘No, you weren’t,’ said Miss Treason sharply, ‘because a haggis is a
pudding of sheep’s offal and meat, well spiced and cooked in a sheep’s
stomach.’

‘Ah, that is only when ye cannae find the real thing, mistress,’ said
Rob Anybody carefully. ‘’Tis no’ a patch on the real thing. Oh, a canny
beast is the haggis, which makes its burrows in – tattie cellars …’

‘And that’s the truth? You were hunting the haggis? Is it, Daft Wullie?’
said Miss Treason, her voice suddenly sharp. All eyes, including a pair
belonging to an earwig, turned to the luckless Wullie.

‘Er … aye … oooh … aarg … waily, waily, waily!’ moaned Daft Wullie, and
dropped to his knees. ‘Please dinnae do somethin’ horrible tae me,
mistress!’ he begged. ‘Yon earwiggy is givin’ me a dreadful look!’

‘Very well, we shall start again,’ said Miss Treason. She reached up and
tore off her blindfold. The Feegles stepped back as she touched the
skulls on either side of her.

‘I do not need eyes to smell a lie when it comes calling,’ she said.
‘Tell me why you are here. Tell me … again.’

Rob Anybody hesitated for a moment. This was, in the circumstances, very
brave of him. Then he said: ‘’Tis aboot the big wee hag, mistress, we
came.’

‘The big wee— Oh, you mean Tiffany?’

‘Aye!’

‘We is under one o’ them big birds,’ said Daft Wullie, keeping his eyes
averted from the witch’s blind stare.

‘He means a geas, miss,’ said Rob Anybody, glaring at his brother. ‘It’s
like a—’

‘– a tremendous obligation that you cannot disobey,’ said Miss Treason.
‘I ken what a geas is. But why?’

Miss Treason had heard a lot of things in 113 years, but now she
listened in astonishment to a story about a human girl who had, for a
few days at least, been the kelda of a clan of Nac Mac Feegles. And if
you were their kelda, even for a few days, they’d watch over you … for
ever.

‘An’ she’s the hag o’ our hills,’ said Billy Bigchin. ‘She cares for
them, keeps them safe. But …’

He hesitated, and Rob Anybody continued: ‘Our kelda is havin’ dreams.
Dreams o’ the future. Dreams o’ the hills all froze an’ everyone deid
an’ the big wee hag wearin’ a crown o’ ice!’

‘My goodness!’

‘Aye, an’ there wuz more!’ said Billy, throwing out his arms. ‘She saw a
green tree growin’ in a land o’ ice! She saw a ring o’ iron! She saw a
man with a nail in his heart! She saw a plague of chickens an’ a cheese
that walks like a man!’

There was silence, and then Miss Treason said: ‘The first two, the tree
and the ring, no problem there, good occult … symbolism. The nail, too,
very metaphorical. I’m a bit doubtful about the cheese – could she mean
Horace? – and the chickens … I’m not sure you can have a plague of
chickens, can you?’

‘Jeannie wuz very firm about them,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘She’s dreamed
many strange and worryin’ things, so we thought we might just see how
the big wee hag wuz gettin’ along.’

‘And so the four o’ yez came all the way?’ said Miss Treason.

‘Oh, we brought a few o’ the lads,’ said Rob. ‘We didnae want to bring
’em all at once, ye ken. They’re oot in the woods.’

‘How many of them are there, then?’

‘Oh, aboot five hundred, gi’ or tak’ a spog.’

Miss Treason’s various eyes stared at him. Rob Anybody stared back with
an expression of ferocious honesty, and did not flinch.

‘This seems an honourable enterprise,’ she said. ‘Why start by lying?’

‘Oh, the lie wuz goin’ tae be a lot more interestin’,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘The truth of the matter seems quite interesting to _me_,’ said Miss
Treason.

‘Mebbe, but I wuz plannin’ on puttin’ in giants an’ pirates an’ magic
weasels,’ Rob declared. ‘Real value for money!’

‘Oh well,’ said Miss Treason. ‘When Miss Tick brought Tiffany to me she
did say she was guarded by strange powers.’

‘Aye,’ said Rob Anybody proudly. ‘That’d be us, right enough.’

‘But Miss Tick is a rather bossy woman,’ said Miss Treason. ‘I am sorry
to say I didn’t listen much to what she said. She is always telling me
that these gels are really keen to learn, but mostly they are just
flibbertigibbets who want to be a witch to impress the young men, and
they run away after a few days. This one doesn’t, oh no! She runs
towards things! Did you know she tried to dance with the wintersmith!’

‘Aye. We ken. We were there,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘You were?’

‘Aye. We followed yez.’

‘No one saw you there. I would have known if they did,’ Miss Treason
said.

‘Aye? Weel, we’re good at no one seein’ us,’ said Rob Anybody, smiling.
‘It’s amazin’, the people who dinnae see us.’

‘She actually tried to dance with the wintersmith,’ Miss Treason
repeated. ‘I told her not to.’

‘Ach, people’re always telling us no’ tae do things,’ said Rob Anybody.
‘That’s how we ken what’s the most interestin’ things tae do!’

Miss Treason stared at him with the eyes of one mouse, two ravens,
several moths and an earwig.

‘Indeed,’ she said, and sighed. ‘Yes. The trouble with being this old,
you know, is that being young is so far away from me now that it seems
sometimes that it happened to someone else. A long life is not what it’s
cracked up to be, that is a fact. It—’

‘The wintersmith is seekin’ for the big wee hag, mistress,’ said Rob
Anybody. ‘We saw her dancin’ wi’ the wintersmith. Now he is seekin’ her.
We can hear him in the howl o’ the wind.’

‘I know,’ said Miss Treason. She stopped, and listened for a moment.
‘The wind has dropped,’ she stated. ‘He’s _found_ her.’

She snatched up her walking-sticks and scuttled towards the stairs,
going up them with amazing speed. Feegles swarmed past her into the
bedroom, where Tiffany lay on a narrow bed.

A candle burned in a saucer at each corner of the room.

‘But _how_ has he found her?’ Miss Treason demanded. ‘I had her hidden!
You, blue men, fetch wood now!’ She glared at them. ‘I said, fetch—’

She heard a couple of thumps. Dust was settling. The Feegles were
watching Miss Treason expectantly. And sticks, a lot of sticks, were
piled in the tiny bedroom fireplace.

‘Ye did well,’ she said. ‘An’ not tae soon!’

Snowflakes were drifting down the chimney.

Miss Treason crossed her walking-sticks in front of her and stamped her
foot hard.

‘Wood burn, fire blaze!’ she shouted. The wood in the grate burst into
flame. But now frost was forming on the window, ferny white tendrils
snapping across the glass with a crackling sound.

‘I am not putting up with this at my age!’ said the witch.

Tiffany opened her eyes, and said: ‘What’s happening?’

1 Er … _Witch-hunting for Dumb People_.

[image]


CHAPTER 3
THE SECRET OF BOFFO

It is not good, being in a sandwich of bewildered dancers. They were
heavy men. Tiffany was Aching all over. She was covered in bruises,
including one the shape of a boot that she wasn’t going to show to
_anyone_.

Feegles filled every flat surface in Miss Treason’s weaving room. She
was working at her loom with her back to the room, because she said that
this helped her think, but since she was Miss Treason this didn’t matter
much. There were plenty of eyes and ears she could use after all. The
fire burned hot, and there were candles everywhere. Black ones, of
course.

Tiffany was angry. Miss Treason hadn’t shouted, hadn’t even raised her
voice. She’d just sighed and said, ‘Foolish child,’ which was a whole
lot worse, mostly because that’s just what Tiffany knew she’d been. One
of the dancers had helped bring her back to the cottage. She couldn’t
remember anything about that at all.

A witch didn’t do things because they seemed a good idea at the time!
That was practically cackling! You had to deal every day with people who
were foolish and lazy and untruthful and downright unpleasant, and you
could certainly end up thinking that the world would be considerably
improved if you gave them a slap. But you didn’t because, as Miss Tick
had once explained: a) it would only make the world a better place for a
very short time; b) it would then make the world a slightly worse place;
and c) you’re not supposed to be as stupid as they are.

Her feet had moved, and she’d listened to them. She ought to have been
listening to her head. Now she had to sit by Miss Treason’s fire with a
tin hot water-bottle on her lap and a shawl around her.

‘So the wintersmith is a kind of god?’ she said.

‘That kind o’ thing, yes,’ said Billy Bigchin. ‘But not the prayin’-to
kinda god. He just … makes winters. It’s his job, ye ken.’

‘He’s an elemental,’ said Miss Treason from her loom.

‘Aye,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Gods, elementals, demons, spirits … sometimes
it’s hard to tell ’em apart wi’oot a map.’

‘And the dance is to welcome winter?’ said Tiffany. ‘That doesn’t make
sense! The Morris dance is to welcome the coming of the summer, yes,
that’s—’

‘Are you an infant?’ said Miss Treason. ‘The year is round! The wheel of
the world must spin! That is why up here they dance the Dark Morris, to
balance it. They welcome the winter because of the new summer deep
inside it!’

_Clack-clack_ went the loom. Miss Treason was weaving a new cloth, of
brown wool.

‘Well, all right,’ said Tiffany. ‘We welcomed it … him. That doesn’t
mean he’s supposed to come looking for me!’

‘Why did you join the dance?’ Miss Treason demanded.

‘Er … There was a space, and—’

‘Yes. A space. A space not intended for you. Not for you, foolish child.
You danced with him, and now he wants to meet such a bold girl. I have
never heard of such a thing! I want you to fetch the third book from the
right on the second shelf from the top of my bookcase.’ She handed
Tiffany a heavy black key. ‘Can you manage to do even that?’

Witches didn’t need to slap the stupid, not when they had a sharp tongue
that was always ready.

Miss Treason also had several shelves of books, which was unusual for
one of the older witches. It was high up, the books looked big and
heavy, and up until now Miss Treason had forbidden Tiffany to dust them,
let alone unlock the big black iron band that secured them to the
shelves. People who came here always gave them a nervous look. Books
were dangerous.

Tiffany unlocked the bands and wiped away the dust. Ah … the books were,
like Miss Treason, not everything they seemed. They looked like magic
books, but they had names like _An Encyclopaedia of Soup_. There was a
dictionary. Next to it, the book Miss Treason had asked for was covered
in cobwebs.

Still blushing with shame and anger, she got the book down, fighting to
get it free of the webs. Some of them went _pling!_ as they snapped, and
dust fell off the top of the pages. When she opened it, it smelled old
and parchmenty, like Miss Treason. The title, in gold lettering that had
almost rubbed away, was _Chaffinch’s Ancient and Classical Mythology_.
It was full of bookmarks.

‘Pages eighteen and nineteen,’ said Miss Treason, her head not moving.
Tiffany turned to them.

‘The Dacne of the Sneasos?’ she said. ‘Is that supposed to be the Dance
of the Seasons?’

‘Regrettably, the artist Don Weizen de Yoyo, whose famous masterpiece
that was, did not have the same talent with letters as he had with
painting,’ said Miss Treason. ‘They worried him, for some reason. I
notice you mention the words before the pictures. You are a bookish
child.’

The pictures were … strange. They showed two figures. Tiffany hadn’t
seen fancy dress. There wasn’t the money at home for that sort of thing.
But she’d read about it and this was pretty much what she’d imagined.

The page showed a man and a woman – or, at least, things that looked
like a man and a woman. The woman was labelled ‘Summer’ and was tall and
blonde and beautiful, and therefore to the short brown-haired Tiffany a
figure of immediate distrust. She was carrying what looked like a big
basket shaped like a shell or horn, which was full of fruit.

The man, ‘Winter’, was old and bent and grey. Icicles glittered on his
beard.

‘Ach, that’s wha’ the wintersmith would look like, sure enough,’ said
Rob Anybody, strolling across the page. ‘Ol’ Frosty.’

‘Him?’ said Tiffany. ‘_That’s_ the wintersmith? He looks a hundred years
old!’

‘A youngster, eh?’ said Miss Treason nastily.

‘Dinnae let him kiss ye, or yer nose might turn blue and fall off!’ said
Daft Wullie cheerfully.

‘Daft Wullie, don’t you dare say things like that!’ said Tiffany.

‘I wuz just tryin’ to lighten the mood, ye ken,’ said Wullie, looking
sheepish.

‘That’s an artist’s impression, of course,’ said Miss Treason.

‘What does that mean?’ said Tiffany, staring at the picture. _It was
wrong._ She knew it. This wasn’t what he was like at all …

‘It means he made it up,’ said Billy Bigchin. ‘He wouldnae ha’ seen him,
noo, would he? No one’s seen the wintersmith.’

‘Yet!’ said Daft Wullie.

‘Wullie,’ said Rob Anybody, turning to his brother, ‘you ken I told ye
aboot makin’ tactful remarks?’

‘Aye, Rob, I ken weel,’ said Wullie obediently.

‘What ye just said wuz not one o’ them,’ said Rob. Wullie hung his head.
‘Sorry, Rob.’

Tiffany clenched her fists. ‘I didn’t mean all this to happen!’

Miss Treason turned her chair and removed her grey bandage with some
solemnity.

‘Then what did you mean? Will you tell me? Did you dance out of youth’s
inclination to disobey old age? To mean is to think. Did you think at
all? Others have joined in the dance before now. Children, drunkards,
youths for a silly bet … nothing happened. The spring and autumn dances
are … just an old tradition, most people would say. Just a way of
marking when ice and fire exchange their dominion over the world. Some
of us think we know better. We think something happens. For you, the
dance became real, and something _has_ happened. And now the wintersmith
is seeking you.’

‘Why?’ Tiffany managed.

‘I don’t know. When you were dancing, did you see anything? Hear
anything?’

How could you describe the feeling of being everywhere and everything?
Tiffany wondered. She didn’t try.

‘I … thought I heard a voice, or maybe two voices,’ she mumbled. ‘Er,
they asked me who I was.’

‘Int-ter-rest-ting,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Two voices? I will consider the
implications. What I can’t understand is how he found you. I will think
about that. In the meantime, I expect it would be a good idea to wear
warm clothing.’

‘Aye,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘the wintersmith cannae abide the heat. Oh, I’d
be forgettin’ my ain head next! We brought a wee letter from that hollow
tree down in the forest. Gi’ it to the big wee hag, Wullie. We picked it
up on the way past.’

‘A letter?’ said Tiffany, as the loom clacked behind her and Daft Wullie
began to pull a grubby rolled-up envelope from his spog.

‘It’s from that wee heap o’ jobbies at the castle back hame,’ Rob went
on, as his brother hauled. ‘He says he bides fine and hopes ye do
likewise, an’ he’s lookin’ forward to you bein’ back hame soon, an’
there’s lots o’ stuff about how the ships are doin’ an’ suchlike, no’
verrae interesting in ma opinion, an’ he’s writ S.W.A.L.K. on the
bottom, but we havenae worked out what that means yet.’

‘You read my letter?’ said Tiffany, in horror.

‘Oh, aye,’ said Rob with pride. ‘Nae problem. Billy Bigchin here gave me
a wee hint with some o’ the longer words, but it was mostly me, aye.’ He
beamed, but the grin faded as he watched Tiffany’s expression. ‘Ach, I
ken ye’re a wee bitty upset that we opened yon envelope thingy,’ he
explained. ‘But that’s OK, ’cuz we glued it up again wi’ slug. Ye
wouldnae ever know it’d been read.’

He coughed, because Tiffany was still glaring at him. All women were a
bit scary to the Feegles, and witches were the worst. At last, when he
was really nervous, Tiffany said: ‘How did you know where that letter
would be?’

She glanced sideways at Daft Wullie. He was chewing the edge of his
kilt. He only ever did this when he was frightened.

‘Er … would you accept a wee bitty lie?’ Rob said.

‘No!’

‘It’s interestin’. There’s dragons an’ unicorns in it—’

‘No. I want the truth!’

‘Ach, it’s so boring. We go to the Baron’s castle an’ read the letters
you send him, an’ ye said the postman knows to leave letters tae you in
the hollow tree by the waterfall,’ said Rob.

If the wintersmith had got into the cottage, the air couldn’t have got
any colder.

‘He keeps the letters fra’ you in a box under his—’ Rob began, and then
shut his eyes as Tiffany’s patience parted with a twang even louder than
Miss Treason’s strange cobwebs.

‘Don’t you know it’s wrong to read other people’s letters?’ she
demanded.

‘Er …’ Rob Anybody began.

‘And you broke into the Baron’s cast—’

‘Ah, ah, ah, no, no, no!’ said Rob, jumping up and down. ‘Ye cannae get
us on that one! We just walked in through one of them little wee slits
for the firin’ o’ the arrows—’

‘And then you read my personal letters sent personally to Roland?’ said
Tiffany. ‘They were personal!’

‘Oh, aye,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘But dinnae fash yersel’, we willnae tell
anyone what was in ’em.’

‘We ne’er tell a soul what’s in your diary, after all,’ said Daft
Wullie. ‘Not e’en the bits wi’ the flowers ye draw aroound them.’

Miss Treason is grinning to herself behind me, Tiffany thought. I just
know she is. But she’d run out of nasty tones of voice. You did that
after talking to the Feegles for any length of time.

You were their Kelda, her Second Thoughts reminded her. They think they
have a solemn duty to protect you. It doesn’t matter what you think.
They’re going to make your life sooo complicated.

‘Don’t read my letters,’ she said, ‘and don’t read my diary, either.’

‘OK,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘Promise?’

‘Oh, aye.’

‘But you promised last time!’

‘Oh, aye.’

‘Cross your heart and hope to die?’

‘Oh, aye, nae problemo.’

‘And that’s the promise of an untrustworthy, lying, stealing Feegle, is
it?’ said Miss Treason. ‘Because ye believe ye’re deid already, do ye
no’? That’s what ye people think, right?’

‘Oh, aye, mistress,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Thank ye for drawing my
attention tae that.’

‘In fact, Rob Anybody, ye ha’ nae intention o’ keepin’ any promise at
all!’

‘Aye, mistress,’ said Rob proudly. ‘Not puir wee weak promises like
that. Becuz, ye see, ’tis oor solemn destiny to guard the big wee hag.
We mus’ lay doon oor lives for her if it comes to it.’

‘How can ye do that when ye’re deid already?’ said Miss Treason sharply.

‘That’s a bit o’ a puzzler, right enough,’ said Rob, ‘so probably we’ll
lay down the lives o’ any scunners who do wrong by her.’

Tiffany gave up, and sighed. ‘I’m almost thirteen,’ she said. ‘I can
look after myself.’

‘Hark at Miss Self-Reliant,’ said Miss Treason, but not in a
particularly nasty way. ‘Against the wintersmith?’

‘What does he want?’ said Tiffany.

‘I told you. Perhaps he wants to find out what kind of girl was so
forward as to dance with him?’ said Miss Treason.

‘It was my feet! I said I didn’t mean to!’

Miss Treason turned round in her chair. How many eyes is she using?
Tiffany’s Second Thoughts wondered. The Feegles? The ravens? The mice?
All of them? How many of me is she seeing? Is she using the insects,
with dozens of glittery eyes?

‘Oh, that’s all right then,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Once again, you didn’t
mean it. A witch takes responsibility! Have you learned _nothing_,
child?’

Child. That was a terrible thing to say to anyone who was almost
thirteen. Tiffany felt herself going red again. The horrible hotness
spread inside her head.

That’s why she walked across the room, opened the front door and stepped
outside.

A fluffy snow was falling, very gently. When Tiffany looked into the
pale grey sky she saw the flakes drifting down in soft, feathery
clusters; it was the kind of snow that people back home on the Chalk
called ‘Granny Aching shearing her sheep’.

Tiffany felt them melting on her hair as she walked away from the
cottage. Miss Treason was shouting from the doorway but she walked on,
letting the melting snow cool her blushes.

Of course this is stupid, she told herself. But being a witch is stupid.
Why do we do it? It’s hard work for not much reward. What’s a good day
for Miss Treason? When someone brings her a second-hand pair of old
boots that fit properly! What does she know about anything?

Where is the wintersmith, then? Is he here? I’ve only got Miss Treason’s
word for it! That and a made-up picture in a book!

‘Wintersmith!’ she shouted.

You could hear the snow falling. It made a strange little noise, like a
faint, cold sizzle.

‘Wintersmith!’

There was no reply.

Well, what had she expected? A big booming voice? Mr Spiky the icicle
man? There was nothing but the softness of white snow falling patiently
among dark trees.

She felt a bit silly now, but satisfied, too. This was what a witch did!
She faced what she was afraid of, and then it held no more fear! She was
good at this!

She turned, and saw the wintersmith.

Remember this, said her Third Thoughts, cutting in. Every little detail
is important.

The wintersmith was …

… nothing. But the snow outlined him. It flowed round him in lines, as
if travelling on an invisible skin. He was just shape, and nothing more,
except perhaps for two tiny pale purple-grey dots in the air, where you
might expect to find eyes.

Tiffany stood still, her mind frozen, her body waiting to be told what
to do.

The hand made of falling snow was reaching towards her now, but very
slowly, as you would reach out towards an animal you do not want to
frighten. There was … something, some strange sense of things unsaid
because there was no voice to say them, a sense of striving, as if the
thing was putting heart and soul into this moment, even if it did not
know the meaning of heart or soul.

The hand stopped about a foot away from her. It was formed into a fist,
and now it turned over and the fingers opened.

Something gleamed. It was the white horse, made of silver, on a fine
silver chain.

Tiffany’s hand flew to her throat. But she’d had it on last night!
Before she went … to … watch … the … dance …

It must have come off! And he’d found it!

That’s interesting, said her Third Thoughts, that busied themselves with
the world in their own way. You can’t see what’s hidden inside an
invisible fist. How does that work? And why are those little purple-grey
blurs in the air where you’d expect to find eyes? Why aren’t _they_
invisible?

That’s Third Thoughts for you. When a huge rock is going to land on your
head, they’re the thoughts that think: Is that an igneous rock, such as
granite, or is it sandstone?

That part of Tiffany’s brain that was a little less precise at the
moment watched the silver horse dangle on its chain.

Her First Thought was: Take it.

Her Second Thought was: Don’t take it. It’s a trap.

Her Third Thought was: Really don’t take it. It will be colder than you
can imagine.

And then the rest of her over-ruled the thoughts entirely and said: Take
it. It’s part of who you are. Take it. When you hold it you think of
home. Take it!

She held out her right hand.

The horse dropped into it. Instinctively she closed her fingers over it.
It was indeed colder than she could have imagined, and it burned.

She screamed. The wintersmith’s snowy outline became a flurry of flakes.
The snow around her feet erupted with a cry of ‘Crivens!’ as a mass of
Feegles grabbed her feet and carried her, upright, across the clearing
and back in through the cottage’s doorway.

Tiffany forced her hand open and, with trembling fingers, pulled the
silver horse off her palm. It left a perfect print, a white horse on
pink flesh. It wasn’t a burn, it was a … freeze.

Miss Treason’s chair rumbled around on its wheels.

‘Come here, child,’ she ordered.

Still clasping her hand, trying to force back the tears, Tiffany walked
over to her.

‘Stand right here by my chair, this instant!’

Tiffany did so. This was no time to be disobedient.

‘I wish to look in your ear,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Brush your hair
aside.’

Tiffany held back her hair, and winced when she heard the tickle of
mouse whiskers. Then the creature was taken away.

‘Ah, I am surprised,’ said Miss Treason. ‘I can see nothing.’

‘Er … what were you expecting to see?’ Tiffany ventured.

‘Daylight!’ snapped Miss Treason, so loudly that the mouse scuttled
away. ‘Have you no brains at all, child?’

‘Ah dunno if anyone is interested,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘but I think yon
wintersmith has offski’d. An’ it’s stopped snowin’.’

No one was listening. When witches row, they concentrate.

‘It was mine!’ Grabbing up the horse and chain again.

‘A trinket!’

‘No!’

‘O’ course, this may not be the best time tae tell ye …’ Rob went on
miserably.

‘You think you need it to be a witch?’

‘Yes!’

‘A witch needs no devices!’

‘You’ve used shambles!’

‘Used, yes! Don’t need. Not _need_!’

‘Ah mean, it’s quite meltin’ awa—’ Rob said, smiling nervously.

Anger grabbed Tiffany’s tongue. How dare this stupid old crone talk
about not needing things!

‘Boffo!’ she shouted. ‘Boffo, Boffo, Boffo!’

Silence slammed down. After a while Miss Treason looked past Tiffany and
said: ‘You wee Feegle schemies! Get oot o’ here right noo! Ah’ll ken it
if ye don’t! This is hag business!’

The room filled with a sort of whooshing noise and the door to the
kitchen slammed shut.

‘So,’ said Miss Treason, ‘you know about Boffo, do you?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, breathing heavily. ‘I do.’

‘Very well. And have you told anyone—?’ Miss Treason paused and raised a
finger to her lips. Then she banged a stick on the floor. ‘Ah said get
oot, ye scunners! Off intae the woods wi’ ye! Check that he’s really
gang awa’! I’ll see yer guilt through yer own een if ye defy me!’

From below there was the sound of a lot of potatoes rumbling as the
Feegles scrambled out through the little ventilation grille.

‘Now they’ve gone,’ said Miss Treason. ‘They’ll stay gone, too. Boffo
will see to that.’

Somehow, in the space of a few seconds, Miss Treason had become more
human and a lot less scary. Well … slightly less scary.

‘How did you find out? Did you go looking for it? Did you go prowling
and rummaging?’ said Miss Treason.

‘No! I’m not like that! I found out by accident one day when you were
having a nap!’ Tiffany rubbed her hand.

‘Does that hurt a lot?’ said Miss Treason, leaning forwards. She might
be blind, but – like all the senior witches who knew what they were
doing – she noticed _everything_.

‘No, not now. It did, though. Look, I—’

‘Then you will learn to listen! Do you think the wintersmith has gone?’

‘He just seemed to vanish— I mean, vanish even more. I think he just
wanted to give me back my necklace.’

‘Do you think that is the sort of thing the spirit of winter, who
commands the blizzard and the frost, would really do?’

‘I don’t know, Miss Treason! He’s the only one I’ve met!’

‘You danced with him.’

‘I didn’t know I was going to!’

‘Nevertheless.’

Tiffany waited, and then said: ‘Nevertheless what?’

‘Just general neverthelessness. The little horse led him to you … But
he’s not here now, you’re right about that. I’d know if he was.’

Tiffany walked up to the front door, hesitated for just a moment, and
then opened it and went out into the clearing. There was a bit of snow
here and there, but the day was turning into just another one of those
grey-skied winter days.

I’d know if he was, too, she thought. And he isn’t. And her Second
Thoughts said: Oh? How do you know?

‘We’ve both touched the horse,’ she said, under her breath.

She looked around at the empty branches and the sleeping trees, fiddling
with the silver chain in her hand. The forests were curling in on
themselves, ready for the winter.

He’s out there, but not close. He must be very busy, with a whole winter
to make …

She said, ‘Thank you!’ automatically, because her mother had always said
that politeness cost nothing, and went back inside. It was very hot
inside now, but Miss Treason always had a huge log pile … built by the
Secret of Boffo. The local woodcutters always kept the pile high. A
chilly witch might get nasty.

‘I should like a cup of black tea,’ said the old woman as Tiffany walked
back in, looking thoughtful.

She waited until Tiffany was washing out the cup, then said: ‘Have you
heard the stories about me, child?’ The voice was kindly. There had been
shouts, there had been things said that might have been better put,
there had been temper and defiance. But they were there together, with
nowhere else to go. The quiet voice was a peace offering, and Tiffany
was glad of it.

‘Er, that you have a demon in the cellar?’ Tiffany answered, her mind
still full of puzzles. ‘And you eat spiders? And get visited by kings
and princes? And that any flower planted in your garden blooms black?’

‘Oh, do they say so?’ said Miss Treason, looking delighted. ‘I haven’t
heard that last one. How nice. And did you hear that I walk around at
night in the dark time of the year and reward those who have been good
citizens with a purse of silver? But, if they have been bad, I slit open
their bellies with my thumbnail like this?’

Tiffany leaped backwards as a wrinkled hand twisted her round and Miss
Treason’s yellow thumbnail scythed past her stomach. The old woman
looked terrifying.

‘No! No, I haven’t heard that one!’ she gasped, pressing up against the
sink.

‘What? And it was a wonderful story, with real historical antecedents!’
said Miss Treason, her vicious scowl becoming a smile. ‘And the one
about me having a cow’s tail?’

‘A cow’s tail? No!’

‘Really? How very vexing,’ said Miss Treason, lowering her finger. ‘I
fear the art of story-telling has got into a pretty bad way in these
parts. I really shall have to do something.’

‘This is just another kind of boffo, right?’ said Tiffany. She wasn’t
totally sure. Miss Treason had looked pretty scary with that thumbnail.
No wonder girls left so quickly.

‘Ah, you do have a brain, after all. Of course it is. Boffo, yes. A good
name for it. Boffo, indeed. The art of expectations. Show people what
they want to see, show ’em what they think should be there. I have a
reputation to keep up, after all.’

Boffo, Tiffany thought. Boffo, Boffo, Boffo.

She went over to the skulls, picked one up and read the label
underneath, just like she’d done a month ago:

Ghastly Skull No. 1 Price $2.99

The Boffo Novelty and Joke Shop

No 4, Tenth Egg Street, Ankh-Morpork

“If it’s a laugh … it’s a Boffo!”

‘Very lifelike, aren’t they,’ said Miss Treason, clicking back to her
chair, ‘if you can say that about a skull, of course! The shop sold a
wonderful machine for making spider webs. You poured in this sticky
stuff, d’you see, and with practice quite good webs could be made. Can’t
abide creepy-crawlies, but of course I’ve got to have the webs. Did you
notice the dead flies?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, glancing up. ‘They’re currants. I thought you had
vegetarian spiders.’

‘Well done. Nothing wrong with your eyes, at least. I got my hat from
there, too. Wicked Old Witch Number Three, A Must For Scary Parties, I
think it was. I’ve still got their catalogue somewhere, if you’re
interested.’

‘Do all witches buy from Boffo?’ said Tiffany.

‘Only me, at least around here. Oh, and I believe Old Mistress
Breathless over in Two Falls used to buy warts from there.’

‘But … why?’ said Tiffany.

‘She couldn’t grow them. Just couldn’t grow them at all, poor woman.
Tried everything. Face like a baby’s bottom, her whole life.’

‘No, I meant, why do you want to seem so’ – Tiffany hesitated, and went
on – ‘awful?’

‘I have my reasons,’ said Miss Treason.

‘But you don’t do those things the stories say you do, do you? Kings and
princes don’t come to consult you, do they?’

‘No, but they might do,’ said Miss Treason stoutly. ‘If they got lost,
for example. Oh, I know all about those stories. I made up most of
them!’

‘You made up stories about _yourself_ ?’

‘Oh, yes. Of course. Why not? I couldn’t leave something as important as
that to _amateurs_.’

‘But people say you can see a man’s soul!’

Miss Treason chuckled. ‘Yes. Didn’t make that one up! But I’ll tell you,
for some of my parishioners I’d need a magnifying glass! I see what they
see, I hear with their ears. I knew their fathers and grandfathers and
great-grandfathers. I know the rumours and the secrets and the stories
and the truths. And I am Justice to them, and I am fair. Look at me. See
me.’

Tiffany looked – and looked past the black cloak and the skulls and the
rubber cobwebs and the black flowers and the blindfold and the stories,
and saw a little half-deaf and blind old lady.

Boffo made the difference … not just the silly party stuff, but
Boffo-thinking – the rumours and the stories. Miss Treason had power
because they thought she did. It was like the standard witch’s hat. But
Miss Treason was taking Boffo much, much further.

‘A witch needs no devices, Miss Treason,’ she said.

‘Don’t get smart with me, child. Didn’t the girl Weatherwax tell you all
this? Oh, yes, you don’t need a wand or a shamble or even a pointy hat
to _be_ a witch. But it helps a witch to put on a show! People expect
it. They’ll believe in you. I didn’t get where I am today by wearing a
woolly bobble hat and a gingham apron! I look the part. I—’

There was a crash from outside, in the direction of the dairy.

‘Our little blue friends?’ said Miss Treason, raising her eyebrows.

‘No, they’re absolutely forbidden to go into any dairy I work in,’
Tiffany began, heading for the door. ‘Oh dear, I hope it’s not Horace …’

‘I told you he’d be nothing but trouble, did I not?’ Miss Treason
shouted as she hurried away.

It _was_ Horace. He’d squeezed out of his cage again. He could make
himself quite runny when he wanted to.

There was a broken butter dish on the floor, but although it had been
full of butter there was none there now. There was just a greasy patch.

And, from the darkness under the sink, there came a sort of high-speed
grumbling noise, a kind of _mnnamnamnam_ …

‘Oh, you’re after butter now, are you, Horace?’ said Tiffany, picking up
the dairy broom. ‘That’s practically cannibalism, you know.’

Still, it was better than mice, she had to admit. Finding little piles
of mouse bones on the floor was a bit distressing. Even Miss Treason had
not been able to work that one out. A mouse she happened to be looking
through would be trying to get at the cheeses and then it would all go
dark.

That was because Horace was a cheese.

Tiffany knew that Lancre Blue cheeses were always a bit on the lively
side, and sometimes had to be nailed down, but … well, she was highly
skilled at cheese-making, even though she said it herself, and Horace
was definitely a champion. The famous blue streaks that gave the variety
its wonderful colour were really pretty, although Tiffany wasn’t sure
they should glow in the dark.

She prodded the shadows with the end of the broom. There was a crack,
and when she pulled the stick out again two inches were missing from the
end. Then there was a _ptooi!_ noise and the missing piece of handle
bounced off the wall on the other side of the room.

‘No more milk for you, then,’ said Tiffany, straightening up, and
thought:

The wintersmith came to give me the Horse back. He took the trouble to
do that.

Um …

That is quite … impressive, when you think about it.

I mean, he’s got to organize avalanches and gales and come up with new
shapes for snowflakes and everything, but he spared a bit of time just
to come and give me my necklace back. Um …

And he just stood there.

And then he just vanished – I mean, vanished even more.

Um …

She left Horace muttering under the sink and made tea for Miss Treason,
who was back at her weaving. Then she quietly went up to her room.

Tiffany’s diary was three inches thick. Annagramma, another local
trainee witch and one of her friends (more or less), said that she
should really call it her Book of Shadows and write it on vellum using
one of the special magical inks sold at ZakZak Stronginthearm’s Magical
Emporium at popular prices – at least, prices that were popular with
ZakZak.

Tiffany couldn’t afford one. You could only trade witchcraft, you
weren’t supposed to sell it. Miss Treason didn’t mind her selling
cheeses, but even so, paper was expensive up here and the wandering
pedlars never had very much to sell. They usually had an ounce or two of
green copperas, though, which could make a decent ink if you mixed it
with crushed oak-galls or green walnut shells.

The diary was now as thick as a brick with extra pages Tiffany had glued
in. She’d worked out she could make it last two more years if she wrote
small.

On the leather cover she had, with a hot skewer, drawn the words
‘Feegles Keep Out!!’ It had never worked. They looked upon that sort of
thing as an invitation. She wrote parts of the diary in code these days.
Reading didn’t come naturally to the Chalk Hill Feegles, so surely
they’d never get the hang of a code.

She looked around carefully, in any case, and unlocked the huge padlock
that secured a chain around the book. She turned to today’s date, dipped
her pen in the ink and wrote:

[image]

Yes, a snowflake would be a good code for the wintersmith.

He just stood there, she thought.

And he ran away because I screamed.

Which was a good thing, obviously.

Um …

But … I wish I hadn’t screamed.

She opened her hand. The image of the horse was still there, as white as
chalk, but there was no pain at all.

Tiffany gave a little shiver and pulled herself together. So? She had
met the spirit of the winter. She was a witch. It was the sort of thing
that sometimes happened. He’d politely given her back what was hers, and
then he’d gone. There was no call to get soppy about it. There were
things to do.

Then she wrote: ‘Ltr frm R.’

She very carefully opened the letter from Roland, which was easy because
slug slime isn’t much of a glue. With any luck she could even re-use the
envelope. She hunched over the letter so that no one could read it over
her shoulder. Finally, she said: ‘Miss Treason, will you get out of my
face, please? I need to use my eyeballs privately.’

There was a pause and then a mutter from downstairs, and the tickling
behind her eyes went away.

It was always … good to get a letter from Roland. Yes, they were often
about the sheep, and other things of the Chalk, and sometimes there’d be
a dried flower inside, a harebell or a cowslip. Granny Aching wouldn’t
have approved of that; she always said that if the hills had wanted
people to pick the flowers they would have grown more of them.

The letters always made her homesick.

One day, Miss Treason had said, ‘This young man who writes to you … is
he your beau?’ and Tiffany had changed the subject until she had time to
look up the word in the dictionary and stop blushing.

Roland was … well, the thing about Roland was … the main thing about …
well, the point was … he was there.

OK, when she’d first really met him he’d been a rather useless, rather
stupid lump, but what could you expect? He’d been the prisoner of the
Queen of the Fairies for a year, to start with, fat as butter and
half-crazy on sugar and despair. Besides, he’d been brought up by a
couple of haughty aunts, his father – the Baron – being mostly more
interested in horses and dogs.

He’d more and less changed since then: more thoughtful, less rowdy, more
serious, less stupid. He’d also had to wear glasses, the first ever seen
on the Chalk.

And he had a library! More than a hundred books! Actually, it belonged
to the castle, but no one else seemed interested in it.

Some of the books were huge and ancient, with wooden covers and huge
black letters and coloured pictures of strange animals and far-off
places. There was Waspmire’s _Book of Unusual Days_, Crumberry’s _Why
Things Are Not Otherwise,_ and all but one volume of _The Ominous
Encyclopaedia_. Roland had been astonished to find that Tiffany could
read foreign words, and she’d been careful not to tell him it was all
done with the help of what remained of Dr Bustle.

The thing was … the fact was … well, who else had they got? Roland
couldn’t, just _couldn’t_ have friends among the village kids, what with
him being the son of the Baron and everything. But Tiffany had the
pointy hat now, and that counted for something. The people of the Chalk
didn’t like witches much, but she was Granny Aching’s grand-daughter,
right? No tellin’ what she learned from the ol’ girl, up at the
shepherding hut. And they do say she showed those witches up in the
mountains what witchin’s all about, eh? Remember the lambing last year?
She prit near brought dead lambs back to life just by lookin’ at ’em!
And she’s an Aching, and they’ve got these hills in their bones. She’s
all right. She’s ours, see?

And that was fine, except that she didn’t have any old friends any more.
Kids back home who’d been friendly were now … respectful, because of the
hat. There was a kind of wall, as if she’d grown up and they hadn’t.
What could they talk about? She’d been to places they couldn’t even
imagine. Most of them hadn’t even been to Twoshirts, which was only half
a day away. And this didn’t worry them at all. They were going to do the
jobs their fathers did, or raise children like their mothers did. And
that was fine, Tiffany added hurriedly to herself. But they hadn’t
decided. It was just happening to them, and they didn’t notice.

It was the same up in the mountains. The only people of her own age that
she could actually talk to were other witches-in-training like
Annagramma and the rest of the girls. It was useless trying to have a
real conversation with people in the villages, especially the boys. They
just looked down and mumbled and shuffled their feet, like people at
home when they had to talk to the Baron.

Actually, Roland did that, too, and he went red every time she looked at
him. Whenever she visited the castle, or walked on the hills with him,
the air was full of complicated silences … just like it had been with
the wintersmith.

She read the letter carefully, trying to ignore the grubby Feegle
fingerprints all over it. He’d been kind enough to include several spare
sheets of paper.

She smoothed one out, very carefully, stared at the wall for a while and
then began to write.

Down in the scullery,2 Horace the cheese had come out from behind the
slop bucket. Now he was in front of the back door. If a cheese ever
looked thoughtful, Horace looked thoughtful now.

In the tiny village of Twoshirts, the driver of the mail coach was
having a bit of a problem. A lot of mail from the countryside around
Twoshirts ended up at the souvenir shop there, which also acted as the
post office.

Usually the driver just picked up the mailbag, but today there was a
difficulty. He frantically turned over the pages of the book of Post
Office Regulations.

Miss Tick tapped her foot. This was getting on his nerves.

‘Ah, ah, ah,’ said the coachman triumphantly. ‘Says here no animals,
birds, dragons or fish!’

‘And which one of them do you think I am?’ said Miss Tick icily.

‘Ah, well, right, well, human is kind of like animal, right? I mean,
look at monkeys, right?’

‘I have no wish to look at monkeys,’ said Miss Tick. ‘I have seen the
sort of things they do.’

The coachman clearly spotted that this was a road not to go down, and
turned the pages furiously. Then he beamed.

‘Ah, ah, ah!’ he said. ‘How much do you weigh, miss?’

‘Two ounces,’ said Miss Tick. ‘Which by chance is the maximum weight of
letter that can be sent to the Lancre and Near Hinterland area for ten
pence.’ She pointed to the two stamps gummed to her lapel. ‘I have
already purchased my stamps.’

‘You never weigh two ounces!’ said the coachman. ‘You’re a hundred and
twenty pounds at least!’

Miss Tick sighed. She’d wanted to avoid this, but Twoshirts wasn’t
Dogbend, after all. It lived on the highway, it watched the world go
past. She reached up and pressed the button that worked her hat.

‘Would you like me to forget you just said that?’ she said.

‘Why?’ said the coachman.

There was a pause while Miss Tick stared blankly at him. Then she turned
her eyes upwards.

‘Excuse me,’ she said. ‘This is always happening, I’m afraid. It’s the
duckings, you know. The spring rusts.’

She reached up and banged the side of the hat. The hidden pointy bit
shot up, scattering paper flowers.

The coachman’s eyes followed it. ‘Oh,’ he said. And the thing about
pointy hats was this: the person under it was definitely a witch or a
wizard. Oh, someone who wasn’t could probably get a pointy hat and go
out wearing it, and they’d be fine right up until the moment when they
met a real pointy-hat owner. Wizards and witches didn’t like impostors.
They also don’t like being kept waiting.

‘How much do I weigh now, pray?’ she asked.

‘Two ounces!’ said the coachman quickly.

Miss Tick smiled. ‘Yes. And not one scruple more! A scruple being, of
course, a weight of twenty grains or one twenty-fourth of an ounce. I am
in fact … unscrupulous!’

She waited to see if this extremely teachery joke was going to get a
smile, but didn’t mind when it didn’t. Miss Tick rather liked being
smarter than other people.

She got on the coach.

As the coach climbed up into the mountains, snow started to fall. Miss
Tick, who knew that no two snowflakes are alike, didn’t pay them any
attention. If she had done so, she’d have felt slightly less smart.

Tiffany slept. A fire glowed in the bedroom grate. Downstairs, Miss
Treason’s loom weaved its way through the night …

Small blue figures crept across the bedroom floor and, by forming a
Feegle pyramid, reached the top of the little table Tiffany used as a
desk.

Tiffany turned over in bed and made a little _snfgl_ noise. The Feegles
froze, just for a moment, and then the bedroom door swung gently shut
behind them.

A blue and red blur raised a trail of dust on the narrow stairs, across
the loom-room floor, out into the scullery and through a strange
cheese-shaped hole in the outside door. From then on it was a trail of
disturbed leaves deep into the woods, where a small fire burned. It lit
the faces of a horde of Feegles, although it may not have wanted to.

The blur stopped and became about six Feegles, two of them carrying
Tiffany’s diary.

They laid it down carefully.

‘We’re well oot o’ that hoose,’ said Big Yan. ‘Di’a see dem bigjob
skulls? There’s a hag ye wouldnae want tae cross in a hurry!’

‘Ach, I see she’s got one of they paddly locks again,’ said Daft Wullie,
walking around the diary.

‘Rob, I cannae help thinkin’ that it’s no’ right to read this,’ said
Billy Bigchin, as Rob put his arm into the keyhole. ‘It’s pers’nal!’

‘She’s oor hag. What’s pers’nal to her is pers’nal to us,’ said Rob
matter-of-factly, fishing around inside the lock. ‘Besides, she must
want someone tae read it, cuz she wrote things doon. Nae point in
writin’ stuff doon if ye dinnae want it read! It’s a sheer waste o’
pencil!’

‘Mebbe she wanted tae read it hersel’,’ said Billy doubtfully.

‘Oh, aye? Why’d she want tae do that?’ said Rob scornfully. ‘She already
kens what’s in it. An’ Jeannie wants tae know what she’s thinkin’ aboot
the Baron’s lad …’

There was a click, and the padlock opened. The assembled feeglehood
watched carefully.

Rob turned the rustling pages, and grinned.

‘Ach, she’s writ here: _Oh, the dear Feegles ha’ turned up again_,’ he
said. This met with general applause.

‘Ach, what a kind girl she is tae write that,’ said Billy Bigchin. ‘Can
I see?’

He read: _Oh dear, the Feegles have turned up again_.

‘Ah,’ he said. Billy Bigchin had come with Jeannie all the way from the
Long Lake clan. The clan there was more at home with reading and
writing, and since he was the gonnagle he was expected to be good at
both.

The Chalk Hill Feegles, on the other hand, were more at home with the
drinkin’, stealin’ and fightin’, and Rob Anybody was good at all three.
But he’d learned to read and write because Jeannie had asked him to. He
did them with a lot more optimism than accuracy, Billy knew. When he was
faced with a long sentence he tended to work out a few words and then
have a great big guess.

‘The art o’ readin’ is all aboot understandin’ whut the wurds is
_tryin_’ tae say, right?’ said Rob.

‘Aye, mebbe,’ said Big Yan, ‘but is there any wurd there to tell us that
the big wee hag is sweet on that heap o’ jobbies doon in the stone
castle?’

‘Ye ha’ a verrae ro-mantic nature,’ said Rob. ‘And the answer is: I
cannae tell. They writes some bits of their letters in them wee codies.
That’s a terrible thing tae do to a reader. It’s hard enough readin’ the
normal words, wi’oot somebody jumblin’ them all up.’

‘It’ll be a baaaad look-oot fra’ us all if the big wee hag starts
mindin’ boys instead o’ gettin’ the knowin’ o’ the hagglin’,’ said Big
Yan.

‘Aye, but the boy willnae be interested in marryin’,’ said Slightly Mad
Angus.

‘He might be, one day,’ said Billy Bigchin, who’d made a hobby of
watching humans. ‘Most bigjob men get married.’

‘They do?’ said a Feegle, in astonishment.

‘Oh, aye.’

‘They want tae get married?’

‘A lot o’ them do, aye,’ said Billy.

‘So there’s nae more boozin’, stealin’ an’ fighting?’

‘Hey, ah’m still allowed some boozin’ an’ stealin’ an’ fightin’!’ said
Rob Anybody.

‘Aye, Rob, but we cannae help noticin’ ye also have tae do the
Explainin’, too,’ said Daft Wullie.

There was a general nodding from the crowd. To Feegles, Explaining was a
dark art. It was just so _hard_.

‘Like, when we come back from boozin’, stealin’ an’ fightin’, Jeannie
gives ye the pursin’ o’ the lips,’ Daft Wullie went on.

A moan went up from all the Feegles: ‘Ooooh, save us from the pursin’ o’
the lips!’

‘An’ there’s the foldin’ o’ the arms,’ said Wullie, because he was even
scaring himself.

‘Oooooh, waily, waily, waily, the foldin’ o’ the arms!’ the Feegles
cried, tearing at their hair.

‘Not tae mention the tappin’ o’ the feets …’ Wullie stopped, not wanting
to mention the tappin’ o’ the feets.

‘Aargh! Ooooo! No’ the tappin’ o’ the feets!’ Some of the Feegles
started to bang their heads on trees.

‘Aye, aye, aye, BUT,’ said Rob Anybody desperately, ‘what youse dinnae
ken is that this is part o’ the hiddlins o’ husbandry.’

Feegles looked at one another. There was silence except for the creak of
a small tree as it fell over.

‘We never heard o’ any sich thing, Rob,’ said Big Yan.

‘Well, an’ ah’m no’ surprised! Who’d tell ye? Ye ain’t married! Ye
dinnae get the po-et-ic symi-tree o’ the whole thing. Gather roound till
I tell ye …’

Rob looked around to see if anyone apart from about five hundred Feegles
was watching him, and went on: ‘See … first ye get the boozin’ an’ the
fightin’ an’ the stealin’, OK. An’ when you get back tae the mound it’s
time for the tappin’ o’ the feets—’

‘Ooooooo!’

‘– an’ the foldin’ o’ the arms—’

‘Aaaargh!’

‘– an’, o’ course, the pursin’ o’ the lips and— _will ye scunners knock
it off wi’ the groanin’ before I starts bangin’ heids together! Right?_
’

All the Feegles fell silent, except for one:

‘Oh, waily, waily, waily! Ohhhhhhh! Aaarrgh! The pursin’ … o’ … the—’

He stopped, and looked around in embarrassment.

‘Daft Wullie?’ said Rob Anybody, with icy patience.

‘Aye, Rob?’

‘Ye ken I told yez there wuz times ye should listen to whut I was
sayin’?’

‘Aye, Rob?’

‘That wuz one o’ them times.’

Daft Wullie hung his head. ‘Sorry, Rob.’

‘Aye! Now, where wuz I … ? Oh, aye … we get the lips an’ the arms an’
the feets, OK? An’ then—’

‘I’s time for the Explainin’!’ said Daft Wullie.

‘Aye!’ snapped Rob Anybody. ‘Any one o’ youse mudlins want to be the one
who dares tae do the Explainin’?’

He looked around.

The Feegles shuffled backwards.

‘Wi’ the kelda a-pursin’ an’ a-foldin’ an’ a-tappin’,’ Rob went on in a
voice of Doom. ‘An’ that look in her bonny eye that says: “This
Explanation had better be really guid”? Well? Do ye?’

By now Feegles were crying and chewing the edges of their kilts in
terror.

‘No, Rob,’ they murmured.

‘No, aye!’ said Rob Anybody triumphantly. ‘Ye wouldnae! That’s because
you don’t have the knowin’ o’ the husbandry!’

‘I heard Jeannie say you come up with Explanations no other Feegle in
all the world would try,’ said Daft Wullie admiringly.

‘Aye, that’s quite likely,’ said Rob, swelling with pride. ‘And Feegles
has got a fine tradition o’ huge Explanations!’

‘She said some of your Explainin’ is so long an’ twisty, by the time
ye’ve got to the end, she cannae recall how they started,’ Daft Wullie
went on.

‘It’s a nat’ral gift, I wouldnae wantae boast,’ said Rob, waving his
hand modestly.

‘I can’t see bigjobs bein’ good at Explainin’,’ said Big Yan. ‘They’re
verrae slow thinkers.’

‘They still get wed, though,’ said Billy Bigchin.

‘Aye, and yon boy in the big castle is bein’ too friendly wi’ the big
wee hag,’ said Big Yan. ‘His da’ is gettin’ old an’ sick and soon yon
boy will own a big stone castle and the wee bittie papers that says that
he owns the hills.’

‘Jeannie’s afeared that if he’s got the wee bittie papers that says he
owns the hills,’ Billy Bigchin continued, ‘he might go daft and think
they belong to him. An’ we know where that’ll lead, right?’

‘Aye,’ said Big Yan. ’Ploughin’.’

It was a dreaded word. The old baron had once planned to plough a few of
the flatter areas of the Chalk, because corn was fetching high prices
and there was no money in sheep, but Granny Aching had been alive then
and had changed his mind for him.

But some pastures around the Chalk were being ploughed up already. There
_was_ money in corn. The Feegles took it for granted that Roland would
take to the plough, too. Wasn’t he brought up by a couple of vain,
scheming and unpleasant aunts?

‘I dinnae trust him,’ said Slightly Mad Angus. ‘He reads books an’ such.
He disnae care about the land.’

‘Aye,’ said Daft Wullie, ‘but if he wuz wed tae the big wee hag, he’d
no’ think o’ the plough, cuz the big wee hag would soon gi’e him the
pursin’ o’ the arms—’

‘It’s the _foldin_’ o’ the arms!’ snapped Rob Anybody.

All the Feegles looked around fearfully.

‘Ooooooh, not the foldin’ o’ th—’

‘Shut up!’ Rob yelled. ‘Ah’m ashamed o’ yez! It’s up tae the big wee hag
tae marry who she wants tae! Is that no’ so, gonnagle?’

‘Hmm?’ said Billy, looking upwards. He caught another snowflake.

‘I said, the big wee hag can wed who she wants, right?’

Billy was staring at the snowflake. ‘Billy?’ said Rob.

‘What?’ he said, as if waking up. ‘Oh … yes. Do ye think she wants to
marry the wintersmith?’

‘The wintersmith?’ said Rob. ‘He cannae marry anyone. He’s like a
spirit, there’s nothin’ tae him!’

‘She danced with him. We saw her,’ said Billy, catching another flake
and inspecting it.

‘Just girlish high spirits! Anyway, why should the big wee hag think
anything o’ the wintersmith?’

‘I have reason tae believe,’ said the gonnagle slowly, as more flakes
danced down, ‘that the wintersmith is thinkin’ a lot aboot the big wee
hag …’

2 A room off a kitchen for washing pans and doing other wet and messy
chores. Although Miss Treason had skulls, she did not keep them in the
scullery. It would have been quite amusing, though, if she did.

[image]


CHAPTER 4
SNOWFLAKES

They say that there can never be two snowflakes that are exactly alike,
but has anyone checked lately?

Snow fell gently in the darkness. It piled up on rooftops, it kissed its
way though the branches of trees, it settled on the forest floor with a
gentle sizzle and smelled sharply of tin.

Granny Weatherwax always checked the snow. She stood at her doorway,
with the candlelight streaming out around her, and caught flakes on the
back of a shovel.

The white kitten watched the snowflakes. That’s all it did. It didn’t
bat them with a paw, it just watched, very intently, each flake spiral
down until it landed. Then the kitten would watch it some more, until it
was sure the entertainment was over, before it looked up and selected
another flake.

It was called You, as in ‘You! Stop that!’ and ‘You! Get off there!’
When it came to names, Granny Weatherwax didn’t do fancy.

Granny looked at the snowflakes and smiled in her not-exactly-nice way.

‘Come back in, You,’ she said, and shut the door.

Miss Tick was shivering by the fire. It wasn’t very big – just big
enough. However, there was the smell of bacon and pease pudding coming
from a small pot on the embers, and beside it was a much larger one from
which came the smell of chicken. Miss Tick didn’t often get chicken, so
she lived in hope.

It had to be said that Granny Weatherwax and Miss Tick did not get on
well with each other. Senior witches often don’t. You could tell that
they didn’t by the way they were extremely polite all the time.

‘The snow is early this year, Mistress Weatherwax,’ said Miss Tick.

‘Indeed it is, Miss Tick,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘And so …
interesting. Have you looked at it?’

‘I’ve seen snow before, Mistress Weatherwax,’ said Miss Tick. ‘It was
snowing all the way out up here. I had to help push the mail coach! I
saw altogether too much snow! But what are we going to do about Tiffany
Aching?’

‘Nothing, Miss Tick. More tea?’

‘She is rather our responsibility.’

‘No. She’s hers, first and last. She’s a witch. She danced the Winter
Dance. I saw her do it.’

‘I’m sure she didn’t mean to,’ said Miss Tick.

‘How can you dance and not mean it?’

‘She’s young. The excitement probably ran away with her feet. She didn’t
know what was going on.’

‘She should have found out,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘She should have
listened.’

‘I’m sure you always did what you were told when you were almost
thirteen, Mistress Weatherwax,’ said Miss Tick with just a hint of
sarcasm.

Granny Weatherwax stared at the wall for a moment. ‘No,’ she said. ‘I
made mistakes. But I didn’t make excuses.’

‘I thought you wanted to help the child?’

‘I’ll help her to help herself. That is my way. She’s danced her way
into the oldest story there is, and the only way out is through the
other end. The only way, Miss Tick.’

Miss Tick sighed. Stories, she thought. Granny Weatherwax believes the
world is all about stories. Oh well, we all have our funny little ways.
Except me, obviously.

‘Of course. It’s just that she’s so … normal,’ she said aloud. ‘When you
consider what she’s done, I mean. And she thinks so much. And now she’s
come to the attention of the wintersmith, well …’

‘She fascinates him,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘That’s going to be a big problem.’

‘Which she will have to solve.’

‘And if she can’t?’

‘Then she’s not Tiffany Aching,’ said Granny Weatherwax firmly. ‘Ah,
yes, she’s in the story now, but she don’t know it! Look at the snow,
Miss Tick. They say that no two snowflakes are alike. How could they
know something like that? Oh, they think they’re so smart! I’ve always
wanted to catch ’em out. An’ I have done! Go outside now, and look at
the snow. Look at the snow, Miss Tick! Every flake the same!’

Tiffany heard the knocking and opened the tiny bedroom window with
difficulty. Snow had built up on the sill, soft and fluffy.

‘We didnae want tae wake ye,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘but Wee Billy said you
ought tae see this.’

Tiffany yawned. ‘What am I looking for?’ she muttered.

‘Catch some o’ yon flakes,’ said Rob. ‘No, not on yer hand, they’ll melt
tae soon.’

In the gloom, Tiffany felt around for her diary. It wasn’t there. She
looked on the floor, in case she’d knocked it off. Then a match flared
as Rob Anybody lit a candle, and there was the diary, looking as though
it had always been there but, she noticed, also being suspiciously cold
to the touch. Rob looked innocent, a sure sign of guilt.

Tiffany saved the questions for later, and poked the diary out of the
window. Flakes settled on it, and she lifted it closer to her eyes.

‘They look just like any ordin—’ she began, and then stopped, and then
said, ‘Oh, no … this must be a trick!’

‘Aye? Well, ye could call it that,’ said Rob. ‘But it’s _his_ trick, ye
ken.’

Tiffany stared at the falling flakes, drifting in the light of the
candle.

Every one of them was Tiffany Aching. A little, frozen, sparkling
Tiffany Aching.

Downstairs, Miss Treason burst out laughing.

The doorknob on the door to the tower bedroom was rattled angrily.
Roland de Chumsfanleigh (pronounced Chuffley; it wasn’t his fault)
carefully paid it no attention.

‘What are you doing in there, child?’ said a muffled voice, peevishly.

‘Nothing, Aunt Danuta,’ said Roland, without turning round from his
desk. One of the advantages of living in a castle was that rooms were
easy to lock; his door had three iron locks and two bolts that were as
thick as his arm.

‘Your father is calling out for you, you know!’ said another voice, with
even more peeve.

‘He whispers, Aunt Araminta,’ Roland said calmly, carefully writing an
address on an envelope. ‘He only cries out when you set the doctors on
him.’

‘It’s for his own good!’

‘He cries out,’ Roland repeated, and then licked the flap on the
envelope.

Aunt Araminta rattled the doorknob again. ‘You are a very ungrateful
child! You will starve, you know! We will get the guards to batter this
door down!’

Roland sighed. The castle had been built by people who did not like to
have their doors battered down, and anyone trying to do that here would
have to carry the battering ram up a narrow spiral staircase with no
room at the top to turn round, and then find a way to knock down a door
four planks thick and made of oak timbers so ancient it was like iron.
One man could defend this room for months, if he had provisions. He
heard some more grumbling outside and then the echo of the aunts’ shoes
as they went down the tower. Then he heard them screaming at the guards
again.

It wouldn’t do them much good. Sergeant Roberts and his guards3 were
edgy about taking orders from the aunts. Everyone knew though that, if
the Baron died before the boy was twenty-one, the aunts would legally
run the estate until he _was_. And while the Baron was very ill, he was
not dead. It was not a happy time to be a disobedient guard, but the
sergeant and his men survived the anger of the aunts by being, when
their orders justified it, deaf, stupid, forgetful, confused, ill, lost
or – in the case of Kevin – foreign.

For now, Roland kept his excursions for the small hours, when no one was
around and he could pillage the kitchen. That’s when he went in to see
his father. The doctors kept the old man dosed with something, but he
held his hand for a while for the comfort that it gave. If he found jars
of wasps or leeches, he threw them into the moat.

He stared at the envelope. Perhaps he ought to tell Tiffany about this,
but he didn’t like to think about it. It would worry her and she might
try to rescue him again, and that wouldn’t be right. This was something
he had to face. Besides, _he_ wasn’t locked in. _They_ were locked out.
While he held the tower, there was a place where they couldn’t poke and
pry and steal. He’d got what was left of the silver candlesticks under
his bed, along with what remained of the antique silver cutlery (‘gone
to be valued’, they’d said) and his mother’s jewel box. He’d been a bit
late finding that; it was missing her wedding ring and the silver and
garnet necklace his grandmother had left to her.

But tomorrow he’d get up early and ride over to Twoshirts with the
letter. He liked writing them. They turned the world into a nicer place,
because you didn’t have to include the bad bits.

Roland sighed. It would have been nice to tell her that in the library
he’d found a book called _Sieges and Survival_ by the famous General
Callus Tacticus (who invented ‘tactics’, which was interesting). Who’d
have thought such an ancient book could be so useful? The general had
been very firm about having provisions, so Roland had plenty of small
beer, large sausage and heavy dwarf bread, which was handy to drop on
people.

He glanced across the room, where there was a portrait of his mother
that he had carried up from the cellar where _they_ had left it (it was
‘waiting to be cleaned’, they said). Right beside it, if you knew what
you were looking for, an area of wall about the size of a small door
looked lighter than the rest of the stones. The candlestick next to it
looked slightly lopsided, too.

There were lots of advantages to living in a castle.

Outside, it began to snow.

The Nac Mac Feegles peered out at the fluffy flakes from the thatch of
Miss Treason’s cottage. By the light that managed to leak out from the
grubby windows below, they watched the tiny Tiffanys whirl past.

‘Say it wi’ snowflakes,’ said Big Yan. ‘Hah!’

Daft Wullie snatched a spiralling flake. ‘Ye gotta admit he’s done the
wee pointy hat really well,’ he said. ‘He must like the big wee hag a
lot …’

‘It disnae make any _sense_!’ said Rob Anybody. ‘He’s the winter! He’s
all the snow an’ ice an’ storms an’ frosts. She’s just a wee big girl!
Ye cannae say that’s an ideal match! Whut do ye say, Billy? Billy?’

The gonnagle was chewing the end of his mousepipes while staring at the
flakes with a faraway look in his eyes. But somehow Rob’s voice broke
into his thoughts, because he said: ‘Whut does he ken aboot people? He’s
no’ as alive as a wee insect yet he’s as powerful as the sea. An’ he’s
sweet on the big wee hag. Why? What can she be to him? What will he do
next? I tell ye this: snowflakes is just the beginning. We must watch
oot, Rob. This may become verrae bad …’

Up in the mountains, 990,393,072,007 Tiffany Achings landed lightly on
the old packed snow on a ridge and began an avalanche which carried away
more than a hundred trees and a hunting lodge. This wasn’t her fault.

It wasn’t her fault that people slipped on packed layers of her, or
couldn’t open the door because she was piled up outside it, or got hit
by handfuls of her thrown by small children. Most of her had melted by
breakfast-time next day, and besides, no one noticed anything strange,
except witches who don’t take people’s word for things, and a lot of
kids who no one listened to.

Even so, Tiffany woke up feeling very embarrassed.

Miss Treason didn’t help at all.

‘At least he likes you,’ she said while she ferociously wound up her
clock.

‘I wouldn’t know about that, Miss Treason,’ said Tiffany, really not
wanting this conversation at all. She was washing the dishes at the
sink, her back to the old woman, and she was glad that Miss Treason
could not see her face – and, if it came to it, that she couldn’t see
Miss Treason’s face, either.

‘What will your young man say about it? I wonder.’

‘What young man is that, Miss Treason?’ said Tiffany, as stonily as she
could manage.

‘He writes you letters, girl!’

And I expect you read them with my eyes, Tiffany thought. ‘Roland? He’s
just a friend … sort of,’ she said.

‘A _sort_ of friend?’

I’m not going into this, Tiffany thought. I bet she’s grinning. It’s not
her business, anyway.

‘Yes,’ she said, ‘that’s right, Miss Treason. A sort of friend.’

There was a long silence, which Tiffany used to scrub out the bottom of
an iron saucepan.

‘It is important to have friends,’ said Miss Treason, in a voice that
was somehow smaller than it had been. It sounded as though Tiffany had
won. ‘When you have finished, dear, please be kind enough to fetch me my
shamble bag.’

Tiffany did so, and hurried off into the dairy. It was always good to
get in there. It reminded her of home, and she could think better. She—

There was a cheese-shaped hole in the bottom of the door, but Horace was
back in his broken cage, making a very faint _mnmnmnmn_ noise which may
have been cheese snores. She left him alone, and dealt with the
morning’s milk.

At least it wasn’t snowing. She felt herself blushing, and tried to stop
herself from even thinking about it.

And there was going to be a coven meeting tonight. Would the other girls
know? Hah! Of course they would. Witches paid attention to snow,
especially if it was going to be embarrassing for somebody.

‘Tiffany? I wish to speak with you,’ Miss Treason called out.

Miss Treason had hardly ever called her Tiffany before. It was quite
worrying to hear her say the name.

Miss Treason was holding up a shamble. Her seeing-eye mouse was dangling
awkwardly among the bits of bone and ribbon.

‘This is so inconvenient,’ she said, and raised her voice. ‘Ach, ye
mudlins! C’mon oot! I ken ye’re there! I can see ye lookin’ at me!’

Feegle heads appeared from behind very nearly everything.

‘Good! Tiffany Aching, sit down!’ Tiffany sat down quickly.

‘At a time like this, too,’ said Miss Treason, laying down the shamble.
‘This is so inconvenient. But there is no doubt.’ She paused for a
moment and said: ‘I will die the day after tomorrow. On Friday, just
before half past six in the morning.’

It was an impressive statement, and did not deserve this reply: ‘Oh,
that’s a shame, tae be missin’ the weekend like that,’ said Rob Anybody.
‘Are ye going somewhere nice?’

‘But … but … you can’t die!’ Tiffany burst out. ‘You’re a hundred and
thirteen years old, Miss Treason!’

‘You know, that is very probably the reason, child,’ said Miss Treason
calmly. ‘Didn’t anyone tell you that witches have forewarning of when
they’re going to die? Anyway, I like a good funeral.’

‘Oh aye, ye cannae beat a good wake,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Wi’ lots o’
boozin’ an’ dancin’ an’ greetin’ an feastin’ an’ boozin’.’

‘There may be some sweet sherry,’ said Miss Treason. ‘As for feasting, I
always say you cannot go far wrong with a ham roll.’

‘But you can’t just—’ Tiffany began, and stopped as Miss Treason turned
her head fast, like a chicken does.

‘– leave you like this?’ she said. ‘Is that what you were going to say?’

‘Er, no,’ Tiffany lied.

‘You’ll have to move in with someone else, of course,’ said Miss
Treason. ‘You’re not really senior enough to take on a cottage, not when
there’s older girls waiting—’

‘You know I don’t want to spend my life in the mountains, Miss Treason,’
Tiffany said quickly.

‘Oh yes, Miss Tick did tell me,’ said the old witch. ‘You want to go
back to your little chalk hills.’

‘They’re not little!’ Tiffany snapped, louder than she’d meant to.

‘Yes, this has been a bit of a trying time all round,’ said Miss
Treason, very calmly. ‘I shall write some letters which you will take
down to the village, and then you shall have your afternoon off. We
shall hold the funeral tomorrow afternoon.’

‘Sorry? You mean _before_ you die?’ said Tiffany.

‘Why, of course! I don’t see why I shouldn’t have some fun!’

‘Good thinkin’!’ said Rob Anybody. ‘That’s the kind of sensible detail
people usually fail tae consider.’

‘We call it a going-away party,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Just for witches,
of course. Other people tend to get a bit nervous, I can’t think why.
And on the bright side, we’ve got that splendid ham that Mr Armbinder
gave us last week for settling the ownership of the chestnut tree, and
I’d love to try it.’

An hour later Tiffany set out, with her pockets full of notes to
butchers and bakers and farmers in the local villages.

She was a bit surprised at the reception she got. They seemed to think
it was all a joke.

‘Miss Treason’s not going to go dying at her time of life,’ said a
butcher, weighing out sausages. ‘I heard that Death’s come for her
before and she slammed the door on him!’

‘Thirteen dozen sausages, please,’ said Tiffany. ‘Cooked and delivered.’

‘Are you sure she’s going to die?’ said the butcher, uncertainty
clouding his face.

‘No. But _she_ is,’ said Tiffany.

And the baker said, ‘Don’t you know about that clock of hers? She had it
made when her heart died. It’s like a clockwork heart, see?’

‘Really?’ said Tiffany. ‘So, if her heart died, and she had a new one
made of clockwork, how did she stay alive while the new heart was being
made?’

‘Oh, that’d be by magic, obviously,’ said the baker.

‘But a heart pumps blood, and Miss Treason’s clock is outside her body,’
Tiffany pointed out. ‘There’s no … tubes …’

‘It pumps the blood by magic,’ said the baker, speaking slowly. He gave
her an odd look. ‘How can you be a witch if you don’t know this stuff?’

It was the same everywhere else. It was as if the idea of there being no
Miss Treason was the wrong shape to put in anyone’s head. She was 113
years old, and they argued that it was practically unheard of for anyone
to die aged 113. It was a joke, they said, or she’d got a scroll signed
in blood that meant she’d live for ever, or you’d have to steal her
clock before she’d die, or every time the Grim Reaper came for her she
lied about her name or sent him to another person, or maybe she was just
feeling a bit unwell …

By the time Tiffany was finished she was wondering if it really _was_
going to happen. Yet Miss Treason had seemed so certain. And at 113, the
amazing thing wasn’t that you were going to die tomorrow, but that you
were still alive today.

With her head full of gloomy thoughts, she set out to the coven meeting.

Once or twice she thought she could feel Feegles watching her. She never
knew how she could feel this; it was a talent you learned. And you
learned to put up with it, most of the time.

All the other young witches were there by the time she arrived, and had
even got a fire lit.

Some people think that ‘coven’ is a word for a group of witches, and
it’s true that’s what the dictionary says. But the real word for a group
of witches is ‘an argument’.

In any case, most of the witches Tiffany had met never used the word.
Mrs Earwig did, though, almost all the time. She was tall and thin and
rather chilly, and wore silver spectacles on a little chain, and used
words like ‘avatar’ and ‘sigil’. And Annagramma, who ran the coven
because she’d invented it and had the tallest hat and sharpest voice,
was her star pupil (and her only one).

Granny Weatherwax always said that what Mrs Earwig did was wizard magic
with a dress on, and Annagramma certainly dragged a lot of books and
wands along to the meetings. Mostly, the girls did a few ceremonies to
keep her quiet, because for them the real purpose of the coven was to
meet friends, even if they were friends simply because they were really
the only people you could talk to freely as they had the same problems
and would understand what you were moaning about.

They always met out in the woods, even in the snow. There was always
enough wood lying around for a fire, and they all dressed up warm as a
matter of course. Even in the summer, comfort on a broomstick at any
height meant more layers of underclothing than anyone would dare guess
at, and sometimes a couple of hot water-bottles held on with string.

At the moment three small fireballs circled the fire. Annagramma had
made them. You could slay enemies with them, she’d said. They made the
others uneasy. It was wizard magic, showy and dangerous. Witches would
prefer to cut enemies dead with a look. There was no sense in killing
your enemy. How would she know you’d won?

Dimity Hubbub had brought a huge tray of Inside-out cake. It was just
the thing to put a coating on your ribs against the cold.

Tiffany said: ‘Miss Treason told me she’s going to die on Friday
morning. She said she just knows.’

‘That’s a shame,’ said Annagramma, in a that’s-not-really-a-shame tone
of voice. ‘She was very old, though.’

‘She still is,’ said Tiffany.

‘Um, it’s called The Call,’ said Petulia Gristle. ‘Old witches know when
they’re going to die. No one knows how it works. They just do.’

‘Has she still got those skulls?’ said Lucy Warbeck, who today had her
hair piled up on her head with a knife and fork stuck in it. ‘I couldn’t
stand them. They seemed to be, like, looking at me all the time!’

‘It was her using me as a mirror that made me leave,’ said Lulu Darling.
‘Does she still do that?’

Tiffany sighed. ‘Yes.’

‘I said flatly that I wouldn’t go,’ said Gertruder Tiring, poking the
fire. ‘Did you know that if you leave a witch without permission, no
other witch will take you on, but if you leave Miss Treason even after
only one night, no one says anything about it and they just find you
another place?’

‘Mrs Earwig says things like skulls and ravens are going far too far,’
said Annagramma. ‘Everyone around there is literally frightened out of
their lives!’

‘Um, what’s going to happen to you?’ said Petulia to Tiffany.

‘I don’t know. I suppose I’ll go somewhere else.’

‘Poor you,’ said Annagramma. ‘Miss Treason didn’t say who’ll take over
the cottage, by any chance?’ she added, as if she’d only just thought of
the question.

The sound that followed was the silence made by half a dozen pairs of
ears listening so hard they were nearly creaking. There were not a lot
of young witches coming up, it was true, but witches lived a long time
and getting your own cottage was the prize. That’s when you started
getting respect.

‘No,’ said Tiffany.

‘Not even a hint?’

‘No.’

‘She didn’t say it was going to be you, did she?’ said Annagramma
sharply. Her voice could be really annoying. It could make ‘hello’ sound
like an accusation.

‘No!’

‘Anyway, you’re too young.’

‘Actually, there’s no, you know, actual age limit,’ said Lucy Warbeck.
‘Nothing written down, anyway.’

‘How do you know that?’ Annagramma snapped.

‘I asked Old Mrs Pewmire,’ said Lucy.

Annagramma’s eyes narrowed. ‘You _asked_ her? Why?’

Lucy rolled her eyes. ‘Because I wanted to know, that’s all. Look,
everyone knows you’re the oldest and the … you know, most trained. Of
course you’ll get the cottage.’

‘Yes,’ said Annagramma, watching Tiffany suspiciously. ‘Of course.’

‘That’s, um, sorted out, then,’ said Petulia, more loudly than
necessary. ‘Did you have a lot of snow last night? Old Mother Blackcap
said it was unusual.’

Tiffany thought: Oh dear, here we go …

‘No, we often get it this early up here,’ said Lucy. ‘I thought it was a
bit fluffier than usual,’ said Petulia. ‘Quite pretty, if you like that
sort of thing.’

‘It was just snow,’ said Annagramma. ‘Hey, did any of you hear what
happened to the new girl who started with Old Miss Tumult? Ran away
screaming after an hour?’ She smiled, not very sympathetically.

‘Um, was it the frog?’ said Petulia.

‘No, not the frog. She didn’t mind the frog. It was Unlucky Charlie.’

‘He can be scary,’ Lucy agreed.

And that was it, Tiffany realized, as the gossip ran on. Someone who was
practically a kind of god had made billions of snowflakes that looked
like her – and they hadn’t noticed!

… which was a good thing, obviously …

Of course it was. The last thing she wanted was teasing and stupid
questions, of course. Well, of course …

… but … well … it would have been nice if they’d known, if they’d said
‘Wow!’ if they’d been jealous or frightened or impressed. And she
couldn’t tell them, or at least she couldn’t tell Annagramma, who’d make
a joke of it and almost but not exactly say that she was making it up.

The wintersmith had visited her and been … impressed. It was a bit sad
if the only people who knew about this were Miss Treason and hundreds of
Feegles, especially since – she shuddered – by Friday morning it would
only be known by hundreds of little blue men.

To put it another way: if she didn’t tell someone else who was at least
the same size as her and alive, she would burst.

So she told Petulia, on the way home. They had to go the same way and
they both flew so slowly that at night it was easier to walk, since you
didn’t hit so many trees.

Petulia was plump and reliable and already the best pig witch in the
mountains, a fact that means a lot where every family owns a pig. And
Miss Treason had said that soon the boys would be running after her,
because a girl who knows her pigs would never want for a husband.

The only problem with Petulia was that she always agreed with you and
always said what she thought you wanted to hear. But Tiffany was a bit
cruel, and just told her all the facts. She got a few wows, which she
was pleased with.

After a while Petulia said: ‘That must have been very, um, interesting.’
And that was Petulia for you.

‘What shall I do?’

‘Um … do you need to do anything?’ said Petulia.

‘Well, sooner or later people are going to notice that all snowflakes
are shaped like me!’

‘Um, are you worried that they won’t?’ said Petulia, so innocently that
Tiffany laughed.

‘But I’ve got this feeling that it’s not going to stop with snowflakes!
I mean, he is everything to do with wintertime!’

‘And he ran away when you screamed …’ said Petulia thoughtfully.

‘That’s right.’

‘And then he did something sort of … silly.’

‘What?’

‘The snowflakes,’ said Petulia helpfully

‘Well, I wouldn’t say that, exactly,’ said Tiffany, a bit hurt. ‘Not
exactly _silly_.’

‘Then it’s all obvious,’ said Petulia. ‘He’s a boy.’

‘What?’

‘A boy. You know what they are?’ said Petulia. ‘Blush, grunt, mumble,
wibble? They’re pretty much all the same.’

‘But he’s millions of years old and he acts like he’s never seen a girl
before!’

‘Um, I don’t know. _Has_ he ever seen a girl before?’

‘He must have done! What about Summer?’ said Tiffany. ‘She’s a girl.
Well, a woman. According to a book I’ve seen, anyway.’

‘I suppose all you can do is wait to see what he does next, then. Sorry.
I’ve never had snowflakes made in my honour … er, we’re here …’

They’d reached the clearing where Miss Treason lived, and Petulia began
to look a bit nervous.

‘Um … all these stories about her …’ she said, looking at the cottage.
‘Are you all right there?’

‘Was one of them about what she can do with her thumbnail?’ said
Tiffany.

‘Yes!’ said Petulia, shuddering.

‘She made that one up. Don’t tell anyone, though.’

‘Why would anyone make up a story like that about themselves?’

Tiffany hesitated. Pigs couldn’t be fooled by boffo, so Petulia hadn’t
run across it. And she was amazingly honest, which Tiffany was coming to
learn was a bit of a drawback in a witch. It wasn’t that witches were
actually _dishonest_, but they were careful about what kind of truth
they told.

‘I don’t know,’ she lied. ‘Anyway, you have to cut through quite a lot
of a person before anything falls out. And skin is quite tough. I don’t
think it’s possible.’

Petulia looked alarmed. ‘You tried?’

‘I practised with my thumbnail on a big ham this morning, if that’s what
you mean,’ said Tiffany. You have to check things, she thought to
herself. I heard the story that Miss Treason has wolf’s teeth, and
people tell that to one another even though they’ve seen her.

‘Um … I’ll come and help tomorrow, of course,’ said Petulia, nervously
looking at Tiffany’s hands in case there were going to be any more
thumbnail experiments. ‘Going Away parties can be quite jolly, really.
But, um, if I was you, I’d tell Mr Wintersmith to go away. That’s what I
did when Davey Lummock started getting, um, too romantic. And I told him
that I was, um, walking out with Makky Weaver – _don’t tell the
others_!’

‘Isn’t he the one who talks about pigs all the time?’

‘Well, pigs are very interesting,’ said Petulia reproachfully. ‘And his
father, um, has got the biggest pig-breeding farm in the mountains.’

‘That’s something worth thinking about, definitely,’ said Tiffany.
‘Ouch.’

‘What happened?’ said Petulia.

‘Oh, nothing. My hand really twinged there for a moment.’ Tiffany rubbed
it. ‘Part of the healing, I suppose. See you tomorrow.’

Tiffany went indoors. Petulia carried on through the forest.

From up near the roof came the sounds of a conversation.

‘Didja hear what the fat girl said?’

‘Aye, but pigs are no’ that interestin’.’

‘Oh, I dinnae ken aboot that. A verrae useful animal is the pig. You can
eat every part o’ it, ye ken, except for the squeal.’

‘Ach, ye’re wrong there. Ye can use the squeal.’

‘Dinnae be daft!’

‘Aye, ye can so! Ye make up a pie crust, right, an’ ye put in a lot o’
ham, right, an’ then ye catch the squeal, put the top on the pie before
he can escape, right, an’ bung it straight in the oven.’

‘I ne’er heard o’ such a thing as that!’

‘Have ye no’? It’s called squeal and ham pie.’

‘There’s nae such thing!’

‘Why not? There’s bubble-and-squeak, right? An’ a squeak is wee compared
tae a squeal. I reckon you could—’

‘If youse mudlins dinnae listen I’ll put ye inna pie!’ yelled Rob
Anybody. The Feegles muttered into silence.

And on the other side of the clearing, the wintersmith watched with
purple-grey eyes. He watched until a candle was lit in an upstairs room,
and watched the orange glow until it went out.

Then, walking unsteadily on new legs, he went towards the flower patch
where, in the summer, roses had grown.

If you went to Zakzak Stronginthearm’s magical emporium, you’d see
crystal balls of all sizes but more or less only one price, which was A
Great Deal Of Money. Since most witches, and particularly the good ones,
had Not Much Money At All, they made use of other things, like the glass
floats off old fishing nets or a saucer of black ink.

There was a puddle of black ink on Granny Weatherwax’s table now. It had
been in the saucer, but things had wobbled a bit when Granny and Miss
Tick had banged their heads together through trying to look in the
saucer at the same time.

‘Did you hear that?’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘Petulia Gristle asked the
important question, and she just didn’t think about it!’

‘I’m sorry to say I missed it too,’ said Miss Tick. You, the white
kitten, jumped up onto the table, walked carefully through the puddle of
ink and dropped into Miss Tick’s lap.

‘Stop that, You,’ said Granny Weatherwax in a vague sort of way, as Miss
Tick stared down at her dress.

‘It hardly shows up,’ said Miss Tick, but in fact four perfect cat
footprints were very clear. Witches’ dresses start out black but soon
fade to shades of grey because of frequent washings or, in the case of
Miss Tick, regular dips in various ponds and streams. They got
threadbare and ragged, too, and their owners liked that. It showed you
were a working witch, not a witch for show. Four black kitten footprints
in the middle of your dress suggested you were a bit wussy, though. She
lowered the cat to the floor, where it trotted over to Granny
Weatherwax, rubbed up against her and tried to ‘meep’ more chicken into
existence.

‘What was the important thing?’ said Miss Tick.

‘I’m asking you as one witch to another, Perspicacia Tick: has the
wintersmith ever _met_ a girl?’

‘Well,’ said Miss Tick, ‘I suppose the classic representation of Summer
might be called a—’

‘But do they ever _meet_?’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘In the dance, I suppose. Just for a moment,’ said Miss Tick.

‘And at that moment, that very moment, in dances Tiffany Aching,’ said
Granny Weatherwax. ‘A witch who won’t wear black. No, it’s blue and
green for her, like green grass under a blue sky. She calls to the
strength of her hills, all the time. An’ they calls to her! Hills that
was once alive, Miss Tick! They feels the rhythm of the dance, an’ so in
her bones does she, if she did but know it. And this shapes her life,
even here! She could not help but tap her feet! The _land_ taps its feet
to the dance of the seasons!’

‘But she—’ Miss Tick began, because no teacher likes to hear anyone else
talk for very long.

‘What happened in that moment?’ Granny Weatherwax went on, unstoppably.
‘Summer, Winter and Tiffany. One spinning moment! And then they part.
Who knows what got tangled? Suddenly, the wintersmith is acting so
stupid he might even be a wee bit … human?’

‘What _has_ she got herself into?’ said Miss Tick.

‘The Dance, Miss Tick. The dance never ends. An’ she can’t change the
steps, not yet. She has to dance to his tune for a while.’

‘She’s going to be in a lot of danger,’ Miss Tick said.

‘She has the strength of her hills,’ said Granny.

‘Soft hills, though,’ said Miss Tick. ‘Easily worn down.’

‘But the heart of the chalk is flint, remember. It cuts sharper than any
knife.’

‘Snow can cover the hills,’ said Miss Tick.

‘Not for ever.’

‘It did once,’ said Miss Tick, fed up with playing games. ‘For thousands
of years, at least. An age of ice. Great beasts wallowed and sneezed
across the world.’

‘That’s as may be,’ said Granny Weatherwax, a glint in her eye. ‘O’
course, I wasn’t around then. In the meantime, we must watch our girl.’

Miss Tick sipped her tea. Staying with Granny Weatherwax was a bit of a
trial. Last night’s pot of chicken scraps had turned out to be not for
her but for You. The witches had good thick pease pudding and bacon soup
without – and this was important – the bacon. Granny kept a big lump of
fat bacon on a string and had taken it out, carefully dried it and put
it away for another day. Despite her hunger, Miss Tick was impressed.
Granny could shave the skin off a second.

‘I hear that Miss Treason has heard her Call,’ she said.

‘Yes. Funeral tomorrow,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘That’s a difficult steading over there,’ said Miss Tick. ‘They’ve had
Miss Treason for a long, long time. It’ll be a tricky task for a new
witch.’

‘She’ll be a difficult … act to follow, indeed,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Act?’ said Miss Tick.

‘I meant life, of course,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Whom will you put in there?’ said Miss Tick, because she liked to be
first with the news. She also made a point of saying ‘whom’ whenever she
could. She felt it was more literate.

‘Miss Tick, that is not up to me,’ said Granny sharply. ‘We have no
leaders in witchcraft, you know that.’

‘Oh indeed,’ said Miss Tick, who also knew that the leader the witches
did not have was Granny Weatherwax. ‘But I know that Mrs Earwig will be
proposing young Annagramma, and Mrs Earwig has quite a few followers
these days. It’s probably those books she writes. She makes witchcraft
sound exciting.’

‘You know I don’t like witches who try to impose their will on others,’
said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Quite,’ said Miss Tick, trying not to laugh.

‘I shall, however, drop a name into the conversation,’ said Granny
Weatherwax.

With a clang, I expect, thought Miss Tick. ‘Petulia Gristle has shaped
up very well,’ she said. ‘A good all-round witch.’

‘Yes, but mostly all round pigs,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘I was
thinking about Tiffany Aching.’

‘What?’ said Miss Tick. ‘Don’t you think that child has enough to cope
with?’

Granny Weatherwax smiled briefly. ‘Well, Miss Tick, you know what they
say: if you want something done, give it to someone who’s busy! And
young Tiffany might be very busy soon,’ she added.

‘Why do you say that?’ said Miss Tick.

‘Hmm. Well, I can’t be sure, but I will be very interested to see what
happens to her feet …’

Tiffany didn’t sleep much on the night before the funeral. Miss
Treason’s loom had clicked and clacked all through the night, because
she had an order for bed sheets she wanted to complete.

It was just getting light when Tiffany gave up and got up, in that
order. At least she could get the goats mucked out and milked before she
tackled the other chores. There was snow, and a bitter wind was blowing
it across the ground.

It wasn’t until she was carting a barrowload of muck to the compost
heap, which was steaming gently in the grey light, that she heard the
tinkling. It sounded a bit like the wind chimes Miss Pullunder had
around her cottage, only they were tuned to a note that was
uncomfortable for demons.

It was coming from the place where the rose bed was in summer. It grew
fine, old roses, full of scent and so red they were nearly, yes, black.

The roses were blooming again. But they—

‘_How do you like them, sheep girl?_’ said a voice. It didn’t arrive in
her head, it wasn’t her thoughts, any of them, and Dr Bustle didn’t wake
up until at least ten. It was her own voice, from her own lips. But she
hadn’t thought it, and she hadn’t meant to say it.

Now she was running back to the cottage. She hadn’t decided to do that
either, but her legs had taken over. It wasn’t fear, not exactly; it was
just that she very much wanted to be somewhere other than in the garden
with the sun not up and the snow blowing and filling the air with ice
crystals as fine as fog.

She ran through the scullery door and collided with a dark figure, which
said, ‘Um, sorry,’ and therefore was Petulia. She was the kind of person
who apologized if you trod on her foot. Right now, there was no sight
more welcome.

‘Sorry, I was called out to deal with a difficult cow and, um, it wasn’t
worth going back to bed,’ she said, and then added: ‘Are you all right?
You don’t look it!’

‘I heard a voice in my mouth!’ said Tiffany.

Petulia gave her an odd look and might just have stepped an inch or so
backward.

‘You mean in your head?’ she said. ‘No! I can deal with _those_! My
mouth said them all by itself! And come and see what’s grown in the rose
garden! You won’t believe it!’

There were roses. They were made of ice so fragile that, if you breathed
on them, they melted away and left nothing but the dead stalks they’d
grown on. And there were dozens of them, waving in the wind.

‘Even the heat of my hand near them makes them drip,’ said Petulia. ‘Do
you think it’s your winter-smith?’

‘He’s not mine! And I can’t think of any other way they’d turn up!’

‘And you think he, um, spoke to you?’ said Petulia, plucking another
rose. Ice particles as fine as sugar slid off her hat every time she
moved.

‘No! It was me! I mean, my voice! But it didn’t sound like him, like him
… I mean, like I think he’d sound! It was a bit snide, like Annagramma
when she’s in a mood! But it was my voice!’

‘How _do_ you think he’d sound?’ said Petulia.

The wind gusted across the clearing, making the pine trees shake and
roar.

‘… Tiffany … be mine …’

After a little while, Petulia coughed and said: ‘Um, was it just me, or
did that sound like—?’

‘Not just you,’ whispered Tiffany, standing very still.

‘Ah,’ said Petulia, in a voice as bright and brittle as a rose of ice.
‘Well, I think we should get indoors now, yes? Um, and get all the fires
lit and some tea made, yes? And then start getting things ready, because
quite soon _a lot of people will be turning up_.’

A minute later they were in the cottage, with the doors bolted and every
candle spluttering into life.

They didn’t talk about the wind or the roses. What would be the point?
Besides, there was a job to be done. Work, that’s what helped. Work and
think and talk later, don’t gabble now like frightened ducks. They even
managed to get another layer of grime off the windows.

All through the morning people arrived from the village with the things
Miss Treason had ordered. People were walking across the clearing. The
sun was out, even if it was as pale as a poached egg. The world was
belonging to … normality. Tiffany caught herself wondering if she was
wrong about things. Were there roses? There were none now; the petals
had not survived even the dawn’s weak light. Had the wind spoken? Then
she met Petulia’s gaze. Yes, it had happened. But for now, there was a
funeral to feed.

The girls had already got to work on the ham rolls, with three sorts of
mustard, but however far wrong you couldn’t go with a ham roll, if that
was all you were giving seventy or eighty hungry witches, you were going
all the way past Wrong and were heading into Absolute Party Disaster. So
barrows were arriving with loaves and joints of beef, and jars of
pickled cucumbers so big that they looked like drowned whales. Witches
are very keen on pickles, as a rule, but the food they like best is free
food. Yes, that’s the diet for your working witch: lots of food that
someone else is paying for, and so much of it that there is enough to
shove in your pockets for later.

As it turned out, Miss Treason wasn’t paying for it either. No one would
take any money. They wouldn’t leave, either, but hung about by the back
door looking worried until they could have a word with Tiffany. The
conversation, when she could spare the time from slicing and spreading,
would go something like this:

‘She’s not really dying, is she?’

‘Yes. At around half past six tomorrow morning.’

‘But she’s very old!’

‘Yes. I think that’s sort of why, you see.’

‘But what will we do without her?’

‘I don’t know. What did you do before she was here?’

‘She was _always_ here! She knew everything! Who’s going to tell us what
to do now?’

And then they’d say: ‘It’s not going to be you, is it?’ and give her a
Look which said: We hope not. You don’t even wear a black dress.

After a while Tiffany got fed up with this and in a very sharp voice
asked the next person, a woman delivering six cooked chickens: ‘What
about all those stories about her slitting open bad people’s bellies
with her thumbnail, then?’

‘Er, well, yes, but it was never anyone we knew,’ said the woman
virtuously.

‘And the demon in the cellar?’

‘So they say. O’ course, I never saw it pers’nally.’ The woman gave
Tiffany a worried look. ‘It is down there, isn’t it?’

You want it to be, Tiffany thought. You actually want there to be a
monster in the cellar!

But as far as Tiffany knew, what was in the cellar this morning was a
lot of snoring Feegles who had been boozin’. If you put a lot of Feegles
in a desert, within twenty minutes they’d find a bottle of something
dreadful to drink.

‘Believe me, madam, you wouldn’t want to wake what’s down there now,’
she said, giving the woman a worried smile.

The woman seemed satisfied with that, but suddenly looked concerned
again.

‘And the spiders? She really eats spiders?’ she said.

‘Well, there’s lots of webs,’ said Tiffany, ‘but you never see a
spider!’

‘Ah, right,’ said the woman, as if she’d been let into a big secret.
‘Say what you like, Miss Treason’s been a real witch. With skulls! I
expect you have to polish ’em, eh? Ha! She could spit your eye out as
soon as look at you!’

‘She never did, though,’ said a man delivering a huge tray of sausages.
‘Not to anyone local, anyway.’

‘That’s true,’ the woman admitted reluctantly. ‘She was very gracious in
that respect.’

‘Ah, she was a proper old-time witch, Miss Treason,’ said the sausage
man. ‘Many a man has widdled in his boots when she’s turned the sharp
side of her tongue on him. You know that weaving she’s always doing? She
weaves your name into the loom, that’s what she does! And if you tell
her a lie, your thread breaks and you drop down dead on the spot!’

‘Yes, that happens all the time,’ said Tiffany, thinking: This is
amazing! Boffo has a life of its own!

‘Well, we don’t get witches like her these days,’ said a man delivering
four dozen eggs. ‘These days it’s all airy-fairy and dancin’ about
without your drawers on.’

They all looked enquiringly at Tiffany.

‘It’s wintertime,’ she said coldly. ‘And I’ve got to get on with my
work. The witches will be here soon. Thank you very much.’

When they were putting the eggs on to boil, she told Petulia about it.
It didn’t come as a surprise.

‘Um, they’re proud of her,’ she said. ‘I’ve heard them boasting about
her up at the pig market in Lancre.’

‘They boast?’

‘Oh, yes. Like: you think old Mistress Weatherwax is tough? Ours has got
skulls! And a demon! She’s gonna live for ever ’cos she’s got a
clockwork heart she winds up every day! And she eats spiders, sure of
it! How d’you like them poisoned apples, huh?’

Boffo works all by itself, Tiffany thought, once you get it started. Our
baron is bigger than your baron, our witch is witchier than your witch …

3 Kevin and Neville and Trevor.

[image]


CHAPTER 5
MISS TREASON’S BIG DAY

The witches started arriving at four o’clock, and Tiffany went out into
the clearing to do air traffic control. Annagramma arrived by herself,
looking very pale and wearing more occult jewellery than you could
imagine. And there was a difficult moment when Mrs Earwig and Granny
Weatherwax arrived at the same time, and circled in a ballet of careful
politeness as each waited for the other to land. In the end, she
directed them into different corners of the clearing and hurried away.

There was no sign of the wintersmith, and she was sure she’d know if he
was near. He’d gone far away, she hoped, arranging a gale or conducting
a blizzard. The memory of that voice in her head remained, awkward and
worrying. Like any oyster dealing with a piece of grit, Tiffany coated
it with people and hard work.

Now the day was just another pale, dry, early winter’s day. Apart from
the food, nothing else at the funeral had been arranged. Witches arrange
themselves. Miss Treason sat in her big chair, greeting old friends and
old enemies alike.4 The cottage was far too small for them all, so they
spilled out into the garden in gossiping groups, like a flock of old
crows or, possibly, chickens. Tiffany didn’t have much time to talk,
because she was kept too busy carrying trays.

But something was going on, she could tell. Witches would pause and turn
to watch her as she staggered past, and then turn back to their group
and the level of hubbub in the group would rise a bit. Groups would come
together and separate again. Tiffany recognized this. The witches were
making a Decision.

Lucy Warbeck sidled up to her while she was bringing out a tray of tea,
and whispered, as if it was a guilty secret: ‘Mistress Weatherwax has
suggested _you_, Tiff.’

‘No!’

‘It’s true! They’re talking about it! Annagramma’s having a fit!’

‘Are you sure?’

‘Positive. Honestly! Best of luck!’

‘But I don’t want the—’ Tiffany pushed the tray into Lucy’s arms. ‘Look,
can you take that around for me, please? They’ll just grab as you go
past. I’ve got to get the, er, put the things in, er … got things to do
…’

She hurried down the steps to the cellar, which was suspiciously empty
of Feegles, and leaned against the wall.

Granny Weatherwax must be cackling, rules or no rules! But the Second
Thoughts crept up to whisper: You could do it, though. She may be right.
Annagramma annoys people. She talks to them as if they are children.
She’s interested in magic (sorry, magick with a K), but people get on
her nerves. She’ll make a mess of it, you know she will. She just
happens to be tall and wears lots of occult jewellery and looks
impressive in a pointy hat …

Why would Granny suggest Tiffany? Oh, she was good. She knew she was
good. But didn’t everyone know she didn’t want to spend her life up
here? Well, it had to be Annagramma, didn’t it? Witches tended to be
cautious and traditional, and she was the oldest of the coven. OK, a lot
of witches didn’t like Mrs Earwig, but Granny Weatherwax didn’t exactly
have many friends, either.

She went back upstairs before she was missed, and tried to be
inconspicuous as she sidled through the crowd.

She saw Mrs Earwig at the centre of one group, with Annagramma; the girl
looked worried, and hurried over when she caught sight of Tiffany. She
was red in the face.

‘Have you heard anything?’ she demanded.

‘What? No!’ said Tiffany, starting to pile up used plates.

‘You’re trying to take the cottage away from me, aren’t you?’ Annagramma
was nearly crying.

‘Don’t be silly! Me? I don’t want a cottage at all!’

‘So you say. But some of _them_ are saying you should get it! Miss Level
and Miss Pullunder have spoken up for you!’

‘What? I couldn’t possibly follow Miss Treason!’

‘Well, of course that’s what Mrs Earwig is telling everyone,’ said
Annagramma, settling down a bit. ‘Completely unacceptable, she says.’

I took the hiver through the Dark Door, Tiffany thought, as she
viciously scraped food scraps onto the garden for the birds. The White
Horse came out of the hill for me. I got my brother and Roland back from
the Queen of the Fairies. And I danced with the wintersmith, who turned
me into ten billion snowflakes. No, I don’t want to be in a cottage in
these damp woods; I don’t want to be a kind of slave to people who can’t
be bothered to think for themselves; I don’t want to wear midnight and
make people afraid of me. There is no name for what I want to be. But I
was old enough to do all those things, and I was _acceptable_.

But she said: ‘I don’t know what this is about!’

At which point, she felt someone looking at her and she knew, if she
turned round, that it would be Granny Weatherwax.

Her Third Thoughts – the ones that paid attention out of the corner of
her ear and the edge of her eye all the time – told her: Something is
going on. All you can do about it is be yourself. Don’t look round.

‘You’re really not interested?’ said Annagramma uncertainly.

‘I’ve come up here to learn witching,’ said Tiffany stiffly. ‘And then
I’m going to go home. But … are you _sure_ you want the cottage?’

‘Well, of course! Every witch wants a cottage!’

‘But they’ve had years and years of Miss Treason,’ Tiffany pointed out.

‘Then they’ll just have to get used to me,’ said Annagramma. ‘I expect
they’ll be pretty glad to see the back of skulls and cobwebs and being
frightened! I know she’s got the local people really scared of her.’

‘Ah,’ said Tiffany.

‘I’ll be a new broom,’ said Annagramma. ‘Frankly, Tiffany, after that
old woman just about anyone would be popular.’

‘Er, yes …’ said Tiffany. ‘Tell me, Annagramma, have you ever worked
with any other witch?’

‘No, I’ve always been with Mrs Earwig. I’m her first pupil, you know,’
Annagramma added proudly. ‘She’s very exclusive.’

‘And she doesn’t go around the villages much, does she?’ said Tiffany.

‘No. She concentrates on the Higher Magick.’ Annagramma wasn’t
particularly observant and was very vain even by the standard of
witches, but now she looked a little less confident. ‘Well, someone has
to. We can’t all tramp around bandaging cut fingers, you know,’ she
added. ‘Is there a problem?’

‘Hmm? Oh, no. I’m sure you’ll get on well,’ said Tiffany. ‘Er … I know
my way around the place, so if you need any help, just ask.’

‘Oh, I’m sure I’ll get things sorted out to my liking,’ said Annagramma,
whose boundless self-confidence couldn’t stay squashed for long. ‘I’d
better go. By the way, it looks as though the food is running low.’

She swept away.

The big vats on the trestle table just inside the door were indeed
looking a bit empty. Tiffany saw one witch stuff four hard-boiled eggs
into her pocket.

‘Good afternoon, Miss Tick,’ she said loudly.

‘Ah, Tiffany,’ said Miss Tick smoothly, turning round without the least
sign of embarrassment. ‘Miss Treason has just been telling us how well
you have been doing here.’

‘Thank you, Miss Tick.’

‘She says you have a fine eye for hidden detail,’ Miss Tick went on.

Like the labels on skulls, Tiffany thought. ‘Miss Tick,’ she said, ‘do
you know anything about people wanting me to take over the cottage?’

‘Oh, that’s all been decided,’ said Miss Tick. ‘There was some
suggestion that it should be you, since you’re already here, but really,
you are still young and Annagramma has had much more experience. I’m
sorry, but—’

‘That’s not fair, Miss Tick,’ said Tiffany.

‘Now, now, Tiffany, that’s not the sort of thing a witch says—’ Miss
Tick began.

‘I don’t mean not fair on me, I mean unfair on Annagramma. She’s going
to make a mess of it, isn’t she?’

Just for the skin of a moment, Miss Tick looked guilty. It really was a
very short space of time indeed, but Tiffany spotted it.

‘Mrs Earwig is certain that Annagramma will do a very good job,’ said
Miss Tick.

‘Are you?’

‘Remember who you are talking to, please!’

‘I’m talking to you, Miss Tick! This is … wrong!’ Tiffany’s eyes blazed.

She saw movement out of the corner of her eye. An entire plate of
sausages was moving across the white cloth at very high speed.

‘And _that_ is stealing,’ she growled, leaping after it.

She chased after the dish as, skimming a few feet above the ground, it
rounded the cottage and disappeared behind the goat shed. She plunged
after it.

There were several plates lying on the leaves behind the shed. There
were jacket potatoes, oozing butter, and a dozen ham rolls, and a pile
of hard-boiled eggs and two cooked chickens. Everything except the
sausages in the dish, which was now stationary, had a gnawed look.

There was absolutely no sign of the Feegles. That was how she could tell
they were there. They always hid from her when they knew she was angry.

Well, this time she was really angry. Not at the Feegles (much),
although the stupid hiding trick got on her nerves, but at Miss Tick and
Granny Weatherwax and Annagramma and Miss Treason (for dying), and the
wintersmith himself (for a lot of reasons she hadn’t had time to sort
out yet).

She stepped back and went quiet.

There was always a feeling of sinking slowly and peacefully, but this
time it was like a dive into darkness.

When she opened her eyes, it felt as if she was looking through windows
into a huge hall. Sound seemed to be coming from a long way away and
there was an itching between her eyes.

Feegles appeared, from under leaves, behind twigs, even from under
plates. Their voices sounded as though they were under water.

‘Ach, crivens! She’s done some big hagglin’ on us!’

‘She’s ne’er done that before!’

Hah, I’m hiding from you, thought Tiffany. Bit of a change, eh? Hmm, I
wonder if I can move? She took a step sideways. The Feegles didn’t seem
to see it.

‘She’s gonna jump oot on us any moment! Ooohhh, waily—’

Ha! If I could walk up to Granny Weatherwax like this she’d have to be
so impressed—

The itch on Tiffany’s nose was getting worse, and there was a feeling
that was similar to, but fortunately not yet the same as, the need to
visit the privy. It meant: Something is going to happen soon, so it
would be a good idea to be ready for it.

The sound of the voices began to get clearer and little blue and purple
spots ran across her vision.

And then there was something that, if it had made a noise, would have
gone _Wwwhamp!_ It was like the popping you got in your ears after a
high broomstick flight. She reappeared in the middle of the Feegles,
causing immediate panic.

‘Stop stealing the funeral meats right now, you wee scuggers!’ she
shouted.

The Feegles stopped and stared at her. Then Rob Anybody said: ‘Socks
wi’oot feets?’

There was one of those moments – you got a lot of them around the
Feegles – when the world seems to have got tangled up and it was so
important to unravel the knot before you can go any further.

‘What are you talking about?’ said Tiffany.

‘Scuggers,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘They’re like socks wi’out feets in ’em.
For keepin’ yer legs warm, ye ken?’

‘You mean like legwarmers?’ said Tiffany.

‘Aye, aye, that would be a verrae guid name for ’em, it bein’ what they
do,’ said Rob. ‘In point o’ fact, mebbe the term ye meant to use wuz
“thievin’ scunners”, which means—’

‘– Us,’ said Daft Wullie helpfully.

‘Oh. Yes. Thank you,’ said Tiffany quietly. She folded her arms and then
shouted, ‘Right, you thieving scunners! How dare you steal Miss
Treason’s funeral meats!’

‘Oh, waily waily, it’s the foldin’ o’ the arms, the foooldin’ o’ the
aaaarmss!’ cried Daft Wullie, dropping to the ground and trying to cover
himself with leaves. Around him Feegles started to wail and cower and
Big Yan began to bang his head on the rear wall of the dairy.

‘Now then, ye must all stay calm!’ yelled Rob Anybody, turning round and
waving his hand desperately at his brothers.

‘There’s the pursin’ o’ the lips!’ a Feegle shouted, pointing a shaking
finger at Tiffany’s face. ‘She’s got the knowin’ o’ the pursin’ o’ the
lips! ’Tis doom come upon us a’!’

The Feegles tried to run, but since they were panicking again they
mostly collided with one another.

‘I’m waiting for an explanation!’ said Tiffany.

The Feegles froze, and every face turned towards Rob Anybody.

‘An explanation?’ he said, shifting uneasily. ‘Oh, aye. An Explanation.
Nae problemo. An Explanation. Er … what kind would you like?’

‘What kind? I just want the truth!’

‘Aye? Oh. The truth? Are you sure?’ Rob ventured, rather nervously. ‘I
can do much more interestin’ Explanations than that—’

‘Out with it!’ snapped Tiffany, tapping her foot. ‘Ach, crivens, the
tappin’ o’ the feets has started!’ moaned Daft Wullie. ‘There’s gonna be
witherin’ scoldin’ at any moment!’

And that was it. Tiffany burst out laughing. You couldn’t look at a
bunch of frightened Nac Mac Feegles and not laugh. They were so bad at
it. One sharp word and they were like a basket of frightened puppies,
only smellier.

Rob Anybody gave her a lopsided, nervous grin.

‘Weel, all the big hags is doin’ it too,’ he said. ‘The wee fat one’s
thieved fifteen ham rolls!’ he added admiringly.

‘That’d be Nanny Ogg,’ said Tiffany. ‘Yes, she always carries a string
bag up her knicker leg.’

‘Ach, this is no’ a proper wake,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘There should be
singin’ an’ boozin’ an’ the flexin’ o’ the knees, no’ all this standin’
arroond gossipin’.’

‘Well, gossiping’s part of witchcraft,’ said Tiffany. ‘They’re checking
to see if they’ve gone batty yet. What is the flexin’ o’ the knees?’

‘The dancin’, ye ken,’ said Rob. ‘The jigs an’ reels. ’Tis no’ a good
wake unless the hands is flingin’ an’ the feets is twinklin’ an’ the
knees is flexin’ an’ the kilts is flyin’.’

Tiffany had never seen the Feegles dance, but she had heard them. It
sounded like warfare, which was probably how they ended up. The flyin’
o’ the kilts sounded a bit worrying, though, and reminded her of a
question she’d never quite dared to ask up until now.

‘Tell me … is there anything worn under the kilt?’

From the way the Feegles went quiet again, she got the feeling that this
was not a question they liked being asked.

Rob Anybody narrowed his eyes. The Feegles held their breath.

‘Not necessarily,’ he said.

At last the funeral was over, possibly because there was nothing left to
eat and drink. Many of the departing witches were carrying small
packages. That was another tradition. A lot of things in the cottage
were the property of the cottage, and would pass on to the next witch,
but everything else got passed on to the soon-to-be-late-witch’s
friends. Since the old witch would be alive when this happened, it saved
squabbling.

That was the thing about witches. They were, according to Granny
Weatherwax, ‘people what looks up’. She didn’t explain. She seldom
explained. She didn’t mean people who looked at the sky; everyone did
that. She probably meant that they looked up above the everyday chores
and wondered, What’s all this about? How does it work? What should I do?
What am I for? And possibly even: Is there anything worn under the kilt?
Perhaps that was why odd, in a witch, was normal …

… but they’d squabble like polecats over a silver spoon that wasn’t even
silver. As it was, several were waiting impatiently by the sink for
Tiffany to wash up some big dishes that Miss Treason had promised to
them, and which had held the funeral roast potatoes and sausage rolls.

At least there was no problem with leftovers. Nanny Ogg, a witch who’d
invented Leftover Sandwiches Soup, was waiting in the scullery with her
big string bag and a bigger grin.

‘We were going to have the rest of the ham with potatoes for supper,’
said Tiffany, severely but with a certain amount of interest. She’d met
Nanny Ogg before and quite liked her, but Miss Treason had said, darkly,
that Nanny Ogg was ‘a disgusting old baggage’. That sort of comment
attracts your attention.

‘Fair enough,’ said Nanny Ogg as Tiffany placed her hand on the meat.
‘You did a good job here today, Tiff. People notice that.’

She was gone before Tiffany could recover. One of them had very nearly
said thank you! Amazing!

Petulia helped her bring the big table indoors and finish the tidying
up. She hesitated, though, before she left.

‘Um … you will be all right, will you?’ she said. ‘It’s all a bit …
strange.’

‘We’re supposed to be no strangers to strangeness,’ said Tiffany primly.
‘Anyway, you’ve sat up with the dead and dying, haven’t you?’

‘Oh, yes. Mostly pigs, though. Some humans. Um … I don’t mind staying,
if you like,’ Petulia added, in a leaving-as-soon-as-possible voice.

‘Thank you. But, after all, what’s the worst that can happen?’

Petulia stared at her, and then said, ‘Well, let me think … a thousand
vampire demons, each one with enormous—’

‘I’ll be fine,’ said Tiffany quickly. ‘Don’t you worry at all.
Goodnight.’

She shut the door and then leaned on it with her hand over her mouth
until she heard the gate click. She counted to ten to make sure that
Petulia had got some distance and then risked taking her hand away. By
then the scream that had been patiently waiting to come out had dwindled
to something like ‘Unk!’

This was going to be a very strange night.

People died. It was sad, but they did. What did you do next? People
expected the local witch to know. So you washed the body and did a few
secret and squelchy things and dressed them in their best clothes and
laid them out with bowls of earth and salt beside them (no one knew why
you did this bit, not even Miss Treason, but it had always been done)
and you put two pennies on their eyes ‘for the ferryman’ and you sat
with them the night before they were buried, because they shouldn’t be
left alone.

Exactly why was never properly explained, although everyone had been
told the story of the old man who was slightly less dead than everyone
thought and rose up off the spare bed in the middle of the night and got
back into bed with his wife.

The real reason was probably a lot darker that that. The start and
finish of things was always dangerous, lives most of all.

But Miss Treason was a wicked ol’ witch. Who knew what might happen?
Hang on, Tiffany told herself; don’t you believe the boffo. She was
really just a clever old lady with a catalogue!

In the other room Miss Treason’s loom stopped.

It often did. But, this evening, the sudden silence it made was louder
than usual.

Miss Treason called out: ‘What do we have in the larder that needs
eating up?’

Yes, this is going to be a very odd night, Tiffany told herself.

Miss Treason went to bed early. It was the first time Tiffany had ever
known her not to sleep in a chair. She’d put on a long white nightdress,
too, the first time Tiffany had seen her not in black.

There was a lot still to do. It was traditional that the cottage should
be left sparkling clean for the next witch, and although it was hard to
make black sparkle, Tiffany did her best. Actually, the cottage was
always pretty clean, but Tiffany scraped and scrubbed and polished
because it put off the moment when she’d have to go and talk to Miss
Treason. She even took down the fake spider webs and threw them on the
fire, where they burned with a nasty blue flame. She wasn’t sure what to
do with the skulls. Finally, she wrote down everything she could
remember about the local villages: when babies were due, who was very
ill and what with, who was feuding, who was ‘difficult’ and just about
every other local detail she thought might be helpful to Annagramma.
Anything to just put off the moment …

At last there was nothing for it but to climb the narrow stairs and say:
‘Is everything all right, Miss Treason?’

The old woman was sitting up in bed, scribbling. The ravens were perched
on the bed posts.

‘I’m just writing a few thank-you letters,’ she said. ‘Some of those
ladies today came quite a long way and will be having a chilly ride
back.’

‘“Thank you for coming to my funeral” letters?’ said Tiffany weakly.

‘Indeed. And they’re not often written, you may be sure of that. You
know the girl Annagramma Hawkin will be the new witch here? I am sure
she would like you to stay on. At least for a while.’

‘I don’t think that would be a good idea,’ said Tiffany.

‘Quite,’ said Miss Treason, smiling. ‘I suspect the girl Weatherwax has
arrangements in mind. It will be interesting to see how Mrs Earwig’s
brand of witchcraft suits my silly people, although it may be best to
observe events from behind a rock. Or, in my case, under it.’

She put the letters aside, and both the ravens turned to look at
Tiffany.

‘You have been here with me only three months.’

‘That’s right, Miss Treason.’

‘We have not talked, woman to woman. I should have taught you more.’

‘I’ve learned a lot, Miss Treason.’ And that was true.

‘You have a young man, Tiffany. He sends you letters and packages. You
go into Lancre Town every week to send letters to him. I fear you live
not where you love.’

Tiffany said nothing. They’d been through this before. Roland seemed to
fascinate Miss Treason.

‘I was always too busy to pay attention to young men,’ said Miss
Treason. ‘They were always for later and then later was too late. Pay
attention to your young man.’

‘Erm … I did say, he’s not actually my—’ Tiffany began, feeling herself
start to blush.

‘But do not become a strumpet like Mrs Ogg,’ said Miss Treason.

‘I’m not very musical,’ said Tiffany uncertainly.

Miss Treason laughed. ‘You have a dictionary, I believe,’ she said. ‘A
strange but useful thing for a girl to have.’

‘Yes, Miss Treason.’

‘On my bookshelf you will find a rather larger dictionary. An
unexpurgated dictionary. A useful thing for a young woman to have. You
may take it, and one other book. The others will remain with the
cottage. You may also have my broomstick. Everything else, of course,
belongs to the cottage.’

‘Thank you very much, Miss Treason. I’d like to take that book about
mythology.’

‘Ah, yes. Chaffinch. A very good choice. It has been a great help to me,
and will, I suspect, be of _particular_ assistance to you. The loom must
stay, of course. Annagramma Hawkin will find it useful.’

Tiffany doubted this. Annagramma wasn’t very practical at all. But it
was probably not the time to say so.

Miss Treason leaned back against the cushions.

‘They think you wove names into your cloth,’ said Tiffany.

‘That? Oh, it’s true. There’s nothing magical about it. It’s a very old
trick. Any weaver can do it. You won’t be able to read it, though,
without knowing how it was done.’ Miss Treason sighed. ‘Oh, my silly
people. Anything they don’t understand is magic. They think I can see
into their hearts, but no witch can do that. Not without surgery, at
least. No magic is needed to read their little minds, though. I’ve known
them since they were babes. I remember when their grandparents were
babes! They think they’re so grown up! But they’re still no better than
babies in the sandpit, squabbling over mud pies. I see their lies and
excuses and fears. They never grow up, not really. They never look up
and open their eyes. They stay children their whole lives.’

‘I’m sure they’ll miss you,’ said Tiffany.

‘Ha! I’m the wicked ol’ witch, girl. They feared me, and did what they
were told! They feared joke skulls and silly stories. I chose fear. I
knew they’d never love me for telling ’em the truth, so I made certain
of their fear. No, they’ll be relieved to hear the witch is dead. And
now I shall tell you something vitally important. It is the secret of my
long life.’

Ah, thought Tiffany, and leaned forward.

‘The important thing,’ said Miss Treason, ‘is to stay the passage of the
wind. You should avoid rumbustious fruits and vegetables. Beans are the
worst, take it from me.’

‘I don’t think I understand—’ Tiffany began.

‘Try not to fart, in a nutshell.’

‘In a nutshell I imagine it would be pretty unpleasant!’ said Tiffany
nervously. She couldn’t believe she was being told this.

‘This is no joking matter,’ said Miss Treason. ‘The human body only has
so much air in it. You have to make it last. One plate of beans can take
a year off your life. I have avoided rumbustiousness all my days. I am
an old person and that means what I say is wisdom!’ She gave the
bewildered Tiffany a stern look. ‘Do you understand, child?’

Tiffany’s mind raced. Everything is a test! ‘No,’ she said. ‘I’m not a
child and that’s nonsense, not wisdom!’

The stern look cracked into a smile. ‘Yes,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Total
gibberish. But you’ve got to admit it’s a corker, all the same, right?
You definitely believed it, just for a moment? The villagers did, last
year. You should have seen the way they walked about for a few weeks!
The strained looks on their faces quite cheered me up! How are things
with the wintersmith? All gone quiet, has it?’

The question was like a sharp knife in a slice of cake, and arrived so
suddenly that Tiffany gasped.

‘I woke up early and wondered where you were,’ said Miss Treason. It was
so easy to forget that she used other people’s ears and eyes all the
time, in an absentminded sort of way.

‘Did you see the roses?’ said Tiffany. She hadn’t felt the tell-tale
tickle, but she hadn’t exactly had much time for anything but worry.

‘Yes. Fine things,’ said Miss Treason. ‘I wish I could help you,
Tiffany, but I’m going to be otherwise occupied. And romance is an area
where I cannot offer much advice.’

‘Romance?’ said Tiffany, shocked

‘The girl Weatherwax and Miss Tick will have to guide you,’ Miss Treason
went on. ‘I must say, though, that I suspect that neither of them has
jousted much in the lists of love.’

‘Lists of love?’ said Tiffany. It was getting worse!

‘Can you play poker?’ Miss Treason asked.

‘Pardon?’

‘Poker. The card game. Or Cripple Mr Onion? Chase My Neighbour Up the
Passage? You must have sat up with the dead and dying before?’

‘Well, yes. But I’ve never played cards with them! Anyway, I don’t know
how to play!’

‘I’ll teach you. There’s a pack of cards in the bottom drawer of the
dresser. Go and fetch them.’

‘Is this like gambling?’ said Tiffany. ‘My father said that people
shouldn’t gamble.’

Miss Treason nodded. ‘Good advice, my dear. Don’t worry. The way I play
poker isn’t like gambling at all …’

When Tiffany awoke with a jolt, playing cards sliding off her dress and
onto the floor, the cold grey light of morning filled the room.

She peered at Miss Treason, who was snoring like a pig.

What was the time? Gone six at least! What should she do?

Nothing. There was nothing to do.

She picked up the Ace of Wands and stared at it. So that was poker, was
it? Well, she hadn’t been too bad at it, once she’d worked out that it
was all about making your face tell lies. For most of the time the cards
were just something to do with your hands.

Miss Treason slept on. Tiffany wondered if she should get some
breakfast, but it seemed such a—

‘The ancient kings of Djelibeybi, who are buried in pyramids,’ said Miss
Treason, from the bed, ‘used to believe that they could take things with
them into the next world. Such things as gold and precious stones and
even slaves. On that basis, please make me a ham sandwich.’

‘Er … you mean …?’ Tiffany began.

‘The journey after death is quite a long one,’ said Miss Treason,
sitting up. ‘I may get hungry.’

‘But you’ll just be a soul!’

‘Well, perhaps a ham sandwich has a soul, too,’ said Miss Treason, as
she swung her skinny legs out of the bed. ‘I’m not sure about the
mustard, but it’s worth a try. Hold still there!’ This was because she
had picked up her hairbrush and was using Tiffany as a mirror. The
fiercely concentrated glare a few inches away was as much as Tiffany
could bear on a morning like this.

‘Thank you, you may go and make the sandwich,’ said Miss Treason, laying
the brush aside. ‘I will now get dressed.’

Tiffany hurried out and washed her face in the basin in her room; she
always did that after the eyeballing, but she’d never plucked up the
courage to object and now certainly wasn’t the time to start.

As she dried her face, she thought she heard a muffled sound outside and
went over to the window. There was frost on—

Oh, no … oh … no … no! He was at it again!

The frost ferns spelled the word: _Tiffany_. Over and over again.

She grabbed the flannel and wiped them off, but the ice only formed
again, thicker.

She hurried downstairs. The ferns were all over the windows, and when
she tried to wipe them off, the flannel froze to the glass. It creaked
when she pulled at it.

Her name, all over the window. Over all the windows. Maybe over all the
windows in all the mountains. Everywhere.

He’d come back. That was dreadful!

But also, just a bit … cool …

She didn’t think the word, because as far as Tiffany knew it meant
‘slightly cold’. But she thought the thought, even so. It was a hot
little thought.

‘In my day young men would just carve the girl’s initials on a tree,’
said Miss Treason, coming down the stairs one careful step at a time.
Too late, Tiffany felt the tickle behind her eyes.

‘It’s not funny, Miss Treason! What shall I do?’

‘I don’t know. If possible, be yourself.’

Miss Treason bent down creakily, and opened her hand. The seeing-eye
mouse hopped down onto the floor, turned and stared at her with tiny
black eyes for a moment. She prodded it with a finger. ‘Go on, off you
go. Thank you,’ she said and then it scuttled off to a hole.

Tiffany helped her upright, and the old witch said: ‘You’re starting to
snivel, aren’t you …’

‘Well, it’s all a bit—’ Tiffany began. The little mouse had looked so
lost and forlorn.

‘Don’t cry,’ said Miss Treason. ‘Living this long’s not as wonderful as
people think. I mean, you get the same amount of youth as everyone else,
but a great big extra helping of being very old and deaf and creaky.
Now, blow your nose and help me on with the ravens’ perch.’

‘He might still be out there …’ Tiffany mumbled, as she eased the perch
onto the thin shoulders.

Then she rubbed at the window again, and saw shapes and movement.

‘Oh … they came …’ she said.

‘What?’ said Miss Treason. She stopped. ‘There’s lots of people out
there!’

‘Er … yes,’ said Tiffany.

‘What do you know about this, my girl?’

‘Well, you see, they kept asking when—’

‘Fetch my skulls! They mustn’t see me without my skulls! How does my
hair look?’ said Miss Treason, frantically winding up her clock.

‘It looks nice—’

‘Nice? _Nice?_ Are you mad? Mess it up this minute!’ Miss Treason
demanded. ‘And fetch my most raggedy cloak! This one’s far too clean!
Move yourself, child!’

It took several minutes to get Miss Treason ready, and a lot of the time
was spent convincing her that taking the skulls out in daylight might be
dangerous, in case they got dropped and someone saw the labels. Then
Tiffany opened the door.

A murmur of conversation crashed into silence.

There were people in a crowd all around the door. As Miss Treason
stepped forward, it parted to leave a clear path.

To her horror, Tiffany saw a dug grave on the other side of the
clearing. She hadn’t expected that. She wasn’t sure what she had
expected, but a dug grave wasn’t it.

‘Who dug—?’

‘Our blue friends,’ said Miss Treason. ‘I asked them to.’

And then the crowd started to cheer. Women hurried forward with big
bunches of yew, holly and mistletoe, the only green things growing.
People were laughing. People were crying. They clustered around the
witch, forcing Tiffany out to the edge of the crowd. She went quiet, and
listened.

‘We don’t know what we’ll do without you, Miss Treason’ … ‘I don’t think
we’ll get another witch as good as you, Miss Treason!’ … ‘We never
thought you’d go, Miss Treason, you brought my ol’ granddad into the
world’ …

Walking into the grave, Tiffany thought. Well, that’s style. That’s …
solid gold boffo. They’ll remember that for the rest of their lives—

‘In that case you shall keep all the puppies but one—’ Miss Treason had
stopped to organize the crowd. ‘The custom is to give that one to the
owner of the dog. You should have kept the bitch in, after all, and
minded your fences. And your question, Mister Blinkhorn?’

Tiffany stood up straight. They were bothering her! Even this morning!
But she … wanted to be bothered. Being bothered was her life.

‘Miss Treason!’ she snapped, pushing her way through the mob. ‘Remember
you have an appointment!’

It wasn’t the best thing to say, but a lot better than: ‘You said you
were going to die in about five minutes’ time!’

Miss Treason turned, and looked uncertain for a moment.

‘Oh, yes,’ she said. ‘Yes, indeed. We had better get on.’ Then, still
talking to Mr Blinkhorn about some complex problem concerning a fallen
tree and someone’s shed, and with the rest of the crowd trailing after
her, she let Tiffany walk her gently to the graveside.

‘Well, at least you’ve got a happy ending, Miss Treason,’ Tiffany
whispered. It was a silly thing to say and deserved what it got.

‘We make happy endings, child, day to day. But, you see, for the witch
there are no happy endings. There are just endings. And here we are …’

Best not to think, thought Tiffany. Best not to think you’re climbing
down an actual ladder into an actual grave. Try not to think about
helping Miss Treason down the ladder onto the leaves which are piled up
at one end. Do not let yourself know you’re standing in a grave.

Down here, the horrible clock seem to clank even louder: CLONK, CLANK,
CLONK, CLANK …

Miss Treason trod the leaves down a bit and said, cheerfully, ‘Yes, I
can see myself being quite comfortable here. Listen, child, I told you
about the books, did I not? And there is a small gift for you under my
chair. Yes, this seems adequate. Oh, I forgot …’

CLONK, CLANK, CLONK, CLANK … went the clock, sounding much louder down
there.

Miss Treason stood on tiptoe and poked her head over the edge of the
hole. ‘Mister Easy! You owe two months rent to the widow Langley!
Understand? Mr Plenty, the pig belongs to Mrs Frumment, and if you don’t
give it back to her I shall come back and groan under your window!
Mistress Fullsome, the Dogelley family have had Right of Passage over
the Turnwise pasture since even I cannot remember, and you must … you
must …’

Clon … k.

There was a moment, one long moment, when the sudden silence of the
clock not ticking any more filled the clearing like thunder.

Slowly, Miss Treason sagged down onto the leaves.

It took a few dreadful seconds for her brain to stop working again, and
then Tiffany screamed at the people clustered above: ‘Go back, all of
you! Give her some air!’

She knelt down as they backed hurriedly away.

The smell of the raw soil was sharp in the air. At least Miss Treason
seemed to have died with her eyes shut. Not everyone did. Tiffany hated
having to shut them for people; it was like killing them all over again
…

‘Miss Treason?’ she whispered. That was the first test. There were a lot
of them and you had to do them all: speak to them, raise an arm, check
the pulses including the one behind the ear, check for breath with a
mirror … and she’d always been so nervous about getting them wrong that
the first time she’d had to go out to deal with someone who looked dead
– a young man who’d been in a horrible sawmill accident – she done every
single test, even though she’d had to go and find his head.

There were no mirrors in Miss Treason’s cottage.

In that case she—

– should think! This is Miss Treason here! And I heard her wind her
clock up only a few minutes ago!

She smiled.

‘Miss Treason!’ she said, very close to the woman’s ear. ‘I know you’re
in there!’

And that’s when the morning, which had been sad, weird, odd and
horrible, became … boffo all the way.

Miss Treason smiled.

‘Have they gone?’ she enquired.

‘Miss Treason!’ said Tiffany sternly. ‘That was a terrible thing to do!’

‘I stopped my clock with my thumbnail,’ said Miss Treason proudly.
‘Couldn’t disappoint them, eh? Had to give ’em a show!’

‘Miss Treason,’ said Tiffany severely, ‘did you make up the story about
your clock?’

‘Of course I did! And it’s a wonderful bit of folklore, a real corker.
Miss Treason and her clockwork heart! Might even become a myth, if I’m
lucky. They’ll remember Miss Treason for thousands of years!’

Miss Treason closed the eye. ‘I’ll certainly remember you, Miss
Treason,’ said Tiffany. ‘I will really, because—’

The world had gone grey, and was getting greyer. And Miss Treason had
gone very still.

‘Miss Treason?’ said Tiffany, nudging her. ‘Miss Treason?’

MISS EUMENIDES TREASON, AGED ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN?

Tiffany heard the voice inside her head. It didn’t seem to have come
through her ears. And she’d heard it before, making her quite unusual.
Most people hear the voice of Death only once.

Miss Treason stood up, without the creak of even one bone. And she
looked just like Miss Treason, solid and smiling. What now lay on the
dead leaves was, in this strange light, just a shadow.

But a very tall dark figure was standing beside her. It was Death
himself. Tiffany had seen him before, in his own land beyond the Dark
Door, but you didn’t need to have met him before to know who he was. The
scythe, the long hooded robe and of course the bundle of hourglasses
were all clues.

‘Where are your manners, child?’ said Miss Treason.

Tiffany looked up and said: ‘Good morning.’

GOOD MORNING, TIFFANY ACHING, AGED THIRTEEN, said Death, in his
no-voice. I SEE YOU ARE IN GOOD HEALTH.

‘A little curtsey would be in order, too,’ said Miss Treason.

To Death? thought Tiffany. Granny Aching wouldn’t have liked that. Never
bend the knee to tyrants, she would say.

AT LAST, MISS EUMENIDES TREASON, WE MUST WALK TOGETHER. Death took her
gently by the arm.

‘Hey, wait a minute!’ said Tiffany. ‘Miss Treason is one hundred and
thirteen!’

‘Er … I adjusted it slightly for professional reasons,’ said Miss
Treason. ‘One hundred and eleven sounds so … adolescent.’ As if to hide
her ghostly embarrassment, she plunged her hand into her pocket and
pulled out the spirit of the ham sandwich.

‘Ah, it worked,’ she said. ‘I know I— Hey, where has the mustard gone?’

MUSTARD IS ALWAYS TRICKY, said Death as they began to fade.

‘No mustard? What about pickled onions?’

PICKLES OF ALL SORTS DON’T SEEM TO MAKE IT. I’M SORRY. Behind them, the
outline of a door appeared.

‘No relishes in the next world? That’s dreadful! What about chutneys?’
said the vanishing Miss Treason.

THERE’S JAM. JAM WORKS.

‘Jam? Jam! With ham?’

And they were gone. The light went back to normal. Sound came back. Time
came back.

Once again, the thing to do was not to think too deeply, just keep her
thoughts nice and level and focused on what she had to do.

Watched by the people still hovering around the clearing, Tiffany went
and got some blankets, bundling them up so that when she carried them
back to the grave no one would notice that the two Boffo skulls and the
spider web-making machine were tucked inside. Then, with Miss Treason
and the secret of boffo safely tucked away, she filled in the grave, and
at this point a couple of men ran and helped her, right up until there
came, from under the soil:

Clonk clank. Clonk.

The men froze. So did Tiffany, but her Third Thoughts cut in with: Don’t
worry! Remember, she stopped it! A falling stone or something must have
started it going again!

She relaxed and said sweetly: ‘That was probably just her saying
goodbye.’

The rest of the soil got shovelled in really quickly.

And now I’m part of the boffo, Tiffany thought, as the people hurried
back to their villages. But Miss Treason worked very hard for them. She
deserves to be a myth, if that’s what she wants. And I’ll bet, I bet
that on dark nights they’ll hear her …

But now there was nothing but the wind in the trees.

She stared at the grave.

Someone should say something. Well? She was the witch, after all.

There wasn’t much religion on the Chalk or in the mountains. The Omnians
came and had a prayer meeting about once a year, and sometimes a priest
from the Nine Day Wonderers or the See of Little Faith or the Church of
Small Gods would come by on a donkey. People went along to listen, if a
priest sounded interesting or went red and shouted, and they sang the
songs if they had a good tune. And then they went home again.

‘We are small people,’ her father had said. ‘It ain’t wise to come to
the attention of the gods.’

Tiffany remembered the words he had said over the grave of Granny
Aching, what seemed like a lifetime ago. On the summer turf of the
downlands, with the buzzards screaming in the sky, they had seemed to be
all there was to say. So she said them now:

‘If any ground is Consecrate, this ground is.

If any day is Holy, it is this day.’

She saw a movement, and then Billy Bigchin the gonnagle scrambled onto
the turned earth of the grave. He gave Tiffany a solemn look, then
unslung his mousepipes and began to play.

Humans could not hear the mousepipes very well because the notes were
too high, but Tiffany could feel them in her head. A gonnagle could put
many things into his music, and she felt sunsets, and autumns, and the
mist on hills and the smell of roses so red they were nearly black …

When he had finished, the gonnagle stood in silence for a moment, looked
at Tiffany again, then vanished.

Tiffany sat on a stump and cried a bit, because it needed to be done.
Then she went and milked the goats, because someone had to do that, too.

4 It says something about witches that an old friend and an old enemy
could quite often be the same person.

[image]


CHAPTER 6
FEET AND SPROUTS

In the cottage, the beds were airing, the floors had been swept and the
log basket was full. On the kitchen table the inventory was laid out: so
many spoons, so many pans, so many dishes, all lined up in the dingy
light. Tiffany packed some of the cheeses, though. She’d made them,
after all.

The loom was silent in its room; it looked like the bones of some dead
animal, but under the big chair was the package Miss Treason had
mentioned, wrapped in black paper. Inside it was a cloak woven of brown
wool so dark that it was almost black. It looked warm.

That was it, then. Time to go. If she lay down and put her ear to a
mouse hole, she could hear widespread snoring coming from the cellar.
The Feegles believed that after a really good funeral, everyone should
be lying down. It wasn’t a good idea to wake them. They’d find her. They
always did.

Was that everything? Oh, no, not quite. She took down _The Unexpurgated
Dictionary_ and Chaffinch’s _Mythology_, with ‘The Dacne of the Sneasos’
in it, and went to tuck them into a bag under the cheeses. As she did so
the pages flipped like cards and several things dropped out onto the
stone floor. Some of them were faded old letters, which she tucked back
inside for now.

There was also the Boffo catalogue. The cover had a grinning clown on
it, and the words:

[image]

Yes, you could spend years trying to be a witch or you could spend a lot
of money with Mr Boffo and be one as soon as the postman arrived.

Fascinated, Tiffany turned the pages. There were skulls (Glow in the
Dark, $8 Extra) and fake ears and pages of hilarious noses (Ghastly
Dangling Bogey free on noses over $5) and masks, as Boffo would say,
Galore!!! Mask No. 19, for example, was: Wicked Witch De-luxe, with Mad
Greasy Hair, Rotting Teeth and Hairy Warts (supplied loose, stick them
where you like!!!). Miss Treason had obviously stopped short of buying
one of these, possibly because the nose looked like a carrot but
probably because the skin was bright green. She could also have bought
Scary Witch Hands ($8 a pair, with green skin and black fingernails) and
Smelly Witch Feet ($9).

Tiffany tucked the catalogue back into the book. She couldn’t leave it
for Annagramma to find, or the secret of Miss Treason’s boffo would be
out.

And that was it: one life ended and neatly tidied away. One cottage,
clean and empty. One girl, wondering what was going to happen next.
‘Arrangements’ would be made.

_Clonk-clank_.

She didn’t move, didn’t look round. I’m not going to be boffo’d, she
told herself. There’s an explanation for that noise which isn’t to do
with Miss Treason. Let’s see … I cleaned the fireplace, right? And I
leaned the poker next to it. But unless you get it just right, it always
falls over sooner or later in a sneaky kind of way. That’s it. When I
turn and look behind me, I’ll see that the poker has fallen over and is
lying in the grate and therefore the noise wasn’t caused by any kind of
ghostly clock at all.

She turned round slowly. The poker was lying in the grate.

And now, she thought, it would be a good idea to go outside in the fresh
air. It’s bit sad and stuffy in here. That’s why I want to go out,
because it’s sad and stuffy. It’s not at all because I’m afraid of any
imaginary noises. I’m not superstitious. I’m a witch. Witches aren’t
superstitious. We are what people are superstitious of. I just don’t
want to stay. I felt safe here when she was alive – it was like
sheltering under a huge tree – but I don’t think it is safe any more. If
the wintersmith makes the trees shout my name, well, I’ll cover my ears.
The house feels like it’s dying and I’m going _outside_.

There was no point in locking the door. The local people were nervous
enough about going inside even when Miss Treason was alive. They
certainly wouldn’t set foot inside now, not until another witch had made
the place her own.

A weak, runny-egg kind of sun was showing through the clouds now, and
the wind had blown the frost away. But a brief autumn turned to winter
quickly up here; from now on there would always be the smell of snow in
the air. Up in the mountains the winter never ended. Even in the summer
the water in the streams was ice-cold from the melting snow.

Tiffany sat down on the old stump with her ancient suitcase and the sack
and waited for the Arrangements. Annagramma would be here pretty soon,
you could bet on that.

From here, the cottage already looked abandoned. It seemed like—

_It was her birthday._ The thought pushed itself to the front. Yes, it
would be today. Death had got it right. The one big day in the year that
was totally hers, and she had forgotten about it in all the excitement
and now it was already two-thirds over.

Had she ever told Petulia and the others when it was? She couldn’t
remember.

Thirteen years old. But she’d been thinking of herself as ‘nearly
thirteen’ for months now. Pretty soon she’d be ‘nearly fourteen’.

She was just about to enjoy a bit of self pity when there was a stealthy
rustling behind her. She turned so quickly that Horace the cheese leaped
backwards.

‘Oh, it’s you,’ said Tiffany. ‘Where have you been, you naughty bo—
cheese? I was worried sick!’

Horace looked ashamed, but it was quite hard to see how he managed it.

‘Are you going to come with me?’ she said.

Horace was immediately surrounded by a feeling of yesness.

‘All right, you must get in the sack.’ Tiffany opened it, but Horace
backed away.

‘Well, if you are going to be a naughty chee—’ she began, and stopped.
Her hand was itching. She looked up … at the wintersmith.

It had to be him. At first he was just swirling snow in the air, but as
he strode across the clearing he seemed to come together, become human,
become a young man with a cloak billowing out behind him and snow on his
hair and shoulders. He wasn’t transparent this time, not entirely, but
something like ripples ran across him and Tiffany thought she could see
the trees behind him, like shadows.

She took a few hurried steps backwards, but the wintersmith was crossing
the dead grass with the speed of a skater. She could turn and run, but
that would mean she was, well, turning and running, and why should she
do that? She hadn’t been the one scribbling on people’s windows!

What should she say? What should she say?

‘Now, I really appreciated you finding my necklace,’ she said, backing
away again. ‘And the snowflakes and roses were really very…it was very
sweet. But … I don’t think that we … well, you’re made of cold and I’m
not … I’m a human, made of … human things …’

‘You must be her,’ said the wintersmith. ‘You were in the dance! And now
you are here, in my winter.’

The voice wasn’t right. It sounded … fake, somehow, as if the
wintersmith had been taught to say the sound of words without
understanding what they were.

‘I’m a her,’ she said uncertainly. ‘I don’t know about “must be”. Er …
please, I’m _really_ sorry about the dance, I didn’t mean to, it just
seemed so …’

He’d still got the same purple-grey eyes, she noticed. Purple-grey, in a
face sculpted from freezing fog. A handsome face, too. ‘Look, I never
meant to make you think—’ she began.

‘Meant?’ said the wintersmith, looking astonished. ‘But we don’t _mean_.
We are!’

‘What do you … mean?’

‘Crivens!’

‘Oh, no …’ muttered Tiffany as Feegles erupted from the grass.

The Feegles didn’t know the meaning of the word ‘fear’. Sometimes
Tiffany wished they’d read a dictionary. They fought like tigers, they
fought like demons, they fought like giants. What they didn’t do was
fight like something with more than a spoonful of brain.

They attacked the wintersmith with swords, heads and feet, and the fact
that everything went through him as if he was a shadow didn’t seem to
bother them. If a Feegle aimed a boot at a misty leg and ended up
kicking himself in his own head, then it had been a good result.

The wintersmith ignored them, like a man paying no attention to
butterflies.

‘Where is your power? Why are you dressed like this?’ the wintersmith
demanded. ‘This is not as it should be!’

He stepped forward and grabbed Tiffany’s wrist hard, much harder than a
ghostly hand should be able to do.

‘It is wrong!’ he shouted. Above the clearing, the clouds were moving
fast.

Tiffany tried to pull away. ‘Let me go!’

‘You are her!’ the wintersmith shouted, pulling her towards him.

Tiffany hadn’t known where the shout came from, but the slap came from
her hand, thinking for itself. It caught the figure on the cheek so hard
that for a moment the face blurred, as if she’d smeared a painting.

‘Don’t come near me! Don’t touch me!’ she screamed.

There was a flicker behind the wintersmith. Tiffany couldn’t see it
clearly because of the icy haze and her own anger and terror, but
something blurred and dark was moving towards them across the clearing,
wavering and distorted like a figure seen though ice. It loomed behind
the transparent figure for one dark moment, and then became Granny
Weatherwax, in the same space as the wintersmith … inside him.

He screamed for a second, and exploded into a mist.

Granny stumbled forward, blinking. ‘Urrrgh. It’ll take a while to get
the taste of that out of my head,’ she said. ‘Shut your mouth, girl,
something might fly into it.’

Tiffany shut her mouth. Something might fly into it.

‘What … what did you do to him?’ she managed.

‘_It!_’ snapped Granny, rubbing her forehead. ‘It’s an it, not a he! An
it that thinks it’s a he! Now give me your necklace!’

‘What! But it’s mine!’

‘Do you think I want an argument?’ Granny Weatherwax snapped. ‘Does it
say on my face I want an argument? Give it to me now! Don’t you dare
defy me!’

‘I won’t just—’

Granny Weatherwax lowered her voice, and in a piercing hiss much worse
than a scream said: ‘It’s how it finds you. Do you want it to find you
again? It’s just a fog now. How solid do you think it will become?’

Tiffany thought about that strange face, not moving like a real one
should, and that strange voice, putting words together as if they were
bricks …

She undid the little silver clasp and held up the necklace.

It’s just boffo, she told herself. Every stick is a wand, every puddle
is a crystal ball. This is just a … a thing. I don’t need it to be me.

Yes, I do.

‘You must _give_ it to me,’ said Granny softly. ‘I can’t take it.’

She held out her hand, palm up.

Tiffany dropped the horse into it, and tried not to see Granny
Weatherwax’s fingers as a closing claw.

‘Very well,’ said Granny, satisfied. ‘Now we must go.’

‘You were watching me,’ said Tiffany sullenly.

‘All morning. You could have seen me if you’d thought to look,’ said
Granny. ‘But you didn’t do a bad job at the burial, I’ll say that.’

‘I did a good job!’

‘That’s what I said.’

‘No,’ said Tiffany, still trembling. ‘You didn’t.’

‘I’ve never held with skulls and suchlike,’ said Granny, ignoring this.
‘Artificial ones, at any rate. But Miss Treason—’

She stopped, and Tiffany saw her stare at the treetops.

‘Is that him again?’ she said.

‘No,’ said Granny, as if this was something to be disappointed about.
‘No, that’s young Miss Hawkin. And Mrs Letice Earwig. Didn’t hang about,
I see. And Miss Treason hardly cooled down.’ She sniffed. ‘Some people
might have had the common decency not to snatch.’

The two broomsticks landed a little way off. Annagramma looked nervous.
Mrs Earwig looked like she always did: tall, pale, very well dressed,
wearing lots of occult jewellery and an expression that said you were
slightly annoying her but she was being gracious enough not to let it
show. And she always looked at Tiffany, when she ever bothered to look
at her at all, as if she was some kind of strange creature that she
didn’t quite understand.

Mrs Earwig was always polite to Granny, in a formal and chilly way. It
made Granny Weatherwax mad, but that was the way of witches. When they
really disliked one another they were as polite as duchesses.

As the other two approached, Granny bowed low and removed her hat. Mrs
Earwig did the same thing, only the bow was a little lower.

Tiffany saw Granny glance up, and then bow lower still, by about an
inch.

Mrs Earwig managed to go half an inch further down.

Tiffany and Annagramma exchanged a hopeless glance over the straining
backs. Sometimes this sort of thing could go on for hours.

Granny Weatherwax gave a grunt and straightened up. So did Mrs Earwig,
red in the face.

‘Blessin’s be upon our meetin’,’ said Granny, in a calm voice. Tiffany
winced. This was a declaration of hostilities. Yelling and prodding with
the fingers was perfectly ordinary witch arguing, but speaking carefully
and calmly was open warfare.

‘How kind of you to greet us,’ said Mrs Earwig.

‘I hopes I sees you in good health?’

‘I keep well, Miss Weatherwax.’ Annagramma shut her eyes. That was a
kick in the stomach, by witch standards.

‘It’s Mistress Weatherwax, Mrs Earwig,’ said Granny. ‘As I believes you
know?’

‘Why, yes. Of course it is. I am so sorry.’

These vicious blows having been exchanged, Granny went on: ‘I trust Miss
Hawkin will find everything to her likin’.’

‘I’m sure that—’ Mrs Earwig stared at Tiffany, her face a question.

‘Tiffany,’ said Tiffany helpfully.

‘Tiffany. Of course. What a lovely name … I’m sure that Tiffany has done
her very best,’ said Mrs Earwig. ‘However, we shall shrive and
consecrate the cottage, in case of … influences.’

I already scrubbed and scrubbed everything! Tiffany thought.

‘Influences?’ said Granny Weatherwax, and even the wintersmith could not
have managed a voice so icy.

‘And disquieting vibrations,’ said Mrs Earwig.

‘Oh, I know about _those_,’ said Tiffany. ‘It’s the loose floorboard in
the kitchen. If you tread on it, it makes the dresser wobble.’

‘There has been talk of a demon,’ said Mrs Earwig, gravely ignoring
this. ‘And … skulls.’

‘But—’ Tiffany began, and Granny’s hand squeezed her shoulder so hard
she stopped.

‘Deary, deary me,’ said Granny, still holding on tightly. ‘Skulls, eh?’

‘There are some very disturbing stories,’ said Mrs Earwig, watching
Tiffany. ‘Of the darkest nature, Mistress Weatherwax. I feel that the
people in this steading have been very badly served, indeed. Dark forces
have been unleashed.’

Tiffany wanted to yell: No! It was all stories! It was all boffo! She
watched over them! She stopped their stupid arguments, she remembered
their laws, she scolded their silliness! She couldn’t do that if she was
just a frail old lady! She had to be a myth! But Granny’s grip kept her
silent.

‘Strange forces are certainly at work,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘I wish
you well in your endeavours, Mrs Earwig. If you will excuse me?’

‘Of course, Mis—tress Weatherwax. May good stars attend you.’

‘May the road slow down to meet your feet,’ said Granny. She stopped
gripping Tiffany so hard but nevertheless almost dragged her around the
side of the cottage. The late Miss Treason’s broomstick was leaning
against the wall.

‘Tie your stuff on quickly!’ she commanded. ‘We must move!’

‘Is he going to come back?’ said Tiffany, struggling to tie the sack and
the old suitcase onto the bristles.

‘Not yet. Not soon, I think. But he will be looking for you. And he will
be stronger. Dangerous to you, I believe, and those around you! You have
such a lot to learn! You have such a lot to do!’

‘I thanked him! I tried to be nice to him! Why is he still interested in
me?’

‘Because of the dance,’ said Granny.

‘I’m sorry about that!’

‘Not good enough. What does a storm know of sorrow? You must make
amends. Did you really think that space was left there for you? Oh, this
is so tangled! How are your feet?’

Tiffany, angry and bewildered, stopped with one leg half over the stick.

‘My feet? What about my feet?’

‘Do they itch? What happens when you take your boots off?’

‘Nothing! I just see my socks! What have my feet got to do with
anything?’

‘We shall find out,’ said Granny, infuriatingly. ‘Now, come along.’

Tiffany tried to get the stick to rise, but it barely cleared the dead
grass. She looked round. The bristles were covered with Nac Mac Feegles.

‘Dinnae mind us,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘We’ll hold on tight!’

‘An’ dinnae make it too bumpy ’cos I feel like the top o’ mah heid’s
come off,’ said Daft Wullie.

‘Do we get meals on this flight?’ said Big Yan. ‘I’m fair boggin’ for a
wee drink.’

‘I can’t take you all!’ said Tiffany. ‘I don’t even know where I’m
going!’

Granny Weatherwax glared at the Feegles. ‘You’ll have to walk. We’re
travellin’ to Lancre Town. The address is: Tir Nani Ogg, The Square.’

‘Tir Nani Ogg,’ said Tiffany. ‘Isn’t that—?’

‘It means Nanny Ogg’s Place,’ said Granny, as Feegles dropped off the
broomstick. ‘You’ll be safe there. Well, more or less. But we must make
a stop on the way. We must put that necklace as far away from you as we
can. And I know how to do that! Oh, yes!’

The Nac Mac Feegle jogged through the afternoon woods. Local wildlife
had found out about Feegles, so the fluffy woodland creatures had all
dived for their burrows and climbed high in the trees, but after a while
Big Yan called a halt and said: ‘There’s somethin’ trackin’ us!’

‘Don’t be daft,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘There’s nothin’ left in these woods
that’s mad enough tae hunt Feegles!’

‘I know what I’m sensin’,’ said Big Yan stubbornly. ‘I can feel it in my
watter. There’s somethin’ creepin’ up on us right noo!’

‘Weel, I’m not one tae argue wi’ a man’s watter,’ said Rob wearily. ‘OK,
lads, spread oot inna big circle!’

Swords drawn, the Feegles spread out, but after a few minutes there was
a general muttering. There was nothing to see, nothing to hear. A few
birds sang, at a safe distance. Peace and quiet, unusual in the vicinity
of Feegles, was everywhere.

‘Sorry, Big Yan, but I’m thinkin’ yer watter is no’ on the button this
time,’ said Rob Anybody.

It was at this point that Horace the cheese dropped from a branch onto
his head.

A lot of water flowed under the big bridge at Lancre, but from up here
you could barely see it because of the spray coming up from the
waterfalls a little further on, spray which hovered in the freezing air.
There was white water all through the deep gorge, and then the river
leaped the waterfall like a salmon and hit the plains below like a
thunderstorm. From the base of the falls you could follow the river all
the way past the Chalk, but it moved in wide, lazy curves and it was
quicker to fly in a straight line.

Tiffany had flown up it just once, when Miss Level had first brought her
up into the mountains. Since then she’d always taken the long way down,
cruising just above the zig-zagging coach road. Flying out over the edge
of that furious torrent into a sudden drop full of cold damp air and
then pointing the stick almost straight down was pretty high on her list
of things she never intended to do, ever.

Now Granny Weatherwax stood on the bridge, the silver horse in her hand.

‘It’s the only way,’ she said. ‘It’ll end up at the bottom of the deep
sea. Let the wintersmith look for you there!’

Tiffany nodded. She wasn’t crying, which is not the same as, well, not
crying. People walked around not crying all the time and didn’t think
about it at all. But now, she did. She thought: I’m not crying …

It made sense. Of course it made sense. It was all boffo! Every stick is
a wand, every puddle is a crystal ball. No thing had any power that you
didn’t put there. Shambles and skulls and wands were like … shovels and
knives and spectacles. They were like … levers. With a lever you could
lift a big rock, but the lever didn’t do any work.

‘It has to be your choice,’ said Granny. ‘I can’t make it for you. But
it’s a small thing, and while you have it, it will be dangerous.’

‘You know, I don’t think he wanted to hurt me. He was just upset,’ said
Tiffany.

‘Really? Do you want to meet it upset again?’

Tiffany thought about that strange face. There had been the shape of a
human there – more or less – but it was as if the wintersmith had heard
of the idea of being human but hadn’t found out how to do it yet.

‘You think he’ll harm other people?’ she said.

‘He is the winter, child. It’s not all pretty snowflakes, is it?’

Tiffany held out her hand. ‘Give it back to me, please.’

Granny handed it over, with a shrug.

It lay in Tiffany’s hand, on the strange white scar. It was the first
thing she had ever been given that wasn’t useful, that wasn’t supposed
to do something.

I don’t need this, she thought. My power comes from the Chalk. But is
that what life’s going to be like? Nothing that you don’t need?

‘We should tie it to something that’s light,’ she said, in a
matter-of-fact voice; ‘otherwise it will get caught on the bottom.’

After some rooting around in the grass near the bridge she found a stick
and wrapped the silver chain around it.

It was noon. Tiffany had invented the word noonlight, because she liked
the sound of it. Anyone could be a witch at midnight, she’d thought, but
you’d have to be really good to be a witch by noonlight.

Good at being a witch, anyway, she thought as she walked back onto the
bridge. Not good at being a happy person.

She threw the necklace off the bridge.

She didn’t make a big thing of it. It would have been nice to say that
the silver horse glittered in the light, seemed to hang in the air for a
moment before falling the long fall. Perhaps it did, but Tiffany didn’t
look.

‘Good,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Is it all over now?’ said Tiffany.

‘No! You danced into a story, girl, one that tells itself to the world
every year. It’s the story about ice and fire, summer and winter. You’ve
made it wrong. You’ve got to stay to the end and make sure it turns out
right. The horse is just buyin’ you time, that’s all.’

‘How much time?’

‘I don’t know. This hasn’t happened before. Time to think, at least. How
are your feet?’

The wintersmith was also moving through the world without, in any human
sense, moving at all. Wherever winter was, he was too.

He was trying to think. He’d never had to do this before, and it hurt.
Up until now, humans had just been parts of the world that moved around
in strange ways and lit fires. Now he was spinning himself a mind, and
everything was new.

A human … made of human stuff … that was what she had said.

Human stuff. He had to make himself of human stuff for the beloved. In
the chill of morgues and the wreckage of ships the wintersmith rode the
air searching for human stuff. And what was it? Dirt and water, mostly.
Leave a human long enough and even the water would go, and there would
be nothing but a few handfuls of dust that blew away in the wind.

So, since water did not think, all the work was being done by the dust.

The wintersmith was logical, because ice was logical. Water was logical.
Wind was logical. There were rules. So what a human was all about was …
the right kind of dust!

And, while he was searching for it, he could show her how strong he was.

That evening, Tiffany sat on the edge of her new bed, the clouds of
sleep rising in her brain like thunderheads, and yawned and stared at
her feet.

They were pink, and had five toes each. They were pretty good feet,
considering.

Normally, when people met you they’d say things like ‘How are you?’
Nanny Ogg had just said: ‘Come on in. How’re your feet?’

Suddenly, everyone was interested in her feet. Of course, feet were
important, but what did people expect to happen to them?

She swung them back and forth on the end of her legs. They didn’t do
anything strange, so she got into bed.

She hadn’t slept properly for two nights. She hadn’t really understood
that until she’d reached Tir Nani Ogg, when her brain had started to
spin of its own accord. She’d talked to Mrs Ogg, but it was hard to
remember what about. Voices had banged in her ears. Now, at last, she
had nothing to do but sleep.

It was a good bed, the best she’d ever slept in. It was the best room
she’d ever been in, although she’d been too tired to explore it much.
Witches didn’t go in much for comfort, especially in spare bedrooms, but
Tiffany had grown up on an ancient bed where the springs went _gloing_
every time she moved, and with care she could get them to play a tune.

This mattress was thick and yielding. She sank into it as if it was a
very soft, very warm, very slow quicksand.

The trouble is, you can shut your eyes but you can’t shut your mind. As
she lay in the dark, it squiggled pictures inside her head, of clocks
that went CLANK-CLONK, of snowflakes shaped like her, of Miss Treason
striding through the night-time forest, seeking bad people with her
yellow thumbnail ready.

Myth Treason …

She fell through these scrambled memories into dull whiteness. But it
got brighter, and took on detail, little areas of black and grey. They
began to move gently from side to side …

Tiffany opened her eyes, and everything became clear. She was standing
on a … a boat, no, a big sailing ship. There was snow on the decks, and
icicles hung from the rigging. It was sailing in the washing-up-water
light of dawn, in a silent grey sea full of floating ice and clouds of
fog. The rigging creaked, the wind sighed in the sails. There was no one
to be seen.

‘Ah. This appears to be a dream. Let me out, please,’ said a familiar
voice.

‘Who are you?’ said Tiffany.

‘You. Cough, please.’

Tiffany thought: Well, if this is a dream … and coughed.

A figure grew up out of the snow on the deck. It was her, and she was
looking around thoughtfully.

‘Are you me too?’ Tiffany said. Strangely, here on the freezing deck, it
didn’t seem that, well, strange.

‘Hmm. Oh, yes,’ said the other Tiffany, still staring intently at
things. ‘I’m your Third Thoughts. Remember? The part of you that never
stops thinking? The bit that notices little details? It’s good to be out
in fresh air. Hmm.’

‘Is there something wrong?’

‘Well, this clearly appears to be a dream. If you would care to look,
you’ll see that the steersman in yellow oilskins up there at the wheel
is the Jolly Sailor off the wrappers of the tobacco that Granny Aching
used to smoke. He always comes into our mind when we think about the
sea, yes?’

Tiffany looked up at the bearded figure, who gave her a cheerful wave.

‘Yes, that’s certainly him!’ she said.

‘But I don’t think this is our dream, exactly,’ said the Third Thoughts.
‘It’s too … real.’

Tiffany reached down and picked up a handful of snow.

‘Feels real,’ she said. ‘Feels cold.’ She made a snowball and threw it
at herself.

‘I really wish I wouldn’t do that,’ said the other Tiffany, brushing the
snow off her shoulder. ‘But you see what I mean? Dreams are never as …
well, non-dreamlike as this.’

‘I know what I mean,’ said Tiffany. ‘I think they’re going to be real,
and then something weird turns up.’

‘Exactly. I don’t like it all. If this is a dream, then something
horrible is going to happen …’

They looked ahead of the ship. There was a dismal, dirty bank of fog
there, spreading out across the sea.

‘There’s something in the fog!’ said the Tiffanys, together.

They turned and scurried up the ladder to the man at the wheel.

‘Keep away from the fog! Please don’t go near it!’ she shouted.

The Jolly Sailor took his pipe out of his mouth and looked puzzled.

‘A Good Smoke in Any Weather?’ he said to Tiffany.

‘What?’

‘It’s all he can say!’ said her Third Thoughts, grabbing the wheel.
‘Remember? That’s what he says on the label!’

The Jolly Sailor pushed her away, gently. ‘A Good Smoke in Any Weather,’
he said soothingly. ‘In Any Weather.’

‘Look, we only want to—’ Tiffany began, but her Third Thoughts, without
a word, put a hand on her head and turned her round.

Something was coming out of the fog.

It was an iceberg, a large one, at least three times as high as the
ship, as majestic as a swan. It was so big that it was causing its own
weather. It seemed to be moving slowly; there was white water around its
base. Snow fell around it. Streamers of fog trailed behind it.

The Jolly Sailor’s pipe dropped out of his mouth as he stared.

‘A Good Smoke!’ he swore.

The iceberg was Tiffany. It was a Tiffany hundreds of feet high, formed
of glittering green ice, but it was still a Tiffany. There were seabirds
perched on her head.

‘It can’t be the wintersmith doing this!’ said Tiffany. ‘I threw the
horse away!’ She cupped her hands to her mouth and shouted: ‘I THREW THE
HORSE AWAY!’

Her voice echoed off the huge ice figure. A few birds took off from the
huge cold head, screaming. Behind Tiffany, the ship’s wheel spun. The
Jolly Sailor stamped a foot and pointed to the white sails above them.

‘A Good Smoke in Any Weather!’ he commanded.

‘I’m sorry, I don’t know what you mean!’ said Tiffany desperately.

The man pointed to the sails and made frantic pulling motions with his
hands.

‘A Good Smoke!’

‘Sorry, I just can’t understand you!’

The sailor snorted and ran off towards a rope which he hauled on, in a
great hurry.

‘It’s got weird,’ said her Third Thoughts quietly.

‘Well, yes, I should think a huge iceberg shaped like me is a—’

‘No, that’s just strange. This is weird,’ said the Third Thoughts.
‘We’ve got passengers. Look.’ She pointed.

Down on the main deck there was a row of hatches with big iron grids on
them; Tiffany hadn’t noticed them before.

Hands, hundreds of them, pale as roots under a log, groping and waving,
were thrusting through the grids.

‘Passengers?’ Tiffany whispered in horror. ‘Oh, no …’

And then the screaming started. It would have been better, but not a lot
better, if it had been cries of ‘Help! and ‘Save us!’ but instead it was
just screaming and wailing, just the sounds of people in pain and fear—

No!

‘Come back inside my head,’ she said grimly. ‘It’s too distracting to
have you running around outside. Right now.’

‘I’ll walk in from behind you,’ said her Third Thoughts. ‘Then it won’t
seem so—’

Tiffany felt a twinge of pain, and a change in her mind, and thought:
Well, I suppose it could have been a lot messier.

OK. Let me think. Let all of me think.

She watched the desperate hands, waving like weeds underwater, and
thought: I’m in something like a dream, but I don’t think it’s mine. I’m
on a ship, and we’re going to get killed by an iceberg that’s a giant
figure of me.

I think I liked it better when I was snowflakes …

Whose dream is this?

‘What is this about, wintersmith?’ she said, and her Third Thoughts,
back where they should be, commented: It’s amazing, you can even see
your own breath in the air …

‘Is this a warning?’ Tiffany shouted. ‘What do you want?’

_You for my bride_, said the wintersmith. The words just arrived in her
memory.

Tiffany’s shoulders sank.

You know this isn’t real, said her Third Thoughts. But it may be the
shadow of something real …

I shouldn’t have let Granny Weatherwax send Rob Anybody away like that—

‘Crivens! Shiver me timber!’ shouted a voice behind her. And then there
was the usual clamour:

‘It’s “timbers”, ye dafty!’

‘Aye? But I can only find one!’

‘Splice the big plank! Daft Wullie’s just walked intae the watter!’

‘The big puddin’! I told him, just the one eyepatch!’

‘With a yo hoho and a ho yoyo—’

Feegles erupted from the cabin behind Tiffany, and Rob Anybody stopped
in front of her as the rest streamed past. He saluted.

‘Sorry we’re a wee bitty late, but we had to find the black patches,’ he
said. ‘There’s sich a thing as style, ye ken.’

Tiffany was speechless, but only for a moment. She pointed.

‘We’ve got to stop this ship hitting that iceberg!’

‘Just that? No problemo!’ Rob looked past her to the looming ice
giantess and grinned. ‘He’s got your nose just right, eh?’

‘Just stop it! Please?’ Tiffany pleaded.

‘Aye-aye! C’mon, lads!’

Watching the Feegles working was like watching ants, except that ants
didn’t wear kilts and shout ‘Crivens!’ all the time. Maybe it was
because they could make one word do so much work that they seemed to
have no problem at all with the Jolly Sailor’s orders. They swarmed
across the deck like … well, a swarm. Mysterious ropes were pulled.
Sails moved and billowed to a chorus of ‘A Good Smoke!’ and ‘Crivens!’

Now the wintersmith wants to marry me, Tiffany thought. Oh, dear.

She’d sometimes wondered if she’d get married one day, but she was
definite that now was too soon for ‘one day’. Yes, her mother had been
married when she was still fourteen, but that was the sort of thing that
happened in the olden days. There _were_ a lot of things to be done
before Tiffany ever got married, she was very clear about that.

Besides, when you thought about it … yuk. He wasn’t even a person. He’d
be too—

_Thud!_ went the wind in the sails. The ship creaked, and leaned over,
and everyone was shouting at her. Mostly they shouted, ‘The wheel! Grab
the wheel right noo!’ although there was also a desperate, ‘A Good Smoke
in Any Weather!’ in there too.

Tiffany turned to see the wheel spinning in a blur. She made a snatch at
it and got thumped across the fingers by the spokes, but there was a
length of rope coiled nearby and she managed to lasso the wheel with a
loop and jerk it to a halt without sliding along the deck too much. Then
she grabbed it and tried to turn it the other way. It was like pushing a
house, but it did move, very slowly at first and then faster as she put
her back into it.

The ship came around. She could feel it moving, beginning to head a
little bit away from the iceberg, not directly for it. Good! Things were
going right at last! She spun the wheel some more, and now the huge cold
wall was sliding past, filling the air with mist. Everything was going
to be all right after—

The ship hit the iceberg.

It started with a simple _crack!_ as a spar caught on an outcrop, but
then others smashed as the ship scraped along the side of the ice. Then
there were some sharp splintering noises as the ship ground onward, and
bits of plank shot up on columns of foaming water. The top of a mast
broke off, dragging sails and rigging with it. A lump of ice smashed
onto the deck a few feet away from Tiffany, showering her with needles.

‘This isn’t how it’s supposed to go!’ she panted, hanging onto the
wheel.

_Marry me_, said the wintersmith.

Churning white water roared across the foundering ship. Tiffany held on
for a moment longer, then the cold surf covered her … except that it was
suddenly not cold, but warm. But it was still stopping her from
breathing. In the darkness she tried to fight her way to the surface,
until the blackness was suddenly pulled aside, her eyes filled with
light and a voice said: ‘I’m sure these mattresses are far too soft, but
you can’t tell Mrs Ogg a thing.’

Tiffany blinked. She was in bed, and a skinny woman with worried hair
and a rather red nose was standing by it.

‘You were tossing and turning like a mad thing,’ the woman said, putting
a steaming mug on the small table by the bed. ‘One day someone will
suffikate, mark my words.’

Tiffany blinked again. I’m supposed to think: Oh, it was just a dream.
But it wasn’t just a dream. Not my dream.

‘What time is it?’ she managed.

‘About seven,’ said the woman.

‘Seven!’ Tiffany pushed the sheets back. ‘I’ve got to get up! Mrs Ogg
will be wanting her breakfast!’

‘I shouldn’t think so. I took it to her in bed not ten minutes ago,’
said the woman, giving Tiffany a Look. ‘And I’m off home.’ She sniffed.
‘Drink your tea before it gets cold.’ And with that she marched towards
the door.

‘Is Mrs Ogg ill?’ said Tiffany, looking everywhere for her socks. She’d
never heard of anyone who wasn’t really old or very ill having a meal in
bed.

‘Ill? I don’t think she’s had a day’s illness in her life,’ said the
woman, managing to suggest that in her opinion this was unfair. She shut
the door.

Even the bedroom floor was smooth – not made smooth by centuries of feet
that had worn down the planks and taken all the splinters out, but
because someone had sanded and varnished it. Tiffany’s bare feet stuck
to it slightly. There was no dust to be seen, no spider webs anywhere.
The room was bright and fresh and exactly unlike any room in a witch’s
cottage ought to be.

‘I’m going to get dressed,’ she said to the air. ‘Are there any Feegles
in here?’

‘Ach, no,’ said a voice from under the bed.

There was some frantic whispering and the voice said: ‘That is tae say,
there’s hardly any o’ us here at a’.’

‘Then shut your eyes,’ said Tiffany.

She got dressed, taking occasional sips of the tea as she did so. Tea
brought to your bedside when you weren’t ill? That sort of thing
happened to kings and queens!

And then she noticed the bruise on her fingers. It didn’t hurt at all,
but the skin was blue where the ship’s wheel had hit it. Right …

‘Feegles?’ she said.

‘Crivens, ye’ll nae be foolin’ us a second time,’ said the voice from
under the bed.

‘Get out here where I can see you, Daft Wullie!’ Tiffany commanded.

‘It’s real hagglin’, miss, the way ye always ken it’s me.’

After some more urgent whispering, Daft Wullie – for it was indeed he –
trooped out with two more Feegles and Horace the cheese.

Tiffany stared. All right, he was a blue cheese, so he was about the
same colour as a Feegle. And he acted like a Feegle, no doubt about
that. Why, though, had he got a grubby strip of Feegle tartan around
him?

‘He kinda found us,’ said Daft Wullie, putting his arm around as much of
Horace as was possible. ‘Can I keep him? He understands evera word I
say!’

‘That’s amazing, because I don’t,’ said Tiffany. ’Look, were we in a
shipwreck last night?’

‘Oh, aye. Sorta.’

‘Sort of? Was it real or wasn’t it?’

‘Oh, aye,’ said the Feegle nervously.

‘Which?’ Tiffany insisted.

‘Kinda real, and kinda not real, in a real unreal sorta way,’ said Daft
Wullie, squirming a bit. ‘I don’t have the knowin’ o’ the right wurdies
…’

‘Are all you Feegles OK?’

‘Oh aye, miss,’ said Daft Wullie, brightening up. ‘Nae problemo. It wuz
only a dream ship on a dream sea, after a’.’

‘And a dream iceberg?’ said Tiffany.

‘Ach, no. The iceberg was real, mistress.’

‘I thought so! Are you sure?’

‘Aye. We’re good at the knowin’ o’ stuff like that,’ said Daft Wullie.
‘That’s so, eh, lads?’ The other two Feegles, in total awe of being in
the presence of the big wee hag without the safety of hundreds of
brothers around them, nodded at Tiffany and then tried to shuffle behind
each other.

‘A real iceberg shaped like me is floating around on the sea?’ said
Tiffany, in horror. ‘Getting in the way of shipping?’

‘Aye. Could be,’ said Daft Wullie.

‘I’m going to get into so much trouble!’ said Tiffany, standing up.

There was a snapping noise, and the end of one of the floorboards leaped
out of the floor and hung there, bouncing up and down with a
rocking-chair noise. It had ripped out two long nails.

‘And now this,’ said Tiffany weakly. But the Feegles and Horace had
vanished.

Behind Tiffany, someone laughed, although it was maybe more of a
chuckle, deep and real and with just a hint that maybe someone had told
a rude joke.

‘Those little devils can’t half run, eh?’ said Nanny Ogg, ambling into
the room. ‘Now then, Tiff, I wants you to turn round slowly and go and
sit on your bed with your feet off the ground. Can you do that?’

‘Of course, Mrs Ogg,’ said Tiffany. ‘Look, I’m sorry about—’

‘Poo, what’s a floorboard more or less?’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘I’m much more
worried about Esme Weatherwax. She said there might be something like
this! Ha, she was right and Miss Tick was wrong! There’ll be no living
with her after this! She’ll have her nose so far in the air her feet
won’t touch the ground!’

With a _spioioioiiing!_ sound, another floorboard sprang up.

‘And it might be a good idea if yours didn’t either, miss,’ Nanny Ogg
added. ‘I’ll be back in half a tick.’

That turned out to be the same length of time as twenty-seven seconds,
when Nanny returned carrying a pair of violently pink slippers with
bunny rabbits on them.

‘My second best pair,’ she said as, behind her, a board went _plunk!_
and hurled four big nails into the far wall. The boards that had already
sprung up were beginning to sprout what looked a lot like leaves. They
were thin and weedy, but leaves were what they were.

‘Is it me doing this?’ asked Tiffany nervously.

‘I daresay Esme will want to tell you all about it herself,’ said Nanny,
helping her feet into the slippers. ‘But what you’ve got here, miss, is
a bad case of Ped Fecundis.’ In the back of Tiffany’s memory Dr
Sensibility Bustle, D.M. Phil., B.El. L., stirred in his sleep for a
moment and took care of the translation.

‘Fertile Feet?’ said Tiffany.

‘Well done! I didn’t expect anything to happen to floorboards, mind you,
but it makes sense, when you think about it. They’re made of wood, after
all, so they’re tryin’ to grow.’

‘Mrs Ogg?’ said Tiffany.

‘Yes?’

‘Please? I haven’t got a clue what you’re talking about! I keep my feet
very clean! And I think I’m a giant iceberg!’

Nanny Ogg gave her a slow, kind look. Tiffany stared into dark,
twinkling eyes. Don’t try to trick her or hold anything back from those,
said her Third Thoughts. Everyone says she’s been Granny Weatherwax’s
best friend since they were girls. And that means that under all those
wrinkles must be nerves of steel.

‘Kettle’s on downstairs,’ said Nanny brightly. ‘Why don’t you come down
and tell me all about it?’

Tiffany had looked up ‘strumpet’ in _The Unexpurgated Dictionary_, and
found it meant ‘a woman who is no better than she should be’ and ‘a lady
of easy virtue’. This, she decided after some working out, meant that
Mrs Gytha Ogg, known as Nanny, was a very respectable person. She found
virtue easy, for one thing. And if she was no better than she should be
then she was just as good as she ought to be.

She had a feeling that Miss Treason hadn’t meant this, but you couldn’t
argue with logic.

Nanny Ogg was good at listening, at least. She listened like a great big
ear, and before Tiffany realized it she was telling her everything.
Everything. Nanny sat on the opposite side of the big kitchen table,
puffing gently at a pipe with a hedgehog carved on it. Sometimes she’d
ask a little question, like ‘Why was that?’ or ‘And then what happened?’
and off they’d go again. Nanny’s friendly little smile could drag out of
you things you didn’t know you knew.

While they talked, Tiffany’s Third Thoughts scanned the room out of the
corners of her eyes.

It was wonderfully clean and bright, and there were ornaments everywhere
– cheap, jolly ones, the sort that have things like ‘To the World’s Best
Mum’ on them. And where there weren’t ornaments there were pictures, of
babies and children and families.

Tiffany had thought that only grand folk lived in homes like this. There
were oil lamps! There was a bath, made of tin, hanging conveniently on a
hook outside the privy! There was a pump actually indoors! But Nanny
ambled around in her rather worn black dress, not grand at all.

From the best chair in the room of ornaments, a large grey cat watched
Tiffany with a half-open eye that glinted with absolute evil. Nanny had
referred to him as ‘Greebo … don’t mind him, he’s just a big old
softie,’ which Tiffany knew enough to interpret as ‘He’ll have his claws
in your leg if you go anywhere near him.’

Tiffany talked as she hadn’t talked to anyone before. It must be a kind
of magic, the Third Thoughts concluded. Witches soon picked up ways of
controlling people with their voice, but Nanny Ogg listened at you.

‘This lad Roland who is not your young man,’ said Nanny, when Tiffany
had paused for breath. ‘Thinking of marrying him, are you?’

Don’t lie, the Third Thoughts insisted.

‘I … well, your mind comes up with all kinds of things when you’re not
paying attention, doesn’t it?’ said Tiffany. ‘It’s not like thinking.
Anyway, all the other boys I’ve met just stare at their stupid feet!
Petulia says it’s because of the hat.’

‘Well, taking it off helps,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘Mind you, so did a low-cut
bodice, when I was a girl. Stopped ’em lookin’ at their stupid feet, I
don’t mind telling you!’

Tiffany saw the dark eyes locked onto her. She burst out laughing. Mrs
Ogg’s face broke into a huge grin that should have been locked up for
the sake of public decency, and for some reason Tiffany felt a lot
better. She’d passed some kind of test.

‘Mind you, that probably wouldn’t work with the wintersmith, of course,’
said Nanny, and the gloom came down again.

‘I didn’t mind the snowflakes,’ said Tiffany. ‘But the iceberg – I think
that was a bit much.’

‘Showing off in front of the girls,’ said Nanny, puffing at her hedgehog
pipe. ‘Yes, they do that.’

‘But he can kill people!’

‘He’s winter. It’s what he does. But I reckon he’s in a bit of a tizzy
because he’s never been in love with a human before.’

‘In love?’

‘Well, he probably thinks he is.’

Once again the eyes watched her carefully.

‘He’s an elemental, and they’re simple, really,’ Nanny Ogg went on. ‘But
he’s trying to be human. And that’s complicated. We’re packed with stuff
he doesn’t understand – can’t understand, really. Anger, for example. A
blizzard is never angry. The storm don’t hate the people who die in it.
The wind is never cruel. But the more he thinks about you, the more he’s
having to deal with feelings like this, and there’s none can teach him.
He’s not very clever. He’s never had to be. And the interesting thing is
that you are changin’ too—’

There was a knocking at the door. Nanny Ogg got up and opened it. Granny
Weatherwax was there, with Miss Tick peering over her shoulder.

‘Blessings be upon this house,’ said Granny, but in a voice which
suggested that if blessings needed to be taken away she could do that,
too.

‘Quite probably,’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘It’s Ped Fecundis, then?’ Granny nodded at Tiffany.

‘Looks like a bad case. The floorboards started growing after she walked
over them in bare feet.’

‘Ha! Have you given her anything for it?’ said Granny.

‘I prescribed a pair of slippers.’

‘I really don’t see how avatarization could be taking place, not when
we’re talking about elementals – it makes no—’ Miss Tick began.

‘Do stop wittering, Miss Tick,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘I notices you
witter when things goes wrong and it is not being a help.’

‘I don’t want to worry the child, that’s all,’ said Miss Tick. She took
Tiffany’s hand, patted it and said, ‘Don’t you worry, Tiffany, we’ll—’

‘She’s a witch,’ said Granny sternly. ‘We just have to tell her the
truth.’

‘You think I’m turning into a … a goddess?’ said Tiffany.

It was worth it to see their faces. The only mouth not in an O now was
the one belonging to Granny Weatherwax, which was smirking. She looked
like someone whose dog has just done a rather good trick.

‘How did you work that out?’ she said.

Dr Bustle had a guess: Avatar, an incarnation of a god. But I’m not
going to tell you that, Tiffany thought. ‘Well, is it?’ she said.

‘Yes,’ said Granny Weatherwax. ‘The wintersmith thinks you are … oh,
she’s got a lot of names. The Lady of the Flowers is a nice one. Or the
Summer Lady. She makes the summertime, just like he makes the winter. He
thinks you’re her.’

‘All right,’ said Tiffany. ‘But we know he’s wrong, don’t we?’

‘Er … not as quite as wrong as we’d like,’ said Miss Tick …

Most of the Feegles had camped out in Nanny Ogg’s barn, where they were
holding a council of war, except that it was about something that isn’t
quite the same thing.

‘What we’ve got here,’ Rob Anybody pronounced, ‘is a case o’ Romance.’

‘What’s that, Rob?’ said a Feegle.

‘Aye, is it like how wee babies are made?’ said Daft Wullie. ‘Ye told us
about that last year. It waz verrae interestin’, although a bit
far-fetched tae my mind.’

‘No’ exactly,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘An’ it’s kinda hard tae describe. But
I reckon yon wintersmith wants to romance the big wee hag and she disnae
ken what tae do aboot it.’

‘So it _is_ like how babbies are made?’ said Daft Wullie.

‘No, ’cos even beasties know that but only people know aboot Romancin’,’
said Rob. ‘When a bull coo meet a lady coo he disnae have tae say, “My
heart goes bang-bang-bang when I see your wee face,” ’cos it’s kinda
built in tae their heads. People have it more difficult. Romancin’ is
verrae important, ye ken. Basically it’s a way the boy can get close to
the girl wi’oot her attackin’ him and scratchin’ his eyes oot.’

‘I dinnae see how we can teach her any o’ that stuff,’ said Slightly Mad
Angus.

‘The big wee hag reads books,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘When she sees a book
she just cannae help herself. And I,’ he added proudly, ‘have a Plan.’

The Feegles relaxed. They always felt happier when Rob had a Plan,
especially since most plans of his boiled down to screaming and rushing
at something.

‘Tell us aboot the Plan, Rob,’ said Big Yan.

‘Ah’m glad ye asked me,’ said Rob. ‘The Plan is: we’ll find her a book
aboot Romancing.’

‘And how will we find this book, Rob?’ asked Billy Bigchin uncertainly.
He was a loyal gonnagle, but he was also bright enough to get nervous
whenever Rob Anybody had a Plan.

Rob Anybody airily waved a hand. ‘Ach,’ he said. ‘We ken this trick! A’
we need is a big hat an’ coat an’ a coathanger an’ a broom handle!’

‘Oh aye?’ said Big Yan. ‘Bags I not bein’ doon in the knee again!’

* * *

With witches, everything is a test. That’s why they tested Tiffany’s
feet.

I bet I’m the only person in the world about to do this, she thought as
she lowered both her feet into a tray of soil that Nanny had hastily
shovelled up. Granny Weatherwax and Miss Tick were both sitting on bare
wooden chairs, despite the fact that the grey cat Greebo was occupying
the whole of one big saggy armchair. You didn’t want to wake up Greebo
when he wanted to sleep.

‘Can you feel anything?’ asked Miss Tick.

‘It’s a bit cold, that’s all – oh … something’s happening …’

Green shoots appeared around her feet, and grew quickly. Then they went
white at the base and gently pushed Tiffany’s feet aside as they began
to swell.

‘Onions?’ said Granny Weatherwax scornfully.

‘Well, they were the only seeds I could find quickly,’ said Nanny Ogg,
poking at the glistening white bulbs. ‘Good size. Well done, Tiff.’

Granny looked shocked. ‘You’re not going to eat those, are you, Gytha?’
she said accusingly. ‘You are, aren’t you? You’re going to eat them!’

Nanny Ogg, standing up with a bunch of onions in each podgy hand, looked
guilty, but only for a moment.

‘Why not?’ she said stoutly. ‘Fresh vegetables are not to be sneezed at
in the winter. And anyway, her feet are nice and clean.’

‘It’s not seemly,’ said Miss Tick.

‘It didn’t hurt,’ said Tiffany. ‘All I had to do was put my feet on the
tray for a moment.’

‘Yes, she says it didn’t hurt,’ Nanny Ogg insisted. ‘Now, I think I
might have some old carrot seeds in the kitchen drawer—’ She saw the
expressions on the faces of the others. ‘All right, all right, then,
there’s no need to look like that,’ she said. ‘I was just tryin’ to
point out the silver lining, that’s all.’

‘Someone _please_ tell me what is happening to me?’ Tiffany wailed.

‘Miss Tick is going to give you the answer in some long words,’ said
Granny. ‘But they boils down to this. It’s the Story happening. It’s
making you fit into itself.’

Tiffany tried not to look like someone who didn’t understand a word that
she had just heard.

‘I could do with a little bit of the fine detail, I think,’ she said.

‘I think I’ll get some tea brewed,’ said Nanny Ogg.

[image]


CHAPTER 7
ON WITH THE DANCE

The Wintersmith and the Summer Lady … danced. The dance never ended.

Winter never dies. Not as people die. It hangs on in late frost and the
smell of autumn in a summer evening, and in the heat it flees to the
mountains.

Summer never dies. It sinks into the ground; in the depths of winter
buds form in sheltered places and white shoots creep under dead leaves.
Some of it flees into the deepest, hottest deserts, where there is a
summer that never ends.

To animals they were just the weather, just part of everything. But
humans arose and gave them names, just as they filled the starry sky
with heroes and monsters, because this turned them into stories. And
humans loved stories, because once you’re turned things into stories you
could change the stories. And there was the problem, right there.

Now the Lady and the Wintersmith danced around the year, changing places
in the spring and autumn, and it had worked for thousands of years,
right up until the time some girl couldn’t control her feet and had
arrived in the dance at exactly the wrong time.

But the Story had life, too. It was like a play, now. It would roll on
around the year, and if one of the players wasn’t the real actress but
just some girl who’d wandered onto the stage, well, that was too bad.
She’d have to wear the costume and speak the lines and hope that there
was going to be a happy ending. Change the story, even if you don’t mean
to, and the story changes you.

Miss Tick used a lot more words than this, like ‘anthropomorphic
personification’, but this was what ended up in Tiffany’s head.

‘So … I’m not a goddess?’ she said.

‘Oh, I wish I had a blackboard,’ sighed Miss Tick. ‘They really don’t
survive the water, though, and of course the chalks get so soggy …’

‘What we _think_ happened in the dance,’ Granny Weatherwax began, in a
loud voice, ‘is that you and the Summer Lady got … mixed up.’

‘Mixed up?’

‘You may have some of her talents. The myth of the Summer Lady says that
flowers grow wherever she walks,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘_Where e’er_,’ said Miss Tick primly.

‘What?’ snapped Granny, who was now pacing up and down in front of the
fire.

‘It’s where e’er she walks, in fact,’ said Miss Tick. ‘It’s more …
poetical.’

‘Hah,’ Granny said. ‘Poetry!’

‘Am I going to get into trouble about this?’ Tiffany wondered. ‘And what
about the _real_ Summer Lady? Is she going to be angry?’

Granny Weatherwax stopped pacing up and down and looked at Miss Tick,
who said: ‘Ah, yes … er … we are exploring every possibility—’

‘That means we don’t know,’ said Granny. ‘That’s the truth of it. This
is about gods, see? But yes, since you ask, they can be a bit touchy.’

‘I didn’t _see_ her in the dance,’ said Tiffany.

‘Did you _see_ the wintersmith?’

‘Well … no,’ said Tiffany. How could she describe that wonderful,
endless, golden, spinning moment? It went beyond bodies and thoughts.
But it _had_ sounded as though two people had said: ‘Who are you?’ She
pulled her boots back on. ‘Er … where is she now?’ she asked as she tied
the laces. Perhaps she’d have to run.

‘She’s probably gone back underground for the winter. The Summer Lady
doesn’t walk above ground in winter.’

‘Up until now,’ said Nanny Ogg cheerfully. She seemed to be enjoying
this.

‘Aah, Mrs Ogg has put her finger on the _other_ problem,’ said Miss
Tick. ‘The, er, wintersmith and the Summer Lady are, uh, that is,
they’ve never—’ She looked imploringly at Nanny Ogg.

‘They’ve never met except in the Dance,’ said Nanny. ‘But now here you
are, and you feel like the Summer Lady to him, walking around as bold as
brass in the wintertime, so you might be … how shall I put it …?’

‘… exciting his romantic propensities,’ said Miss Tick quickly.

‘I wasn’t going to describe it quite like that,’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘Yes, I suspects you weren’t!’ said Granny. ‘I suspects you was going to
use Language!’

Tiffany definitely heard the capital ‘L’, which entirely suggested that
the language she was thinking of was not to be uttered in polite
company.

Nanny stood up and tried to look haughty, which is hard to do when you
have a face like a happy apple.

‘I was actually going to draw Tiff’s attention to this,’ she said,
taking an ornament off the crowded mantelpiece. It was a little house.
Tiffany had glanced at it before; it had two little doorways at the
front and, at the moment, a tiny little wooden man with a top hat.

‘It’s called a weather house,’ she said, handing it to Tiffany. ‘I don’t
know how it works – there’s a bit of special string or something – but
there’s a little wooden man who comes out if it’s going to rain and a
little wooden woman who comes out when it’s going to be sunny. But
they’re on a little pivot-y thing, see? They can _never_ be out at the
same time, see? Never. An’ I can’t help wonderin’, when the weather’s
changin’, if the little man sees the little woman out of the corner of
his eye and wonders—’

‘Is this about sex?’ said Tiffany.

Miss Tick looked at the ceiling. Granny Weatherwax cleared her throat.
Nanny gave a huge laugh that would have embarrassed even the little
wooden man.

‘Sex?’ she said. ‘Between summer and winter? Now there’s a thought.’

‘Don’t … think … it,’ said Granny Weatherwax sternly. She turned to
Tiffany. ‘He’s fascinated by you, that’s what it is. And we don’t know
how much of the Summer Lady’s power is in you. She might be quite weak.
You’ll have to be a summer in winter until winter ends,’ she added
flatly. ‘That’s justice. No excuses. You made a choice. You get what you
chose.’

‘Couldn’t I just go and find her and say I’m sorry—?’ Tiffany began.

‘No. The old gods ain’t big on “sorry”,’ said Granny, pacing up and down
again. ‘They know it’s _just_ a word.’

‘You know what I think?’ said Nanny. ‘I think she’s watchin’ you, Tiff.
She’s sayin’ to herself, “Who’s this hoity-toity young madam steppin’
into my shoes? Well, let’s make her walk a mile in ’em and see how she
likes it!”’

‘Mrs Ogg may have something there,’ said Miss Tick, who was leafing
through Chaffinch’s _Mythology_. ‘The gods expect you to _pay_ for your
mistakes.’

Nanny Ogg patted Tiffany’s hand. ‘If she wants to see what you can do,
_show_ her what you can do, Tiff, eh? That’s the way! Surprise her!’

‘You mean the Summer Lady?’ said Tiffany.

Nanny winked. ‘Oh, and the Summer Lady, too!’

There was what sounded very much like the start of a laugh from Miss
Tick before Granny Weatherwax glared at her.

Tiffany sighed. It was all very well to talk about choices, but she had
no choice here.

‘All right. What else can I expect apart from … well, the feet?’

‘I’m, er, checking,’ said Miss Tick, still thumbing through the book.
‘Ah … it says here that she was, I mean _is_, fairer than all the stars
in heaven …’

They all looked at Tiffany.

‘You could try doing something with your hair,’ said Nanny Ogg, after a
while.

‘Like what?’ said Tiffany.

‘Like anything, really.’

‘Apart from the feet and doing something about my hair,’ said Tiffany
sharply, ‘is there anything else?’

‘Says here, quoting a very old manuscript: “She waketh the grasses in
Aprill and filleth the behives with honey swete,”’ Miss Tick reported.

‘How do I do that?’

‘I don’t know, but I suspect that happens anyway,’ said Miss Tick.

‘And the Summer Lady gets the credit?’

‘I think she just has to exist for it to happen, really,’ said Miss
Tick.

‘Anything else?’

‘Er, yes. You have to make sure the winter ends,’ said Miss Tick. ‘And,
of course, deal with the wintersmith.’

‘And how do I do _that_?’

‘We think that you just have to … be there,’ said Granny Weatherwax.
‘Oh, perhaps you’ll know what to do when the time comes.’

‘Meep?’

‘Be where?’ said Tiffany.

‘Everywhere. Anywhere.’

‘Granny, your hat squeaked,’ said Tiffany. ‘It went meep!’

‘No it didn’t,’ Granny said sharply.

‘It did, you know,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘I heard it, too.’

Granny Weatherwax grunted and pulled off her hat. The white kitten,
curled around her tight bun of hair, blinked in the light.

‘I can’t help it,’ Granny muttered. ‘If I leave the dratted thing alone
it goes under the dresser and cries and cries.’ She looked around at the
others as if daring them to say anything. ‘Anyway,’ she added, ‘it keeps
m’ head warm.’

On his chair, the yellow slit of Greebo’s left eye opened lazily.

‘Get down, You,’ said Granny, lifting the kitten off her head and
putting it on the floor. ‘I dare say Mrs Ogg has got some milk in the
kitchen.’

‘Not much,’ said Nanny. ‘I’ll swear something’s been drinking it!’

Greebo’s eye opened all the way and he began to growl softly.

‘You sure you know what you’re doing, Esme?’ said Nanny Ogg, reaching
for a cushion to throw. ‘He’s very protective of his territory.’

You the kitten sat on the floor and washed her ears. Then, as Greebo got
to his feet, she fixed him with an innocent little stare and took a
flying leap onto his nose, landing on it with all her claws out.

‘So is she,’ said Granny Weatherwax as Greebo erupted from the chair and
hurtled around the room before disappearing into the kitchen. There was
a crash of saucepans followed by the _gloioioioing_ of a saucepan lid
spinning into silence on the floor.

The kitten padded back into the room, hopped into the empty chair and
curled up again.

‘He brought in half a wolf last week,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘You haven’t been
hexperimenting5 on that poor kitten, have you?’

‘I wouldn’t dream of such a thing,’ said Granny. ‘She just knows her own
mind, that’s all.’ She turned to Tiffany. ‘I don’t reckon the
wintersmith will be worrying about you too much for a while,’ she said.
‘The big winter weather will be on us soon. That’ll keep him busy. In
the meantime, Mrs Ogg will teach you … things she knows.’

And Tiffany thought: I wonder how embarrassing this is going to be?

Deep in the snow, in the middle of a windswept moorland, a small band of
travelling librarians sat around their cooling stove and wondered what
to burn next.

Tiffany had never been able to find out much about the librarians. They
were a bit like the wandering priests and teachers who went even into
the smallest, loneliest villages to deliver those things – prayers,
medicine, facts – that people could do without for weeks at a time but
sometimes needed a lot of all at once. The librarians would loan you a
book for a penny, although they often would take food or good
second-hand clothes. If you gave them a book, you got ten free loans.

Sometimes you’d see two or three of their wagons parked in some clearing
and could smell the glues they boiled up to repair the oldest books.
Some of the books they loaned were so old that the printing had been
worn grey by the pressure of people’s eyeballs reading it.

The librarians were mysterious. It was said they could tell what book
you needed just by looking at you, and they could take your voice away
with a word.

But here they were searching the shelves for T. H. Mouseholder’s famous
book _Survival in the Snow_.

Things were getting desperate. The oxen that pulled the wagon had broken
their tethers and run off in the blizzard, the stove was nearly out and,
worst of all, they were down to their last candle, which meant that soon
they would not be able to read books.

‘It says here in K. Pierpoint Poundsworth’s _Among the Snow Weasels_
that the members of the ill-fated expedition to Whale Bay survived by
making soup of their own toes,’ said Deputy Librarian Grizzler.

‘That’s interesting,’ said Senior Librarian Swinsley, who was rummaging
on the shelf below. ‘Is there a recipe?’

‘No, but there may be something in Superflua Raven’s book _Cooking in
Dire Straits_. That’s where we got yesterday’s recipe for Nourishing
Boiled Socks Surprise—’ There was a thunderous knocking at the door. It
was a two-part door which allowed only the top half to be opened, so
that a ledge on the bottom half could be a sort of small desk for
stamping books. Snow came through the crack as the knocking continued.

‘I hope that’s not the wolves again,’ said Mr Grizzler. ‘I got no sleep
at all last night!’

‘Do they knock? We could check in _The Habits of Wolves_ by Captain W.
E. Lightly,’ said Senior Librarian Swinsley, ‘or perhaps you could just
open the door? Quickly! The candles are going out!’

Grizzler opened the top half of the door. There was a tall figure on the
steps, hard to see in the fitful, cloud-strained moonlight.

‘Ah’m lookin’ for Romance,’ it rumbled.

The Deputy Librarian thought for a moment, and then said, ‘Isn’t it a
bit chilly out there?’

‘Aren’t ye the people wi’ all dem books?’ the figure demanded.

‘Yes, indeed … oh, Romance! Yes, certainly!’ said Mr Swinsley, looking
relieved. ‘In that case, I think you’ll want Miss Jenkins. Forward
please, Miss Jenkins.’

‘It looks like youse freezin’ in here,’ said the figure. ‘Dem’s icicles
hanging from der ceilin’.’

‘Yes. However, we have managed to keep them off the books,’ said Mr
Swinsley. ‘Ah, Miss Jenkins. The, er, gentleman is looking for Romance.
Your department, I think.’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Miss Jenkins, stepping out from the shelves. ‘What kind
of romance were you looking for?’

‘Oh, one w’ a cover on, ye ken, and wi’ pages wi’ all wurdies on ’em,’
said the figure.

Miss Jenkins, who was used to this sort of thing, disappeared into the
gloom at the other end of the wagon.

‘Dese scunners are total loonies!’ said a new voice. It appeared to come
from somewhere on the person of the dark book-borrower, but much lower
than the head.

‘Pardon?’ said Mr Swinsley.

‘Ach, nae problemo,’ said the figure quickly. ‘Ah’m sufferin’ from a
grumblin’ knee, ’tis an old trouble—’

‘Why don’t they be burnin’ all dem books, eh?’ the unseen knee grumbled.

‘Sorry aboot this, ye know how knees can let a man doon in public. I’m a
martyr to dis one,’ said the stranger.

‘I know how it is. My elbow plays me up in wet weather,’ said Mr
Swinsley. There was some sort of fight going on in the nether regions of
the stranger, who was shaking like a puppet.

‘That will be one penny,’ Miss Jenkins said. ‘And I will need your name
and address.’

The dark figure shuddered. ‘Oh, I— we ne’er give out oour name an’
address!’ it said quickly. ‘It is against oor religion, ye ken. Er … I
dinnae wanta be a knee aboot this, but why is ye all here freezin’ tae
death?’

‘Our oxen wandered off and, alas, the snow’s too deep to walk through,’
said Mr Swinsley.

‘Aye. But youse got a stove and all them dry ol’ books,’ said the dark
figure.

‘Yes, we know,’ said the librarian, looking puzzled.

There was the kind of wretched pause you get when two people aren’t
going to understand each other’s point of view at all. Then:

‘Tell ye what, me an’ – ma knee – will go and fetch yer cows for ye,
eh?’ said the mysterious figure. ‘Got tae be worth a penny, eh? Big Yan,
you’ll feel the rough side o’ my hand in a minit!’

The figure dropped out of sight. Snow flew up in the moonlight. For a
moment it sounded as if a scuffle was going on, and then a sound like
‘Crivens!’ disappearing into the distance.

The librarians were about to shut the door when they heard the terrified
bellows of the oxen, getting louder very quickly.

Two curling waves of snow came across the glittering moors. The
creatures rode them like surfers, yelling at the moon. The snow settled
down a few feet away from the wagon. There was a blue and red blur in
the air, and the romantic book was whisked away.

But what was really odd, the librarians agreed, was that when the oxen
had come speeding towards them, they had appeared to be travelling
_backwards_.

… It was hard to be embarrassed by Nanny Ogg, because her laugh drove it
away. She wasn’t embarrassed about anything.

Today Tiffany, with extra pairs of socks on to avoid unfortunate floral
incidents, went with her ‘Around the houses’, as it was known to
witches.

‘You did this for Miss Treason?’ asked Nanny as they stepped out. There
were big fat clouds massing around the mountains; there would be a lot
more snow tonight.

‘Oh yes. And for Miss Level and Miss Pullunder.’

‘Enjoyed it, did you?’ said Nanny, wrapping her cloak around her.

‘Sometimes. I mean, I know why we do it, but sometimes you get fed up
with people being stupid. I quite like doing the medicine stuff.’

‘Good with the herbs, are you?’

‘No. I’m very good with the herbs.’

‘Oh, there’s a bit of swank, eh?’ said Nanny.

‘If I didn’t know I was good with herbs, I’d be stupid, Mrs Ogg.’

‘That’s right. Good. It’s good to be good at something. Now, our next
little favour is—’

– giving an old lady a bath, as much as was possible with a couple of
tin basins and some flannels. And that was witchcraft. Then they looked
in on a woman who’d just had a baby, and that was witchcraft, and a man
with a very nasty leg injury that Nanny Ogg said was doing very well,
and that was witchcraft, too, and then in an out-of-the-way group of
huddled little cottages, they climbed the cramped wooden stairs to a
tiny little bedroom where an old man shot at them with a crossbow.

‘You old devil, ain’t you dead yet?’ said Nanny. ‘You’re looking well! I
swear, the man with the scythe must’ve forgotten where you live!’

‘I’m a-waitin’ for him, Mrs Ogg!’ said the old man cheerfully. ‘If I’m
gonna go, I’ll take ’im with me!’

‘This is my girl Tiff, she’s learnin’ the witchin’,’ said Nanny, raising
her voice. ‘This is Mr Hogparsley, Tiff … Tiff?’ She snapped her fingers
in front of Tiffany’s eyes.

‘Huh?’ said Tiffany. She was still staring in horror.

The twang of the bow as Nanny opened the door had been bad enough, but
for a fraction of a second she could have sworn that an arrow had gone
right through Nanny Ogg and stuck in the doorframe.

‘Shame on you for firing at a young lady, Bill,’ said Nanny severely,
plumping up his pillows. ‘And Mrs Dowser says you’ve been shootin’ at
her when she comes up to see you,’ she added, putting her basket down by
the bed. ‘That’s no way to treat a respectable woman who brings you your
meals, is it? For shame!’

‘Sorry, Nanny,’ muttered Bill. ‘It’s just that she’s skinny as a rake
and wears black. ’Tis an easy mistake to make in poor light.’

‘Mr Hogparsley here is lying in wait for Death, Tiff,’ said Nanny.
‘Mistress Weatherwax helped you make the special traps and arrows, ain’t
that right, Bill?’

‘Traps?’ whispered Tiffany. Nanny just nudged her and pointed down. The
floorboards were covered in ferociously spiked mantraps.

They were all drawn in charcoal.

‘I said, isn’t that right, Bill?’ Nanny repeated, raising her voice.
‘She helped you with the traps!’

‘She did that!’ said Mr Hogparsley. ‘Hah! I wouldn’t want to get on the
wrong side o’ her!’

‘Right, so no shootin’ arrows at anyone except Death, right? Otherwise
Mistress Weatherwax won’t help you any more,’ said Nanny, putting a
bottle on the old wooden box that was Mr Hogparsley’s bedside table.
‘Here’s some of your jollop, freshly mixed up. Where did she tell you to
keep the pain?’

‘It’s sitting up here on my shoulder, missus, being no trouble.’

Nanny touched the shoulder, and seemed to think for a moment. ‘It’s a
brown and white squiggle? Sort of oblong?’

‘That’s right, missus,’ said Mr Hogparsley, pulling at the cork on the
bottle. ‘It wiggles away there and I laughs at it.’ The cork popped out.
Suddenly, the room smelled of apples.

‘It’s gettin’ big,’ said Nanny. ‘Mistress Weatherwax will be along
tonight to take it away.’

‘Right you are, missus,’ said the old man, filling a mug to the brim.

‘Try not to shoot her, all right? It only makes her mad.’

It was snowing again when they stepped out of the cottage, big feathery
flakes that meant business.

‘I reckon that’s it for today,’ Nanny announced. ‘I’ve got things to see
to over in Slice, but we’ll take the stick tomorrow.’

‘That arrow he fired at us—’ said Tiffany.

‘Imaginary,’ said Nanny Ogg, smiling.

‘It looked real for a moment!’

Nanny Ogg chuckled. ‘It’s amazing what Esme Weatherwax can make people
imagine!’

‘Like traps for Death?’

‘Oh, yes. Well, it gives the old boy an interest in life. He’s on his
way to the Door. But at least Esme’s seen to it that there’s no pain.’

‘Because it’s floating over his shoulder?’ said Tiffany.

‘Yep. She put it just outside his body for him, so it don’t hurt,’ said
Nanny, the snow crunching under her feet.

‘I didn’t know you could do that!’

‘I can do it for small stuff, toothaches and the like. Esme’s the
champion for it, though. We’re none of us too proud to call her in.
Y’know, she’s very good at people. Funny, really, ’cos she doesn’t like
’em much.’

Tiffany glanced at the sky, and Nanny was the kind of inconvenient
person who notices _everything_.

‘Wondering if lover boy is goin’ to drop in?’ she said, with a big grin.

‘Nanny! Really!’ said Tiffany, shocked.

‘But you are, aren’t you,’ said Nanny, who knew no shame. ‘O’ course,
he’s _always_ around, when you think about it. You’re walking through
him, you feel him on your skin, you stamp him off your boots when you go
indoors—’

‘Just don’t talk like that, please?’ said Tiffany.

‘Besides, what’s time to an elemental?’ Nanny chattered. ‘And I suppose
snowflakes don’t just make themselves, especially when you’ve got to get
the arms and legs right …’

She’s looking at me out of the corner of her eye to see if I’m going
red, Tiffany thought. I know it.

Then Nanny nudged her in the ribs and laughed one of her laughs that
would make a rock blush.

‘Good for you!’ she said. ‘I’ve had a few boyfriends myself that I’d
have _loved_ to stamp off my boots!’

Tiffany was just getting ready for bed that night when she found a book
under her pillow.

The title, in fiery red letters, was _PASSION’S PLAYTHING_ by Marjory J.
Boddice, and in smaller print were the words: _Gods and Men said their
love was not to be, but they would not listen!! A tortured tale of a
tempestuous romance by the author of_ Sundered Hearts_!!!_

The cover showed, up close, a young woman with dark hair and clothes
that were a bit on the skimpy side in Tiffany’s opinion, both hair and
clothes blowing in the wind. She looked desperately determined, and also
a bit chilly. A young man on a horse was watching her some distance
away. It appeared that a thunderstorm was blowing up.

Strange. There was a library stamp inside and Nanny didn’t use the
library. Well, it wouldn’t hurt to read a bit before blowing the candle
out.

Tiffany turned to page one. And then to page two. When she got to page
nineteen she went and fetched _The Unexpurgated Dictionary_.

She had older sisters and she knew some of this, she told herself. But
Marjory J. Boddice had got some things laughably wrong. Girls on the
Chalk didn’t often run away from a young man who was rich enough to own
his own horse – or not for long and not without giving him a chance to
catch up. And Megs, the heroine of the book, clearly didn’t know a thing
about farming. No young man would be interested in a woman who couldn’t
dose a cow or carry a piglet. What kind of help would she be around the
place? Standing around with lips like cherries wouldn’t get the cows
milked or the sheep sheared!

And that was another thing. Did Marjory J. Boddice know _anything_ about
sheep? This was a sheep farm in the summertime, wasn’t it? So when did
they shear the sheep? The second most important occasion in a sheep
farm’s year and it wasn’t worth mentioning?

Of course, they might have a breed like Habbakuk Polls or Lowland
Cobbleworths, which didn’t need shearing, but these were rare and any
sensible author would surely have mentioned it.

And the scene in chapter five, where Megs left the sheep to fend for
themselves while she went gathering nuts with Roger … well, how stupid
was that? They could have wandered anywhere, and they were really stupid
to think they’d find nuts in June.

She read on a bit further, and thought: Oh. I see. Hmm. Hah. Not nuts at
all, then. On the Chalk, we call that sort of thing ‘looking for cuckoo
nests’.

She stopped there to go downstairs to fetch a fresh candle, got back
into bed, let her feet warm up again, and went on reading.

Should Megs marry sulky dark-eyed William, who already owned two and a
half cows, or should she be swayed by Roger, who called her ‘my proud
beauty’ but was clearly a bad man because he rode a black stallion and
had a moustache?

Why did she think she had to marry either of them? Tiffany wondered.
Anyway, she spent too much time leaning meaningfully against things and
pouting. Wasn’t anyone doing any work? And if she always dressed like
that, she’d catch a chill.

It was amazing what those men put up with. But it made you think.

She blew out the candle and sank gently under the eiderdown, which was
as white as snow.

Snow covered the Chalk. It fell around the sheep, making them look a
dirty yellow. It covered the stars, but glowed by its own light. It
stuck to the windows of the cottages, blotting out the orange
candlelight. But it would never cover the castle. It stood on a mound a
little way from the village, a tower of stone ruling all those thatched
homes. They looked as if they had grown from the land, but the castle
nailed it down. It said: I Own.

In his room, Roland wrote carefully. He ignored the hammering from
outside.

Annagramma, Petulia, Miss Treason— Tiffany’s letters were full of
faraway people with strange-sounding names. Sometimes he tried to
imagine them, and wondered if she was making them up. The whole
witchcraft business seemed … well, not as advertised. It was more like—

‘Do you hear this, you wicked boy?’ Aunt Danuta sounded triumphant. ‘Now
it’s barred from this side too! Hah! This is for your own good, you
know. You will stay in there until you are ready to apologize!’

– like hard work, to be honest. Worthy, though, visiting the sick and
everything, but very busy and not very magical. He’d heard of ‘dancing
about without your drawers on’ and tried his best not to imagine it, but
in any case there didn’t seem to be anything like that. Even broomstick
rides sounded—

‘And we know about your secret passage now, oh yes! It’s being walled
up! No more cocking a snook at people who are doing their very best for
you!’

– dull. He paused for a moment, staring blankly at the carefully stacked
piles of loaves and sausages beside his bed. I ought to get some onions
tonight, he thought. General Tacticus says they are unsurpassable for
the proper operation of the digestive system if you can’t find fresh
fruit.

What to write, what to write … yes! He’d tell her about the party. He’d
only gone because his father, in one of his good moments, had asked him
to. It was important to keep in with the neighbours _but not with the
relatives_! It’d been quite nice to get out, and he’d been able to leave
his horse at Mr Gamely’s stable where the aunts wouldn’t think of
looking for it. Yes … she’d enjoy hearing about the party.

The aunts were shouting again, about locking the door to his father’s
room. And they were blocking the secret passage. That meant that all he
was left with was the loose stone that came out behind the tapestry in
the next room, the wobbly flagstone that could let him drop down into
the room below and, of course, the chain outside the window which let
him climb all the way down to the ground. And on his desk, on top of
Gen. Tacticus’s book, was a complete set of shiny new castle keys. He’d
got Mr Gamely to make them for him. The blacksmith was a thoughtful man
who could see the sense in being friendly to the next baron.

He could come and go as he liked, whatever they did. They could bully
his father, they could shout all they pleased, but they would never own
_him_.

You could learn a lot from books.

The wintersmith was learning. It was a hard, slow task when you have to
make your brain out of ice. But he had learned about snowmen. They were
built by the smaller kinds of humans. That was interesting. Apart from
the ones in pointy hats, the bigger humans didn’t seem to hear him. They
knew invisible creatures didn’t speak to them out of the air.

The small ones, though, hadn’t found out what was impossible.

In the big city was a big snowman.

Actually, it would be more honest to call it a slushman. _Technically_
it was snow, but by the time it had spiralled down through the big
city’s fogs, smogs and smokes it was already a sort of yellowish grey,
and then most of what ended up on the pavement was what had been thrown
up from the gutter by cart wheels. It was, at best, a mostly-snowman.
But three grubby children were building it anyway, because building
something that you could call a snowman was what you did. Even if it was
yellow.

They’d done their best with what they could find, and had given him two
horse apples6 for eyes and a dead rat for a nose.

At which point, the snowman spoke to them, in their heads.

Small humans, why do you do that?

The boy who might have been the oldest boy looked at the girl who might
have been the oldest girl. ‘I’ll tell you I heard that if you say you
heard it too,’ he said.

The girl was still young enough not to think ‘snowmen can’t talk’ when
one of them had just spoken to her, so she said to it: ‘You have to put
them in to make you a snowman, mister.’

Does that make me human?

‘No, ’cos …’ She hesitated.

‘You ain’t got innards,’ said the third and smallest child, who might
have been the youngest boy or the youngest girl, but who was spherical
with so many layers of clothing that it was quite impossible to tell. It
did have a pink woolly hat with a bobble on it, but that didn’t mean
anything. Someone did care about it, though, because they’d embroidered
‘R’ and ‘L’ on its mittens, ‘F’ and ‘B’ on the front and back of its
coat, ‘T’ on top of the bobble hat and probably ‘U’ on the underside of
its rubber boots. That meant that while you couldn’t know what it was,
you could be certain it was the right way up and which way it was
facing.

A cart went by, throwing up another wave of slush.

_Innards?_ said the secret voice of the snowman. _Made of special dust,
yes! But what dust?_

‘Iron,’ said the possibly older boy promptly. ‘Enough iron to make a
nail.’

‘Oh, yeah, that’s right, that’s how it goes,’ said the possibly older
girl. ‘We used to skip to it. Er … “Iron enough to make a nail, water
enough to drown a cow—”’

‘A dog,’ said the possibly older boy. ‘It’s “Water enough to drown a
dog, sulphur enough to kill the fleas.” It’s “poison enough to kill a
cow.”’

_What is this?_ the wintersmith asked.

‘It’s … like … an old song,’ said the possibly older boy.

‘More like a sort of poem. Everyone knows it,’ said the possibly older
girl.

‘’S called “These Are the Things That Make a Man”,’ said the child who
was the right way up.

_Tell me the rest of it_, the wintersmith demanded, and on the freezing
pavement they did, as much as they knew.

When they’d finished, the possibly older boy said hopefully, ‘Is there
any chance you can take us flying?’

_No_, said the wintersmith. _I have things to find! Things that make a
man!_

One afternoon, when the sky was growing cold, there was a frantic
knocking on Nanny’s door. It turned out to be caused by Annagramma, who
almost fell into the room. She looked terrible, and her teeth were
chattering.

Nanny and Tiffany stood her by the fire, but she started talking before
her teeth had warmed up.

‘Skkkkulls!’ she managed.

Oh dear, thought Tiffany.

‘What about them?’ she said, as Nanny Ogg hurried in from the kitchen
with a hot drink.

‘Mmmmmiss Trrreason’s Skkkkulls!’

‘Yes? What about them?’

Annagramma took a swig from the mug. ‘What did you do with them?’ she
gasped, cocoa dribbling down her chin.

‘Buried them.’

‘Oh, no! Why?’

‘They were skulls. You can’t just leave skulls lying about!’

Annagramma looked around wildly. ‘Can you lend me a shovel, then?’

‘Annagramma! You can’t dig up Miss Treason’s grave!’

‘But I need some skulls!’ Annagramma insisted. ‘The people there – well,
it’s like the olden days! I whitewashed that place with my own hands!
Have you any idea how long it takes to whitewash over black? They
complained! They won’t have anything to do with crystal therapy, they
just frown and say Miss Treason gave them sticky black medicine that
tasted horrible but worked! And they keep on asking me to sort out
stupid little problems, and I don’t have a clue what they’re on about.
And this morning there was this old man who’s dead and I’ve got to lay
him out and sit up with him tonight. Well, I mean, that’s so … yuk …’

Tiffany glanced at Nanny Ogg, who was sitting in her chair and puffing
gently on her pipe. Her eyes were gleaming. When she saw Tiffany’s
expression she winked and said: ‘I’ll leave you girls to have a little
chat, shall I?’

‘Yes please, Nanny. And please don’t listen at the door.’

‘To a private conversation? The very idea!’ said Nanny, and went into
the kitchen.

‘Will she listen?’ whispered Annagramma. ‘I’ll just die if Mistress
Weatherwax finds out.’

Tiffany sighed. Did Annagramma know anything? ‘Of course she’ll listen,’
she said. ‘She’s a witch.’

‘But she said she wouldn’t!’

‘She’ll listen but she’ll pretend she hasn’t and she won’t tell anyone,’
said Tiffany. ‘It’s her cottage, after all.’

Annagramma looked desperate. ‘And on Tuesday I’ve probably got to go and
deliver a baby out in some valley somewhere! An old woman came and
gabbled at me about it!’

‘That’ll be Mrs Owslick’s baby,’ said Tiffany. ‘I _did_ leave some
notes, you know. Didn’t you read them?’

‘I think perhaps Mrs Earwig tidied them away,’ said Annagramma.

‘You should have looked at them! It took me an hour to write them all
down!’ said Tiffany reproachfully. ‘Three pieces of paper! Look, calm
down, will you? Didn’t you learn anything about midwifery?’

‘Mrs Earwig said giving birth is a natural action and nature should be
allowed to take its course,’ said Annagramma, and Tiffany was sure she
heard a snort from behind the kitchen door. ‘I know a soothing chant,
though.’

‘Well, I expect that will be a help,’ said Tiffany weakly.

‘Mrs Earwig said the village women know what to do,’ said Annagramma
hopefully. ‘She says to trust in their peasant wisdom.’

‘Well, Mrs Obble was the old woman who called and what she has got is
simple peasant ignorance,’ said Tiffany. ‘She puts leaf mould on wounds
if you don’t watch her. Look, just because a woman’s got no teeth
doesn’t mean she’s wise. It might just mean she’s been stupid for a very
long time. Don’t let her anywhere near Mrs Owlslick until after the
baby. It’s not going to be an easy birth as it is.’

‘Well, I know plenty of spells that will help—’

‘No! No magic! Only to take away pain! Surely you know that?’

‘Yes, but Mrs Earwig says—’

‘Why don’t you go and ask Mrs Earwig to help you then?’

Annagramma stared at Tiffany. That sentence had come out a bit louder
than intended. And then Annagramma’s face slid into what she probably
thought was a friendly expression. It made her look slightly mad.

‘Hey, I’ve got a great idea!’ she said, as bright as a crystal that was
about to shatter. ‘Why don’t you come back to the cottage and work for
me?’

‘No. I’ve got other work to do.’

‘But you’re so good at the messy stuff, Tiffany,’ said Annagramma in a
syrupy voice. ‘It seems to come naturally to you.’

‘I started at the lambing when I was small, that’s why. Small hands can
get inside and untangle things.’

And now Annagramma had that hunted look she got when she was dealing
with anything she didn’t immediately understand.

‘Inside the sheep? You mean up its …’

‘Yes. Of course.’

‘_Untangle things?_’

‘Sometimes the lambs try to get born backwards,’ said Tiffany.

‘Backwards,’ muttered Annagramma weakly.

‘And it can be worse if there’s twins.’

‘Twins …’ Then Annagramma said, as if spotting the flaw: ‘But look, I’ve
seen lots of pictures of shepherds and sheep and there’s never anything
like that. I thought it was all just … standing around and watching the
sheep eat grass.’

There were times when you could feel that the world would be a better
place if Annagramma got the occasional slap around the ear. The silly
unthinking insults, her huge lack of interest in anyone other than
herself, the way she treated everyone as if they were slightly deaf and
a bit stupid … it could make your blood boil. But you put up with it
because every once in a while you saw through it all. Inside there was
this worried, frantic little face watching the world like a bunny
watching a fox, and screaming at it in the hope that it would go away
and not hurt her. And a meeting of witches, who were supposed to be
clever, had handed her this steading which would be a hard job for
anyone.

It didn’t make sense.

No, it didn’t make sense.

‘It only happens when there’s a difficult lambing,’ said Tiffany, while
her mind raced. ‘And that means it’s out in the dark and cold and the
rain. Artists never seem to be around then. It’s amazing.’

‘Why are you looking at me like that?’ said Annagramma. ‘Like I’m not
here!’

Tiffany blinked. All right, she thought. How am I supposed to deal with
this?

‘Look, I’ll come and help you with the laying-out,’ she said, as calmly
as she could manage. ‘And I expect I can help with Mrs Owslick. Or ask
Petulia. She’s good. But you’ll have to do the watching by yourself.’

‘Sitting up all night with a dead person?’ said Annagramma, and
shivered.

‘You can take a book to read,’ said Tiffany.

‘I suppose I could draw a circle of protection around the chair …’
Annagramma muttered.

‘No,’ said Tiffany. ‘No magic. Mrs Earwig must have told you this?’

‘But a circle of protection—’

‘It draws attention. Something might turn up to see why it’s there.
Don’t worry, it’s just to make the old people happy.’

‘Er … when you say something might turn up …’ Annagramma began.

Tiffany sighed. ‘All right, I’ll sit up with you, just this once,’ she
said. Annagramma beamed.

‘And as for skulls,’ said Tiffany, ‘just wait a moment.’ She went
upstairs and got the Boffo catalogue, which she’d hidden in her old
suitcase. She came back with it carefully rolled up and handed it over.
‘Don’t look at it now,’ she said. ‘Wait until you’re alone. You might
find it gives you ideas. OK? I’ll come and meet you around seven
tonight.’

When Annagramma had gone, Tiffany sat and counted under her breath. When
she’d got to five, Nanny Ogg came and vigorously dusted a few ornaments
before saying: ‘Oh, has your little friend gone?’

‘Do you think I’m being silly?’ said Tiffany.

Nanny stopped pretending to do housework. ‘I don’t know what you’re
talkin’ about, not havin’ listened,’ she said, ‘but if I had been
listenin’ I’d think you won’t get any thanks, that’s what I’d think.’

‘Granny shouldn’t have meddled,’ said Tiffany.

‘Shouldn’t have, eh?’ said Nanny, her face blank.

‘I’m not stupid, Nanny,’ said Tiffany. ‘I’ve worked it out.’

‘Worked it out, have you? There’s a clever girl,’ said Nanny Ogg,
sitting down in her chair. ‘And what is it you’ve worked out then?’

This was going to get difficult. Nanny was usually cheerful all the
time. When she went solemn, like she was now, it could make you nervous.
But Tiffany pressed on.

‘I couldn’t take on a cottage,’ she said. ‘Oh, I can do most of the
everyday stuff, but you need to be older to run a steading. There’s
things people won’t tell you if you’re thirteen, hat or not. But Granny
put it about that she was suggesting me, and so everyone saw it as a
contest between me and Annagramma, right? And they chose her because
she’s older and sounds really competent. And now it’s all falling apart.
It’s not her fault she was taught magic instead of witchcraft. Granny
just wants her to fail so that everyone will know that Mrs Earwig is a
bad teacher. And I don’t think that’s good.’

‘I wouldn’t be too quick to decide what it is Esme Weatherwax wants, if
I was you,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘I won’t say a word, mind you. You go off
and help your friend if you want, but you’ve still got to work for me,
OK? That’s only fair. How’s the feet?’

‘They feel fine, Nanny. Thank you for asking.’

More than a hundred miles away, Mr Fusel Johnson knew nothing about
Tiffany, Nanny Ogg or, indeed, anything very much except for clocks and
watches, which he made for a living. He also knew how to lime-wash a
kitchen, which was an easy and cheap way to get a nice white look even
if the stuff was a bit runny. And therefore he had no idea why several
handfuls of the white powder fountained up out of the mixing bowl before
he could add the water, hung in the air for a moment like a ghost and
vanished up the chimney. In the end, he put it down to too many trolls
moving into the area. This wasn’t very logical, but such beliefs
generally aren’t.

And the wintersmith thought: Lime enough to make a man!

That night she sat up with Annagramma and old Mr Tissot, except that he
was lying down because he was dead. Tiffany had never liked watching
over the dead. It wasn’t exactly something you could like. It was always
a relief when the sky turned grey and the birds started to sing.

Sometimes, in the night, Mr Tissot made little noises. Except, of
course, it wasn’t Mr Tissot, who’d met Death hours ago. It was just the
body he’d left behind, and the sounds it made were really no different
from the noises made by an old house as it cooled down.

It was important to remember these things around two o’clock in the
morning. Vitally important, when the candle flickered.

Annagramma snored. No one with a nose that small should be able to make
a snore that loud. It was like ripping planks. Whatever evil spirits
might be around on this night, that sound would probably scare them
away.

It wasn’t the _Gnh gnh gnh_ part that was so bad, and Tiffany could live
with the _Bloooooorrrrt!_ It was the gap between them, after the _Gnh
gnh gnh_ had wound up but before the long let-down of the
_Bloooooorrrrt!_ That really got on her nerves. It was never the same
length twice. Sometimes there was _Gnh gnh gnh Bloooooorrrrt!_ one right
after the other, and then there might be such a huge gap after _Gnh gnh
gnh_ that Tiffany found herself holding her breath while she waited for
the _Bloooooorrrrt!_ It wouldn’t have been so bad if Annagramma had
stuck to one length of pause. Sometimes she stopped altogether, and
there was blessed silence until a festival of blorts began, usually with
a faint _mni mni_ lip-smacking sound as Anna-gramma shifted position in
her chair.

Where are you, Flower Lady? What are you? You should be sleeping!

The voice was so faint that Tiffany might not have heard it at all if
she hadn’t been all tensed up waiting for the next _Gnh gnh gnh_. And
here it came—

Gnh gnh gnh!

Let me show you my world, Flower Lady. Let me show you all the colours
of ice!

BLOOOOOORRRRT!

About three quarters of Tiffany thought: Oh, no! Will he find me if I
reply? No. If he could find me, he’d be here. My hand isn’t itching.

The other quarter thought: A god or god-like being is talking to me and
I could really do without the snoring, Annagramma, thank you so much.

Gnh gnh gnh!

‘I said I was sorry,’ she whispered into the dancing candlelight. ‘I saw
the iceberg. It was very … er … nice of you.’

I have made many more.

BLOOOOOORRRRT!

Many more icebergs, thought Tiffany. Great big freezing, floating
mountains that look like me, dragging fog banks and snowstorms behind
them. I wonder how many ships run into them?

‘You shouldn’t have gone to all that trouble,’ she whispered.

Now I am growing stronger! I am listening and learning! I am
understanding humans!

Outside the cottage window a thrush began to sing. Tiffany blew out the
candle, and grey light crept into the room.

Listening and learning … how could a blizzard understand things?

Tiffany, Flower Lady! I am making myself a man!

There was a complicated grunting as Annagramma’s _Gnh gnh gnh_ and
_Bloooooorrrrt!_ ran into each other and she woke up.

‘Ah,’ she said, stretching her arms and yawning. She looked around.
‘Well, that seemed to go well.’

Tiffany stared at the wall. What did he mean, making himself a man?
Surely he—

‘You didn’t fall asleep, did you, Tiffany?’ said Annagramma in what she
probably thought was a playful voice. ‘Not even for one tiny little
second?’

‘What?’ said Tiffany, glaring at the wall. ‘Oh … no. I didn’t!’

People were moving around downstairs. After a little while there was a
creaking on the stairs and the low door was pushed open. A middle-aged
man, looking sheepishly at the floor, uttered, ‘Mam says would you
ladies like some breakfast?’

‘Oh, no, we couldn’t possibly take what little you have—’ Annagramma
began.

‘Yes please, we would be grateful,’ said Tiffany, louder and quicker.
The man nodded, and shut the door.

‘Oh, how could you say that?’ said Annagramma, as his footsteps creaked
down. ‘These are poor people! I thought you would—’

‘Shut up, will you?’ snapped Tiffany. ‘Just shut up and wake up! These
are real people! They’re not some kind of, of, of _idea_! We will go
down there and we will eat breakfast and we’ll say how good it is and
then we will thank them and they will thank us and we will go! And that
will mean everyone has done the right thing by custom and that will be
what’s important to them. Besides, they don’t think they’re poor,
because everyone around here is poor! But they’re not so poor they can’t
afford to do the right things! That _would_ be poor!’

Annagramma was staring at her with her mouth open.

‘Be careful what you say next,’ said Tiffany, breathing heavily. ‘In
fact, don’t say anything.’

Breakfast was ham and eggs. It was eaten in polite silence. After that,
in the same silence except that it was outdoors, they flew back to what
people would probably always think of as Miss Treason’s cottage.

There was a small boy loitering outside. As soon as they landed he
blurted out, ‘Mrs Obble says the baby’s on the way an’ she said you’d
give me a penny for goin’.’

‘You’ve got a bag, have you?’ said Tiffany, turning to Annagramma.

‘Yes, er, lots.’

‘I mean a call-out bag. You know, you keep it by the door with
everything in it that you’ll need if …’

Tiffany saw the terrified look on the girl’s face. ‘OK, so you haven’t
got a bag. We’ll just have to do the best we can. Give him a penny and
let’s go.’

‘Can we get anyone to help if it goes wrong?’ said Annagramma as they
left the ground.

‘We _are_ the help,’ said Tiffany simply. ‘And since this is your
steading, I’m giving you the really tough job—’

– which was keeping Mrs Obble occupied. Mrs Obble wasn’t a witch,
although most people thought she was. She looked like one – that is, she
looked like someone who’d bought everything in the Boffo catalogue on
the day of the Special Offer on hairy warts – and she was mildly crazy
and should not have been allowed within a mile of any mother who was
going to have her first baby, since she would very conscientiously tell
them (or cackle at them, anyway) about everything that could go wrong in
a way that made it sound as if they would all go wrong. She wasn’t a bad
nurse, though, once you stopped her putting a leaf-mould poultice on
everything.

Things went noisily and with a certain amount of fuss, but nothing like
Mrs Obble had predicted, and the result was a baby boy, who was not a
bouncing baby but only because Tiffany caught him; Annagramma didn’t
know how to hold babies.

She did look good in a pointy hat, though, and since she was clearly
older than Tiffany and did hardly any of the work the other women
assumed she was in charge.

Tiffany left her holding the baby (the right way up, this time) and
looking proud, and began the long flight back though the woods to Tir
Nani Ogg. It was a crisp evening but there was a bit of wind which blew
stinging snow crystals off the trees. It was an exhausting journey and
very, very cold. He can’t know where I am, she repeated to herself as
she flew back in the dusk. And he’s not very clever. Winter has to end
sometime, right?

Er … how? said her Second Thoughts. Miss Tick says you just have to be
there, but surely you have to do something else?

I suppose I’ll have to walk around with my shoes off, Tiffany thought.

Everywhere? the Second Thoughts wondered, as she swerved between the
trees.

It’s probably like being a queen, her Third Thoughts said. She just has
to sit in a palace and maybe do a bit of driving around in a big coach
and waving, and all over a huge kingdom monarching is going on.

But as she avoided more trees she also tried to avoid the little
scurrying thought that was trying to creep into her mind: Sooner or
later, one way or the other, he will find you … and how can he make
himself a man?

Assistant Postmaster Groat did not believe in doctors. They made you
ill, he thought. So he put sulphur in his socks every morning and he was
proud to say that he had never had a day’s illness in his life. This may
have been because not many people cared to come very close to him,
because of the smell. Something did come close, though. A gale roared
into his post office when he was opening the door one morning and blew
his socks clean off.7

And no one heard the wintersmith say: ‘Sulphur enough to make a man!’

Nanny Ogg was sitting by the fire when Tiffany came in, stamping snow
off her boots.

‘You look frozen all through,’ she said. ‘You need a glass of hot milk
with a drop of brandy in it, that’s what you need.’

‘Ooh, y-yess …’ Tiffany managed through chattering teeth.

‘Get me one too, then, will you?’ said Nanny. ‘Only joking. You get
warmed up, I’ll see to the drink.’

Tiffany’s feet felt like blocks of ice. She knelt by the fire and
stretched out her hand to the stockpot on its big black hook. It bubbled
all the time.

Get your mind right, and balance. Reach out and cup your hands around
it, and concentrate, concentrate, on your freezing boots.

After a while her toes felt warm and then—

‘Ow!’ Tiffany pulled her hands away and sucked at her fingers.

‘Didn’t have your mind right,’ said Nanny Ogg from the doorway.

‘Well, you know, that’s just a bit difficult when you’ve had a long day
and you didn’t sleep much and the wintersmith is looking for you,’
snapped Tiffany.

‘The fire doesn’t care,’ said Nanny, shrugging. ‘Hot milk coming up.’

Things were a little better when Tiffany had warmed up. She wondered how
much brandy Nanny had added to the milk. Nanny had done one for herself,
with probably some milk added to the brandy.

‘Isn’t this nice and cosy,’ said Nanny after a while.

‘Is this going to be the talk about sex?’ said Tiffany.

‘Did anyone say there was going to be one?’ said Nanny innocently.

‘I kind of got the feeling,’ said Tiffany. ‘And I know where babies come
from, Mrs Ogg.’

‘I should hope so.’

‘I know how they get there, too. I live on a farm and I’ve got a lot of
older sisters.’

‘Ah, right,’ said Nanny. ‘Well, I see you’re pretty well prepared for
life, then. Not much left for me to tell you, I expect. And I’ve never
had a god pay any attention to me, as far as I can recall. Flattered,
are you?’

‘No!’ Tiffany looked into Nanny’s smile. ‘Well, a bit,’ she admitted.

‘And frightened of him?’

‘Yes.’

‘Well, the poor thing hasn’t quite got it right yet. He started off so
well with the ice roses and everything, and then he wanted to show you
his muscles. Typical. But you shouldn’t be frightened of him. He should
be frightened of you.’

‘Why? Because I’m pretending to be the flower woman?’

‘Because you’re a girl! It’s a poor lookout if a bright girl can’t wind
a boy around her little finger. He’s smitten with you. You could make
his life a misery with a word. Why, when I was a girl, a young man
nearly threw himself off the Lancre bridge because I spurned his
advances!’

‘He did? What happened?’

‘I unspurned ’em. Well, he looked so pretty standing there, and I
thought, That’s a good-looking bum on him if ever I saw one.’ Nanny sat
back. ‘And think about poor ol’ Greebo. He’ll fight anything. But Esme’s
little white kitten leaped straight at him and now the poor dear won’t
come into this room without peering round the door to check she’s not
here. You should see his poor little face when he does, too. It’s all
wrinkled up. O’ course, he could tear her into bits with one claw, but
he can’t now ’cos she’s fixed his head.’

‘You’re not saying I should try to tear the wintersmith’s face off, are
you?’

‘No, no, you don’t have to be as blunt as that. Give him a little hope.
Be kind but firm—’

‘He wants to marry me!’

‘Good.’

‘_Good?_ ’

‘That means he wants to stay friendly. Don’t say no, don’t say yes. Act
like a queen. He’s got to learn to show you some respect. What are you
doing?’

‘Writing this down,’ said Tiffany, scribbling in her diary.

‘You don’t need to write it down, love,’ said Nanny. ‘It’s written down
in you, somewhere. On a page you haven’t read yet, I reckon. Which
reminds me, these came when you were out.’ Nanny felt down among the
seat cushions and fished out a couple of envelopes. ‘My boy Shawn is the
postman, so he knew you’d moved.’

Tiffany nearly snatched them out of her hand. Two letters! ‘Like him, do
you? Your young man in the castle?’ said Nanny.

‘He’s a friend who writes to me,’ said Tiffany haughtily.

‘That’s right, that’s just the look and voice you need to deal with the
wintersmith!’ said Nanny, looking delighted. ‘Who does he think he is,
daring to talk to you? That’s the way!’

‘I shall read them in my room,’ said Tiffany.

Nanny nodded. ‘One of the girls did us a lovely casserole,’ she said
(famously, Nanny never remembered the names of her daughters-in-law).
‘Yours is in the oven. I’m off to the pub. Early start tomorrow!’

Alone in her room, Tiffany read the first letter.

To the unaided eye, not much happened on the Chalk. It had avoided
History. It was a place of small things. Tiffany enjoyed reading about
them.

The second letter seemed to be much the same as the first one – until
the bit about the ball. He’d gone to a ball! It was at the house of Lord
Diver, who was a neighbour! He’d danced with his daughter, who was
called Iodine because Lord Diver thought that was a nice name for a
girl! They’d had three dances!! And ice cream!! Iodine had shown him her
water-colours!!!

How could he sit there and write such things?!!!

Tiffany’s eyes moved on, over everyday news like the bad weather and
what had happened to old Aggie’s leg, but the words didn’t enter her
head because it was on fire.

Who did he think he was, dancing with another girl?

You danced with the wintersmith, her Third Thoughts said.

All right, but what about the water-colours?

The wintersmith showed you the snowflakes, said the Third Thoughts.

But I was just being polite!

Perhaps he was just being polite, too.

All right, but I know those aunts, Tiffany thought furiously. They’ve
never liked me, because I’m only a farm girl! And Lord Diver’s very rich
and his daughter is his only child! They’re scheming!

How could he sit there and write as if eating ice creams with another
girl was a perfectly normal thing to do! That was as bad as – well,
something pretty bad, at least!

As for looking at her water-colours …

He’s just a boy you happen to write to, said the Third Thoughts.

Yes, well …

Yes, well … what? the Third Thoughts persisted. They were getting on
Tiffany’s nerves. Your own brain ought to have the decency to be on your
side!

Just, ‘Yes, well …’ OK? she thought angrily. You’re not being very
sensible about this.

Oh, really? Well, I’ve been sensible all day! I’ve been sensible for
years! I think I’m owed five minutes of being really unreasonably angry,
don’t you?

There’s some casserole downstairs and you haven’t eaten since breakfast,
said the Third Thoughts. You’ll feel better after you’ve eaten
something.

How can I eat stew when people are looking at water-colours? How dare he
look at water-colours!

But the Third Thoughts were right – not that this made things any
better. If you’re going to be angry and miserable, you might as well be
so on a full stomach. She went downstairs and found the casserole in the
oven. It smelled good. Nothing but the best for dear ol’ Mum.

She opened the cutlery drawer for a spoon. It stuck. She rattled it,
pulled at it and swore a few times, but it stayed stuck.

‘Oh, yes, go ahead,’ said a voice behind her. ‘See how much help that
is. Don’t be sensible and stick your hand under the top and carefully
free up the stuck item. Oh no. Rattle and curse, that’s the way!’

Tiffany turned.

There was a skinny, tired-looking woman standing by the kitchen table.
She seemed to be wearing a sheet draped around her and was smoking a
cigarette. Tiffany had never seen a woman smoke a cigarette before, but
especially never a cigarette that burned with a fat red flame and gave
off sparks.

‘Who are you and what are you doing in Mrs Ogg’s kitchen,’ she said
sharply.

This time it was the woman who looked surprised.

‘You can hear me?’ she said. ‘And see me?’

‘Yes!’ Tiffany snarled. ‘And this is a food preparation area, you know!’

‘You’re not supposed to be able to see me!’

‘Well, I’m looking at you!’

‘Hold on a minute,’ said the woman, frowning at Tiffany. ‘You’re not
just a human, are you … ?’ She squinted oddly for a moment and then
said, ‘Oh, you’re _her_. Am I right? The new Summer?’

‘Never mind me, who are you?’ said Tiffany. ‘And it was only one dance!’

‘Anoia, Goddess of Things That Get Stuck in Drawers,’ said the woman.
‘Pleased to meet you.’ She took another puff at the flaming cigarette,
and there were more sparks. Some of them dropped on the floor, but
didn’t seem to do any damage.

‘There’s a goddess just for that?’ said Tiffany.

‘Well, I find lost corkscrews and things that roll under furniture,’
said Anoia, off-handedly. ‘Sometimes things that get lost under sofa
cushions, too. They want me to do stuck zips, and I’m thinking about
that. But mostly I manifest whensoever people rattle stuck drawers and
call upon the gods.’ She puffed on her cigarette. ‘Got any tea?’

‘But I didn’t call on anyone!’

‘You did,’ said Anoia, blowing more sparks. ‘You cussed. Sooner or
later, every curse is a prayer.’ She waved the hand that wasn’t holding
the cigarette and something in the drawer went _pling_. ‘It’ll be all
right now. It was the fish slice. Everyone has one, and no one knows
why. Did anyone in the world ever knowingly go out one day and buy a
fish slice? I don’t think so.’

Tiffany tried the drawer. It slid out easily.

‘About that tea …?’ said Anoia, sitting down.

Tiffany put the kettle on. ‘You know about me?’ she said.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Anoia. ‘It’s been quite some time since a god fell in
love with a mortal. Everyone wants to see how it turns out.’

‘Fell in love?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘And you mean the gods are watching?’

‘Well, of course,’ said Anoia. ‘Most of the big ones don’t do anything
else these days! But I’m supposed to do zips, oh yes, and my hands get
very stiff in this weather!’

Tiffany glanced at the ceiling, which was now full of smoke.

‘They’re watching all the time?’ she said, aghast.

‘I heard you’re getting more interest than the war in Klatchistan, and
that was pretty popular,’ said Anoia, holding out her red hands. ‘Look,
chilblains. Not that they care, of course.’

‘Even when I’m having a … wash?’ said Tiffany.

The goddess laughed nastily. ‘Yes. And they can see in the dark, too.
Best not to think about it.’

Tiffany looked up the ceiling again. She had been hoping for a bath
tonight.

‘I’ll try not to,’ she said darkly, and added: ‘Is it … hard, being a
goddess?’

‘It has its good days,’ said Anoia. She stood with her cigarette cupped
at the elbow by her other hand, holding the flaming, sparking thing
close to her face. Now she took a sharp pull, raised her head and blew a
cloud of smoke out to join the smog on the ceiling. Sparks fell out of
it like rain. ‘I haven’t been doing drawers long. I used to be a volcano
goddess.’

‘Really?’ said Tiffany. ‘I’d never have guessed.’

‘Oh, yes. It was good work, apart from the screaming,’ said Anoia, and
then added, in a bitter tone of voice: ‘Ha! And the god of storms was
always raining on my lava. That’s men for you, dear. They rain on your
lava.’

‘And look at water-colours,’ said Tiffany.

Anoia’s eyes narrowed. ‘Someone else’s water-colours?’

‘Yes!’

‘Men! They’re all the same,’ said Anoia. ‘Take my advice, dear, and show
Mr Wintersmith the door. He’s only an elemental, after all.’

Tiffany glanced at the door.

‘Give him the boot, dear, send him packing and change the locks. Let’s
have summer all year round like the hot countries do. Grapes all over
the place, eh? Coconuts on every tree! Hah, when I was in the volcano
game I couldn’t move for mangoes. Kiss goodbye to snow and fog and
slush. Have you got the thingy yet?’

‘The thingy?’ said Tiffany, looking worried.

‘It’ll turn up, I daresay,’ said Anoia. ‘I hear it can be a bit tricky
to— Oops, I hear rattling, must fly, don’t worry, I won’t tell him where
you are—’

She vanished. So did the smoke.

Not knowing what else to do, Tiffany ladled out a plate of hearty meat
and vegetables, and ate it. So … she could see gods now? And they knew
about her? And everyone wanted to give her advice.

It was not a good idea to come to the attention of those in high places,
her father had said.

But it was impressive. In love with her, eh? And telling everyone? But
he was really an elemental, not a proper god at all. All he knew was how
to move wind and water around!

Even so … huh! Some people have elementals running after them! Oh yes!
How about that? If people were stupid enough to dance around with girls
who painted water-colours to lead honest men to their Doom, well, she
could be haughty to people who were almost gods. She ought to mention
that in a letter, except that of course she wasn’t going to be writing
to him _now_. Hah!

And a few miles away Old Mother Blackcap, who made her own soap out of
animal fat and the potash that came, indeed, from plant ashes, felt a
bar snatched from her hand just as she was about to boil some sheets.
The tub of water froze solid, too.

Being a witch, she immediately said: ‘There’s a strange thief about!’

And the wintersmith said: ‘Potash enough to make a man!’

5 Hexperiment: to use magic just to see what happens.

6 So called because you get them from horses and they are about the size
of apples …

7 This was reported in the newspapers, and shortly afterwards a widow
wrote to him saying how much she admired a man who really understood
about hygiene. They were later seen walking together, so it’s an ill
wind, as they say …

[image]


CHAPTER 8
THE HORN OF PLENTY

That night, after Nanny Ogg had gone to bed, Tiffany did have the bath
she’d been looking forward to. It was not something to be taken lightly.
First, the tin bath had to be fetched from its hook on the back of the
privy, which was at the bottom of the garden, and then dragged through
the dark, freezing night to a place of honour in front of the fire.
Kettles had to be heated over the fire and on the black kitchen stove,
and getting even six inches of warm water was an effort. Afterwards, the
water all had to be scooped out and into the sink and the bath moved
into a corner, ready to be taken outside in the morning. When you had to
do all that, you might as well scrub every inch.

Tiffany did one extra thing: she wrote ‘PRIVATE!!’ on a piece of
cardboard and wedged it in the hanging lamp in the centre of the room so
that it could only be read from above. She wasn’t sure it would put off
any inquisitive gods, but she felt better for doing it.

That night she slept without dreaming. In the morning fresh snow had put
a coating on the drifts, and a couple of Nanny Ogg’s grandchildren were
building her a snowman on the lawn. They came in after a while and
demanded a carrot for the nose and two lumps of coal for the eyes.

Nanny took her to the isolated village of Slice, where people were
always glad and surprised to see someone they weren’t related to. Nanny
Ogg ambled from cottage to cottage along the paths cut in the snow,
drinking enough cups of tea to float an elephant and doing witchcraft in
small ways. Mostly, it seemed to just consist of gossip, but once you
got the hang of it, you could hear the magic happening. Nanny Ogg
changed the way people thought, even if it was only for a few minutes.
She left people thinking they were slightly better people. They weren’t,
but as Nanny said, it gave them something to live up to.

Then there was another night without dreams, but Tiffany woke up with a
snap at half-past five, feeling … odd.

She rubbed the frost off the window, and saw the snowman by moonlight.

Why do we do it? she wondered. As soon as there’s snow, we build
snowmen. We do worship the wintersmith, in a way. We make the snow human
…We give him coal eyes and a carrot nose to bring him alive. Oh, and I
see the children gave him a scarf. That’s what a snowman needs, a scarf
to keep him warm …

She went down into the silent kitchen, and for want of anything else to
do scrubbed the table. Doing something with her hands helped her think.

Something had changed, and it was her. She’d been worrying about what he
would do and what he would think, as if she was just a leaf being blown
about by the wind. She dreaded hearing his voice in her head, where he
had no right to be.

Well, not now. Not any more.

He ought to be worried about her.

Yes, she’d made a mistake. Yes, it was her fault. But she wasn’t going
to be bullied. You couldn’t let boys go around raining on your lava and
ogling other people’s water-colours.

Find the story, Granny Weatherwax always said. She believed that the
world was full of story shapes. If you let them, they controlled you.
But if you studied them, if you found out about them … you could use
them, you could change them …

Miss Treason had known all about stories, yes? She’d spun them like a
spider’s web, to give herself power. And they worked because people
wanted to believe them. And Nanny Ogg told a story, too. Fat, jolly
Nanny Ogg, who liked a drink (and another drink, thank you kindly) and
was everyone’s favourite grandmother … but those twinkling little eyes
could bore into your head and read all your secrets.

Even Granny Aching had a story. She’d lived in the old shepherding hut,
high on the hills, listening to the wind blowing over the turf. She was
mysterious, alone – and the stories floated up and gathered around her,
all those stories about her finding lost lambs even though she was dead,
all those stories about her, still, watching over people …

People wanted the world to be a story, because stories had to sound
right and they had to make sense. People wanted the world to make sense.

Well, her story wasn’t going to be the story of a little girl who got
pushed around. There was no sense in that.

Except … he’s not actually bad. The gods in the _Mythology_, they seemed
to get the hang of being human – a bit too human, sometimes – but how
could a snowstorm or a gale ever find out? He was dangerous and scary –
but you couldn’t help feeling sorry for him …

Someone hammered on Nanny Ogg’s back door. It turned out to be a tall
figure in black.

‘Wrong house,’ said Tiffany. ‘No one here is even a bit sick.’

A hand raised the black hood and from its depths a voice hissed: ‘It’s
me, Annagramma! Is she in?’

‘Mrs Ogg’s not up yet,’ said Tiffany.

‘Good. Can I come in?’

At the kitchen table, over a cup of warming tea, Annagramma revealed
all. Life in the woods was not going well.

‘Two men came to see me about some stupid cow they both think they own!’
she said.

‘That’ll be Joe Broomsocket and Shifty Adams. I left you a note about
them, too,’ said Tiffany. ‘Whenever one or other of them gets drunk,
they argue about that cow.’

‘What am I supposed to do about it?’

‘Nod and smile. Wait until the cow dies, Miss Treason always said. Or
one of the men,’ said Tiffany. ‘It’s the only way.’

‘And a woman came to see me with a sick pig!’

‘What did you do about it?’

‘I told her I don’t do pigs! But she burst into tears, so I tried
Bangle’s Universal Nostrum on it.’

‘You used that on a pig?’ said Tiffany, shocked.

‘Well, the pig-witch uses magic, so I don’t see why—’ Annagramma began
defensively.

‘_She_ knows what works!’ said Tiffany.

‘It was perfectly all right when I got it down out of the tree! She
didn’t have to make all that fuss! I’m sure the bristles will grow back!
In time!’

‘It wasn’t a spotted pig, was it? And a woman with a squint?’ Tiffany
asked.

‘Yes! I think so! Does it matter?’

‘Mrs Stumper is very attached to that pig,’ said Tiffany reproachfully.
‘She brings him up to the cottage about once a week. It’s usually just
an upset stomach. She feeds him too much.’

‘Really? Then I won’t open the door to her next time,’ said Annagramma
firmly.

‘No, let her in. Really, it’s all because she’s lonely and wants to
chat.’

‘Well, I should think I’ve got better things to do with my time than
listen to an old lady who just wants to talk,’ said Annagramma
indignantly.

Tiffany looked at her. Where did you start, apart from banging the
girl’s head on the table until the brain started working?

‘Listen very carefully,’ she said. ‘I mean to her, not just to me.
You’ve got no better use of your time than to listen to old ladies who
want to talk. Everyone tells things to witches. So listen to everyone
and don’t say much and think about what they say and how they say it and
watch their eyes … it becomes like a big jigsaw, but you’re the only one
who can see all the pieces. You’ll know what they want you to know, and
what they don’t want you to know, and even what they think no one knows.
That’s why we go around the houses. That’s why you _will_ go around the
houses, until you’re part of their lives.’

‘All this just to get some power over a crowd of farmers and peasants?’

Tiffany spun round and kicked a chair so hard that it broke a leg.
Annagramma backed away quickly.

‘What did you do that for?’

‘You’re clever, you guess!’

‘Oh, I forgot … your father is a shepherd …’

‘Good! You remembered!’ Tiffany hesitated. Certainty was pouring into
her brain, courtesy of her Third Thoughts. Suddenly, she knew
Annagramma.

‘And _your_ father?’ she asked.

‘What?’ Annagramma instinctively drew herself up. ‘Oh, he owns several
farms—’

‘Liar!’

‘Well, perhaps I should say he is a farmer—’ the girl began, nervousness
beginning to show.

‘Liar!’

Annagramma backed away. ‘How dare you talk to me like—’

‘How dare you not tell me the truth!’

In the pause that opened, Tiffany heard everything – the faint crackle
of wood in the stove, the sound of mice in the cellar, her own breathing
roaring like the sea in a cave …

‘He works for a farmer, all right?’ said Annagramma quickly, and then
looked shocked at her own words. ‘We don’t have any land, we don’t even
own the cottage. There’s the truth, if you want it. Happy now?’

‘No. But thank you,’ said Tiffany.

‘Are you going to tell the others?’

‘No. It doesn’t matter. But Granny Weatherwax wants you to make a mess
of all this, do you understand? She’s got nothing against you …’ Tiffany
hesitated, then went on, ‘I mean, nothing more than she has against
everyone. She just wants people to see that Mrs Earwig’s style of
witchcraft doesn’t work. This is just like her! She’s not said a word
against you, she’s just let you have exactly what you wanted. It’s like
a story. Everyone knows that if you get exactly what you wish for, it
all goes bad. And you wished for a cottage. And you’re going to mess it
up.’

‘I just need another day or two to get the hang—’

‘Why? You’re a witch with a cottage. You’re supposed to be able to deal
with it! Why take it on if you couldn’t do it?’

You’re supposed to be able to deal with it, sheep girl! Why take it on
if you couldn’t do it?

‘So you’re not going to help me?’ Annagramma glared at Tiffany and then
her expression, most unusually, softened a bit and she said, ‘Are you
all right?’

Tiffany blinked. It’s horrible to have your own voice echo back at you
from the other side of your mind.

‘Look, I haven’t got time,’ she said weakly. ‘Maybe the others can …
help out?’

‘I don’t want them to know!’ Panic cut its curves on Annagramma’s face.

She can do magic, Tiffany thought. She’s just not good at witchcraft.
She’ll make a mess of it. She’ll make a mess of _people_.

She gave in. ‘All right, I can probably spare some time: there’s not
many chores to do at Tir Nani Ogg. And I’ll explain things to the
others. They’ll have to know. They’ll probably help. You learn fast, you
could pick up the basic stuff in a week or so.’

Tiffany watched Annagramma’s face. She was actually _thinking_ about it!
If she was drowning and you threw her a rope she’d complain if it was
the wrong colour …

‘Well, if they are just _helping_ me …’ Annagramma said, brightening up.

You could almost admire the girl for the way she could rearrange the
real world in her head. Another story, thought Tiffany; it’s all about
Annagramma.

‘Yes, we’ll be helping you,’ she sighed.

‘Perhaps we could even tell people that you girls are coming to me to
learn things?’ said Annagramma hopefully.

People said that you should always count up to ten before losing your
temper. But if it was Annagramma you were dealing with, you had to know
some bigger numbers, like perhaps a million.

‘No,’ said Tiffany, ‘I don’t think we’ll do that. You are the one doing
the learning.’

Annagramma opened her mouth to argue, saw the look on Tiffany’s face and
decided not to.

‘Er, yes,’ she said. ‘Of course. Er … thank you.’

That was a surprise.

‘They probably will help,’ said Tiffany. ‘It won’t look good if one of
us fails.’

To her amazement, the girl really was crying. ‘It’s just that I didn’t
really think they were my friends …’

‘I don’t like her,’ said Petulia, who was knee-deep in pigs. ‘She calls
me the pig-witch.’

‘Well, you are a pig-witch,’ said Tiffany, who was standing outside the
pig pen. The big shed was full of pigs. The noise was nearly as bad as
the smell. Fine snow, like dust, was falling outside.

‘Yes, but when she says it, there’s a good deal too much pig and not
enough witch,’ said Petulia. ‘Every time she opens her mouth I think
I’ve done something wrong.’ She waved a hand in a pig’s face and
muttered a few words. The animal’s eyes crossed and it opened its mouth.
It got a large dose of green liquid from a bottle.

‘We can’t just leave her to struggle,’ said Tiffany. ‘People might get
hurt.’

‘Well, that wouldn’t be our fault, would it?’ said Petulia, dosing
another pig. She cupped her hands and shouted over the din to a man at
the other end of the pens: ‘Fred, this lot’s done!’ Then she climbed out
of the pen and Tiffany saw that she’d got her dress tucked up to her
waist and was wearing a pair of heavy leather britches under it.

‘They’re making a real fuss this morning,’ she said. ‘Sounds like
they’re getting a bit frisky.’

‘Frisky?’ said Tiffany. ‘Oh … yes.’

‘Listen, you can hear the boars yelling in their shed,’ said Petulia.
‘They can smell the spring.’

‘But it’s not even Hogswatch yet!’

‘It’s the day after tomorrow. Anyway the springtime sleeps under the
snow, my dad always says,’ said Petulia, washing her hands in a bucket.

No Ums, said Tiffany’s Third Thoughts. When she’s working, Petulia never
says ‘um’. She’s certain of things when she’s working. She stands up
straight. She’s in charge.

‘Look, it _will_ be our fault if we can see something wrong and don’t do
anything about it,’ said Tiffany.

‘Oh, Annagramma again,’ said Petulia. She shrugged. ‘Look, I can go over
there maybe once a week after Hogswatch and show her some of the basic
stuff. Will that make you happy?’

‘I’m sure she’ll be grateful.’

‘I’m sure she won’t be. Have you asked any of the others?’

‘No, I thought that if they knew you’d agreed, they probably would,
too,’ said Tiffany.

‘Hah! Well, I suppose that at least we can say we tried. You know, I
used to think Annagramma was really clever because she knew a lot of
words and could do sparkly spells. But show her a sick pig and she’s
useless!’

Tiffany told her about Mrs Stumper’s pig and Petulia looked shocked.

‘We can’t have that sort of thing,’ she said. ‘In a tree? Perhaps I’ll
try to drop in this afternoon, then.’ She hesitated. ‘You know Granny
Weatherwax won’t be happy about this. Do we want to be caught between
her and Mrs Earwig?’

‘Are we doing the right thing or not?’ said Tiffany. ‘Anyway, what’s the
worst she could do to us?’

Petulia gave a short laugh with no humour in it at all. ‘Well,’ she
said, ‘first, she could make our—’

‘She won’t.’

‘I wish I was as sure as you,’ said Petulia. ‘All right, then. For Mrs
Stumper’s pig.’

Tiffany flew above the treetops, so that the occasional high twig
brushed against her boots. There was just enough winter sunshine to make
the snow crisp and glittery, like a frosted cake.

It had been a busy morning. The coven hadn’t been very interested in
helping Annagramma. The coven itself seemed a long time ago. It had been
a busy winter.

‘All we did was muck about while Annagramma bossed us around,’ Dimity
Hubbub had said, while grinding minerals and very carefully tipping
them, a bit at a time, into a tiny pot being heated by a candle. ‘I’m
too busy to mess around with magic. It never did anything useful. You
know her trouble? She thinks you can be a witch by buying enough
things.’

‘She just needs to learn how to deal with people,’ said Tiffany. At this
point, the pot exploded.

‘Well, I think we can safely say that wasn’t your everyday toothache
cure,’ said Dimity, picking bits of pot out of her hair. ‘All right, I
can spare the odd day, if Petulia’s doing it. But it won’t do much
good.’

Lucy Warbeck was lying full length and fully clothed in a tin bath full
of water when Tiffany called. Her head was right under the surface, but
when she saw Tiffany peering in she held up a sign saying: I’M NOT
DROWNING! Miss Tick had said she would make a good witch-finder, so she
was training hard.

‘I don’t see why we should help Annagramma,’ she said as Tiffany helped
her get dry. ‘She just likes putting people down with that sarcastic
voice of hers. Anyway, what’s it to you? You know she doesn’t like you.’

‘I thought we’ve always got on … more or less,’ said Tiffany.

‘Really? You can do stuff she can’t even attempt! Like that thing where
you go invisible … you do it and you make it look easy! But you come
along to the meetings and act like the rest of us and help clear up
afterwards and that drives her mad!’

‘Look, I don’t understand what you’re going on about …’

Lucy picked up another towel. ‘She can’t stand the idea that someone’s
better than her but doesn’t crow about it.’

‘Why should I do that?’ said Tiffany, bewildered.

‘Because that’s what she’d do, if she was you,’ said Lucy, carefully
pushing the knife and fork back into her piled-up hair.8 ‘She thinks
you’re laughing at her. And now, oh my word, she’s got to depend on you.
You might as well have pushed pins up her nose.’

But Petulia had signed up, and so Lucy and the rest of them did, too.
Petulia had become the big success story since she’d won the Witch
Trials with her famous Pig Trick two years ago. She’d been laughed at –
well, by Annagramma, and everyone else had sort of grinned awkwardly –
but she’d stuck to what she was good at and people were saying that
she’d got skills with animals that even Granny Weatherwax couldn’t
match. She’d got solid respect, too. People didn’t understand a lot of
what witches did, but anyone who could get a sick cow back on its feet …
well, that person was someone you looked up to. So, for the whole coven,
after Hogswatch, it was going to be All About Annagramma time.

Tiffany flew back to Tir Nani Ogg with her head spinning. She’d never
thought anyone could be envious of her. OK, she’d picked up one or two
things, but anyone could do them. You just had to be able to switch
yourself off.

She’d sat on the sand of the desert behind the Door, she’d faced dogs
with razor teeth … they weren’t things she wanted to remember. And on
top of all that, there was the wintersmith.

He couldn’t find her without the horse, everyone was sure of that. He
could speak in her head, and she could speak to him, but that was a kind
of magic and didn’t have anything to do with maps.

He’d been quiet for a while. He was probably building icebergs.

She landed the broomstick on a small bald hill amongst the trees. There
was no cottage to be seen.

She climbed off the stick but held onto it, just in case.

The stars were coming out. The wintersmith liked clear nights. They were
colder.

And the words came. They were her words in her voice and she knew what
they meant, but they had a sort of echo.

‘Wintersmith! I command you!’

As she blinked at the high-toned way the words had sounded, the reply
came back.

The voice was all around her.

Who commands the wintersmith?

‘I am the Summer Woman.’ Well, she thought, I’m a sort of stand-in.

‘Then why do you hide from me?’

‘I fear your ice. I fear your chill. I run from your avalanches. I hide
from your storms.’ Ah, right. This is goddess talk.

‘Live with me in my world of ice!’

‘How dare you order me! Don’t you dare to order me!’

‘But you chose to dwell in my winter …’ The wintersmith sounded
uncertain.

‘I go where I please. I make my own way. I seek the leave of no man. In
your country you will honour me – or there will be a reckoning!’ And
that bit is mine, Tiffany thought, pleased to get a word in.

There was a long silence, filled with uncertainty and puzzlement. Then
the wintersmith said: ‘How may I serve you, my lady?’

‘No more icebergs looking like me. I don’t want to be a face that sinks
a thousand ships.’

‘And the frost? May we share the frosts? And the snowflakes?’

‘Not the frosts. You must not write my name on windows. That can only
lead to trouble.’

‘But I may be permitted to honour you in snowflakes?’

‘Er …’ Tiffany stopped. Goddesses shouldn’t say ‘er’, she was sure of
that.

‘Snowflakes will be … acceptable,’ she said. After all, she thought,
it’s not as though they have my name on them. I mean, most people won’t
notice and if they do they won’t know it’s me.

Then there will be snowflakes, my lady, until the time we dance again.
And we will, for I am making myself a man!

The voice of the wintersmith … went.

Tiffany was alone again among the trees.

Except … she wasn’t.

‘I know you’re still there,’ she said, her breath leaving a sparkle in
the air. ‘You are, aren’t you? I can feel you. You’re not my thoughts.
I’m not imagining you. The wintersmith has gone. You can speak with my
mouth. Who are you?’

The wind made snow fall from the trees nearby. The stars twinkled.
Nothing else moved.

‘You _are_ there,’ said Tiffany. ‘You’ve put thoughts in my head. You’ve
even made my own voice speak to me. That’s not going to happen again.
Now I know the feeling, I _can_ keep you out. If you have anything to
say to me, say it now. When I leave here, I _will_ shut my mind to you.
I will not let—’

How does it feel to be so helpless, sheep girl?

‘You are Summer, aren’t you?’ said Tiffany.

_And you are like a little girl dressing in her mother’s clothes, little
feet in big shoes, dress trailing in the dirt. The world will freeze
because of a silly child_—

Tiffany did … something that it would be impossible for her to describe,
and the voice ended up like a distant insect.

It was lonely on the hill, and cold. And all you could do was keep
going. You could scream, cry and stamp your feet, but apart from making
you feel warmer it wouldn’t do any good. You could say it was unfair,
and that was true, but the universe didn’t care because it didn’t know
what ‘fair’ meant. That was the big problem about being a witch. It was
up to you. It was always up to you.

Hogswatch came, with more snow and some presents. Nothing from home,
though, even though some coaches were getting through. She told herself
there was probably a good reason, and tried to believe it.

It was the shortest day of the year, which was convenient because it
fitted neatly with the longest night. This was the heart of winter, but
Tiffany didn’t expect the present that arrived next day.

It had been snowing hard, but the evening sky was pink and blue and
freezing.

It came out of the pink evening sky with a whistling noise and landed in
Nanny Ogg’s garden, throwing up a shower of dirt and leaving a big hole.

‘Well, that’s goodbye to the cabbages,’ said Nanny, looking out of the
window.

Steam was rising from the hole when they went outside and there was a
strong smell of sprouts.

Tiffany peered through the steam. Dirt and stalks covered the thing, but
she could make out something rounded.

She let herself slide further into the hole, right down amongst the mud
and steam and the mysterious thing. It wasn’t very hot now, and as she
scraped stuff away she began to have a nasty feeling that she knew what
it was.

It was, she was sure, the thingy that Anoia had talked about. It looked
mysterious enough. And as it emerged from the mud, she knew she’d seen
it before …

‘Are you all right down there? I can’t see you for all this steam!’
Nanny Ogg called down. By the sound of it, the neighbours had come
running; there was some excited chattering.

Tiffany quickly scraped mud and mashed cabbages over the arrival and
called up, ‘I think this might explode. Tell everyone to get indoors!
And then reach down and grab my hand, will you?’

There was some shouting above her and the sound of running feet. Nanny
Ogg’s hand appeared, waving around in the fog, and between them they got
Tiffany out of the hole.

‘Shall we hide under the kitchen table?’ said Nanny as Tiffany tried to
brush mud and cabbage off her dress. Then Nanny winked. ‘If it _is_
going to explode?’

Her son Shawn came round the house with a bucket of water in each hand
and stopped, looking disappointed that there was nothing to do with
them.

‘What was it, Mum?’ he panted.

Nanny looked at Tiffany, who said: ‘Er … a giant rock fell out of the
sky.’

‘Giant rocks can’t stay up in the sky, miss!’ said Shawn.

‘I expect that’s why this one fell down, lad,’ said Nanny briskly. ‘If
you want to do something useful, you can stand guard and make sure
nobody comes near it.’

‘What shall I do if it explodes, Mum?’

‘Come and tell me, will you?’ said Nanny.

She hurried Tiffany into the cottage, shut the door behind them and
said: ‘I’m a dreadful ol’ liar, Tiff, and it takes one to know one.
What’s down there?’

‘Well, I don’t think it’s going to explode,’ said Tiffany. ‘And if it
did, I think the worst that’ll happen is that we’d be covered in
coleslaw. I think it’s the Cornucopia.’

There was the sound of voices outside and the door was flung open.

‘Blessings be upon this house,’ said Granny Weatherwax, stamping snow
off her boots. ‘Your boy said I shouldn’t come in, but I think he was
wrong. I came as quick as I could. What’s happened?’

‘We’ve got cornucopias,’ said Nanny Ogg, ‘whatever _they_ are.’

It was later that evening. They’d waited until it was dark before
pulling the Cornucopia out of the hole. It was a lot lighter than
Tiffany had expected; in fact it had an air about it of something very,
very heavy which, for reasons of its own, had become light just for a
while.

Now it was on the kitchen table, wiped clean of mud and cabbages.
Tiffany thought it looked vaguely alive. It was warm to the touch and
seemed to vibrate slightly under her fingers.

‘According to Chaffinch,’ she said, with the _Mythology_ open on her lap
at the picture of the Summer Lady, ‘the god Blind Io created the
Cornucopia from a horn of the magical goat Almeg to feed his two
children by the Goddess Bisonomy, who was later turned into a shower of
oysters by Epidity, god of things shaped like potatoes, after insulting
Resonata, goddess of weasels, by throwing a mole at her shadow. It is
now the badge of office of the Summer Goddess.’

‘I always said there used to be far too much of that sort of thing in
the old days,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

The witches stared at the thing. It did look a bit like a goat horn, but
much larger.

‘How does it work?’ said Nanny Ogg. She stuck her head inside it and
shouted, ‘Hello!’ Hellos came back, echoing for a long time, as if they
had gone much further than you would expect them to.

‘Looks like a great big seashell to _me_,’ was the opinion of Granny
Weatherwax. The kitten You padded around the giant thing, sniffing
daintily at it (Greebo was hiding behind the saucepans on the top shelf.
Tiffany checked).

‘I don’t think anyone knows,’ she said. ‘But the other name for it is
the Horn of Plenty.’

‘A horn? Can you play a tune on it?’ asked Nanny.

‘I don’t think so,’ said Tiffany. ‘It contains … er … things.’

‘What sort of things?’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Well, technically … everything,’ said Tiffany. ‘Everything that grows.’

She showed them the picture in the book. All sorts of fruits, vegetables
and grain were spilling from the Cornucopia’s wide mouth.

‘Mostly fruit, though,’ said Nanny. ‘Not many carrots, but I suppose
they’re up in the pointy end. They’d fit better there.’

‘Typical artist,’ said Granny. ‘He just painted the showy stuff in the
front. Too proud to paint an honest potato!’ She poked at the page with
an accusing finger. ‘And what about these cherubs? We’re not going to
get them too, are we? I don’t like to see little babies flying though
the air.’

‘They turn up a lot in old paintings,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘They put them in
to show it’s Art and not just naughty pictures of ladies with not many
clothes on.’

‘Well, they’re not fooling _me_,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Go on, Tiff, give it a go,’ said Nanny Ogg, walking round the table.

‘I don’t know how!’ said Tiffany. ‘There aren’t any instructions!’

And then, too late, Granny shouted: ‘You! Come out of there!’

But with a flick of her tail, the white kitten trotted inside.

They banged on the horn. They held it upside down and shook it. They
tried shouting down it. They put a saucer of milk in front of it and
waited. The kitten didn’t return. Then Nanny Ogg prodded gently inside
the Cornucopia with a mop, which to no one’s great surprise went further
inside the Cornucopia than there was Cornucopia on the outside.

‘She’ll come out when she’s hungry,’ she said reassuringly.

‘Not if she finds something to eat in there,’ said Granny Weatherwax,
peering into the dark.

‘I shouldn’t think she’ll find cat food,’ said Tiffany, examining the
picture closely. ‘There may be milk, though.’

‘You! Come out of there this minute!’ Granny commanded, in a voice fit
to shake mountains.

There was a distant ‘meep’.

‘Perhaps she’s got stuck?’ said Nanny. ‘I mean, it’s like a spiral,
growing smaller at the end, right? Cats ain’t very big at goin’
backwards.’

Tiffany saw the look on Granny’s face and sighed.

‘Feegles?’ she said to the room in general. ‘I _know_ there are some of
you in this room. Come out, please!’

Feegles appeared from behind every ornament. Tiffany tapped the
Cornucopia.

‘Can you get a little kitten out of here?’ she said.

‘Just that? Aye, nae problemo,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘I wuz hopin’ it was
gonna be something _difficult_!’

The Nac Mac Feegles disappeared into the horn at a trot. Their voices
died away. The witches waited.

They waited some more.

And some more.

‘Feegles!’ shouted Tiffany into the hole. She thought she heard a very
distant, very faint ‘Crivens!’

‘If it can produce grain, they might have found beer in there,’ said
Tiffany. ‘And that means they’ll only run out when the beer runs out
too!’

‘Cats can’t feed on beer!’ snapped Granny Weatherwax.

‘Well, I’m fed up with waiting,’ said Nanny. ‘Look, there’s a little
hole in the pointy end, too. I’m going to blow into it!’

She tried to, at least. Her cheeks went big and red and her eyes bulged
and it was pretty clear that if the horn didn’t blow up then she would –
at which point, the horn gave up. There was a distant and unmistakably
_curly_ rumbling noise, which got louder and louder.

‘I can’t see anything yet,’ said Granny, looking into the wide mouth of
the horn.

Tiffany pulled her away just as You galloped out of the Cornucopia with
her tail straight out and her ears flattened. She skidded across the
table, leaped onto Granny Weatherwax’s dress, scrambled onto her
shoulder and turned and spat defiance.

With a cry of ‘Crivvvvvvvvens!’ Feegles poured out of the horn.

‘Behind the sofa, everyone!’ yelled Nanny. ‘Run!’

Now the rumble was like thunder. It grew and grew and then—

– stopped.

In the silence, three pointy hats rose from behind the sofa. Small blue
faces arose from behind everything.

Then there was a noise very similar to _pwat!_ and something small and
wizened rolled out of the end of the horn and dropped onto the floor. It
was a very dried-up pineapple.

Granny Weatherwax brushed some dust off her dress.

‘You’d better learn to use this,’ she said to Tiffany.

‘How?’

‘Don’t you have _any_ idea?’

‘No!’

‘Well, it’s turned up for you, madam, and it’s dangerous!’

Tiffany gingerly picked up the Cornucopia, and again there was that
definite feeling of some hugely heavy thing pretending, very
successfully, to be light.

‘Maybe it needs some magic word,’ suggested Nanny Ogg. ‘Or there’s
somewhere special that you press …’

As Tiffany turned it in the light, something gleamed for a moment.

‘Hold on, these look like words,’ she said. She read: Π’ΑΝΤΑ Π’O’Y
EΠIΘ’EIΣ, XAΠ’IZΩ E’IO ’ΕΝΑ ’ΟΝΟΜΑ

_All that you desire, I give upon a name_, murmured the memory of Dr
Bustle.

The next line said: ΜΕГΑΛΩΝΩ ΣΥΣΤΕΛΛΟΜΙ

_I Grow, I Shrink_, Dr Bustle translated. ‘I think I might have an
idea,’ she said, and in memory of Miss Treason she declared: ‘Ham
sandwich! With mustard!’

Nothing happened.

Then Dr Bustle lazily translated, and Tiffany said: ‘Ενα σαντουιτς του
ζαμπον με μουταρδι!’

With a _fwlap_ a ham sandwich sailed out of the mouth of the Cornucopia
and was expertly caught by Nanny, who bit into it.

‘Not bad at all!’ she announced. ‘Try a few more.’

‘δωαε μαμ Πολλα ααυ;ιαυ;ιιζ χαμΠωυ!’ said Tiffany, and there was the
kind of sound you get when you disturb a cave full of bats.

‘Stop!’ she yelled, but nothing stopped. Then Dr Bustle whispered and
she shouted: ‘Μην περισσοιερο σανιουιις ιων ζαμπον!’

There were a _lot_ of sandwiches. The pile reached the ceiling, in fact.
Only the tip of Nanny Ogg’s hat was visible, but there were some muffled
noises further down the heap.

An arm thrust out, and Nanny Ogg forced her way through the wall of
bread and sliced pig, chewing thoughtfully.

‘No mustard, I notice. Hmm. Well, at least we can see that everyone
around here has a good supper tonight,’ she said. ‘And I can see I’m
going to have to make an awful lot of soup, too. Best not to try it
again in here, though, all right?’

‘I don’t like it at all,’ snapped Granny Weatherwax. ‘Where does all
that stuff come from, eh? Magic food never fed anyone properly!’

‘It’s not magic, it’s a god thing,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘Like manners from
heaven, that sort of stuff. I expect it’s made out of raw firmament.’

_In fact it’s merely a living metaphor for the boundless fecundity of
the natural world_, whispered Dr Bustle in Tiffany’s head.

‘You don’t get manners from heaven,’ said Granny.

‘This was in foreign parts, a long time ago,’ said Nanny, turning to
Tiffany. ‘If I was you, dear, I’d take it out into the woods tomorrow
and see what it can do. Although, if you don’t mind, I could really do
with some fresh grapes right now.’

‘Gytha Ogg, you can’t use the Cornucopia of the Gods as a … a larder!’
said Granny. ‘The feet business was bad enough!’

‘But it is one,’ said Nanny Ogg innocently. ‘It’s _the_ larder. It’s,
like, everything waiting to grow next spring.’

Tiffany put it down very carefully. There was something … alive about
the Cornucopia. She wasn’t at all sure that it was just some magical
tool. It seemed to be listening.

As it touched the tabletop it began to shrink, until it was the size of
a small vase.

‘Scuse me?’ said Rob Anybody. ‘But does it do beer?’

‘Beer?’ said Tiffany, without thinking.

There was a trickling noise. All eyes turned to look at the vase. Brown
liquid was foaming over the lip.

Then all the eyes turned to Granny Weatherwax, who shrugged.

‘Don’t look at me,’ she said sourly. ‘You’re going to drink it
_anyway_!’

It _is_ alive, Tiffany thought, as Nanny Ogg hurried off to find some
more mugs. It learns. It’s learned my language …

* * *

Around midnight, Tiffany woke up because a white chicken was standing on
her chest. She pushed it off and reached down for her slippers, and
found only chickens. When she got the candle alight, she saw half a
dozen chickens on the end of the bed. The floor was covered in chickens.
So were the stairs. So was every room down below. In the kitchen,
chickens had overflowed into the sink.

They weren’t making much noise, just the occasional ‘werk’ a chicken
makes when it’s a bit uncertain about things, which is more or less all
the time.

The chickens were shuffling along patiently, to make room. ‘Werk.’ They
were doing this because the Cornucopia, now grown just a bit bigger than
a full-grown chicken, was gently firing out a chicken every eight
seconds. ‘Werk.’

As Tiffany watched, another one landed on the mountain of ham
sandwiches. ‘Werk.’

Marooned on top of the Cornucopia was You, looking very puzzled. ‘Werk.’
And in the middle of the floor Granny Weatherwax snored gently in the
big armchair, surrounded by fascinated hens. ‘Werk.’ Apart from the
snoring, the chorus of ‘werks’ and the rustle of shuffling chickens, it
was all very peaceful in the candlelight. ‘Werk.’

Tiffany glared at the kitten. She rubbed up against things when she
wanted to be fed, didn’t she? ‘Werk.’ And made ‘meep’ noises? ‘Werk.’
And the Cornucopia could work out languages, couldn’t it? ‘Werk.’

Now she whispered: ‘No more chickens,’ and, after a few seconds the flow
of chickens ceased. ‘Werk.’

But she couldn’t really leave it like that. She shook Granny by the
shoulder and, as the old woman awoke, she said: ‘The good news is, a lot
of the ham sandwiches have gone … er …’

‘Werk.’

8 All witches are a bit odd. It’s best to get your oddness sorted out
early.

[image]


CHAPTER 9
GREEN SHOOTS

It was much colder next morning, a numb dull coldness that could
practically freeze the flames on a fire.

Tiffany let the broomstick settle between the trees a little way from
Nanny Ogg’s cottage. The snow hadn’t drifted much here, but it came up
to her knees and cold had put a crispness on it that crackled like a
stale loaf when Tiffany trod it.

In theory she was out in the woods to get the hang of the Cornucopia,
but really she was there to keep it out of the way. Nanny Ogg hadn’t
been too upset about the chickens. After all, she now owned five hundred
hens, which were currently standing around in her shed going ‘werk’. But
the floors were a mess, there were chicken doo-dahs even on the
banisters, and, as Granny had pointed out (in a whisper), supposing
someone had said ‘sharks’?

The Cornucopia lay on her lap while she sat on a stump among
snow-covered trees. Once, the forest had been pretty. Now it was
hateful. Dark trunks against snowdrifts, a striped world of black and
white, bars against the light. She longed for horizons.

Funny … the Cornucopia was always very slightly warm, even out here, and
seemed to know in advance what size it ought to be. I Grow, I Shrink,
thought Tiffany. And I’m feeling pretty small.

What next? What now? She’d kept hoping that the … the power would drop
on her, just like the Cornucopia had done. It hadn’t.

There was life under the snow. She felt it in her fingertips. Somewhere
down there, out of reach, was the real Summer. Using the Cornucopia as a
scoop, she scraped away at the snow until she reached dead leaves. There
was life down there in the white webs of fungi and pale, new roots. A
half-frozen worm crawled slowly away and burrowed under a leaf skeleton,
fine as lace. Beside it was an acorn.

The woods weren’t silent. They were holding their breath. They were all
waiting for her, and she didn’t know what to do.

I’m not the Summer Lady, she told herself. I can never be her. I’m in
her shoes, but I can never be her. I might be able to make a few flowers
grow, but I can never be her. She’ll walk across the world, and oceans
of sap will rise in these dead trees and a million tons of grass will
grow in a second. Can I do that? No. I’m a stupid child with a handful
of tricks, that’s all. I’m just Tiffany Aching, and I’m aching to go
home.

Feeling guilty about the worm, she breathed some warm air on the soil
and then pulled the leaves back to cover it. As she did so there was a
wet little sound, like the snapping of a frog’s fingers, and the acorn
split. A white shoot escaped from it and grew more than half an inch as
she watched it.

Hurriedly, she made a hole in the mould with her fingers, pushed the
acorn in and patted the soil back again.

Someone was watching her. She stood up and turned round quickly. There
was no one to be seen, but that didn’t mean a thing.

‘I know you’re there!’ she said, still turning round. ‘Whoever you are!’

Her voice echoed among the black trees. Even to her, it sounded thin and
scared.

She found herself raising the Cornucopia.

‘Show yourself,’ she quavered, ‘or—’

What? she wondered. Fill you full of fruit?

Some snow fell off a tree with a thump, making her jump and then feel
even more foolish. Now she was flinching at the fall of a handful of
snowflakes! A witch ought never to be frightened in the darkest forest,
Granny Weatherwax had once told her, because she should be sure in her
soul that the most terrifying thing in the forest was her.

She raised the Cornucopia and said, half-heartedly: ‘Strawberry …’

Something shot out of the Cornucopia with a _pfut_ and made a red stain
on a tree twenty feet away. Tiffany didn’t bother to check; it always
delivered what you asked for.

Which was more than she could say for herself.

And on top of everything else, it was her day to visit Annagramma.
Tiffany sighed deeply. She’d probably get that wrong, too.

Slowly, astride her broomstick, she disappeared among the trees.

After a minute or two, a green shoot thrust up from the patch of soil
that she had breathed on, grew to a height of about six inches, and put
out two green leaves.

Footsteps approached. They were not as crunchy as footsteps on frozen
snow usually are.

There was a crunch now, though, of someone kneeling on the frosted
snowdrifts.

A pair of skinny but powerful hands gently dragged and sculpted the snow
and dead leaves together to make a tall, thin wall around the shoot,
enclosing it and protecting it from the wind like a soldier in a castle.

A small white kitten tried to nuzzle at it and was carefully lifted out
of the way.

Then Granny Weatherwax walked back into the woods, leaving no
footprints. You never teach anyone else _everything_ you know.

Days went by. Annagramma learned, but it was a struggle. It was hard to
teach someone who wouldn’t admit that there was anything she didn’t
know, so there were conversations like this:

‘You know how to prepare placebo root, do you?’

‘Of course. Everyone knows that.’ And this was not the time to say, ‘OK
then, show me,’ because she’d mess around for a while and then say she
had a headache. This was the time to say, ‘Good, watch me to see if I’m
doing it right,’ and then do it perfectly. And you’d add things like:
‘As you know, Granny Weatherwax says that practically anything works
instead of placebo root, but it’s best to use the real thing if you can
get it. If prepared in syrup it’s an amazing remedy for minor illnesses,
but of course you already know this.’

And Annagramma would say: ‘Of course.’

A week later, in the forests, it was so cold some older trees exploded
in the night. They hadn’t seen that for a long time, the older people
said. It happened when the sap froze, then tried to expand.

Annagramma was as vain as a canary in a room full of mirrors and
panicked instantly when faced with anything she didn’t know, but she was
sharp at picking things up, and very good at appearing to know more than
she really did, which is a valuable talent for a witch. Once, Tiffany
noticed the Boffo catalogue open on the table with some things ringed
around. She asked no questions. She was too busy.

A week after that, wells froze.

Tiffany went around the villages with Annagramma a few times, and knew
that she would make it, eventually. She’d got built-in boffo. She was
tall and arrogant and acted as if she knew everything even when she
didn’t have a clue. That would get her a long way. People listened to
her.

They needed to. There were no roads open now; between cottages, people
had cut tunnels full of cold blue light. Anything that needed to be
moved was moved by broomstick. That included old people. They were
lifted, bedclothes, walking-sticks and all, and moved into other houses.
People packed together stayed warmer, and could pass the time by
reminding one another that, however cold this was, it wasn’t as cold as
the cold you got when they were young.

After a while, they stopped saying that.

Sometimes it would thaw, just a little, and then freeze again. That
fringed every roof with icicles. At the next thaw, they stabbed the
ground like daggers.

Tiffany didn’t sleep; at least, she didn’t go to bed. None of the
witches did. The snow got trampled down into ice that was like rock, so
a few carts could be moved about, but there still weren’t enough witches
to go around or enough hours in the day. There weren’t enough hours in
the day and the night put together. Petulia had fallen asleep on her
stick and ended up in a tree two miles away. Tiffany slid off once and
landed in a snowdrift.

_Wolves entered the tunnels. They were weak with hunger, and desperate.
Granny Weatherwax put a stop_ _to them and never told anyone how she’d
done it._

The cold was like being punched, over and over again, day and night. All
over the snow were little dark dots that were dead birds, frozen out of
the air. Other birds had found the tunnels and filled them with
twittering, and people fed them scraps because they brought a false hope
of spring to the world …

… because there was food. Oh, yes, there was food. The Cornucopia ran
day and night.

And Tiffany thought: I should have said no to snowflakes …

There was a shack, old and abandoned. And there was, in the rotted
planks, a nail. If the wintersmith had fingers, they would have been
shaking.

This was the last thing! There had been so much to learn! It had been so
hard, so hard! Who would have thought a man was made of stuff like chalk
and soot and gases and poisons and metals? But now, ice formed under the
rusty nail, and the wood groaned and squeaked as the ice grew and forced
it out.

It spun gently in the air, and the voice of the wintersmith could be
heard in the wind that froze the treetops: ‘IRON ENOUGH TO MAKE A MAN!’

High up in the mountains, the snow exploded. It mounded up into the air
as if dolphins were playing under it, shapes forming and disappearing …

Then, as suddenly as it had risen, the snow settled again. But now there
was a horse there, white as snow, and on its back a rider, glittering
with frost. If the greatest sculptor the world had ever known had been
told to build a snowman, this is what it would have looked like.

Something was still going on. The shape of the horse and man still
crawled with movement as they grew more and more lifelike. Details
settled. Colours crept in, always pale, never bright.

And there was a horse, and there was a rider, shining in the comfortless
light of the mid-winter sun.

The wintersmith extended a hand and flexed his fingers. Colour is, after
all, merely a matter of reflection; the fingers took on the colour of
flesh.

The wintersmith spoke. That is, there were a variety of noises, from the
roar of a gale to the rattle of the sucking of the surf on a shingle
shore after a wrecking storm at sea. Somewhere among them all was a tone
that seemed right. He repeated it, stretched it, stirred it around and
turned it into speech, playing with it until it sounded right.

He said: ‘Tasbnlerizwip? Ggokyziofvva? Wiswip? Nananana … Nyip … nap …
Ah … Ah! It is to speak!’ The wintersmith threw back his head and sang
the Overture to ‘Überwald Winter’ by the composer Wotua Doinov. He’d
overheard it once when driving a roaring gale around the rooftops of an
opera house, and had been astonished to find that a human being, nothing
more really than a bag of dirty water on legs, could have such a
wonderful understanding of snow.

‘CHOBA ΠOXOΠO AΠ O!’ he sang to the freezing sky. The only slight error
the wintersmith made, as his horse trotted through the pine trees, was
in singing the instruments as well as the voices. He sang, in fact, the
whole thing, and rode like a travelling orchestra, making the sounds of
the singers, the drums and the rest of the orchestra all at once.

To smell the trees! To feel the pull of the ground! To be solid! To feel
the darkness behind your eyes and know it was you! To be – and know
yourself to be – a man!

He had never felt like this before. It was exhilarating. There was so
much of … of everything, coming at him from every direction. The thing
with the ground, for example. It tugged, all the time. Standing upright
took a lot of thinking about. And the birds! The wintersmith had always
seen them as nothing more than impurities in the air, interfering with
the flow of the weather, but now they were living things just like him.
And they played with the tug and the wind, and owned the sky.

The wintersmith had never seen before, never felt before, never heard
before. You could not do those things unless you were … apart, in the
dark behind the eyes. Before, he hadn’t been apart; he’d been a part, a
part of the whole universe of tug and pressure, sound and light,
flowing, dancing. He’d run storms against mountains for ever, but he’d
never known what a mountain was until today.

The dark behind the eyes … what a precious thing. It gave you your …
you-ness. Your hand, with those laughable waggly things on it, gave you
touch; the holes on either side of your head let in sound; the holes at
the front let in the wonderful smell. How clever of holes to know what
to do! It was amazing! When you were an elemental, everything happened
all together, inside and outside, in one big … thing.

Thing. That was a useful word … thing. Thing was anything the
wintersmith couldn’t describe. Everything was … things, and they were
exciting.

It was good to be a man! Oh, he was mostly made of dirty ice, but that
was just better organized dirty water, after all.

Yes, he was human. It was so easy. It was just a matter of organizing
_things_. He had senses, he could move among humans, he could … search.
That was how to search for humans. You become one! It was so hard to do
it as an elemental; it was hard even to recognize a human in the
churning thing-ness of the physical world. But a human could talk to
other humans with the hole for the sound. He could talk to them and they
would not suspect!

And now he was human, there would be no going back. King Winter!

All he needed was a queen.

Tiffany woke up because someone was shaking her.

‘Tiffany!’

She’d gone to sleep in Nanny Ogg’s cottage with her head against the
Cornucopia. From somewhere close there was a strange _pif_ noise, like a
dry drip. Pale blue snowlight filled the room.

As she opened her eyes, Granny Weatherwax was gently pushing her back
into her chair.

‘You’ve been sleeping since nine o’clock, my girl,’ she said. ‘Time to
go home, I think.’

Tiffany looked around. ‘I am here, aren’t I?’ she said, feeling dizzy.

‘No, this is Nanny Ogg’s house. And this is a bowl of soup—’

Tiffany woke up. There was a blurry bowl of soup in front of her. It
looked … familiar.

‘When did you last sleep in a bed?’ said a wavering, shadowy figure.

Tiffany yawned. ‘What day is this?’

‘Tuesday,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Mmm … what’s a Tuesday?’

Tiffany woke up for the third time, and was grabbed and pulled upright.

‘There,’ said the voice of Granny Weatherwax. ‘This time, stay awake.
Drink soup. Get warm. You need to go home.’

This time Tiffany’s stomach took control of a hand and a spoon and, by
degrees, Tiffany warmed up.

Granny Weatherwax sat opposite, the kitten You on her lap, watching
Tiffany until the soup was gone.

‘I expected too much from you,’ she said. ‘I’d hoped that as the days
grew longer you’d find more power. That ain’t no fault of yours.’

The _pif_ noises were getting more frequent. Tiffany looked down and saw
corn dripping out of the Cornucopia. The number of grains increased even
as she watched.

‘You set it on corn before you fell asleep,’ said Granny. ‘It slows
right down when you’re tired. Just as well, really, otherwise we’d have
been eaten alive by chickens.’

‘It’s about the only thing I’ve got right,’ said Tiffany.

‘Oh, I don’t know. Annagramma Hawkin seems to be showing promise. Lucky
in her friends, from what I hears.’ If Miss Treason had tried to play
poker against Granny Weatherwax’s face, she would have lost.

The patter of the new corn suddenly became much louder in the silence.

‘Look I—’ Tiffany began.

Granny sniffed. ‘I’m sure no one has to explain themselves to _me_,’ she
said virtuously. ‘Will you promise me that you’ll go home? A couple of
coaches got through this morning and I hear it’s not too bad yet, down
on the plains. You go back to your Chalk country. You’re the only witch
they’ve got.’

Tiffany sighed. She did want to go home, more than anything. But it
would be like running away.

‘It might be like running to,’ said Granny, picking up her old habit of
replying to something that hadn’t actually been said.

‘I’ll go tomorrow then,’ said Tiffany.

‘Good.’ Granny stood up. ‘Come with me. I wants to show you something.’

Tiffany followed her through a snow tunnel that came out near the edge
of the forest. The snow had been packed down here by people dragging
firewood home and, once you got a little way from the edge of the
forest, the drifts weren’t too bad; a lot of snow hung in the trees,
filling the air with cold blue shadows.

‘What are we looking for?’ said Tiffany.

Granny Weatherwax pointed.

There was a splash of green in the white and grey. It was young leaves
on an oak sapling a couple of feet high. When Tiffany crunched her way
through the snow crust and reached out to touch it, the air felt warm.

‘Do you know how you managed that?’ said Granny.

‘No!’

‘Me neither. I couldn’t do it. You did, girl. Tiffany Aching.’

‘It’s just one tree,’ said Tiffany.

‘Ah, well. You have to start small, with oak trees.’

They stared in silence at the tree for a few moments. The green seemed
to reflect off the snow around it. Winter stole colour, but the tree
glowed.

‘And now, we’ve all got things to do,’ said Granny, breaking the spell.
‘You, I believe, would normally be heading for Miss Treason’s old place
about now. I’d expect no less of you …’

There was a coaching inn. It was busy, even at this time in the morning.
The fast mail coach had made a quick stop for fresh horses after the
long haul into the mountains, and another one, bound for down on the
plains, was waiting for the passengers. The breath of the horses filled
the air with steam. Drivers stamped their feet. Sacks and packages were
being loaded. Men bustled around with nosebags. Some bandy-legged men
just hung around, smoking and gossiping. In fifteen minutes the inn’s
yard would be empty again, but for now everyone was too busy to pay much
attention to one more stranger.

Afterwards, they all told different stories, contradicting one another
at the tops of their voices. Probably the most accurate account came
from Miss Dymphnia Stoot, the innkeeper’s daughter, who was helping her
father serve breakfast:

‘Well, he, like, came in, and right there I could see he was odd. He
walked funny, you know, lifting his legs like a trotting horse does.
Also, he was kind of, like, shiny. But we get all sorts here; it does
not pay to make pers’nal remarks; we had a bunch of werewolves in here
last week and they were just like you and me except we had to put their
plates on the floor … all right, yes, this man … well, he sat down at a
table and said: “I am a human just like you!” He came out with it, just
like that!

‘Of course, no one else paid attention, but I told him I was glad to
hear it and what did he want to eat, because the sausages was particular
fine this morning, and he said he could only eat cold food, which was
funny ’cos everyone was grumbling about how cold it was in the room now,
and it’s not like there wasn’t a big fire burning. Anyway … actually we
did have some cold sausage left in the pantry and they were a bit on the
turn, if you know what I mean, so I gave them to him, and he chewed one
for a bit and then he says, with his mouth full if you please, “This is
not what I expected. What do I do now?” and I said, “You swallow,” and
he said, “Swallow?” and I said, “Yes, you swallow it down into your
stomach, right,” and he said, spraying bits of sausage all over the
place, “Oh, a hollow bit!” and sort of like wavers and then he says,
“Ah, I am a human, I have successfully eaten human sausages!” and I said
there was no need to be like that, they were made of mostly pig, same as
always.

‘Then he says what is he supposed to do with them now and I says it’s
not my place to tell him and that will be two pennies please and he puts
down a gold coin so I curtsey because, well, you never know. Then he
says, “I am a human just like you. Where are the pointy humans who fly
though the sky?” which was a funny way of putting it to my mind, but I
told him if it was witches he wanted, there was plenty of ’em over the
Lancre bridge, and he said, “Name of Treason?” and I said I heard she
was dead but with witches who can say. And off he went. All the time he
had this, like, smile, all shiny and a bit worrying. Something wrong
with his clothes, too, like they were stuck to him or something. But you
can’t be too choosy in this business. We had some trolls in here
yesterday. They can’t eat our food, you know, being kind of like walking
rocks, but we gave them a slap-up meal of broken cups and grease. But he
was a rum ’un. The place got a lot warmer after he left, too.’

Expect no less of you …

The words kept Tiffany warm as she flew over the trees. The fire in her
head burned with pride, but contained one or two big crackly logs of
anger.

Granny had known! Had she planned it? Because it looked good, didn’t it?
All the witches would know. Mrs Earwig’s pupil couldn’t cope, but
Tiffany Aching organized all the other girls to help out and didn’t tell
anyone. Of course, among witches, not telling anyone was a sure way of
getting things found out. Witches were very good at listening to what
you weren’t saying. So Annagramma held onto her cottage, and Mrs Earwig
was embarrassed and Granny would be smug. All that work and rushing
around, to let Granny feel smug. Well, and for Mrs Stumper’s pig and
everyone else, of course. That made it complicated. If you could, you
did what needed to be done. Poking your nose in was basic witchcraft.
She knew it. Granny _knew_ she knew it. So Tiffany had scurried around
like a little clockwork mouse …

There would be a reckoning!

The clearing was full of snow in great icy drifts, but a path had been
worn to the cottage, she was pleased to see.

There was something new. There were people standing by Miss Treason’s
grave, and some of the snow had been scraped off.

Oh no, Tiffany thought as she circled down, please say she hasn’t gone
looking for the skulls!

It turned out to be, in some ways, worse.

She recognized the people around the grave. They were villagers, and
they gave Tiffany the defiant, worried stares of people scared half to
death by the small but possibly angry pointy hat in front of them. And
there was something about the very deliberate way they weren’t looking
at the mound that instantly drew her attention to it. It was covered in
little torn scraps of paper, pinned down with sticks. They fluttered in
the wind.

She snatched up a couple:

[image]

There were more. And just as she was about to speak sharply to the
villagers for _still_ bothering Miss Treason, she remembered the packets
of Jolly Sailor tobacco that the shepherds even now left on the turf
where the old shepherding hut had been. They didn’t write their
petitions down, but they were there, all the same, floating in the air:

‘Granny Aching, who herds the clouds in the blue sky, please watch my
sheep. Granny Aching, cure my son. Granny Aching, find my lambs.’

They were the prayers of small people, too afraid to bother the gods in
their high places. They trusted in what they knew. They weren’t right or
wrong. They were just … hopeful.

Well, Miss Treason, she thought, you’re a myth now, as sure as anything.
You might even make it to goddess. It’s not much fun, I can tell you.

‘And has Becky been found?’ she said, turning to the people.

A man avoided her gaze as he said: ‘I reckon Miss Treason’ll understand
why the girl won’t be wantin’ to come home any time soon.’

Oh, thought Tiffany, one of _those_ reasons.

‘Any news of the boy, then?’ she said.

‘Ah, that one worked,’ said a woman. ‘His mum got a letter yesterday
sayin’ he’d been in a dreadful shipwreck but was picked up alive, which
only goes to show.’

Tiffany didn’t ask what it was that it went to show. It was enough that
it had gone to show it.

‘Well, that’s good,’ she said.

‘But lots of poor seamen got drownded,’ the woman went on. ‘They hit an
iceberg in the fog. A big floating mountain of ice shaped like a woman,
they said. What d’you think of that?’

‘I expect if they’d been at sea long enough, anything would look like a
woman, eh?’ said the man and chuckled. The women gave him a Look.

‘He didn’t say who she— if she looked like, you know … anyone?’ said
Tiffany, trying to sound nonchalant. ‘Depends where they were looking—’
the man began cheerfully.

‘You ought to wash your brain out with soap and water,’ said the woman,
prodding him sharply in the chest.

‘Er, no, miss,’ he said, looking down at his feet. ‘He just said her
head was all covered with seagull— poo, miss.’

This time, Tiffany tried not to sound relieved. She looked down at the
fluttering bits of paper on the grave and back to the woman, who was
trying to hide what might be a fresh request behind her back.

‘Do you believe in this stuff, Mrs Carter?’

The woman suddenly looked flustered. ‘Oh no, miss, of course not. But
it’s just that … well, you know …’

It makes you feel better, thought Tiffany. It’s something you can do
when there’s nothing more to be done. And who knows, it might work. Yes,
I know. It’s—

Her hand itched. And now she realized that it had been itching for a
while.

‘Oh yes?’ she said, under her breath. ‘You dare?’

‘Are you all right, miss?’ said the man. Tiffany ignored him. A rider
was approaching and snow followed after him, spreading and widening
behind him like a cloak, soundless as a wish, thick as fog.

Without taking her eyes off him, Tiffany reached into her pocket and
gripped the tiny Cornucopia. Hah!

She walked forward.

The wintersmith dismounted from his snow-white horse when it had drawn
level with the old cottage.

Tiffany stopped about twenty feet away, her heart pounding.

‘My lady,’ said the wintersmith, and bowed.

He looked … better, and older.

‘I warn you! I’ve got a Cornucopia and I’m not afraid to use it!’ said
Tiffany. But she hesitated. He did look almost human, except for that
fixed, strange grin. ‘How did you find me?’ she said.

‘For you I have learned,’ said the figure. ‘I learned how to search. I
am human!’

Really? But his mouth doesn’t look right, said her Third Thoughts. It’s
pale inside, like snow. That’s not a boy there. It just thinks it is.

One big pumpkin, her Second Thoughts urged. They get really hard at this
time of year. Shoot him now!

Tiffany herself, the one on the outside, the one who could feel the air
on her face, thought: I can’t just do that! All he’s doing is standing
there talking. All this is my fault!

He wants never-ending winter, said the Third Thoughts. Everyone you know
will die!

She was sure the eyes of the wintersmith could see right into her mind.

The summer kills the winter, the Third Thoughts insisted. That’s how it
works!

But not like this, Tiffany thought. I know it’s not supposed to be like
this! It feels wrong. It’s not the right … story. The king of winter
can’t be killed by a flying pumpkin!

The wintersmith was watching her carefully. Thousands of Tiffany-shaped
flakes were falling around him.

‘We will finish the dance now?’ he said. ‘I am human, just like you!’ He
held out a hand.

‘Do you know what human is?’ said Tiffany.

‘Yes! Easy! Iron enough to make a nail!’ said the wintersmith promptly.
He beamed, as if he’d done a successful trick. ‘And now, please, we
dance …’

He took a step forward. Tiffany backed away.

If you dance now, her Third Thoughts warned, that will be the end of it.
You’ll be believing in yourself and trusting in your star, and big
twinkly things thousands of miles up in the sky don’t care if they
twinkle on everlasting snow.

‘I’m … not ready,’ Tiffany said, hardly above a whisper.

‘But time is passing,’ said the wintersmith. ‘I am human, I know these
things. Are you not a goddess in human form?’

The eyes bored into her.

No, I’m not, she thought. I’ll always be just … Tiffany Aching.

The wintersmith drew closer, his hand still outstretched.

‘Time to dance, Lady. Time to finish the dance.’

Thoughts leaked out away from Tiffany’s grasp. The eyes of the
wintersmith filled her mind with nothing but whiteness, like a field of
pure snow …

‘Aaaiiiiieeeee!’

The door of old Miss Treason’s cottage flew open and … something came
out, staggering through the snow. It was a witch. You could not mistake
it. She – it was probably a she, but some things are so horrible that
worrying about how to address a letter to them is silly – had a hat with
a point that curled like a snake. It was on top of dripping strands of
mad, greasy hair, which was perched on a nightmare of a face. It was
green, like the hands which waved black fingernails that were really
terrible claws.

Tiffany stared. The wintersmith stared. The people stared.

As the horrible screaming, lurching thing drew nearer, the details got
clearer, like the brown rotting teeth and the warts. Lots of warts. Even
the warts on the warts had warts.

Annagramma had sent off for _everything_. Part of Tiffany wanted to
laugh, even now, but the wintersmith snatched at her hand—

– and the witch grabbed his shoulder.

‘Don’t you take hold of her like that! How dare you! I’m a witch, you
know!’

Annagramma’s voice wasn’t easy on the ear at the best of times, but when
she was frightened or angry it had a whine that bored right into the
head.

‘Let go of her, I say!’ screamed Annagramma, and the wintersmith looked
stunned. Having to listen to Annagramma in a rage was hard for someone
who hadn’t had ears for very long.

‘Let her go!’ she yelled. Then she threw a fireball. She missed.
Possibly she meant to. A ball of flaming gas whizzing nearby usually
makes most people stop what they are doing. But most people don’t melt.

The wintersmith’s leg dropped off.

Later, on the journey through the blizzard, Tiffany wondered how the
wintersmith _worked_. He was made of snow, but he could make it walk and
talk. That must mean he had to _think_ about it all the time. He had to.
Humans didn’t have to think about their bodies all the time, because
their bodies knew what to do. But snow doesn’t even know how to stand up
straight.

Annagramma was glaring at him as if he’d done something really annoying.

He looked around, as if puzzled, cracks appearing across his chest, and
then he was just crumbling snow, collapsing into glittering crystals.

The snow began to pour down now, as if the clouds were being squeezed.

Annagramma pulled the mask to one side and stared first at the heap and
then at Tiffany.

‘All right,’ she said, ‘what just happened? Was he _supposed_ to do
that?’

‘I was coming to see you and … that’s the wintersmith!’ was all that
Tiffany could manage at that point.

‘You mean like … the _wintersmith_?’ said Annagramma. ‘Isn’t he just a
story? What is he after _you_ for?’ she added accusingly.

‘It’s … he … I …’ Tiffany began, but there was nowhere to start. ‘He’s
real! I’ve got to get away from him!’ she said. ‘I’ve got to get away!
It takes too long to explain!’

For a horrible moment she thought Annagramma was still going to demand
the whole story, but she reached out and grabbed Tiffany’s hand with a
black rubber claw.

‘Then get out of here right now! Oh, no, you’ve _still_ got Miss
Treason’s old broom? Totally useless! Use mine!’ She dragged Tiffany
towards the cottage, as the snowflakes thickened.

‘“Iron enough to make a nail”!’ said Tiffany, trying to keep up. She
couldn’t think of anything else to say, and it was suddenly very
important. ‘He thought he was human—’

‘I’ve only knocked over his snowman, you fool. He’ll be back!’

‘Yes, but iron enough, you see, to—’

A green hand slapped her face, but this hurt less than it might because
of the rubber.

‘Don’t babble! I thought you were clever! I really don’t know what this
is about, but if I had that thing after me I wouldn’t stand around
babbling!’ Annagramma pulled across the Wicked Witch DeLuxe Mask With
Free Dangling Bogey, adjusted the hang of the bogey and turned to the
villagers, who’d been rooted to the spot all this time. ‘What are you
all staring at? Haven’t you ever seen a witch before?’ she shouted. ‘Go
back home! Oh, and I’ll be down tomorrow with some physic for your
little boy, Mrs Carter!’

They stared at the green face, the rotted teeth, the stinking hair and
the huge bogey, made in fact of glass, and fled.

Still drunk with terror and relief, Tiffany rocked gently, muttering,
‘Iron enough to make a nail!’ until Annagramma shook her. The thick
flakes were dropping so fast that it was hard to see her face.

‘Tiffany, broomstick. Broomstick fly,’ said Annagramma. ‘Fly a long way!
Do you hear me! Somewhere safe!’

‘But he … the poor thing thinks that …’

‘Yes, yes, I’m sure it’s all very important,’ said Annagramma, dragging
her towards the cottage wall, where her broomstick leaned. She
half-pushed, half-lifted Tiffany onto it and looked up. Snow was pouring
out of the sky like a waterfall now.

‘He’s coming back!’ she snapped, and said a few words under her breath.
The broomstick shot straight up and disappeared into the fading,
snow-filled light.

[image]


CHAPTER 10
GOING HOME

Granny Weatherwax looked up from the saucer of ink, in which a tiny
Tiffany was disappearing into the whiteness of the blizzard. She was
smiling, but with Granny Weatherwax this did not necessarily mean that
something nice was happening.

‘We could ha’ taken him doon easy,’ said Rob Anybody reproachfully. ‘Ye
should ha’ let us.’

‘Perhaps. Or perhaps he’d have frozen you solid?’ said Granny. ‘Besides,
there’s a bigger task ahead of the Nac Mac Feegles. Your big wee hag
needs you to do two things. One of them is hard, the other one is very
hard.’

The Feegles cheered up when they heard this. They were everywhere in Mrs
Ogg’s kitchen. Some were perched on Nanny Ogg herself, and Miss Tick
looked very uncomfortable surrounded by them. Unlike Miss Tick, Feegles
rarely had an opportunity for a bath.

‘Firstly,’ said Granny, ‘she will need you to go into the … Underworld,
to fetch the Real Summer Lady.’

The significant pause did not seem to bother the Feegles at all.

‘Oh aye, we can do that,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘We can get into anywhere.
An’ that’s the verrae hard bit, is it?’

‘And out again?’ said Granny.

‘Oh, aye,’ said Rob firmly. ‘Mostly we get thrown oot!’

‘The very hard part,’ said Granny, ‘will be finding a Hero.’

‘That’s no’ hard,’ said Rob. ‘We’re a’ heroes here!’ A cheer went up.

‘Really?’ said Granny. ‘Are you frightened to go into the Underworld,
Rob Anybody?’

‘Me? No!’ Rob Anybody looked around at his brothers and grinned hugely.

‘Spell the word “marmalade”, then.’ Granny Weatherwax pushed a pencil
across Nanny Ogg’s table and sat back in her chair. ‘Go on. Right now.
And no one is to help you!’

Rob backed away. Granny Weatherwax was the hag o’ all hags, he knew
that. There was no telling what she might do to an errant Feegle.

He picked up the pencil nervously, and placed the pointy end against the
wood of the table. Other Feegles clustered around, but under Granny’s
frown no one dared to even cheer him on.

Rob stared upwards, his lips moving and sweat beading his forehead.

‘Mmmmaa …’ he said.

‘One,’ said Granny.

Rob blinked. ‘Hey? Who’s countin’?’ he protested.

‘Me,’ said Granny. The kitten You leaped up onto her lap and curled up.

‘Crivens, ye never said there wuz gonna be countin’!’

‘Didn’t I? The rules can change at any time! Two!’

Rob scribbled a passable M, hesitated, and then drew an R just as Granny
said, ‘Three!’

‘There’s gonna have tae be a “A” in there, Rob,’ said Billy Bigchin. He
looked up defiantly at Granny and added: ‘I heard tell the rules can
change at any time, right?’

‘Certainly. Five!’

Rob scratched in an A and added another M in a burst of creativity.

‘Six and a half,’ said Granny, calmly stroking the kitten.

‘Whut? Ach, crivens,’ muttered Rob, and wiped a sweaty hand on his kilt.
Then he gripped the pencil again and drew an L. It had a rather wavy
foot because the pencil skidded out of his hands and the point broke.

He growled and drew his sword. ‘Eight,’ said Granny. Wood shavings flew
as Rob hacked a rather ragged fresh point out of the pencil.

‘Nine.’ An A and a D were scribbled by a Rob whose eyes were now bulging
and whose cheeks were red.

‘Ten.’ Rob stood to attention, looking mostly nervous but slightly
proud, beside MRAMLAD. The Feegles cheered, and those nearest to him
fanned him with their kilts.

‘Eleven!’

‘Whut? Crivens!’ Rob scurried back to the end of the word and plonked
down a small e.

‘Twelve!’

‘Ye can count all ye want tae, mistress,’ said Rob, flinging down the
pencil, ‘but that’s all the marmalade there is!’ This got another cheer.

‘An heroic effort, Mr Anybody,’ said Granny. ‘The first thing a hero
must conquer is his fear, and when it comes to fightin’, the Nac Mac
Feegles don’t know the meanin’ of the word.’

‘Aye, true enough,’ Rob grunted. ‘We dinnae ken the meanin’ o’ thousands
o’ wurds!’

‘Can you fight a dragon?’

‘Oh, aye, bring it on!’ Rob was still angry about the marmalade.

‘Run up a high mountain?’

‘Nae problemo!’

‘Read a book to the very end to save your big wee hag?’

‘Oh, aye.’ Rob stopped. He looked cornered. He licked his lips. ‘How
many o’ them pagey things would that be?’ he said hoarsely.

‘Hundreds,’ said Granny.

‘Wi’ wurds on both sides?’

‘Yes, indeed. In quite small writing!’

Rob crouched. He always did that when he was cornered, the better to
come up fighting. The mass of Feegles held their breath.

‘I’ll do it!’ he announced grimly, clenching his fists.

‘Good,’ said Granny. ‘Of course you would. That would be heroic – for
you. But someone must go into the Underworld to find the real Summer
Lady. That is a Story. It has happened before. It works. And he must do
it in fear and terror like a real hero should, because a lot of the
monsters he must overcome are the ones in his head, the ones he brings
in with him. It’s time for spring, and winter and its snow is still with
us, so you must find him _now_. You’ve got to find him and set his feet
on the path. The Path That Goes Down, Rob Anybody.’

‘Aye, we ken that path,’ said Rob.

‘His name is Roland,’ said Granny. ‘I reckon you should leave as soon as
it is light.’

The broomstick barrelled through the black blizzard. They usually went
where the witch wanted them to go, and Tiffany lay along the broom,
tried not to freeze to death and hoped it was taking her home. She
couldn’t see anything except darkness and rushing snow that stung her
eyes, so she lay with the hat pulled down to streamline the stick. Even
so, snowflakes struck her like stones and piled up on the stick. She had
to flail around every few minutes to stop things icing up.

She did hear the roar of the falls below and felt the sudden depth of
air as the stick glided out over the plains and began to sink. She felt
cold to the bone.

She couldn’t fight the wintersmith, not like Annagramma could. Oh, she
could plan to do it, and go to bed determined, but when she saw him …

… _iron enough to make a nail_ … the words hung around in her head as
the stick flew on and she remembered the old rhyme she’d learned years
ago, when the wandering teachers came to the village. Everyone seemed to
know it:

Iron enough to make a nail

Lime enough to paint a wall

Water enough to drown a dog

Sulphur enough to stop the fleas

Potash enough to wash a shirt

Gold enough to buy a bean

Silver enough to coat a pin

Lead enough to ballast a bird

Phosfor enough to light the town…

And on, and on …

It was a kind of nonsense, the sort that you never remember being taught
but always seem to have known. Girls skipped to it, kids dib-dibbed it
to see who was O-U-T out.

And then one day a travelling teacher, who like all the others would
teach for eggs, fresh vegetables and clean used clothing, found he got
more to eat by teaching things that were interesting rather than useful.
He talked about how some wizards had once, using very skilful magic,
worked out exactly what a human being was made of. It was mostly water,
but there was iron and brimstone and soot and a pinch of just about
everything else, even a tiny amount of gold, but all cooked up together
somehow.

It made as much sense to Tiffany as anything else did. But she was
certain of this: if you took all that stuff and put it in a big bowl, it
wouldn’t turn into a human no matter how much you shouted at it.

You couldn’t make a picture by pouring a lot of paint into a bucket. If
you were human, you knew that.

The wintersmith wasn’t. The wintersmith didn’t …

He didn’t know how the song ended, either.

The words went round and round her mind as the borrowed broom plunged
onwards. At one point Dr Bustle turned up, with his reedy,
self-satisfied voice, and gave her a lecture on the Lesser Elements and
how, indeed, humans were made up of nearly all of them, but also
contained a lot of narrativium, the basic element of stories, which you
could only detect by watching the way all the others behaved …

‘_You run, you flee. How do you like this, sheep girl? You stole him
from me. Is he all that you hoped for?_ ’ The voice came out of the air
right beside her.

‘I don’t care who _you_ are,’ muttered Tiffany, too cold to think
straight. ‘Go away …’

Hours went by. The air down here was a bit warmer, and the snow not so
fierce, but the cold always got through, no matter how much clothing you
wore. Tiffany fought to stay awake. Some witches could sleep on a
broomstick, but she didn’t dare try in case she dreamed she was falling
and woke up to find that it was true but soon wouldn’t be.

But now there were lights below, fitful and yellow. It was probably the
inn at Twoshirts, an important navigation point.

Witches never stayed in inns if they could help it, because in some
areas that could be dangerous, and in any case most of them
inconveniently required you to pay them money. But Mrs Umbridge, who ran
the souvenir shop opposite the inn, had an old barn round the back and
was what Miss Tick called FTW, or Friendly To Witches. There was even a
witch-sign, scratched on the barn wall where no one who wasn’t looking
for it would find it: a spoon, a pointy hat and one big schoolmistressy
tick.

A pile of straw had never seemed more wonderful, and inside two minutes
Tiffany was inside the straw. At the other end of the little barn Mrs
Umbridge’s pair of cows kept the air warm and smelling of fermented
grass.

It was a dark sleep. She dreamed of Annagramma taking off the De-Luxe
Mask and revealing her face, and then taking her face off to show Granny
Weatherwax’s face underneath …

And then: _Was it worth a dance, sheep girl? You have taken my power and
I am weak. The world will become frost. Was it worth a dance?_

She sat up in the pitch-black barn and thought she saw a writhing glow
in the air, like a snake. Then she fell back into the darkness and
dreamed of the wintersmith’s eyes.

[image]


CHAPTER 11
EVEN TURQUOISE

Clang-clonk!

Tiffany sat bolt upright, straw tumbling off her. But it was only the
sound of a handle clanging on the side of a metal pail.

Mrs Umbridge was milking her cows. Pale daylight shone through the
cracks in the walls. She looked up when she heard Tiffany.

‘Ah, I thought one of my ladies must’ve arrived in the night,’ she said.
‘Want some breakfast, dear?’

‘Please!’

Tiffany helped the old woman with her buckets, helped make some butter,
patted her very old dog, had beans on toast and then—

‘I think I’ve got something here for you,’ said Mrs Umbridge, heading
for the little counter that was Twoshirts’ entire Post Office. ‘Now
where did I—? Oh yes …’

She handed Tiffany a small bundle of letters and a flat parcel, all held
together by an elastic band and covered with dog hairs. She went on
talking, but Tiffany barely noticed. There was something about how the
carter had broken his leg, poor man, or maybe it was his horse that had
broken a leg, poor creature, and one of the blizzards had brought down a
lot of trees onto the track, and then the snow had set in so cruelly,
dear, that not even a man on foot could get through, and so what with
one thing and another the mail to and from the Chalk had been delayed
and really there was hardly any of it anyway—

All this was a kind of background buzzing to Tiffany, because the
letters were all addressed to her – three from Roland and one from her
mother, and so was the parcel. It had a businesslike air, and when
opened revealed a sleek black box which itself opened to reveal—

Tiffany had never seen a box of water-colour paints before. She hadn’t
known that so many colours existed in one place.

‘Oh, a paint box,’ said Mrs Umbridge, looking over her shoulder. ‘That’s
nice. I had one when I was a girl. Ah, and it’s got turquoise in it.
That’s very expensive, turquoise. That’s from your young man, is it?’
she added, because old women like to know everything, or a little bit
more.

Tiffany cleared her throat. In her letters she’d kept right off the
whole painful subject of painting. He must have thought she’d like to
try it.

The colours in her hands gleamed like a trapped rainbow.

‘It’s a lovely morning,’ she said, ‘and I think I’d better go home …’

On the chilly river just above the thundering Lancre falls, a tree trunk
was moored. Granny Weatherwax and Nanny Ogg stood on a huge, water-worn
stone in the middle of the torrent and watched it.

The log was covered in Feegles. They all looked cheerful. Admittedly,
certain death awaited them, but it did not involve – and this is
important – having to spell anything.

‘You know, no man has ever gone over these falls and lived to tell the
tale,’ said Nanny.

‘Mr Parkinson did,’ said Granny. ‘Don’t you remember? Three years ago?’

‘Ah, yes, he lived, certainly, but he was left with a very bad stutter,’
said Nanny Ogg.

‘But he wrote it down,’ said Granny. ‘He called it “My fall over the
Falls”. It was quite interestin’.’

‘No one actually _told_ a tale,’ said Nanny. ‘That is my point.’

‘Aye, weel, we’re as light as wee feathers,’ said Big Yan. ‘An’ the wind
blowin’ through the kilt keeps a man well aloft, ye ken.’

‘I’m sure that’s a sight to see,’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘Are ye all ready?’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Fine! Would ye be so good as to
untie yon rope, Mrs Ogg?’

Nanny Ogg undid the knot and gave the log a shove with her foot. It
drifted a little way and then got caught by the current.

‘Row, row, row yer boat?’ Daft Wullie suggested.

‘Whut aboot it?’ said Rob Anybody as the log began to speed up.

‘Why don’t we all sing it?’ said Daft Wullie. The walls of the canyon
were closing in fast now.

‘OK,’ said Rob. ‘After all, it is a pleasin’ naut-ickal ditty. And
Wullie, ye’r tae keep yon cheese away fra’ me. I dinnae like the way
it’s looking at me.’

‘It hasnae got any eyes, Rob,’ said Wullie meekly, holding onto Horace.

‘Aye, that’s what I mean,’ said Rob sourly.

‘Horace didna’ _mean_ tae try an’ eat ye, Rob,’ said Daft Wullie. ‘An’
ye wuz sae nice an’ _clean_ when he spat ye oot.’

‘An’ how come ye ken whut name a cheese has?’ Rob demanded, as white
water began to splash over the log.

‘He told me, Rob.’

‘Aye?’ said Rob, and shrugged. ‘Oh, OK. I wouldnae argue wi’ a cheese.’

Bits of ice were bobbing on the river. Nanny Ogg pointed them out to
Granny Weatherwax.

‘All this snow is making the ice rivers move again,’ she said.

‘I know.’

‘I hope you can trust the stories, Esme,’ said Nanny.

‘They are ancient stories. They have a life of their own. They long to
be repeated. Summer rescued from a cave? Very old,’ said Granny
Weatherwax.

‘The wintersmith will chase our girl, though.’

Granny watched the Feegles’ log drift around the bend.

‘Yes, he will,’ she said. ‘And, you know, I almost feel sorry for him.’

And so the Feegles sailed home. Apart from Billy Bigchin they couldn’t
carry a tune in a bucket, but that minor problem was dwarfed by the
major problem, which was that they didn’t bother with the idea of
singing at the same pitch, or speed, or even with the same words. Also,
minor fights soon broke out, as always happened even when Feegles were
having fun, and so the sound that echoed among the rocks as the log sped
towards the lip of the waterfall went something like:

[image]

And with its cargo of Feegles, the log tipped and disappeared, along
with the accompanying song, into the mists.

* * *

Tiffany flew over the long whale-back of the Chalk. It was a white whale
now, but the snow didn’t look too deep here. The bitter winds that blew
the snow onto the downs also blew it away. There were no trees and few
walls to make it drift.

As she drew nearer to home she looked down onto the lower, sheltered
fields. The lambing pens were already being set up. There was a lot of
snow for this time of year – and whose fault was that? – but the ewes
were on their own timetable, snow or not. Shepherds knew how bitter the
weather could be at lambing; winter never gave in without a fight.

She landed in the farmyard and said a few words to the broomstick. It
wasn’t hers, after all. It rose again, and shot off back to the
mountains. A stick can always find its way home, if you know the trick.

There were reunions, lots of laughter, a few tears, a general claiming
that she had grown like a beanstalk and was already as tall as her
mother and all the other things that get said at a time like this.

Apart from the tiny Cornucopia in her pocket, she’d left everything
behind – her diary, her clothes, everything. It didn’t matter. She
hadn’t run away, she’d run to, and here she was, waiting for herself.
She could feel her own ground under her boots again.

She hung the pointy hat behind the door and went and helped the men
setting up the pens.

It was a good day. A bit of sun had managed to leak through the murk.
Against the whiteness of the snow all colours seemed bright, as if the
fact that they were here gave them some special brilliance. Old harness
on the stable wall gleamed like silver; even the browns and greys that
might once have appeared so drab seemed, now, to have a life of their
own.

She got out the box of paints and some precious paper and tried to paint
what she was seeing, and there was a kind of magic there, too. It was
all about light and dark. If you could get down on paper the shadow and
the shine, the shape that any creature left in the world, then you could
get the thing itself.

She’d only ever drawn with coloured chalks before. Paint was so much
better.

It was a good day. It was a day just for her. She could feel bits of
herself opening up and coming out of hiding again. Tomorrow there would
be the chores, and people very nervously coming up to the farm for the
help of a witch. If the pain was strong enough no one worried that the
witch who was making it go away was someone you last remembered being
two years old and running around without her vest on.

Tomorrow … might become anything. But today, the winter world was full
of colour.

[image]


CHAPTER 12
THE PIKE

There was talk of strangeness all across the plains. There was the
rowing boat belonging to the old man who lived in a shack just below the
waterfall. It rowed itself away so fast, people said, that it skipped
over the water like a dragonfly – but there was no one inside it. It was
found tied up at Twoshirts, where the river ran under the coach road.
But then the overnight mail coach that had been waiting outside the inn
ran away by itself, with all the mail bags left behind. The coachman
borrowed a horse to give chase and found the coach in the shadow of the
Chalk with all the doors open and one horse missing.

The horse was returned a couple of days later by a well-dressed young
man who said he’d found it wandering. Surprisingly, then, it looked well
fed and groomed.

Very, very thick would be the best way to describe the walls of the
castle. There were no guards at night, because they locked up at eight
o’clock and went home. Instead, there was Old Robbins, who’d once been a
guard and was now officially the night watchman, but everyone knew he
fell asleep in front of the fire by nine. He had an old trumpet which he
was supposed to blow if there was an attack, although no one was
entirely sure what this would achieve.

Roland slept in the Heron Tower, because it was up a long flight of
steps which his aunts didn’t much like climbing. It also had very, very
thick walls and this is just as well, because at eleven o’clock someone
stuck a trumpet against his ear and blew on it hard.

He leaped out of bed, got caught in the eiderdown, slipped on a mat that
covered the freezing stone floor, banged his head on a cupboard and
managed to light a candle with the third desperately struck match.

On the little table by his bed was the pair of huge bellows with Old
Robbins’s trumpet stuck in the business end. The room was empty, except
for the shadows.

‘I’ve got a sword, you know,’ he said. ‘And I know how to use it!’

‘Ach, ye’re deid already,’ said a voice from the ceiling. ‘Chopped tae
tiny wee pieces in yer bed while ye snored like a hog. Only jokin’, ye
ken. None of us mean ye any harm.’ There was some hurried whispering in
the darkness of the rafters and then the voice continued: ‘Wee
correction there: _most_ o’ us dinnae mean ye any harm. But dinnae fash
yersel’ aboot Big Yan, he disnae like anybody verrae much.’

‘Who are you?’

‘Aye, there ye go again, getting it all wrong,’ said the voice
conversationally. ‘I’m up here an’ heavily armed, ye ken, while ye’re
doon there in your wee nightie, making a bonny target, an’ ye think ye
are the one who asks the questions. So ye know how to fight, do ye?’

‘Yes!’

‘So you’ll fight monsters tae save the big wee hag? Will ye?’

‘The big wee hag?’

‘That’s Tiffany tae ye.’

‘You mean Tiffany Aching? What’s happened to her?’

‘You’ll be ready for when she needs ye?’

‘Yes! Of course! Who _are_ you?’

‘And ye know how tae fight?’

‘I’ve read _The Manual of Swordsmanship_ all the way through!’

After a few seconds the voice from the high shadows said: ‘Ah, I think
I’ve put my finger on a wee flaw in this plan …’

There was an armoury across the castle courtyard. It wasn’t much of one.
There was a suit of armour made of various non-matching pieces, a few
swords, a battle-axe that no one had ever been able to lift, and a
chainmail suit that appeared to have been attacked by extremely strong
moths. And there were some wooden dummies on big springs for sword
practice, and right now the Feegles were watching Roland attack one with
a great deal of enthusiasm.

‘Ach weel,’ said Big Yan despondently as Roland leaped about. ‘If he
never meets anythin’ other than bits o’ wood that dinnae fight back, he
might be OK.’

‘He’s willin’,’ Rob Anybody pointed out as Roland put his foot against
the dummy and tried to tug the sword point out of it.

‘Oh, aye.’ Big Yan looked glum.

‘He’s got a bonny action, ye must admit,’ said Rob.

Roland succeeded in pulling the sword out of the dummy, which sprang
back on its ancient spring and hit him on the head.

Blinking a little, the boy looked down at the Feegles. He remembered
them from the time he was rescued from the Queen of the Fairies. No one
who met the Nac Mac Feegles ever forgot them, even if they tried hard.
But it was all vague. He’d been near-crazy part of the time, and
unconscious, and had seen so many strange things that it was hard to
know what was real and what wasn’t.

Now he knew: they were real. Who’d make up a thing like this? OK, one of
them was a cheese that rolled around of its own accord, but nobody was
perfect.

‘What am I going to have to do, Mr Anybody?’ he said.

Rob Anybody had been worried about this bit. Words like ‘Underworld’ can
give people the wrong idea.

‘Ye must rescue a … lady,’ he said. ‘Not the big wee hag. Another …
lady. We can take ye to the place where she bides. It’s like …
undergroound, ye ken. She’s like … sleepin’. An’ all ye ha’ tae do is
bring her up tae the surface, kind o’ thing.’

‘Oh, you mean like Orpheo rescuing Euniphon from the Underworld?’ said
Roland.

Rob Anybody just stared.

‘It’s a myth from Ephebe,’ Roland went on. ‘It’s supposed to be a love
story but it’s really a metaphor for the annual return of summer.
There’s a lot of versions of _that_ story.’

They still stared. Feegles have very worrying stares. They’re even worse
than chickens in that respect.9

‘A metaphor is a kind o’ lie to help people understand what’s true,’
said Billy Bigchin, but this didn’t help much.

‘And he won her freedom by playing beautiful music,’ Roland added. ‘I
think he played a lute. Or maybe it was a lyre.’

‘Ach, weel, that’ll suit us fine,’ said Daft Wullie. ‘We’re experts at
looting an’ then lyin’ aboot it.’

‘They’re musical instruments,’ said Billy Bigchin. He looked up at
Roland. ‘Can ye play one, mister?’

‘My aunts have a piano,’ said Roland doubtfully. ‘But I’ll get into real
trouble if anything happens to it. They’ll tear the walls down.’

‘Swords it is, then,’ said Rob Anybody reluctantly. ‘Ha’ ye never fought
against a real person, mister?’

‘No. I wanted to practise with the guards, but my aunts won’t let them.’

‘But ye have used a sword before?’

Roland looked embarrassed. ‘Not lately. Not as such. Er … not at all, in
fact. My aunts say—’

‘So how d’ye practise?’ asked Rob, in horror.

‘Well, there’s a big mirror in my room, you see, and I can practise …
the … actual …’ Roland began, stopping when he saw their expressions.
‘Sorry,’ he added. ‘I don’t think I’m the type you’re looking for …’

‘Oh, I wouldnae say that,’ said Rob Anybody wearily. ‘Accordin’ tae the
hag o’ hags, ye’re just the laddie. Ye just need someone tae fight with
…’

Big Yan, always suspicious, looked at his brother and followed his gaze
to the battered suit of armour.

‘Oh aye?’ he growled. ‘Weel, A’m no’ gonna be a knee!’

Next day was a good day, right up to the point where it became a tight
little bowl of terror.

Tiffany got up early and lit the fires. When her mother came down she
was scrubbing the kitchen floor, very hard.

‘Er … aren’t you supposed to do that sort of thing by magic, dear?’ said
her mother, who’d never really got the hang of what witchcraft was all
about.

‘No, Mum, I’m supposed not to,’ said Tiffany, still scrubbing.

‘But can’t you just wave your hand and make all the dirt fly away,
then?’

‘The trouble is getting the magic to understand what dirt is,’ said
Tiffany, scrubbing hard at a stain. ‘I heard of a witch over in Escrow
who got it wrong and ended up losing the entire floor and her sandals
and nearly a toe.’

Mrs Aching backed away. ‘I thought you just had to wave your hands
about,’ she mumbled nervously.

‘That works,’ said Tiffany, ‘but only if you wave them about on the
floor with a scrubbing brush.’

She finished the floor. She cleaned under the sink. She opened all the
cupboards, cleaned them out and put everything back. She cleaned the
table, and then turned it over and cleaned it underneath. She even
washed the bottom of the legs, where they touched the floor. It was then
that Mrs Aching went and found things to do somewhere, because this was
clearly not just about good housekeeping.

It wasn’t. As Granny Weatherwax once said, if you wanted to walk around
with your head in the air, then you needed to have both feet on the
ground. Scrubbing floors, cutting wood, washing clothes, making cheese –
these things grounded you, taught you what was real. You could set a
small part of your mind to them, giving your thoughts time to line up
and settle down.

Was she safe here from the wintersmith? Was _here_ safe from the
wintersmith?

Sooner or later she’d have to face him again – a snowman who thought he
was human and had the power of the avalanche. Magic could only slow him
down for a while, and make him angry. No ordinary weapon would work, and
she didn’t have many extraordinary ones.

Annagramma had gone for him in a rage! Tiffany wished she could be that
angry. She’d have to go back and thank her, too. Annagramma was going to
be all right, at least. People had seen her turn into a screaming,
green-skinned monster. They could respect a witch like that. Once you
got respect, you’d got everything.

She’d have to try to see Roland, too, before it got dark. She didn’t
know what to say. That was kind of all right, because he wouldn’t know
what to say, either. They could spend whole afternoons together, not
knowing what to say. He was probably in the castle right now. As she
cleaned under the seat of a chair, she wondered what he was doing.

There was a hammering on the door of the armoury. That was the aunts for
you. The door was four thicknesses of oak and iron, but they banged on
it anyway.

‘We will not tolerate this waywardness!’ said Aunt Danuta. There was a
crash from the other side of the door. ‘Are you fighting in there?’

‘No, I’m writing a flute sonata!’ shouted Roland. Something heavy hit
the door.

Aunt Danuta pulled herself together. She looked like Miss Tick in
general outline, but with the eyes of the perpetually offended and the
mouth of an instant complainer.

‘If you don’t do as you’re told, I will tell your father—’ she began,
and stopped when the door was yanked open.

Roland had a cut on his arm, his face was red, sweat was dripping off
his chin and he was panting. He raised his sword in a trembling hand.
Behind him, on the other side of the grey room, was the suit of very
battered armour. It turned its helmet to look at the aunts. This made a
squeaking noise.

‘If you dare disturb my father,’ he said, as they stared at it, ‘I shall
tell him about the money that’s being taken out of the big chest in the
strongroom. Don’t lie!’

For a moment – a blink would have missed it – Aunt Danuta’s face had
guilt written on it, but it vanished with speed. ‘How dare you! Your
dear mother—’

‘Is dead!’ shouted Roland, and slammed the door.

The helmet’s visor was pushed up and half a dozen Feegles peered out.

‘Crivens, what a pair of ol’ corbies,’ said Big Yan.

‘My aunts,’ said Roland darkly. ‘What’s a corbie?’

‘I’s like a big ol’ crow that hangs around waitin’ for someone tae die,’
said Billy Bigchin.

‘Ah, then you’ve met them before,’ said Roland with a glint in his eye.
‘Let’s have another go, shall we? I think I’m getting the hang of it.’

There was a grumble of protests from every part of the armour, but Rob
Anybody shouted it down.

‘All right! We’ll gi’e the lad one more chance,’ he said. ‘Get tae yer
posts!’

There were clangs and much swearing as the Feegles climbed around inside
the suit, but after a few seconds the armour seemed to pull itself
together. It picked up a sword and lumbered towards Roland, who could
hear the muffled orders coming from inside.

The sword swung, but in one quick movement he deflected it, stepped
sideways, swung his own sword in a blur, and chopped the suit in half
with a clang that echoed around the castle.

The top part hit the wall. The bottom half just rocked, still standing.

After a few seconds, a lot of small heads slowly rose above the iron
trousers.

‘Was that supposed to happen?’ Roland said. ‘Is everyone, er … whole?’

A quick count revealed that there were indeed no half-Feegles, although
there was a lot of bruising and Daft Wullie had lost his spog. A lot of
Feegles were walking in circles and banging at their ears with their
hands, though. It had been a very loud clang.

‘No’ a bad effort, that time,’ said Rob Anybody vaguely. ‘Ye seem tae be
gettin’ the knowin’ o’ the fightin’.’

‘It definitely seemed better, didn’t it,’ said Roland, looking proud.
‘Shall I have another go?’

‘No! I mean … no,’ said Rob. ‘No, I reckon that’s enough for today, eh?’

Roland glanced up at the little barred window, high in the wall. ‘Yes,
I’d better go and see my father,’ he said, and the glow in his face
faded. ‘It’s well past lunchtime. If I don’t see him every day he
forgets who I am.’

When the boy had gone the Feegles looked at one another.

‘That lad is no’ havin’ an easy life right noo,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘You’ve got to admit he’s getting better,’ said Billy Bigchin.

‘Oh, aye, I’ll warrant he’s no’ such a bunty as I thought, but that
sword is far tae heavy for him an’ it’ll take weeks to ge’ him any
guid,’ said Big Yan. ‘Ha’ we got weeks, Rob?’

Rob Anybody shrugged. ‘Who can tell?’ he said. ‘He’s gonna be the Hero,
come what may. The big wee hag’ll meet the wintersmith soon enough. She
cannae fight that. It’s like the hag o’ hags sez: ye cannae fight a
story as old as that. It’ll find a way.’ He cupped his hands. ‘C’mon,
lads, away tae the mound. We’ll come back tonight. Mebbe ye can’t make a
hero all in one go.’

Tiffany’s little brother was old enough to want to be considered older
still, which is a dangerous ambition on a busy working farm, where there
are big-hoofed horses and sheep dips and a hundred and one other places
where a small person might not be noticed until it’s too late. But most
of all he liked water. When you couldn’t find him, he was usually down
by the river, fishing. He loved the river, which was a bit surprising
since a huge green monster had once leaped out of it to eat him.
However, Tiffany had hit it in the mouth with an iron frying pan. Since
he’d been eating sweets at the time, his only comment afterwards was,
‘Tiffy hit fish go bang.’ But he did seem to be growing up as a skilled
angler. He was fishing this afternoon. He’d found the knack of knowing
where the monsters were. The really big pike lurked in the deep, black
holes, thinking slow hungry thoughts until Wentworth’s silver lure
dropped almost into their mouth.

When Tiffany went to call him in she met him staggering up the path,
much dishevelled, carrying a fish that looked as if it weighed at least
half as much as him.

‘It’s the big one!’ he shouted as soon as he saw her. ‘Old Abe reckoned
it was tucked in under the fallen willow, you know? He said they’ll snap
at anything this time of year! It pulled me over but I held on! Must
weigh at least thirty pounds!’

About twenty, thought Tiffany, but fish are always much heavier to the
man who catches them.

‘Well done. But come on in, it’s going to freeze,’ she said.

‘Can I have it for supper? It took ages to get in the net! It’s at least
thirty-five pounds!’ Wentworth said, struggling under the load. Tiffany
knew better than to offer to carry it. That would be an insult.

‘No, it has to be cleaned and soaked for a day, and Mum’s done stew for
tonight. But I’ll cook it for you tomorrow with ginger sauce.’

‘And there’ll be enough for everyone,’ said Wentworth happily, ‘because
it weighs at least forty pounds!’

‘Easily,’ Tiffany agreed.

And that night, after the pike had been duly admired by everyone, and
found to weigh twenty-three pounds with Tiffany’s hand on the scales
helping it along a bit, she went into the scullery and cleaned the fish,
which was a nice way of talking about pulling out or cutting off
everything that you shouldn’t eat, which if Tiffany had her way meant
the whole fish. She didn’t much like pike, but a witch should never turn
up her nose at food, especially free food, and at least a good sauce
would stop it tasting of pike.

Then, as she was tipping the innards into the pig bucket, she saw the
glint of silver. Well, you couldn’t exactly blame Wentworth for being
too excited to extract the lure.

She reached down and pulled out, covered with slime and scales but very
recognizably itself, the silver horse.

There should have been a roll of thunder. There was just Wentworth, in
the next room, telling for the tenth time about the heroic capture of
the monster fish. There should have been a rush of wind. Barely a
draught disturbed the candles.

But the wintersmith knew she’d touched it. She felt his shock.

She went to the door. As she opened it a few snowflakes fell but, as if
suddenly happy to have an audience, more began to pour down until, with
no sound but a hiss, the night turned white. She held out her hand to
catch some flakes and looked at them very closely. Little icy Tiffanies
melted away.

Oh, yes. He had found her now.

Her mind went cold, but crystal wheels of thought spun fast.

She could take a horse … No, she’d not get far on a night like this. She
should’ve kept that broomstick!

She shouldn’t have danced.

There was nowhere to run to. She’d have to face him again, and face him
here, and stop him dead. In the mountains, with their black forests,
endless winter was hard to imagine. It was easier here, and because it
was easier it was worse, because he was bringing winter into her heart.
She could feel it growing colder.

But the snow was inches deep already, in this short time. She was a
shepherd’s daughter before she was a witch, and at this time, in this
place, there were more immediate things to do.

She went into the golden warmth and light of the kitchen and said: ‘Dad,
we must see to the flock.’

9 ‘Werk’ …

[image]


CHAPTER 13
THE CROWN OF ICE

That was then. This is now.

‘Ach, crivens,’ moaned Wee Dangerous Spike, on the roof of the cart
shed.

The fire went out. The snow which had filled the sky began to thin. Wee
Dangerous Spike heard a scream high overhead and knew exactly what to
do. He raised his arms in the air and shut his eyes just as the buzzard
swooped out of the white sky and snatched him up.

He _liked_ this bit. When he opened his eyes, the world was swinging
beneath him and a voice nearby said, ‘Get up here quick, laddie!’

He grabbed the thin leather harness above him, pulled, and the talons
gently released their grip. Then, hand over hand in the wind of the
flight, he dragged himself across the bird’s feathers until he could
grab the belt of Hamish the aviator.

‘Rob says ye’re old enough tae come doon intae the Underworld,’ said
Hamish over his shoulder. ‘Rob’s gone tae fetch the Hero. Ye are a lucky
wee laddie!’

The bird banked.

Below, the snow … fled. There was no more melting, it simply drew back
from the lambing pen like the tide going out or a deep breath being
taken, with no more sound than a sigh.

Morag skimmed over the lambing field, where men were looking round in
puzzlement. ‘One dead ship and a dozen dead lambs,’ said Hamish, ‘but no
big wee hag! He’s taken her.’

‘Where to?’

Hamish steered Morag up in a big wide circle. Around the farm, the snow
had stopped falling. But up on the downs, it was dropping like hammers.

And then, it took a shape.

‘Up there,’ he said.

All right, I’m alive. I’m pretty sure about that.

Yes.

And I can feel the cold all around me but I don’t feel cold, which would
be pretty hard to explain to anyone else.

And I can’t move. Not at all.

White all around me. And inside my head, all white.

Who am I?

I can remember the name Tiffany. I hope that was me.

White all around me. That happened before. It was a kind of dream or
memory or something else I don’t have a word for. And all around me,
whiteness falling. And building up around me, and lifting me up. It was
… the chalk lands being built, silently, under ancient seas.

That is what my name means.

It means Land Under Wave.

And, like a wave, colour came flooding back into her mind. It was mostly
the redness of rage.

How dare he!

To kill the lambs!

Granny Aching wouldn’t have allowed that. She never lost a lamb. She
could bring them back to life.

I should never have left here in the first place, Tiffany thought.
Perhaps I should have stayed and tried to learn things by myself. But if
I hadn’t gone, would I still be me? Know what I know? Would I have been
as strong as my grandmother or would I just be a cackler? Well, I’ll be
strong now.

When the killing weather was blind nature, you could only cuss, but if
it was walking about on two legs … then it was war. And there would be a
reckoning!

She tried to move, and now the whiteness gave way. It felt like hard
snow, but it wasn’t cold to her touch; it fell away, leaving a hole.

A smooth, slightly transparent floor stretched away in front of her.
There were big pillars rising up to a ceiling that was hidden by some
sort of fog.

And there were walls made of the same stuff as the floor. They looked
like ice – she could even see little bubbles inside them – but were no
more than cool when she touched them.

It was a very large room. There was no furniture of any sort. It was
just the sort of room a king would build to say, ‘Look, I can afford to
waste all this space!’

Her footsteps echoed as she explored. No, not even a chair. And how
comfortable would it be if she found one?

She did, eventually, find a staircase that went up (unless, of course,
you started at the top). It led to another hall which at least had
furniture. They were the sort of couches that rich ladies were supposed
to lounge on, looking tired but beautiful. Oh, and there were urns,
quite big urns, and statues, too, all in the same warm ice. The statues
showed athletes and gods, very much like the pictures in Chaffinch’s
_Mythology_, doing ancient things like hurling javelins or killing huge
snakes with their bare hands. They didn’t have a stitch of clothing
between them, but all the men wore fig leaves which Tiffany, in a spirit
of enquiry, found would not come off.

And there was a fire. The first strange thing about it was that the logs
were also of the same ice. The other strange thing was that the flames
were blue – and cold.

This level had tall pointed windows, but they began a long way from the
floor and showed nothing but the sky, where the pale sun was a ghost
among the clouds.

Another staircase, very grand this time, led up to yet another floor
with more statues and couches and urns. Who could live in a place like
this? Someone who didn’t need to eat or sleep, that’s who. Someone who
didn’t need to be comfortable.

‘Wintersmith!’

Her voice bounced from wall to wall, sending back ‘… ITH … Ith … ith …’
until it died away.

Another staircase, then, and this time there was something new. On a
plinth, where there might have been a statue, was a crown. It floated in
the air a few feet above the base, turning gently, and glittered with
frost. A little bit further on was another statue, smaller than most,
but around this one blue and green and gold lights danced and shimmered.

They looked just like the Hublights, which could sometimes be seen in
the depths of winter floating over the mountains at the centre of the
world. Some people thought they were alive.

The statue was the same height as Tiffany.

‘Wintersmith!’ There was still no reply. A nice palace with no kitchen,
no bed … He didn’t need to eat or sleep, so who was it for?

She knew the answer already: me.

She reached out to touch the dancing lights and they swarmed up her arm
and spread across her body, making a dress that glittered like moonlight
on snow-fields. She was shocked, then angry. Then she wished she had a
mirror, felt guilty about that and went back to being angry again, and
resolved that if by chance she did find a mirror, the only reason she’d
look in it would be to check how angry she was.

After searching for a while she found a mirror, which was nothing more
than a wall of ice of such a dark green that it was almost black.

She did look angry. And immensely, beautifully sparkly. There were
little glints of gold on the blue and green, just like there were in the
sky on wintry nights.

‘Wintersmith!’

He must be watching her. He could be anywhere.

‘All right! I’m here! You know that!’

‘Yes. I do,’ said the wintersmith, behind her.

Tiffany spun around and slapped him across the face, then slapped him
again with her other hand.

It was like hitting rock. He was learning very quickly now.

‘That’s for the lambs,’ she said, trying to shake some life back into
her fingers. ‘How dare you! You didn’t have to!’

He looked much more human. Either he really was wearing actual clothes
or he had worked hard on making them look real. He’d actually managed to
look … well, handsome. Not cold any more, just … cool.

He’s nothing but a snowman, her Second Thoughts protested. Remember
that. He’s just too smart to have coal for eyes or a carrot for a nose.

‘Ouch,’ said the wintersmith, as if he’d just remembered to say it.

‘I demand that you let me go!’ Tiffany snapped. ‘Right now.’ That’s
right, her Second Thoughts said. You want him to end up cowering behind
the saucepans on top of the kitchen dresser. As it were …

‘At this moment,’ said the wintersmith, very calmly, ‘I am a gale
wrecking ships a thousand miles away. I am freezing water pipes in a
snow-bound town. I am freezing the sweat on a dying man, lost in a
terrible blizzard. I creep silently under doors. I hang from gutters. I
stroke the fur of the sleeping bear, deep in her cave, and course in the
blood of the fishes under the ice.’

‘I don’t care!’ said Tiffany. ‘I don’t want to be here! And you
shouldn’t be here, either!’

‘Child, will you walk with me?’ said the wintersmith. ‘I will not harm
you. You are safe here.’

‘What from?’ said Tiffany, and then, because too much time around Miss
Tick does something to your conversation, even in times of stress, she
changed this to: ‘From what?’

‘Death,’ said the wintersmith. ‘Here, you will never die.’

At the back of the Feegles’ chalk pit, more chalk had been carved out of
the wall to make a tunnel about five feet high and perhaps as long.

In front of it stood Roland de Chumsfanleigh (it wasn’t his fault). His
ancestors had been knights, and they had come to own the Chalk by
killing the kings who thought they did. Swords, that’s what it had all
been about. Swords and cutting off heads. That was how you got land in
the old days, and then the rules were changed so that you didn’t need a
sword to own land any more; you just needed the right piece of paper.
But his ancestors had still hung onto their swords, just in case people
thought that the whole thing with the bits of paper was unfair, it being
a fact that you can’t please everybody.

He’d always wanted to be good with a sword, and it had come as a shock
to find they were so _heavy_. He was great at air sword. In front of a
mirror he could fence against his reflection and win nearly all the
time. Real swords didn’t allow that. You tried to swing them and they
ended up swinging you. He’d realized that maybe he was more cut out for
bits of paper. Besides, he needed glasses, which could be a bit tricky
under a helmet, especially if someone was hitting _you_ with a sword.

He wore a helmet now, and held a sword which was – although he wouldn’t
admit it – far too heavy for him. He was also wearing a suit of
chainmail that made it very hard to walk. The Feegles had done their
best to make it fit, but the crotch hung down to his knees and flapped
amusingly when he moved.

I’m not a hero, he thought. I’ve got a sword, which I need two hands to
lift, and I’ve got a shield which is also really heavy and I’ve got a
horse with curtains round it which I’ve had to leave at home (and my
aunts will go mad when they go into the drawing room), but inside I’m a
kid who would quite like to know where the privy is …

But she rescued me from the Queen of Fairyland. If she hadn’t, I’d still
be a stupid kid instead of … um … a young man hoping he isn’t too
stupid.

The Nac Mac Feegles had exploded back into his room, fighting their way
through the storm that had arrived overnight and now, they said, it was
time for him to be a Hero for Tiffany … Well, he would be. He was sure
of that. Fairly sure. But right now the scenery wasn’t what he’d
expected.

‘You know, this doesn’t look like the entrance to the Underworld,’ he
said.

‘Ach, any cave can be the way in,’ said Rob Anybody, who was sitting on
his helmet. ‘But ye must ha’ the knowin’ o’ the crawstep. OK, Big Yan,
ye go first …’

Big Yan strutted up to the chalk hole. He stuck out his arms behind him,
bent at the elbows. He leaned backwards, sticking out one leg to keep
his balance. Then he wiggled the foot in the air a few times, leaned
forward, and vanished as soon as the foot touched the ground.

Rob Anybody banged on Roland’s helmet with his fist.

‘OK, big hero,’ he shouted. ‘Off ye go!’

There was no way out. Tiffany didn’t even know if there was a way in.

‘If you were the Summer Lady, then we _would_ dance,’ said the
wintersmith. ‘But I know now that you are not her, even though you seem
to be. But for the sake of you I am now human, and I must have company.’

Tiffany’s racing mind showed her pictures: the sprouting acorn, the
fertile feet, the Cornucopia. I’m just enough of a goddess to fool a few
floorboards and an acorn and a handful of seeds, she thought. I’m just
like him. Iron enough to make a nail doesn’t make a snowman a human, and
a couple of oak leaves don’t make me a goddess.

‘Come,’ said the wintersmith, ‘let me show you my world. Our world.’

When Roland opened his eyes, all he could see was shadows. Not shadows
of things – just shadows, drifting like cobwebs.

‘I was expecting somewhere … hotter,’ he said, trying to keep the relief
out of his voice. Around him, Feegles popped out of nowhere.

‘Ah, you’re thinkin’ o’ hells,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘They tends to be on
the toasty side, it’s true. Underworlds are more o’ the gloomy sort.
It’s where folks end up when they’s lost, ye ken.’

‘What? You mean if it’s a dark night and you take the wrong turning—’

‘Ach, no! Like mebbe dead when they shouldn’t be an’ there’s nae place
for ’em tae go, or they fall doon a gap in the worlds an’ dinnae ken the
way. Some o’ them don’t even ken where they are, poor souls. There’s an
awful lot o’ that kind o’ thing. There’s no’ a lot o’ laughs in a
underworld. This one used tae be called Limbo, ye ken, cuz the door was
verrae low. Looks like it’s gone way downhill since we wuz last here.’
He raised his voice. ‘An’ a big hand, lads, for young Wee Dangerous
Spike, oot wi’ us for the first time!’ There was a ragged cheer, and Wee
Dangerous Spike waved his sword.

Roland pushed his way through the shadows, which actually offered some
resistance. The very air was grey down here. Sometimes he heard groans,
or someone coughing in the distance … and then there were footsteps,
shuffling towards him.

He drew his sword and peered through the gloom.

Shadows parted and a very old woman in tattered, threadbare clothes
shuffled past, dragging a large cardboard box behind her. It bounced
awkwardly as she tugged at it. She didn’t even glance at Roland.

He lowered the sword.

‘I thought there’d be monsters,’ he said as the old woman disappeared
into the gloom.

‘Aye,’ said Rob Anybody grimly. ‘There are. Think o’ somethin’ solid,
will ye?’

‘Something solid?!’

‘I’m nae jokin’! Think o’ of a nice big mountain, or a hammer! Whatever
ye do, dinnae wish or regret or hope!‘

Roland closed his eyes and then reached up to touch them.

‘I can still see! But my eyes are shut!’

‘Aye! And ye’ll see more wi’ yer een shut. Look aroond ye, if ye dare!’

Roland, his eyes shut, took a few steps forward and looked around.
Nothing seemed to have changed. Perhaps things were slightly more
gloomy. And then he saw it – a flash of bright orange, a line in the
dark which came and went.

‘What was that?’ he said.

‘We dinnae ken whut they call themselves. We call ’em bogles,’ said Rob.

‘They are flashes of light?’

‘Ach, that one was a long way away,’ said Rob. ‘If ye want tae see one
close up, it’s standin’ right beside ye …’

Roland spun round.

‘Ah, ye see, ye made a classic mistake right there,’ said Rob
conversationally. ‘Ye opened yer eyes!’

Roland shut his eyes. The bogle was standing six inches away from him.

He didn’t flinch. He didn’t scream. Hundreds of Feegles were watching
him, he knew.

At first he thought: It’s a skeleton. When it flashed again, it looked
like a bird, a tall bird like a heron. Then it was a stick figure, like
a kid would draw. Over and over again it scribbled itself against the
darkness in thin, burning lines.

It scribbled itself a mouth and leaned forward for a moment, showing
hundreds of needle teeth. Then it vanished.

There was a murmur from the Feegles.

‘Aye, ye done weel,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Ye stared it in the mouth and ye
didnae take so much as a step back.’

‘Mr Anybody, I was too scared to run,’ Roland muttered.

Rob Anybody leaned down until he was level with the boy’s ear.

‘Aye,’ he whispered, ‘I ken that well enough! There be a lot o’ men who
became heroes cuz they wuz too scared tae run! But ye didnae yell nor
cack yer kecks, an’ that’s good. There’ll be more o’ them as we go on.
Dinnae let them intae yer heid! Keep ‘em oot!’

‘Why, what do they—? No, don’t tell me!’ said Roland.

He walked on through the shadows, blinking so that he wouldn’t miss
anything. The old woman had gone, but the gloom began to fill up with
people. Mostly they stood by themselves, or sat on chairs. Some wandered
around quietly. They passed a man in ancient clothing who was staring at
his own hand as though he was seeing it for the first time.

There was another woman swaying gently and singing a nonsense song in a
quiet, little girl voice. She gave Roland a strange, mad smile as he
walked past. Right behind her stood a bogle.

‘All right,’ said Roland grimly. ‘Now tell me what they do.’

‘They eat yer memories,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Yer thoughts is real tae
them. Wishes an’ hope are like food! They’re vermin, really. This is
what happens when these places are no’ looked after.’

‘And how can I kill them?’

‘Oh, that was a verrae nasty voice ye just used. Hark at the big wee
hero! Dinnae bother aboot them, laddie. They won’t attack yet, and we’ve
got a job tae do.’

‘I hate this place!’

‘Aye, hells is a lot more lively,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Slow doon now,
we’re at the river.’

A river ran through the Underworld. It was as dark as the soil, and
lapped at its banks in a slow, oily way.

‘Ah, I think I’ve heard of this,’ said Roland. ‘There’s a ferryman,
right?’

YES.

He was there, suddenly, standing in a long, low boat. He was all in
black, of course in black, with a deep hood that entirely concealed his
face and gave a definite feeling that this was just as well.

‘Hi, pal,’ said Rob Anybody cheerfully. ‘How’re ye doin’?’

OH NO, NOT YOU PEOPLE AGAIN, said the dark figure, in a voice that was
not so much heard as felt. I THOUGHT YOU WERE BANNED.

‘Just a wee misunderstandin’, ye ken,’ said Rob, sliding down Roland’s
armour. ‘Ye have tae let us in, cuz we’s deid already.’

The figure extended an arm. The black robe fell away, and what pointed
at Roland looked, to him, very much like a bony finger.

BUT _HE_ MUST PAY THE FERRYMAN, he said accusingly, in a voice of crypts
and graveyards.

‘Not until I’m on the other side,’ Roland said firmly.

‘Oh, c’mon!’ said Daft Wullie to the ferryman. ‘Ye can see he’s a hero!
If ye cannae trust a hero, who can ye trust?’

The cowl regarded Roland for what seemed like a hundred years.

OH, VERY WELL THEN.

The Feegles swarmed aboard the rotting boat with their usual enthusiasm
and cries of ‘Crivens!’, ‘Where’s the booze on this cruise?’ and ‘We’re
right oot in the Styx noo!’ and Roland climbed in with care, watching
the ferryman suspiciously.

The figure pulled on the big oar and they set off with a creak and then,
regrettably, and to the ferryman’s disgust, to the sound of singing.
More or less singing, that is, at every possible speed and tempo and
with no regard at all for the tune:

[image]

WILL YOU SHUT UP?

[image]

THIS IS HARDLY APPROPRIATE!

[image]

‘Mr Anybody?’ said Roland as they glided jerkily along.

‘Aye?’

‘Why am I sitting next to a blue cheese with a bit of tartan wrapped
around it?’

‘Ah, that’d be Horace,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘He’s Daft Wullie’s pal. He’s
no’ bein’ a nuisance, is he?’

‘No. But he’s trying to sing!’

‘Aye, all blue cheeses hum a bit.’

‘Mnamnam mnam mnamnam,’ crooned Horace.

The boat bumped against the far bank, and the ferryman stepped ashore
quickly.

Rob Anybody scrambled up Roland’s ragged chainmail sleeve, and
whispered: ‘When I gi’e ye the word, run for it!’

‘But I can pay the ferryman. I have the money,’ said Roland, patting his
pocket.

‘You whut?’ said the Feegle, as if this was some strange and dangerous
idea.

‘I have the money,’ Roland repeated. ‘Two pennies is the rate to cross
the River of the Dead. It’s an old tradition. Two pennies to put on the
eyes of the dead, to pay the ferryman.’

‘Whut a clever man ye are, to be sure,’ said Rob as Roland dropped two
copper coins into the ferryman’s bony hand. ‘An did ye no’ think tae
bring four pennies?’

‘The book just said the dead take tuppence,’ said Roland.

‘Aye, mebbe they do,’ Rob agreed, ‘but that’s cuz the deid dinnae expect
tae be comin’ back!’

Roland looked back across the dark river. Flashes of orange light were
thick on the bank they’d left.

‘Mr Anybody, I was once a prisoner of the Queen of Fairyland,’ he said.

‘Aye, I ken that.’

‘It was for a year in this world but it only seemed like a few weeks
there … except that the weeks passed like centuries. It was so … dull I
could hardly remember anything after a while. Not my name, not the feel
of sunshine, not the taste of real food.’

‘Aye, we ken that, we helped tae rescue ye. Ye niver said thanks, but ye
wuz oot o’ yer skull the whole time so we didnae take offence.’

‘Then allow me to thank you now, Mr Anybody.’

‘Dinnae mention it. Any time. Happy tae oblige.’

‘She had pets that feed you dreams until you die of hunger. I hate
things that try to take away what you are. I want to kill those things,
Mr Anybody. I want to kill all of them. When you take away memories, you
take away the person. Everything they are.’

‘’Tis a fine ambition ye’ve got there,’ said Rob. ‘But we have got a wee
job tae do, ye ken. Aw, crivens, this is whut happens when things get
sloppy an’ bogles take over.’

There was a big pile of bones on the path. They were certainly animal
bones, and the rotting collars and lengths of rusted chain were another
clue.

‘Three big dogs?’ said Roland.

‘One verrae big dog wi’ three heads,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Verrae popular
in underworlds, that breed. Can bite right through a man’s throat. Three
times!’ he added, with relish. ‘But put three doggy biscuits in a row on
the groound and the puir wee thing sits there strainin’ an’ whinin’ all
day. It’s a wee laff, I’m tellin’ ye!’ He kicked at the bones. ‘Aye,
time wuz when places like this had some pers’nality. Look, see what
they’ve done here, too.’

Further along the path was what was probably a demon. It had a horrible
face, with so many fangs that some of them must have been just for show.
There were wings, too, but they couldn’t possibly have lifted it. It had
found a piece of mirror, and every few seconds it took a peep into it
and shuddered.

‘Mr Anybody,’ said Roland, ‘is there anything down here that this sword
I’m carrying could kill?’

‘Ah, no. No’ kill,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘No’ bogles. No’ as such. It’s no’
a magic sword, see?’

‘Then why am I dragging it along?’

‘Cuz ye are a hero. Whoever hear’ o’ a hero wi’ oot a sword?’

Roland tugged the sword out of its scabbard. It was heavy and not at all
like the flying, darting silver thing that he’d imagined in front of the
mirror. It was more like a metal club with an edge.

He gripped it in both hands and managed to hurl it out into the middle
of the slow, dark river.

Just before it hit the water a white arm rose and caught it. The hand
waved the sword a couple of times, and then disappeared with it under
the water.

‘Was that supposed to happen?’ he said.

‘A man throwin’ his sword awa’?’ yelled Rob. ‘No! Ye’re no’ supposed tae
bung a guid sword intae the drinkie!’

‘No, I mean the hand,’ said Roland. ‘It just—’

‘Ach, they turn up sometimes.’ Rob Anybody waved a hand as if mid-stream
underwater sword jugglers were an everyday occurrence. ‘But ye’ve got no
weapon noo!’

‘You said swords can’t hurt bogles!’

‘Aye, but it’s the look o’ the thing, OK?’ said Rob, hurrying on.

‘But not having a sword should make me _more_ heroic, right?’ said
Roland, as the rest of the Feegles trotted after them.

‘Technic’ly, aye,’ said Rob Anybody reluctantly. ‘But mebbe also more
deid.’

‘Besides, I have a Plan,’ said Roland.

‘Ye have a Plan?’ said Rob.

‘Yes. I mean aye.’

‘Writted doon?’

‘I’ve only just thought of—’ Roland stopped. The ever-shifting shadows
had parted and a big cave lay ahead.

In the centre of it, surrounding what looked like a rock slab, was a dim
yellow glow. There was a small figure lying on the slab.

‘Here we are,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘That wasnae so bad, aye?’

Roland blinked. Hundreds of bogles were clustered around the slab, but
at a distance, as if they were not keen on going any further.

‘I can see … someone lying down,’ he said.

‘That’s Summer herself,’ said Rob. ‘We have tae be canny aboot this.’

‘Canny?’

‘Like … careful,’ said Rob helpfully. ‘Goddesses can be a wee bit
tricky. Verrae image-conscious.’

‘Don’t we just … you know, grab her and run?’ said Roland.

‘Oh, aye, we’ll end up doin’ somethin’ like that,’ said Rob. ‘But you,
mister, will have tae be the one tae kiss her first. You OK wi’ that?’

Roland looked a bit strained, but he said: ‘Yes … er, fine.’

‘The ladies expect it, ye ken,’ Rob went on.

‘And then we run for it?’ said Roland hopefully.

‘Aye, cuz probably that’s when the bogles will try an’ stop us gettin’
awa’. It’s people leavin’ that they don’t like. Off ye go, laddie.’

I’ve got a Plan, thought Roland, walking towards the slab. And I’ll
concentrate on it so that I don’t think about the fact that I’m walking
through a crowd of scribbly monsters that are only there if I blink and
my eyes are watering. What’s in our head is real to them, right?

I’m going to blink, I’m going to blink, I’m going to …

… blink. It was over in a moment but the shudder went on for a lot
longer. They had been everywhere, and every toothy mouth was looking at
him. It should not be possible to look with teeth.

He ran forward, eyes streaming with the effort of not closing, and
looked down at the figure lying in the yellow glow. It was female, it
was breathing, it was asleep, and it looked like Tiffany Aching.

From the top of the ice palace Tiffany could see for miles, and they
were miles of snow. Only on the Chalk was there any sign of green. It
was an island.

‘You see how I learn?’ said the wintersmith. ‘The Chalk is yours. So
there, summer will come, and you will be happy. And you will be my bride
and I will be happy. And everything will be happy. Happiness is when
things are correct. Now I am human, I understand these things.’

Don’t scream, don’t shout, said the Third Thoughts. Don’t freeze up,
either.

‘Oh … I see,’ she said. ‘And the rest of the world will stay in winter?’

‘No, there are some latitudes that never feel my frost,’ said the
wintersmith. ‘But the mountains, the plains as far as the circle sea …
oh, yes.’

‘Millions of people will die!’

‘But only once, you see. That is what makes it wonderful. And after
that, no more death!’

And Tiffany saw it, like a Hogswatch card: birds frozen to their twigs,
horses and cows standing still in the fields, frozen grass like daggers,
no smoke from any chimney; a world without death because there was
nothing left to die, and everything glittering like tinsel.

She nodded carefully. ‘Very … sensible,’ she said. ‘But it would be a
shame if nothing moved at all.’

‘That would be easy. Snow people,’ said the wintersmith. ‘I can make
them human!’

‘Iron enough to make a nail?’ said Tiffany.

‘Yes! It is easy. I have eaten sausage! And I can think! I never thought
before. I was a _part_. Now I am apart. Only when you are apart do you
know who you are.’

‘You made me roses of ice,’ said Tiffany.

‘Yes! Already I was becoming!’

But the roses melted at dawn, Tiffany added to herself, and glanced at
the pale yellow sun. It had just enough strength to make the wintersmith
sparkle. He does think like a human, she thought, looking into the odd
smile. He thinks like a human who’s never met another human. He’s
cackling. He’s so mad he will never understand how mad he is.

He just doesn’t have a clue what ‘human’ means, he doesn’t know what
horrors he’s planning, he just doesn’t … understand. And he’s so happy
he’s almost sweet …

Rob Anybody banged on Roland’s helmet.

‘Get on wi’ it, laddie,’ he demanded.

Roland stared at the glowing figure. ‘This can’t be Tiffany!’

‘Ach, she’s a goddess, she can look like anything,’ said Rob Anybody.
‘Just a wee peck on the cheek, OK? Dinnae get enthusiastic, we havenae
got all day. A wee peck and we’re offski.’

Something butted Roland on the ankle. It was a blue cheese.

‘Dinnae fash yerself aboot Horace, he just wants ye tae do the right
thing,’ said the mad Feegle who Roland had come to know as Daft Wullie.

He went closer, with the glow crackling around him, because no man wants
to be a coward in front of a cheese.

‘This is kind of … embarrassing,’ he said.

‘Crivens, get _on_ wi’ it, will ye?’

Roland leaned forward and pecked the sleeping cheek.

The sleeper opened her eyes, and he took a step back very quickly.

‘That’s _not_ Tiffany Aching!’ he said, and blinked. Bogles were as
thick around him as grass stems.

‘Now take her by the hand an’ run,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘The bogles will
turn nasty when they see we’re leavin’.’ He banged cheerfully on the
side of the helmet and added: ‘But that’s OK, right? Cuz ye have a
Plan!’

‘I hope I’ve got it right, though,’ said Roland. ‘My aunts say I’m too
clever by half.’

‘Glad tae hear it,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘cuz that’s much better than bein’
too stupid by three-quarters! Now grab the lady and run!’

Roland tried to avoid the stare of the girl as he took her hand and
pulled her gently off the slab. She said something in a language he
couldn’t understand, except that it sounded as though there was a
question mark on the end of it.

‘I’m here to rescue you,’ he said. She looked at him with the golden
eyes of a snake.

‘The sheep girl is in trouble,’ she said, in a voice full of unpleasant
echoes and hisses. ‘So sad, _so_ sad.’

‘Well, er, we’d better run,’ he managed, ‘whoever you are …’

The not-Tiffany gave him a smile. It was an uncomfortable one, with a
bit of a smirk in it. They ran.

‘How do _you_ fight them?’ he panted when the Feegle army were jogging
through the caves.

‘Ach, they dinnae like the taste o’ us overmuch,’ said Rob Anybody as
the shadows parted. ‘It may be cuz we think aboot the boozin’ a lot, it
makes ’em squiffy. Keep movin’!’

And it was at this point that the bogles struck, although that was
hardly the right word. It was more like running into a wall of whispers.
Nothing grabbed, there were no claws. If thousands of tiny weak things
like shrimps or flies were trying to stop someone, this would be how it
felt.

But the ferryman was waiting. He raised a hand as Roland staggered
towards the boat.

THAT WILL BE SIX PENNIES, he said.

‘Six?’ said Roland.

‘Ah, we wasnae doon here more’n two hour an’ bang went saxpence!’ said
Daft Wullie.

ONE DAY RETURN, ONE SINGLE, said the ferryman.

‘I don’t have that much!’ Roland shouted. He was beginning to feel
little tugs in his head now. Thoughts had to push hard to get as far as
his mouth.

‘Leave this tae me,’ said Rob Anybody. He turned to look down on his
fellow Feegles and banged on Roland’s helmet for silence.

‘OK, lads,’ he announced. ‘We’re no’ leavin!’

WHAT? said the ferryman. OH NO, _YOU_ LEAVE! I’M NOT HAVING _YOU_ DOWN
HERE AGAIN! WE’RE STILL FINDING THE BOTTLES FROM LAST TIME! COME ON, GET
ON THE BOAT THIS MINUTE!

‘Crivens, we cannae do that, pal,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘We’re under a geas
to help this lad, ye ken. Where he disnae go, we dinnae go!’

PEOPLE ARE NOT SUPPOSED TO WANT TO STAY HERE! snapped the ferryman.

‘Ach, we’ll soon ha’ the old place jumpin’ again,’ said Rob Anybody,
grinning.

The ferryman drummed his fingers on the pole. They made a clicking
sound, like dice.

OH, ALL RIGHT THEN. BUT – AND I WANT TO BE CLEAR ON THIS – THERE IS TO
BE NO SINGING!

Roland dragged the girl onto the boat. The bogles kept clear of that, at
least, but as the ferryman pushed them away from the shore Big Yan
kicked Roland on the boot and pointed upwards. Scribbles of orange
light, hundreds of them, were moving across the roof of the cavern.
There were more of them on the opposite shore.

‘How’s the Plan goin’, Mister Hero?’ said Rob Anybody quietly as he
climbed down from the boy’s helmet.

‘I’m waiting for the opportune moment,’ said Roland haughtily. He turned
to look at the not-Tiffany. ‘I’m here to get you out,’ he said, trying
not to look directly at her eyes.

‘You?’ said the not-Tiffany, as if the idea was amusing.

‘Well, us,’ Roland corrected himself. ‘Everything is—’

There was a bump as the boat grounded on the further shore, where the
bogles were as thick as standing corn.

‘Off ye go, then,’ said Big Yan.

Roland pulled the not-Tiffany along the path for a few steps, and
stopped. When he blinked, the path ahead was a writhing orange mass. He
could feel the little pulls on him, no stronger than a breeze. But they
were in his brain, too. Cold, and nibbling. This was stupid. It couldn’t
work. He wouldn’t be able to do it. He wasn’t any good at this sort of
thing. He was wayward and inconsiderate and disobedient, just like his …
aunts … said.

Behind him, Daft Wullie shouted, in his cheerful way, ‘Make yer aunties
proud of ye!’

Roland half turned, suddenly angry. ‘My _aunts_? Let me tell you about
my aunts …’

‘No time, laddie!’ shouted Rob Anybody. ‘Get _on_ wi’ it!’

Roland looked around, his mind on fire.

Our memories are real, he thought. And I will not stand for this!

He turned to the not-Tiffany, and said: ‘Don’t be afraid.’ Then he held
out his left hand and whispered, under his breath: ‘I remember … a sword
…’

When he shut his eyes, there it was – so light he could barely feel it,
so thin he could hardly see it, a line in the air that was made up
mostly of sharpness. He’d killed a thousand enemies with it, in the
mirror. It was never too heavy, it moved like part of him, and here it
was. A weapon that chopped away everything that clung and lied and
stole. He smiled, and took a firm grip.

‘Mebbe ye can make a hero all in one go,’ said Rob Anybody thoughtfully,
as bogles scribbled themselves into existence and died. He turned to
Daft Wullie. ‘Daft Wullie,’ he said, ‘can ye bring to mind when it was I
told ye that sometimes ye say _exactly the right thing_?’

Daft Wullie looked baffled. ‘No’ that ye mention it, Rob, I dinnae
recall ye ever sayin’ that, ever.’

‘Aye?’ said Rob. ‘Weel, if I had done, just now would ha’ been one o’
those times.’

Daft Wullie looked worried. ‘That’s all right though, aye? I said
somethin’ right?’

‘Aye. Ye did, Daft Wullie. A first. I’m proud o’ ye,’ said Rob.

Daft Wullie’s face split in an enormous grin. ‘Crivens! Hey, lads, I
said—’

‘But dinnae get carried awa’,’ Rob added.

As Roland swung the airy blade, the bogles parted like spider webs.
There were more, always more, but the silver line always found them,
cutting him free. They backed away, tried new shapes, recoiled from the
heat of the anger in his head. The sword hummed. Bogles curled around
the blade and squealed, and sizzled into nothingness on the floor—

– and someone was banging on his helmet. They’d been doing so for quite
a while.

‘Huh?’ he said, opening his eyes.

‘Ye’ve run oot,’ said Rob Anybody. His chest heaving, Roland looked
around. Eyes open or shut, the caves were empty of orange streaks. The
not-Tiffany was watching him with a strange smile on her face.

‘Either we get oot noo,’ said Rob, ‘or you can hang aroound and wait for
some more, mebbe?’

‘An’ here they come,’ said Billy Bigchin. He pointed across the river. A
pure mass of orange was pouring into the cave, so many bogles that there
was no space between them.

Roland hesitated, still fighting for breath.

‘I’ll tell ye what,’ said Rob Anybody soothingly. ‘If ye are a guid boy
and rescue the lady, we’ll bring you doon here another time, wi’ some
sandwiches so’s we can make a day o’ it.’

Roland blinked. ‘Er, yes,’ he said. ‘Um … sorry. I don’t know what
happened just then …’

‘Offski time!’ yelled Big Yan. Roland grabbed the hand of the
not-Tiffany.

‘An’ don’t look back until we’re well oot o’ here,’ said Rob Anybody.
‘It’s kind o’ traditional.’

On the top of the tower, the ice crown appeared in the wintersmith’s
pale hands. It shone more than diamonds could, even in the pale
sunlight. It was purest ice, without bubbles, lines or flaw.

‘I made this for you,’ he said. ‘The Summer Lady will never wear it,’ he
added sadly.

It fitted perfectly. It didn’t feel cold.

He stepped back.

‘And now it is done,’ said the wintersmith.

‘There is something I have to do, too,’ said Tiffany. ‘But first,
there’s something I have to know. You found the things that make a man?’

‘Yes!’

‘How did you find out what they were?’

The wintersmith proudly told her about the children, while Tiffany
breathed carefully, forcing herself to relax. His logic was very …
logical. After all, if a carrot and two pieces of coal can make a heap
of snow a snowman, then a big bucket of salts and gases and metal should
certainly make him a human. It made … sense. At least, sense to the
wintersmith.

‘But, you see, you need to know the whole song,’ said Tiffany. ‘It is
mostly only about what humans are made of. It isn’t about what humans
_are_.’

‘There were some things that I could not find,’ said the wintersmith.
‘They made no sense. They had no substance.’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, nodding sadly. ‘The last three lines, I expect,
which are the whole point. I’m really sorry about that.’

‘But I will find them,’ said the wintersmith. ‘I will!’

‘I hope you do, one day,’ said Tiffany. ‘Now, have you ever heard of
boffo?’

‘What is this boffo? It was not in the song!’ said the wintersmith,
looking uneasy.

‘Oh, boffo is how humans change the world by fooling themselves,’ said
Tiffany. ‘It’s wonderful. And boffo says that things have no power that
humans don’t put there. You can make things magical, but you can’t
magically make a human out of things. It’s just a nail in your heart.
Only a nail.’

And the time has come and I know what to do, she thought dreamily. I
know how the story has to end. I must end it in the right kind of way.

She pulled the wintersmith towards her, and saw the look of astonishment
on his face. She felt light-headed, as though her feet weren’t touching
the floor. The world became … simpler. It was a tunnel, leading to the
future. There was nothing to see but the wintersmith’s cold face,
nothing to hear but her own breathing, nothing to feel but the warmth of
the sun on her hair.

It wasn’t the fiery globe of summer, but it was still much bigger than
any bonfire could ever be.

Where this takes me, there I choose to go, she told herself, letting the
warmth pour into her. I choose. This I choose to do. And I’m going to
have to stand on tiptoe, she added.

Thunder on my right hand. Lightning in my left hand.

Fire above me …

‘Please,’ she said, ‘take the winter away. Go back to your mountains.
Please.’

Frost in front of me …

‘No. I am winter. I cannot be anything else.’

‘Then you cannot be human,’ said Tiffany. ‘The last three lines are:
“Strength enough to build a home, Time enough to hold a child, Love
enough to break a heart”.’

Balance … and it came quickly, out of nowhere, lifting her up inside.

The centre of the see-saw does not move. It feels neither up-ness nor
down-ness. It is balanced.

Balance … and his lips were like blue ice. She’d cry, later, for the
wintersmith who wanted to be human.

Balance … and the old kelda had once told her: ‘There’s a wee bit o’ you
that willnae melt and flow.’

Time to thaw.

She shut her eyes and kissed the wintersmith …

… and drew down the sun.

Frost to fire.

The entire top of the ice palace was melted in a flash of white light
that cast shadows on walls a hundred miles away. A pillar of steam
roared up, stitched with lightning, and spread out above the world like
an umbrella, covering the sun. Then it began to fall back as a soft,
warm rain that punched little wormholes in the snow.

Tiffany, her head usually so full of thoughts, hadn’t got a thought to
spare. She lay on a slab of ice in the soft rain and listened to the
palace collapse around her.

There are times when everything that you can do has been done and
there’s nothing for it now but to curl up and wait for the thunder to
die down.

There was something else in the air, too, a golden glint that vanished
when she tried to look at it and then turned up again in the corner of
her eye.

The palace was melting like a waterfall. The slab she lay on half-slid
and half-floated down a staircase that was turning into a river. Above
her, huge pillars fell, but went from ice to a gush of warm water in
mid-air, so that what crashed down was spray.

Goodbye to the glittering crown, Tiffany thought. Goodbye to the dress
made of dancing light, and goodbye to the ice roses and the snowflakes.
Such a shame. Such a shame.

And then there was grass under her, and so much water pouring past her
that it was a case of get up or drown. She managed to get to her knees,
at least, and waited until it was possible to stand up without being
knocked over.

‘You have something of mine, child,’ said a voice behind her. She
turned, and golden light rushed into a shape. It was her own shape, but
her eyes were … odd, like a snake’s. Right here and now, with the
roaring of the heat of the sun still filling her ears, this didn’t seem
very amazing.

Slowly, Tiffany took the Cornucopia out of her pocket and handed it
over.

‘You are the Summer Lady, aren’t you?’ she asked.

‘And you are the sheep girl who would be me?’ There was a hiss to the
words.

‘I didn’t want to be!’ said Tiffany hurriedly. ‘Why do you look like
me?’

The Summer Lady sat down on the turf, which steamed. It is very strange
to watch yourself, and Tiffany noticed she had a small mole on the back
of her neck.

‘It’s called resonance,’ she said. ‘Do you know what that is?’

‘It means “to vibrate with”,’ said Tiffany.

‘How does a sheep girl know that?’

‘I have a dictionary,’ said Tiffany. ‘And I’m a witch, thank you.’

‘Well, while you were picking up things from me, I’ve been picking up
things from you, clever sheep-witch,’ said the Summer Lady. She was
beginning to remind Tiffany a lot of Annagramma. That was actually a
relief. She didn’t sound wise, or nice … she was just another person,
who happened to be very powerful but not frighteningly smart and,
frankly, a bit annoying.

‘What’s your real shape?’ she asked.

‘The shape of heat on a road, the shape of the smell of apples.’ Nice
reply, Tiffany thought, but not helpful, as such.

Tiffany sat down next to the goddess. ‘Am I in trouble?’ she asked.

‘Because of what you did to the wintersmith? No. He has to die every
year, as do I. We die, and sleep and wake. Besides … you were
entertaining.’

‘Oh? I was _entertaining_, was I?’ said Tiffany, her eyes narrowing.

‘What it is you want?’ said the Summer Lady. Yes, thought Tiffany,
_just_ like Annagramma. Wouldn’t spot a hint a mile high.

‘Want?’ said Tiffany. ‘Nothing. Just the summer, thank you.’

The Summer Lady looked puzzled. ‘But humans always want something from
gods.’

‘But witches don’t accept payment. Green grass and blue skies will do.’

‘What? You’ll get those anyway!’ The Summer Lady sounded both confused
and angry and Tiffany was quite happy about this, in a small and
spiteful way.

‘Good,’ she said.

‘You saved the world from the wintersmith!’

‘Actually, I saved it from a silly girl, Miss Summer. I put right what I
put wrong.’

‘One simple mistake? You’d be a silly girl not to accept a reward.’

‘I’d be a sensible young woman to refuse one,’ said Tiffany, and it felt
good to say that. ‘Winter is over. I know. I’ve seen it through. Where
it took me I chose to go. I chose when I danced with the wintersmith.’

The Summer Lady stood up. ‘Remarkable,’ she said. ‘And strange. And now
we part. But first, some more things must be taken. Stand up, young
woman.’

Tiffany did so, and when she looked into the face of Summer, golden eyes
became pits that drew her in.

And then the summer filled her up. It must have been for only a few
seconds, but inside them it went on for much longer. She felt what it
was like to be the breeze through green corn on a spring day, to ripen
an apple, to make the salmon leap the rapids – the sensations came all
at once and merged into one great big, glistening, golden-yellow feeling
of summer …

… which grew hotter. Now the sun turned red in a burning sky. Tiffany
drifted through air like warm oil into the searing calm of deep deserts,
where even camels die. There was no living thing. Nothing moved except
ash.

She drifted down a dried-up riverbed, with pure white animal bones on
the banks. There was no mud, not one drop of moisture in this oven of a
land. This was a river of stones – agates banded like a cat’s eye,
garnets lying loose, thunder eggs with their rings of colour, stones of
brown, orange, creamy white, some with black veins, all polished by the
heat.

‘Here is the heart of the summer,’ hissed the voice of the Summer Lady.
‘Fear me as much as the wintersmith. We are not yours, though you give
us shapes and names. Fire and ice we are, in balance. Do not come
between us again …’

And now, at last, there was movement. From out of gaps between the
stones they came like stones brought alive: bronze and red, umber and
yellow, black and white, with harlequin patterns and deadly gleaming
scales.

The snakes tested the boiling air with their forked tongues and hissed
triumphantly.

The vision vanished. The world came back.

The water had poured away. The everlasting wind had teased the fogs and
steams into long streamers of cloud, but the unconquered sun was finding
its way through. And, as always happens, and happens far too soon, the
strange and wonderful becomes a memory and a memory becomes a dream.
Tomorrow it’s gone.

Tiffany walked across the grass where the palace had been. There were a
few pieces of ice left, but they would be gone in an hour. There were
the clouds, but clouds drifted away. The normal world pressed in on her,
with its dull little songs. She was walking on a stage after the play
was over, and who now could say it ever happened?

Something sizzled on the grass. Tiffany reached down and picked up a
piece of metal. It was still warm with the last of the heat that had
twisted it out of shape, but you could see that it had once been a nail
…

No, I won’t take a gift to make the giver feel better, she thought. Why
should I? I’ll find my own gifts. I was … ‘entertaining’ to her, that’s
all.

But him – he made me roses and icebergs and frost and never understood …

She turned suddenly at the sound of voices. The Feegles came bounding
over the slope of the downs, at a speed just fast enough for a human to
keep up. And Roland was keeping up, panting a little, his overlarge
chainmail making him run like a duck.

She laughed.

Two weeks later Tiffany went back to Lancre. Roland took her as far as
Twoshirts, and the pointy hat took her the rest of the way. That was a
bit of luck. The driver remembered Miss Tick, and since there was a
spare space on the roof of the coach he wasn’t prepared to go through
all that again. The roads were flooded, the ditches gurgled, the swollen
rivers sucked at the bridges.

First, she visited Nanny Ogg, who had to be told everything. That saved
some time, because once you’ve told Nanny Ogg you’d more or less told
everyone else. When she heard exactly what Tiffany had done to the
wintersmith, she laughed and laughed.

Tiffany borrowed Nanny’s broomstick and flew slowly across the forests
to Miss Treason’s cottage.

Things were going on. In the clearing, several men were digging the
vegetable area, and lots of people were hanging around the door, so she
landed back in the woods, shoved the broom in a rabbit hole and her hat
under a bush and walked back on foot.

Stuck in a birch tree where the track entered the clearing was … a doll,
maybe, made out of lots of twigs bound together. It was new, and a bit
worrying. That was probably the idea. She took the back way, through the
trees.

No one saw her raise the catch on the scullery door, or slip inside the
cottage. She leaned against the kitchen wall and went quiet.

From the next room came the unmistakable voice of Annagramma at her most
typically Annagrammatical.

‘– only a tree, do you understand? Cut it up and share the wood. Agreed?
And now shake hands. Go on. I mean it. Properly, or else I’ll get angry!
Good. That feels better, doesn’t it? Let’s have no more of this
silliness—’

After ten minutes of listening to people being scolded, grumbled at and
generally prodded, Tiffany crept out again, cut back through the woods
and walked into the clearing via the track. There was a woman hurrying
towards her, but she stopped when Tiffany said: ‘Excuse me, is there a
witch near here?’

‘Ooooh, yes,’ said the woman, and gave Tiffany a hard stare. ‘You’re not
from round here, are you?’

‘No,’ said Tiffany, and thought: I lived here for months, Mrs Carter,
and I saw you most days. But I always wore the hat. People always talk
to the hat. Without the hat, I’m in disguise.

‘Well, there’s Miss Hawkin,’ said Mrs Carter, as if reluctant to give
away a secret. ‘Be careful, though.’ She leaned forward and lowered her
voice. ‘She turns into a terrible monster when she’s angry! I’ve seen
her! She’s all right with us, of course,’ she added. ‘Lots of young
witches have been coming to learn things from her!’

‘Gosh, she must be good!’ said Tiffany.

‘She’s amazing,’ Mrs Carter went on. ‘She’d only been here five minutes
and she seemed to know all about us!’

‘Amazing,’ said Tiffany. You’d think that somebody wrote it all down.
Twice. But that wouldn’t be interesting enough, would it? And who would
believe that a real witch bought her face from Boffo?

‘And she’s got a cauldron that bubbles green,’ Mrs Carter said with
great pride. ‘All down the sides. That’s proper witching, that is.’

‘It sounds like it,’ said Tiffany. No witch she’d met had done anything
with a cauldron apart from make stew, but somehow people believed in
their hearts that a witch’s cauldron should bubble green. And that must
be why Mr Boffo sold Item #61 Bubbling Green Cauldron Kit, $14, extra
sachets of Green, $1 each.

Well, it worked. It probably shouldn’t, but people were people. She
didn’t think Annagramma would be particularly interested in a visit
right now, especially from someone who’d read all the way through the
Boffo catalogue, so she retrieved her broom and headed on to Granny
Weatherwax’s cottage.

There was a chicken run out in the back garden now. It had been
carefully woven out of pliable hazel, and contented ‘werk’s were coming
from the other side.

Granny Weatherwax was coming out of the back door. She looked at Tiffany
as if she’d just come back from walking around the cottage.

‘I’ve got business down in the town right now,’ she said. ‘It wouldn’t
worry me if you came, too.’ That was, from Granny, as good as a brass
band and an illuminated scroll of welcome. Tiffany fell in alongside her
as she strode off along the track.

‘I hope I find you well, Mistress Weatherwax?’ she said, hurrying to
keep up.

‘I’m still here after another winter, that’s all I know,’ said Granny.
‘You look well, girl.’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘We saw the steam from up here,’ said Granny.

Tiffany said nothing. That was it? Well, yes. From Granny, that would be
it.

After a while Granny said: ‘Come back to see your young friends, eh?’

Tiffany took a deep breath. She’d been through this in her head dozens
of times: what she would say, what Granny would say, what she would
shout, what Granny would shout …

‘You planned it, didn’t you?’ she said. ‘If you’d suggested one of the
others they’d probably have got the cottage, so you suggested me. And
you knew, you just _knew_ that I’d help her. And it’s all worked out,
hasn’t it? I bet every witch in the mountains knows what happened by
now. I bet Mrs Earwig is seething. And the best bit is, no one got hurt.
Annagramma’s picked up where Miss Treason left off, all the villagers
are happy and you’ve won! Oh, I expect you’ll say it was to keep me busy
and teach me important things and keep my mind off the wintersmith, but
you still won!’

Granny Weatherwax walked on calmly. After a while she said: ‘I see you
got your little trinket back.’

It was like having a bolt of lightning and then not getting any thunder,
or throwing a pebble into a pool and not getting a splash.

‘What? Oh. The horse. Yes! Look, I—’

‘What kind of fish?’

‘Er … pike,’ said Tiffany.

‘Ah? Some likes ’em, but they are too muddy for my taste. In most
stories it’s a salmon.’

And that was it. Against Granny’s calm she had nowhere to go. She could
nag, she could whine and it wouldn’t make any difference. Tiffany
consoled herself with the fact that at least Granny knew that she knew.
It wasn’t much, but it was all she was going to get.

‘And the horse ain’t the only trinket I see,’ Granny continued. ‘Magick,
is it?’ She always stuck a K on the end of any magic she disapproved of.

Tiffany glanced down at the ring on her finger. It had a dull shine.
It’d never rust while she wore it, the blacksmith had told her, because
of the oils in her skin. He’d even taken the time to cut little
snowflakes in it with a tiny chisel.

‘It’s just a ring I had made out of a nail,’ she said.

‘Iron enough to make a ring,’ said Granny, and Tiffany stopped dead. Did
she really get into people’s minds? It had to be something like that.

‘And why did you decide you wanted a ring?’ said Granny.

For all sorts of reasons which never quite managed to be clear in
Tiffany’s head, she knew. All she could think of to say was: ‘It seemed
like a good idea at the time.’ She waited for the explosion.

‘Then it probably was,’ said Granny mildly. She stopped, pointed away
from the path, in the direction of Nanny Ogg’s house, and said: ‘I put
the fence round it. It’s got other things protectin’ it, you may be sure
of that, but some beasts is just too stupid to scare.’

It was the oak tree sapling, already five feet high. A fence of poles
and woven branches surrounded it.

‘Growing fast, for oak,’ said Granny. ‘I’m keeping an eye on it. But
come on, I don’t want to miss it.’ She set off again, covering the
ground fast. Bewildered, Tiffany ran after her.

‘Miss what?’ she panted.

‘The dance, of course!’

‘Isn’t it too early for that?’

‘Not up here. They starts up here!’

Granny hurried along little paths and behind gardens and came out into
the town square, which was thronged with people. Small stalls had been
set up. A lot of people were standing around in the slightly hopeless
why-are-we-here? way of crowds who’re doing what their heart wants to do
but their head feels embarrassed about, but at least there were hot
things on sticks to eat. There were lots of white chickens, too. Very
good eggs, Nanny had said, so it would have been a shame to kill them.

Granny walked to the front of the crowd. There was no need to push
people out of the way. They just moved sideways, without noticing.

They’d arrived just in time. A lot of children came running along the
road to the bridge, only just ahead of the dancers who, as they trudged
along with the Top-hatted Fool in the lead, seemed like quite homely and
ordinary men – men she’d seen often, working in forges or driving carts.
They all wore white clothes, or at least clothes that had been white
once, and like the audience they looked a bit sheepish, their
expressions suggesting that this was all just a bit of fun, really, not
to be taken seriously. They were even waving to people in the crowd.
Tiffany looked around and saw Miss Tick, and Nanny, and even Mrs Earwig
… nearly every witch she knew. Oh, and there was Annagramma, minus Mr
Boffo’s little devices, and looking very proud.

It wasn’t like this last autumn, she thought. It was dark and quiet and
solemn and hidden, everything that this isn’t. Who watched it from the
shadows?

Who is watching now from the light? Who is _here_ in secret? At which
point, Granny Weatherwax took off her hat and placed You the kitten on
the ground.

A drummer and a man with an accordion pushed their way though the crowd,
along with the local publican carrying eight pints of beer on a tray
(because no grown man is going to dance in front of his friends with
ribbons round his hat and bells on his trousers without the clear
prospect of a large drink).

When the noise had died down a bit the drummer beat the drum a few times
and the accordionist played a long drawn-out chord, the legal signal
that a Morris Dance is about to begin, and people who hang around after
this have only got themselves to blame.

The two-man band struck up. The men, in two lines of three facing each
other, counted the beat and then leaped … Tiffany turned to Granny as
twelve hob-nailed boots _crashed_ to the ground, throwing up sparks.

‘Tell me how to take away pain,’ she said, above the noise of the dance.

Crash!

‘It’s hard,’ said Granny, not taking her eyes off the dancers. _Crash_
went the boots again.

‘You can move it out of the body?’

Crash!

‘Sometimes. Or hide it. Or make a cage for it and carry it away. And all
of it’s dangerous and it will kill you if you don’t respect it, young
woman. It is all price and no profit. You are asking me to tell you how
to put your hand in the lion’s mouth.’

Crash!

‘I must know, to help the Baron. It’s bad. There is a lot I have to do.’

‘This you choose to do?’ said Granny, still watching.

‘Yes!’

Crash!

‘This is your baron who doesn’t like witches?’ said Granny, her gaze
going from face to face in the crowd.

‘But who _does_ like witches until they need one, Mistress Weatherwax?’
said Tiffany sweetly.

Crash!

‘This is a reckoning, Mistress Weatherwax,’ Tiffany added. After all,
once you’ve kissed the wintersmith, you’re in the mood to dare. And
Granny Weatherwax smiled, as if she’d done all that was expected of her.

‘Ha! Is it now?’ she said. ‘Very well. Come and see me again before you
go, and we’ll see what you may take back with you. And I hopes you can
close the doors you are opening. Now watch the people! Sometimes you see
her!’

Tiffany paid attention to the dance. The Fool had turned up without her
noticing, wandering around collecting money in his greasy top hat. If a
girl looked as though she’d squeal if he kissed her, he gave her a kiss.
And sometimes, without any warning, he’d spring off into the dance,
spinning through the leaping men with never a foot in the wrong place.

Then Tiffany saw it. The eyes of a woman on the other side of the dance
flashed gold, just for a moment. Once she’d seen it, she saw it again –
in the eyes of a boy, a girl, the man holding the beer, moving around to
watch the Fool—

‘Summer’s here!’ said Tiffany, and realized that she was tapping her
foot to the beat; she realized it because a heavier boot had just
trodden on it and pinned it gently but firmly to the ground. Beside it,
You looked up at her in blue-eyed innocence that became, for the
briefest fragment of a second, the lazy golden eyes of a snake.

‘She’s meant to be,’ said Granny Weatherwax, removing her boot.

‘A few coppers for luck, miss?’ said a voice close by, and there was the
sound of money being shaken in an ancient hat.

Tiffany turned and looked into purple-grey eyes. The face around them
was lined and tanned and grinning. He had a gold earring. ‘A copper or
two from the lovely lady?’ he wheedled. ‘Silver or gold, maybe?’

Sometimes, Tiffany thought, you just know how it all should go …

‘Iron?’ she said, taking the ring off her finger and dropping it into
the hat.

The Fool picked it out delicately, and flipped it into the air.
Tiffany’s eye followed it but, somehow, it wasn’t in the air any more
but _was_ glistening on the man’s finger.

‘Iron’s enough,’ he said, and gave her a sudden kiss on the cheek.

It was only _slightly_ chilly.

* * *

The galleries inside the Feegle mound were crowded but hushed. This was
important. The honour of the clan was at stake here.

In the middle was a large book, taller than Rob and filled with
colourful pictures. It was quite muddy from its journey down into the
mound.

Rob had been challenged. For years, he’d thought himself to be a hero,
and then the hag o’ hags had said he wasnae, no’ really. Weel, you
couldn’t argue wi’ the hag o’ hags, but he wuz goin’ to rise tae the
challenge, oh aye, so he wuz, or his name wasnae Rob Anybody.

‘Where’s mah coo?’ he read. ‘Is that mah coo? It gaes “cluck”! It is a …
a … chicken! It is no’ mah coo! An’ then there’s this wee paintin’ o’ a
couple o’ chickens. That’s another page, right?’

‘It is indeed, Rob,’ said Billy Bigchin.

There was a cheer from the assembled Feegles as Rob ran around the book,
waving his hands in the air.

‘An’ this one is a lot harder than Abker, right?’ he said, when he’d
done the circuit. ‘That one was easy! An’ a very predictable plot.
Whoever writted that book didnae stretch himself, in ma opinion.’

‘You mean _The ABC_?’ said Billy Bigchin.

‘Aye.’ Rob Anybody jumped up and down and punched the air a few times.
‘Got somethin’ a wee bit tougher?’

The gonnagle looked at the stack of battered books the Feegles had, in
various ways, collected.

‘Somethin’ I can get ma teeth intae,’ Rob added. ‘A big book.’

‘Well, this one’s called _Principles of Modern Accountancy_,’ said Billy
doubtfully.

‘An’ is that a big heroic book to read?’ said Rob, running on the spot.

‘Aye. Probably, but—’

Rob Anybody held up a hand for silence and looked across at Jeannie, who
had a crowd of little Feegles surrounding her. She was smiling at him,
and his sons were staring at their father in silent astonishment. One
day, Rob thought, they’ll be able to walk up to even the longest words
and give them a good kicking. Not even commas and those tricksy
semi-colonses will stop them!

He had to be a hero.

‘Ah’m feelin’ guid about this readin’,’ said Rob Anybody. ‘Bring it on!’

And he read _Principles of Modern Accountancy_ all morning, but just to
make it interesting, he put lots of dragons in it.

[image]


Author’s Note

The Morris Dance …

… is traditionally danced on May 1st, to welcome in the summer. Its
history is a bit confused, possibly because it’s often danced near pubs,
but it is now the English folk dance. The dancers usually wear white,
and have bells sewn on their clothes.

I invented the Dark Morris for another book (at least, I think I
invented it), reasoning that since the year is round the seasons might
need more than one push. Once, when I was on a book signing tour a
Morris side turned up all in black, just for me. They danced the Dark
Morris in silence and perfect time, without the music and bells of the
‘summer’ dance.

It was beautifully done. But it was also a bit creepy. So it might not
be a good idea to try it at home …

Terry Pratchett


Read on

If you enjoyed WINTERSMITH, you’ll love I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT, the next
adventure starring Tiffany Aching.

Here’s the first chapter to get you started . . .

[image]


CHAPTER 1
A FINE BIG WEE LADDIE

WHY WAS IT, Tiffany Aching wondered, that people liked noise so much?
Why was noise so important?

Something quite close sounded like a cow giving birth. It turned out to
be an old hurdy-gurdy organ, hand-cranked by a raggedy man in a battered
top hat. She sidled away as politely as she could, but as noise went, it
was sticky; you got the feeling that if you let it, it would try to
follow you home.

But that was only one sound in the great cauldron of noise around her,
all of it made by people and all of it made by people trying to make
noise louder than the other people making noise. Arguing at the
makeshift stalls, bobbing for apples or frogs,¹ cheering the prize
fighters and a spangled lady on the high wire, selling candyfloss at the
tops of their voices and, not to put too fine a point on it, boozing
quite considerably.

The air above the green downland was thick with noise. It was as if the
populations of two or three towns had all come up to the top of the
hills. And so here, where all you generally heard was the occasional
scream of a buzzard, you heard the permanent scream of, well, everyone.
It was called _having fun_. The only people not making any noise were
the thieves and pickpockets, who went about their business with
commendable silence, and they didn’t come near Tiffany; who would pick a
witch’s pocket? You would be lucky to get all your fingers back. At
least, that was what they feared, and a sensible witch would encourage
them in this fear.

When you were a witch, you were all witches, thought Tiffany Aching as
she walked through the crowds, pulling her broomstick after her on the
end of a length of string. It floated a few feet above the ground. She
was getting a bit bothered about that. It seemed to work quite well, but
nevertheless, since all around the fair were small children dragging
balloons, _also_ on the end of a piece of string, she couldn’t help
thinking that it made her look more than a little bit silly, and
something that made one witch look silly made _all_ witches look silly.

On the other hand, if you tied it to a hedge somewhere, there was bound
to be some kid who would untie the string and get on the stick for a
dare, in which case most likely he would go straight up all the way to
the top of the atmosphere where the air froze, and while she could in
theory call the stick back, mothers got very touchy about having to thaw
out their children on a bright late-summer day. That would not look
good. People would talk. People always talked about witches.

She resigned herself to dragging it again. With luck, people would think
she was joining in with the spirit of the thing in a humorous way.

There was a lot of etiquette involved, even at something so deceptively
cheerful as a fair. She was the witch; who knows what would happen if
she forgot someone’s name or, worse still, got it wrong? What would
happen if you forgot all the little feuds and factions, the people who
weren’t talking to their neighbours and so on and so on and a lot more
so and even further on? Tiffany had no understanding at all of the word
‘minefield’, but if she had, it would have seemed kind of familiar.

She was the witch. For all the villages along the Chalk she was the
witch. Not just her own village any more, but for all the other ones as
far away as Ham-on-Rye, which was a pretty good day’s walk from here.
The area that a witch thought of as her own, and for whose people she
did what was needful, was called a steading, and as steadings went, this
one was pretty good. Not many witches got a whole geological outcrop to
themselves, even if this one was mostly covered in grass, and the grass
was mostly covered in sheep. And today the sheep on the downs were left
by themselves to do whatever it was that they did when they were by
themselves, which would presumably be pretty much the same as they did
if you were watching them. And the sheep, usually fussed and herded and
generally watched over, were now of no interest whatsoever, because
right here the most wonderful attraction in the world was taking place.

Admittedly, the scouring fair was only one of the world’s most wonderful
attractions if you didn’t usually ever travel more than about four miles
from home. If you lived around the Chalk you were bound to meet everyone
that you knew² at the fair. It was quite often where you met the person
you were likely to marry. The girls certainly all wore their best
dresses, while the boys wore expressions of hopefulness and their hair
smoothed down with cheap hair pomade or, more usually, spit. Those who
had opted for spit generally came off better since the cheap pomade was
very cheap indeed and would often melt and run in the hot weather,
causing the young men not to be of interest to the young women, as they
had fervently hoped, but to the flies, who would make their lunch off
their scalps.

However, since the event could hardly be called ‘the fair where you went
in the hope of getting a kiss and, if your luck held, the promise of
another one’, the fair was called the scouring.

The scouring was held over three days at the end of summer. For most
people on the Chalk, it was their holiday. This was the third day, and
most people said that if you hadn’t had a kiss by now you might as well
go home. Tiffany hadn’t had a kiss, but after all, she was _the witch_.
Who knew what they might get turned into?

If the late-summer weather was clement, it wasn’t unusual for some
people to sleep out under the stars, and under the bushes as well. And
that was why if you wanted to take a stroll at night it paid to be
careful so as not to trip over someone’s feet. Not to put too fine a
point to it, there was a certain amount of what Nanny Ogg – a witch who
had been married to three husbands – called _making your own
entertainment_. It was a shame that Nanny lived right up in the
mountains, because she would have loved the scouring and Tiffany would
have loved to see her face when she saw the giant.³

He – and he was quite definitely a he, there was no possible doubt about
that – had been carved out of the turf thousands of years before. A
white outline against the green, he belonged to the days when people had
to think about survival and fertility in a dangerous world.

Oh, and he had also been carved, or so it would appear, before anyone
had invented trousers. In fact, to say that he had no trousers on just
didn’t do the job. His lack of trousers filled the world. You simply
could not stroll down the little road that passed along the bottom of
the hills without noticing that there was an enormous, as it were, lack
of something – e.g. trousers – and what was there instead. It was
definitely a figure of a man without trousers, and certainly not a
woman.

Everyone who came to the scouring was expected to bring a small shovel,
or even a knife, and work their way down the steep slope to grub up all
the weeds that had grown there over the previous year, making the chalk
underneath glow with freshness and the giant stand out boldly, as if he
wasn’t already.

There was always a lot of giggling when the girls worked on the giant.

And the reason for the giggling, and the circumstances of the giggling,
couldn’t help but put Tiffany in mind of Nanny Ogg, who you normally saw
somewhere behind Granny Weatherwax with a big grin on her face. She was
generally thought of as a jolly old soul, but there was a lot more to
the old woman. She had never been Tiffany’s teacher _officially_, but
Tiffany couldn’t help learning things from Nanny Ogg. She smiled to
herself when she thought that. Nanny knew all the old, dark stuff – old
magic, magic that didn’t need witches, magic that was built into people
and the landscape. It concerned things like death, and marriage, and
betrothals. And promises that were promises even if there was no one to
hear them. And all those things that make people touch wood and never,
ever walk under a black cat.

You didn’t need to be a witch to understand it. The world around you
became more – well, more real and fluid, at those special times. Nanny
Ogg called it _numinous –_ an uncharacteristically solemn word from a
woman who was much more likely to be saying, ‘I would like a brandy,
thank you very much, and could you make it a double while you are about
it.’ And she had told Tiffany about the old days, when it seemed that
witches had a bit more fun. The things that you did around the changing
of the seasons, for example; all the customs that were now dead except
in folk memory which, Nanny Ogg said, is deep and dark and breathing and
never fades. Little rituals.

Tiffany especially liked the one about the fire. Tiffany liked fire. It
was her favourite element. It was considered so powerful, and so scary
to the powers of darkness that people would even get married by jumping
over a fire together⁴. Apparently it helped if you said a little chant,
according to Nanny Ogg, who lost no time in telling Tiffany the words,
which immediately stuck in Tiffany’s mind; a lot of what Nanny Ogg told
you tended to be sticky.

But those were times gone by. Everybody was more respectable now, apart
from Nanny Ogg and the giant.

There were other carvings on the Chalk lands too. One of them was a
white horse that Tiffany thought had once broken its way out of the
ground and galloped to her rescue. Now she wondered what would happen if
the giant did the same thing, because it would be very hard to find a
pair of pants sixty feet long in a hurry. And on the whole, you’d _want_
to hurry.

She’d only ever giggled about the giant once, and that had been a very
long time ago. There were really only four types of people in the world:
men and women and wizards and witches. Wizards mostly lived in
universities down in the big cities and weren’t allowed to get married,
although the reason why not totally escaped Tiffany. Anyway, you hardly
ever saw them around here.

Witches were definitely women, but most of the older ones Tiffany knew
hadn’t got married either, mostly because Nanny Ogg had already used up
all the eligible husbands, but also probably because they didn’t have
time. Of course, every now and then, a witch might marry a grand
husband, like Magrat Garlick, as was, of Lancre had done, although by
all accounts she only did herbs these days. But the only young witch
Tiffany knew who had even had time for courting was her best friend up
in the mountains: Petulia – a witch who was now specializing in pig
magic, and was soon going to marry a nice young man who was shortly
going to inherit his father’s pig farm,⁵ which meant he was practically
an aristocrat.

But witches were not only very busy, they were also _apart_, Tiffany had
learned that early on. You were among people, but not the _same_ as
them. There was always a kind of distance or separation. You didn’t have
to work at it, it happened anyway. Girls she had known when they were
all so young they used to run about and play with only their vests on
would make a tiny little curtsy to her when she passed them in the lane,
and even elderly men would touch their forelock, or probably what they
thought was their forelock, as she passed.

This wasn’t just because of respect, but because of a kind of fear as
well. Witches had secrets; they were there to help when babies were
being born. When you got married, it was a good idea to have a witch
standing by (even if you weren’t sure if it was for good luck or to
prevent bad luck), and when you died there would be a witch there too,
to show you the way. Witches had secrets they never told … well, to
people who weren’t witches. Among themselves, when they could get
together on some hillside for a drink or two (or in the case of Mrs Ogg,
a drink or nine), they gossiped like geese.

_But never about the real secrets, the ones you never told, about things
done and heard and seen. So many secrets that you were afraid they might
leak. Seeing a giant without his trousers was hardly worth commenting on
compared to some of the things that a witch might see_.

No, Tiffany did not envy Petulia her romance, which surely must have
taken place in big boots, unflattering rubber aprons and the rain, not
to mention an awful lot of ‘oink’.

She did, however, envy her for being so _sensible_. Petulia had got it
all worked out. She knew what she wanted her future to be, and had
rolled up her sleeves and made it happen, up to her knees in ‘oink’ if
necessary.

Every family, even up in the mountains, kept at least one pig to act as
a garbage can in the summer and as pork, bacon, ham and sausages during
the rest of the year. The pig was _important;_ you might dose Granny
with turpentine when she was poorly, but when the pig was ill you sent
immediately for a pig witch, and paid her too, and paid her well,
generally in sausages.

On top of everything else, Petulia was a specialist pig borer, and
indeed she was this year’s champion in the noble art of boring. Tiffany
thought you couldn’t put it better; her friend could sit down with a pig
and talk to it gently and calmly about extremely boring things until
some strange pig mechanism took over, whereupon it would give a happy
little yawn and fall over, no longer a living pig and ready to become a
very important contribution to the family’s diet for the following year.
This might not appear the best of outcomes for the pig, but given the
messy and above all noisy way pigs died _before_ the invention of pig
boring, it was definitely, in the great scheme of things, a much better
deal all round.

Alone in the crowd, Tiffany sighed. It was hard, when you wore the
black, pointy hat. Because, like it or not, the witch _was_ the pointy
hat, and the pointy hat was the witch. It made people _careful_ about
you. They would be respectful, oh yes, and often a little bit nervous,
as if they expected you to look inside their heads, which as a matter of
fact you could probably do, using the good old witch’s standbys of First
Sight and Second Thoughts.⁶ But these weren’t really magic. Anyone could
learn them if they had a lick of sense, but sometimes even a lick is
hard to find. People are often so busy living that they never stopped to
wonder _why_. Witches did, and that meant them being needed: oh yes,
needed – needed practically all the time, but not, in a very polite and
definitely unspoken way, not _exactly_ wanted.

This wasn’t the mountains, where people were very used to witches;
people on the Chalk could be friendly, but they weren’t friends, not
_actual_ friends. The witch was different. The witch knew things that
you did not. The witch was another kind of person. The witch was someone
that perhaps you should not anger. The witch was not like other people.

Tiffany Aching was the witch, and she had made herself the witch because
they needed one. Everybody needs a witch, but sometimes they just don’t
know it.

And it was working. The storybook pictures of the drooling hag were
being wiped away, every time Tiffany helped a young mother with her
first baby, or smoothed an old man’s path to his grave. Nevertheless,
old stories, old rumours and old picture books still seemed to have
their own hold on the memory of the world.

What made it more difficult was that there was no tradition of witches
on the Chalk – none would ever have settled there when Granny Aching had
been alive. Granny Aching, as everybody knew, was a wise woman, and wise
enough not to be a witch. Nothing ever happened on the Chalk that Granny
Aching disapproved of, at least not for more than about ten minutes.

So Tiffany was a witch alone.

And not only was there no longer any support from the mountain witches
like Nanny Ogg, Granny Weatherwax and Miss Level, but the people of the
Chalk weren’t very familiar with witches. Other witches would probably
come and help if she asked, _of course_, but although they wouldn’t say
so, this might mean that you couldn’t cope with responsibility, weren’t
up to the task, weren’t sure, _weren’t good enough_.

‘Excuse me, miss?’ There was a nervous giggle. Tiffany looked round and
there were two little girls in their best new frocks and straw hats.
They were looking at her eagerly, with perhaps just a hint of mischief
in their eyes. She thought quickly and smiled at them.

‘Oh yes, Becky Pardon and Nancy Upright, yes? What can I do for the two
of you?’

Becky Pardon shyly produced a small bouquet from behind her back and
held it out. Tiffany recognized it, of course. She had made them herself
for the older girls when she was younger, simply because it was what you
did, it was part of the scouring: a little bunch of wild flowers picked
from the downland, tied in a bunch with – and this was the important
bit, the magic bit – some of the grass pulled up as the fresh chalk was
exposed.

‘If you put this under your pillow tonight, you will dream of your
beau,’ said Becky Pardon, her face quite serious now.

Tiffany took the slightly wilting bunch of flowers with care. ‘Let me
see …’ she said. ‘We have here sweet mumbles, ladies’ pillows,
seven-leaf clover – very lucky – a sprig of old man’s trousers,
jack-in-the-wall, oh – love-lies-bleeding and …’ She stared at the
little white and red flowers.

The girls said, ‘Are you all right, miss?’

‘Forget-me-lots!’⁷ said Tiffany, more sharply than she had intended. But
the girls hadn’t noticed, so she continued to say, brightly, ‘Quite
unusual to see it here. It must be a garden escapee. And, as I’m sure
you both know, you have bound them all together with strips of candle
rush, which once upon a time people used to make into rush lights. What
a lovely surprise. Thank you both very much. I hope you have a lovely
time at the fair …’

Becky raised her hand. ‘Excuse me, miss?’

‘Was there something else, Becky?’

Becky went pink, and had a hurried conversation with her friend. She
turned back to Tiffany, looking slightly more pink but nevertheless
determined to see things through.

‘You can’t get into trouble for asking a question, can you, miss? I
mean, just asking a question?’

It’s going to be ‘How can I be a witch when I’m grown up?’ Tiffany
thought, because it generally was. The young girls saw her on her
broomstick and thought that was what being a witch was. Out loud she
said, ‘Not from me, at least. Do ask your question.’

Becky Pardon looked down at her boots. ‘Do you have any passionate
parts, miss?’

Another talent needful in a witch is the ability not to let your face
show what you’re thinking, and especially not allowing it, no matter
what, to go as stiff as a board. Tiffany managed to say, without a
single wobble in her voice and no trace of an embarrassed smirk, ‘That
is a very interesting question, Becky. Can I ask you why you want to
know?’

The girl looked a lot happier now that the question was, as it were, out
in the public domain.

‘Well, miss, I asked my granny if I could be a witch when I was older,
and she said I shouldn’t want to, because witches have no passionate
parts, miss.’

Tiffany thought quickly in the face of the two solemn owlish stares.
These are farm girls, she thought, so they had certainly seen a cat have
kittens and a dog have puppies. They’d have seen the birth of lambs, and
probably a cow have a calf, which is always a noisy affair that you can
hardly miss. They know what they are asking me about.

At this point Nancy chimed in with, ‘Only, if that is so, miss, we would
quite like to have the flowers back, now we’ve shown them to you,
because perhaps it might be a bit of a waste, meaning no offence.’ She
stepped back quickly.

Tiffany was surprised at her own laughter. It had been a long time since
she had laughed. Heads turned to see what the joke was, and she managed
to grab both the girls before they fled, and spun them round.

‘Well done, the pair of you,’ she said. ‘I like to see some sensible
thinking every now and again. Never hesitate to ask a question. And the
answer to your question is that witches are the same as everybody else
when it comes to passionate parts, but often they are so busy rushing
around that they never have time to think about them.’

The girls looked relieved that their work had not been entirely in vain
and Tiffany was ready for the next question, which came from Becky
again. ‘So, do you have a beau, miss?’

‘Not right at the moment,’ Tiffany said briskly, clamping down on her
expression lest it give anything away. She held up the little bouquet.
‘But who knows, if you’ve made this properly, then I’ll get another one,
and in that case you will be better witches than me, that is for
certain.’ They both beamed at this dreadful piece of outright flannel,
and it stopped the questions.

‘And now,’ said Tiffany, ‘the cheese rolling will be starting at any
minute. I’m sure you won’t want to miss that.’

‘No, miss,’ they said in unison. Just before they left, full of relief
and self-importance, Becky patted Tiffany on her hand. ‘Beaus can be
very difficult, miss,’ she said with the assurance of, to Tiffany’s
certain knowledge, eight years in the world.

‘Thank you,’ said Tiffany. ‘I shall definitely bear that in mind.’

When it came to the entertainment offered at the fair, such as people
making faces through a horse collar or fighting with pillows on the
greasy pole or even the bobbing for frogs, well, Tiffany could take them
or leave them alone, and in fact much preferred to leave them alone. But
she always liked to see a good cheese roll – that is to say, a good
cheese roll all the way down a slope of the hill, although not across
the giant because no one would want to eat the cheese afterwards.

They were hard cheeses, sometimes specially made for the cheese-rolling
circuit, and the winning maker of the cheese that reached the bottom
unscathed won a belt with a silver buckle and the admiration of all.

Tiffany was an expert cheese-maker, but she had never entered. Witches
couldn’t enter that sort of competition because if you won – and she
knew she had made a cheese or two that _could_ win – everyone would say
that was unfair because you were a witch; well, that’s what they would
think, but very few would _say_ it. And if you didn’t win, people would
say, ‘What kind of witch can’t make a cheese that could be beat by
simple cheeses made by simple folk like we?’

There was a gentle movement of the crowd to the start of the cheese
rolling, although the frog-bobbing stall still had a big crowd, it being
a very humorous and reliable source of entertainment, especially to
those people who weren’t actually bobbing. Regrettably, the man who put
weasels down his trousers, and apparently had a personal best of nine
weasels, hadn’t been there this year, and people were wondering if he
had lost his touch. But sooner or later everyone would drift over to the
start line for the cheese rolling. It was a tradition.

The slope here was very steep indeed and there was always a certain
amount of boisterous rivalry between the cheese-owners, which led to
pushing and shoving and kicking and bruises; occasionally you got a
broken arm or leg. All was going as normal as the waiting men lined up
their cheeses, until Tiffany saw, and seemed to be the only one to see,
a dangerous cheese roll up all by itself. It was black under the dust
and there was a piece of grubby blue and white cloth tied to it.

‘Oh, no,’ she said. ‘Horace. And where you are, trouble can’t be far
behind.’ She spun around, carefully searching for signs of what should
not be there. ‘Now you just listen to me,’ she said under her breath. ‘I
know at least one of you must be somewhere near. This isn’t for you,
it’s just about people. Understand?’

But it was too late. The Master of the Revels, in his big floppy hat
with lace around the brim, blew his whistle and the cheese rolling, as
he put it, _commenced –_ which is a far grander word than _started_. And
a man with lace around his hat was never going to use a short word where
a long word would do.

Tiffany hardly dared to look. The runners didn’t so much run as roll and
skid behind their cheeses. But she could hear the cries that went up
when the black cheese not only shot into the lead, but occasionally
turned round and went back uphill again in order to bang into one of the
ordinary innocent cheeses. She could just hear a faint grumbling noise
coming from it as it almost shot to the top of the hill.

Cheese-runners shouted at it, tried to grab at it and flailed at it with
sticks, but the piratical cheese scythed onwards, reached the bottom
again just ahead of the terrible carnage of men and cheeses as they
piled up, then rolled gently back up to the top and sat there demurely
while still gently vibrating.

At the bottom of the slope, fights were breaking out among the
cheese-jockeys who were still capable of punching somebody, and since
everyone was now watching that, Tiffany took the opportunity to snatch
up Horace and shove him into her bag. After all, he was hers. Well, that
was to say, she had made him, although something odd must’ve got into
the mix since Horace was the only cheese that would eat mice and, if you
didn’t nail him down, other cheeses as well. No wonder he got on so well
with the Nac Mac Feegles,⁸ who had made him an honorary member of the
clan. He was their kind of cheese.

Surreptitiously, hoping that no one would notice, Tiffany held the bag
up to her mouth and said, ‘Is this any way to behave? Aren’t you
ashamed?’ The bag wobbled a little bit, but she knew that the word
‘shame’ was not in Horace’s vocabulary, and neither was anything else.
She lowered the bag and moved a little way from the crowd and said, ‘I
know you are here, Rob Anybody.’

There he was, sitting on her shoulder. She could smell him. Despite the
fact that they generally had little to do with bathing, except when it
rained, the Nac Mac Feegles always smelled something like slightly drunk
potatoes. ‘The kelda wanted me tae to find out how ye were biding,’ said
the Feegle chieftain. ‘You havenae bin tae the mound to see her these
past two weeks,’ he went on, ‘and I think she is afeared that a harm may
come tae ye, ye are working sae hard an’ all.’

Tiffany groaned, but only to herself. She said, ‘That is very kind of
her. There is always so much to do; surely the kelda knows this. It
doesn’t matter what I do, there is always more to be done. There is no
end to the wanting. But there is nothing to worry about. I am doing
fine. And please don’t take Horace out again in public – you know he
gets excited.’

‘Well, in point of fact, it says up on that banner over there that this
is for the folk of these hills and we is more than folk. We is
_folklore_! Ye cannae argue with the lore! Besides, I wanted tae come
and pay my ain respects to the big yin without his breeks. He is a fine
big wee laddie and nae mistake.’ Rob paused, and then said quietly, ‘So
I can tell her that ye are quite well in yourself, aye?’ There was a
certain nervousness to him, as if he would like to have said more but
knew it wouldn’t be welcome.

‘Rob Anybody, I would be very grateful if you would do just that,’ said
Tiffany, ‘because I have a lot of people to bandage, if I’m any judge.’

Rob Anybody, suddenly looking like a man on a thankless errand,
frantically said the words he had been told by his wife to say: ‘The
kelda says there’s plenty more fish in the sea, miss!’

And Tiffany stood perfectly still for a moment. And then, without
looking at Rob, said quietly, ‘Do thank the kelda for her angling
information. I have to get on, if you don’t mind, Rob. _Do_ thank the
kelda.’

Most of the crowd was reaching the bottom of the slope by now, to gawk
or rescue or possibly attempt some amateur first aid on the groaning
cheese-runners. For the onlookers, of course, it was just another show;
you didn’t often see a satisfying pile-up of men and cheeses, and – who
knew? – there might be some really interesting casualties.

Tiffany, glad of something to do, did not have to push her way through;
the pointy black hat could create a path through a crowd faster than a
holy man through a shallow sea. She waved the happy crowd away, with one
or two forceful pushes for those of slow uptake. As a matter of fact, as
it turned out, the butcher’s bill wasn’t too high this year, with one
broken arm, one broken wrist, one broken leg and an enormous number of
bruises, cuts and rashes being caused by people sliding most of the way
down – grass isn’t always your friend. There were several young men
clearly in distress as a result, but they were absolutely definite that
they were not going to discuss their injuries with a lady, thank you all
the same, so she told them to put a cold compress on the afflicted area,
wherever it was, when they got home, and watched them walk unsteadily
away.

Well, she’d done all right, hadn’t she? She had used her skills in front
of the rubbernecking crowd and, according to what she overheard from the
old men and women, had performed well enough. Perhaps she imagined that
one or two people were embarrassed when an old man with a beard to his
waist said with a grin, ‘A girl who can set bones would have no trouble
finding a husband,’ but that passed, and with nothing else to do, people
started the long climb back up the hill … and then the coach came past,
and then, which was worse, it stopped.

It had the coat of arms of the Keepsake family on the side. A young man
stepped out. Quite handsome in his way, but also so stiff in his way
that you could have ironed sheets on him. This was Roland. He hadn’t
gone more than a step when a rather unpleasant voice from inside the
coach told him that he should have waited for the footman to open the
door for him, and to hurry up, because they didn’t have all day.

The young man hurried towards the crowd and there was a general
smartening-up because, after all, here came the son of the Baron, who
owned most of the Chalk and nearly all their houses, and although he was
a decent old boy, as old boys go, a little politeness to his family was
definitely a wise move …

‘What happened here? Is everybody all right?’ he said.

Life on the Chalk was generally pleasant and the relationship between
master and man was one of mutual respect; but nevertheless, the farm
workers had inherited the idea that it could be unwise to have too many
words with powerful people, in case any of those words turned out to be
a word out of place. After all, there was still a torture chamber in the
castle and even though it hadn’t been used for hundreds of years … well,
best to be on the safe side, best to stand back and let the witch do the
talking. If she got into trouble, she could fly away.

‘One of those accidents that was bound to happen, I’m afraid,’ said
Tiffany, well aware that she was the only woman present who had not
curtsied. ‘Some broken bones that will mend and a few red faces. All
sorted out, thank you.’

‘So I see, so I see! Very well done, young lady!’

For a moment Tiffany thought she could taste her teeth. _Young lady_,
from … him? It was almost, but not entirely, insulting. But no one else
seemed to have noticed. It was, after all, the kind of language that
nobs use when they are trying to be friendly and jolly. He’s trying to
talk to them like his father does, she thought, but his father did it by
instinct and was good at it. You can’t talk to people as though they are
a public meeting. She said, ‘Thank you kindly, sir.’

Well, not too bad so far, except that now the coach door opened again
and one dainty white foot touched the flint. It was her: Angelica or
Letitia or something else out of the garden; in fact Tiffany knew full
well it was Letitia, but surely she could be excused just a tiny touch
of nasty in the privacy of her own head? Letitia! What a name. Halfway
between a salad and a sneeze. Besides, who was Letitia to keep Roland
away from the scouring fair? He should have been there! His father would
have been there if the old man possibly could! And look! Tiny white
shoes! How long would they last on somebody who had to do a job of work?
She stopped herself there: _a bit_ of nasty was enough.

Letitia looked at Tiffany and the crowd with something like fear and
said, ‘Do let’s get going, can we please? Mother is getting vexed.’

And so the coach left and the hurdy-gurdy man thankfully left and the
sun left, and in the warm shadows of the twilight some people stayed.
But Tiffany flew home alone, up high where only bats and owls could see
her face.

1 This was done blindfolded.

2 Speaking as a witch, she knew them very well.

3 Later on, Tiffany realized that all the witches had probably flown
across the giant, especially since you could hardly miss him if you were
flying from the mountains to the big city. He kind of stood out, in any
case. But in Nanny Ogg’s case, she would probably turn round to look at
him again.

4 Obviously, Tiffany thought, when jumping over a fire together, one
ought to be concerned about wearing protective clothing and having
people with a bucket of water to hand, just in case. Witches may be a
lot of things, but first and foremost, they are practical.

5 Possibly Petulia’s romantic ambitions had been helped by the
mysterious way the young man’s pigs were forever getting sick and
required treating for the scours, the blind heaves, brass neck, floating
teeth, scribbling eyeball, grunge, the smarts, the twisting screws,
swivelling and gone knees. This was a terrible misfortune, since more
than half of those ailments are normally never found in pigs, and one of
them is a disease known only in freshwater fish. But the neighbours were
impressed at the amount of work Petulia put in to relieve their stress.
Her broomstick was coming and going at all hours of the day and night.
Being a witch, after all, was about dedication.

6 First Sight means that you can see what really is there, and Second
Thoughts mean thinking about what you are thinking. And in Tiffany’s
case, there were sometimes Third Thoughts and Fourth Thoughts, although
these were quite difficult to manage and sometimes led her to walk into
doors.

7 The forget-me-lots is a pretty red and white flower usually given by
young ladies to signal to their young men that they never wanted to see
them again ever, or at least until they’d learned to wash properly and
got a job.

8 If you do not yet know who the Nac Mac Feegles are: 1) be grateful for
your uneventful life; and 2) be prepared to beat a retreat if you hear
anyone about as high as your ankles shout ‘Crivens!’ They are, strictly
speaking, one of the faerie folk, but it is probably not a good idea to
tell them this if you are looking forward to a future in which you still
have your teeth.


About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT was the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His fortieth Discworld novel, _Raising Steam_, was
published in 2013. His books have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he was the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
He died in March 2015.

For more information about Terry Pratchett and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk


Also by Terry Pratchett, for children:

_The Carpet People_

The Bromeliad Trilogy:

_Truckers_

_Diggers_

_Wings_

The Johnny Maxwell Trilogy:

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

For young adults and above:

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_
(A Discworld® novel)

The Tiffany Aching Sequence (Discworld® novels):

_The Wee Free Men_

_A Hat Full of Sky_

_Wintersmith_

_I Shall Wear Midnight_

_Nation_

_Dodger_

_Dodger’s Guide to London_

A full list of Terry Pratchett’s books can be found on
www.TERRYPRATCHETT.co.uk

WINTERSMITH
AN RHCP DIGITAL EBOOK 978 1 407 042503

Published in Great Britain by RHCP Digital,
an imprint of Random House Children’s Publishers UK
A Penguin Random House Company

[image.missing]

This ebook edition published 2014

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, 2006
Illustrations copyright © Paul Kidby, 2006
Extract from I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett,
2010
Discworld® is a registered trademark of Terry Pratchett

First Published in Great Britain

Doubleday 2006

The right of Terry Pratchett to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

RANDOM HOUSE CHILDREN’S PUBLISHERS UK
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA

www.RANDOMHOUSECHILDRENS.co.uk
www.TOTALLYRANDOMBOOKS.co.uk
www.RANDOMHOUSE.co.uk

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group Limited can be
found at: www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm

THE RANDOM HOUSE GROUP Limited Reg. No. 954009

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.
