About the Book

_‘The thing about football – the_ important _thing about football – is
that it is not just about football.’_

Football is _supposed_ to be a gentleman’s game, played on venerable
university lawns for honour, polite applause and a hearty match tea
afterwards. Unfortunately for the gentlemen, the rest of the world
doesn’t see it that way. Football has moved on, to the streets, and now
it inhabits a world of pies, chants and jumpers for goalposts. This is a
world where a talent for keeping tin cans in the air could make you a
local celebrity, and where any polite applause is lost in the roar of
pitched battles between fans. This is a world of life or death.

And if the gentlemen want to try and bend it to their rules again,
they’re going to have a fight on their hands.


Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Dedication

Unseen Academicals

Note from the Publisher

Footnotes

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright



Terry Pratchett

UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

A DISCWORLD® NOVEL

This book is dedicated to Rob Wilkins, who typed most of it and had the
good sense to laugh occasionally. And to Colin Smythe for his
encouragement.

The chant of the goddess Pedestriana is a parody of the wonderful poem
‘Brahma’ by Ralph Waldo Emerson, but of course you knew that anyway.

_Note from the Publisher_

For extra information on the folklore background to _Unseen
Academicals_, see _The Folklore of Discworld_.

 

IT WAS MIDNIGHT in Ankh-Morpork’s Royal Art Museum.¹ It occurred to new
employee Rudolph Scattering about once every minute that on the whole it
might have been a good idea to tell the Curator about his nyctophobia,
his fear of strange noises and, he now knew, his fear of absolutely
every thing he could see (and, come to that, not see), hear, smell and
feel crawling up his back during the endless hours on guard during the
night. It was no use telling himself that everything in here was dead.
That didn’t help at all. It meant that he stood out.

And then he heard the sob. A scream might have been better. At least you
are certain when you’ve heard a scream. A faint sob is something you
have to wait to hear again, because you can’t be sure.

He raised his lantern in a shaking hand. There shouldn’t be anyone in
here. The place was securely locked; no one could get in. Or, now he
came to think about it, out. He wished he _hadn’t_ thought about it.

He was in the basement, which was not among the most scary places on his
round. It was mostly just old shelves and drawers, full of the things
that were almost, but very definitely not entirely, thrown away. Museums
don’t like things to be thrown away, in case they turn out to be very
important later on.

Another sob, and a sound like the scraping of . . . pottery? A rat,
then, somewhere on the rear shelves? Rats didn’t sob, did they? ‘Look, I
don’t want to have to come in there and get you!’ said Scattering with
heartfelt accuracy.

And the shelves exploded. It seemed to him to happen in slow motion,
bits of pottery and statues spreading out as they drifted towards him.
He went over backwards and the expanding cloud passing overhead crashed
into the shelves on the other side of the room, which were demolished.

Scattering lay on the floor in the dark, unable to move, expecting at
any moment to be torn apart by the phantoms bubbling up from his
imagination . . .

The day staff found him there in the morning, deeply asleep and covered
in dust. They listened to his garbled explanation, treated him kindly,
and agreed that a different career might suit his temperament. They
wondered for a while about what he had been up to, night watchmen being
rather puzzling people at the best of times, but put it out of their
heads . . . because of the find.

Mr Scattering then got a job in a pet shop in Pellicool Steps, but left
after three days because the way the kittens stared at him gave him
nightmares. The world can be very cruel to some people. But he never
told anyone about the gloriously glittering lady holding a large ball
over her head who smiled at him before she vanished. He did not want
people to think he was strange.

But perhaps it is time to talk about beds.

Lectrology, the study of the bed and its associated surroundings, can be
extremely useful and tell you a great deal about the owner, even if it’s
only that they are a very knowing and savvy installations artist.

The bed of Archchancellor Ridcully of Unseen University, for example, is
at the very least a bed and a half, being an eight-poster. It
encompasses a small library and a bar, and artfully includes a shutaway
privy, of mahogany and brass throughout, to save those long cold
nocturnal excursions with their concomitant risk of tripping over
slippers, empty bottles, shoes and all the other barriers presented to a
man in the dark who is praying that the next thing that stubs his toe
will be porcelain, or at least easy to clean.

The bed of Trevor Likely is anywhere: a friend’s floor, in the hayloft
of any stable that has been left unlocked (which is usually a much more
fragrant option), or in a room of an empty house (though there are
precious few of those these days); or he sleeps at work (but he is
always careful about that, because old man Smeems never seems to sleep
_at all_ and might catch him at any time). Trev can sleep anywhere, and
does.

Glenda sleeps in an ancient iron bed,³ whose springs and mattress have
gently and kindly shaped themselves around her over the years, leaving a
generous depression. The bottom of this catenary couch is held off the
floor by a mulch of very cheap, yellowing romantic novels of the kind to
which the word ‘bodice’ comes naturally. She would die if anyone found
out, or possibly they will die if she finds out that they have found
out. Usually there is, on the pillow, a very elderly teddy bear called
Mr Wobble.

Traditionally, in the lexicon of pathos, such a bear should have only
one eye, but as the result of a childhood error in Glenda’s sewing, he
has three, and is more enlightened than the average bear.

Juliet Stollop’s bed was marketed to her mother as fit for a princess,
and is more or less like the Archchancellor’s bed, although almost all
less, since it consists of some gauze curtains surrounding a very
narrow, very cheap bed. Her mother is now dead. This can be inferred
from the fact that when the bed collapsed under the weight of a growing
girl, someone raised it up on beer crates. A mother would have made sure
that at least they were, like everything else in the room, painted pink
with little crowns on.

Mr Nutt was seven years old before he found out that sleeping, for some
people, involved a special piece of furniture.

Now it was two o’clock in the morning. A cloying silence reigned along
the ancient corridors and cloisters of Unseen University. There was
silence in the Library; there was silence in the halls. There was so
much silence you could hear it. Everywhere it went, it stuffed the ears
with invisible fluff.

Gloing!

The tiny sound flew past, a moment of liquid gold in the stygian
silence.

Silence ruled again above stairs, until it was interrupted by the
shuffling of the official thick-soled carpet slippers of Smeems, the
Candle Knave, as he made his rounds throughout the long night from one
candlestick to another, refilling them from his official basket. He was
assisted tonight (although, to judge from his occasional grumbling, not
assisted enough) by a dribbler.

He was called the Candle Knave because that was how the post had been
described in the university records when it was created, almost two
thousand years before. Keeping the candlesticks, sconces and, not least,
the candelabra of the university filled was a never-ending job. It was,
in fact, the most important job in the place, in the mind of the Candle
Knave. Oh, Smeems would admit under pressure that there were men in
pointy hats around, but they came and went and mostly just got in the
way. Unseen University was not rich in windows, and without the Candle
Knave it would be in darkness within a day. That the wizards would
simply step outside and from the teeming crowds hire another man capable
of climbing ladders with pockets full of candles had never featured in
his thoughts. He was irreplaceable, just like every other Candle Knave
before him.

And now, behind him, there was a clatter as the official folding
stepladder unfolded.

He spun around. ‘Hold the damn thing right!’ he hissed.

‘Sorry, master!’ said his temporary apprentice, trying to control the
sliding, finger-crushing monster that every stepladder becomes at the
first opportunity, and often without any opportunity at all.

‘And keep the noise down!’ Smeems bellowed. ‘Do you want to be a
dribbler for the rest of your life?’

‘Actually, I quite like being a dribbler, sir—’

‘Ha! Want of ambition is the curse of the labouring class! Here, give me
that thing!’

The Candle Knave snatched at the ladder just as his luckless assistant
closed it.

‘Sorry about that, sir . . .’

‘There’s always room for one more on the wick-dipping tank, you know,’
said Smeems, blowing on his knuckles.

‘Fair enough, sir.’

The Candle Knave stared at the grey, round, guileless face. There was an
unshakeably amiable look about it that was very disconcerting,
especially when you knew what it was you were looking at. And he knew
what it was, oh yes, but not what it was called.

‘What’s your name again? I can’t remember _everybody_’s name.’

‘Nutt, Mister Smeems. With two t’s.’

‘Do you think the second one helps matters, Nutt?’

‘Not really, sir.’

‘Where is Trev? He should be on tonight.’

‘Been very ill, sir. Asked me to do it.’

The Candle Knave grunted. ‘You have to look smart to work above stairs,
Nutts!’

‘Nutt, sir. Sorry, sir. Was born not looking smart, sir.’

‘Well, at least there’s no one to see you now,’ Smeems conceded. ‘All
right, follow me, and try to look less . . . well, just try not to
look.’

‘Yes, master, but I think—’

‘You are not paid to think, young . . . man.’

‘Will try not to do so, master.’

Two minutes later Smeems was standing in front of the Emperor, watched
by a suitably amazed Nutt.

A mountain of silvery-grey tallow almost filled the isolated junction of
stone corridors. The flame of this candle, which could just be made out
to be a mega-candle aggregated from the stubs of many, many thousands of
candles that had gone before, all dribbled and runnelled into one great
whole, was a glow near the ceiling, too high to illuminate anything very
much.

Smeems’s chest swelled. He was in the presence of History.

‘Behold, Nutts!’

‘Yes, sir. Beholding, sir. It’s Nutt, sir.’

‘Two thousand years look down on us from the top of this candle, Nutts.
Of course, they look further down on you than on me.’

‘Absolutely, sir. Well done, sir.’

Smeems glared at the round, amiable face, and saw nothing there but a
slicked-down keenness that was very nearly frightening.

He grunted, then unfolded his ladder without much more than a pinched
thumb, and climbed it carefully until it would take him no further. From
this base camp generations of Candle Knaves had carved and maintained
steps up the hubward face of the giant.

‘Feast your eyes on this, lad,’ he called down, his ground-state bad
temper somewhat moderated by this contact with greatness. ‘One day you
might be the . . . man to climb this hallowed tallow!’

For a moment, Nutt looked like someone trying hard to disguise the
expression of a person who seriously hopes that his future holds more
than a big candle. Nutt was young and as such did not have that
reverence for age that is had by, mostly, the aged. But the cheerful
not-quite-smile came back. It never went away for long.

‘Yessir,’ he said, on the basis that this generally worked.

Some people claimed that the Emperor had been lit on the very night that
UU was founded, and had never gone out since. Certainly the Emperor was
huge, and was what you got when, every night for maybe two thousand
years, you lit a new fat candle from the guttering remains of the last
one and pressed it firmly into the warm wax. There was no visible
candlestick now, of course. That was somewhere in the vast accumulation
of waxy dribbles on the next floor down.

Around a thousand years ago, the university had had a large hole made in
the ceiling of the corridor below, and already the Emperor was seventeen
feet high up here. There was thirty-eight feet in total of pure,
natural, dribbled candle. It made Smeems proud. He was keeper of the
candle that never went out. It was an example to everyone, a light that
never failed, a flame in the dark, a beacon of tradition. And Unseen
University took tradition very seriously, at least when it remembered
to.

As now, in fact . . .

From somewhere in the distance came a sound like a large duck being
trodden on, followed by a cry of ‘Ho, the Megapode!’ And then all hell
eventuated.

A . . . creature plunged out of the gloom.

There is a phrase ‘neither flesh nor fowl nor good red herring’. This
thing was all of them, plus some other bits of beasts unknown to science
or nightmare or even kebab. There was certainly some red, and a lot of
flapping, and Nutt was sure he caught a glimpse of an enormous sandal,
but there were the mad, rolling, bouncing eyes, the huge yellow and red
beak and then the thing disappeared down another gloomy corridor,
incessantly making that flat honking noise of the sort duck hunters make
just before they are shot by other duck hunters.

‘Aho! The Megapode!’ It wasn’t clear where the cry came from. It seemed
to be coming from everywhere. ‘There she bumps! Ho, the Megapode!’

The cry was taken up on every side, and from the dark shadows of every
corridor, bar the one down which the beast had fled, galloped curious
shapes, which turned out to be, by the flickering light of the Emperor,
the senior faculty of the university. Each wizard was being carried
piggy-back by a stout bowler-hatted university porter, whom he was
urging onward by means of a bottle of beer on a string held, as
tradition demanded, ahead of the porter’s grasp on a long stick.

The doleful quack rang out again, some distance away, and a wizard waved
his staff in the air and yelled: ‘Bird is Flown! Ho, the Megapode!’

The colliding wizardry, who’d already crushed Smeems’s rickety ladder
under the hobnailed boots of their steeds, set off at once, butting and
barging for position.

For a little while ‘Aho! The Megapode!’ echoed in the distance. When he
was certain they had gone, Nutt crept out from his refuge behind the
Emperor, picked up what remained of the ladder, and looked around.

‘Master?’ he ventured.

There was a grunt from above. He looked up. ‘Are you all right, master?’

‘I have been better, Nutts. Can you see my feet?’

Nutt raised his lantern. ‘Yes, master. I’m sorry to say the ladder is
broken.’

‘Well, do something about it. I’m having to concentrate on my handholds
here.’

‘I thought I wasn’t paid to think, master.’

‘Don’t you try to be smart!’

‘Can I try to be smart enough to get you down safely, master?’

No answer was the stern reply. Nutt sighed, and opened up the big canvas
tool bag.

Smeems clung to the vertiginous candle as he heard, down below,
mysterious scrapings and clinking noises. Then, with a silence and
suddenness that made him gasp, a spiky shape rose up beside him, swaying
slightly.

‘I’ve screwed together three of the big snuffer poles, master,’ said
Nutt from below. ‘And you’ll see there’s a chandelier hook stuck in the
top, yes? And there’s a rope. Can you see it? I think that if you can
make a loop around the Emperor it won’t slip much and you ought to be
able to let yourself down slowly. Oh, and there’s a box of matches,
too.’

‘What for?’ said Smeems, reaching out for the hook.

‘Can’t help noticing that the Emperor has gone out, sir,’ said the voice
from below, cheerfully.

‘No it hasn’t!’

‘I think you’ll find it has, sir, because I can’t see the—’

‘There is no room in this university’s most important department for
people with bad eyesight, Nutts!’

‘I beg your pardon, master. I don’t know what came over me. Suddenly I
can see the flame!’

From above came the sound of a match being struck, and a circle of
yellow light expanded on the ceiling as the candle that never went out
was lit. Shortly afterwards Smeems very gingerly lowered himself to the
floor.

‘Well done, sir,’ said Nutt.

The Candle Knave flicked a length of congealed candle dribble off his
equally greasy shirt.

‘Very well,’ he said. ‘But you’ll have to come back in the morning to
recover the—’ But Nutt was already going up the rope like a spider.
There was a clanging on the other side of the great candle as the
lengths of snuffer pole were dropped, and then the boy abseiled back
down to his master with the hook under his arm. And now he stood there
all eagerness and scrubbed (if somewhat badly dressed) efficiency. There
was something almost offensive about it. And the Candle Knave wasn’t
used to this. He felt obliged to take the lad down a peg, for his own
good.

‘All candles in this university must be lit by long taper from a candle
that still burns, boy,’ he said sternly. ‘Where did you get those
matches?’

‘I wouldn’t like to say, sir.’

‘I dare say you wouldn’t, indeed! Now tell me, boy!’

‘I don’t want to get anyone into trouble, master.’

‘Your reluctance does you credit, but I insist,’ said the Candle Knave.

‘Er, they fell out of your jacket when you were climbing up, master.’

Off in the distance was one last cry: ‘The Megapode is catched!’ But
around the Emperor silence listened with its mouth open.

‘You are mistaken, Nutts,’ said Smeems slowly. ‘I think you will find
that one of the gentlemen must have dropped them.’

‘Ah, yes, that’s certainly what must have happened, sir. I must learn
not to jump to conclusions.’

Once again, the Candle Knave had that off-balance feeling. ‘Well, then,
we will say no more about it,’ was all he managed.

‘What was it that happened just then, sir?’ said Nutt.

‘Oh, that? That was all part of one of the gentlemen’s magically
essential magical activities, lad. It was vital to the proper running of
the world, I’ll be bound, oh yes. Could be they was setting the stars in
their courses, even. It’s one of them things we have to do, you know,’
he added, carefully insinuating himself into the company of wizardry.

‘Only it looked like a skinny man with a big wooden duck strapped to his
head.’

‘Ah, well, it may have looked like that, come to think of it, but that
was because that’s how it looks to people like us, what are not gifted
with the ocular sight.’

‘You mean it was some sort of metaphor?’

Smeems handled this quite well in the circumstances, which included
being so deeply at sea with that sentence that barnacles would be
attracted to his underwear. ‘That’s right,’ he said. ‘It could be a meta
for something that didn’t look so stupid.’

‘Exactly, master.’

Smeems looked down at the boy. It’s not his fault, he thought, he can’t
help what he is. An uncharacteristic moment of warmth overtook him.

‘You’re a bright lad,’ he said. ‘There’s no reason why you shouldn’t be
head dribbler one day.’

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Nutt, ‘but if you don’t mind I was rather hoping
for something a bit more in the fresh air, so to speak.’

‘Ah,’ said Smeems, ‘that could be a bit . . . tricky, as you might say.’

‘Yes, sir. I know.’

‘It’s just that there’s a lot of— well, look, it’s not me, it’s . . .
it’s . . . well, you know. It’s people. You know what people are like.’

‘Yes. I know what people are like.’

Looks like a scarecrow, talks posh like one of the gentlemen, Smeems
thought. Bright as a button, grubby as a turd. He felt moved to pat the
little . . . fellow on his curiously spherical head, but desisted.

‘Best if you stay down in the vats,’ he said. ‘It’s nice and warm,
you’ve got your own bedroll, and it’s all snug and safe, eh?’

To his relief the boy was silent as they walked down the passages, but
then Nutt said, in a thoughtful tone of voice, ‘I was just wondering,
sir . . . How often has the candle that never goes out . . . not gone
out?’

Smeems bit back the stinging retort. For some reason he knew it could
only build up trouble in the long run.

‘The candle that never goes out has failed to go out three times since
I’ve been Candle Knave, lad,’ he said. ‘It’s a record!’

‘An enviable achievement, sir.’

‘Damn right! And that’s even with all the strangeness there’s been
happening lately.’

‘Really, sir?’ said Nutt. ‘Have stranger than usual things been
happening?’

‘Young . . . man, stranger than usual things happen all the time.’

‘One of the scullery boys told me that all the toilets on the
Tesseractical floor turned into sheep yesterday,’ said Nutt. ‘I should
like to see that.’

‘I shouldn’t go further than the sculleries, if I was you,’ said Smeems,
quickly. ‘And don’t worry about what the gentlemen do. They are the
finest minds in the world, let me tell you. If you was to ask ’em...’He
paused, trying to think of something really difficult, like, ‘What is
864 times 316 . . .?’

‘273,024,’ said Nutt, not quite under his breath.

‘What?’ said Smeems, derailed.

‘Just thinking aloud, master,’ said Nutt.

‘Oh. Right. Er . . . Well that’s it, see? They’d have an answer for you
in a brace of shakes. Finest minds in the world,’ said Smeems, who
believed in truth via repetition. ‘Finest minds. Engaged in the business
of the universe. Finest minds!’

‘Well, that was fun,’ said Mustrum Ridcully, Archchancellor of the
university, throwing himself into a huge armchair in the faculty’s
Uncommon Room with such force that it nearly threw him out again. ‘We
must do it again some time.’

‘Yes, sir. We will. In one hundred years,’ said the new Master of The
Traditions smugly, turning over the pages in his huge book. He reached
the crackling leaf headed Hunting the Megapode, wrote down the date and
the amount of time it had taken to find the aforesaid Megapode, and
signed his name with a flourish: Ponder Stibbons.

‘What is a Megapode, anyway?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
helping himself to the port.

‘A type of bird, I believe,’ said the Archchancellor, waving a hand
towards the drinks trolley. ‘After me.’

‘The original Megapode was found in the under-butler’s pantry,’ said the
Master of The Traditions. ‘It escaped in the middle of dinner and caused
what my predecessor eleven hundred years ago called . . .’ he referred
to the book, ‘ “a veritable heyhoe-rumbelow as all the Fellows pursued
it through the college buildings with much mirth and good spirits”.’

‘Why?’ said the head of the Department of Post-Mortem Communications,
deftly snatching the decanter full of good spirits as it went past.

‘Oh, you can’t have a Megapode running around loose, Doctor Hix,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Anyone’ll tell you that.’

‘No, I meant why do we do it again every hundred years?’ said the head
of the Department of Post-Mortem Communications.⁴

The Senior Wrangler turned his face away and murmured, ‘Oh, good gods .
. .’

‘It’s a tradition,’ the Chair of Indefinite Studies explained, rolling a
cigarette. ‘We have to have traditions.’

‘They’re traditional,’ said Ridcully. He beckoned to one of the
servants. ‘And I don’t mind saying that this one has made me somewhat
peckish. Can you fetch the cheeseboards one to five, please? And, um,
some of that cold roast beef, some ham, a few biscuits and, of course,
the pickle carts.’ He looked up. ‘Anyone want to add anything?’

‘I could toy fitfully with a little fruit,’ said the Professor of
Recondite Phenomena. ‘How about you, Librarian?’

‘Ook,’ growled the figure hogging the fire.

‘Yes, of course,’ said the Archchancellor. He waved a hand at the
hovering waiter. ‘The fruit trolley as well. See to it, please,
Downbody. And . . . perhaps that new girl could bring it up? She ought
to get used to the Uncommon Room.’

It was as if he had just spoken a magic spell. The room, its ceiling
hazy with blue smoke, was suddenly awash with a sort of heavy, curiously
preoccupied silence mostly due to dreamy speculation, but in a few rare
cases owing to distant memory.

The new girl . . . At the mere thought, elderly hearts beat dangerously.

Very seldom did beauty intrude into the daily life of UU, which was as
masculine as the smell of old socks and pipe smoke and, given the
faculty’s general laxness when it came to knocking out their pipes, the
smell of smoking socks as well. Mrs Whitlow, the housekeeper, she of the
clanking chatelaine and huge creaking corset that caused the Chair of
Indefinite Studies to swoon when he heard it, generally took great care
to select staff who, while being female, were not excessively so, and
tended to be industrious, clean in their habits, rosy cheeked and, in
short, the kind of ladies who are never too far from gingham and an
apple pie. This suited the wizards, who liked to be not far away from an
apple pie themselves, although they could take gingham or leave it
alone.

Why, then, had the housekeeper employed Juliet? What could she have been
thinking of? The girl had come into the place like a new world in a
solar system, and the balance of the heavens was subtly wobbling. And,
indeed, as she advanced, so was Juliet.

By custom and practice, wizards were celibate, in theory because women
were distracting and bad for the magical organs, but after a week of
Juliet’s presence many of the faculty were subject to (mostly)
unfamiliar longings and strange dreams, and were finding things rather
hard, but you couldn’t really put your finger on it: what she had went
beyond beauty. It was a sort of distillation of beauty that travelled
around with her, uncoiling itself into the surrounding ether. When she
walked past, the wizards felt the urge to write poetry and buy flowers.

‘You may be interested to know, gentlemen,’ said the new Master of The
Traditions, ‘that tonight’s was the longest chase ever recorded in the
history of the tradition. I suggest we owe a vote of thanks to tonight’s
Megapode . . .’

He realized the statement had plummeted on to deaf ears. ‘Er,
gentlemen?’ he said.

He looked up. The wizards were staring, in a soulful sort of way, at
whatever was going on inside their heads.

‘Gentlemen?’ he said again, and this time there was a collective sigh as
they woke up from their sudden attack of daydreaming.

‘What say?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘I was just remarking that tonight’s Megapode was undoubtedly the finest
on record, Archchancellor. It was Rincewind. The official Megapode
headdress suited him very well, all things considered. I think he’s gone
for a lie down.’

‘What? Oh, that. Well, yes. Indeed. Well done, that man,’ said Ridcully,
and the wizards commenced that slow handclapping and table-thumping
which is the mark of appreciation amongst men of a certain age, class
and girth, accompanied by cries of ‘Ver’, ver’ well done, that man!’ and
‘Jolly good!’ But eyes stayed firmly fixed on the doorway, and ears
strained for the rattle of the trolley, which would herald the arrival
of the new girl and, of course, one hundred and seven types of cheese,
and more than seventy different varieties of pickles, chutneys and other
tracklements. The new girl might be the very paradigm of beauty, but UU
was not the place for a man who could forget his cheeses.

Well, she was a distraction at least, Ponder thought as he snapped the
book shut, and the university needed a few of them right now. It had
been tricky since the Dean had left, very tricky indeed. Whoever heard
of a man resigning from UU? It was something that simply did not happen!
Sometimes people left in disgrace, in a box or, in a few cases, in bits,
but there was no tradition of resigning at all. Tenure at Unseen
University was for life, and often a long way beyond.

The office of Master of The Traditions had fallen inevitably on Ponder
Stibbons, who tended to get all the jobs that required someone who
thought that things should happen on time and that numbers should add
up.

Regrettably, when he’d gone to check on things with the previous Master
of The Traditions, who, everyone agreed, had not been seen around and
about lately, he’d found that the man had been dead for two hundred
years. This wasn’t a wholly unusual circumstance. Ponder, after years at
Unseen, still didn’t know the full size of the faculty. How could you
keep track of them in a place like this these days, where hundreds of
studies all shared one window, but only on the outside, or rooms drifted
away from their doorways during the night, travelled intangibly through
the slumbering halls and ended up docking quite elsewhere?

A wizard could do what he liked in his own study, and in the old days
that had largely meant smoking anything he fancied and farting hugely
without apologizing. These days it meant building out into a congruent
set of dimensions. Even the Archchancellor was doing it, which made it
hard for Ponder to protest: he had half a mile of trout stream in his
bathroom, and claimed that messin’ about in his study was what kept a
wizard out of mischief. And, as everyone knew, it did. It generally got
him into trouble instead.

Ponder had let that go, because he now saw it as his mission in life to
stoke the fires that kept Mustrum Ridcully bubbling and made the
university a happy place. As a dog reflects the mood of its owner, so a
university reflects its Archchancellor. All he could do now, as the
university’s sole self-confessed entirely sensible person, was to steer
things as best he could, keep away from squalls involving the person
previously known as the Dean, and find ways of keeping the
Archchancellor too occupied to get under Ponder’s feet.

Ponder was about to put the Book of Traditions away when the heavy pages
flopped over.

‘That’s odd.’

‘Oh, those old book bindings get very stiff,’ said Ridcully. ‘They have
a life of their own, sometimes.’

‘Has anyone heard of Professor H. F. Pullunder, or Doctor Erratamus?’

The faculty stopped watching the door and looked at one another.

‘Ring a bell, anyone?’ said Ridcully.

‘Not a tinkle,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, cheerfully.

The Archchancellor turned to his left. ‘What about you, Dean? You know
all the old—’

Ponder groaned. The rest of the wizards shut their eyes and braced
themselves. This might be bad.

Ridcully stared down at two empty chairs, with the imprint of a buttock
in each one. One or two of the faculty pulled their hats down over their
faces. It had been two weeks now, and it had not got any better.

He took a deep breath and roared: ‘Traitor!’ – which was a terrible
thing to say to two dimples in leather.

The Chair of Indefinite Studies gave Ponder Stibbons a nudge, indicating
that he was the chosen sacrifice for today, again.

Again.

‘Just for a handful of silver he left us!’ said Ridcully, to the
universe in general.

Ponder cleared his throat. He’d really hoped the Megapode hunt would
take the Archchancellor’s mind off the subject, but Ridcully’s mind kept
on swinging back to the absent Dean the way a tongue plunges back to the
site of a missing tooth.

‘Er, in point of fact, I believe his remuneration is at least—’ he
began, but in Ridcully’s current mood no answer would be the right one.

‘Remuneration? Since when did a wizard work for wages? We are pure
academics, Mister Stibbons! We do not care for mere money!’

Unfortunately, Ponder was a clear logical thinker who, in times of
mental confusion, fell back on reason and honesty, which, when dealing
with an angry Archchancellor, were, to use the proper academic term,
unhelpful. And he neglected to think strategically, always a mistake
when talking to fellow academics, and as a result made the mistake of
employing, as at this point, common sense.

‘That’s because we never actually pay for anything very much,’ he said,
‘and if anyone needs any petty cash they just help themselves from the
big jar—’

‘We are part of the very fabric of the university, Mister Stibbons! We
take only what we require! We do not seek wealth! And most certainly we
do not accept a “post of vital importance which includes an attractive
package of remuneration”, whatever the hells that means, “and other
benefits including a generous pension”! A pension, mark you! When ever
has a wizard retired?’

‘Well. Doctor Earwig—’ Ponder began, unable to stop himself.

‘He left to get married!’ snapped Ridcully. ‘That’s not retirin’, that’s
the same as dyin’.’

‘What about Doctor Housemartin?’ Ponder went on.

The Lecturer in Recent Runes kicked him on the ankle, but Ponder merely
said, ‘Ouch!’ and continued. ‘He left with a bad case of work-related
frogs, sir!’

‘If you can’t stand the heat, get off the pot,’ muttered Ridcully.
Things were subsiding a bit now, and the pointy hats were tentatively
raised. The Archchancellor’s little moments only lasted a few minutes.
This would have been more comforting were it not for the fact that at
approximately five-minute intervals something suddenly reminded him of
what he considered to be the Dean’s totally treasonable activity, to
wit, applying for and getting a job at another university via a common
advertisement in a newspaper. That was not how a prince of magic
behaved. He didn’t sit in front of a panel of drapers, greengrocers and
bootmakers (wonderful people though they may be, salt of the earth, no
doubt, but even so . . .) to be judged and assessed like some champion
terrier (had his teeth counted, no doubt!). He’d let down the entire
brotherhood of wizardry, that’s what he’d done—

There was a squeaking of wheels out in the corridor, and every wizard
stiffened in anticipation. The door swung open and the first overloaded
trolley was pushed in.

There was a series of sighs as every eye focused on the maid who was
pushing it, and then some rather louder sighs when they realized that
she was not, as it were, the intended.

She wasn’t ugly. She might be called homely, perhaps, but it was quite a
nice home, clean and decent and with roses round the door and a welcome
on the mat and an apple pie in the oven. But the thoughts of the wizards
were, astonishingly, not on food at this point, although some of them
were still a bit hazy as to why not.

She was, in fact, quite a pleasant looking girl, even if her bosom had
clearly been intended for a girl two feet taller; but she was not Her.⁵

The faculty was crestfallen, but it brightened up considerably as the
caravan of trolleys wound its way into the room. There was nothing like
a 3 a.m. snack to raise the spirits, everyone knew that.

Well, Ponder thought, at least we’ve got through the evening without
anything breaking. Better than Tuesday, at least.

It is a well-known fact in any organization that, if you want a job
done, you should give it to someone who is already very busy. It has
been the cause of a number of homicides, and in one case the death of a
senior director from having his head shut repeatedly in quite a small
filing cabinet.

In UU, Ponder Stibbons was that busy man. He had come to enjoy it. For
one thing, most of the jobs he was asked to do did not need doing, and
most of the senior wizards did not care if they were not done, provided
they were not not done by themselves. Besides, Ponder was very good at
thinking up efficient little systems to save time, and was, in
particular, very proud of his system for writing the minutes of
meetings, which he had devised with the help of Hex, the university’s
increasingly useful thinking engine. A detailed analysis of past
minutes, coupled with Hex’s enormous predictive abilities, meant that
for a simple range of easily accessible givens, such as the agenda
(which Ponder controlled in any case), the committee members, the time
since breakfast, the time to dinner, and so on, in most cases the
minutes could be written beforehand.

All in all, he considered that he was doing his bit in maintaining UU in
its self-chosen course of amiable, dynamic stagnation. It was always a
rewarding effort, knowing the alternative, to keep things that way.

But a page that turns itself was, to Ponder, an anomaly. Now, while the
sound of the pre-breakfast supper grew around him, he smoothed out the
page and read, carefully.

Glenda would have cheerfully broken a plate over Juliet’s sweet, empty
head when the girl finally turned up in the Night Kitchen. At least, she
would cheerfully have thought about it, in quite a deliberate way, but
there was no point in losing her temper, because its target was not
really much good at noticing what other people were thinking. There
wasn’t a nasty bone in Juliet’s body, it’s just that she had a great
deal of trouble homing in on the idea that someone was trying to be
unpleasant to her.

So Glenda made do with ‘Where have you been? I told Mrs Whitlow you’d
gone home ill. Your dad’ll be worried sick! And it looks bad to the
other girls.’

Juliet slumped into a chair, with a movement so graceful that it seemed
to sing.

‘Went to the football, didn’t I. You know, we were playing those buggers
in Dimwell.’

‘Until three in the morning?’

‘That’s the rules, innit? Play until full time, first dead man or first
score.’

‘Who won?’

‘Dunno.’

‘You don’t know?’

‘When we left it was being decided on head wounds. Anyway, I went with
Rotten Johnny, didn’t I.’

‘I thought you’d broken up with him.’

‘He bought me supper, didn’t ’e.’

‘You shouldn’t have gone. That’s not the sort of thing you should do.’

‘Like you know?’ said Juliet, who sometimes thought that questions were
answers.

‘Just do the washing-up, will you?’ said Glenda. And I’ll have to do it
again after you, she thought, as her best friend drifted over to the
line of big stone sinks. Juliet didn’t exactly wash dishes, she gave
them a light baptism. Wizards weren’t the type of people who noticed
yesterday’s dried egg on the plate, but Mrs Whitlow could see it from
two rooms away.

Glenda liked Juliet, she really did, although sometimes she wondered
why. Of course, they’d grown up together, but it had always amazed her
that Juliet, who was so beautiful that boys went nervous and
occasionally fainted as she passed, could be so, well, dumb about
everything. In fact it was Glenda who had grown up. She wasn’t sure
about Juliet; sometimes it seemed to Glenda that she had done the
growing up for both of them.

‘Look, you just have to scrub a bit, that’s all,’ she snapped after a
few seconds of listless dipping, and took the brush out of Juliet’s
perfect hand, and then, as the grease was sent down the drain, she
thought: I’ve done it again. Actually, I’ve done it again again. How
many times is that? I even used to play with her dolls for her!

Plate after plate sparkled under Glenda’s hands. Nothing cleans stubborn
stains like suppressed anger.

Rotten Johnny, she thought. Ye gods, he smells of cat wee! He’s the only
boy stupid enough to think he’s got a chance. Good grief, she’s got a
figure like that and all she ever dates are total knobheads! What would
she do without me?

After this brief excitement, the Night Kitchen settled into its routine
and those who had been referred to as ‘the other girls’ got on with
their familiar tasks. It has to be said that girlhood for most of them
had ended a long time previously, but they were good workers and Glenda
was proud of them. Mrs Hedges ran the cheeseboards like a champion.
Mildred and Rachel, known officially on the payroll as the vegetable
women, were good and reliable, and indeed it was Mildred who had come up
with the famous recipe for beetroot and cream cheese sandwiches.

Everybody knew their job. Everybody _did_ their job. The Night Kitchen
was reliable and Glenda liked reliable.

She had a home to go to and made sure she went to it at least once a
day, but the Night Kitchen was where she lived. It was her fortress.

***

Ponder Stibbons stared at the page in front of him. His mind filled up
with nasty questions, the biggest and nastiest of which was simply: Is
there any way at all in which people can make out that this is my fault?
No. Good!

‘Er, there is one tradition here that regrettably we don’t appear to
have honoured for some considerable time, Archchancellor,’ he said,
managing to keep the concern out of his voice.

‘Well, does that matter?’ said Ridcully, stretching.

‘It is traditional, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder reproachfully.
‘Although I might go so far as to say that not observing it has now,
alas, become the tradition.’

‘Well, that’s fine, isn’t it?’ said Ridcully. ‘If we can make a
tradition of not observing another tradition, then that’s doubly
traditional, eh? What’s the problem?’

‘It’s Archchancellor Preserved Bigger’s Bequest,’ said the Master of The
Traditions. ‘The university does very well out of the Bigger estates.
They were a very rich family.’

‘Hmm, yes. Name rings a faint bell. Decent of him. So?’

‘Er, I would have been happier had my predecessor paid a little more
attention to some of the traditions,’ said Ponder, who believed in
dripfeeding bad news.

‘Well, he _was_ dead.’

‘Yes, of course. Perhaps, sir, we should, ahem, start a tradition of
checking on the health of the Master of The Traditions?’

‘Oh, he was quite healthy,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Just dead. Quite
healthy for a dead man.’

‘He was a pile of dust, Archchancellor!’

‘That’s not the same as being ill, exactly,’ said Ridcully, who believed
in never giving in. ‘Broadly speaking, it’s stable.’

Ponder said, ‘There is a condition attached to the bequest. It’s in the
small print, sir.’

‘Oh, I never bother with small print, Stibbons!’

‘I do, sir. It says: “. . . and thys shall follow as long as the
University shall enter a team in the game of foot-the-ball or Poore
Boys’ Funne”.’

‘Porree boy’s funny?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘That’s ridiculous!’ said Ridcully.

‘Ridiculous or not, Archchancellor, that is the condition of the
bequest.’

‘But we stopped taking part in that years ago,’ said Ridcully. ‘Mobs in
the streets, kicking and punching and yelling . . . and they were the
players! Mark you, the spectators were nearly as bad! There were
hundreds of men in a team! A game could go on for days! That’s why it
was stopped.’

‘Actually, it has never been stopped as such, Archchancellor,’ said the
Senior Wrangler. ‘_We_ stopped, yes, and so did the guilds. It was no
longer a game for gentlemen.’

‘Nevertheless,’ said the Master of The Traditions, running a finger down
the page, ‘such are the terms. There are all sorts of other conditions.
Oh, dear. Oh, calamity. Oh, surely not...’

His lips moved silently as he read on. The room craned as one neck.

‘Well, out with it, man!’ roared Ridcully.

‘I think I’d like to check a few things,’ said the Master of The
Traditions. ‘I would not wish to worry you unduly.’ He glanced down.
‘Oh, hells’ bells!’

‘What are you talking about, man?’

‘Well, it looks as though— No, it would be unfair to spoil your evening,
Archchancellor,’ Ponder protested. ‘I must be reading this wrongly. He
surely can’t mean— Oh, good heavens . . .’

‘In a nutshell, please, Stibbons,’ growled Ridcully. ‘I believe I am the
Archchancellor of this university? I’m sure it says so on my door.’

‘Of course, Archchancellor, but it would be quite wrong of me to—’

‘I appreciate that you do not wish to spoil my evening, sir,’ said
Ridcully. ‘But I would not hesitate to spoil your day tomorrow. With
that in mind, what the hells are you talking about?’

‘Er, it would appear, Archchancellor, that, er . . . When was the last
game we took part in, do you know?’

‘Anyone?’ said Ridcully to the room in general. A mumbled discussion
produced a consensus on the theme of ‘Around twenty years, give or
take.’

‘Give or take what, exactly?’ said Ponder, who hated this kind of thing.

‘Oh, you know. Something of that order. In the general vicinity of, so
to speak. Round about then. You know.’

‘About?’ said Ponder. ‘Can we be more _precise_?’

‘Why?’

‘Because if the university hasn’t played in the Poor Boys’ Fun for a
period of twenty years or more, the bequest reverts to any surviving
relatives of Archchancellor Bigger.’

‘But it’s banned, man!’ the Archchancellor insisted.

‘Er, not as such. It’s common knowledge that Lord Vetinari doesn’t like
it, but I understand that if the games are outside the city centre and
confined to the back streets, the Watch turns a blind eye. Since I would
imagine that the supporters and players easily outnumber the entire
Watch payroll, I suppose it is better than having to turn a broken
nose.’

‘That’s quite a neat turn of phrase there, Mister Stibbons,’ said
Ridcully. ‘I’m quite surprised at you.’

‘Thank you, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. He had in fact got it from a
leader in the _Times_, which the wizards did not like much because it
either did not print what they said or printed what they said with
embarrassing accuracy.

Emboldened, he added, ‘I should point out, though, that under UU law,
Archchancellor, a ban doesn’t matter. Wizards are not supposed to take
notice of such a ban. We are not subject to mundane law.’

‘Of course. But nevertheless it is generally convenient to _acknowledge_
the civil power,’ said Ridcully, speaking like a man choosing his words
with such care that he was metaphorically taking some of them outside to
look at them more closely in daylight.

The wizards nodded. What they had heard was: ‘Vetinari may have his
little foibles, but he’s the sanest man we’ve had on the throne in
centuries, he leaves us alone, and you never know what he’s got up his
sleeve.’ You couldn’t argue with that.

‘All right, Stibbons, what do you suggest?’ said Ridcully. ‘These days
you only ever tell me about a problem when you’ve thought up a solution.
I respect this, although I find it a bit creepy. Got a way to wriggle us
out of this, have you?’

‘I suppose so, sir. I thought we might, well, put up a team. It doesn’t
say anything about winning, sir. We just have to play, that’s all.’

It was always beautifully warm in the candle vats. Regrettably, it was
also extremely humid and rather noisy in an erratic and unexpected way.
This was because the giant pipes of Unseen University’s central heating
and hot water system passed overhead, slung from the ceiling on a series
of metal straps with a greater or lesser coefficient of linear
expansion. That was only the start, however. There were also the huge
pipes for balancing the slood differential across the university, the
pipe for the anthropic particle flux suppressor, which did not work
properly these days, the pipes for the air circulation, which had not
worked either since the donkey had been ill, and the very ancient tubes
that were all that remained of the ill-fated attempt by a previous
archchancellor to operate a university communication system by means of
trained marmosets. At certain times of the day all this piping broke
into a subterranean symphony of gurgles, twangs, upsetting organic
trickling sounds and, occasionally, an inexplicable boinging noise that
would reverberate through the cellar levels.

The general ad hoc nature of the system’s construction was enhanced by
the fact that, as an economy measure, the big iron hot water pipes were
lagged with old clothing held on by string. Since some of these items
had once been wizards’ apparel, and however hard you scrubbed you could
never get all of the spells out, there were sporadic showers of
multicoloured sparks and the occasional ping-pong ball.

Despite everything, Nutt felt at home down among the vats. It was
worrying; in the high country, people in the street had jeered at him
that he’d been made in a vat. Although Brother Oats had told him that
this was silly, the gently bubbling tallow called to him. He felt at
peace here.

He ran the vats now. Smeems didn’t know, because he hardly ever troubled
to come down here. Trev knew, of course, but since Nutt doing his job
for him meant that he could spend more time kicking a tin can around on
some bit of wasteground he was happy. The opinion of the other dribblers
and dippers didn’t really count; if you worked in the vats it meant
that, as far as the job market was concerned, you had been still
accelerating when you’d hit the bottom of the barrel and had been
drilled into the bedrock. It meant that you no longer had enough
charisma to be a beggar. It meant that you were on the run from
something, possibly the gods themselves, or the demons inside you. It
meant that if you dared to look up you would see, high above you, the
dregs of society. Best, then, to stay down here in the warm gloom, with
enough to eat and no inconvenient encounters and, Nutt added in his
head, no beatings.

No, the dippers were no problem. He did his best for them when he could.
Life itself had beaten them so hard that they had no strength left to
beat up anyone else. That was helpful. When people found out that you
were a goblin, all you could expect was trouble.

He remembered what the people in the villages had shouted at him when he
was small and the word would be followed by a stone.

Goblin. It was a word with an ox-train-load of baggage. It didn’t matter
what you said or did, or made, the train ran right over you. He’d shown
them the things he’d built, and the stones had smashed them while the
villagers screamed at him like hunting hawks and shouted more words.

That had stopped on the day Pastor Oats rode gently into town, if a
bunch of hovels and one street of stamped mud could be called a town,
and he had brought . . . forgiveness. But on that day, no one had wanted
to be forgiven.

In the darkness, Concrete the troll, who was so gooned out on Slab,
Slice, Sleek and Slump, and who would even snort iron filings if Nutt
didn’t stop him, whimpered on his mattress.

Nutt lit a fresh candle and wound up his home-made dribbling aid. It
whirred away happily, and made the flame go horizontal. He paid
attention to his work. A good dribbler never turned the candle when he
dribbled; candles in the wild, as it were, almost never dripped in more
than one direction, which was away from the draught. No wonder the
wizards liked the ones he made; there was something disconcerting about
a candle that appeared to have dribbled in every direction at once. It
could put a man off his stroke.⁶

He worked fast, and was putting the nineteenth well-dribbled candle in
the delivery basket when he heard the clank of a tin can being bowled
along the stone floor of the passage.

‘Good morning, Mister Trev,’ he said, without looking up. A moment later
an empty tin can landed in front of him, on end, with no more ceremony
than a jigsaw piece falling into place.

‘How did you know it was me, Gobbo?’

‘Your leitmotif, Mister Trev. And I’d prefer Nutt, thank you.’

‘What’s one o’ them motifs?’ said the voice behind him.

‘It is a repeated theme or chord associated with a particular person or
place, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt, carefully placing two more warm candles
in the basket. ‘I was referring to your love of kicking a tin can about.
You seem in good spirits, sir. How went the day?’

‘You what?’

‘Did Fortune favour Dimwell last night?’

‘What are you on about?’

Nutt pulled back further. It could be dangerous not to fit in, not to be
helpful, not to be careful. ‘Did you _win_, sir?’

‘Nah. Another no-score draw. Waste of time, really. But it was only a
friendly. Nobody died.’ Trev looked at the full baskets of realistically
dribbled candles.

‘That’s a shitload you’ve done there, kid,’ he said kindly.

Nutt hesitated again, and then said, very carefully, ‘Despite the
scatological reference, you approve of the large but unspecified number
of candles that I have dribbled for you?’

‘Blimey, what was that all about, Gobbo?’

Frantically, Nutt sought for an acceptable translation. ‘I done okay?’
he ventured.

Trev slapped him on the back. ‘Yeah! Good job! Respect! But you gotta
learn to speak more proper, you know. You wu’nt last five minutes down
our way. You’d probably get a half-brick heaved at yer.’

‘That has, I mean _’as_ been known to . . . ’appen,’ said Nutt,
concentrating.

‘I never seen why people make such a to-do,’ said Trev generously. ‘So
there were all those big battles? So what? It was a long time ago and a
long way away, right, an’ it’s not like the trolls and dwarfs weren’t as
bad as you lot, ain’t I right? I mean, goblins? What was that all about?
You lot jus’ cut throats and nicked stuff, right? That’s practically
civilized in some streets round here.’

Probably, Nutt thought. No one could have been neutral when the Dark War
had engulfed Far Uberwald. Maybe there had been true evil there, but
apparently the evil was, oddly enough, always on the other side. Perhaps
it was contagious. Somehow, in all the confusing histories that had been
sung or written, the goblins were down as nasty cowardly little bastards
who collected their own earwax and were always on the other side. Alas,
when the time came to write their story down, his people hadn’t even had
a pencil.

SMILE AT PEOPLE. LIKE THEM. BE HELPFUL. ACCUMULATE WORTH. He liked Trev.
He was good at liking people. When you clearly liked people, they were
slightly more inclined to like you. Every little helped.

Trev, though, seemed genuinely unfussed about history, and had
recognized that having someone in the vats who not only did not try to
eat the tallow but also did most of his work for him and, at that, did
it better than he could be bothered to do it himself, was an asset worth
protecting. Besides, he was congenially lazy, except when it came to
foot-the-ball, and bigotry took too much effort. Trev never made too
much effort. Trev went through life on primrose paths.

‘Master Smeems came looking for you,’ said Nutt. ‘I sorted it all out.’

‘Ta,’ said Trev, and that was that. No questions. He _liked_ Trev.

But the boy was standing there, just staring at him, as if trying to
work him out.

‘Tell you what,’ Trev said. ‘Come on up to the Night Kitchen and we’ll
scrounge breakfast, okay?’

‘Oh no, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt, almost dropping a candle. ‘I don’t
think, sorry, fink, I ought to.’

‘Come on, who’s going to know? And there’s a fat girl up there who cooks
great stuff. Best food you ever tasted.’

Nutt hesitated. ALWAYS AGREE, ALWAYS BE HELPFUL, ALWAYS BE BECOMING,
NEVER FRIGHTEN ANYONE.

‘I fink I will come with you,’ he said.

There’s a lot to be said for scrubbing a frying pan until you can see
your face in it, especially if you’ve been entertaining ideas of gently
tapping someone on the head with it. Glenda was not in the mood for Trev
when he came up the stone steps, kissed her on the back of the neck and
said cheerfully, ‘’ullo, darlin’, what’s hot tonight?’

‘Nothing for the likes of you, Trevor Likely,’ she said, batting him
away with the pan, ‘and you can keep your hands to yourself, thank you!’

‘Not bin keeping somethin’ warm for your best man?’

Glenda sighed. ‘There’s bubble and squeak in the warming oven and don’t
say a word if anyone catches you,’ she said.

‘Just the job for a man who’s bin workin’ like a slave all night!’ said
Trev, patting her far too familiarly and heading for the ovens.

‘You’ve been at the football!’ snapped Glenda. ‘You’re always at the
football! And what kind of working do you call that?’

The boy laughed, and she glared at his companion, who backed away
quickly as though from armour-piercing eyes.

‘And you boys ought to wash before you come up here,’ she went on, glad
of a target that didn’t grin and blow kisses at her. ‘This is a
food-preparation area!’

Nutt swallowed. This was the longest conversation he’d ever had with a
female apart from Ladyship and Miss Healstether and he hadn’t even said
anything.

‘I assure you, I bath regularly,’ he protested.

‘But you’re grey!’

‘Well, some people are black and some people are white,’ said Nutt,
almost in tears. Oh, why had he, why had he left the vats? It was nice
and uncomplicated down there, and quiet, too, when Concrete hadn’t been
on the ferrous oxide.

‘It doesn’t work like that. You’re not a zombie, are you? I know they do
their best, and none of us can help how we die, but I’m not having all
that trouble again. Anyone might get their finger in the soup, but
rolling around in the bottom of the bowl? That’s not right.’

‘I am alive, miss,’ said Nutt helplessly.

‘Yes, but a live what, that’s what I’d like to know.’

‘I’m a goblin, miss.’ He hesitated as he said it. It sounded like a lie.

‘I thought goblins had horns,’ said Glenda.

‘Only the grown-up ones, miss.’ Well, that was true, for some goblins.

‘You lot don’t do anything nasty, do you?’ said Glenda, glaring at Nutt.

But he recognized it as a kind of residual glare; she’d said her piece,
and now it was just a bit of play-acting, to show she was the boss here.
And bosses can afford to be generous, especially when you look a little
fearful and suitably impressed. It worked.

Glenda said, ‘Trev, fetch Mister . . . ?’

‘Nutt,’ said Nutt.

‘Fetch Mister Nutt some bubble and squeak, will you? He looks
half-starved.’

‘I have a very fast metabolism,’ said Nutt.

‘I don’t mind about that,’ said Glenda, ‘so long as you don’t go showing
it to people. I have enough—’

There was a crash from behind her.

Trev had dropped the tray of bubble and squeak. He was stock still,
staring at Juliet, who was returning the stare with a look of deep
disgust. Finally, she said, in a voice like pearls, ‘’ad your bleedin’
eyeful? You got a nerve, largin’ it in here wiv that rag round your
neck! Everyone knows Dimwell are well pants. Beasly couldn’t carry the
ball in a sack.’

‘Oh yeah right? Well, I hear that the Lobbins walked all over you last
week. Lobbin Clout! Everyone knows they’re a bunch o’ grannies!’

‘Oh yeah, that’s all you know! Staple Upwright was let out of the Tanty
the day before! See if you Dimmers like him stamping all over you!’

‘Old Staple? Ha! He’ll clog away, yeah, but he can’t run above a canter!
We’ll run rings around—’

Glenda’s frying pan clanged loudly on top of the iron range. ‘Enough of
that, the pair of you! I’ve got to clean up for the day, and I don’t
want football dirtying up my nice surfaces, you hear me? You wait here,
my girl, and you, Trevor Likely, you get back to your cellar, and I
shall want that dish cleaned and back here by tomorrow night or you can
try begging your meals off some other girl, right? Take your little
friend with you. Nice to meet you, Mister Nutt, but I wish I could find
you in better company.’

She paused. Nutt looked so lost and bewildered. Gods help me, she
thought, I’m turning into my mum again. ‘No, wait.’ She reached down,
opened one of the warming ovens and came back again with another large
dish. The scent of cooked apples filled the kitchen. ‘This is for you,
Mister Nutt, with my compliments. You need fattening up before you blow
away. Don’t bother to share it with this scallywag, ’cos he’s a greedy
beggar, ask anyone. Now, I’ve got to clean up, and if you boys don’t
want to help, get out of my kitchen! Oh, and I’ll want that dish back as
well!’

Trev grabbed Nutt’s shoulder. ‘Come on, you heard what she said.’ ‘Yes,
and I don’t mind helping—’

‘Come on!’

‘Thank you very much, miss,’ Nutt managed, as he was dragged down the
stairs.

Glenda folded her oven cloth neatly as she watched them go.

‘Goblins,’ she said thoughtfully. ‘Have you ever seen a goblin before,
Jools?’

‘What?’

‘Have you ever seen a goblin?’

‘Dunno.’

‘Do you think he’s a goblin?’

‘What?’

‘Mr Nutt. Is he a goblin, do you think?’ said Glenda, as patiently as
possible.

‘He’s a posh one, then. I mean, he sounded like he reads books and
stuff.’

This was a discrimination that was, in Glenda’s view, at practically
forensic standards of observation for Juliet. She turned around and
found to her surprise that Juliet had gone back to reading something, or
at least staring intently at the words. ‘What have you got there?’ she
asked.

‘It’s called _Bu-bubble_. It’s like, what important people are doing.’
Glenda looked over her friend’s shoulder as she leafed through the
pages. As far as she could tell all the important people shared one
smile and were wearing unsuitable clothes for this time of year. ‘So
what is it that makes them important?’ she asked. ‘Just being in a
magazine?’

‘There’s fashion tips too,’ said Juliet defensively. ‘Look, it says here
chrome and copper micromail is the look for the season.’ ‘That’s the
page for dwarfs,’ sighed Glenda. ‘Come on, get your things and I’ll take
you home.’

Juliet was still reading as they waited for the horse bus. Such sudden
devotion to a printed page worried Glenda. The last thing she wanted was
to see her friend getting ideas in her head. There was such a lot of
room in there for them to bounce around and do damage. Glenda herself
was reading one of her cheap novels wrapped in a page of the _Times_.
She read the way a cat eats: furtively, daring anyone to notice. While
the horses plodded up towards Dolly Sisters, she took her scarf out of
her bag and absent-mindedly wrapped it around her wrist. Personally, she
hated the violence of the football, but it was important to belong. Not
belonging, especially after a big game, could be dangerous to your
health. It was important to show the right colours on your home turf. It
was important to fit in.

For some reason, that thought immediately turned her mind to Nutt. How
strange he was. Kind of ugly, but very clean. He had stunk of soap and
seemed so nervous. There was something about him...

The air in the Uncommon Room had gone as cold as meltwater. ‘Are you
telling us, Mister Stibbons, that we should be seen to enter a game for
bullies, louts and roughs?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘That
would be impossible!’

‘Unlikely, yes. Impossible? No,’ said Ponder wearily.

‘Most certainly not possible!’ said the Senior Wrangler, nodding at the
Chair. ‘We would be trading kicks with people from the gutters!’

‘My grandfather scored two goals in a match against Dimwell,’ said
Ridcully, in a quiet, matter-of-fact voice. ‘Most people never managed
one in their lives, in those days. I think the most number of goals
scored by one man in his whole life is four. That was Dave Likely, of
course.’

There was a ripple of hurried rethinking and retrenchment.

‘Ah, well, of course, those were different times,’ said the Senior
Wrangler, suddenly all syrup. ‘I’m sure that even skilled workmen
occasionally took part in a spirit of fun.’

‘It wasn’t much fun if they ran into Granddad,’ said Ridcully, with a
faint little grin. ‘He was a prizefighter. He knocked people down for
money and pubs sent for him if there was a really dangerous brawl. Of
course, in a sense, this made it even more dangerous, but by then most
of it was out in the street.’

‘He threw people out of the buildings?’

‘Oh yes. In fairness, it was usually from the ground floor and he always
opened the window first. He was a very gentle man, I understand. Made
musical boxes for a living, very delicate, won awards for them.
Teetotal, you know, and quite religious as well. The punching was just a
job of casual work. I know for a fact he never tore off anything that
couldn’t be stitched on again. A decent chap, by all accounts. Never met
him, unfortunately. I’ve always wished I had something to remember the
old boy by.’

As one wizard, the faculty looked down at Ridcully’s huge hands. They
were the size of frying pans. He cracked his knuckles. There was an
echo.

‘Mister Stibbons, all we need to do is engage another team and lose?’ he
said.

‘That’s right, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘You simply forfeit the
game.’

‘But losing means being seen not to win, am I right?’

‘That would be so, yes.’

‘Then I rather think we ought to win, don’t you?’

‘Really, Mustrum, this is going too far,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Excuse me?’ said Ridcully, raising his eyebrows. ‘May I remind you that
the Archchancellor of this university is, by college statute, the first
among equals?’

‘Of course.’

‘Good. Well, I am he. The word _first_ is, I think, germane here. I see
you scribbling in your little notebook, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor. I’m looking to see if we could manage without the
bequest.’

‘Good man,’ said the Senior Wrangler, glaring at Ridcully. ‘I knew there
was no reason to panic.’

‘In fact I’m pleased to say that I think we could rub along quite well
with only a minimal cut in expenditure,’ Ponder went on.

‘There,’ said the Senior Wrangler, looking triumphantly at the first
among equals, ‘you see what happens if you don’t simply panic.’

‘Indeed,’ said Ridcully calmly. With his gaze still fixed on the Senior
Wrangler he added, ‘Mister Stibbons, would you be so kind as to
enlighten the rest of us: to what, in reality, does a “minimal cut in
expenditure” equate?’

‘The bequest is a trust,’ said Ponder, still scribbling. ‘We have the
use of the significant income from the very wise investments of the
Bigger trustees, but we cannot touch the capital. Nevertheless, the
income is enough to cover – I’m sorry to be imprecise – about
eighty-seven point four per cent of the university’s food bill.’

He waited patiently until the uproar had died away. It was amazing, he
thought, how people would argue against figures on no better basis than
‘they must be wrong’.

‘I’m sure the Bursar would not agree with those figures,’ said the
Senior Wrangler sourly.

‘That is so,’ said Ponder, ‘but I’m afraid that is because he regards
the decimal point as a nuisance.’

The faculty looked at one another.

‘Then who is dealing with our financial affairs?’ said Ridcully.

‘Since last month? Me,’ said Ponder, ‘but I would be happy to hand the
responsibility over to the first volunteer.’

This worked. Regrettably, it always did. ‘In that case,’ he said, in the
sudden silence, ‘I have worked out, with reference to calorific tables,
a regime that will give every man here a nourishing three meals a day—’

The Senior Wrangler frowned. ‘Three meals? _Three meals?_ What kind of
person has three meals a day?’

‘Someone who can’t afford nine,’ said Ponder flatly. ‘We could eke out
the money if we concentrate on a healthy diet of grains and fresh
vegetables. That would allow us to keep the cheeseboard with a choice
of, say, three types of cheese.’

‘Three cheeses isn’t a choice, it’s a penance!’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘Or we could play a game of football, gentlemen,’ said Ridcully,
clapping his hands together cheerfully. ‘One game. That’s all. How hard
would that be?’

‘As hard as a face full of hobnails, perhaps?’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies. ‘People get trodden into the cobbles!’

‘If all else fails, we will find volunteers from the student body,’ said
Ridcully.

‘Corpse might be a better word.’

The Archchancellor leaned back in his chair. ‘What makes a wizard,
gentlemen? A facility with magic? Yes, of course, but around this table
we know this is not, for the right kind of mind, hard to obtain. It does
not, as it were, happen like magic. Good heavens, witches manage it.

But what makes a magic user is a certain cast of mind which looks a
little deeper into the world and the way it works, the way its currents
twist the fortunes of mankind, et cetera, et cetera. In short, they
should be the kind of person who might calculate that a guaranteed
double first is worth the occasional inconvenience of sliding down the
street on their teeth.’

‘Are you seriously suggesting that we give out degrees for mere physical
prowess?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘No, of course not. I am seriously suggesting that we give out degrees
for extreme physical prowess. May I remind you that I rowed for this
university for five years and got a Brown?’

‘And what good did that do, pray?’

‘Well, it does say “Archchancellor” on my door. Do you remember why? The
University Council at the time took the very decent view that it might
be the moment for a leader who was not stupid, mad or dead. Admittedly,
most of these are not exactly qualifications in the normal sense, but I
like to think that the skill of leadership, tactics and creative
cheating that I learned on the river also stood me in good stead. And
thus for my sins, which I don’t actually remember committing but must
have been quite crimson, I was at the top of a shortlist of one. Was
that a choice of three cheeses, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Yes, Archchancellor.’

‘I was just checking.’ Ridcully leaned forward. ‘Gentlemen, in the
morning, correction, later this morning, I propose to tell Vetinari
firmly that this university intends to once again play football. And the
task falls to me because I am the first among equals. If any of you
would like to try your luck in the Oblong Office, you have only to say.’

‘He’ll suspect something, you know,’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies.

‘He suspects everything. That is why he is still Patrician.’ Ridcully
stood up. ‘I declare this meet— this overly extended snack . . . over.
Mister Stibbons, come with me!’

Ponder hurried after him, books clutched to his chest, happy for the
excuse to get out of there before they turned on him. The bringer of bad
news is never popular, especially when it’s on an empty plate.

‘Archchancellor, I—’ he began, but Ridcully held his finger to his lips.

After a moment of cloying silence, there was a sudden festival of
scuffling, as of men fighting in silence.

‘Good for them,’ Ridcully said, heading off down the corridor. ‘I
wondered how long it would take them to realize that they might be
seeing the last overloaded snack trolley for some time. I’m almost
tempted to wait and see them waddle out with their robes sagging.’

Ponder stared at him. ‘Are you enjoying this, Archchancellor?’

‘Good heavens no,’ said Ridcully, his eyes sparkling. ‘How could you
suggest such a thing? Besides, in a few hours I have to tell Havelock
Vetinari that we are intending to become a personal affront. The
unschooled mob hacking at one another’s legs is one thing. I don’t
believe he will be happy with the prospect of our joining in.’

‘Of course, sir. Er, there is a minor matter, sir, a small conundrum, if
you will . . . Who is Nutt?’

There seemed to Ponder to be a rather longer pause than necessary before
Ridcully said, ‘Nutt would be . . . ?’

‘He works in the candle vats, sir.’

‘How do you know that, Stibbons?’

‘I do the wages, sir. The Candle Knave says Nutt just turned up one
night with a chitty saying he was to be employed and paid minimal wage.’

‘Well?’

‘That’s all I know, sir, and I only found that out because I asked
Smeems. Smeems says he’s a good lad but sort of odd.’

‘Then he should fit right in, don’t you think, Stibbons? In fact, we are
_seeing_ how he fits in.’

‘Well yes, sir, no problem there, but he’s a goblin, apparently, and
generally, you know, it’s a sort of odd tradition, but when the first
people from other races first come to the city they start out in the
Watch . . .’

Ridcully cleared his throat, loudly. ‘The trouble with the Watch,
Stibbons, is that they ask too many questions. We should not emulate
them, I suggest.’ He looked at Ponder and appeared to reach a decision.
‘You know that you have a glowing future here at UU, Stibbons.’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder gloomily.

‘I would advise you, with this in mind, to forget all about Mister
Nutt.’

‘Excuse me, Archchancellor, but that simply will not do!’

Ridcully swayed backwards, like a man subjected to an attack by a
hitherto comatose sheep.

Ponder plunged on, because when you have dived off a cliff your only
hope is to press for the abolition of gravity.

‘I have twelve jobs in this university,’ he said. ‘I do all the
paperwork. I do all the adding up. In fact, I do everything that
requires even a modicum of effort and responsibility! And I go on doing
it even though Brazeneck have offered me the post of Bursar! With a
staff ! I mean real people, not a stick with a knob on the end. Now . .
. Will . . . You . . . Trust . . . Me? What is it about Nutt that is so
important?’

‘The bastard tried to lure you away?’ said Ridcully. ‘How sharper than a
serpent’s tooth it is to have a thankless Dean! Is there nothing he will
not stoop to? How much did—’

‘I didn’t ask,’ said Ponder quietly.

There was a moment of silence and then Ridcully patted him a couple of
times on the shoulder.

‘The problem with Mister Nutt is that people want to kill him.’

‘What people?’

Ridcully stared into Ponder’s eyes. His lips moved. He squinted up and
down like a man engaged in complex calculation. He shrugged.

‘Probably everybody,’ he said.

‘Please have some more of my wonderful apple pie,’ said Nutt. ‘But she
gave it to you,’ said Trev, grinning. ‘I’d never ’ear the end of it if I
ate your pie.’

‘But you are my friend, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt. ‘And since it is my pie
I can decide what to do with it.’

‘Nah,’ said Trev, waving it away. ‘But there is a little errand you can
do for me, me being a kind and understanding boss what lets you work all
the hours you want.’

‘Yes, Mister Trev?’ said Nutt.

‘Glenda will come in around midday. To be honest, she hardly ever leaves
the place. I would like you to go and ask her the name of that girl who
was up there tonight.’

‘The one who shouted at you, Mister Trev?’

‘The very same,’ said Trev.

‘Of course I will do that,’ said Nutt. ‘But why don’t you ask Miss
Glenda yourself? She knows you.’

Trev grinned again. ‘Yes, she does and that’s why I know she won’t tell
me. If I am any judge, and I’m pretty sound, she would like to know you
better. I’ve never met a lady so good at feelin’ sorry for people.’

‘There’s not much of me to know,’ said Nutt.

Trev gave him a long, thoughtful glance. Nutt had not taken his eyes off
his work. Trev had never seen anyone who could be so easily engrossed.
Other people who ended up working in the vats were a bit weird, it was
almost a requirement, but the little dark-grey fellow was somehow weird
in the opposite direction. ‘You know, you ought to get out more, Mister
Nutts,’ he said.

‘Oh, I don’t think I should like that at all,’ said Nutt, ‘and may I
kindly remind you my name is not plural, thank you.’

‘’ave you ever seen a game of football?’

‘No, Mister Trev.’

‘Then I’ll take you to the match tomorrow. I don’t play, o’course, but I
never miss a game if I can ’elp it,’ said Trev. ‘No edged weapons,
prob’ly. The season starts soon, everyone’s warming up.’

‘Well, that is very kind of you, but I—’

‘Tell you what, I’ll pick you up down ’ere at one o’clock.’

‘But people will look at me!’ said Nutt. And in his head he could hear
Ladyship’s voice, calm and cool as ever: DO NOT STAND OUT. BE PART OF
THE CROWD.

‘No, they won’t. Trust me on that,’ said Trev. ‘I can sort that out.
Enjoy your pie. I’m off.’

He pulled a tin can out of his coat pocket, dropped it on to his foot,
flicked it into the air, toed it a few times so it spun and twinkled
like some celestial object and then kicked it very hard so it sailed off
down the huge gloomy room a few feet above the vats, rattling slightly.
Against all probability it stopped in its flight a few feet from the far
wall, spun for a moment and then started to come back with, it seemed to
the amazed Nutt, a greater speed than before.

Trev caught it effortlessly and dropped it back into his pocket.

‘How can you do that, Mister Trev?’ said Nutt, astonished.

‘Never thought about it,’ said Trev. ‘But I always wonder why everyone
else can’t. It’s just about the spinning. It’s not hard. See yer
tomorrow, okay? And don’t forget that name.’

The horse buses were not much faster than walking, but it wasn’t _you_
doing the walking, and there were seats and a roof and a guard with a
battle-axe and all in all it was, in the damp grey hours before dawn,
good value for tuppence. Glenda and Juliet sat side by side, rocking
gently to the sway, lost in their thoughts. At least Glenda was; Juliet
could get lost in half a thought, if that.

But Glenda had become an expert at knowing when Juliet was going to
speak. It was rather like the sense a sailor has that the wind is going
to change. There were little signs, as if a thought had to get the
beautiful brain warmed up and spinning before anything could happen.

‘Who was that boy what come up for his bubble and squeak?’ she asked
nonchalantly, or what she probably thought was nonchalantly, or again,
what she might have thought was nonchalantly had she known that there
was a word like nonchalantly.

‘That’s Trevor Likely,’ said Glenda. ‘And you don’t want anything to do
with him.’

‘Why not?’

‘He’s a Dimmer! Fancies himself as a Face, too. And his dad was Big Dave
Likely! Your dad would go mad if he heard you’d even talked to him.’

‘He’s got a lovely smile,’ said Juliet, with a wistfulness that rang all
kinds of alarms for Glenda.

‘He’s a scallywag,’ she said firmly. ‘He’ll try on anything. Can’t keep
his hands to himself, too.’

‘How come you knows that?’ said Juliet.

That was another worrying thing about Juliet. Nothing much seemed to be
going on between those perfect ears for hours on end and then a question
like that would come spinning towards you with edges on it.

‘You know, you should try to speak better,’ Glenda said, to change the
subject. ‘With your looks you could snag a man who thinks about more
than beer and footie. Just speak with a little more class, eh? You don’t
have to sound like—’

‘My fare, lady?’

They looked up at the guard, who was holding his axe in a way that was
very nearly not threatening. And when it came to looking up, this was
not a long way. The axe’s owner was very short.

Glenda gently pushed the weapon out of the way. ‘Don’t wave it about,
Roger,’ she sighed. ‘It doesn’t impress.’

‘Oh, sorry, Miss Glenda,’ said the dwarf, what was visible of his face
behind the beard colouring with embarrassment. ‘It’s been a long shift.
That will be fourpence, ladies. Sorry about the axe, but we’ve been
getting people jumping off without paying.’

‘He ought to be sent back to where he came from,’ muttered Juliet, as
the guard moved on along the bus. Glenda chose not to rise to this. As
far as she had been able to tell, up until today, at least, her friend
had no opinions of her own, and simply echoed anything other people said
to her. But then she couldn’t resist. ‘That would be Treacle Mine Road,
then. He was born in the city.’

‘He’s a Miners fan, then? I suppose it could be worse.’

‘I don’t think dwarfs bother much about football,’ said Glenda.

‘I don’t fink you can be a real Morporkian an’ not shout for your team,’
was the next piece of worn-out folk wisdom from Juliet. Glenda let this
one pass. Sometimes, arguing with her friend was like punching mist.
Besides, the plodding horses were laboriously passing their street. They
got off without missing a step.

The door to Juliet’s house was covered in the ancient remnants of
multiple layers of paint, or, rather, multiple layers of paint that had
bubbled up into tiny little mountains over the years. It was always the
cheapest paint possible. After all, you could afford to buy beer or you
could afford to buy paint and you couldn’t drink paint unless you were
Mr Johnson at number fourteen, who apparently drank it all the time.

‘Now, I won’t tell your dad that you were late,’ said Glenda, opening
the door for her. ‘But I want you in early tomorrow, all right?’

‘Yes, Glenda,’ said Juliet meekly.

‘And no thinking about that Trevor Likely.’

‘Yes, Glenda.’ It was a meek reply, but Glenda recognized the sparkle.
She’d seen it in the mirror once.

But now she cooked an early breakfast for widow Crowdy, who occupied the
house on the other side and couldn’t get about much these days, made her
comfortable, did the chores in the rising light, and finally went to
bed.

Her last thought as she plummeted into sleep was: Don’t goblins steal
chickens? Funny, he doesn’t look the type . . .

At half past eight, a neighbour woke her up by throwing gravel at her
window. He wanted her to come and look at his father, described as
‘poorly’, and the day began. She had never needed to buy an alarm clock.

Why did other people need so much sleep? It was a permanent puzzle for
Nutt. It got boring by himself.

Back in the castle in Uberwald there had always been someone around to
talk to. Ladyship liked the night-time and wouldn’t go out in bright
sunshine at all, so a lot of visitors came then. He had to stay out of
sight, of course, but he knew all the passages in the walls and all the
secret spy-holes. He saw the fine gentlemen, always in black, and the
dwarfs with iron armour that gleamed like gold (later, down in his
cellar that smelled of salt and thunderstorms, Igor showed him how it
was made). There were trolls, too, looking a bit more polished than the
ones he’d learned to run away from in the forests. He especially
remembered the troll that shone like a jewel (Igor said his skin was
made of living diamond). That alone would have been enough to glue him
into Nutt’s memory, but there had been that moment, one day when the
diamond troll was seated at the big table with other trolls and dwarfs,
when the diamond eyes had looked up and had seen Nutt, looking through a
tiny, hidden spy-hole at the other end of the room. Nutt was convinced
of it. He’d jerked away from the hole so quickly that he’d banged his
head on the wall opposite.

He’d grown to know his way around all the cellars and workshops in
Ladyship’s castle. GO ANYWHERE YOU WISH, TALK TO EVERYONE. ASK ANY
QUESTIONS; YOU WILL BE GIVEN ANSWERS. WHEN YOU WANT TO LEARN, YOU WILL
BE TAUGHT. USE THE LIBRARY. OPEN ANY BOOK.

Those had been good days. Everywhere he went, men stopped work to show
him how to plane and carve and mould and fettle and smelt iron and make
horseshoes – but not how to fit them, because any horse went mad when he
entered the stables. One once kicked the boards out of the rear wall.

That particular afternoon he went up to the library, where Miss
Healstether found him a book on scent. He read it so fast that his eyes
should have left trails on the paper. He certainly left a trail in the
library: the twenty-two volumes of Brakefast’s _Compendium of Odours_
were soon stacked on the long lectern, followed by Spout’s _Trumpet of
Equestrianism_, and then, via a detour through the history section, Nutt
plunged into the folklore section, with Miss Healstether pedalling after
him on the mobile library steps.

She watched him with a kind of gratified awe. He’d been barely able to
read when he’d arrived, but the goblin boy had set out to improve his
reading as a boxer trains for a fight. And he was fighting something,
but she wasn’t sure in her own mind what it was and, of course, Ladyship
never explained. He would sit all night under the lamp, book of the
moment in front of him, dictionary and thesaurus on either side,
wringing the meaning out of every word, punching ceaselessly at his own
ignorance.

When she came in the next morning there was a dictionary of Dwarfish and
a copy of Postalume’s _The Speech of Trolls_ on the lectern too.

Surely it’s not right to learn like this, she told herself. It can’t be
settling properly. You can’t just fork it into your head. Learning has
to be digested. You don’t just have to know, you have to comprehend.

She mentioned this to Fassel, the smith, who said, ‘Look, miss, he came
up to me the other day and said he’d watched a smith before, and could
he have a go? Well, you know her ladyship’s orders, so I gave him a bit
of bar stock and showed him the hammer and tongs and next minute he was
going at it like – well, hammer and tongs! Turned out a nice little
knife, very nice indeed. He thinks about things. You can see his ugly
little mush working it all out. Have you ever met a goblin before?’

‘Strange you should ask,’ she told him. ‘Our catalogue says we’ve got
one of the very few copies of J. P. Bunderbell’s _Five Hours and Sixteen
Minutes Among the Goblins of Far Uberwald_, but I can’t find it
anywhere. It’s priceless.’

‘Five hours and sixteen minutes doesn’t sound very long,’ said the
smith.

‘You’d think so, wouldn’t you? But according to a lecture Mr Blunderbell
gave to the Ankh-Morpork Trespassers’ Society,’⁷ said Miss Healstether,
‘it was about five hours too long. He said they ranged in size from
unpleasantly large to disgustingly small, had about the same level of
culture as yogurt and spent their time picking their own noses and
missing. A complete waste of space, he said. It caused quite a stir.
Anthropologists are not supposed to write that sort of thing.’

‘And young Nutt is one of them?’

‘Yes, that puzzled me, too. Did you see him yesterday? There’s something
about him that frightens horses, so he came to the library and found
some old book about the Horseman’s Word. They were a kind of secret
society, which knew how to make special oils that would make horses obey
them. Then he spent the afternoon down in Igor’s crypt, brewing up gods
know what, and this morning he was riding a horse around the yard! It
wasn’t happy, mind you, but he was winning.’

‘I’m surprised his ugly little head doesn’t explode,’ said Fassel.

‘Ha!’ Miss Healstether sounded bitter. ‘Stand by, then, because he’s
discovered the Bonk School.’

‘What’s that?’

‘Not that, them. Philosophers. Well, I _say_ philosophers, but, well . .
.’

‘Oh, the mucky ones,’ said Fassel cheerfully.

‘I wouldn’t say mucky,’ said Miss Healstether, and this was true. A
ladylike librarian would not employ that word in the presence of a
smith, especially one who was grinning. ‘Let’s say “indelicate”, shall
we?’

There is not a lot of call for delicacy on an anvil, so the smith
continued unabashed: ‘They are the ones who go on about what happens if
ladies don’t get enough mutton, and they say cigars are—’

‘That is a fallacy!’

‘That’s right, that’s what I read.’ The smith was clearly enjoying this.
‘And Ladyship lets him read this stuff ?’

‘Indeed, she very nearly insists. I can’t imagine what she’s thinking.’
Or him, come to that, she thought to herself.

There was a limit to how many candles he should make, Trev had told
Nutt. It looked bad if he made too many, Trev explained. The pointy hats
might decide that they didn’t need all the people. That made sense to
Nutt. What would No Face and Concrete and Weepy Mukko do? They would
have nowhere else to go. They had to live in a simple world; they too
easily got knocked down by life in this one.

He’d tried wandering around the other cellars, but there was nothing
much happening at night, and people gave him funny looks. Ladyship did
not rule here. But wizards are a messy lot and nobody tidied up much and
lived to tell the tale, so all sorts of old storerooms and junk-filled
workshops became his for the use of. And there was so much for a lad
with keen night vision to find. He had already seen some luminous spoon
ants carrying a fork, and, to his surprise, the forgotten mazes were
home to that very rare indoorovore, the Uncommon Sock Eater. There were
some things living up in the pipes, too, which periodically murmured,
‘Awk! Awk!’ Who knew what strange monsters made their home here?

He cleaned the pie plates very carefully indeed. Glenda had been kind to
him. He must show that he was kind, too. It was important to be kind.
And he knew where to find some acid.

Lord Vetinari’s personal secretary stepped into the Oblong Office with
barely a disturbance in the air. His lordship glanced up. ‘Ah,
Drumknott. I think I shall have to write to the _Times_ again. I am
certain that one down, six across and nine down appeared in that same
combination three months ago. On a Friday, I believe.’ He dropped the
crossword page on to the desk with a look of disdain. ‘So much for a
Free Press.’

‘Well done, my lord. The Archchancellor has just entered the palace.’
Vetinari smiled. ‘He must have looked at the calendar at last. Thank
goodness they have Ponder Stibbons. Show him straight in after the
customary wait.’

Five minutes later, Mustrum Ridcully was ushered in.

‘Archchancellor! To what urgent matter do I owe this visit? Our usual
meeting is not until the day after tomorrow, I believe.’

‘Er, yes,’ said Ridcully. As he sat down, a very large sherry was placed
in front of him.⁸ ‘Well, Havelock, the fact of the matter is—’

‘But it is in fact quite providential that you have arrived just now,’
Vetinari went on, ignoring him, ‘because a problem has arisen on which I
would like your advice.’

‘Oh? Really?’

‘Yes, indeed. It concerns this wretched game called foot-the-ball . . .’

‘It does?’

The glass, now in Ridcully’s hand, trembled not a fraction. He’d held
his job for a long time, right back to the days when a wizard who
blinked died.

‘One has to move with the times, of course,’ said the Patrician, shaking
his head.

‘We tend not to, over the road,’ said Ridcully. ‘It only encourages
them.’

‘People do not understand the limits of tyranny,’ said Vetinari, as if
talking to himself. ‘They think that because I can do what I like I can
do what I like. A moment’s thought reveals, of course, that this cannot
be so.’

‘Oh, it is the same with magic,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘If you flash
spells around like there’s no tomorrow, there’s a good chance that there
won’t be.’

‘In short,’ Vetinari continued, still talking to the air, ‘I am
intending to give my blessing to the game of football, in the hope that
its excesses can be more carefully controlled.’

‘Well, it worked with the Thieves’ Guild,’ Ridcully observed, amazed at
his own calmness. ‘If there has to be crime, then it should be
organized, I think that’s what you said.’

‘Exactly. I have to admit to the view that all exercise for any purpose
other than bodily health, the defence of the realm and the proper action
of the bowels is barbaric.’

‘Really? What about agriculture?’

‘Defence of the realm against starvation. But I see no point in people
just . . . running about. Did you catch your Megapode, by the way?’

How the hells does he do it? Ridcully wondered. I mean, how? Aloud, he
said, ‘Indeed we did, but surely you are not suggesting that we were
merely “running about”?’

‘Of course not. All three exceptions apply. Tradition is at least as
important as bowels, if not quite so useful. And, indeed, the Poor Boys’
Fun has some remarkable traditions of its own, which some might find it
worthwhile exploring. Let me be frank, Mustrum. I cannot enforce a mere
personal dislike against public pressure. Well, I can, strictly
speaking, but not without going to ridiculous and indeed tyrannical
lengths. Over a game? I think not. So . . . as things stand, we find
teams of burly men pushing and shoving and kicking and biting in the
faint hope, it seems to me, of propelling some wretched object at some
distant goal. I have no problem with them trying to kill one another,
which has little in the way of a downside, but it has now become so
popular once more that property is being damaged, and that cannot be
tolerated. There have been comments in the _Times_. No, what the wise
man cannot change he must channel.’

‘And how do you intend to do that?’

‘By giving the job to you. Unseen University has always had a fine
sporting tradition.’

‘ “Had” is the right word,’ sighed Ridcully. ‘In my day we were all so .
. . so relentlessly physical. But if I was to suggest so much as an egg
and spoon race these days they’d use the spoon to eat the egg.’

‘Alas, I did not know your day was over, Mustrum,’ said Lord Vetinari,
with a smile.

The room, never normally noisy, sank into deeper silence.

‘Now look here—’ Ridcully began.

‘This afternoon I shall be speaking to the editor of the _Times_,’ said
Vetinari, gently surfing his voice over that of the wizard with all the
skill of a born committee manipulator, ‘who is, as we know, a very
civicminded person. I’m sure he will welcome the fact that I am asking
the university to tame the demon foot-the-ball, and that you have, after
careful thought, agreed to the task.’

I don’t have to do this, Ridcully thought carefully. On the other hand,
since it is what I want, and thereby don’t have to ask for, this may be
unwise. Damn! This is so like him!

‘You would not object if we raise our own team?’ he managed.

‘Indeed, I positively demand that you do so. But no magic, Mustrum. I
must make that clear. Magic is not sporting, unless you are playing
against other wizards, of course.’

‘Oh, I am a very sporting man, Havelock.’

‘Capital! How is the Dean settling in at Brazeneck, by the way?’

If it had been anyone else asking, Ridcully thought, that would simply
be a polite enquiry. But this is Vetinari, isn’t it...

‘I’ve been too busy to find out,’ he said loftily, ‘but I’m sure he will
be fine when he finds his feet.’ Or manages to see them without a
mirror, he added to himself.

‘I’m sure you must be pleased to see your old friend and colleague
making his way in the world,’ said Vetinari, innocently. ‘And so is
Pseudopolis itself, of course. I must say, I admire the sturdy burghers
of that city for embarking on their noble experiment in this . . . this
democracy,’ he went on. ‘It is always good to see it attempted again.
And sometimes amusing, too.’

‘There is something to be said for it, you know,’ grunted Ridcully.

‘Yes, I believe you practise it at the university,’ said the Patrician,
with a little smile. ‘However, on the matter of football we are in
accord. Capital. I will tell Mister de Worde what you are doing. I’m
sure that the keen players of foot-the-ball will be interested, when
someone explains the longer words to them. Well done. Do try the sherry.
I am told it is highly palatable.’

Vetinari stood up, a signal that, in theory at least, the business of
the meeting was concluded, and strolled over to a polished stone slab,
set into a square wooden table. ‘On a different note, Mustrum . . . How
is your young visitor?’

‘My visit— Oh, you mean the . . . uh . . .’

‘That’s right.’ Vetinari smiled at the slab as if sharing a joke with
it. ‘The, as you put it, Uh.’

‘I note the sarcasm. As a wizard, I must tell you that words have
power.’

‘As a politician, I must tell you I already know. How is he getting
along? Concerned minds would like to know.’

Ridcully glanced at the little carved men on the playing slab as if they
were listening to him. In a roundabout way, they probably were.
Certainly it was well known now that the hands that guided half the
pieces lived in a big castle in Uberwald, and were female and belonged
to a lady who was mostly rumour.

‘Smeems says he keeps himself to himself. He says he thinks the boy is
cunning.’

‘Oh, good,’ said Vetinari, still seeming to find something totally
engrossing in the layout of playing pieces.

‘Good?’

‘We need cunning people in Ankh-Morpork. We have a Street of Cunning
Artificers, do we not?’

‘Well, yes, but—’

‘Ah, then it is _context_ that has power,’ said Vetinari, turning around
with a look of unmasked delight. ‘Did I say that I am a politician?
Cunning: artful, sly, deceptive, shrewd, astute, cute, on the ball and,
indeed, arch. A word for any praise and every prejudice. Cunning . . .
is a cunning word.’

‘You don’t think that maybe this . . . experiment of yours might be a
step too far?’ said Ridcully.

‘People said that about the vampires, did they not? It’s alleged that
they have no proper language, but I am told he speaks several languages
fluently.’

‘Smeems did say he talked la-di-da,’ Ridcully admitted.

‘Mustrum, compared with Natchbull Smeems, trolls speak la-di-da.’

‘The . . . boy was brought up by a priest of some sort, I know that,’
said Ridcully. ‘But what will he become when he grows up?’

‘By the sound of him, a professor of linguistics.’

‘You know what I mean, Havelock.’

‘Possibly, although I wonder if _you_ do. But he is, I suggest, unlikely
to become a ravening horde all by himself.’

Ridcully sighed. He glanced towards the game again, and Vetinari
noticed.

‘Look at them. Ranks, files,’ he said, waving a hand over the little
stone figures, ‘locked in everlasting conflict at the whim of the
player. They fight, they fall, and they cannot turn back because the
whips drive them on, and all they know is whips, kill or be killed.
Darkness in front of them, darkness behind them, darkness and whips in
their heads. But what if you could take one out of this game, get him
before the whips do, take him to a place without whips – what might he
become? One creature. One singular being. Would you deny them that
chance?’

‘You had three men hanged last week,’ said Ridcully, without quite
understanding why.

‘They had their chances. They used them to kill, and worse. All we get
is a chance. We don’t get a benison. _He_ was chained to an anvil for
seven years. He should get his chance, don’t you think?’

Suddenly Vetinari was smiling again.

‘Let us not get sombre, however. I look forward to your ushering in a
new era of lively, healthy activity in the best sporting tradition.
Indeed, tradition will be your friend here, I am sure. Please don’t let
me trespass any further on your time.’

Ridcully drained the sherry. That at least was palatable.

It’s a short walk from the palace to Unseen University; positions of
power like to keep an eye on one another.

Ridcully walked back through the crowds, occasionally nodding at people
he knew, which, in this part of the city, was practically everyone.

Trolls, he thought, we get along with trolls, now that they remember to
look where they’re putting their feet. Got ’em in the Watch and
everything. Jolly decent types, bar a few bad apples, and gods know we
have enough of those of our own. Dwarfs? Been here for ages. Can be a
bit tricky, can be as tight as a duck’s arse – here he paused to think
and edited that thought to ‘drive a hard bargain’. You always know where
you are with them, anyway, and of course they are short, which is always
a comfort provided you know what they are doing down there. Vampires?
Well, the Uberwald League of Temperance seemed to be working. Word on
the street – or in the vault or whatever – was that they policed their
own. Any unreformed bloodsucker who tried to make a killing in the city
would be hunted down by people who knew exactly how they thought and
where they hung out.

Lady Margolotta was behind all that. She was the person who, by
diplomacy, and probably more direct means, had got things moving again
in Uberwald, and she had some sort of . . . relationship with Vetinari.
Everyone knew it, and that was all everyone knew. A dot dot dot
relationship. One of those. And nobody had been able to join up the
dots.

She had been to the city on diplomatic visits, and not even the
well-practised dowagers of Ankh-Morpork had been able to detect a
whisper of anything other than a businesslike amiability and
international cooperation between the two of them.

And he played endless and complex games with her, via the clacks system,
and apart from that, that was, well, that . . . until now.

And she’d sent him this Nutt to keep safe. Who knew why, apart from
them? Politics, probably.

Ridcully sighed. One of the monsters, all alone. It was hard to think of
it. They came in thousands, like lice, killing everything and eating the
dead, including theirs. The Evil Empire had bred them in huge cellars,
grey demons without a hell.

The gods alone knew what had happened to them when the Empire collapsed.
But there was convincing evidence now that some still lived up in the
far hills. What might they do? And one, right now, was making candles in
Ridcully’s cellars. What might he become?

‘A bloody nuisance?’ said Ridcully aloud.

‘’ere, ’oo are you calling a nuisance, mister? It’s my road, same as
yours!’

The wizard looked down at a young man who appeared to have stolen his
clothes only from the best washing lines, though the tattered black and
red scarf around his neck was probably his own. There was an edginess to
him, a continual shifting of weight, as though he might at any moment
run off in a previously unguessable direction. And he was throwing a tin
can up in the air and catching it again. For Ridcully it brought back
memories so sharp that they stung, but he pulled himself together.

‘I am Mustrum Ridcully, Archchancellor and Master of Unseen University,
young man, and I see you are sporting colours. For some game? A game of
football, I suggest?’

‘As it happens, yes. So what?’ said the urchin, then realized that his
hand was empty when it should now, under normal gravitational rules, be
full again. The tin had not fallen back from its last ascent, and was in
fact turning gently twenty feet up in the air.

‘Childish of me, I know,’ said Ridcully, ‘but I did want your full
attention. I want to witness a game of football.’

‘Witness? Look, I never saw nuffin’—’

Ridcully sighed. ‘I mean I want to watch a game, okay? Today, if
possible.’

‘You? Are you sure? It’s your funeral, mister. Got a shilling?’

There was a clink, high above.

‘The tin will come back down with a sixpence in it. Time and place,
please.’

‘’ow do I know I can trust you?’ said the urchin.

‘I don’t know,’ said Ridcully. ‘The subtle workings of the brain are a
mystery to me, too. But I’m glad that is your belief.’

‘What?’ With a shrug, the boy decided to gamble, what with having had no
breakfast.

‘Loop Alley off the Scours, ’arp arsed one, an’ I’ve never seen you
before in my life, got it?’

‘That is quite probable,’ said Ridcully, and snapped his fingers.

The tin dropped into the urchin’s waiting hand. He shook out the silver
coin and grinned. ‘Best o’ luck to you, guv.’

‘Is there anything to eat at these affairs?’ said Ridcully, for whom
lunchtime was a sacrament.

‘There’s pies, guv, pease pudding, jellied eel pies, pie and mash,
lobster . . . pies, but mostly they are just pies. Just pies, sir. Made
of pie.’

‘What kind?’

His informant looked shocked. ‘They’re pies, guv. You don’t ask.’

Ridcully nodded. ‘And as a final transaction, I’ll pay you one penny for
a kick of your can.’

‘Tuppence,’ said the boy promptly.

‘You little scamp, we have a deal.’

Ridcully dropped the can on the toe of his boot, balanced it for a
moment, then flicked it into the air and, as it came down, hit it with a
roundhouse kick that sent it spinning over the crowd.

‘Not bad, granddad,’ said the kid, grinning. In the distance there was a
yell and the sound of someone bent on retribution.

Ridcully plunged a hand into his pocket and looked down. ‘Two dollars to
start running, kid. You won’t get a better deal today!’ The boy laughed,
grabbed the coins and ran. Ridcully walked on sedately, while the years
fell back on him like snow.

He found Ponder Stibbons pinning up a notice on the board just outside
the Great Hall. He did this quite a lot. Ridcully assumed it made him
feel better in some way.

He slapped Ponder on the back, causing him to spill drawing pins all
over the flagstones.

‘It is a bulletin from the Ankh Committee on Safety, Archchancellor,’
said Ponder, scrabbling for the spinning, wayward pins.

‘This is a university of magic, Stibbons. We have no business with
safety. Just being a wizard is unsafe, and so it should be.’

‘Yes, Archchancellor.’

‘But I should pick up all those pins if I were you, you can’t be too
careful. Tell me – didn’t we use to have a sports master here?’

‘Yes, sir. Evans the Striped. He vanished about forty years ago, I
believe.’

‘Killed? It was dead men’s shoes in those days, you know.’

‘I can’t imagine who would want his job. Apparently he evaporated while
doing press-ups in the Great Hall one day.’

‘Evaporated? What kind of death is that for a wizard? Any wizard would
die of shame if he just evaporated. We always leave _something_ behind,
even if it’s only smoke. Oh, well. Cometh the hour, cometh the . . .
whatever. General comethness, perhaps. What is that thinking engine of
yours doing these days?’

Ponder brightened. ‘As a matter of fact, Archchancellor, Hex has just
discovered a new particle. It travels faster than light in two
directions at once!’

‘Can we make it do anything interesting?’

‘Well yes! It totally explodes Spolwhittle’s Trans-Congruency Theory!’

‘Good,’ said Ridcully cheerfully. ‘Just so long as something explodes.
Since it’s finished exploding, set it to finding either Evans or a
decent substitute. Sports masters are pretty elementary particles, it
shouldn’t be difficult. And call a meeting of the Council in ten
minutes. We are going to play football!’

Truth is female, since truth is beauty rather than handsomeness; this,
Ridcully reflected as the Council grumbled in, would certainly explain
the saying that a lie could run around the world before Truth has got
its, correction, _her_ boots on, since she would have to choose which
pair – the idea that any woman in a position to choose would have just
one pair of boots being beyond rational belief. Indeed, as a goddess she
would have lots of shoes, and thus many choices: comfy shoes for home
truths, hobnail boots for unpleasant truths, simple clogs for universal
truths and possibly some kind of slipper for self-evident truth. More
important right now was what kind of truth he was going to have to
impart to his colleagues, and he decided not on the whole truth, but
instead on nothing but the truth, which dispensed with the need for
honesty.

‘Well, go on, then, what did he say?’

‘He responded to reasoned argument.’

‘He did? Where’s the catch?’

‘None. But he wants the rules to be more traditional.’

‘Surely not! Gather they are practically prehistoric as it is!’

‘And he wants the university to take the lead in all this, and quickly.
Gentlemen, there is a game going to be played in about three hours’
time. I suggest we observe it. And to this end, I will require you to
wear . . . trousers.’

After a while Ridcully took out his watch, which was one of the
old-fashioned imp-driven ones and was reliably inaccurate. He flipped up
the gold lid and stared patiently as the little creature pedalled the
hands around. When the expostulating had not stopped after a minute and
a half, he snapped the lid shut. The click had an effect that no amount
of extra shouting could have achieved.

‘Gentlemen,’ he said gravely. ‘We must partake of the game of the people
– from whom, I might add, we derive. Has any of us, in the last few
decades, even seen the game being played? I thought not. We should get
outside more. Now, I’m not asking you to do this for me, or even for the
hundreds of people who work to provide us with a life in which
discomfort so seldom rears its head. Yes, many other ugly heads have
reared, it is true, but dinner has always beckoned. We are, fellow
wizards, the city’s last line of defence against all the horrors that
can be thrown against it. However, none of them are as potentially
dangerous as us. Yes, indeed. I don’t know what might happen if wizards
were really hungry. So do this, I implore you on this one occasion, for
the sake of the cheeseboard.’

There had been some nobler calls to arms in history, Ridcully would be
the first to admit, but this one was well tailored to its target
audience. There was some grumbling, but that was the same as saying that
the sky was blue.

‘What about lunch?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes suspiciously.

‘We’ll eat early,’ said Ridcully, ‘and I am told that the pies at the
game are just – amazing.’

Truth, in front of her huge walk-in wardrobe, selected black leather
boots with stiletto heels for such a barefaced truth.

Nutt was already waiting with a proud but worried look on his face when
Glenda got in to the Night Kitchen. She didn’t notice him at first, but
she turned back from hanging her coat on its peg and there he was,
holding a couple of dishes in front of him like shields.

She almost had to shade her eyes because they gleamed so brightly.

‘I hope this is all right,’ said Nutt nervously.

‘What have you done?’

‘I plated them with silver, miss.’

‘How did you do that?’

‘Oh, there’s all kinds of old stuff in the cellars and, well, I know how
to do things. It won’t cause trouble for anyone, will it?’ Nutt added,
looking suddenly anxious.

Glenda wondered if it would. It shouldn’t, but you could never be sure
with Mrs Whitlow. Well, she could solve that problem by hiding them
somewhere until they tarnished.

‘It’s kind of you to take the trouble. I generally have to chase people
to get plates back. You are a real gentleman,’ she said, and his face
lit up like a sunrise.

‘You are very kind,’ he beamed, ‘and a very handsome lady with your two
enormous chests that indicate bountifulness and fecundity—’

The morning air froze in one enormous block. He could tell he’d said
something wrong, but he had no idea what it was.

Glenda looked around to see if anyone had heard, but the huge gloomy
room was otherwise empty. She was always the first one in and the last
one out. Then she said, ‘Stay right there. Don’t you dare move an inch!
Not an inch! And don’t steal any chickens!’ she commanded as an
afterthought.

She should have trailed steam as she headed out of the room, her boots
echoing on the flagstones. What a thing to come out with! Who did he
think he was? Come to that, who did she think he was? And what did she
think he was?

The cellars and undercrofts of the university were a small city in
themselves, and bakers and butchers turned to look as she clattered
past. She didn’t dare stop now; it would be too embarrassing.

If you knew all the passages and stairs, and if they stayed still for
five minutes, it was possible to get to just about anywhere in the
university without going above ground. Probably none of the wizards knew
the maze. Not many of them cared to know the dull details of domestic
management. Hah, they thought the dinners turned up by magic!

A small set of stone steps led up to the little door. Hardly anyone used
it these days. The other girls wouldn’t go in there. But Glenda would.
Even after the very first time that she had, in response to the bell,
delivered the midnight banana, or rather had failed to deliver it on
account of running away screaming, she knew she’d have to face it again.
After all, we can’t help how we’re made, her mother had said, and nor
can we help what a magical accident might turn us into through no fault
of our own, as Mrs Whitlow had explained slightly more recently, when
the screaming had stopped. And so Glenda had picked up the banana and
had headed right back there.

Now, of course, she was surprised that anyone might find it odd that the
custodian of all the knowledge that could be was a reddish brown and
generally hung several feet above his desk, and she was pretty certain
that she knew at least fourteen meanings of the word ‘ook’.

As it was daytime, the huge building beyond the little door was
bustling, insofar as the word can be applied to a library. She headed
towards the nearest lesser librarian, who failed to look the other way
in time, and demanded: ‘I need to see a dictionary of embarrassing words
beginning with F!’

His haughty glance softened somewhat when he realized she was a cook.
Wizards always had a place in their hearts for cooks, because it was
near their stomach.

‘Ah, then I think Birdcatcher’s _Discomforting Misusage_ will be our
friend here,’ he said cheerfully, and led her to a lectern, where she
spent several enlightening minutes before heading back the way she had
come, a little wiser and a great deal more embarrassed.

Nutt was still standing where she’d told him to stand, and looked
terrified.

‘I’m sorry, I didn’t know what you meant,’ she said, and thought:
abundant, productive and fruitful. Well, yes, I can see how he got
there, worse luck, but that’s not me, not really me. I think. I hope.

‘Um, it was kind of you to say that about me,’ she said, ‘but you should
have used more appropriate language.’

‘Ah, yes, I’m so sorry,’ said Nutt. ‘Mister Trev told me about this. I
should not talk posh. I should have said that you have enormous t—’

‘Just stop there, will you? Trevor Likely is teaching _you_ elocution?’

‘Don’t tell me, I know this one . . . You mean talkin’ proper?’ said
Nutt. ‘Yes, and he’s promised to take me to the football,’ he added
proudly.

This led to some explanation, which only made Glenda gloomy. Trev was
right, of course. People who didn’t know long words tended to be edgy
around people who did. That’s why her male neighbours, like Mr Stollop
and his mates, distrusted nearly everybody. Their wives, on the other
hand, shared a much larger if somewhat specialized vocabulary owing to
the cheap romantic novels that passed like contraband from scullery to
washhouse, in every street. That’s why Glenda knew ‘elocution’,
‘torrid’, ‘boudoir’ and ‘reticule’, although she wasn’t too certain
about ‘reticule’ and ‘boudoir’, and avoided using them, which in the
general scheme of things was not hard. She was deeply suspicious about
what a lady’s boudoir might be, and certainly wasn’t going to ask
anybody, even in the Library, just in case they laughed.

‘And he’s going to take you to the football, is he? Mister Nutt, you
will stand out like a diamond in a sweep’s earhole!’

DO NOT STAND OUT FROM THE CROWD. There were so many things to remember!

‘He says he will look after me,’ said Nutt, hanging his head. ‘Er, I was
wondering who that nice young lady was who was in here last night,’ he
added desperately, as transparent as air.

‘He asked you to ask me, right?’

LIE. STAY SAFE. But Ladyship wasn’t here! And the nice apple-pie lady
was right here in front of him! It was too complicated!

‘Yes,’ he said meekly.

And Glenda surprised herself. ‘Her name is Juliet, and she lives bang
next door to me so he’d better not come round, okay? Juliet Stollop, see
if he likes that.’

‘You fear he will press his suit?’

‘Her dad will press a lot more than that if he sees he’s a Dimmer
supporter!’

Nutt looked blank, so she went on: ‘Don’t you know anything? Dimwell Old
Pals? The football team? The Dollies are Dolly Sisters Football Club.
Dollies hate the Dimmers, the Dimmers hate the Dollies! It’s always been
like that!’

‘What could have caused such a difference between them?’

‘What? There is no difference between them, not when you’ve got past the
colours! They’re two teams, alike in villainy! Dolly Sisters wears white
and black, Dimwell wears pink and green. It’s all about football.
Bloody, bloody, clogging, hacking, punching, gouging, silly football!’
The bitterness in Glenda’s voice would have soured cream.

‘But you have a Dolly Sisters scarf !’

‘When you live there, it’s safer that way. Anyway, you have to support
your own.’

‘But is it not a game, like spillikins or halma or Thud?’

‘No! It’s more like war, but without the kindness and consideration!’
‘Oh, dear. But war is not kind, is it?’ said Nutt, bewilderment clouding
his face.

‘No!’

‘Oh, I see. You were being ironic.’

She gave him a sideways look. ‘I might have been,’ she conceded. ‘You
are an odd one, Mister Nutt. Where are you from, really?’

The old panic contained again. BE HARMLESS. BE HELPFUL. MAKE FRIENDS.
LIE. But how did you lie to friends?

‘I must go,’ he said, scurrying down the stone steps. ‘Mister Trev will
be waiting!’

Nice but odd, Glenda thought, watching him leap down the steps. Clever,
too. To spot my scarf on a hook ten yards away.

The sound of a rattling tin can alerted Nutt to his boss’s presence
before he had even hurried through the old archway to the vats. The
other habitués had paused in their work, which, frankly, given its usual
snail-like progress, meant hardly any change at all, and were watching
him listlessly. But they were watching, at least. Even Concrete looked
vaguely alert, but Nutt saw a little dribble of brown in the corner of
his mouth. Someone had been giving him iron filings again.

The can shot up as Trev caught it with his boot, flew over his head, and
then came back obliquely, as if rolling down an invisible slope, and
landed in his waiting hand. There was a murmur of appreciation from the
watchers and Concrete banged his hand on the table, which generally
meant approval.

‘What kept you, Gobbo? Chatting up Glenda, were you? You’ve got no
chance there, take it from me. Been there, tried that, oh yes. No
chance, mate.’ He threw a grubby bag towards Nutt. ‘Get these on quick,
else you’ll stand out like a diamond in—’

‘A sweep’s earhole?’ Nutt suggested.

‘Yeah! You’re gettin’ it. Now don’t hang about or we’ll be late.’

Nutt looked doubtfully at a long, a very long scarf in pink and green
and a large yellow woolly hat with a pink bobble on it.

‘Pull it down hard so it covers your ears,’ Trev commanded. ‘Get a move
on!’

‘Er . . . pink?’ said Nutt doubtfully, holding up the scarf.

‘What about it?’

‘Well, isn’t football a rough man’s game? Whereas pink, if you will
excuse me, is rather a . . . female colour?’

Trev grinned. ‘Yeah, that’s right. Think about it. You are the clever
one around here. And you can walk and think at the same time, I know
that. Makes you stand out from the crowd in these parts.’

‘Ah, I think I have it. The pink proclaims an almost belligerent
masculinity, saying as it does: I am so masculine I can afford to tempt
you to question it, giving me the opportunity to proclaim it anew by
doing violence to you in response. I don’t know if you have ever read
Ofleberger’s _Die Wesentlichen Ungewissheiten Zugehörig der
Offenkundigen Männlichkeit_ ?’

Trev grabbed his shoulder and spun him round. ‘Wot do you fink, Gobbo?’
he said, his red face a couple of inches from Nutt’s. ‘Wot is your
problem? Wot are you all about? You come out with ten-dollar words an’
you lay ’em down like a man doin’ a jigsaw! So how come you’re down in
the vats, eh, workin’ for someone like me? It don’t make sense! Are you
on the run from the Old Sam? No problem, there, unless you did up an old
lady or somethin’, but you got to tell me!’

Too dangerous, thought Nutt desperately. Change the subject! ‘She’s
called Juliet!’ he gasped. ‘The girl you asked about! She lives next
door to Glenda! Honestly!’

Trev looked suspicious. ‘Glenda told you that?’

‘Yes!’

‘She was windin’ you up. She knew you’d tell me.’

‘I don’t think she would lie to me, Mister Trev. She is my friend.’

‘I kept thinkin’ about her all last night,’ said Trev.

‘Well, she is a wonderful cook,’ Nutt agreed.

‘I meant Juliet!’

‘Um, and Glenda said to tell you that Juliet’s other name is Stollop,’
said Nutt, hating to be the bearer of worse news.

‘What? That girl is a Stollop?’

‘Yes. Glenda said I was to see how you liked that, but I know the
meaning of irony.’

‘But it’s like findin’ a strawberry in a dogmeat stew, yeah? I mean, the
Stollops are buggers, the lot of ’em, biters and cloggers to a man, the
kind of bastards who’ll kick your family jewels up into your throat.’

‘But you don’t play football, do you? You just watch.’

‘Damn right! But I’m a Face, right? I’m known in all the boroughs. You
can ask anyone. Everyone knows Trev Likely. I’m Dave Likely’s lad. Every
supporter in the city knows about him. Four goals! No one else scored
that much in a lifetime! And gave as good as he got, did Dad. One game
he picked up the Dolly bastard holding the ball and threw ’im over the
line. He gave as good as ’e got, my dad, and then some.’

‘So, he was a bugger and a clogger and a biter too, was he?’

‘What? Are you pulling my tonker?’

‘I would not wish to do so initially, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt, so
solemnly that Trev had to grin, ‘but, you see, if he fought the opposing
team with even more force than they used, does that not mean that he—’

‘He was my dad,’ said Trev. ‘That means you don’t try any fancy maths,
okay?’

‘Okay indeed. And you never wanted to follow in his footsteps?’

‘What, and get brung home on a stretcher? I got my brains from my ol’
mum, not from Dad. He was a good bloke and loved his football, but he
wasn’t flush with brains to start with an’ on that day some of ’em were
leakin’ out of his ear. The Dollies got ’im in the melee and sorted ’im
out good and proper. That’s not for me, Gobbo. I’m smart.’

‘Yes, Mister Trev, I can see that.’

‘Get the gear on and let’s go, okay? We don’t want to miss anything.’

‘Fing,’ said Nutt automatically, as he started to wind the huge scarf
around his neck.

‘What?’ said Trev, frowning.

‘Wot?’ said Nutt, his voice a little muffled. There was a lot of scarf.
It was almost covering his mouth.

‘Are you pulling my chuff, Gobbo?’ said Trev, handing him an ancient
sweater, faded and saggy with age.

‘Please, Mister Trev, I don’t know! There appears to be so much I might
inadvertently pull!’ He tugged on the big woolly hat with the pink
pompom on it. ‘They are so very pink, Mister Trev. We must be bursting
with machismo!’

‘I don’t know what you person’ly are bursting with, Gobbo, but here’s
somethin’ to learn. “Come on if you think you’re hard enough.” Now _you_
say it.’

‘Come on if you think you’re hard enough,’ said Nutt obediently.

‘Well, okay,’ said Trev, inspecting him. ‘Just remember, if anyone
starts pushing you around during the game, and givin’ you grief, just
you say that to ’em and they’ll see you’re wearing the Dimmer colours
and they’ll think twice. Got it?’

Nutt, somewhere in the space between the big bobbly hat and the boa
constrictor of a scarf, nodded.

‘Wow, there you are, Gobbo, a complete . . . fan. Your own mother
wouldn’t recognize you!’

There was a pause before a voice emerged from inside the mound of
ancient woollens, which looked very much like a nursery layette made by
a couple of giants who weren’t sure what to expect.

‘I believe you are accurate.’

‘Yeah? Well, that’s good, innit? Now let’s go and meet the lads. Move
fast, stay close.’

‘Now remember, this is a pre-season friendly between the Angels and the
Whoppers, right?’ said Trev, as they stepped out into a fine rain which,
because of Ankh-Morpork’s standing cloud of pollution, was morphing
gently into smog. ‘They’re both pretty crap, they’ll never amount to
anythin’, but the Dimmers shout for the Angels, right?’

It took some explaining, but the core of it, as far as Nutt could
understand it, was this: All football teams in the city were rated by
Dimwell in proportion to their closeness, physical, psychological or
general gut feeling, to the hated Dolly Sisters. It had just evolved
that way. If you went to a match between two other teams, you
automatically, according to some complex and ever-changing
ready-reckoner of love and hate, cheered the team most nearly allied to
your native turf or, more accurately, cobbles.

‘Do you see what I mean?’ Trev finished.

‘I have committed what you said to memory, Mister Trev.’

‘Oh Brutha, an’ I’ll bet you ’ave, at that. And it’s just Trev when
we’re not at work, right? We shout together, right?’ He punched Nutt
playfully on the arm.

‘Why did you do that, Mister Trev?’ said Nutt. His eyes, almost the only
part of him visible, looked hurt. ‘You struck me!’

‘That wasn’t me hitting you, Gobbo! That was just a friendly punch! Big
difference! Don’t you know that? It’s a little tap on the arm, to show
we’re mates. Go on, do it to me. Go on.’ Trev winked.

. . . YOU WILL BE POLITE AND, MOST OF ALL, YOU WILL NEVER RAISE YOUR
HAND IN ANGER TO ANYONE . . .

But this wasn’t like that, was it? Nutt asked himself. Trev was his
friend. This was friendly. A friend thing. He punched the friendly arm.

‘That was a punch?’ said Trev. ‘You call that a punch? A girl could
punch better’n that! How come you’re still alive with a weedy punch like
that? Go on, try a proper punch!’

Nutt did.

Be one of the crowd? It went against everything a wizard stood for, and
a wizard would not stand for anything if he could sit down for it, but
even sitting down, you had to stand out. There were, of course, times
when a robe got in the way, especially when a wizard was working in his
forge, creating a magic metal or mobiloid glass or any of those other
little exercises in practical magic where not setting fire to yourself
is a happy bonus, so every wizard had some leather trousers and a
stained, rotted-by-acid shirt. It was the shared dirty little secret,
not very secret, but ingrained with deep-down dirt.

Ridcully sighed. His colleagues had aimed for the look of the common
man, but had only a hazy grasp of what the common man looked like these
days, and now they were sniggering and looking at one another and saying
things like ‘Cor blimey, don’t you scrub down well, as it were, my ol’
mate.’ Beside them, and looking extremely embarrassed, were two of the
university’s bledlows, not knowing what to do with their feet and
wishing that they were having a quiet smoke somewhere in the warm.

‘Gentlemen,’ Ridcully began, and then with a gleam in his eye added, ‘or
should I say, fellow workers by hand and brain, this afternoon we— Yes,
Senior Wrangler?’

‘Are we, in point of fact, workers? This is a university, after all,’
said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I agree with the Senior Wrangler,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.
‘Under university statute we are specifically forbidden to engage, other
than within college precincts, in any magic above level four, unless
specifically asked to do so by the civil power or, under clause three,
we really want to. We are acting as place holders, and as such,
forbidden from working.’

‘Would you accept “slackers by hand and brain”?’ said Ridcully, always
happy to see how far he could go.

‘Slackers by hand and brain _by statute_,’ said the Senior Wrangler
primly.

Ridcully gave up. He could do this all day, but life couldn’t be all
fun.

‘That being settled, then, I must tell you that I have asked the
stalwart Mister Frankly Ottomy and Mister Alf Nobbs to join us in this
little escapade. Mister Nobbs says that since we are not wearing
football favours we should not attract unwanted attention.’

The wizards nodded nervously at the bledlows. They were, of course,
merely employees of the university, while the wizards were, well, _were_
the university, weren’t they? After all, a university was not just about
bricks and mortar, it was about people, specifically wizards. But to a
man, the bledlows scared them. They were all hefty men with a look of
having been carved out of bacon. And they were all descendants of, and
practically identical to, those men who had chased those wizards –
younger and more limber, and it was amazing how fast you could run with
a couple of bledlows behind you – through the foggy night-time streets.
If caught, said bledlows, who took enormous pleasure in the prosecution
of the university’s private laws and idiosyncratic rules, would then
drag you before the Archchancellor on a charge of Attempting to Become
Rascally Drunk. That was preferable to fighting back, when the bledlows
were widely believed to take the opportunity for a little class warfare.
That was years ago, but even now the unexpected sight of a bledlow
caused sullen, shameful terror to flow down the spines of men who had
acquired more letters after their names than a game of Scrabble.

Mr Ottomy, recognizing this, leered and touched the brim of his uniform
cap. ‘Afternoon, gents,’ he said. ‘Don’t you worry about a thing. Me and
Alf here will see you right. We’d better get movin’, though, they bully
off in half an hour.’

The Senior Wrangler would not have been the Senior Wrangler if he did
not hate the sound of silence. As they shuffled out of the back door,
wincing at the unfamiliar chafing of trouser upon knee, he turned to Mr
Nobbs and said, ‘Nobbs . . . that’s not a common name. Tell me, Alf, are
you by any chance related to the famous Corporal Nobby Nobbs of the
Watch?’

Mr Nobbs took it well, Ridcully thought, given the clumsy lack of
protocol.

‘Nosir!’

‘Ah, a distant branch of the name, then . . .’

‘Nosir! Different tree!’

In the greyness of her front room, Glenda looked at the suitcase, and
despaired. She’d done her best with brown boot polish, week after week,
but it had been bought from a shonky shop and the cardboard under the
leather-ish exterior was beginning to show through. Her customers never
seemed to notice, but she did, even when it was out of sight.

It was a secret part of a secret life that she lived for an hour or two
on her half-day off once a week, and maybe a little longer if today’s
cold calls worked out.

She looked at her face in the mirror, and said in a voice that was full
of jaunt: ‘We all know the problem of underarm defoliation. It is so
hard, isn’t it, to keep the lichens healthy . . . But,’ she flourished a
green and blue container with a golden stopper, ‘one spray with Verdant
Spring will keep those crevices moist and forest fresh all day long . .
.’

She faltered, because it really wasn’t her. She couldn’t do jaunty. The
stuff was a dollar a bottle! Who could afford that? Well, a lot of troll
ladies, that’s who, but Mr Stronginthearm said it was okay because they
had the money, and anyway it did let the moss grow. She’d said all
right, but a dollar for a fancy bottle of water with some plant food in
it was a bit steep. And he’d said you are Selling the Dream.

And they bought it. That was the worrying part. They bought it and
recommended it to their friends. The city had discovered the Heavy
Dollar now. She’d read about it in the paper. There had always been
trolls around, doing the heavy lifting and generally being there in the
background if not being the actual background itself. But now they were
raising families and running businesses, moving on and up and buying
things, and that made them people at last. And so you got other people
like Mr Stronginthearm, a dwarf, selling beauty products to Miss and Mrs
Troll, via ladies like Glenda, a human, because although dwarfs and
trolls were officially great chums these days, because of something
called the Koom Valley Accord, that sort of thing only meant much to the
sort of people who signed treaties. Even the most well-intentioned dwarf
would not walk down some of the roads along which Glenda, every week,
dragged her nasty, semi-cardboard case, Selling the Dream. It got her
out of the house and paid for the little treats. There was money to put
away for a rainy day. Mr Stronginthearm had the knack of coming up with
new ideas, too. Who would have thought that lady trolls would go for
fake-tan lotion? It sold. Everything sold. The Dream sold, and it was
shallow and expensive and made her feel cheap. It—

Her ever-straining ears caught the sound of next door’s front door
opening very slowly. Ha! Juliet jumped as Glenda suddenly loomed beside
her.

‘Off somewhere?’

‘Gonna watch the game, ain’t I?’

Glenda glanced up the street. A figure was disappearing rapidly around
the corner. She grinned a grim grin.

‘Oh yes. Good idea. I wasn’t doing anything. Just wait while I fetch my
scarf, will you?’ To herself she added, You just keep walking, Johnny!

With a thump that caused pigeons to explode away like a detonating
daisy, the Librarian landed on his chosen rooftop.

He liked football. Something about the shouting and the fighting
appealed to his ancestral memories. And this was fascinating, because,
strictly speaking, his ancestors had been blamelessly engaged for
centuries as upstanding corn and feed merchants and, moreover, were
allergic to heights.

He sat down on the parapet with his feet over the edge, and his nostrils
flared as he snuffed up the scents rising from below.

It is said that the onlooker sees most of the game. But the Librarian
could smell as well, and the game, seen from outside, was humanity. Not
a day went past without his thanking the magical accident that had moved
him a few little genes away from it. Apes had it worked out. No ape
would philosophize, ‘The mountain is, and is not.’ They would think,
‘The banana is. I will eat the banana. There is no banana. I want
another banana.’

He peeled one now, in a preoccupied way, while watching the evolving
tableau below. Not only does said onlooker see most of the game, he
might even see more than one game.

This street was indeed a crescent, which would probably have an effect
on tactics if the players had any truck with such high-flown concepts.

People were pouring in from either end and also from a couple of
alleyways. Mostly they were male – extremely so. The women fell into two
categories: those who had been tugged there by the ties of blood or
prospective matrimony (after which they could stop pretending that this
bloody mess was in any way engrossing), and a number of elderly women of
a ‘sweet old lady’ construction, who bawled indiscriminately, in a
rising cloud of lavender and peppermint, screams of ‘Get ’im dahn an’
kick ’im inna nuts!’ and similar exhortations.

And there was another smell now, one he’d learned to recognize but could
not quite fathom. It was the smell of Nutt. Tangled with it were the
smells of tallow, cheap soap and shonky-shop clothing that the ape part
of him categorized as belonging to ‘Tin Flinging Man’. He had been just
another servant in the maze of the university, but now he was a friend
of Nutt, and Nutt was important. He was also wrong. He had no place in
the world, but he was in it, and the world was becoming aware of him
soon enough.

The Librarian knew all about this sort of thing. There had been no space
in the fabric of reality marked ‘simian librarian’ until he’d been
dropped into one, and the ripples had made his life a very strange one.

Ah, another scent was riding the gentle updraught. It was easy:
Screaming Banana Pie Woman. The Librarian liked her. Oh, she had
screamed and run away the first time she’d seen him. They all did. But
she had come back, and she’d smelled ashamed. She also respected the
primacy of words, and, as a primate, so did he. And sometimes she baked
him a banana pie, which was a kind act. The Librarian was not very
familiar with love, which had always struck him as a bit ethereal and
soppy, but kindness, on the other hand, was practical. You knew where
you were with kindness, especially if you were holding a pie it had just
given you. She was a friend of Nutt, too. Nutt made friends easily for
someone who had come from nowhere. Interesting . . .

The Librarian, despite appearances, liked order. Books about cabbages
went on the Brassica shelves, (blit) UUSSFY890-9046 (antiblit1.1),
although obviously _Mr Cauliflower’s Big Adventure_ would be better
placed in UUSS J3.2 (>blit) 9, while _The Tau of Cabbage_ would
certainly be a candidate for UUSS (blit+) 60-sp55-09-hl (blit). To
anyone familiar with a seven-dimensional library system in blit
dimensional space it was as clear as daylight, if you remembered to keep
your eye on the blit.

Ah, and here came his fellow wizards, walking awkwardly in the chafing
trousers and trying so hard not to stand out in a crowd that they would
have stood out even more if the rest of the crowd had been the least bit
interested.

Nobody noticed. It was enthralling and exciting at the same time,
Ridcully concluded. Normally the pointy hat, robe and staff cleared the
way faster than a troll with an axe.

They were being pushed! And shoved! But it was not as unpleasant as the
words suggested. There were moderate pressures on all sides as people
poured in behind, as though the wizards were standing chest deep in the
sea, and were swaying and shifting to the slow rhythm of the tide.

‘My goodness,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Is this football?
It’s a bit dull, isn’t it?’

‘Pies were mentioned,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, craning his
neck.

‘People are still coming in, guv,’ said Ottomy.

‘But however do we see things?’

‘Depends on the Shove, guv. Usually people near the action shout out.’

‘Ah, I see a pie seller,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. He took
a couple of steps forward, there was a random shift and sway in the
crowd, and he vanished.

‘How is it now, Mister Trev?’ said Nutt, as people surged around them.
‘Hurts like buggery, excuse my Klatchian,’ muttered Trev, clutching his
injured arm to his coat. ‘Are you sure you weren’t holding a hammer?’

‘No hammer, Mister Trev. I’m sorry, but you did ask me—’

‘I know, I know. Where did you learn to punch like that?’

‘Never learned, Mister Trev. I must never raise my hand to another
person! But you went on so, and—’

‘I mean, you’re so skinny!’

‘Long bones, Mister Trev, long muscles. I really am very sorry!’

‘My fault, Gobbo, I didn’t know your own strength—’ Suddenly Trev shot
forward, cannoning into Nutt.

‘Where’ve you been, my man?’ said the person who had just slapped him
hard on the back. ‘We said to meet at the eel-pie stall!’

Now the speaker looked at Nutt and his eyes narrowed. ‘And who’s this
stranger who thinks he’s one of us?’

He did not exactly glare at Nutt, but there was a definite sense of a
weighing in the balance, and on unfriendly scales.

Trev brushed himself off, looking uncharacteristically embarrassed. ‘Hi,
Andy. Er, this is Nutt. He works for me.’

‘What as? A bog brush?’ said Andy. There was laughter from the group
behind him. Andy always got a laugh. It was the first thing you noticed,
after the glint in his eye.

‘Andy’s dad is captain of Dimwell, Gobbo.’

‘Pleased to meet you, sir,’ said Nutt, extending a hand.

‘Ooo, pleased to meet you, sir,’ Andy mimicked, and Trev grimaced as a
calloused hand the size of a plate grasped Nutt’s cheese-straw fingers.

‘He’s got hands like a girl,’ Andy observed, taking a grip.

‘Mister Trev has been telling me wonderful things about the Dimmers,
sir,’ said Nutt. Andy grunted. Trev saw his knuckles whiten with effort
while Nutt chattered. ‘The camaraderie of the sport must be a wonderful
thing.’

‘Yeah, right,’ Andy grunted, finally managing to pull his hand away, his
face full of angry puzzlement.

‘And this is my mate, Maxie,’ said Trev quickly, ‘and this is Carter the
Farter—’

‘It’s Fartmeister now,’ said Carter.

‘Yeah, right. And this is Jumbo. You want to watch out for him. He’s a
thief. Jumbo can pick a lock faster than you can pick your nose.’

The said Jumbo held up a small bronze badge. ‘Guild, of course,’ he
said. ‘They nail your ears to the door else.’

‘You mean you break the law for a living?’ said Nutt, horrified.

‘Ain’t you ever heard of the Thieves’ Guild?’ said Andy.

‘Gobbo’s new,’ said Trev protectively. ‘Hasn’t got out much. He’s a
goblin, from the high country.’

‘Coming down here, taking our jobs, yeah?’ said Carter.

‘Like, how often do you do a hand’s turn?’ said Trev.

‘Well, I might want to one day.’

‘Milking the cows when they come home?’ said Andy. This got another
laugh, on cue. And that was the introductions sorted out, to Nutt’s
surprise. He’d been expecting chicken theft to be mentioned. Instead,
Carter pulled a couple of tin cans out of a pocket and tossed them to
Nutt and Trev.

‘Did a few hours’ unloading down the docks, didn’t I?’ he said
defensively, as though a bit of casual labour was some kind of offence.
‘This come off a boat from Fourecks.’

Jumbo fished in his pocket again and pulled out someone else’s watch.

‘Game on in five minutes,’ he declared. ‘Let’s shove . . . er, if that’s
all right with you, Andy?’

Andy nodded. Jumbo looked relieved. It was always important that things
were all right with Andy. And Andy was still watching Nutt as a cat
watches an unexpectedly cheeky mouse, while massaging his hand.

Mr Ottomy cleared his throat, causing his red Adam’s apple to bob up and
down like an indecisive sunset. Shouting in public, yes, he liked that,
he was good at that. Speaking in public, now, that was a different
kettle of humiliation.

‘Well, er, gents, what we will have here is your actual football, what
is basically about the Shove, which is what you gentlemen will be doing
soon—’

‘I thought we watched two groups of players vie with one another to get
the ball in the opponents’ goal?’

‘Could be, sir, could very much be,’ the bledlow conceded, ‘but in the
streets, see, your actual supporters on both sides try and endeavour to
shorten the length of the field, as it were, depending on the flow of
play, so to speak.’

‘Like living walls, d’y’mean?’ said Ridcully.

‘That style of thing, sir, yes, sir,’ said Ottomy loyally.

‘What about the goals?’

‘Oh, they’re allowed to move the goals, too.’

‘Sorry?’ said Ponder. ‘The spectators can move the goals?’

‘You have put your finger firmly on it, sir.’

‘But that’s sheer anarchy! It’s a mess!’

‘Some of the old boys do say the game has gone downhill, sir, that is
true.’

‘Downhill, into and out through the bottom of the world, I’d say.’

‘Good one to play with magic, though,’ said Dr Hix. ‘Well worth a try.’

‘A word to the wise, sir,’ said Ottomy with unwitting accuracy, ‘but
you’d be wearing your guts for garters if you tried it with some of the
types who play these days. They take it seriously.’

‘Mister Ottomy, I’m sure none of my blokes wear garters—’ Ridcully
stopped and listened to Ponder Stibbons’s whispered interjection and
continued, ‘well, possibly one, two at most, and it would be a very dull
world if we were all the same, that’s what I say.’ He looked around and
shrugged. ‘So, this is football, is it? Rather a wizened shell of a
game, yes? I, for one, don’t want to stand around all day in the rain
while other people have all the fun. Let’s go and find the ball,
gentlemen. We are wizards. That must count for something.’

‘I thought we were blokes now,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Same thing,’ said Ridcully, straining to see over the heads of the
crowd.

‘Surely not!’

‘Well,’ said Ridcully, ‘isn’t a bloke someone who likes drinking with
his mates and without the company of women? Anyway, I’m fed up with
this. Form up behind me, nevertheless. We’re going to see some
football.’

The progress of the wizards astonished Ottomy and Nobbs, who had
hitherto seen them as fluffy plump creatures quite divorced from real
life. But to get to be a senior wizard and stay there called for deep
reserves of determination, viciousness and the sugared arrogance that is
the mark of every true gentleman, as in ‘Oh, was that your foot? I’m so
_terribly_ sorry.’

And, of course, there was Dr Hix, a good man to have in a tight spot
because he was (by college statute) an officially bad person, in
accordance with UU’s happy grasp of the inevitable.⁹

A less mature organization than UU might have taken the view that the
way forward would be to hunt such renegades down, at great risk and
expense. UU, on the other hand, had given Hix and his team a department
and a budget and a career structure, and also the chance to go out into
dark caves occasionally and throw fireballs at unofficial evil wizards;
it all worked rather well so long as nobody pointed out that the
Department of Post-Mortem Communications was really, when you got right
down to it, just a politer form of n*e*c*r*o*m*a*n*c*y, wasn’t it?

And so Dr Hix was now tolerated as a useful, if slightly irritating
member of the Council largely because he was allowed (by statute) to say
some of the naughty things that the other wizards would really have
liked to say themselves. Someone with a widow’s peak, a skull ring, a
sinister staff and a black robe was expected to spread a little evil
around the place, although university statute had redefined acceptable
evil in this case as being inconveniences on a par with shoelaces tied
together or a brief attack of groinal itch. It wasn’t the most
satisfactory of arrangements, but it was in the best UU tradition: Hix
occupied, amiably, a niche that might otherwise be occupied by someone
who really got off on the whole mouldering corpses and peeled skulls
thing. Admittedly, he was always giving fellow wizards free tickets to
the various amateur dramatic productions he was obsessively involved
with, but, on balance, they agreed, taking one thing with another, this
was still better than peeled skulls.

For Hix, a crowd like this was too good to waste. Not only was there a
plethora of bootlaces to be expertly tied together, but there were an
awful lot of pockets as well. He always had some flyers for the next
production in his robe,¹⁰ and it wasn’t the same as picking pockets.
Quite the reverse. He stuffed them into any he could find.

The day was all a mystery to Nutt, and it stayed a mystery, becoming a
little more mysterious with every passing minute. In the distance a
whistle was blown and somewhere in this moving, jostling, crushing and
in most cases drinking mob of people there was a game going on,
apparently. He had to take Trev’s word for it. There were _Oo_s and
_Aah_s in the distance and the crowd ebbed and flowed in response. Trev
and his chums, who called themselves, as far as Nutt could make out over
the din, the Dimwell Massive Pussy, took advantage of every temporary
space to move nearer and nearer to the mysterious game, holding their
ground when the press went against them and pushing hard when an eddy
went their way. Push, sway, shove . . . and something in this spoke to
Nutt. It came up through the soles of his feet and the palms of his
hands, and slid into his brain with a beguiling subtlety, warming him,
stripping him away from himself and leaving him no more than a beating
part of the living, moving thing around him.

A chant came past. It had started somewhere at the other end of the game
and, whatever it had been once, it was now just four syllables of roar,
from hundreds of people and many gallons of beer. As it faded, it took
the warm, belonging feeling away with it, leaving a hole.

Nutt looked into the eyes of Trev.

‘Happened to you, did it?’ Trev said. ‘That was quick.’

‘It was—’ Nutt began.

‘I know. We don’t talk about it,’ said Trev flatly.

‘But it spoke to me without—’

‘We don’t talk about it, okay? Not that sort of thing. Look! They’re
being pushed back. It’s opening up! Let’s shove!’

And Nutt was good at shoving . . . very good. Under his inexorable
pressure people slid or gently spun out of the way, their hobnailed
boots scraping on the stones as, short of an alternative, the owners
were rolled and squeezed alongside Nutt and Trev and deposited behind
them, somewhat dizzy, bewildered and angry.

Now, though, there was a frantic tugging at Nutt’s belt.

‘Stop pushing!’ Trev shouted. ‘We’ve left the others behind!’

‘In fact my progress is now hindered by a pease pudding and chowder
stand. I have been doing my best, Mister Trev, but it has really been
slowing me down,’ said Nutt over his shoulder, ‘and also Miss Glenda.
Hello, Miss Glenda.’

Trev glanced behind him. There was a fight going on back there, and he
could hear Andy’s battle cry. There was generally a fight going on
around Andy, and if there wasn’t, he started one. But you had to like
Andy, because . . . well, you just had to. He— Glenda was up ahead?
Surely that meant that _she_ would be there too?’

There was a commotion further on and a vaguely oblong thing, wrapped now
in tatters of cloth, rose up in the air and fell back, to cheers and
catcalls from the crowd. Trev had been right up to the game face many
times before. It was no big deal. He’d seen the ball dozens of times.

But how long had Nutt been pushing a pudding stall in front of him like
a snowplough? Oh my, Trev thought, I’ve found a player! How can ’e do
it? He looks half-starved all the time!

In the absence of any way round in the press of people, Trev scrambled
between Nutt’s legs, and for a moment looked down an avenue of coat
hems, boots and, right in front of him, a pair of legs that were
considerably more attractive than those of Nutt. He surfaced a few
inches away from the milky-blue eyes of Juliet. She did not look
surprised; surprise is an instant thing, and by the time Juliet could
register surprise, she generally wasn’t. Glenda, on the other hand, was
the kind of person who instantly whacks surprise on the meat slab of
indignation and hammers it into fury, and as their gazes locked and
metaphorical bluebirds cleared their throats for the big number, she
appeared between them and demanded: ‘What the hells were you doing down
there, Trevor Likely?’

The bluebirds evaporated.

‘What are _you_ doin’ up front here?’ said Trev. It wasn’t repartee, but
it was the best he could do now, with his heart pounding.

‘We got shoved,’ growled Glenda. ‘You lot were shoving us!’

‘Me? I never did!’ said Trev indignantly. ‘It was—’ He hesitated. Nutt?
Look at him standing there all nervous and skinny, like he’s never had a
good meal in his life. _I_ wouldn’t believe me, and I _am_ me. ‘It was
them behind,’ he said lamely.

‘Trolls with big boots on, were they?’ said Glenda, her voice all
vinegar. ‘We’d be in the game if it wasn’t for Mister Nutt here, holding
you all back!’

The unfairness of this took Trev aback, but he decided to stay there
rather than argue with Glenda. Nutt could do no wrong in her eyes, and
Trev could do no right, which he couldn’t contest, but rather felt
should be amended to ‘never did any serious wrong’.

But there was Juliet, smiling at him. When Glenda looked away to talk to
Nutt she slipped something into his hand and then turned her back on him
as if nothing had happened.

Trev opened his hand, heart pounding, and there was a little enamel
badge in black and white, the colours of the hated enemy. It was still
warm from Her hand.

He closed his hand quickly and looked around to see if anyone had
spotted this betrayal of all that was good and true, i.e. the good name
of Dimwell. Supposing he got knocked down by a troll and one of the lads
found it on him! Supposing Andy found it on him!

But it was a gift from Her! He put it into his pocket and rammed it down
to the bottom. This was going to be really difficult, and Trev was not a
man who liked problems in his life.

The owner of the pudding stand, having enterprisingly sold a number of
portions to passing trade during its journey, strolled up to Trev and
offered him a bag of hot pease.

‘Tough mate you got there,’ he said. ‘Some kind of troll, is he?’

‘Not troll. Goblin,’ said Trev, as the sounds of the strife drew nearer.

‘I thought they were little buggers—?’

‘This one isn’t,’ said Trev, wishing the man would go away.

There was a sudden, localized silence. The kind of noise made by people
who are holding their breath. He looked up and saw the ball, for the
second time in the game.

There was a core of ash wood in there somewhere, then a leather skin and
finally dozens of layers of cloth for grip, and it was dropping with
pinpoint inevitability towards the beautiful, dreamy head of Juliet.
Trev dived at her without a moment’s thought, dragging her under the
cart as the ball thumped on to the cobbles where She had been gracing
the world with Her presence.

Many things went through Trev’s mind as the ball hit the ground. She was
in his arms, even if She was complaining about getting mud on her coat.
He had probably saved Her life, which from a romantic point of view was
money in the bank, and— oh, yes. Dimmer or Dolly, if one of the hardcore
posses found out about this the next thing to go through his head would
be a boot.

She giggled.

‘Shush!’ he managed. ‘Not a good idea if you’d rather not know how you
would look with that beautiful hair shaved off !’

Trev peeped out from under the stall, and attracted no attention at all.

This is because Nutt had picked up the ball and was turning it over and
over in his hands with a frown on what was visible of, if you were kind,
his face.

‘Is this all it is?’ he said to a bewildered Glenda. ‘A most
inappropriate ending to a pleasant social gathering with interesting
canapés! Where is this wretched thing supposed to be, then?’

Glenda, hypnotized by the sight, pointed a wavering finger in the
general direction of down the street.

‘There’s a big pole? Painted white . . . well, spattered with red at the
bottom . . .’

‘Oh yes, I see it. Well, in that case, I’ll— Look, will you men please
stop pushing?’ Nutt added to the crowd, who were craning to see.

‘But there’s no way you’ll ever get it there!’ Glenda yelled. ‘Just put
it down and come away!’

Trev heard a grunt from Nutt and absolute silence from the rest of the
world. Oh, no, he thought. Really no. It must be more than, what, a
hundred and fifty yards to that goal, and those things fly like a
bucket. There is no way that he could—

A distant _pock_ broke the breathless silence, which healed itself
instantly.

Trev peered over a shoulder as the sixty-foot goal post gave up its
battle with termites, rot, weather, gravity and Nutt, and fell into its
own base in a cloud of dust. He was so astonished that he hardly noticed
Juliet standing up next to him.¹¹

‘Is that a kind of, like, sign?’ said Juliet, who believed in such
things.

At that moment, Trev believed in pointing a finger towards the other
side of the street and shouting, ‘He went that way!’ and then hauling
Juliet upright and butting Nutt in the stomach. ‘Let’s go!’ he added. He
couldn’t do anything about Glenda, but that would not matter; while he
held Juliet’s hand Glenda would follow him like a homing vulture. People
were trying to run towards the hidden goal; others were making for the
apparent location of the long-distance scorer. Trev pointed in a random
direction and yelled, ‘He went down there! Big man with a black hat!’
Confusion always helped, when it wasn’t yours; when it was time for a
hue and cry, make sure who was hue.

They halted a few alleys away. There was still a commotion far off, but
a city crowd is easier to get lost in than a forest.

‘Look, perhaps I should go back and apologize,’ Nutt began. ‘I could
make a new pole quite easily.’

‘I hate to tell you this, Gobbo, but I think you might have upset the
kind of people who don’t listen to apologies,’ said Trev. ‘Keep moving,
everyone.’

‘Why might they be upset?’

‘Well, Mister Nutt, first, you are not supposed to score a goal when it
is not your game, and anyway you are a watcher, not a player,’ said
Glenda. ‘And second, a shot like that gets right up people’s noses. You
could have killed someone!’

‘No, Miss Glenda, I assure you I could not. I deliberately aimed at the
pole.’

‘So? That doesn’t mean you were sure to hit it!’

‘Er, I have to say it does, Miss Glenda,’ he mumbled.

‘How did you do it? You took the pole to bits! They don’t grow on trees!
You’ll get us all into trouble!’

‘Why can’t he be a player?’ said Juliet, staring at her reflection in a
window.

‘What?’ said Glenda.

‘Bloody hell,’ said Trev. ‘With him on the team you wouldn’t need a
team!’

‘That’d save a lot of trouble, then,’ said Juliet.

‘So you say,’ said Glenda, ‘and where would be the fun in that? That
wouldn’t be football any more—’

‘We are being watched,’ said Nutt. ‘I am sorry to interrupt you.’

Trev glanced around. The street was busy, but mostly with its own
affairs. ‘There’s no one interested, Gobbo. We’re well away.’

‘I can feel it on my skin,’ Nutt insisted.

‘What, through all that wool?’ said Glenda.

He turned round, soulful eyes on her. ‘Yes,’ he said, and remembered
Ladyship testing him on that. It had seemed like a game at the time.

He glanced up and a large head drew back quickly from a parapet. There
was a very faint smell of bananas. Ah, that one. He was nice. Nutt saw
him sometimes, going hand over hand along the pipes.

‘You ought to get ’er home,’ said Trev to Glenda.

Glenda shuddered. ‘Not a good idea. Old Stollop’ll ask her what she saw
at the game.’

‘Well?’

‘She’ll tell him. And who she saw—’

‘Can’t she lie?’

‘Not in the way you can, Trev. She’s just no good at making stuff up.
Look, let’s get back to the university. We all work there, and I often
go in to catch up. We’ll go directly now and you two go back the long
way. We never saw one another, right? And for heavens’ sake don’t let
him do anything silly!’

‘Excuse me, Miss Glenda,’ said Nutt meekly.

‘Yes, what?’

‘Which of us were you addressing?’

‘I have let you down,’ said Nutt, as they strolled through the
post-match crowds. At least, Trev ambled; Nutt moved with a strange gait
that suggested there was something wrong with his pelvis.

‘Nah, it’s fixable,’ said Trev. ‘Everything is fixable. I’m a fixer, me.
What did anybody really see? Just a bloke in Dimmer kit. There’s
thousands of us. Don’t worry. Er, how come you’re so tough, Gobbo? You
spent your life lifting weights, or what?’

‘You are correct in your surmise, Mister Trev. Before I was born I did
indeed use to lift weights. I was only a child then, of course.’

They strolled on and after a while Trev said, ‘Could you say that again?
It’s got stuck in my head. Actually, I think part of it’s stickin’ out
of my ear.’

‘Ah, yes. Perhaps I have confused you. There was a time when my mind was
full of darkness. Then Brother Oats helped me to the light, and I was
born.’

‘Oh, religion stuff.’

‘But here I am. You asked why I am strong? When I lived in the dark of
the forge, I used to lift weights. The tongs at first, and then the
little hammer and then the biggest hammer, and then one day I could lift
the anvil. That was a good day. It was a little freedom.’

‘Why was it so important to lift the anvil?’

‘I was chained to the anvil.’

They walked on in silence again until Trev, picking each word with care,
said, ‘I guess things must be sort of tough in the high country?’

‘It is not so bad now, I think.’

‘Makes you count your blessin’s, that sort of thing.’

‘The presence of a certain lady, Mister Trev?’

‘Yes, since you ask. I think about ’er all the time! I really like ’er!
But she’s a Dolly!’ A small group of supporters turned to glance at
them, and he lowered his voice to a hiss. ‘She’s got brothers with fists
the size of a bull’s arse!’

‘I have read, Mister Trev, that love laughs at locksmiths.’

‘Really? And what does it do when it’s been smacked in the face by a
bull’s arse?’

‘The poets are not forthcoming in that respect, Mister Trev.’

‘Besides,’ said Trev, ‘locksmiths tend to be quiet blokes, you know?
Careful and patient and that. Like you. I reckon you could get away with
a bit of a joke. You must ’ave met girls. I mean, you’re no oil
painting, that’s a fact, but they like a posh voice. I bet you ’ad them
eatin’ out of your ’and . . . well, after you’d washed it, obviously.’

Nutt hesitated. There had been Ladyship, of course, and Miss
Healstether, neither of whom fitted easily into the category of ‘girl’.
Of course, there were the Little Sisters, who were certainly young and
apparently female but it had to be said looked rather like intelligent
chickens, and certainly weren’t seen at their best when you watched them
feeding – but once again, ‘girls’ did not seem the right word.

‘I have not met many girls,’ he volunteered.

‘There’s Glenda. She’s taken a real shine to you. Watch out, though,
she’ll run your life for you if you let her. It’s what she does. She
does it to everyone.’

‘You two have a history, I think,’ said Nutt.

‘You are a sharp one, aren’t you? Quiet and sharp. Like a knife. Yeah, I
suppose it was a history. I wanted it to be more of a geography, but she
kept slappin’ my hand.’ Trev paused to search for any flicker in Nutt’s
face. ‘That was a joke,’ he added, without much hope.

‘Thank you for telling me, Mister Trev. I will decipher it later.’

Trev sighed. ‘But I ain’t like that any more, and Juliet . . . well, I’d
crawl a mile over broken glass just to hold ’er ’and, no funny
business.’

‘Writing a poem is often the way to the intended’s heart,’ said Nutt.

Trev brightened. ‘Ah, I’m good with words. If I wrote ’er a letter, you
could give it to ’er, right? If I write it on posh paper, something
like, let’s see . . . “I think you are really fit. How about a date? No
hanky panky, promise. Luv, Trev.” How does that sound?’

‘The soul of it is pure and noble, Mister Trev. But, ah, if I could
assist in some way . . . ?’

‘It needs longer words, right? And more sort of curly language?’ said
Trev.

But Nutt was not paying attention.

‘Sounds lovely to me,’ said a voice above Trev’s head. ‘Who do you know
what can read, smart boy?’

There was this to be said about the Stollop brothers: they weren’t Andy.
It was, in the great scheme of things, not a huge difference when you
couldn’t see for blood but, in short, Stollops knew that force had
always worked, and so had never bothered to try anything else, whereas
Andy was a stone-cold psychopath who had a following only because it was
safer than being in front of him. He could be quite charming when the
frantically oscillating mood swing took him; that was the best time to
run. As for the Stollops, it would not take long for a researcher to
realize that Juliet was the brains of the family outfit. One advantage
from Trev’s viewpoint was that they thought they were clever, because no
one had ever told them otherwise.

‘Ha, Mister so-called Trev,’ said Billy Stollop, prodding Trev with a
finger like a hippopotamus sausage. ‘You full o’ smarts, you tell us who
broke the goal, right?’

‘I was in the Shove, Billy. Didn’t see a thing.’

‘He gonna play for the Dimmers?’ Billy persisted.

‘Billy, not even your dad at his best could throw the ball half as far
as everyone is saying. You know it, right? You couldn’t do it. I’m
hearing that the Angels’ post just fell apart and someone made up a
story. Would I lie to you, Billy?’ Trev could make up lies that were
very nearly truths.

‘Yeah, ’cos you’re a Dimmer.’

‘All right, you got me, I’ll come clean,’ said Trev, holding out his
hands. ‘Respect and all that, Billy . . . It was Nutt here that threw
that ball. That’s my last offer.’

‘I ought to smack your ’ead off for that,’ said Billy, sneering at Nutt.
‘That kid don’t look like he could even lift the ball.’

And then a voice behind Trev said, ‘Why, Billy, have they let you out
without your collar on?’

Nutt heard Trev mutter, ‘Oh gods, and I was doing so well,’ under his
breath, and then his friend turned and said, ‘It’s a free street, Andy.
No ’arm in passin’ the time, eh?’

‘The Dollies killed your ol’ man, Trev. Ain’t you got no shame?’

The rest of the Massive Posse was standing behind Andy, their
expressions a mix of defiance and the realization that, once again, they
were going to be dragged into something. They were out in the main
streets now. The Watch was not inclined to get involved in alley
scuffles, but out in the open they had to do something in case the
taxpayers complained, and since tired coppers didn’t like having to do
something, they did it good and hard, so with any luck they wouldn’t
have to do it again any time soon.

‘What do you know about all this they’re saying about a Dimmer man and a
Dolly tart holding hands in the Shove?’ Andy demanded. He put a heavy
hand on Trev’s shoulder. ‘Come on, you’re smart, you always know
everything before anyone else.’

‘Tart?’ That was Billy; it was a long way from his ears to his brain.
‘There’s not a girl in Dolly Sisters who’d look at you poxy lot!’

‘Ah, so that’s where we got it from!’ said Carter the Farter. This
struck Nutt as inflammatory in the circumstances. Perhaps, he thought,
the ritual is that childish insults shall be exchanged until both sides
feel fully justified in attacking, just as Dr Vonmausberger noted in
_Ritual Aggression in Pubescent Rats_.

But Andy had fished his short cutlass out of his shirt. It was a nasty
little weapon, alien to the true spirit of foot-the-ball, which
generally smiled indulgently on things that bruised, scared, fractured
and, okay, worst case, heat of the moment and so on, blinded.¹² But then
came Andy, who had issues. And once you had someone like Andy around
you, you got other Andys around too, and every kid who might otherwise
have gone to a match with a pair of brass knuckles for bravado
noticeably clanked when he walked, and needed to be helped up if he fell
over.

Now, weapons were being loosened here, too.

‘Careful now, everyone,’ Trev cautioned, stepping back and waving his
empty hands in a conciliatory way. ‘This is a busy street, okay? If the
Old Sam catch you fightin’, they’ll be down on you with big, big
truncheons and they’ll beat you until you ’onk your breakfast, ’cos for
why? ’cos they hate you, ’cos you’re making paperwork for ’em and
keepin’ ’em out of the doughnut shop.’

He stepped back a little further. ‘And then on account of you damagin’
their weapons with your ’eads they’ll run you down to the Tanty for a
nice night in the Tank. Been there? Was it so much fun you want to go
back again?’

He noted with satisfaction the looks of dismayed recollection on the
faces of all except Nutt, who couldn’t have any idea, and Andy, who was
brother to the Tank. But even Andy was not inclined to go up against the
Sam. Kill just one of them, and Vetinari would give you one chance to
see if you could stand on air.

They relaxed a little, but not too much. All it took in these
sphinctertaut circumstances was one idiot . . .

As it happened, one very clever person was able to do the job, when Nutt
turned to Algernon, the youngest Stollop, and said cheerfully, ‘Do you
know, sir, that your situation here is very similar to that described by
Vonmausberger in his treatise on his experiment with rats?’

At this point, Algernon, after one second of what passed for Algernon as
thought, whacked him hard with his club. Algernon was a big boy.

Trev managed to grab his friend before he hit the cobbles. The club had
hit Nutt square in the chest and torn the ancient sweater open. Blood
was soaking through the stitches.

‘What did you ’ave to go and ’it him for, you bloody fool?’ Trev said to
Algernon, agreed even by his brothers to be as thick as elephant soup.
‘He wasn’t doin’ a thing. What was that all about, eh?’ He sprang to his
feet and before Algernon could move Trev had ripped his own shirt off
and was ministering to Nutt, trying to staunch the wound. He came back
up again after half a minute and flung the sodden shirt at Algernon.
‘There’s no heartbeat, you moron! What did he ever do to you?’

Even Andy was frozen. No one had ever seen Trev like it, not old Trev.
Even the Dollies knew Trev was smart. Trev was slick. Trev wasn’t the
sort to commit suicide by yelling at a bunch of men who were already
tensed for a fight.

The luckless Algernon, with Trev’s rage baking his face, managed, ‘But,
like . . . he’s a Dimmer . . .’

‘Who are yer? You’re a bloody fool, that’s what you are!’ screamed Trev.

He rounded on the others, finger shaking. ‘Who are yer? Who are yer?
Nuffin! You’re rubbish! You’re all shite!’

He jabbed the finger at Nutt. ‘And him? He made stuff. He knew things.
And he’d never seen a game before today! He was only wearing the strip
to fit in!’

‘Don’t you worry, Trev, mate,’ Andy hissed and raised his cutlass
menacingly. ‘There’s going to be a bloody war about this!’ But Trev was
suddenly in his face like a wasp.

‘You what? You are mental! You just don’t get it, do you?’

‘I can see helmets, Andy,’ said Jumbo urgently.

‘Me? What did I do?’

‘As much as the stupid Stollops. Dimmers and Dollies? I hope the gods
shit thin shit on both of you!’

‘They’re getting really close, Andy.’

The Stollop boys, who were not altogether dumb, were already leaving.
People in football strip were criss-crossing the city. The Watch
couldn’t chase everyone. But, well, belting some bloke who then bled a
lot and stopped breathing, well, that was tantamount to murder, and the
Old Sam could develop quite a turn of speed in those circumstances.

Andy shook a furious finger at Trev. ‘It’s a hard life in the Shove when
you’re a dumb chuff with no mates.’

‘This ain’t the Shove!’

‘Better wake up, kid. It’s all Shove.’

The Posse left at speed, although Jumbo turned for a moment to mouth
‘sorry’. They weren’t the only ones hurrying off. The street people were
all for a free cabaret, but this one might have associated difficulties:
for example the asking of dangerous metaphysical questions such as ‘Did
you see anything?’ and similar. It was all very well for the Watch to
say ‘the innocent have nothing to fear’, but what was that all about?
Who cared about the innocent and their problems when the Watch were on
their way?

Trev knelt by the cooling body of the late Nutt.

And now for the first time in a minute, it seemed to Trev, he started to
breathe again. He had stopped when he had raged at Andy ’cos if you
talked like that to Andy you were dead anyway, so why waste your breath?

There were things you had to do, weren’t there? Weren’t you supposed to
keep banging on the chest to, like, show the broken heart how to beat
again? But he didn’t know how, and you didn’t need much smarts to know
that it was not a good idea to try to learn with the Watch on the way.
It would not give a good first impression.

That was why, when two watchmen turned up at speed, Trev was walking
unsteadily towards them with Nutt in his arms. He was relieved to see
that in charge was Constable Haddock: at least he was one of the ones
who asked questions first. Behind him, and eclipsing most of the
scenery, was Troll officer Bluejohn, who could clear a whole street just
by walking down the centre of it.

‘Can you help me get him to the Lady Sybil, Mister Haddock? He’s very
heavy,’ said Trev.

Constable Haddock pulled the sodden shirt aside, and made a sad little
clicking sound. With experience comes familiarity.

‘Morgue’s closer, lad.’

‘No!’

Haddock nodded. ‘You’re Dave Likely’s son, aren’t you?’

‘I don’t have to tell you!’

‘No, ’cos I’m right,’ said Constable Haddock evenly. ‘Okay, Trev.
Bluejohn here will take this man, who I expect you have never seen
before in your life, and we’ll both run to keep up. There was a decent
thunderstorm the night before last. He might be lucky. And so might
you.’

‘I never did it!’

‘’course not. And now . . . let’s see who’s fastest at running, shall
we? The hospital first.’

‘I want to stay with him,’ said Trev, as Bluejohn’s huge hand gently
cradled Nutt.

‘No, lad,’ said Haddock. ‘You stay with me.’

It didn’t stop with Constable Haddock. It never did. Everyone called him
Kipper, and his calm unspoken message that since we’re all in this
together, why make it hard for one another often worked, but sooner or
later you’d be handed over to a senior copper who manufactured hard, in
a little room with another copper at the door. And this one had been
working double shifts, by the look of her.

‘I’m Sergeant Angua, sir, and I hope you are not in trouble.’ She opened
a notebook and smoothed down the page.

‘Shall we go through the motions? You told Constable Haddock that you
saw a fight going on and when you got there all the big boys had run
away and, amazingly, you found your workmate, Mister Nutts, bleeding to
death. Well, I bet I can name all the big boys, every last one of them.
I wonder why can’t you? And what, Trevor Likely, is _this_ about?’ She
flicked a black-and-white enamel token across the table, and by luck or
judgement its pin stuck in the wood a few inches from Trev’s hand.

The unofficial motto of the Lady Sybil Free Hospital was ‘Not everybody
dies’. It was true that, subsequent to the founding of the Lady Sybil,
the chances of death from at least some causes in the city were quite
amazingly reduced. Its surgeons were even known to wash their hands
_before_ operating as well as after. But moving through its white
corridors now was a figure who knew, from personal experience, that the
unofficial motto was, in reality, entirely mistaken.

Death stood by the well-scrubbed slab and looked down. MISTER NUTT?
WELL, THIS IS A SURPRISE, said Death, reaching into his robe. LET ME SEE
WHAT I HAVE HERE.

YOU KNOW, he said, I USED TO WONDER WHY PEOPLE SCRABBLED SO. AFTER ALL,
COMPARED WITH THE LENGTH OF INFINITY, PEOPLE DO NOT LIVE ANY TIME AT
ALL. EVEN YOU, MISTER NUTT. ALTHOUGH I CAN SEE THAT SCRABBLING WOULD
WORK A LITTLE MAGIC IN YOUR CASE.

‘I can’t see you,’ said Nutt.

JUST AS WELL, said Death. YOU WILL NOT REMEMBER ME, IN ANY CASE, LATER
ON.

‘I’m dying, then,’ said Nutt.

‘YES. DYING AND THEN AGAIN LIVING. He fished out a life-timer from his
robe and watched as the sand fell upwards. SEE YOU _LATER_, MISTER NUTT.
I FEAR THAT YOU WILL HAVE AN INTERESTING LIFE.

‘A Dolly favour on a good Dimmer boy? Gods bless my soul, I say, what
can this be about? And you know what? I will find out. It’s all a matter
of shoving.’

Trev said nothing. He was out of options. Besides, he had seen the
sergeant before, and she always seemed to be looking at his throat.

‘Constable Haddock tells me the Igor’s on duty down at the Lady Sybil. I
hope he’s got a heart in his vats that’ll fit your friend, I really do,’
she said. ‘But it’ll still be a murder case, even if he comes walking in
here tomorrow. Lord Vetinari’s rules: if it takes an Igor to bring you
back, you were dead. Briefly dead, it’s true, which is why the murderer
will be briefly hanged. A quarter of a second usually does it.’

‘I didn’t touch ’im!’

‘I know. But you have to keep solid with your mates, right? Jumbo and,
of course, Carter, and, oh yes, Andy Shank, your mates, who aren’t here.
Look, you are not under arrest – yet – you are helping the Watch with
their inquiries. That means you can use the privy, if you’re feeling
brave. If you’re feeling suicidal, use the canteen. But if you try to
run off I will hunt you down.’ She sniffed and added, ‘Like a dog.
Understand?’

‘Can’t I go and see how Nutt is gettin’ on?’

‘No. Kipper’s still down there now. That’s Constable Haddock to you.’

‘Everyone calls him Kipper.’

‘Maybe, but not when it’s you talking to me.’ The sergeant twirled the
favour around on the table in an absent-minded way. ‘Has Mister Nutt got
any next of kin? That means relatives.’

‘I know what it means. He talks about people in Uberwald. That’s all I
know,’ Trev lied instinctively. Saying that someone had spent his youth
chained to an anvil was not going to help here. ‘He gets on all right
with the other guys in the vats.’

‘How come he’s in there?’

‘We never ask. There’s usually some bad story.’

‘Anyone ever ask _you_?’

He stared at her. That was coppers for you. They came over all friendly,
and just when you dropped your guard they stuck a pickaxe in your brain.

‘Was that an official copper question, or were you just bein’ nosy?’

‘Coppers are never nosy, Mister Likely. However, sometimes we ask
tangential questions.’

‘So it wasn’t official?’

‘Not really . . .’

‘Then shove it where the sun does not shine.’

Sergant Angua smiled a copper’s smile. ‘You’ve got no card in your hand
that you dare play, and you come out with something like that. From
Andy, yes, I’d expect it, but Kipper says you’re smart. How smart does
someone have to be to be as stupid as you?’

There was a tentative knock at the door and then a watchman put his head
around it. Someone was shouting in the background in a large,
authoritative voice. ‘—I mean, you deal with this sort of thing all the
time, don’t you? For heavens’ sake, it’s not that hard—’

‘Yes, Nobby?’

‘We’ve got a bit of a situation, sarge. That stiff that went to the Lady
Sibyl? Doctor Lawn’s here and he says the man’s got up and gone home!’

‘Did they get an Igor to look at him?’

‘Yes. Sort of . . . er . . .’

The watchman was elbowed out of the way by an expansive man in a long
green rubber robe who was clearly trying to balance angry and friendly
at the same time. He was tailed by Constable Haddock, who was clearly
trying to mollify him, and definitely failing.

‘Look, we try to help, all right?’ said Doctor Lawn. ‘You people say
you’ve got a murder case and I’ll pull old Igor off his slab and hang
the overtime. But you tell Sam Vimes from me that I’d like him to send
his boys down when they’re not busy for a bit of first-aid tuition, to
wit, the difference between dead and sleeping. It’s a fine line
sometimes, but it’s generally possible to spot the clues. The profession
has always tended to consider walking about to be among the more
reliable, although in this city we’ve learned to look on that as just a
very good start. But when we pulled back the sheet he sat up and asked
Igor if he had a sandwich, which is generally conclusive. Apart from a
fever, he was fine. Strong heartbeat, which suggests he’s got one. Not a
scratch on him, but he could certainly do with a good dinner. He must
have been hungry because he ate the sandwich Igor made for him. On the
subject of dinners, frankly I could do with mine!’

‘You let him go?’ said Sergeant Angua, horrified.

‘Of course! I can’t keep a man in hospital for being inconveniently
alive!’

She turned to Constable Haddock. ‘And you let him go, Kipper?’

‘It looked like a case of doctor’s orders, sarge,’ said Haddock, giving
Trev a wretched look.

‘He was covered in blood! He was really messed up!’ Trev exploded.

‘A prank, then?’ Angua tried.

‘I’d have sworn there wasn’t a heartbeat, Sergeant,’ Haddock
volunteered. ‘Maybe he’s one of those monks from the Hub that do the
hocus-pocus stuff.’

‘Then someone has been wasting Watch time,’ said Angua, glaring at Trev.

He spotted that one for the desperate throw it was. ‘What would be in it
for me?’ he said. ‘Do you think I want to be here?’

Constable Haddock cleared his throat. ‘It’s match night, sarge. The desk
is heaving and there are supporters roaming around all over the place
and someone’s been feeding them a lot of rumours. We’re stretched,
that’s all I’m saying. We’ve had a couple of big shouts already. And he
did walk away, after all.’

‘Not a problem for me,’ said the doctor. ‘Came in horizontal, went out
upright. It’s the preferred way. And I’ve got to get back, sergeant.
We’re going to have a busy night, too.’

The sergeant looked for someone to shout at, and there was Trev.

‘You! Trev Likely. This one’s down to you! Go and find your chum. And if
there’s any more trouble, there’ll be . . . trouble. Is that clear?’

‘Twice, sarge.’ He couldn’t resist it, he just couldn’t, not even with
the cold sweat rolling down his spine. But he felt light . . . uplifted
. . . released. But some people just can’t respect an epiphany when
you’re having one. It’s not a cop skill.

‘It’s sergeant to you, Likely! Here!’

Trev managed to catch the favour as it was skimmed across the room.

‘Thanks, sarge!’

‘Get out!’

He got out, and was half expecting the shadowy shape that stepped up to
him when he was clear of the building. There was a faint odour in the
grey air. Well, at least it wasn’t Andy. He could do without Andy right
now.

‘Yes, Carter?’ he said to the fog.

‘How did you know it was me?’

Trev sighed. ‘I guessed.’ He started to walk fast.

‘Andy’ll want to know what you said.’

‘Don’t worry, it’s sorted.’

‘Sorted! How?’ Carter, always a bit overweight, had to scurry to keep
up.

‘Not going to tell you.’ Oh, the joy of the moment.

‘But can I tell him we’re in the clear?’

‘It’s all sorted! Done and dusted! I blew it out. It’s fixed. All gone
away. It never happened.’

‘Are you sure?’ said Carter. ‘He was pretty busted up.’

‘Hey, what can I tell you?’ Trev flung out his arms and twirled a
pirouette. ‘I’m Trev Likely!’

‘Well, that’s firm, then. Hey, I bet Andy’ll let you back in the Posse
now. That would be great, eh?’

‘Do you know what Nutt thought the Posse was called, Carter?’

‘No. What?’

Trev told him.

‘Well, that’s—’ Carter began, but Trev interrupted.

‘It’s funny, Carter. It’s funny, and sort of sad and hopeless. It really
is.’ Trev stopped walking so abruptly that Carter collided with him.
‘And here’s a tip: Carter the Farter isn’t gonna take you anywhere. And
that goes for the Fartmeister, too. Trust me.’

‘But everybody calls me Carter the Farter,’ the Fartmeister wailed.

‘Punch the next one who does. See a doctor. Cut down on carbohydrates.
Keep out of confined spaces. Use aftershave,’ said Trev, speeding up
again.

‘Where are you going, Trev?’

‘I’m gettin’ out of the Shove!’ Trev called over his shoulder.

Carter looked around desperately. ‘What Shove?’

‘Haven’t you heard? It’s all Shove!’

Trev wondered if he glowed as he trotted through the fog. Things were
going to be different. As soon as Smeems got in, he’d go and see him
about a better job or something . . .

A figure appeared out of the mist ahead of him. This was something of an
achievement since the figure was a head shorter than him.

‘Mithter Likely?’ it said.

‘Who’s askin’?’ said Trev and added, ‘What’s askin’?’

The figure sighed. ‘I underthtand that you are a friend of the gentleman
rethently admitted to the hothpital,’ it said.

‘What’s that to you?’

‘Quite a lot,’ said the figure. ‘May I athk if you know very much about
the gentleman?’

‘I don’t have to talk to you,’ said Trev. ‘Everything’s been fixed,
okay?’

‘Would that thith wath the cathe,’ said the figure. ‘I have to talk to
you. My name ith Igor.’

‘You know, I had a feelin’ about that. Are you the one who made the
sandwich for Nutt?’ asked Trev.

‘Yeth. Tuna, thpaghetti and jam, with thprinkleth. My thignature dith.
Do you know anything about hith background?’

‘Not a thing, mister.’

‘Really?’

‘Look. In the vats you stir up tallow, not the past, okay? You just
don’t, right? I know he’s had some bad times, an’ that’s all I’m telling
you.’

‘I thought tho,’ said Igor. ‘I believe he cometh from Uberwald. Thome
thtrange and dangerouth thingth come from Uberwald.’

‘This might sound a stupid question, but do you come from Uberwald, by
any chance?’ said Trev.

‘Thinth you athk, yeth,’ said Igor.

Trev hesitated. You saw Igors around occasionally. The only thing most
people knew was that they could stitch you up even better than the Watch
and did strange things in cellars and only tended to come out much when
there were thunderstorms.

‘I think your friend may be very dangerouth,’ said Igor.

Trev tried to picture Nutt as dangerous. It was quite hard until you
remembered a throw that knocked down a whole goal post half a street
away. He wished he didn’t.

‘Why should I listen to you? How do I know _you_ are not dangerous?’ he
said.

‘Oh, I am,’ said Igor, ‘believe me. And Uberwald containth thingth that
I would not want to meet.’

‘I am not gonna listen to you,’ said Trev. ‘And you are pretty hard to
understand in any case.’

‘Ith he thubject to thtrange moodth?’ Igor ploughed on. ‘Doth he get
into a rage? Do you know anything about hith eating habitth?’

‘Yes, he likes apple pies,’ said Trev. ‘What’re you on about?’

‘I can thee you are great friendth,’ said Igor. ‘I am thorry that I have
trethpathed on your time.’ ‘Trethpathed’ hanging in the air considerably
added to the water drops hanging in the fog. ‘I will give you thome
advith. When you need me, jutht thcream. I regret that you will find it
very eathy to thcream.’ The figure turned and instantly vanished into
the mist.

And Igors moved about oddly, Trev remembered. And you never saw one at a
football game . . .

He noticed that last thought go past. What had he tried to tell himself
? That someone who did not watch football was not a real person? He
couldn’t think of a proper answer. He was amazed that he had even asked
the question. Things were changing.

Glenda arrived in the Night Kitchen with Juliet sworn to silence, and
beneficently gave Mildred and Mrs Hedges the rest of the night off. That
suited them both very well, as it always does, and a little favour had
been done there that she could call upon when necessary.

She took her coat off and rolled up her sleeves. She felt at home in the
Night Kitchen, in charge, in control. Behind black iron ranges she could
defy the world.

‘All right,’ she said to the subdued Juliet. ‘We weren’t there today.
Today did not happen. You were here helping me clean the ovens. I’ll see
you get some overtime so your dad won’t suspect. Okay? Have you got
that?’

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘And while we’re here we’ll make a start on the pies for tomorrow night.
It’ll be nice to get ahead of ourselves, right?’

Juliet said nothing.

‘Say “Yes, Glenda”,’ Glenda prompted.

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘Go and chop some pork, then. Being busy takes your mind off things,
that’s what I always say.’

‘Yes, Glenda, that’s what you always say,’ said Juliet.

An inflection caught Glenda’s ear, and worried her a little. ‘Do I
always say that? When?’

‘Every day when you come in and put your apron on, Glenda.’

‘Mother used to say that,’ said Glenda, and tried to shake the thought
out of her head. ‘And she was right, of course! Hard work never hurt
anybody!’ And she tried to unthink the treacherous thought: _except
her_. Pies, she thought. You can rely on pies. Pies don’t give you
grief.

‘I fink that Trev likes me,’ Juliet muttered. ‘He don’t give me funny
looks like the other boys. He looks like a little puppy.’

‘You want to watch out for that look, my girl.’

‘I fink I luvim, Glendy.’

Wild boar, thought Glenda, and apricots. There’s some left in the cool
room. And we’ve got mutton pies with a choice of tracklements . . .
always popular. So . . . pork pies, I think, and there’s some decent
oysters in the pump room, so they’ll do for the wet pie. I’ll do Sea Pie
and the anchovies look good, so there’s always room for a Stargazey or
two, even though I feel sorry for the little fishes, but right now I’ll
bake some blind pastries so that— ‘What did you say?’

‘I luvim.’

‘You can’t!’

‘He saved my life!’

‘That’s no basis for a relationship! A polite thank you would have
sufficed!’

‘I’ve got a feelin’ about him!’

‘That’s just silly!’

‘Well? Silly’s not bad, is it?’

‘Now you listen to me, young— Oh, hello, Mister Ottomy.’

It is in the way of the Ottomies all around the worlds to look as if
they have been built out of the worst parts of two men and to be
annoyingly hushen-footed on thick red rubber soles, all the better to
peep and pry. And they always assume that a free cup of tea is theirs by
right.

‘What a day, miss, what a day! Were you at the match?’ he enquired,
glancing from Glenda to Juliet.

‘Been cleaning the ovens,’ said Glenda briskly.

‘Yes, today didn’t happen,’ Juliet added, and giggled. Glenda hated
giggling.

Ottomy looked around slowly and without embarrassment, noting the
absence of dirt, discarded gloves, cloths—

‘And we’ve only just finished getting everything all neat and tidy,’
Glenda snarled. ‘Would you like a cup of tea, Mister Ottomy? And then
you can tell us all about the game.’

It has been said that crowds are stupid, but mostly they are simply
confused, since as an eyewitness the average person is as reliable as a
meringue lifejacket. It became obvious, as Ottomy went on, that nobody
had any clear idea about anything other than that some bloke threw a
goal from halfway down the street, and even then only maybe.

‘But, funny thing,’ Ottomy went on, as Glenda metaphorically let out a
breath, ‘while we was in the Shove, I could’ve sworn I saw your lovely
assistant here chatting to a lad in the Dimmer strip...’

‘No law against that!’ Glenda said. ‘Anyway, she was here, cleaning the
ovens.’ It was clumsy, but she hated people like him, who lived for the
exercise of third-hand authority and loved every little bit of power
they could grab. He’d seen more than he’d told her, that was certain,
and wanted her to wriggle. And out of the corner of her mind, she could
feel him looking at their coats. Their wet coats.

‘I thought you didn’t go to the football, Mister Ottomy?’

‘Ah, well, there you have it. The pointies wanted to go and watch a
game, and me and Mister Nobbs had to go with them in case they got
breathed on by ordinary people. Blimey, you wouldn’t believe it! Tutting
and complaining and taking notes, like they owned the street. They’re up
to something, you mark my words.’

Glenda didn’t like the word ‘pointies’, although it was a good
description. Coming from Ottomy, though, it was an invitation to greasy
conspiracy. But however you baked it, wizards were nobs, people who
mattered, the movers and the shakers: and when people like that got
interested in the doings of people who by definition did not matter,
little people were about to be shaken, and shook.

‘Vetinari doesn’t like football,’ she said.

‘Well, o’course, they’re all in it together,’ said Ottomy, tapping his
nose. This caused a small lump of dried matter to shoot from his other
nostril into his tea. Glenda had a brief struggle with her conscience
over whether to point this out, but won.

‘I thought you should know this, on account of how people up in the
Sisters look up to you,’ said Ottomy. ‘I remember your mum. She was a
saint, that woman. Always had a helping hand for everyone.’ Yes, and
didn’t they grab, said Glenda to herself. She was lucky to die with all
her fingers.

Ottomy drained his mug and plonked it on the table with a sigh. ‘Can’t
stand around here all day, eh?’

‘Yes, I’m sure you’ve got lots of other places to stand.’

Ottomy paused at the entrance arch, and turned to grin at Juliet.

‘A girl the spit and image of you, I’d swear it. With a Dimmer boy.
Amazing. You must have one of those double gangers. Well, it’ll have to
remain a mystery, as the man said when he found something that would
have to remain a mystery. Toodle-oo—’

He stopped dead rather than walk into the silvery knife that Glenda was
holding in a not totally threatening way quite close to his throat. She
had the satisfaction of seeing his Adam’s apple pop back up and down
again like a sick yoyo.

‘Sorry about that,’ she said, lowering it. ‘I’ve always got a knife in
my hand these days. We’ve been doing the pork. Very much like human
flesh, pork, or so they say.’ She put her spare hand across his
shoulders and said, ‘Probably not a good idea, spreading silly rumours,
Mister Ottomy. You know how people can be so funny about that sort of
thing. Nice of you to drop by and if you happen to be going past
tomorrow I’ll see that you get a pie. Do excuse us. I have a lot of
chopping up to do.’

He left at speed. Glenda, her heart pounding, looked at Juliet; her
mouth made a perfect O.

‘What? What?’

‘I fort you was goin’ to stab ’im!’

‘I just happened to be holding a knife. You are holding a knife. We hold
knives. This is a kitchen.’

‘D’you fink he’s goin’ to tell?’

‘He doesn’t really know anything.’ Eight inches, she thought. That’s as
big as you can make a pie without a dish. How many pies could I make out
of a weasel like Ottomy? The big mincer would make it easy. Ribcages and
skulls must be a problem, though. Probably better, on the whole, to
stick to pork.

But the thought blazed away at the back of her mind, never to become
action but unfamiliar, exciting and oddly liberating.

What were the wizards doing at the game? Making notes about what? A
puzzle to think about.

In the meantime, they were in a world of pies. Juliet could work quite
well at repetitive jobs when she put her mind to it, and she had a
meticulousness often found in people who were not very clever.
Occasionally she sniffed, not a good thing when you are making pie
filling. She was probably thinking about Trev, and pasting him, in her
beautiful and not very overcrowded head, into one of those glittery
dreams sold by _Bu-bubble_ and other junk, where all you had to do to be
famous was just ‘be yourself ’. Ha! While Glenda had always known what
she wanted. She worked long, poorly paid hours to get it, and here it
was: her own kitchen, and power, more or less . . . over pies! _A moment
ago you were daydreaming of turning a man into pies!_

Why are you so angry all the time? What went wrong? I’ll tell you what
went wrong! When you got there, there was no there there. You wanted to
see Quirm from an open carriage while a nice young man drank champagne
out of your slipper, but you never did, because they were a funny lot in
Quirm, and you couldn’t trust the water, and how did that champagne
thing work, anyway? Didn’t it drip out? What would happen if your toe
trouble played up again...? So you never did. Never will.

‘I never said Trev’s a bad lad,’ she said aloud. ‘Not a gentleman, needs
a slap to teach him manners and he takes life a good deal too easily,
but he could make something of himself if he had reason to put his mind
to it.’

Juliet did not seem to be listening, but you never could tell.

‘It’s just the football. You’re on different sides. It won’t work,’
Glenda finished.

‘S’posing I went and supported the Dimmers?’

A day ago that would have sounded like some kind of sacrilege; now it
just presented a huge problem.

‘For a start, your dad wouldn’t speak to you ever again. Or your
brothers.’

‘They don’t now, much, anyway, except to ask when their grub is goin’ to
be ready. D’you know, today was the first time I ever saw the ball up
close? And you know what? It weren’t worth it. Hey, and they’re goin’ to
have a fashion show on at Shatta tomorrow. Why don’t we go?’

‘Never heard of it,’ Glenda snorted.

‘It’s a dwarf store.’

‘That sounds right. I can’t imagine humans naming anything like that.
You’d be hostage to the first misprint.’

‘We could go. Might be fun.’ Juliet waved a tattered copy of
_Bu-bubble_. ‘And the new micromails are going to be really good and
soft, and don’t chafe, it says here, plus, horned helmets are making a
return after too long in obs . . . curi . . . tea. Where’s that? And
there’s this mat . . . in . . . a tomorrow.’

‘Yes, but we’re not the kind of women who go to fashion shows, Jules.’

‘You’re not. Why am I not?’

‘Well, because . . . Well, I wouldn’t know what to wear.’ Glenda was
getting desperate now.

‘That’s why you should go to fashion shows,’ said Juliet smugly.

Glenda opened her mouth to snap a reply, and thought: it’s not about
boys and it’s not about football. It’s safe.

‘All right. I suppose it might be fun. Look, we’ve done a woman’s job
this evening. I’ll take you home now and do my chores and come back.
Your dad might be worrying.’

‘He’ll be in the pub,’ said Juliet accurately.

‘Well, he would be worrying if he wasn’t,’ said Glenda.

She wanted some time to herself with her feet up. It hadn’t just been a
long day, it had been a long and deep one as well. She needed some time
for things to settle.

‘And we’ll take a chair, how about that?’

‘They’re very expensive!’

‘Well, you’re only young once, that’s what I say.’

‘I never heard you say that before.’

Several troll chairs were waiting outside the university. They were
expensive at fivepence for the ride, but the seats in panniers round the
carrier’s neck were much more comfy than the slats on the buses. Of
course, it was posh, and curtains twitched and lips pursed. That was the
strange thing about the street: if you were born there, people didn’t
like it if you started not to fit in. Granny had called it ‘getting
ideas above your station’. It was letting the side up.

She opened Juliet’s door for her because the girl always fumbled with
the lock, and watched it shut.

Only then did she open her own front door, which was as patched and
peeling as the other one. She’d hardly taken her coat off when there was
a hammering on the weatherbeaten woodwork. She flung it open to find Mr
Stollop, Juliet’s father, one fist still raised and a little cloud of
powdered paint flecks settling around him.

‘Heard you come in, Glendy,’ he said. ‘What’s this all about?’

His other huge hand rose, holding a crisp off-white envelope. You didn’t
see many of these in Dolly Sisters.

‘It’s called a letter,’ said Glenda.

The man held it out imploringly and now she noticed the large letter V
on the dreaded government stamp, guaranteed to spread fear and
despondency among those with taxes yet to pay.

‘It’s his lordship writing to me!’ said Mr Stollop in distress. ‘Why’d
he want to go and write to me? I haven’t done nothing!’

‘Have you thought about opening it?’ said Glenda. ‘That’s generally how
we find out what’s in letters.’

There was another of those imploring looks. In Dolly Sisters reading and
writing was soft indoor work that was best left to the women. Real work
required broad backs, strong arms and calloused hands. Mr Stollop
absolutely fitted the bill. He was captain of the Dollies and in one
match had bitten an ear off three men. She sighed and took the letter
from a hand which she noticed was slightly trembling and slit it open
with her thumbnail.

‘It says here, Mister Stollop,’ she said, and the man winced. ‘Yes. That
would be you,’ Glenda added.

‘Is there anything about taxes or anything?’ he said.

‘Not that I can see. He writes that “I would greatly appreciate your
company at a dinner I am proposing to hold at Unseen University at eight
o’clock Wednesday evening to discuss the future of the famous game
foot-the-ball. I will be pleased to welcome you as the captain of the
Dolly Sisters team.’’ ’

‘Why has he picked on me?’ Stollop demanded.

‘He says,’ said Glenda, ‘because you’re the captain.’

‘Yes, but why me?’

‘Maybe he’s invited all the team captains,’ Glenda volunteered. ‘You
could send a lad round with a white scarf and check, couldn’t you?’

‘Yeah, but supposing it’s just me,’ said Stollop again, determined to
plumb the horror to its depths.

Glenda had a bright idea. ‘Well then, Mister Stollop, it would look like
the captain of the Dolly Sisters is the only one important enough to
discuss the future of football with the ruler himself.’

Stollop didn’t square his shoulders because he wore them permanently
squared, but with a muscular nudge he managed to achieve the effect of
cubed. ‘Hah, he’s got that one right!’ he roared.

Glenda sighed inwardly. The man was strong, but his muscles were melting
into fat. She knew his knees hurt. She knew he got out of breath rather
quickly these days and in the presence of something he couldn’t bully,
punch or kick, Mr Stollop was entirely at a loss. Down by his sides his
hands flexed and unflexed themselves as they tried to do his thinking
for him.

‘What’s this all about?’

‘I don’t know, Mister Stollop.’

He shifted his weight. ‘Er, would it be about that Dimmer boy that got
himself hurt today, d’you think?’

Could be anyone, thought Glenda as cold dread blossomed. It’s not as
though it doesn’t happen every week. It doesn’t have to be either of
them. It will be, of course, I know it, but I don’t know it, can’t
possibly know it, and if I repeat that long enough it might all never
have happened.

Got himself hurt, thought Glenda in the roar of panic. That quite likely
means he happened to be standing in the wrong place in the wrong strip,
which is tantamount to a self-inflicted wound. He got himself killed.

‘My lads came in and said it was out in the street. That’s what they
just heard. He got killed, that’s what they heard.’

‘They didn’t see anything?’

‘That’s right, they didn’t see a thing.’

‘But they were doing a lot of listening?’

That one went over Stollop’s head without even bothering to climb.

‘And it was a Dimmer boy?’

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘They heard he died, but you know how those Dimwell
buggers lie.’

‘Where are your boys now?’

For a moment the old man’s eyes blazed. ‘They’re stoppin’ indoors or
I’ll thrash ’em. You get some nasty gangs out when something like that’s
been happening.’

‘One less now, then,’ said Glenda.

Stollop’s face was painted in pigments of misery and dread. ‘They’re not
bad boys, you know. Not at heart. People pick on them.’

Yes, down at the Watch House, she said to herself, where people say,
‘That’s them! The big ones! I’d know them anywhere!’

She left him shaking his head and ran down the road. The troll would
never expect to get a fare up here and there was no sense in hanging
around and getting covered in paint. She might just about be able to
catch up with it on its way down town. After a minute or two she
realized that someone was following her. _Chasing_ her in the gloom. If
only she’d remembered to bring the knife. She stepped into a patch of
deeper shadow and, as the knife-wielding maniac drew level, stepped out
and shouted, ‘Stop following me!’

Juliet gave a little scream. ‘They’ve got Trev,’ she sobbed, as Glenda
held her. ‘I know they have!’

‘Don’t be silly,’ said Glenda. ‘There’s fighting all the time after a
big match. No sense in getting too worried.’

‘So why were you running?’ said Juliet sharply. And there was no answer
to that.

The bledlow nodded him through the staff door with a grunt and he headed
straight away for the vats. A couple of the lads were dribbling in their
meticulous and very slow way, but there was no sign of Nutt until Trev
risked his sanity and nasal passages by checking the communal sleeping
area, where he found Nutt sleeping on his bedroll, clutching his
stomach. It was an extremely large stomach. Given the usual neat shape
of Nutt, it made him look a little like a snake that had swallowed an
extremely large goat. The curious face of the Igor and his worried voice
came back to him. He looked down beside the bedroll and saw a small
piece of piecrust and some crumbs. It smelled like a very good pie. In
fact, he could think of only one person who could ever make a pie quite
so beguiling. Whatever it was that had been filling Trev, the invisible
illumination that had made him almost dance here from the Watch House,
drained out through his feet.

He headed through the stone corridors to the Night Kitchen. Any optimism
he might have retained was dashed one hope at a time by the trail of pie
crumbs, but the illumination rose again as he saw Juliet and, oh yes,
Glenda, standing in what was left of the Night Kitchen, which was a mess
of torn-open cupboards and pieces of piecrust.

‘Oh, Mister Trevor Likely,’ said Glenda, folding her arms. ‘Just one
question: who ate all the pies?’

The illumination swelled until it filled Trev with a kind of silvery
light. It had been three nights since he had slept in an actual bed and
it had not been your normal sort of day. He smiled broadly at nothing at
all and was caught by Juliet as he hit the ground.

Trev woke up half an hour later, when Glenda brought him a cup of tea.
‘I thought we’d better let you sleep,’ she said. ‘Juliet said you looked
awful, so obviously she’s coming to her senses.’

‘He was dead,’ said Trev. ‘Dead as a doorknob, and then he wasn’t.
What’s that all about?’ He levered himself up and realized that he had
been put to bed on one of the grubby bedrolls in the vats. Nutt was
lying on the roll next to him.

‘All right,’ said Glenda. ‘If you can do it without lying, tell me.’ She
sat down and watched the sleeping Nutt for a while as Trev tried to make
sense of the previous evening. ‘What was in the sandwich again? The one
the Igor gave him?’

‘Tuna, spaghetti and jam. With sprinkles,’ said Trev, yawning.

‘Are you sure?’

‘It’s not the kinda thing you forget.’

‘What kind of jam?’ Glenda insisted.

‘Why ask?’

‘I’m thinking it might work with quince. Or chilli. Can’t see any place
for sprinkles, though. They don’t make any sense.’

‘What? He’s an Igor. It doesn’t have to make sense!’

‘But he warned you about Nutt?’

‘Yes, but I don’t think he meant “lock up your pies”, do you? Are you
gonna get into trouble about the pies?’

‘No. I’ve got plenty more maturing in the cool room. They’re at their
best when matured. You have to keep ahead of yourself, with pies.’

She looked down at Nutt and went on, ‘Are you really telling me he got
all smashed up by the Stollop boys and then walked out of the Lady
Sibyl?’

‘He was as dead as a doorknob. Even old ’addock could spot that.’

This time they both stared at Nutt.

‘He’s alive now,’ said Glenda, as if it was an accusation.

‘Look,’ said Trev, ‘all I know about people who come from Uberwald is
that some of them are vampires and some are werewolves. Well, I don’t
think vampires are much interested in pies. And it was a full moon last
week and he didn’t act odd; well, odder than normal.’

Glenda lowered her voice. ‘Maybe he’s a zombie— No, they don’t eat pies
either.’ She continued to stare at Nutt, but another part of her said,
‘There’s going to be a banquet on Wednesday night. Lord Vetinari’s up to
something with the wizards. It’s about the football, I’m sure of it.’

‘Well?’

‘For some plan, I expect. Something nasty. The wizards were at the game
today taking notes! Don’t tell me that’s healthy. They want to shut down
football, that’s what it is!’

‘Good!’

‘Trevor Likely, how can you say that! Your dad—’

‘Died because he was dumb,’ said Trev. ‘And don’t tell me it was the way
he would have wanted to go. No one would want to go like that.’

‘But he loved his football!’

‘So? What does that mean? The Stollop boys love their football. Andy
Shank loves ’is football! And what does it mean? Not countin’ today, how
often have you seen the ball in play? Hardly ever, I bet.’

‘Well, yes, but it’s not about the football.’

‘You’re saying that football is not about football?’

Glenda wished she’d had a proper education, or, failing that, any real
education at all. But she was not going to back off now. ‘It’s the
sharing,’ she said. ‘It’s being part of the crowd. It’s chanting
together. It’s all of it. The whole thing.’

‘I believe, Miss Glenda,’ said Nutt from his mattress, ‘that the work
you are looking for is Trousenblert’s _Der Selbst uberschritten durch
das Ganze_.’

They looked down at Nutt again, mouths open. He had opened his eyes and
appeared to be staring at the ceiling. ‘It is the lonely soul trying to
reach out to the shared soul of all humanity, and possibly much further.
W. E. G. Goodnight’s translation of _In Search of The Whole_ is marred,
while quite understandable, by the mistranslation of
_bewußtseinsschwelle_ as “haircut” throughout.’

Trev and Glenda looked at one another. Trev shrugged. Where could they
start?

Glenda coughed. ‘Mister Nutt, are you alive or dead or what?’

‘Alive, thank you very much for asking.’

‘I saw you killed!’ Trev shouted. ‘We ran all the way to the Lady
Sybil!’

‘Oh,’ said Nutt. ‘I am sorry, I do not recall. It would seem that
diagnosis was in error. Am I right?’

They exchanged glances. Trev got the worst of it. When Glenda was angry,
her glance might just possibly etch glass. But Nutt had a point. It was
hard to argue with a man who insisted that he was not dead. ‘Um, and
then you came back here and ate nine pies,’ said Glenda.

‘Looks like they did you good,’ said Trev, with brittle cheerfulness.

‘But I can’t see where they’ve gone,’ Glenda finished. ‘Belly-busters,
every one of them.’

‘You will be angry with me.’ Nutt looked frightened.

‘Let’s all calm down, shall we?’ said Trev. ‘Look, I was pretty worried,
my oath, yes. Not angry, okay? We’re your friends.’

‘I must be becoming. I must be helpful!’ This came from Nutt’s lips like
a mantra.

Glenda took his hands. ‘Look, I’m not bothered about the pies, really
I’m not. I like to see a man with a good appetite. But you must tell us
what’s wrong. Have you done something you shouldn’t?’

‘I should be making myself worthy,’ Nutt said, pulling away gently and
not meeting her eyes. ‘I must be becoming. I must not lie. I must gain
worth. Thank you for your kindness.’

He got up, walked down the length of the vats, picked up a basket of
candles, came back, wound up his dribbling machine and began to work,
oblivious of their presence.

‘Do you know what goes on in his head?’ Glenda whispered.

‘When he was young, he was chained to an anvil for seven years,’ said
Trev.

‘What? That’s terrible! Someone must have been very cruel to do
something like that!’

‘Or desperate to make sure he didn’t get free.’

‘Things are never all they seem, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt, without
looking up from his feverish activity, ‘and the acoustics in these
cellars are very good. Your father loved you, did he not?’

‘Wot?’ Trev’s face reddened.

‘He loved you, took you to the football, shared a pie with you, taught
you to cheer for the Dimmers? Did he hold you on his shoulders so that
you could see more of the game?’

‘Stop talkin’ about my dad like that!’

Glenda took Trev’s arm. ‘It’s okay, Trev, it’s all right, it’s not a
nasty question, really it isn’t!’

‘But you hate him, because he became a mortal man, dying on the
cobbles,’ said Nutt, picking up another undribbled candle.

‘_That_ is nasty,’ said Glenda. Nutt ignored her.

‘He let you down, Mister Trev. He wasn’t the small boy’s god. It turned
out that he was only a man. But he was not only a man. Everyone who has
ever watched a game in this city has heard of Dave Likely. If he was a
fool, then any man who has ever climbed a mountain or swum a torrent is
a fool. If he was a fool then so was the man who first tried to tame
fire. If he was a fool then so was the man who tried the first oyster,
he was a fool, too – although I’m bound to remark that, given the
division of labour in early hunter-gatherer cultures, he was probably a
woman as well. Perhaps only a fool gets out of bed. But, after death,
some fools shine like stars, and your father is such a one. After death,
people forget the foolishness, but they do remember the shine. You could
not have done anything. You could not have stopped him. If you could
have stopped him he would not have been Dave Likely, a name that means
football to thousands of people.’ Nutt very carefully put down a
beautifully dribbled candle and continued. ‘Think about this, Mister
Trev. Don’t be smart. Smart is only a polished version of dumb. Try
intelligence. It will surely see you through.’

‘That’s just a load of words!’ said Trev hotly, but Glenda saw the
glistening lines down his cheeks.

‘Please think about them, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt and added, ‘There, I
have done a complete basket. That is worth.’

It was the calmness. Nutt had been spinning, almost sick with anxiety.
He’d been repeating himself, as if he’d had to learn things for a
teacher. And then he was otherwise – totally reserved and collected.

Glenda looked from Trev to Nutt and back again. Trev’s mouth hung open.
She didn’t blame it. What Nutt had said with quiet matter-of-factness
had sounded like not an opinion but the truth, winched out of some deep
well.

Then Trev broke the silence, speaking as if hypnotized, his voice
hoarse.

‘He gave me his old jersey when I was five. It was like a tent. I mean,
it was so greasy I never got wet—’ He stopped.

After a moment Glenda pushed at his elbow. ‘He’s gone all stiff,’ she
said, ‘as stiff as a piece of wood.’

‘Ah, catatonic,’ said Nutt. ‘He is overwhelmed by his feelings. We
should lay him down.’

‘These old mattresses they sleep on in here are rubbish!’ said Glenda,
looking around for a better alternative to cold flagstones.

‘I know the very thing!’ said Nutt, suddenly all action and plunging off
down the passage. This left Glenda still holding a rigid Trev when
Juliet appeared from the direction of the kitchens. She stopped
instantly when she saw them, and burst into tears.

‘He’s dead, isn’t he?’

‘Er, no—’ Glenda began.

‘I talked to some of the bakery lads coming in to work and they’re
telling me there’s been fights all over the city and someone got himself
murdered!’

‘Trev’s just had a bit of a shock, that’s all. Mister Nutt’s gone to
find something for him to lie down on.’

‘Oh.’ Juliet sounded a little disappointed, presumably because ‘a bit of
a shock’ was not sufficiently dramatic, but she rallied just as a loud,
rough and uniquely wooden noise from the other direction heralded Nutt
pushing a large couch, which shuddered to a halt in front of them.

‘There’s a big room piled up with old furniture up the hall,’ he said,
patting the faded velvet. ‘It’s a bit musty, but I think all the mice
have fallen out on the way here. Quite a find actually. I believe it is
a chaise longue from the workshop of the famous Gurning Upspire. I think
I can probably restore it later. Let him down gently.’

‘What happened to him?’ said Juliet.

‘Oh, the truth can be a little bit upsetting,’ said Nutt. ‘But he will
get over it and feel better.’

‘I would very much like to know the truth myself, Mister Nutt, thank you
very much,’ said Glenda, folding her arms and trying to look stern while
all the time a voice in her head was whispering _Chaise longue! Chaise
longue! When no one else is here you can have a go at languishing!_

‘It’s a kind of medicine with words,’ said Nutt, carefully. ‘Sometimes
people fool themselves into believing things that aren’t true. Sometimes
that can be quite dangerous for the person. They see the world in a
wrong way. They won’t let themselves see that what they believe is
wrong. But often there is a part of the mind that does know, and the
right words can let it out.’ He gave them a worried look. ‘Well, that’s
nice,’ said Juliet.

‘It sounds like hocus pocus to me,’ said Glenda. ‘Folk know their own
minds!’ She folded her arms again, and saw Nutt glance at them.

‘Well?’ she demanded. ‘Haven’t you ever seen elbows before?’

‘Never such pretty dimpled ones, Miss Glenda, on such tightly folded
arms.’

Up until that point Glenda had never realized that Juliet had such a
dirty laugh, to which, Glenda fervently hoped, she was not entitled.

‘Glenda’s got a bee-oh! Glenda’s got a bee-ooh!’

‘It’s “beau”, actually,’ Glenda said, swiping to the back of her mind
the recollection that it had taken her years to find that out herself.
‘And I was just helping. We’re helping him, aren’t we, Mister Nutt?’

‘Doesn’t he look sweet lying there?’ said Juliet. ‘All pink.’ She
stroked Trev’s greasy hair inexpertly. ‘Just like a little boy!’

‘Yes, he’s always been good at that,’ said Glenda. ‘Why don’t you go and
get the little boy a cup of tea? And a biscuit. Not one of the chocolate
ones. That’ll take some time,’ she said as the girl shimmied away. ‘She
tends to get distracted. Her mind wanders and amuses itself elsewhere.’

‘Trev tells me that despite your more mature appearance you are the same
age as her,’ said Nutt.

‘You really don’t talk to many ladies, do you, Mister Nutt?’

‘Oh dear, have I made another faux pas?’ said Nutt, suddenly all nerves
again, to such an extent that she took pity on him.

‘Would this be “faux pas” that looks as if it should be said like “forks
pass”?’

‘Er, yes.’

Glenda nodded, satisfied, another literary puzzle solved. ‘Better not
use the word “mature” unless you are talking about cheese or wine. Not
good to use it for ladies.’

She stared at him, wondering how to pose the next question. She opted
for directness; she wasn’t very good at anything else.

‘Trev is sure you sort of died and came alive again.’

‘So I understand.’

‘Not many people do that.’

‘The vast majority do not, I believe.’

‘How did you do it?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘This is rather late in the day, I must admit, but you don’t feel any
hunger for blood or brains, do you?’

‘Not at all. Just pies. I like pies. I am very ashamed about the pies.
It will not happen again, Miss Glenda. I fear my body was acting on its
own. It needed instant nourishment.’

‘Trev says you used to be chained to an anvil?’

‘Yes. That was because I was worthless. Then I was taken to see Ladyship
and she told me: You are worthless but, I think, not unworthy, and I
will give you worth.’

‘But you must have had parents!’

‘I do not know. There are many things I don’t know. There is a door.’

‘What?’

‘A door in my head. Some things are behind the door and I don’t know
them. But that is all right, Ladyship says.’

Glenda felt like giving up. Nutt answered questions, yes, but really all
you ended up with was more questions. But she persevered. It was like
stabbing away at a tin can, hoping to find a way in. ‘Ladyship is a real
lady, is she? Castles and servants and whatnot?’

‘Oh, yes. Even a whatnot. She is my friend. And she is mature like
cheese and wine, because she has lived for a long time and is not old.’

‘But she sent you here, yes? Did she teach you . . . whatever it was you
used on Trev?’

Beside Glenda, Trev stirred.

‘No,’ said Nutt. ‘I read the works of the masters in the library all by
myself. But she did tell me that people, too, were a kind of living
book, and I would have to learn to read them.’

‘Well, you read Trev well enough. Be told, though: don’t try that stuff
on me or you’ll never see another pie!’

‘Yes, Miss Glenda. Sorry, Miss Glenda.’

She sighed. What is it about me? The moment they look downcast I feel
sorry for them! She looked up. He was watching her.

‘Stop that!’

‘Sorry, Miss Glenda.’

‘But you got to see the football, at least. Did you enjoy it?’

Nutt’s face lit up. ‘Yes. It was wonderful. The noise, the crowds, the
chanting, oh the chanting! It becomes a second blood! The unison! To not
be alone! To be not just one but one and all, of one mind and purpose! .
. . excuse me.’ He had seen her face.

‘So you quite liked it, then,’ said Glenda. The intensity of Nutt’s
outburst had been like opening an oven door. It was a mercy her hair
hadn’t frizzled.

‘Oh yes! The ambience was wonderful!’

‘I didn’t try those,’ Glenda hazarded, ‘but the pease pudding is usually
good.’

The scrape of crockery and the tinkling of a teaspoon heralded the
arrival of Juliet, or rather of the cup of tea that she was holding in
front of her as if it were a grail, so that she drifted along behind it
like a comet’s tail. Glenda was impressed. The tea was in the cup
instead of in the saucer and it was the acceptable brown colour that is
usually characteristic of tea and was usually the only tea-like
characteristic of tea made by Juliet.

Trev sat up, and Glenda wondered how long he might have been paying
attention. All right, he might be good in an emergency, and at least he
washed sometimes and owned a toothbrush, but Juliet was special, wasn’t
she? All she needed was a prince. Technically that meant Lord Vetinari,
but he was far too old. Besides, no one was sure which side of the bed
he got out of, or even if he went to bed at all. But one day a prince
would come, even if Glenda had to drag him on a chain.

She turned her head. Nutt was watching her intently again. Well, her
book was locked down tightly. No one was going to riffle through her
pages. And tomorrow she would find out what the wizards were up to. That
was easy. She’d be invisible.

In the stillness of the night, Nutt sat in his special place, which was
yet another room, very close to the vats. Candles burned as he sat at a
rescued table, staring at a piece of paper and absent-mindedly cleaning
out his ear with the point of his pencil.

Nutt was technically an expert on love poetry throughout the ages and
had discussed it at length with Miss Healstether, the castle librarian.
He had also tried to discuss it with Ladyship, but she had laughed and
said it was frivolity, although quite helpful as a tutorial on the use
of vocabulary, scansion, rhythm and affect as a means to an end, to wit
getting a young lady to take all her clothes off. At that particular
point, Nutt had not really understood what she meant. It sounded like
some sort of conjuring trick.

He tapped the pencil on the page. The castle library had been full of
poetry and he’d read it avidly as he read all books, not knowing why it
had been written or what exactly it was supposed to achieve. But
generally poems written by men to women followed a very similar format.
Now, with a world’s worth of the finest poetry to choose from, he was
lost for words.

Then he nodded to himself. Ah, yes, Robert Scandal’s famous poem, ‘Oi!
To his Deaf Mistress’. It surely had the right shape and tempo. Of
course, there had to be a muse. Oh, yes, all poetry needed a muse. That
might present a difficulty. Juliet, while quite attractive, was also, in
his mind, a kind of amiable ghost. Hmm. Ah, of course . . .

Nutt pulled the pencil out of his ear, hesitated and wrote:

  I sing, but not of love, for love is blind,

  but celebrate instead the muse of kindness . . .

The fires in the vats cooled, but Nutt’s brain was suddenly ablaze.

 

Round about midnight, Glenda decided it was safe enough to leave the
boys alone to get up to whatever it was boys got up to when women
weren’t around to look after them, and made sure that she and Juliet
were on the late cross-town bus. That meant she actually got to sleep in
her own bed.

She looked around the tiny bedroom by candlelight and met the gaze,
which was quite difficult, of Mr Wobble, the three-eyed transcendental
teddy bear. It would have been nice to have a bit of cosmic explanation
at this point, but the universe never gave you explanations, it just
gave you more questions.

She reached down surreptitiously, even though there was only a
three-eyed teddy bear watching her, and picked up the latest Iradne
Comb-Buttworthy from the cache unsuccessfully hidden below. After ten
minutes of reading, which took her some way into the book (Ms
Comb-Buttworthy producing volumes that were even slimmer than her
heroines), she experienced déjà vu. Moreover, the déjà vu was squared,
because she had the feeling of having had the déjà vu before.

‘They’re really all the same, aren’t they?’ she said to the three-eyed
teddy bear. ‘You know it’s going to be Mary the Maid, or someone like
her, and there’s got to be two men and she will end up with the nice
one, and there has to be misunderstandings, and they never do anything
more than kiss and it’s absolutely guaranteed that, for example, an
exciting civil war or an invasion by trolls or even a scene with any
cooking in it is not going to happen. The best you can expect is a
thunderstorm.’ It really had nothing to do with real life at all, which,
although short on civil wars and invasions by trolls, at least had the
decency to have lots of cooking.

The book dropped out of her fingers and thirty seconds later she was
sound asleep.

Surprisingly, no neighbour needed her in the night so she got up,
dressed and breakfasted in what was an almost unfamiliar world. She
opened her door to take breakfast to widow Crowdy and found Juliet on
the doorstep.

The girl took a step back. ‘Are you goin’ out, Glendy? It’s early!’

‘Well, you’re up,’ said Glenda. ‘And with a newspaper, I’m pleased to
see.’

‘Isn’t it exciting?’ said Juliet, and thrust the paper at her.

Glenda took one look at the picture on the front page, took a second,
closer look, and then grabbed Juliet and pulled her inside.

‘You can see their tonkers,’ Juliet observed, in a voice that was much
too matter-of-fact for Glenda’s liking.

‘You shouldn’t know what they look like!’ she said, smacking the paper
down on her kitchen table.

‘What? I’ve got three brothers, ain’t I? Everyone bathes in a tub in
front of the fire, don’t they? It’s not like they’re anything special.
Anyway, it’s culture, all right? Remember when you took me to that place
full of people in the nuddy. You stayed in there hours.’

‘It was the Royal Art Museum,’ said Glenda, thanking her stars that they
were indoors. ‘That’s different!’

She tried to read the story, but it was very difficult with that amazing
picture beside it, just where an eye might stray again and again.

Glenda enjoyed her job. She didn’t have a career; they were for people
who could not hold down jobs. She was very good at what she did, so she
did it all the time, without paying much attention to the world. But now
her eyes were opened. In fact, it was time to blink.

Under the headline ‘New Light on Ancient Game’ was a picture of a vase
or, rather more grandly, an urn, in orange and black. It showed some
very tall and skinny men – their masculinity was beyond doubt, but
possibly beyond belief. They were apparently struggling for possession
of a ball; one of them was lying on the ground, and looked as if he was
in some pain. The translation of the name of the urn was, said the
caption, THE TACKLE.

According to the accompanying story, someone at the Royal Art Museum had
found the urn in an old storeroom, and it contained scrolls which, it
said here, had the original rules of foot-the-ball laid down in the
early years of the century of the Summer Weevil, a thousand years ago,
when the game was played in honour of the goddess Pedestriana . . .

Glenda skimmed through the rest of it, because there was a lot of rest
to skim. An artist’s impression of the aforesaid goddess adorned page
three. She was, of course, beautiful. You seldom saw a goddess portrayed
as ugly. This probably had something to do with their ability to strike
people down instantly. In Pedestriana’s case, she would probably have
gone for the feet.

Glenda put the paper down, seething with anger, and as a cook she knew
how to seethe. This wasn’t football – except that the Guild of
Historians said that it was, and could prove it not only with old
parchments but also with an urn, and she could see that you were on the
wrong end of an argument if you were up against an urn.

But it was too neat, wasn’t it? Except . . . why? His lordship didn’t
like football, but here was an article saying that this game was very
old and had its own goddess, and if there were two things this city
liked, it was tradition and goddesses, especially if the goddesses were
a bit short on the chiffon above the waist. Did his lordship let them
put _anything_ in the paper? What was going on? ‘I’ve got business to
attend to,’ she said sternly. ‘It’s good that you bought a decent paper,
but you don’t want to read this kind of stuff.’

‘I didn’t. Who’s interested in that? I got it for the advert. Look.’

Glenda had never bothered much about the adverts in the paper, because
they were put there by people who were after your money. But there it
was, right there. Madame Sharn of Bonk gives you . . . micromail.

‘You said we could go,’ said Juliet pointedly.

‘Yes, well, that was before—’

‘You said we could go.’

‘Yes. But, well, has anyone from the Sisters ever gone to a fashion
show? It’s not our kind of thing, is it?’

‘Doesn’t say that in the paper. Says admission free. You said we could
go!’

Two o’clock, thought Glenda. Suppose I could manage it... ‘All right,
meet at work at half past one, do you hear? Not a minute later! I’ve got
things to do.’

The University Council meets every day at half past eleven, she thought
to herself. Oh, to be a fly on that wall. She grinned . . .

Trev was sitting in the battered old chair that served as his office in
the vats. Work was proceeding at its usual reliable snail’s pace.

‘Ah, I see you are in early, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt. ‘I am sorry not to
have been here. I had to go and deal with an emergency candelabra
upset.’ He leaned closer. ‘I have done what you asked, Mister Trev.’

Trev snapped out of his daydream of Juliet and said, ‘Huh?’ ‘You asked
me to write . . . to improve your poem for Miss Juliet.’

‘You’ve done it?’

‘Perhaps you would like to have a look, Mister Trev?’ He handed the
paper to Trev and stood nervously by the chair as a pupil stands by the
teacher.

After a very short while Trev’s forehead wrinkled. ‘What’s ee-er?’

‘That’s “e’er”, sir, as in “where e’er she walks”.’

‘You mean, like, she walks on air?’ said Trev.

‘No, Mister Trev. I should just put it down to poetry if I were you.’

Trev struggled on. He had never had much to do with poetry, except the
sort that started ‘There was a young lady of Quirm’, but this looked
like the real stuff. The page seemed to be crowded and yet full of space
as well. Also, the writing was extremely curly and that was a sure sign,
wasn’t it? You didn’t get that sort of thing from the lady of Quirm.
‘This is great stuff, Mister Nutt. This is really great stuff. This is
poetry, but what really is it sayin’?’

Nutt cleared his throat. ‘Well, sir, the essence of poetry of this
nature is to create a mood that will make the recipient, that is to say,
sir, the young lady who you are going to send it to, feel very kindly
disposed to the author of the poem, which would be you, sir, in this
case. According to Ladyship, everything else is just showing off. I have
brought you a pen and an envelope; if you would kindly sign the poem I
will ensure that it gets to Miss Juliet.’

‘I bet no one’s ever written her a poem before,’ said Trev, skating
quickly over the truth that he hadn’t either. ‘I’d love to be there when
she reads it.’

‘That would not be advised,’ said Nutt quickly. ‘The general consensus
is that the lady concerned reads it in the absence of the hopeful swain,
that is you, sir, and forms a beneficent mental picture of him. Your
actual presence might actually get in the way, especially since I see
you haven’t changed your shirt again today. Besides, I am informed that
there is a possibility that all her clothes will fall off.’

Trev, who had been struggling with the concept of ‘swain’,
fast-forwarded to this information at speed. ‘Er, say that again?’

‘All her clothes might fall off. I am sorry about this, but it appears
to be a by-product of the whole business of poetry. But broadly
speaking, sir, it carries the message you have asked for, which is to
say “I think you’re really fit. I really fancy you. Can we have a date?
No hanky panky, I promise.” However, sir, since it is a love poem, I
have taken the liberty of altering it slightly to carry the suggestion
that if hanky or panky should appear to be welcomed by the young lady
she will not find you wanting in either department.’

***

Archchancellor Ridcully rubbed his hands together. ‘Well, gentlemen, I
hope we have all seen the papers this morning, or glanced at them at any
rate?’

‘I thought that the front page was not the place,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes. ‘It quite put me off my breakfast. Metaphorically
speaking, of course.’

‘Apparently, the urn has been in the museum’s cellars for at least three
hundred years, but for some reason it makes its presence felt now,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Of course, they have tons of stuff in there that’s never
really been looked at properly and the city was going through a prudish
period then and didn’t care to know about that sort of thing.’

‘What, that men have tonkers?’ said Dr Hix. ‘That sort of news gets out
sooner or later.’

He looked around at the disapproving faces and added, ‘Skull ring,
remember? Under college statute the head of the Department of PostMortem
Communications is entitled, nay, required to make tasteless, divisive
and moderately evil remarks. I’m sorry, but these are _your_ rules.’

‘Thank you, Doctor Hix. Your uncalled-for remarks are duly noted and
appreciated.’

‘You know, it seems very suspicious to me that this wretched urn has
turned up at just this time,’ observed the Senior Wrangler, ‘and I hope
I am not alone in this?’

‘I know what you mean,’ said Hix. ‘If I didn’t know that the
Archchancellor had his work cut out to persuade Vetinari to let us play,
I would think that this was some sort of plan.’

‘Ye-ess,’ said Ridcully thoughtfully.

‘The old rules look a lot more interesting, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Ye-ess.’

‘Did you read the bit that said players were not allowed to use their
hands, sir? And the high priest takes to the field of play to ensure
that the rules are honoured?’

‘I can’t see that catching on these days,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

‘He’s armed with a poisoned dagger, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Ah? Well, that should make for a more interesting game, at least, eh,
Mustrum? . . . Mustrum?’

‘What? Oh, yes. Yes. Something to think about, indeed. Yes, indeed. One
man, in charge . . . The onlooker who sees most of the game . . . the
gamer, in fact . . . So what move have I missed?’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor?’

Ridcully blinked at Ponder Stibbons. ‘What? Oh, just composing my
thoughts, as one does.’ He sat up straight. ‘In any case the rules don’t
concern us at this point. We have to play this game in any eventuality
and so we will abide by them in the best traditions of sportsmanship
until we have worked out where they may be most usefully broken to our
advantage. Mister Stibbons, you are collating our studies of the game.
The floor is yours.’

‘Thank you, Archchancellor.’ Ponder cleared his throat. ‘Gentlemen, the
game of football is clearly about more than the rules and the nature of
the play. In any case, these are pure mechanical considerations; the
chanting and, of course, the food are of more concern to us, I feel.
They seem to be an integral part of the game. Regrettably, so do the
supporters’ clubs.’

‘What is the nature of this problem?’ Ridcully enquired.

‘They hit one another over the head with them. It would be true to say
that brawling and mindless violence, such as occurred yesterday
afternoon, is one of the cornerstones of the sport.’

‘A far cry from its ancient beginnings, then,’ said the Chair of
Indefinite Studies, shaking his head.

‘Well, yes. I understand that in those days the losing team was
throttled. However, I suppose this would be called mindful violence that
took place with the enthusiastic consent of the entire community, or at
least that part of it that was still capable of breath. Fortunately, we
do not yet have supporters, so that this is not at present _our_
problem, and I propose we go directly to the pies.’

There was a chorus of general agreement from the wizards. Food was their
cup of tea, and if possible slice of cake too. Some of them were already
watching the door in anticipation of the tea trolley. It seemed like an
age since nine.

‘Central to the game is the pie,’ Ponder went on, ‘which is generally of
shortcrust pastry containing appropriate pie-like substances. I
collected half a dozen and tested them on the usual subjects.’

‘The students?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes. They said they were pretty awful. Not a patch on the pies here,
they said. They finished them off, however. Examination of the
ingredients suggests that they consisted of gravy, fat and salt, and
insofar as it was possible to tell, none of the students appears to have
died . . .’

‘So we are ahead on pies, then,’ said Ridcully cheerfully.

‘I suppose so, Archchancellor, although I do not believe that the pie
quality plays any role—’ He stopped, because the door had swung open to
allow the ingress of a reinforced, heavy-duty tea trolley. Since it was
not being propelled by Her, the wizards paid no further attention and
settled down to the passing of cups, the handing round of the sugar
bowl, the inspection of the quality of the chocolate biscuits with a
view to taking more than one’s entitlement and all the other little
diversions without which a committee would be a clever device for making
worthwhile decisions quickly.

When the rattling had ceased, and the last biscuit had been fought for,
Ridcully tinkled his teaspoon on the rim of his cup for silence,
although since he was Ridcully this only added the crash of broken
crockery to the hubbub. Once the girl in charge of the trolley had
sponged everybody down, he continued: ‘The chanting, gentlemen, appears
to be another inconsequentiality at first sight, but I have reason to
believe that it has a certain power, and we will ignore it at our peril.
I see the museum’s translators say the modern chants were originally
hymns to the goddess calling on her to grant her favours to the team of
choice, while naiads danced on the edges of the field of play, the
better to encourage the players to greater feats of prowess.’

‘Naiads?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘They’re water nymphs,
aren’t they? Young women with very thin damp clothing? Why would anyone
want them around? Besides, didn’t they drown sailors by singing to
them?’

Ridcully let the thoughtful pause hang in the air for a while before
volunteering: ‘Fortunately, I don’t think anyone these days would expect
that we play football underwater.’

‘The pies would float,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Not necessarily,’ said Ponder.

‘What about clothing, Mister Stibbons? I assume there will be some?’

‘Temperatures were somewhat warmer in olden days. I can assure you that
no one will insist on nudity.’

Ponder might have noticed the rattle as the girl with the tea trolley
almost dropped a cup, but was gracious enough not to notice that he had
noticed. He went on. ‘Currently the teams wear old shirts and short
trousers.’

‘How short?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies, urgency in his voice.

‘About mid-knee, I believe,’ said Ponder. ‘Is this likely to be a
problem?’

‘Yes, it is. The knees should be covered. It is a well-known fact that a
glimpse of the male knee can drive women into a frenzy of
libidinousness.’ There was another rattle from the tea trolley, but
Ponder ignored it because his own head had rattled a bit, too.

‘Are you sure about that, sir?’

‘It is established fact, young Stibbons.’

Ponder had found a grey hair on his comb that morning and was not in the
mood to take this standing up.

‘And precisely in what books does—’ he began, but Ridcully interrupted
with unusual diplomacy. Generally he liked little tiffs among the
faculty.

‘A few more inches to prevent mobbing by the ladies should present us
with no problems, surely, Mister Stibbons? Oops . . .’

This last was to Glenda, who had dropped two spoons on the carpet. She
gave him a cursory curtsy.

‘Er, yes . . . and we should sport the university colours,’ he went on,
with a hint of nervousness. Ridcully prided himself on treating the
staff well, and indeed did so whenever he remembered them, but the
expression of intelligent amusement on the face of the dumpy girl had
unnerved him; it was as if a chicken had winked.

‘Um, yes, yes indeed,’ he said. ‘The good old red jersey we used to wear
in my rowing days, with the big U’s on the front, bold as brass . . .’

He glanced at the maid, who was frowning. But he was Archchancellor,
wasn’t he? It said so on his door, didn’t it?

‘That’s what we’ll do,’ he declared. ‘We’ll look into pies, although
I’ve seen a few pies that don’t bear looking into, haha, and we’ll adapt
the good old red sweater. What’s next, Mister Stibbons?’

‘With regard to the chanting, sir. I’ve asked the Master of the Music to
work on some options,’ said Ponder smoothly. ‘We need to select a team
as soon as possible.’

‘I don’t see what the rush is,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
who had almost nodded off in the arms of a chocolate biscuit surfeit.

‘The bequest, remember?’ said the head of the Department of PostMortem
Communications. ‘We—’

‘Pas devant la domestique!’ snapped the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

Automatically, Ridcully turned again to look at Glenda, and got a
distinct feeling that here was a woman about to learn a foreign language
in a hurry. It was an odd but slightly exciting idea. Until this moment,
he had never thought of the maids in the singular. They were all . . .
servants. He was polite to them, and smiled when appropriate. He assumed
they sometimes did other things than fetch and carry, and sometimes went
off to get married and sometimes just . . . went off. Up until now,
though, he’d never really thought that they might think, let alone what
they thought about, and least of all what they thought about the
wizards. He turned back to the table.

‘Who will be doing the chanting, Mister Stibbons?’

‘The aforesaid supporters, fans, sir. It’s short for fanatics.’

‘And ours will be . . . who?’

‘Well, we are the largest employer in the city, sir.’

‘As a matter of fact I think Vetinari is, and I wish to all hells I knew
exactly who he is employing,’ said Ridcully.

‘I’m sure our loyal staff will support us,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. He turned to Glenda, and to Ridcully’s dismay said, glutinously,
‘I’m sure you would be a fan, would you not, my child?’

The Archchancellor sat back. He had a definite feeling that this was
going to be fun. Well, she hadn’t blushed and she hadn’t yelled. In
fact, she had not done anything, apart from carefully pick up the china.

‘I support Dolly Sisters, sir. Always have done.’

‘And are they any good?’

‘Having a poor patch at the moment, sir.’

‘Ah, then I expect you will want to support our team, which will be very
good indeed!’

‘Can’t do that, sir. You’ve got to support your team, sir.’

‘But you just said they weren’t doing well.’

‘That’s _when_ you support your team, sir. Otherwise you’re a numper.’

‘A numper being . . .?’ said Ridcully.

‘He’s someone who’s all cheering when things are going well, and then
runs off to another team when there’s a losing streak. They always
shouts the loudest.’

‘So you support the same team all your life?’

‘Well, if you move away it’s okay to change. No one will mind much
unless you go to a real enemy.’ She looked at their puzzled expressions,
sighed and went on: ‘Like Naphill United and the Whoppers, or Dolly
Sisters and Dimwell Old Pals, or the Pigsty Hill Pork Packers and the
Cockbill Boars. You know?’

When they clearly didn’t, she continued: ‘They hate each other. Always
have done, always will. They are the bad matches. The shutters go up for
those. I don’t know what my neighbours would say if they saw me cheering
a Dimmer.’

‘But that’s dreadful!’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Excuse me, miss,’ said Ponder, ‘but most of those pairs are quite close
to one another, so why do they hate one another so much?’

‘That at least is easy,’ said Dr Hix. ‘It’s hard to hate people who are
a long way away. You forget how dreadful they are. But you see a
neighbour’s warts every day.’

‘That’s just the sort of cynical comment I’d expect from a postmortem
communicator,’ grumbled the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘Or a realist,’ said Ridcully, smiling. ‘But Dolly Sisters and Dimwell
are quite far apart, miss.’

Glenda shrugged. ‘I know, but it’s always been like that. That’s how it
is. That’s all I know.’

‘Well, thank you . . .?’ There was no mistaking the hanging question.

‘Glenda,’ she said.

‘I see there are a great many things we don’t yet understand.’

‘Yes, sir. Everything.’ She hadn’t meant to say that aloud. It just
escaped of its own accord.

There was a stirring among the wizards, who were nonplussed because what
had happened could not really have happened. The tea trolley might as
well have neighed.

Ridcully banged his hand on the table before the others could summon up
words.

‘Well said, miss,’ he chuckled, as Glenda waited for the floor to open
and swallow her. ‘And I’m sure that remark came from the heart, because
I suspect it could not have come from the head.’

‘Sorry, sir, but the gentleman did ask for my opinion.’

‘Now, that one was from the head. Well done,’ said Ridcully. ‘So do,
therefore, give us the benefit of your thinking, Miss Glenda.’

Still in a kind of shock, Glenda looked into the Archchancellor’s eyes
and saw that it was no time to be less than bold, but that was unnerving
too.

‘Well, what’s this all about, sir? If you want to play, just go and do
it, yes? Why change things?’

‘The game of foot-the-ball is very behind the times, Miss Glenda.’

‘Well, so are you— Sorry, sorry, but, well. You know. Wizards are always
wizards. Not a lot changes in here, does it? And then you talk about
some Master of the Music to make a new chant, and that’s not how it
goes. The Shove makes up the chants. They just happen. They just, like,
come out of the air. And the pies are pretty awful, that’s true, but
when you’re in the Shove, and it’s mucky weather, and the water’s coming
through your coat, and your shoes are leaking, and then you bite into
your pie, and you know that everyone else is biting into their pie, and
the grease slides down your sleeve, well, sir, I don’t have the words
for it, sir, I really don’t, sir. There’s a feeling I can’t describe,
but it’s a bit like being a kid at Hogswatch, and you can’t just buy it,
sir, you can’t write it down or organize it or make it shiny or make it
tame. Sorry to speak out of turn, sirs, but that’s the long and the
short of it. You must have known it, sir. Didn’t your father ever take
you to a game?’

Ridcully looked down the table at the Council and noted a certain
moistness of eye. Wizards were, largely, of that generation from which
grandfathers are carved. They were also, largely, large, and awash with
cynical crabbiness and the barnacles of the years, but . . . the smell
of cheap overcoats in the rain, which always had a tint and taste of
soot in it, and your father, or maybe your grandfather, lifting you on
to his shoulders, and there you were, above all those cheap hats and
scarves, and you could feel the warmth of the Shove, watch its tides,
feel its heartbeat, and then, certainly, a pie would be handed up, or
maybe half a pie if times were hard, and if they were really bad it
might be a handful of fat greasy pease which were to be eaten one at a
time to make them last longer . . . or when times were flush there might
be a real treat, like a hot dog you didn’t have to share, or a plate of
scouse, with yellow fat beading on the top and lumps of gristle you
could chew at on the way home, meat which now you would not give to a
dog but which was sacred lotus eaten with the gods, in the rain, in the
cheering, in the bosom of the Shove . . .

The Archchancellor blinked. No time seemed to have passed, unless you
count seventy years which had gone past like that. ‘Er, very graphically
argued,’ he said, and pulled himself together. ‘Interesting points well
made. But, you see, we have a responsibility here. After all, this city
was just a handful of villages before my university was built. We are
concerned about the fighting in the streets yesterday. We heard a rumour
that someone was killed because he supported the wrong team. We can’t
stand by and let this sort of thing happen.’

‘So you’ll be shutting down the Assassins’ Guild, will you, sir?’

There was a gasp from every mouth, including her own. The only rational
thought that didn’t flee from her mind was: _I wonder if that job is
still going in the Fools’ Guild? The pay wasn’t much, but they do know
how to appreciate a pie_.

When she dared look, the Archchancellor was staring at the ceiling,
while his fingers drummed on the table. _I should have been more
careful_, Glenda whined in her own ear. _Don’t get chatty with nobs. You
forget what you are, but they don’t._

The drumming stopped. ‘Good point, well put,’ said Ridcully, ‘and I
shall marshal my responses thusly.’ He flicked a finger and, with a
smell of gooseberries and a _pop_, a small red globe appeared in the air
over the table.

‘One: the Assassins, while deadly, are not random, and indeed are mostly
a danger to one another. Assassination is only to be feared, generally
speaking, by those powerful enough to have a stab, as it were, at
defending themselves.’

Another little globe appeared.

‘Two: it is an article of faith with them that property is undamaged.
They are invariably courteous and considerate and notoriously silent,
and would never dream of inhuming their target in a public street.’

A third globe appeared.

‘Three: they are organized and therefore amenable to civic influence.
Lord Vetinari is very keen on that sort of thing.’

And another globe popped into life.

‘And four: Lord Vetinari is himself a trained Assassin, majoring in
stealth and poisons. I am not sure he would share your opinion. And he
is a Tyrant even if he has developed tyranny to such a point of
metaphysical perfection that it is a dream rather than a force. He does
not have to listen to you, you see. He doesn’t even have to listen to
me. He listens to the city. I don’t know how he does, but he does. And
he plays it like a violin’ – Ridcully paused, then went on – ‘or like
the most complicated game you can imagine. The city works, not
perfectly, but better than it has ever done. I think it’s time for
football to change too.’ He smiled at her expression. ‘What is your job,
young lady? Because you are wasted in it.’

It was probably meant as a compliment, but Glenda, her head so
bewilderingly full of the Archchancellor’s words that they were
trickling out of her ears, heard herself say, ‘I’m certainly not wasted,
sir! You’ve never eaten better pies than mine! I run the Night Kitchen!’

The metaphysics of real politics were not a subject of interest to most
of those present, but they knew where they were with pies. She was the
centre of attention already, but now it blazed with interest.

‘You do?’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘We thought it was the
pretty girl.’

‘Really?’ said Glenda brightly. ‘Well, I run it.’

‘So who does that wonderful pie you send up here sometimes, with the
cheese pastry and the hot pickle layer?’

‘The Ploughman’s Pie? Me, sir. My own recipe.’

‘Really? How do you manage to get the pickled onions to stay so hard and
crispy in the baking? It’s just amazing!’

‘My own recipe, sir,’ said Glenda firmly. ‘It wouldn’t be mine if I told
anyone else.’

‘Well said,’ said Ridcully gleefully. ‘You can’t go around asking
craftsmen the secrets of their trade, old chap. It’s a thing you just
don’t do. Now, I am concluding this meeting, although what it has in
fact concluded I shall decide later.’ He turned back to Glenda. ‘Thank
you for coming here today, Miss Glenda, and I shall not enquire why a
young lady who works in the Night Kitchen is pouring tea up here at
nearly noon. Do you have any further advice for us?’

‘Well,’ said Glenda, ‘since you ask . . . No, I really shouldn’t say . .
.’

‘This is hardly the moment for bashfulness, do you think?’

‘Well, it’s about your strip, sir. That means your team colours. Nothing
wrong with red and yellow, no one else uses those two, but, well, you
want two big U’s on the front, right? Like UU?’ She waved her hands in
the air.

‘Yes, that is exactly right. After all, it’s what we are.’ Ridcully
nodded.

‘Are you sure? I mean, I know you gentlemen are bachelors and all, but .
. . well, you’ll look like you’ve got bosoms. Honestly.’

‘Oh gods, sir, she’s right,’ said Ponder. ‘It will make a rather
unfortunate shape . . .’

‘What kind of mind would see something like that in a pair of innocent
letters?’ the Lecturer in Recent Runes demanded angrily.

‘I don’t know, sir,’ said Glenda, ‘but every man watching the football
has got one. And they would make up nicknames. They love doing that.’

‘I suspect you may be right,’ said Ridcully, ‘but we never had any
trouble when I was rowing in the old days.’

‘Football followers are rather more robust in their language, sir,’ said
Ponder.

‘Yes, and in those days we were pretty careless when it came to throwing
fireballs, as I recall,’ Ridcully mused. ‘Oh dear, what a shame. I was
looking forward to giving the old rag a bit of an airing again. Still,
I’m sure we can change the design a little to save embarrassment all
round. Thank you once again, Miss Glenda. Bosoms, eh? Narrow escape
there, all round. Good day to you.’ He shut the door after the trolley,
which Glenda was pushing as if in a race . . .

Molly, the head maid in the Day Kitchen, was fretting at the end of the
corridor beyond. She sagged with relief when Glenda came round the
corner, teacups rattling.

‘Was it all right? Did anything go wrong? I’ll get into so much trouble
if anything went wrong. Tell me nothing went wrong!’

‘It was all fine,’ said Glenda. That got her a suspicious look.

‘Are you sure? You owe me for this!’

The laws of favours are amongst the most fundamental in the multiverse.
The first law is: nobody asks for just one favour; the second request
(after the granting of the first favour), prefaced by ‘and can I be
really cheeky . . . ?’ is the asking of the second favour. If the
aforesaid second request is not granted, the second law ensures that the
need for any gratitude for the first favour is nullified, and in
accordance with the third law the favour giver has not done any favours
at all, and the favour field collapses.

But Glenda reckoned she’d won a lot of favours over the years, and was
owed a few herself. Besides, she had reason to believe that Molly had
been spending the welcome break in dalliance with her boyfriend, who
worked in the bakery.

‘Can you get me in to the banquet on Wednesday night?’

‘Sorry, the butler chooses who gets those jobs,’ said Molly.

Ah yes, the tall, thin girls, Glenda thought.

‘Why in the world would you want to get in, anyway?’ Molly said. ‘It’s a
lot of running around and not much pay, when all’s said and done. I
mean, we get some decent leftovers after a big affair, but what’s that
to you? Everyone knows that you’re the leftover queen!’ She paused, too
awkwardly. ‘I mean, we all know you’re really good at making wonderful
food with always a little something left over,’ she gabbled. ‘That’s all
I meant!’

‘I didn’t think you meant anything else,’ said Glenda, keeping her voice
level. But she raised it again to add, as Molly scurried off: ‘I can pay
back the favour right now! You’ve got two floury handprints on your
arse!’

The glare that came back was a small victory, but you have to take what
you can get.

Still, that strange interlude, which she was sure she would regret, had
taken up a lot of time. She had to get the Night Kitchen organized.

When the door had closed behind the rather forthright maid, Ridcully
nodded meaningfully at Ponder. ‘All right, Mister Stibbons. You were
glancing at your thaumometer the whole time I was talking to her. Out
with it.’

‘Some kind of entanglement,’ said Ponder.

‘And there was me thinking that Vetinari was behind the business with
the urn,’ said Ridcully gloomily. ‘I should have realized he’s never
that unsubtle.’

‘Oh, I assumed it was going to be something like that right at the
start,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Indeed,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘It crossed my mind as
soon as I saw it in the paper.’

‘Gentlemen,’ said Ridcully. ‘I am humbled that as soon as I have an idea
about what something is, it turns out that you all knew what it was. I
am amazed.’

‘Excuse me,’ said Dr Hix, ‘but I don’t have a clue what you’re talking
about.’

‘You are out of touch! You’ve been spending too long underground, sir!’
said the Lecturer in Recent Runes sternly.

‘You don’t often let me out, that’s why! And can I remind you that I
have to maintain a vital line of cosmic defence in this establishment
here with a staff of exactly one? And he’s dead!’

‘You mean Charlie? I remember old Charlie, keen worker nevertheless,’
said Ridcully.

‘Yes, but I have to keep rewiring him all the time,’ sighed Hix. ‘I do
try to keep you abreast of things in my monthly reports. I hope you read
them . . .?’

‘Tell me, Doctor Hix,’ said Ponder, ‘did you experience anything unusual
when that young lady was speaking so eloquently?’

‘Well, yes, I had a pleasant moment of happy recollection about my
father.’

‘So did we all, I am sure,’ said Ponder. There was sombre nodding around
the table. ‘I never knew my father. I was brought up by my aunts. I had
déjà vu _without the original vu_.’

‘And it wasn’t magic?’ suggested the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘No. Religion, I suspect,’ said Ridcully. ‘A god invoked, that sort of
thing.’

‘Not invoked, Mustrum,’ said Dr Hix. ‘Summoned by bloodshed!’

‘Oh, I hope not,’ said Ridcully, getting to his feet. ‘I would like to
try a little experiment this afternoon, gentlemen. We will not talk
about football, we will not speculate about football, we will not worry
about football—’

‘You are going to make us play it, aren’t you?’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes glumly.

‘Yes,’ said Ridcully, more than somewhat miffed at the spoiling of a
perfectly good peroration. ‘Just a little kick-about to help us get some
hands-on experience of the game as it is played.’

‘Er. Strictly, under the new rules, by which I mean the ancient rules we
are taking as our model, hands-on experience means no hands,’ said
Ponder.

‘Well pointed out, that man. Put the word out, will you? Football
practice on the lawn after lunch!’

One thing you had to remember when dealing with dwarfs was that while
they shared the same world as you did, metaphorically they thought about
it as if it were upside down. Only the richest and most influential of
dwarfs lived in the deepest caverns. For a dwarf, a penthouse in the
centre of the city would be some kind of slum. Dwarfs liked it dark and
cool.

It didn’t stop there. A dwarf on the up and up was really on his uppers,
and upper-class dwarfs were lower class. A dwarf who was rich, healthy
and had respect and his own rat farm justifiably felt at rock bottom and
was held in low esteem. When you talked to dwarfs, you turned your mind
upside down. The city, too. Of course, when you dug down in Ankh-Morpork
you just found more Ankh-Morpork. Thousands of years of it, ready to be
dug out and shored up and walled in with the shiny dwarf brick.

It was Lord Vetinari’s ‘Grand Undertaking’. The city’s walls corseted it
like a fetishist’s happiest dream. Gravity offered only a limited supply
of up, but the deep loam of the plain had a limitless supply of down.

Glenda was surprised, therefore, to find Shatta right at the surface in
the Maul, alongside the really posh dress shops that were for human
ladies. That made sense, however; if you were going to make a scandalous
profit selling clothes, it made sense to camouflage yourself amongst
other shops doing the same thing. She wasn’t sure about the name, but
apparently _shatta_ meant ‘a wonderful surprise’ in Dwarfish, and if you
started to laugh about that sort of thing then you would never have time
to pause for breath.

She approached the door with the apprehension of one who is certain that
the moment she sets foot inside she will be charged five dollars a
minute for breathing and then be held upside down and have all her
wealth removed with a hook.

And it was, indeed, classy. But it was dwarf classy. That meant an awful
lot of chain mail, and enough weaponry to take over a city – but if you
paid attention, you realized it was female chain mail and weaponry. That
was how things were happening, apparently. Dwarf women had got fed up
with looking like dwarf men all the time and were metaphorically melting
down their breastplates in order to make something a little lighter and
with adjustable straps.

Juliet had explained this on the way down, although, of course, Juliet
did not use the word ‘metaphorically’, it being several syllables beyond
her range. There were battle-axes and war hammers, but all with that
certain feminine touch: one war axe, apparently capable of cleaving a
backbone lengthwise, was beautifully engraved with flowers. It was
another world, and as she stood just inside the doorway looking around,
Glenda felt relieved that there were other humans in the place. In fact,
there were quite a few, and that was surprising. One of them, a young
human woman with steel boots six inches high, gravitated towards them as
if drawn by a magnet – and given the amount of ferrous metal on her
body, a magnet was something she would never pass in a hurry. She was
holding a tray of drinks.

‘There’s black mead, red mead and white mead,’ she said, and then
lowered her voice by a few decibels and three social classes. ‘Actually,
the red mead is really sherry and all the dwarf ladies are drinking it.
They like not having to quaff.’

‘Do we have to pay for this?’ said Glenda nervously.

‘It’s free,’ said the girl. She indicated a bowl of small black things
on the tray, each one pierced with a cocktail stick, and said slightly
hopelessly, ‘And do try the rat fruit.’

Before Glenda could stop her, Juliet had taken one and was chewing
enthusiastically.

‘What part of a rat is its fruit?’ asked Glenda. The girl with the tray
did not look directly at her.

‘Well, you know shepherd’s pie?’ she said.

‘I know twelve different recipes,’ said Glenda in a moment of rare
smugness. This was actually a lie. She probably knew about four recipes
because there was only so much you could do with meat and potatoes, but
the glittering metallic grandeur of the place was getting on her nerves
and she felt the need to stick up for herself. And then realization
dawned. ‘Oh, you mean like traditional shepherd’s pie,’ she said, ‘made
with the—’

‘I’m afraid so,’ said the girl, ‘but they’re very popular with the
ladies.’

‘Don’t have any more, Jools,’ said Glenda quickly.

‘It’s quite nice,’ said Juliet. ‘Can’t I have one more?’

‘Just one, then,’ said Glenda. ‘That should even up the rat.’ She helped
herself to a sherry and the girl, balancing carefully as she managed
three different things with two different hands, handed her a glossy
brochure.

Glenda glanced through it and knew her original impression had been
right. This place was so expensive they didn’t tell you the price of
anything. You could always be sure things were going to be expensive
when they didn’t tell you the price. No point in looking through it,
it’d suck your wages out through your eyeballs. Free drinks? Oh, yes.

With nothing else to do, she scanned the rest of the crowd. Everyone,
except the growing and, in fact, quite large number of humans, had a
beard. All dwarfs had beards. It was part of being a dwarf. Here,
though, the beards were a little finer than you usually saw around the
city and there had been some experimentation with perms and ponytails.
There were mining pickaxes on view, it was true, but carried in
expensively tooled bags as if the owner might spot a likely-looking coal
seam on the way to the shops and wouldn’t be able to help herself.

She shared this thought with Juliet, who pointed down at the feet of
another well-heeled customer and said, ‘Wot? And spoil those gorgeous
boots? They’re Snaky Cleavehelms, they are! Four hundred dollars a pop,
an’ you’ve to wait for six months!’

Glenda couldn’t see the face of the boots’ owner, but she did see the
change in her body language. The hint of preening, even from the rear.
Well, she thought, I suppose if you’re going to spend all of a working
family’s yearly income on a pair of boots it’s nice that someone
notices.

When you watch people, you forget that people are watching you. Glenda
was not very tall, which meant that from her point of view dwarfs were
not very short. And she realized that they were being approached in a
determined kind of way by two dwarfs, one of whom was extremely
expansive around the waist and wearing a breastplate so beautifully
hammered and ornamented that taking it into battle would be an act of
artistic vandalism. He – and you had to remember that all dwarfs were he
unless they asserted otherwise – had, when he spoke, a voice that
sounded like the darkest and most expensive type of dark chocolate,
possibly smoked. And the hand he offered had so many rings on each
finger that you had to look with care to realize that he was not wearing
a gauntlet. And she was a she, Glenda was sure of it: the chocolate was
just too rich and fruity.

‘So glad you could come, my dears,’ she said, and the chocolate swirled.
‘I am Madame Sharn. I wondered if you could be of assistance to me? I
really would not dream of asking, but I am, as you would put it, between
a rock and a hard one.’

All this was, to Glenda’s annoyance, addressed to Juliet, who was eating
rat fruit as if there was no tomorrow, which presumably there had not
been for the rat. She giggled.

‘She’s with me,’ said Glenda, and, without meaning to, added, ‘Madame?’

Madame waved another hand and more rings glistened. ‘This salon is
technically a mine and that means that under dwarf law I am the king of
the mine and in my mine my rules go. And since I am King, I declare that
I am Queen,’ she said. ‘Dwarf law bends and creaks but is not broken.’

‘Well,’ Glenda began, ‘we— Hey!’

This was to Madame’s smaller companion, who was actually holding a tape
measure up against Juliet. ‘That is Pepe,’ said Madame.

‘Well, if he’s going to take liberties like that I hope he’s a woman,’
said Glenda.

‘Pepe is . . . Pepe,’ said Madame calmly. ‘And there is no changing him,
as it were, or her. Labels are such unhelpful things, I feel.’

‘Especially yours, ’cos you don’t put the prices on them,’ said Glenda,
out of sheer nervousness.

‘Ah yes, you notice these things,’ said Madame, with a wink that
disarmed to the point of melting.

Pepe looked up excitedly at Madame, who went on, ‘I wonder if you, if
she . . . if you _both_ would mind joining me backstage? The matter is a
little delicate.’

‘Ooh, yes,’ said Juliet immediately.

Out of nowhere, other human girls materialized among the crowd and
carefully opened a path towards the back of the enormous room along
which Madame progressed as though propelled by invisible forces.

Glenda felt that the situation had suddenly got away from her, but it
had been a good measure of sherry and it whispered to her, ‘Why not let
a situation get away from you every once in a while? Or even just once.’
She had no idea what she was expecting behind the gilded door at the far
end, but she had not expected smoke and flames and shouting and someone
screaming in a corner. The place looked like a foundry on the day they
let the clowns in.

‘Come on through. Don’t let this disturb you,’ said Madame. ‘It’s always
like this at show time. Nerves, you know. Of course, everyone in this
business is lowly strung and there is always this problem to begin with
with the micromail. It’s new, you see. According to dwarf law it must be
hallmarked on every link and that would not only be sacrilege, but also
bloody difficult to do.’ Behind the scenes, it appeared that Madame
became a little less chocolatey and a little more earthy.

‘Micromail!’ said Juliet, as if she had been shown the gateway to
riches.

‘You know what it is?’ said Madame.

‘She talks about nothing else,’ said Glenda. ‘Talks and talks.’

‘Well, of course, it’s wonderful stuff,’ said Madame. ‘Almost as soft as
cloth, certainly better than leather—’

‘—and it doesn’t chafe,’ said Juliet.

‘Which is always a consideration for the more traditional dwarf who will
not wear cloth,’ said Madame. ‘Old tribal customs, how they hold us
back, always pull us back. We haul ourselves out of the mine, but
somehow we always drag a bit of the mine with us. If I had my way, silk
would be reclassified as a metal. What is your name, young lady?’

‘Juliet,’ said Glenda automatically, and then blushed. That was mumming,
pure and simple. It was almost as bad as getting someone to spit on
their handkerchief and wiping their face for them. The young lady with
the drinks had followed them in and chose this moment to take Glenda’s
sherry glass and replace it with a full one.

‘Would you mind just walking up and down a moment, Juliet?’ said Madame.

Glenda wanted to ask why, but since her mouth was full of sherry as an
anti-embarrassment remedy, she let that one pass.

Madame watched Juliet critically, one hand cupping the elbow of the
other arm.

‘Yes, yes. But I mean slowly, as if you were not in a hurry to get there
and didn’t care,’ said Madame. ‘Imagine you’re a bird in the air, a fish
in the sea. Wear the world.’

‘Oh, right,’ said Juliet and started again.

By the time Juliet was halfway across the floor for the second time,
Pepe had burst into tears. ‘Where has she been? Where was she trained?’
he, or conceivably she, squeaked while clapping his or her cheeks with
both hands. ‘You must hire her at once!’

‘She’s already got a good steady job at the university,’ Glenda said.
But the sherry said, ‘Once in a while isn’t over yet. Don’t spoil it!’¹³

Madame, who clearly had an instinct for this kind of thing, put an arm
around her shoulders. ‘The problem with dwarf ladies, you see, is that a
lot of us are a little shy about being the centre of attention. I also
have to bear in mind that dwarf clothing is proving quite interesting to
young humans of a certain turn of mind. Your daughter is human—’ Madame
turned briefly to Juliet. ‘You are human, aren’t you, dear? I find it
pays to check.’

Juliet, apparently staring rapturously into a private world, nodded
enthusiastically.

‘Oh good,’ said Madame. ‘And while she is exquisitely well built and
moves like a dream, she is not too much taller than the average dwarf
and frankly, my dear, some of the ladies would aspire to being a little
taller than they are. This may be letting the side up, but that walk, my
word. Dwarfs have hips, of course, but they seldom know what to do with
them . . . I’m sorry, have I said something wrong?’

The half-pint of sherry so recently consumed by Glenda finally gave way
under the pressure of her rage. ‘I am _not_ her mother. She is my
friend.’

Madame shot her another of those looks that gave her the feeling that
her brain was being taken out and examined minutely. ‘Then would you
mind if I paid your friend’ – there was a pause – ‘five dollars to model
for me this afternoon?’

‘All right,’ said the sherry to Glenda. ‘You wondered where I was going
to take you and here you are. Can you see the view? What are you going
to do now?’

‘Twenty-five dollars,’ said Glenda.

Pepe clapped her, or possibly his, cheeks again and screamed, ‘Yes!
Yes!’

‘And a shop discount,’ said Glenda.

Madame gave her a long-drawn-out stare. ‘Excuse me one moment,’ said the
dwarf.

She walked over and took Pepe’s arm, walking him at some speed to the
corner. Glenda could not hear what was said over some nearby riveting
and someone having hysterics. Madame came back smirking artificially,
Pepe trailing her. ‘I have a show starting in ten minutes and my best
model has dropped her pickaxe on her foot. We shall negotiate any future
engagements. And will you please stop that jumping up and down, Pepe?’

Glenda blinked. _I cannot believe I just did that_, she thought.
_Twenty-five dollars for putting some clothes on! That’s more than I
earn in a month! That’s just not right_. And the sherry said, ‘What
exactly is wrong here? Would you dress up in chain mail and parade in
front of a lot of strangers for twenty-five dollars?’

Glenda shuddered. _Certainly not_, she thought.

‘Well, there you are then,’ said the sherry.

_But it will all end in tears_, thought Glenda.

‘No, you’re just saying that because part of you thinks it should,’ said
the sherry. ‘You know there are far worse things that a girl could do
for twenty-five dollars than put some clothes on. Take them off, for a
start.’

_But what will the neighbours say?_ was the last despairing argument
from Glenda.

‘They can stick it up their jumper,’ said the sherry. ‘Anyway, they
won’t know, will they? Dolly Sisters doesn’t shop in the Maul, it’s far
too grand. Look, we’re looking at twenty-five dollars. Twenty-five
dollars to do what you couldn’t stop her doing now with a length of lead
pipe. Just look at her face! She looks as if someone has lit a lamp
inside.’

It was true.

_Oh, all right then_, thought Glenda.

‘Good,’ said the sherry. ‘And incidentally, I’m feeling lonely.’

And as the tray was at Glenda’s elbow again, she reached out
automatically.

Juliet was now surrounded by dwarfs and, by the sound of it, she was
having a lightning education in how to wear clothing. But it wouldn’t
matter, would it? The truth of the matter was that Juliet would look
good in a sack. Somehow, everything she wore fitted perfectly. Glenda,
on the other hand, never found anything good in her size and indeed
seldom found anything in her size. In theory, something should fit, but
all she ever found was facts, which are so unbecoming.

‘Well, we have a nice day for it,’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Looks like rain,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes hopefully.

‘I suggest two teams of five on a side,’ said Ridcully. ‘Only a friendly
game, of course, just to get the hang of it.’

Ponder Stibbons made no comment. Wizards were competitive. It was a part
of wizardry. Wizards have no more idea of a friendly game than cats have
of a friendly mouse. The college lawns stretched out in front of them.
‘Of course, next time we’ll have proper jerseys,’ said Ridcully. ‘Mrs
Whitlow already has her girls working on that. Mister Stibbons!’

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘You shall be the keeper of the rules and adjudicate fairly. I will, of
course, be captain of one of the teams and you, Runes, will captain the
other. As Archchancellor, I suggest that I pick my team first and then
you will be at liberty to choose yours.’

‘It isn’t actually supposed to work like that, Archchancellor,’ said
Ponder. ‘You pick a team member and then he picks a team member until
you have enough team members or have run out of team members who aren’t
grossly fat or trembling with nerves. At least that’s how I remember
it.’ Ponder, in his youth, had spent far too long standing next to the
fat kid.

‘Oh well, if that’s how it’s done, then I suppose we shall have to do it
that way,’ said the Archchancellor with bad grace. ‘Stibbons, it will be
your task to penalize the opposing side for any infringements they
make.’

‘Don’t you mean that I should penalize either side for any infringements
they make, Archchancellor?’ he said. ‘It has to be fair.’

Ridcully looked at him with his mouth open as if Ponder had mentioned a
concept that was totally alien. ‘Oh yes, I suppose it has to be like
that.’

A variety of wizards had turned out this afternoon from curiosity, a
suspicion that being there might turn out to be a good career move, and
the prospect of maybe seeing some colleagues travelling across the lawn
on their noses.

_Oh dear_, thought Ponder as the choosing began. It was just like school
again, but at school nobody wanted the fat boy. Here, of course, it had
to be a case of nobody wanted the fattest boy, which, since the
departure of the Dean, was a matter of fine judgement.

Ponder reached into his robes and pulled out a whistle or, perhaps, the
grandfather of all whistles, eight inches long and as thick as a
generous pork sausage.

‘Where did that come from, Mister Stibbons?’ said Ridcully.

‘As a matter of fact, Archchancellor, I found it in the study of the
late Evans the Striped.’

‘It’s a fine whistle,’ said Ridcully.

It was an innocent sentence that managed to hint quite silently that
such a fine whistle should not be in the hands of Ponder Stibbons when
it could be in the ownership of, for example, the Archchancellor of a
university. Ponder spotted this because he had been expecting it. ‘I
shall need this to alert and control the behaviour of both teams,’ he
said haughtily. ‘You made me the referee, Archchancellor, and I’m afraid
that for the duration of the game I am, as it were,’ he hesitated, ‘in
charge.’

‘This university is a hierarchy, you understand, Stibbons?’

‘Yes, sir, and this is a game of football. I believe that the procedure
is to put the football down and when the whistle is blown each side will
attempt to hit the goal of the opposing side with the ball while trying
to prevent the ball hitting their own goal. Have we all understood
that?’

‘It seems pretty clear to me,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.
There was a murmur of agreement.

‘Nevertheless, before the game I demand a blow on the whistle.’

‘Of course, Archchancellor, but then you must give it me back. I am the
custodian of the game.’ He handed over the whistle.

On Ridcully’s first attempt at blowing he dislodged a spider that had
been living a blameless yet frugal life for the last twenty years and
deposited him in the beard of the Professor of Natural Studies, who was
just passing.

The second blow shook free the fossilized pea inside and filled the air
with echoes of liquid brass. And then . . .

Ridcully froze. His face flushed from the neck upwards at speed. The
sound of his next drawn breath was like the vengeance of the gods. His
stomach expanded, his eyes became pinpoints, thunder rolled overhead and
he roared, ‘WHY HAVEN’T YOU BOYS BROUGHT YOUR KIT?!’

St Elmo’s fire roared along the length of the whistle. The sky darkened
and fear gripped every watching soul as time reversed and there stood
the giant, maniacally screaming Evans the Striped. The instigator of
badly forged notes from your mother, the enthusiast for long runs in the
sleet, the promoter of communal showers as a cure for adolescent shyness
and the one who, if you didn’t bring your proper gear, would make you
PLAY IN YOUR PANTS. Venerable wizards who had faced down the most
cunning of monsters through the decades trembled in damp adolescent fear
as the scream went on and on, to be halted as sharply as it started.

Ridcully fell forward on to the turf.

‘I do apologize for that,’ said Dr Hix, lowering his staff. ‘A slightly
evil deed, of course, but I’m sure you’ll agree that it was necessary in
the circumstances. The skull ring, remember? University statute? And
that was a clear case of possession by artefact if ever I saw one.’

The collected wizards, the cold sweat beginning to evaporate, nodded
sagely. Oh, yes. It was regrettably necessary, they agreed. For his own
good, they agreed. Had to be done, they agreed. And this verdict was
echoed by Ridcully himself when he opened his eyes and said, ‘What the
hell was that?’

‘Er, the soul of Evans the Striped, I think, Archchancellor,’ said
Ponder.

‘In the whistle, was it?’ Ridcully rubbed his head.

‘Yes, I think so,’ said Ponder.

‘And who hit me?’

A general shuffling and murmuring indicated that by democratic agreement
this was a question that could best be answered by Dr Hix.

‘It was acceptable treachery under college statute, sir. Wouldn’t mind
the whistle for the Dark Museum, if nobody objects.’

‘Quite so, quite so,’ said Ridcully. ‘Saw the problem, sorted it out.
Well done that man.’

‘Do you think I could be allowed an evil chuckle, sir?’

Ridcully brushed himself down. ‘No. We shall forgo the whistle, Mister
Stibbons. And now, gentlemen, let the game commence.’

And thus, after a certain amount of bickering, Unseen University’s first
football match in decades began. Instantly, from Ponder Stibbons’s point
of view, various problems arose. The most pressing one was that all the
wizards were dressed as wizards, which was to say alike. Ponder ordered
the teams to play hats on and hats off, which caused another row. And
that particular problem was exacerbated further because there were so
many collisions that even the officially hatted kept losing theirs. And
then the game was paused because it was declared that the statue
commemorating Archchancellor Scrubbs’s discovery of blit was in fact
three inches narrower than the venerable statue of Archchancellor
Flanker discovering the Third Breakfast, thus giving an unfair advantage
to the hatless squad.

But all these problems, foreseeable and inescapable, paled into
insignificance compared with the problem of the ball. It was an official
ball – Ponder had made certain of that. But pointy shoes, even if they
have a very long point, cannot absorb the impact of the human foot
kicking what is, when all is said and screamed, a piece of wood with a
thin cloth and leather wrapping. Eventually, as another wizard was
helped away with a sprained ankle, even Ridcully was moved to say, ‘This
is damn nonsense, Stibbons! There has got to be something better than
this.’

‘Bigger boots?’ suggested the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘The kind of boots you need for kicking this would slow you right down,’
said Ponder.

‘Besides, the men on the urn had nothing at all on their feet. I suggest
we consider this research. What do we need, Stibbons?’

‘A better ball, sir. And some attempt at running about. And a general
consensus that it is not a good idea to stop to re-light your pipe in
the middle of play. A more sensible type of goal, because running into a
stone statue is painful. Some grasp, however small, of the notion of
teamwork in a gaming situation. A resolution not to run away if a member
of the opposing team is rushing towards you. An understanding of the
fact that you do not handle the ball in _any_ circumstances; may I
remind you that I gave up stopping play because of this since you
gentlemen, when you were excited, persisted in picking it up and, in one
case, hiding it behind your back, and standing on it. I would like to
point out at this juncture that a sense of direction is worth
cultivating vis-à-vis the goal that is yours and the goal that is
theirs; inviting as it may be, there is no point in kicking the ball
into your own goal, and nor should you congratulate and pat on the back
anyone who achieves this feat. Out of the three goals scored in our
match, the number scored by players into their own goal was’ – he paused
and looked down at his clipboard – ‘three. This is a commendably high
level of scoring, compared with football as currently played, though
once again I must stress that issues of direction and goal ownership are
of pivotal importance. A tactic, which I admit looked promising, was for
the players to cluster thickly around their own goal so there was no
possibility of anything getting past them. I regret, however, that if
both teams do this you do not have a game so much as a tableau. A more
promising tactic, which seemed to be adopted by one or two of you, was
to lurk near the opponents’ goal so that if the ball came in your
direction you would be ideally placed to get it past the custodian of
the goal. The fact that in some cases you and the opposing custodian
leaned companionably against the goal, sharing a cigarette and watching
the play up-field, showed a decent spirit and may possibly be a good
starting point for some more advanced tactics, but I do not think this
should be encouraged. On this general topic, I have to assume that
retiring from the field of play for the call of nature or a breather is
acceptable, but doing so for a snack is not. My feeling, Archchancellor,
is that our colleagues’ general desire to be never more than twenty
minutes from some savouries may be satisfactorily catered for by a pause
in the middle of the game. Happily, if they changed ends at that point,
that would satisfy the complaints about one goal being larger than the
other. Yes?’ This was to the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

‘If we change ends,’ said the Chair, who had put his hand up, ‘will that
then mean that the goals that were scored into our own goal will now
become goals scored against the opposing team since that goal is now
physically theirs?’

Ponder considered the metaphysics of answering this one and settled for,
‘No, of course not. I have a whole list of other notes, Archchancellor,
and regrettably they add up to us not being very good at football.’

The wizards fell silent. ‘Let’s start with the ball,’ said Ridcully.
‘I’ve got an idea about the ball.’

‘Yes, sir. I thought you would.’

‘Then come and see me after dinner.’

***

Juliet had been sucked into the manic circus that was the backstage area
of Shatta, and no one was paying Glenda any attention whatsoever. Just
for now, she was a hindrance, surplus, no use to anyone, an obstruction
to be worked around, an onlooker in the game. A little way away, a
handsome young dwarf with a double ponytail beard was waiting patiently
while a temporary rivet was put into what looked like a silver cuirass.
She was surrounded by workers in much the same way as a knight is when
his vassals must dress him for combat. Standing a little apart from them
were two taller dwarfs, whose weaponry looked slightly more functional
than beautiful. They were male. Glenda knew this simply because any
female of any sapient species knows the look of a man who has nothing
very much to do in an environment that, for this time, is clearly
occupied by and totally under the control of females. It looked as
though they were on guard.

Propelled by the sherry, she wandered over. ‘That must cost a lot of
money,’ she said to the nearest guard. He looked slightly embarrassed by
the approach.

‘You’re telling me. Moonsilver, they call it. We’re even having to walk
down the catwalk with her. They say it’s the coming thing, but I dunno.
It won’t take an edge and it wouldn’t stop a decent blade. You need
Igors to help you smelt it, too. They say it’s worth even more than
platinum. Looks good, though, and they say you hardly know you’re
wearing it. It’s not what my granddad would have called a metal, but
they say that we have to move with the times. Personally, I wouldn’t
even hang it on the wall, but there you go.’

‘Girl’s armour,’ said the other guard.

‘What about this micromail stuff ?’ said Glenda.

‘Ah, different pocketful of rats entirely, miss,’ said the first guard.
‘I hear they set up and forge it right here in the city, ’cos the best
craftsmen are here. Just the job, eh? Chain mail as fine as cloth and
strong as steel! It’ll get cheaper, too, they say, and most of all it
doesn’t—’

‘Wotcher, Glendy, guess who?’

Someone tapped Glenda on the shoulder. She turned round and saw a vision
of heavily but tastefully armoured beauty. It was Juliet, but Glenda
only knew this because of the milky-blue eyes. Juliet was wearing a
beard.

‘Madame says I’d better wear this,’ she said. ‘It’s not dwarf if it
don’t include a beard. What d’you think?’

This time the sherry got in first.

‘It’s actually rather attractive,’ said Glenda, still in mild shock.
‘It’s very – silvery.’

It was a female beard, she could tell. It looked styled and stylish and
didn’t have bits of rat in it.

‘Madame says there’s a place saved for you in the front row,’ said
Juliet.

‘Oh, I couldn’t sit in the front row—’ Glenda began, on automatic, but
the sherry cut in with, ‘Shut up, stop thinking like your mother, will
you, and go and sit down in the damn front row.’

One of the ever-present young ladies chose this exact moment to take
Glenda by the hand and lead her slightly unsteady feet through the
settling chaos, out through the door and back into fairyland. There was
indeed a seat waiting for her.

Fortunately, although in the front row it was off to one side. She would
have died of shame had it been right in the middle. She clutched her
handbag in both hands and risked a look along the row. It was packed. It
wasn’t exclusively dwarf, either; there were a number of human ladies,
smartly dressed, a little on the skinny side (in her opinion), almost
offensively at ease and all talking.

Another sherry mystically appeared in her hand and, as the noise stopped
with rat-trap sharpness, Madame Sharn came out through the curtain and
began to address the crowded hall. Glenda thought, I wish I’d worn a
better coat . . . At which point the sherry tucked her up and put her to
bed.

Glenda only started to think properly again some time later, when she
was hit on the head by a bunch of flowers. They struck her just over the
ear and as expensive petals rained around her she looked up at the
beaming, radiant face of Juliet, at the very edge of the catwalk,
halfway through the motions of shouting ‘Duck!’

. . . And there were more flowers flying and people standing and
cheering, and music, and in general the feeling of being under a
waterfall with no water but inexhaustible torrents of sound and light.

Out of it all Juliet exploded, throwing herself at Glenda and flinging
her arms around her neck.

‘She wants me to do it again!’ she panted. ‘She says I could go to Quirm
and Genua, even! She says she’ll pay me more if I don’t work for no one
else and the world is an oyster. I never knew that.’

‘But you’ve already got a steady job in the kitchen . . .’ said Glenda,
only three-quarters of her way into consciousness. Later, more often
than she liked, she remembered saying those words while the applause
thundered all around them.

There was a gentle pressure on her shoulder, and here was one of the
interchangeable young women with a tray. ‘Madame sends her compliments,
miss, and would like to invite you and Miss Juliet to join her in her
private boudoir.’

‘That’s nice of her, but I think we should be getting— A boudoir, you
say?’

‘Oh yes. And would you like another drink? It’s a celebration, after
all.’

Glenda looked around at the chattering, laughing and, above all,
drinking crowd. The place felt like an oven.

‘All right, but not that sherry, thank you all the same. Have you got
something very cold and fizzy?’

‘Why, yes, miss. Lots.’ The girl produced a large bottle and expertly
filled a tall fluted glass with, apparently, bubbles. When Glenda drank
it, the bubbles filled her, too.

‘Mm, quite nice,’ she ventured. ‘A bit like lemonade grown up.’

‘That’s how Madame drinks it, certainly.’

‘Er, this boudoir,’ Glenda tried, following the girl rather unsteadily.
‘How big is it?’

‘Oh, pretty large, I think. There must be about forty people in there
already.’

‘Really? That’s a big boudoir.’ Well, thank goodness, Glenda thought.
That at least is sorted out. They really ought to put proper
explanations in these novels.

She had never been sure, given that she had no idea what sort of thing a
boudoir was, what sort of thing you would find in it when you did. She
found that it contained people, heat and flowers – not flowers in
bunches, but in pillars and towering stacks, filling most of the air
with clouds of sticky perfume while the people below filled the rest of
it with words, tightly packed. No one could possibly hear what they were
saying, Glenda told herself, but perhaps that wasn’t important. Perhaps
what was important was being there to be seen to say it.

The crowd parted, and she saw Juliet, still in the glittering outfit,
still in the beard . . . being there. Salamanders were flashing on and
off, which meant people with iconographs, didn’t it? The trashy papers
were full of people glittering for the picture. She had no time for
them. What made it worse was that her disapproval mattered not a fig to
anyone. The people glittered anyway. And here was Juliet, glittering
most of all.

‘I think I could do with a little fresh air,’ she mumbled.

Her guide led her gently to an unobtrusive doorway. ‘Restrooms through
here, ma’am.’ And they were – except that the long, carefully lit room
was like some kind of fairy tale, all velvet and drapes. Fifteen
surprised visions of Glenda stared at her from as many mirrors. It was
overpowering enough to make her sit down in a very expensive bendylegged
chair that turned out to be very restful, too . . .

When she jerked awake, she staggered out, got lost in a dark world of
smelly passages choked with packing cases and finally blundered into a
very large room indeed. It was more like a cavern; at the far end were a
pair of double doors, probably ashamed to let in a grey light which did
not so much illuminate as accuse. Another chaos of empty clothes racks
and packing cases was scattered around the floor. In one place, water
had dripped from the roof, and a puddle had formed on the stone, soaking
some cardboard.

‘There they are, in there with their glitter and their finery, and it’s
all muck and rubbish round the back, right, dear?’ said a voice in the
dark. ‘You look like a lady who can spot a metaphor when she stares it
in the face.’

‘Something like that,’ muttered Glenda. ‘Who’s doing the asking?’

An orange light glowed and faded in the gloom. Someone was smoking a
cigarette in the shadows.

‘It’s the same all over, love. If there was an award for the arse end of
things, there’d be a real bloody squabble for first place. I’ve seen a
few palaces in my time and they’re all the same: turrets and banners in
the front, maids’ bedrooms and water pipes round the back. Fancy a
top-up? Can’t be walking around here with an empty glass, you’ll stand
out.’

The cooler air was making her feel better. She still had a glass in her
hand. ‘What is this stuff ?’

‘Well, if this was any other party it’d probably be the cheapest fizzing
wine you could strain through a sock, but Madame won’t stint. It’s the
real stuff. Champagne.’

‘What? I thought only nobby people drank that!’

‘No, just people with money, love. Sometimes it’s the same thing.’

She looked closer, and gasped. ‘What? Are you Pepe?’

‘That’s me, love.’

‘But you’re not all . . . all . . .’ She waved her hands frantically.

‘Off duty, love. Don’t have to worry about . . .’ He waved his hands
equally frantically. ‘I’ve got a bottle here of our very own. Care to
join me?’

‘Well, I ought to be getting back in there—’

‘Why? To fuss around her like an old hen? Leave her be, love. She’s a
duck who’s just found water.’

Pepe looked taller in this gloom. Maybe it was the language and the lack
of flapping. And, of course, anyone next to Madame Sharn would look
small. He was willowy, though, like someone made of sinews.

‘But anything could happen to her!’

Pepe’s grin gleamed. ‘Yes! But probably won’t. My word, she sold
micromail for us, and no mistake. Told Madame I had a good feeling.
She’s got a great career in front of her.’

‘No, she’s got a good, steady job in the Night Kitchen, with me,’ said
Glenda. ‘It might not be big money, but it’ll turn up every week. On the
nail, and she won’t lose it if someone prettier comes along.’

‘Dolly Sisters, right? Sounds like the Botney Street area,’ said Pepe.
‘I’m sure of it. Not too bad, as I recall. I didn’t get beaten up much
down there, but at the end of the day they’re all crab buckets.’

Glenda was taken aback. She’d expected anger or condescension, not this
sharp little grin.

‘You know a lot about our city for a dwarf from Uberwald, I must say.’

‘No, love, I know a lot about Uberwald for a boy from Lobbin Clout,’
said Pepe smoothly. ‘Old Cheese Alley, to be precise. Local lad, me.
Wasn’t always a dwarf, you know. I just joined.’

‘What? Can you do that?’

‘Well, it’s not like they advertised. But yeah, if you know the right
people. And Madame knew the right people, ha, knew quite a lot about the
right people. It wasn’t hard. I’ve got to believe in a few things,
there’s a few observances, and of course I have to keep off the old
booze—’ He smiled as her glance pinned the glass in his hand, and went
on: ‘Too quick, love, I was going to add “when I’m working”, and good
job too. It doesn’t matter if you are shoring up the mine roof or
riveting a bodice, being a piss artist is bloody stupid. And the moral
of all this is, you have to grab life or drop back into the crab
bucket.’

‘Oh yes, that’s all very well to say,’ Glenda snapped, wondering what
crabs had got to do with anything. ‘But in real life people have
responsibilities. We don’t have shiny jobs with lots of money, but they
are real jobs doing things that people need! I’d be ashamed of myself,
selling boots at four hundred dollars a go, which only rich people can
afford. What’s the point of that?’

‘Well, you must admit that it makes rich people less rich,’ said the
chocolate voice of Madame behind her. Like many large people, she could
move as quietly as the balloon she resembled. ‘That’s a good start,
isn’t it? And it goes to wages for the miners and the smiths. It all
goes around, they tell me.’

She sat down heavily on a packing case, glass in hand. ‘Well, we’ve got
most of them out now,’ she said, fumbling in her capacious breastplate
with her spare hand and pulling out a thick wad of paper.

‘The big names want to be in on this and everyone wants it exclusively
and we’re going to need another forge. Tomorrow I’ll go and see the
bank.’ She paused to dip into her metal bodice again. ‘As a dwarf I was
raised in the faith that gold is the one true currency,’ she said,
counting out some crisp notes, ‘but I have to admit this stuff is a lot
warmer. That’s fifty dollars for Juliet, twenty-five from me and
twenty-five from the champagne, which is feeling happy. Juliet said to
give it to you to look after.’

‘Miss Glenda thinks that we’ll lead her treasure into a lifetime of
worthless sin and depravity,’ said Pepe.

‘Well, that’s a thought,’ said Madame, ‘but I can’t remember when I last
had some depravity.’

‘Tuesday,’ said Pepe.

‘A whole box of chocolates is not depraved. Besides, you slid out the
card between the layers, which confused me. I did not intend to eat the
bottom layer. I did not want the bottom layer. It was practically
assault.’

Pepe coughed. ‘We’re scaring the normal lady, love.’

Madame smiled. ‘Glenda, I know what you’re thinking. You’re thinking
we’re a couple of louche evil clowns who booze away in a world of smoke
and mirrors. Well, that’s fairly accurate right now, but today was the
end of a year’s hard work, you see.’

And you bicker like an old married couple, Glenda thought. Her head was
aching. She’d tried a rat fruit, that was the trouble, she was sure of
it.

‘In the morning I’m going to show these orders to the manager of the
Royal Bank and ask him for a lot of money. If he trusts us, can you? We
_need_ Juliet. She just . . . sparkles.’

And you two are holding hands. Tightly. Something soft snapped inside
Glenda.

‘All right, look,’ she said. ‘It’s like this. Jools is going to come
back home with me tonight, to get her head straight. Tomorrow . . .
well, we’ll see.’

‘We can’t ask for more than that. Can we?’ said Madame, patting Glenda
on the knee. ‘You know, Juliet thinks the world of you. She said she’d
need you to say yes. She was telling all the society ladies about your
pies.’

‘She’s been talking to society ladies?’ said Glenda in astonishment
laced with trepidation and tinted with wonder.

‘Certainly. They all wanted a close look at the micromail, and she just
chatted away, cheery as you like. I don’t think anyone ever said
“Wotcher!” to them in their lives before.’

‘Oh no! I’m sorry!’

‘Why be? They were rather taken by it. And apparently you can bake
pickled onions into a pie so that they stay crunchy?’

‘She told them that?’

‘Oh, yes. I gather that they all intend to get their cooks to try it
out.’

‘Hah. They’ll never find the way!’ said Glenda with satisfaction.

‘So Jools says.’

‘We . . . generally call her Juliet,’ said Glenda.

‘She told us to call her Jools,’ said Madame. ‘Is there a problem?’

‘Well, er, not really a problem,’ Glenda began wretchedly.

‘That’s good, then,’ said Madame, who clearly knew when not to notice
subtleties. ‘Now let’s prise her away from her new friends, and you can
see to it that she gets a good night’s sleep.’

There was laughter, and the girls helping with the show streamed out
into the clammy place that was the midwife to beauty. Juliet was among
them, and with the loudest laugh. She broke away when she saw Glenda and
gave her another hug. ‘Oh, Glendy, isn’t this great? It’s like a fairy
story!’

‘Yes, well, it might be,’ said Glenda, ‘but they don’t all have happy
endings. Just you remember you have a good job now, with prospects and
regular leftovers to take home. That’s not to be lightly thrown away.’

‘No, it should be hurled with great force,’ said Pepe. ‘I mean, what is
this? Emberella? The wand has been waved, the court is cheering, a score
of handsome princes are waiting to sign up for just a sniff of her
slipper, and you want her to go back to work making pumpkins?’

He looked at their blank faces. ‘All right, perhaps that came out a
little confused, but surely you can follow the seam? This is a _big_
chance! As big as it gets. A way out of the bucket!’

‘I think we’ll go home now,’ said Glenda primly. ‘Come along, Jools.’

‘See,’ said Pepe, when they had gone, ‘it’s a crab bucket.’

Madame peered into a bottle to see if, against all probability, one
glassful yet remained. ‘Did you know she more or less raised the kid?
Jools will do what she says.’

‘What a waste,’ said Pepe. ‘Don’t take the world by storm, stay here and
make pies? You think that’s a life?’

‘Someone has to make pies,’ Madame said, with an infuriating calm
reasonableness.

‘Oh, pur-lease! Not her. Let it not be her. And for leftovers? Oh no!’

Madame picked up another empty bottle. She knew it was empty because it
was in the vicinity of Pepe at the end of a long day, but she examined
it anyway because thirst springs eternal.

‘Hmm. It might not come to that,’ she said. ‘I have a feeling that Miss
Glenda is just about to start thinking. There’s a powerful mind behind
that rather sad cloak and those awful shoes. Today might be its lucky
day.’

Ridcully strode through the corridors of Unseen University with his
robes flapping confidently behind him. He had a big stride and Ponder
had to run in a semi-crabwise fashion to keep up with him, his clipboard
clutched protectively to his chest. ‘You know we did agree that it
wasn’t to be used for purposes other than pure research, Archchancellor.
You actually signed the edict.’

‘Did I? I don’t remember that, Stibbons.’

‘I remember it most distinctly, sir. It was just after the case of
Mister Floribunda.’

‘Which one was he?’ said Ridcully, still striding purposefully ahead.

‘He was the one who felt a little peckish and asked the Cabinet for a
bacon sandwich to see what would happen.’

‘I thought that anything taken out of the Cabinet had to be returned in
14.14 hours recurring?’

‘Yes, sir. That is the case, but the Cabinet appears to have strange
rules that we do not fully understand. In any case, Mister Floribunda’s
defence was that he thought the fourteen-hour rule didn’t apply to bacon
sandwiches. Nor did he tell anybody and so the students on his floor
were only alerted when they heard the screams some fourteen hours
later.’

‘Correct me if I’m wrong,’ said Ridcully, still covering the flagstones
at an impressive rate, ‘but would it not have been digested by that
point?’ ‘Yes, sir. But it still went back to the Cabinet, of its own
accord, you might say. That was quite an interesting discovery. We did
not know that could happen.’

Ridcully stopped and Ponder bumped into him. ‘What exactly did happen to
him?’

‘You wouldn’t want me to draw a picture, sir. However, the good news is
that he will soon be out of the wheelchair. In fact, I gather he’s
already walking quite well with a stick. How we discipline him is, of
course, up to you, sir. The file is on your desk, as are, indeed, a
considerable number of other documents.’

Ridcully strode off again. ‘He did it to see what would happen, did he?’
he said cheerfully.

‘So he said, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘And this was against my express orders, was it?’

‘Yes, absolutely definitely, sir,’ said Ponder, who knew his
Archchancellor and already had an inkling of how this one was going to
end. ‘And so therefore, sir, I must insist that he—’ He walked into
Ridcully again because the man had stopped outside a large door on which
was a bright red notice saying, ‘No Item To Be Removed From This Room
Without The Express Permission Of The Archchancellor. Signed Ponder
Stibbons pp Mustrum Ridcully.’

‘You signed this one for me?’ Ridcully said.

‘Yes, sir. You were busy at the time and we had agreed on this one.’

‘Yes, of course, but I don’t think that you should pp just like that.
Remember what that young lady said about the UU.’

Ponder produced a large key and opened the door. ‘May I also remind you,
Archchancellor, that we agreed a moratorium on the use of the Cabinet of
Curiosity until we had cleaned up some of the residual magic in the
building. We still don’t seem to have got rid of the squid.’

‘Did we agree, Mister Stibbons,’ said Ridcully, turning around sharply,
‘or did you agree with yourself pp me, as it were?’

‘Well, er, I think I understood the spirit of your thinking, sir.’

‘Well, this is the spirit of pure research,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s
research into how we can hope to save our cheeseboard. Many would say
there could be no greater goal. As for young Floribunda . . .’

‘Yes, sir?’ said Ponder wearily.

‘Promote him. Whatever level he is, move him up one.’

‘I think that’ll send the wrong kind of signal,’ Ponder tried.

‘On the contrary, Mister Stibbons. It will send exactly the right
message to the student body.’

‘But he disobeyed an express order, may I point out?’

‘That’s right. He showed independent thinking and a certain amount of
pluck, and in the course of so doing added valuable data to our
understanding of the Cabinet.’

‘But he might have destroyed the whole university, sir.’

‘Right, in which case he would have been vigorously disciplined, if we’d
been able to find anything left of him. But he didn’t and he was lucky
and we need lucky wizards. Promote him, on the direct order of me, not
pp’d at all. Incidentally, how loud were his screams?’

‘As a matter of fact, Archchancellor, the first one was so heartfelt
that it kept going long after he’d run out of breath and apparently
adopted an independent existence. Residual magic again. We’ve had to
lock it in one of the cellars.’

‘Did he actually say what the bacon sandwich was like?’

‘Coming or leaving, sir?’ said Ponder.

‘Only coming, I think,’ said Ridcully. ‘I do have a vivid imagination
after all.’

‘He said it was the most delightful bacon sandwich he’d ever eaten. It
was the bacon sandwich that you dream of when you hear the words bacon
sandwich and never, ever quite get.’

‘With brown sauce?’ said Ridcully.

‘Of course. Apparently, it was the bacon sandwich to end all bacon
sandwiches.’

‘It nearly did, for him, but isn’t that what you already know about the
Cabinet? That it always delivers a perfect specimen?’

‘Actually, we know very little for certain,’ said Ponder. ‘What we do
know is that it will hold nothing too large to fit inside a cube
measuring 14.14 inches recurring on a side, that it will cease working
if, we now know, a non-organic object is not replaced in it in 14.14
hours recurring, and that none of its contents are pink, although we do
not know why this should be.’

‘But bacon is definitely organic, Mister Stibbons,’ said Ridcully.

Ponder sighed. ‘Yes, sir, we don’t know why that is either.’

The Archchancellor took pity on him. ‘Perhaps it was one of those very
crispy ones,’ he suggested kindly. ‘The kind that you can break between
your fingers. I like that in a bacon sandwich.’

The door swung open and there it was. Small, in the centre of a _very_
large room . . .

The Cabinet of Curiosity.

‘Do you think this is wise?’ said Ponder.

‘Of course not,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now find me a football.’

On one wall was a white mask, such as one might wear to a carnival.
Ponder turned towards it. ‘Hex. Please find me a ball suitable for the
game of football.’

‘That mask is new?’ said Ridcully. ‘I thought Hex’s voice travelled in
blit space?’

‘Yes, sir. It just comes out of the air, sir. But somehow, well, it
feels better to have something to talk to.’

‘What shape football do you require?’ said Hex, his voice as smooth as
clarified butter. ‘Oval or spherical?’

‘Spherical,’ said Ponder.

Instantly the Cabinet shook.

The thing had always worried Ridcully. It looked too smug, for a start.
It seemed to be saying: You don’t know what you are doing. You use me as
a kind of lucky dip and I bet you have never thought of how many
dangerous things can fit into a fourteen-inch cube. In fact, Ridcully
had thought about that, often at three in the morning, and never went
into the room without a couple of subcritical spells in his pocket just
in case. And then there was Nutt . . . Well, hope for the best and
prepare for the worst, that was the UU way.

A drawer slid out and went on sliding until it reached the wall and
presumably continued to slide into some other hospitable set of
dimensions, because it never turned up outside the room, no matter how
often you looked.

‘Very smooth today,’ he observed, as another drawer rose up from under
the floor and sprouted a further drawer exactly the same size as itself
which began to move purposefully towards the far wall.

‘Yes. The lads at Brazeneck have come up with a new algorithm for
handling wave spaces in higher-level blit. It speeds up something like
the Cabinet by getting on for 2,000 Drinkies.’

Ridcully frowned. ‘Did you just make that up?’

‘No, sir. Charlie Drinkie came up with it at Brazeneck. It’s a shorter
way of saying 15,000 iterations to the first negative blit. And it’s a
lot easier to remember.’

‘So people you know at Brazeneck send you stuff ?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Ponder.

‘For free?’

‘Of course, sir,’ said Ponder, looking surprised. ‘The free sharing of
information is central to the pursuit of natural philosophy.’

‘And so you tell them things, do you?’

Ponder sighed. ‘Yes, of course.’

‘I don’t think I approve of that,’ said Ridcully. ‘I’m all for the free
sharing of information, provided it’s them sharing their information
with us.’

‘Yes, sir, but I think we’re rather hampered by the meaning of the word
“sharing”.’

‘Nevertheless,’ Ridcully began and stopped. A sound so quiet that they
had barely noticed it had stopped. The Cabinet of Curiosity had folded
itself up and was once again just a piece of wooden furniture in the
centre of the room, but as they looked at it its two front doors opened
and a brown ball dropped on to the floor and bounced with a sound like
_gloing!_ Ridcully marched over and picked it up, turning it in his
hands.

‘Interesting,’ he said, slamming it towards the floor. It bounced up
past his head, but he was quick enough to catch it on the way down.
‘Remarkable,’ he said. ‘What do you think of this, Stibbons?’ He flicked
the ball into the air and kicked it hard across the room. It came back
towards Ponder, who, to his own amazement, caught it.

‘Seems to have a life of its own.’ Ponder dropped it on to the floor and
tried a kick.

It flew.

Ponder Stibbons was the quintessential, all-time holder of the
one-hundred-metre note from his auntie, which also asked for him to be
excused all sporting activities on account of his athlete’s ear, erratic
stigmatism, a grumbling nose and a revolving spleen. By his own
admission, he would rather run ten miles, leap a five-bar gate and climb
a big hill than engage in any athletic activity.

The ball sang to him. It sang _gloing!_

A few minutes later, he and Ridcully walked back to the Great Hall,
occasionally bouncing the ball on the flagstones. There was something
about the sound of _gloing!_ that made you want to hear it again.

‘You know, Ponder, I think you’ve been doing it all wrong. There are
more things in Heaven and Disc than are dreamed of in our philosophies.’

‘I expect so, sir. I don’t have many things in my philosophies.’

‘It’s all about the ball,’ said Ridcully, slamming it down hard on the
flagstones again and catching it. ‘Tomorrow, we’ll bring it here and see
what happens. You gave the ball a mighty kick, Mister Stibbons, and yet
you are, by your own admission, a wet and a weed.’

‘Yes, sir, and a wuss, and I am proud of the appellation. I’d better
remind you, Archchancellor, that the thing mustn’t spend too long
outside the Cabinet.’

Gloing!

‘But we could make a copy, couldn’t we?’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s only
leather stitched together, probably protecting a bladder of some sort. I
bet any decent craftsman could make another one for us.’

‘What, _now_?’

‘The lights never go off on the Street of Cunning Artificers.’

By now, they were back in the Great Hall and Ridcully looked around
until his gaze lighted on two figures pushing a trolley laden with
candles. ‘You lads, to me!’ he shouted. They stopped pushing the trolley
and walked over to him. ‘Mister Stibbons here would like you to run an
errand for him. It’s of considerable importance. Who are you?’

‘Trevor Likely, guv.’

‘Nutt, Archchancellor.’

Ridcully’s eyes narrowed. ‘Yes . . . Nutt,’ he said, and thought about
the spells in his pocket. ‘The candle dribbler, yes? Well, you can make
yourselves useful. Over to you, Mister Stibbons.’

Ponder Stibbons held out the ball. ‘Have you any idea what this is?’

Nutt took it out of his hands and bounced it on the tiles a couple of
times.

Gloing! Gloing!

‘Yes. It appears to be a simple sphere, although technically I believe
it to be, in actual fact, a truncated icosahedron, made by stitching
together a number of pentagons and hexagons of tough leather, and
stitching means holes and holes let the air leak . . . Ah, there is
lacing just here, you see? There must be some internal bladder – animal,
probably. A balloon, as it were, for lightness and elasticity,
encapsulated by leather, simple and elegant.’ He handed the ball back to
Ponder, who was open-mouthed.

‘Do you know everything, Mister Nutt?’ he said with the sarcasm of a
born pedagogue.

Nutt’s reply was concentrated and there was a lengthy pause before he
said, ‘I’m not sure about a lot of the detail, sir.’

Ponder heard a snigger behind him and felt himself redden. He’d been
cheeked, by a dribbler, even if Nutt was the most incontinently erudite
one he’d ever encountered.

‘Do you know where a copy of this may be made?’ said Ridcully loudly.

‘I expect so,’ said Nutt. ‘I believe dwarf rubber will be our friend
here.’

‘There’s plenty of dwarfs up at Old Cobblers who could knock one up,
guv,’ said Trev. ‘They’re good at this sort of thing, but they’d want
paying, they always want paying. Nuffin’s on credit when you’re dealing
with a dwarf.’

‘Give these young gentlemen twenty-five dollars, Mister Stibbons, will
you?’

‘That’s a lot of money, Archchancellor.’

‘Yes, well, dwarfs, while the salt of the earth, don’t have much of a
grasp of small numbers and I want this in a hurry. I’m sure I can trust
Mister Likely and Mister Nutt with the money, can’t I?’ He said it
jovially, but there was an edge to his voice. Trev, at least, got the
message very quickly; a wizard could trust you because of the hellish
future he could unleash on you if his trust was betrayed.

‘You can certainly trust us, guv.’

‘Yes, I thought I could,’ said Ridcully.

When they had gone, Ponder Stibbons said, ‘You’re entrusting them with
twenty-five dollars?’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Ridcully cheerfully. ‘It will be interesting to see
the outcome.’

‘Nevertheless, sir, I have to say that it was an unwise move.’

‘Thank you for your input, Mister Stibbons, but may I gently remind you
who is the guv around here?’

Glenda and Juliet took a trolley bus home, another huge extravagance
but, of course, Glenda was carrying more money than she had ever seen at
one go. She had stuffed the notes into her bodice, à la Madame, and it
seemed to generate a heat of its own. You were safe on a troll. Anyone
wanting to mug a troll would have to use a building on a stick.

Juliet was quiet. This puzzled Glenda; she had expected her to bubble
like a fountain full of soap flakes. The silence was unnerving.

‘Look. I know it was a lot of fun,’ Glenda said, ‘but showing off
clothes isn’t like a real job, is it?’ No. Real jobs pay a lot less, she
thought.

Where had that come from? Jools hadn’t opened her mouth and the troll
was still covered in mountain lichen and had a single-syllable
vocabulary. It came from me, she thought. This is about dreams, isn’t
it? She is a dream. I dare say the micromail is good stuff, but she made
it sparkle. And what can I say? You help in the kitchen. You are useful
and helpful, at least when you’re not daydreaming, but you don’t know
how to keep accounts or plan a weekly menu. What would you do without
me? How would you get on away from here, in foreign parts where folks
are so odd?

‘I’ll have to open a bank account for you,’ she said aloud. ‘It’ll be
our little secret, all right? It’ll be a nice little nest egg for you.’

‘And if Dad don’t know I’ve got the money he won’t get it off me and
piss it against the wall,’ said Juliet, glancing up at the solemn,
impassive face of the troll. If Glenda had known how to say ‘_Pas devant
le troll_’ she would have done so. But it was true: Mr Stollop commanded
that all family earnings were pooled, with him holding the pool, which
was then pooled with his friends in the bar of the Turkey & Vegetables,
and ultimately pooled again in the reeking alley behind it.

She settled for: ‘I wouldn’t put it quite like that.’

_Gloing! Gloing!_

The new ball was magic, that’s what it was. It bounced back to Trev’s
waiting hand as if by its own free will. For two pins he’d risk kicking
it, but he and Nutt and the ball were already picking up a trail of
curious street urchins such that he would be guaranteed never to see it
again.

‘Are you really sure you know ’ow it works?’ he said to Nutt.

‘Oh, yes, Mister Trev. It’s a lot simpler than it looks, although the
polyhedrons will need some work, but overall—’

A hand landed on Trev’s shoulder. ‘Well, now. Trev Likely,’ said Andy.
‘And his little pet, harder to kill than a cockroach, by all accounts.
Something’s going on, ain’t it, Trev? And you’re going to tell me what
it is. Here, what’s that you’re holding?’

‘Not today, Andy,’ said Trev, backing away. ‘You’re lucky you didn’t end
up in the Tanty with Mister One Drop measurin’ you up for a hemp
collar.’

‘Me?’ said Andy innocently. ‘I didn’t do a thing! Can’t blame me for
what a thicko Stollop does, but something is going on with the football,
ain’t it? Vetinari wants to muck it about.’

‘Just leave it alone, will you?’ said Trev.

There was more than the usual gang behind Andy. The Stollop brothers had
sensibly spared the streets their presence lately, but people like Andy
could always find followers. Like they said, it was better to be beside
Andy than in front of him. And with Andy you never knew just when he
was—

The cutlass was out in one movement. That was Andy. Whatever it was
inside that held back the primeval rage could flick off just like that.
And here came the blade with Trev’s future written on it in very short
words. And it stopped in mid air and Nutt’s voice said, ‘I believe I
could squeeze with enough pressure, Andy, to make your bones grind and
flow. There are twenty-seven bones in the human hand. I truly believe
that I could make every one of them useless with the slightest extra
pressure. However, I would like to give you a chance to revise your
current intentions.’

Andy’s face was a mix of colours: a white that was almost blue and a
rage that was almost crimson. He was trying to pull away and Nutt stood
calmly and was completely immoveable. ‘Get ’im!’ Andy hissed at the
world in general.

‘Could I regretfully remind you gentlemen that I have another hand?’
said Nutt.

He must have squeezed because Andy yelped as his hand ground against the
weapon’s handle.

Trev knew all too well that Andy did not have friends, he had followers.
They were looking at their stricken leader and they were looking at
Nutt, and they could see very clearly not only that Nutt had a spare
hand, but what he was capable of doing with it. They did not move.

‘Very well,’ said Nutt. ‘Perhaps this has been nothing more than an
unfortunate misunderstanding. I am about to release my grip just enough
for you to drop the cutlass, Mister Andy, please.’

There was another intake of breath from Andy as the cutlass landed on
the stones.

‘Now, if you would excuse us, Mister Trev and I are going to walk away.’

‘Take the bloody cutlass! Don’t leave the cutlass on the ground,’ said
Trev.

‘I am sure Mister Andy would not come after us,’ said Nutt.

‘Are you bloody mad?’ said Trev. He reached down, snatched up the
cutlass and said, ‘Let ’im go and let’s get a move on.’

‘Very well,’ said Nutt. He must have squeezed a little harder because
now Andy slumped to his knees.

Trev pulled Nutt away and towed him through the permanent city crowd.
‘That’s Andy!’ he said, hurrying them along. ‘You don’t expect logic
with Andy. You don’t expect him to “learn the error of his ways”. Don’t
look for any sense when Andy’s after you. Got that? Don’t try talkin’ to
’im as if ’e’s a human being. Now, keep up with me.’

Dwarf shops were doing well these days, largely because they understood
the first rule of merchandising, which is this: I have got goods for
sale and the customer has got money. I should have the money and,
regrettably, that involves the customer having my goods. To this end,
therefore, I will not say ‘The one in the window is the last one we
have, and we can’t sell it to you, because if we did no one would know
we have them for sale’, or ‘We’ll probably have some more on Wednesday’,
or ‘We just can’t keep them on the shelves’, or ‘I’m fed up with telling
people there’s no demand for them’; I will make a sale by any means
short of physical violence, because without one I am a waste of space.

Glang Snorrisson lived by this rule, but he didn’t like people much, an
affliction that affects many who have to deal with the general public
over a long period, and the two people on the other side of his counter
were making him edgy. One was small and looked harmless, but something
so deep down in Glang’s psyche that it was probably stuffed in his genes
was making him nervous. The other intru— customer was not much more than
a boy and therefore likely to commit a crime any moment.

Glang dealt with the situation by not understanding anything they said
and uttering silly insults in his native tongue. There was hardly a
risk. Only the Watch learned Dwarfish, and it came as a surprise when
the worryingly harmless one said, in better Llamedos Dwarfish than Glang
himself spoke these days: ‘Such incivility to the amiable stranger
shames your beard and erases the writings of Tak, ancient merchant.’

‘What did you say to him?’ Trev asked, as Glang spluttered out
apologies.

‘Oh, just a traditional greeting,’ said Nutt. ‘Could you pass me the
ball, please?’ He took the football and bounced it on the floor.

Gloing!

‘I suspect you might know the trick of making brimstoned rubber?’

‘That was my . . . my grandfather’s name,’ Glang stuttered.

‘Ah, a good omen,’ said Trev quickly. He caught the ball and batted it
down again.

Gloing!

‘I can cut out and stitch the outer cover if you will work on the
bladder,’ said Nutt, ‘and we will pay you fifteen dollars and allow you
a licence to make as many more as you wish.’

‘You’ll make a fortune,’ said Trev encouragingly.

_Gloing! Gloing!_ went the ball, and Trev added, ‘That’d be a university
licence, too. No one would dare mess with it.’

‘How come you know about brimstoned rubber?’ said Glang. He had the look
about him of someone who knows that he is outnumbered but will go down
fighting.

‘Because King Rhys of the dwarfs presented a dress of brimstoned rubber
and leather to Lady Margolotta six months ago, and I’m pretty sure I
understand the principle.’

‘Her? The Dark Lady? She can kill people with a thought!’

‘She is my friend,’ said Nutt calmly, ‘and I will help you.’

Glenda wasn’t quite sure why she tipped the troll tuppence. He was
elderly and slow, but his upholstery was well kept and he had twin
umbrellas and it was no fun for trolls to come this far, because the kid
gangs would have graffitied them to the waist by the time they got out
of there.

She felt hidden eyes on her as she walked up to her door, and it didn’t
matter.

‘All right,’ she said to Juliet. ‘Have a night off, okay?’

‘I’ll go back to work with you,’ said Juliet, to her surprise. ‘We need
the money and I can’t tell Dad about the fifty dollars, can I?’

There was a small collision of expectations in Glenda’s head as Juliet
went on: ‘You’re right, it’s a steady job and I want to keep it an’ I’m
so fick I’d prob’ly muck up the other one. I mean, it was fun and all
that, but then, I thought, well, you always gave me good advice, an’ I
remembered that time you kicked Greasy Damien in the goolies so hard
when he was messin’ me around, he walked bent double for a week.
Besides, if I go away with them it means leaving the street, and Dad and
the lads. That’s really scary. An’ you said be careful about fairy
stories, and you’re right, half the time it’s goblins. An’ I don’t know
how I’d get on without you puttin’ me right. You are solid, you are. I
can’t remember you not bein’ around, and when one of the girls sniggered
about your old coat I told her you work very hard.’

Glenda thought, I used to be able to read you like a book – one with big
colourful pages and not many words. And now I can’t. What’s happening?
You’re agreeing with me and I ought to feel smug about it, but I don’t.
I feel bad about it, and I don’t know why, and that hurts.

‘Maybe you ought to sleep on it,’ she suggested.

‘No, I’d mess it up, I know I would.’

‘Do you feel all right?’ Something inside Glenda was shouting at her.

‘I’m okay,’ said Juliet. ‘Oh, it was fun and that, but it’s for nobby
girls, not me. It’s all glitter, nuffin’ you can hold. But a pie’s a
pie, right? Solid! Besides, who’d look after Dad and the lads?’

_No, no, no_, screamed Glenda’s voice in her own head, _not that! I
didn’t want that_. Oh, didn’t I? Then what did I think I was doing,
passing on all that old toot? She looks to me, and I’ve gone and given
her a good example! Why? Because I wanted to protect her. She’s so . . .
vulnerable. Oh dear, I’ve taught her to be me, and I’ve even made a bad
mess of that chore!

‘All right, then, you can head back with me.’

‘Will we see the banquet? Our dad has been fretting about the banquet.
He reckons Lord Vetinari is going to have everyone murdered.’

‘Does he do that a lot?’

‘Yes, but it gets hushed up, our dad says.’

‘There’s going to be hundreds of people there. That would need a lot of
hush.’ And if I don’t like what I hear, there won’t be enough hush in
all the world, she thought.

Trev mooched aimlessly around the shop while Nutt and the dwarf put
their heads together over the ball. For some reason there was a faint
scrabbling on the roof. It sounded like claws. Just a bird, he told
himself. Even Andy wouldn’t come in through the roof. There was another
pressing matter. This place would have a privy, wouldn’t it? There was
at least a back door and that would inevitably lead to a back alley and,
well, what is a back alley for except for sleeping tramps and the call
of nature? Possibly in the same place if you were feeling cruel.

Trev unbuckled his belt, faced a noisome wall and stared upwards
nonchalantly, as a man does in these circumstances. However, most men
don’t look up into the astonished faces of two birdlike women who were
standing, no, _perching_ on the roof. They screeched _Awk! Awk!_ and
flew up into the darkness.

Trev scuttled quickly and damply back into the shop. This city got
bloody stranger every day.

After that, time flew past for Trev, and every second stank of sulphur.
He’d seen Nutt dribbling candles, but that was at snail’s pace compared
with the speed at which the leather was cut for the ball. But that
wasn’t creepy, that was just Nutt. What was creepy was that he didn’t
measure anything. Eventually, Trev couldn’t stand it any more, and
stopped leaning against the wall, pointed to one of the multi-sided
little leather strips and said, ‘How long is that?’

‘One and fifteen sixteenths of an inch.’

‘How can you tell without measuring?’

‘I do measure, with my eyes. It is a skill. It can be learned.’

‘An’ that makes you worthy?’

‘Yes.’

‘An’ who judges?’

‘I do.’

‘Here we are, Mister Nutt, still warm,’ said Glang, arriving from the
back of the shop holding something that looked like something taken from
an animal that was now, you hoped for its own sake, dead.

‘Of course, I could do a lot better with more time,’ he continued, ‘but
if you blow down this little tube . . .’

Trev watched in wonder, and it occurred to him that in all his life he’d
made a few candles and a lot of mess. How much was he worth?

Gloing! Gloing!

Two balls in harmony, thought Trev, but clapped as Nutt and Glang shook
hands, then, while they were still admiring their handiwork, he reached
behind him and slipped a dagger off the bench and into his pocket.

He wasn’t a thief. Oh, fruit off stalls, but everyone knew that didn’t
count, and picking a toff ’s pocket was just a case of social
redistribution, everyone knew that, too, and maybe you found something
that looked lost, well, someone would pick it up, so why not you?

Weapons got you killed, often because you were holding one. But things
were going too far. He had heard Andy’s bones creak and Nutt had brought
the man to his knees without sweating. And there were two reasons for
taking precautions right there. One was that if you put Andy down you’d
better put him out, right out, because he would come back, blood around
the corner of his mouth. And two, the worst, was that right now Nutt was
more worrying than Andy. At least he knew what Andy was . . .

Carrying a ball each, they hurried back to the university, with Trev
keeping a watchful eye on high buildings. ‘It’s amazin’ what’s turnin’
up in this city,’ he said. ‘There were a couple of vampire types back
there, did you know?’

‘Oh, those? They work for Ladyship. They are there for protection.’

‘Whose?’ said Trev.

‘Do not worry about them.’

‘Hah! And do you know something even stranger has happened this
evening?’ said Trev, as the university hove into sight. ‘You offered
that dwarf fifteen dollars and he didn’t even haggle. Like, that’s
unheard of. Must be the power of _gloing!_’

‘Yes, but I actually gave him twenty dollars,’ said Nutt.

‘Why? He didn’t ask for anythin’ more.’

‘No, but he did work very hard and the extra five dollars will more than
repay him for the dagger you stole while our backs were turned.’

‘I never did!’ said Trev hotly.

‘Your automatic, unthinking and spring-loaded reply is noted, Mister
Trev. As was the sight of the dagger on the bench, shortly followed by
the sight of the empty space where the dagger had been. I am not angry,
because I saw you most sensibly toss Mister Shank’s wretched cutlass
over a wall and I understand your nervousness, but nevertheless I must
point out that this is stealing. And so I ask you, as my friend, to take
the dagger back in the morning.’

‘But that will leave ’im up by five dollars _and_ his dagger back.’ Trev
sighed. ‘But at least we’ve got a few dollars each,’ he said, as they
entered the back door of the university.

‘Yes, and then again no, Mister Trev. You will take the remaining five
dollars and this rather grubby although genuine receipt for twenty
dollars to Mister Stibbons, who thinks you are no good, thus making him
doubt his original assumption that you are a thief and a scallywag and
assisting your progress in this university.’

‘I’m not a—’ Trev began and stopped, honest enough to acknowledge the
knife in his coat. ‘Honestly, Nutt, you’re one of a kind, you are.’

‘Yes,’ said Nutt. ‘I am coming to that conclusion.’

WOTCHER!

The word, in huge type, shouted out from the front page of the _Times_,
next to a big picture of Juliet glittering in micromail and smiling
right at the reader. Glenda, frozen for the last fifteen seconds in the
act of raising a piece of toast to her mouth, finally bit.

Now she blinked and dropped the toast to read:

  Mystery model ‘Jewels’ was the toast of an astounding fashion show at
  Shatta yesterday when she was the very incarnation of micromail, the
  remarkable metal ‘cloth’ about which there has been so much
  speculation in recent months and which, she confirms, Does Not Chafe.
  She chatted happily and with fetching straightforward earthiness to
  dignitaries to whom, this writer is certain, no one has ever said
  ‘Wotcher’ before. They appeared to find the experience refreshing and
  entirely without chafe . . .

Glenda stopped reading at this point because the question ‘How much
trouble are we going to get into about this?’ was attempting to fill her
whole head. And there was no trouble, was there? And there would not be.
There couldn’t be. First, who would think that the beauty in the silver
beard, like some goddess of the forge, was a cook’s assistant? And,
second, there was no trouble to be had, unless someone tried to make it,
in which case they would have to go through Glenda and Glenda would go
through _them_, in very short order. Because Jools was wonderful. She
had to admit it. The girl brought radiant sunshine to the page, and
suddenly it was plain: it would be a crime to hide all that grace and
beauty in a cellar. So what if she had a vocabulary of fewer than seven
hundred words? There were more than enough people who were stuffed tight
as an egg with words, and who would want to see any of _them_ on the
front page?

Anyway, she thought, as she pulled her coat on, it would be a
nine-minute wonder in any case and besides, she added to herself, it
wasn’t as if anyone would spot it was Juliet. After all, she was wearing
a beard and that was amazing, because there was no way that a woman in a
beard should look attractive, but it worked. Imagine that catching on!
You’d have to spend twice as long at the hairdresser’s. Someone’s going
to think about that, she thought.

There was no sound from the Stollops’ house. She wasn’t surprised.
Juliet did not have much grasp of the idea of punctuality. Glenda popped
next door to see how the widow Crowdy was and then headed, in the
drizzling rain, back to her safe haven of the Night Kitchen. Halfway
there an all but forgotten pressure in her bodice reminded her of her
duty and she dared go into the Royal Bank of Ankh-Morpork.

Trembling with fear and defiance, she walked up to a clerk at his desk,
slapped fifty warm dollars in front of him and said, ‘I want to start a
bank account, all right?’ She left five minutes later with a shiny
account book and the delightful recollection that a posh-looking man at
a posh-looking desk in a posh-looking building had called her madam, and
enjoyed the sensation until it ran into the reality that madam had
better roll up her sleeves and get to work.

There was a lot to do. She made pies at least a day ahead so that they
could mature, and Mister Nutt’s appetite last night had put quite a
large dent in her pantry. But at least there wouldn’t be much demand for
pies tomorrow night. Even the wizards didn’t call for a pie after a
banquet.

Ah, yes, the banquet, she thought, as the rain started to soak into her
coat. The banquet. She would have to see about the banquet. Sometimes if
you wanted to go to the ball you had to be your own fairy godmother.

There were several obstacles requiring the touch of a magic wand: Mrs
Whitlow did indeed operate a certain kind of apartheid between the Night
and Day Kitchens, as if one flight of stairs actually changed who you
were. The next difficulty was that Glenda did not have, according to the
traditions of the university, the right kind of figure to serve at
table, at least when there were visitors, and, lastly, Glenda did not
have the temperament for serving at table. It wasn’t that she didn’t
know how to smile; she was quite capable of smiling, if you gave her
enough warning, but she positively hated having to smile at people who
actually merited, instead, a flick around the earhole with a napkin. She
hated taking away plates of unfinished food. She always had to suppress
a tendency to say things like ‘Why did you put it on your plate if you
didn’t intend to finish it?’ and ‘Look, you’ve left more than half of it
and it cost a dollar a pound,’ and ‘Of course it’s cold, but that’s
because you’ve been playing footsie with the young lady opposite and
haven’t been concentrating on your dinner,’ and when all else failed
‘There’s little children in Klatch you know . . .’ – it was a phrase of
her mother’s, but she’d obviously missed some significant part of it.

She hated waste, she thought to herself as she walked along the stone
corridor towards the Night Kitchen. There never needed to be any if you
knew your way around a kitchen and if your diners had the decency to
take your food seriously. She was rambling to herself. She knew that.
Occasionally she would pull the front page of the _Times_ out of her bag
and take a look at it again. It had all really happened and there was
the proof. But, it was a funny thing: _every_ day something happened
that was important enough to be on the front page of the newspaper.
She’d never bought it and seen a little sign that said ‘Not much
happened yesterday, sorry about that’. And tomorrow, wonderful though
that picture was, it would be wrapping up fish and chips and everyone
would have forgotten about it. That would be a load off her mind.

There was a polite cough. She recognized it as belonging to Nutt, who
had the politest cough there could possibly be. ‘Yes, Mister Nutt?’

‘Mister Trev has sent me with this letter for Miss Juliet, Miss Glenda,’
said Nutt, who had apparently been waiting by the steps. He held it out
as if it were some double-edged sword.

‘She’s not come in yet, I’m afraid,’ said Glenda as Nutt followed her up
the steps, ‘but I’ll put it on the shelf over here where she’ll be bound
to see it.’ She looked at Nutt and saw his eyes firmly fixed on the pie
racks. ‘Oh, and I do seem to have made one apple pie more than called
for. I wonder if you could assist me by removing it from the premises?’

He gave her a grateful smile, took the pie and hurried away.

Alone again, Glenda looked at the envelope. It was the cheapest sort,
the kind that looked as if it had been made from recycled lavatory
paper. And somehow, it seemed to have got a bit bigger.

Inexplicably, she found herself recalling that the gum on those
envelopes was so bad that when it came to sealing them it was probably
better to just have a very bad cold. Anyone could simply open it up, see
what it said, dig out a bit of earwax and no one would be any the wiser.

But that would have been a very bad thing to do.

Glenda thought that same thought fifteen times before Juliet walked into
the Night Kitchen, hung up her coat on the hook and put on her apron.
‘There was a man on the bus readin’ the paper and it had a picture of me
on the front,’ she said excitedly.

Glenda nodded and handed over her own paper.

‘Well, I suppose it’s me,’ said Juliet, with her head on one side. ‘What
shall we do now?’

‘Open the damn letter!’ shouted Glenda.

‘What?’ said Juliet.

‘Er, oh, Trev sent you a letter,’ said Glenda. She snatched it from the
shelf and held it out. ‘Why don’t you read it right _now_ ?’

‘He’s probably just mucking about.’

‘No! Why don’t you just read it right _now_ ? I haven’t tried to open
it!’

Juliet took the envelope. It opened more or less to a touch. Glenda’s
evil side thought, hardly any gum at all! I could have just flicked it
open!

‘I can’t read with you standin’ so close,’ said Juliet. After some time
moving her lips she went on, ‘I don’t get it. It’s all kinda long words.
Lovely curly writing, though. There’s a bit here saying that I look like
a summer’s day. What’s that all about, then?’ She pressed it into
Glenda’s hand. ‘Can you read it for me, Glendy? You know I’m not good at
complicated words.’

‘Well, I’m a bit busy,’ said Glenda, ‘but since you ask.’

‘First time I’ve ever had a letter that’s not all in capitals,’ said
Juliet.

Glenda sat down and started to read. A lifetime of what even she would
call bad romantic novels suddenly bore fruit. It read as though someone
had turned on the poetry tap and then absent-mindedly gone on holiday.
But they were wonderful words, nevertheless. There was the word swain,
for example, which was a definite marker, and quite a lot about flowers
and quite a lot of what looked like pleading, wrapped up in fancy
letters, and after a while she took out her handkerchief and fanned the
air around her face.

‘So, what’s it all about?’ said Juliet.

Glenda sighed. How to begin? How did you talk to Juliet about similes
and metaphors and poetic licence all wrapped up in wonderful curly
writing?

She did her best. ‘Weeell, basically he’s saying that he really fancies
you, thinks you’re really fit, how about a date, no hanky panky, he
promises. And there’s three little x’s underneath.’

Juliet started to cry. ‘That’s loverlee. Fancy ’im sitting down and
writing all those words just for me. Real poetry just for me. I’m gonna
sleep with it under my pillow.’

‘Yes, I suspect that he had something like that in mind,’ said Glenda
and thought, Trev Likely a poet? Not likely at all.

There was a dreadful load on Pepe’s bladder, and he was stuck between a
rock and a hard place, if that wasn’t too offensive a description of
lying between Madame and a wall. She was still asleep. She snored
magnificently, using the traditional multi-part snore, known to those
who are fortunate enough to have to listen to it every night as the
‘errgh, errgh, errghh, blorrrt!’ symphony. And she was lying on his leg.
And the room was pitch dark. He managed to retrieve his leg, half of
which had gone to sleep, and set out on the well-known search for
porcelain, which began by him putting his foot down on an empty
champagne bottle, which skittered away and left him flat on his back. In
the gloom he groped for it, found it, tested it for true emptiness,
because you never knew your luck, and, as it were, filled it again,
putting it down on what was probably a table, but in his mind and the
darkness could just as well have been an armadillo.

There was another sound syncopating with Madame’s virtuoso performance.
It must have been that which woke him. By groping, he located his shorts
and after only three tries managed to get them the right way up and the
right way round. They were a little chilly. That was the problem with
micromail; it was, after all, metal. On the other hand, it did not chafe
and you never had to wash it. Five minutes on the fire and it was as
hygienic as anything. Besides, Pepe’s version of the shorts held a
surprise all of their own.

Thus feeling that he could face the world, or at least the part of it
that would need to see only the top of him, he shuffled and stubbed his
way to the shop’s door, checking every bottle along the way for evidence
of liquid content. Remarkably, a bottle of port had survived with fifty
per cent remaining capacity. Any port in a storm, he thought, and drank
his breakfast.

The shop’s door was rattling. It had a small sliding aperture by which
the staff could determine whether they wanted to let a prospective
customer in, because when you are a posh shop like Shatta, you don’t
sell things to just anyone. Pairs of eyeballs zigzagged back and forth
across his vision as people clustered on the other side of the door and
fought for attention. Somebody said, ‘We’re here to see Jewels.’

‘She’s resting,’ said Pepe. That was always a good line and could mean
anything.

‘Have you seen the picture in the _Times_?’ said a voice. Then, ‘Look,’
as a vision of Juliet was held up in front of the door.

Blimey, he said to himself. ‘She had a very tiring day,’ he said.

‘The public wants to know all about her,’ said a sterner voice.

And a rather less aggressive female voice said, ‘She seems to be rather
amazing.’

‘She is. She is,’ said Pepe, inventing desperately, ‘but a _very_
private person and a bit artistic too, if you know what I mean.’

‘Well, I’ve got a big order to place,’ said yet another voice as the
owner managed to shuffle for slot space.

‘Oh, well, we don’t have to wake her up for that. Just give me a moment
and I’ll be right with you.’ He took another swig of the port. When he
turned around, Madame, in a nightshirt that could have accommodated a
platoon, at least if they were very friendly, was bearing down on him
with a glass in one hand and the champagne bottle in the other.

‘This stuff ’s gone horribly flat,’ she said.

‘I’ll go and find some fresh,’ he replied, snatching it from her
quickly. ‘We’ve got newspaper people and customers out there and they
all want Jools. Can you remember where she lives?’

‘I’m sure she told me,’ said Madame, ‘but it all seems a long time ago.
That other one, Glenda I think, works at some big place in the city, as
a cook. Anyway, why do they want to see her?’

‘There’s a wonderful picture in the _Times_,’ said Pepe. ‘You know when
you said you thought we’d get rich? Well, it looks like you weren’t
thinking big enough.’

‘What do you suggest, dear?’

‘Me?’ said Pepe. ‘Take the order, because that’s good business, and tell
the others that Jools will see them later.’

‘Do you think they’ll go for that?’

‘They’ll have to, because we don’t know where the hell she is. There’s a
million dollars walking around this city on legs.’

***

Rhys, Low King of the Dwarfs, paid particular attention to the picture
of the wonderful girl. The definition wasn’t too bad at all. The
technique of translating the clacks semaphore signal into a
black-and-white picture was quite well advanced these days. Even so, his
people in Ankh-Morpork must have thought this particularly interesting
to merit the expense of the bandwidth required. Certainly, it was
exercising a lot of other dwarfs, but in the Low King’s experience, it
was possible to find someone, somewhere, who objected to anything. He
looked at the grags in front of him. So simple for people like Vetinari,
he thought. He just has religions to deal with. We don’t have religions.
Being a dwarf is a religion in itself, and no two priests ever agree,
and sometimes it seems that every other dwarf is a priest. ‘I see
nothing here to disturb me,’ he said.

‘We believe the beard to be a false one,’ said one of the grags. ‘That
is perfectly acceptable,’ said the King. ‘There is absolutely nothing in
any precedent that bans false beards. They are a great salvation to
those who find beards hard to grow.’

‘But she looks, well, alluring,’ said one of the other grags. They were
indistinguishable under their tall, pointed leather cowls.

‘Attractive, certainly,’ said the King. ‘Gentlemen, is this going to
take long?’

‘It must be stopped. It’s not dwarfish.’

‘Oh, but it manifestly is, is it not?’ said the King. ‘Micromail is one
hundred per cent mail and you don’t get any more dwarfish than that. She
is smiling and while I would agree that dwarfs do not appear to smile
very much, certainly not when they come to see me, I think we could
profit from her example.’

‘It’s positively an offence against morality.’

‘How? Where? Only in your heads, I feel.’

The tallest grag said, ‘So you intend to do nothing?’

The King paused for a moment, staring at the ceiling. ‘No, I intend to
do something,’ he said. ‘First of all, I shall see to it that my staff
find out just how many orders there have been for micromail originating
from here in Bonk today. I’m sure Shatta would not object to them seeing
their records, especially since I intend to tell Madame Sharn that she
can come back and establish her premises here.’

‘You would do that?’ said a grag.

‘Yes, of course. We have nearly concluded the Koom Valley Accord, a
peace with the trolls that no one ever thought they would see. And I am
fed up, gentlemen, with your whining, moaning and endless, endless
attempts to re-fight battles that you have already lost. As far as I am
concerned, this young lady is showing us a better future and now, if you
are not out of my office in ten seconds, I will charge you rent.’

‘There will be trouble over this.’

‘Gentlemen, there is always trouble! But this time I will be making it
for you.’

As the door slammed shut behind them, the King sat back in his chair.

‘Well done, sir,’ said his secretary.

‘They’ll keep on. I can’t imagine what being a dwarf would be like if we
didn’t argue all the time.’ He squirmed a little in his chair. ‘You
know, they’re right when they say it doesn’t chafe and it’s not as cold
as you would imagine. Do ask our agent to express my thanks to Madame
Sharn for her generous gift, will you?’

Even this early in the day, the Great Hall of the University was a
general thoroughfare. Most of the tables were pushed back against the
walls or, if someone felt like showing off, levitated to the ceiling,
and the huge black-and-white slabs of the floor, worn smooth by the
footfalls of millennia, were polished still further as today’s faculty
and students took a short cut to various concerns, destinations and,
very occasionally, when no viable excuse presented itself, to lectures.

The Great Chandelier had been swung down and off to one side for its
daily replenishing of candles, but there was, fortunately for Mustrum
Ridcully’s purposes, a large expanse of clear floor.

He saw the figure he was waiting for hurrying towards him. ‘How did it
go, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Extremely well, I have to say, sir,’ said Ponder. He opened the sack he
was carrying. ‘One of these is our original ball and one of them is the
ball that Nutt and Trevor Likely had made last night.’

‘Ah, spot the ball,’ said Ridcully. He picked them both up in his
enormous hands and dropped them on the flagstones.

Gloing! Gloing!

‘Perfectly identical,’ he said.

‘Trevor Likely said they had it made by a dwarf for twenty dollars,’
said Ponder.

‘Did he really?’

‘Yes, sir, and he gave me the change and the receipt.’

‘You seem puzzled, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Well, yes, sir. I feel I have been rather misjudging him.’

‘Possibly even small leopards can change their shorts,’ said Ridcully,
slamming him on the back convivially. ‘Call it score one for human
nature. Now, which of these balls is the one that’s going back to the
Cabinet?’

‘Amazingly, sir, they did think to mark the new ball and there’s a tiny
little dot of white paint on this one here . . . I mean this one here .
. . I think it was here . . . Ah! Here it is. It’s ours. I’ll send one
of the students to put the other one back shortly. We still have an hour
and a half.’

‘No, I’d rather you did it yourself, Mister Stibbons, I’m sure it would
only take a few minutes. Do hurry back, I’d like to try a little
experiment.’

When Ponder returned, he found Ridcully loitering unobtrusively by one
of the big doors. ‘You have your notebook ready, Mister Stibbons?’ he
said quietly.

‘And a fresh pencil, Archchancellor.’

‘Very well, then. The experiment begins.’

Ridcully gently rolled the new football out on to the floor,
straightened up and glanced at his stopwatch.

‘Ah, the ball has been kicked aside by the Professor of Illiberal
Studies, quite possibly by accident . . . Now one of the bledlows,
Mister Hipney I think his name is, has kicked it somewhat uncertainly.
One of the students, Pondlife, I believe, has prodded it back . . . We
have momentum, Mister Stibbons. Undirected, it is true, but promising.
Ah, but we can’t have this . . .

‘No touching the ball with your hands, gentlemen!’ shouted the
Archchancellor, deftly trapping the travelling ball with his boot.
‘That’s a rule! We really could do with that whistle, Stibbons.’

He bounced the ball on the stone floor.

Gloing!

‘Don’t just mess about like kids kicking a tin! Play football! I am the
Archchancellor of this university, by Io, and I will rusticate, or
otherwise expel, any man who skives off without a note from his mother,
hah!’

Gloing!

‘You will arrange yourself into two teams, set up goals and strive to
win! No man will leave the field of play unless injured! The hands are
not to be used, is that clear? Any questions?’ A hand went up. Ridcully
sought the attached face.

‘Ah, Rincewind,’ he said, and, because he was not a determinedly
unpleasant man, amended this to, ‘Professor Rincewind, of course.’

‘I would like permission to fetch a note from my mother, sir.’

Ridcully sighed. ‘Rincewind, you once informed me, to my everlasting
puzzlement, that you never knew your mother because she ran away before
you were born. Distinctly remember writing it down in my diary. Would
you like another try?’

‘Permission to go and find my mother?’

Ridcully hesitated. The Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography had no
students and no real duties other than to stay out of trouble. Although
Ridcully would never admit it, it was against all reason an emeritus
position. Rincewind was a coward and an unwitting clown, but he had
several times saved the world in slightly puzzling circumstances. He was
a luck sink, the Archchancellor had decided, doomed to being a lightning
rod for the fates so that everyone else didn’t have to. Such a person
was worth all his meals and laundry (including an above-average level of
soiled pants) and a bucket of coal every day even if he was, in
Ridcully’s opinion, a bit of a whiner. However, he was fast, and
therefore useful.

‘Look,’ said Rincewind, ‘a mysterious urn turns up and suddenly it’s all
about football. That bodes. It means something bad is going to happen.’

‘Come now, it could be something wonderful,’ Ridcully protested.

Rincewind appeared to give this due consideration. ‘Could be wonderful,
will be dreadful. Sorry, that’s how it goes.’

‘This is Unseen University, Rincewind. What is there to fear?’ Ridcully
said. ‘Apart from me, of course. Good heavens, this is a sport.’ He
raised his voice. ‘Arrange yourselves into two teams and play football!’

He stepped back and joined Ponder. The dragooned footballers, having
been given clear instructions in a loud voice, went into a huddle to
find out by hubbub what they should actually do instead.

‘I can’t believe this,’ said Ridcully. ‘Every boy knows what to do when
they’ve found something to kick, don’t they?’ He cupped his hands. ‘Come
on, two captains step up. I don’t care who it is.’ This took rather more
time than might have been expected since those who had not
surreptitiously left the Hall could see that the post of football
captain was one that offered a wonderful chance for being the target of
the Archchancellor’s mercurial wrath. Eventually two sacrifices were
pushed forward and found it too difficult to push their way back into
the ranks again.

‘Now, I say again, pick the teams alternately.’ He took off his hat and
flung it to the ground. ‘Now we all understand this! It’s a boy thing!
It’s like little girls and the colour pink! You know how to do this!
Pick the teams alternately so one of you ends up with the weird kid and
the other with the fat kid. Some of the fastest mathematics of all time
has been achieved by team captains trying not to end up with the weird
kid— Stay where you are, Rincewind!’

Ponder gave an involuntary shudder as his schooldays came running back,
jeering at him. The fat kid in his class had been the unfortunately
named ‘Piggy’ Love, whose father owned a sweet shop, which gave the son
some weight in the community, not to mention clout. That had left only
the weird kid as the natural target for the other boys, which meant a
chronic hell for Ponder until that wonderful day when sparks came out of
Ponder’s fingers and Martin Sogger’s pants caught fire. He could smell
them now. Best days of your life be buggered; the Archchancellor could
be a bit crass and difficult at times, but at least he wasn’t allowed to
give you a wedgie—

‘Are you listening to me, Stibbons?’

Ponder blinked. ‘Er, sorry, sir, I was . . . calculating.’

‘I said, who’s the tall feller with the tan and the dinky beard?’

‘Oh, that’s Professor Bengo Macarona, Archchancellor. From Genua,
remember? He’s swapped with Professor Maidenhair for a year.’

‘Oh, right. Poor old Maidenhair. Perhaps he won’t get laughed at so much
in a foreign language. And Mister Macarona’s here to better himself,
yes? Put a bit of polish on his career, no doubt.’

‘Hardly, sir. He’s got doctorates from Unki, QIS and Chubb, thirteen in
all, and a visiting professorship at Bugarup, and he has been cited in
two hundred and thirty-six papers and, er, one divorce petition.’

‘What?’

‘The rule about celibacy isn’t taken seriously over there, sir. Very
hot-blooded people, I understand, of course. His family owns a huge
ranch and the biggest coffee plantation outside Klatch, and I think his
grandmother owns the Macarona Shipping Company.’

‘So why the hell did he come here?’

‘He wants to work with the best, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘I think he’s
serious.’

‘Really? Oh, well, he seems like a sensible chap, then. Er, the divorce
thing?’

‘Don’t know much, sir, it got hushed up, I believe.’

‘Angry husband?’

‘Angry wife, as I heard it,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, he was married, was he?’

‘Not to my knowledge, Archchancellor.’

‘I don’t think I quite understand,’ said Ridcully.

Ponder, who was not at all at home in this area, said very slowly, ‘She
was the wife of another man . . . I, er, believe, sir.’

‘But I—’

To Ponder’s relief, light dawned on Ridcully’s huge face. ‘Oh, you mean
he was like Professor Hayden. We used to have a name for him...’

Ponder braced himself.

‘Snakes. Very keen on them, you know. Could talk for hours about snakes
with a side order of lizards. Very keen.’

‘I’m glad you feel like that, Archchancellor, because I know that a
number of the students—’

‘And then there was old Postule, who was in the rowing team. Coxed us
through two wonderful years.’ Ponder’s expression did not change, but
for a few moments his face went pink and shiny. ‘A lot of that sort of
thing about, apparently,’ said Ridcully. ‘People make such a fuss.
Anyway, in my opinion there’s not enough love in the world. Besides, if
you didn’t like the company of men you wouldn’t come here in the first
place. I say! Well done, that man!’ This was because, in the absence of
Ridcully’s attention, the footballers had at last started their own
kick-about and some quite fancy footwork was emerging. ‘Yes, what?’

A bledlow had appeared alongside Ridcully.

‘Gentleman to see the Archchancellor, sir. He’s a wizard, sir. The, er,
the Dean, as was, only he says he’s an Archchancellor too.’

Ridcully hesitated, but you’d have had to be an experienced Ridcully
watcher, like Ponder, to notice the moment. When the Archchancellor
spoke, it was calmly and carefully, every word hammered on the anvil of
self-control.

‘What a pleasant surprise, Mister Nobbs. Do show the Dean in. Oh, and
please do not glance at Mister Stibbons for confirmation, thank you. I
am still the Archchancellor in these parts. The only one, in fact. Is
there a problem, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Well, sir, it is a bit public in here—’ Ponder stopped, because
suddenly he had nobody’s attention. He hadn’t seen the ball bounce
towards Bledlow Nobbs (no relation). Nor the vicious kick the latter
gave it, just as he would an impertinent intrusion by a street urchin’s
tin can. Ponder did see the ball curving majestically through the air,
heading for the other end of the Hall where, behind the organ, rose the
stained-glass window dedicated to Archchancellor Abasti, which on a
daily basis showed one of several thousand scenes of a mystical or
spiritual nature. The intuition with which Ponder had successfully
calculated the distance and trajectory of the ball told him that the
current glowing picture of ‘Bishop Horn realizing that the alligator
quiche was an unwise choice’ had appeared just in time to be extremely
unlucky.

And then, like some new planet swimming into the ken of a watcher of the
skies, as they are prone to do, a rusty red shape arose, unfolding as it
came, snatched the ball out of the air and landed on the organ keyboard
to the sound of _gloing!_ in B flat.

‘Well done, that ape!’ the Archchancellor boomed. ‘A beautiful save,
but, regrettably, against the rules!’

To Ponder’s surprise there was a murmur of dissent from all the players.
‘I believe that decision may benefit from some consideration,’ said a
small voice behind them.

‘Who said that?’ said Ridcully, spinning round and looking into the
suddenly terrified little eyes of Nutt.

‘Nutt, sir. The candle dribbler. We met yesterday. I helped you with the
ball . . . ?’

‘And you are telling me I’m wrong. Are you?’

‘I would rather you thought of me as suggesting a way in which you could
be even more right.’

Ridcully opened his mouth and then shut it again. I know what he is, he
thought. Does he? Or did they spare him that?

‘Very well, Mister Nutt. Is there a point you wish to make?’

‘Yes, sir. What is the purpose of this game?’

‘To win, of course!’

‘Indeed. Regrettably, it is not being played that way.’

‘It isn’t?’

‘No, sir. The players all want to kick the ball.’

‘And so they should, surely?’ said Ridcully.

‘Only if you believe the purpose of the game is healthy exercise, sir.
Do you play chess?’

‘Well, I have done.’

‘And would you have thought it proper for all the pawns to swarm up the
board in the hope of checkmating the king?’

For a moment, Ridcully had a mental vision of Lord Vetinari holding
aloft a solitary pawn and saying what it might become . . .

‘Oh, come now, that is quite different!’ he burst out.

‘Yes, but the skill lies in marshalling resources in the right way.’

Ridcully saw a face appear behind Nutt, like a rising moon of wrath.

‘You don’t talk to the gentlemen, Nutt, it is not your place to take up
their time with your chatter—’

Ridcully writhed in sympathy with Nutt, all the more so because Smeems,
as is the habit of such people, kept looking at the Archchancellor as if
seeking and, worse, expecting approval of this petty tyranny.

But authority must back up authority, in public at least, otherwise
there is no authority, and therefore the senior authority is forced to
back up the junior authority, even if he, the senior authority, believes
that the junior authority is a tiresome little tit.

‘Thank you for your concern, Mister Smeems,’ he said, ‘but in fact I
asked Mister Nutt his opinion of our little kick-about, since it is the
game of the people and he is rather more people than I am. I will not
keep him long from his duties, Mister Smeems, nor you from yours, which
I know are both vital and pressing.’

Small, insecure authority can spot, if it is sensible, when a larger
authority is giving it a chance to save face.

‘Right you are, sir!’ said Smeems after only a second’s hesitation, and
he scurried off to safety. The thing called Nutt appeared to be
trembling.

He thinks he’s done something wrong, Ridcully thought, and I shouldn’t
think of him as a thing. Some wizard’s sense made him look round into
the face of – what was the lad’s name? – Trevor Likely.

‘Do you have anything else to add, Mister Likely? Only I’m a bit busy at
the moment.’

‘I gave Mister Stibbons the change and the receipt,’ said Trevor.

‘What is it you do around here, young man?’

‘I run the candle vats, guv.’

‘Oh, do you? We’re getting some very good dribbling from you fellows
these days.’

Trev appeared to let this pass. ‘Mister Nutt is not in any trouble, is
he, guv?’

‘Not to my knowledge.’

But what do I know? Ridcully asked himself. Mr Nutt, by definition, is
trouble. But the Librarian says he potters about repairing things and is
generally an amiable milksop, and he talks as though he’s giving a
lecture.¹⁴ This little man, who actually, when you look at him, is not
as little as he appears because he weighs himself down with humility . .
. this little man was born with a name so fearsome some peasants chained
him to an anvil because they were too scared to kill him. Perhaps
Vetinari and his friends are right in their smug way and a leopard can
change his shorts. I hope so, because if they aren’t, a leopard will be
a picnic. And any minute now, the Dean is coming, damn his treacherous
hide.

‘Only he’s my friend, guv.’

‘Well, that’s good. Everyone should have a friend.’

‘I’m not gonna let anyone touch ’im, guv.’

‘A brave ambition, young man, if I may say so. Nevertheless, Mister
Nutt, why did you object when I pointed out that the Librarian,
wonderful though his rising save was, was in infringement of the rules?’

Nutt didn’t look up, but in a small voice said, ‘It was elegant. It was
beautiful. The game should be beautiful, like a well-executed war.’

‘Oh, I don’t think many people would say that war is very jolly,’ said
Ridcully.

‘Beauty can be considered to be neutral, sir. It is not the same as nice
or good.’

‘I thought it was the same as truth, though,’ said Ponder, trying to
keep up.

‘Which is often horrible, sir, but Mister Librarian’s leap was both
beautiful, sir, and good, sir, and therefore must be true and therefore
the rule which should prevent him from doing it again would be proved to
be neither beautiful nor true and would, indeed, be a false law.’

‘That’s right, guv,’ said Trev. ‘People will shout for that stuff.’

‘Do you mean that they’d cheer for a goal not achieved?’ said Ponder.

‘Of course they will! And groan! It’s something happening,’ Ridcully
snorted. ‘You saw the game the other day! If you were lucky, you got a
glimpse of a lot of large, grubby men fighting over a ball like a lump
of wood. People want to see goals scored!’

‘And saved, remember!’ Trev pointed out.

‘Exactly, young man,’ agreed Ridcully. ‘It must be a game of speed. This
is the year of the Pensive Hare, after all. People get bored so easily.
No wonder there are fights. We need, do we not, to make a sport that is
more exciting than beating other people over the head with big weapons.’

‘That one’s always been very popular,’ said Ponder doubtfully.

‘Well, we are wizards, after all. And now I must go and greet the
bloody, the so-called Archchancellor of Brazeneck so-called College in
the correct damn spirit of fraternal goodwill!’

‘So called,’ murmured Ponder, not quite softly enough.

‘What say?’ the Archchancellor bellowed.

‘Just wondering what you want me to do, Archchancellor?’

‘Do? Keep ’em playing! See who’s good at it! Work out what the most
beautiful rules are,’ Ridcully called out, heading out of the Hall at
speed.

‘By myself?’ said Ponder, horrified. ‘I’ve got a huge workload!’

‘Delegate!’

‘You know I’m hopeless at delegating, sir!’

‘Then delegate the job of delegating to someone who isn’t! Now, I must
be off before he steals the silverware!’

It was very rare for Glenda to take time off. Being the head of the
Night Kitchen was a mental state, not a physical one. The only meal she
ever ate at home was breakfast, and that was always in a hurry. But now
she’d stolen some time to sell the dream. May Hedges was looking after
the kitchen and she was reliable and got on with everyone and so there
were no worries there.

The sun had come out and now she knocked on the rear door of Mr
Stronginthearm’s workshop. The dwarf opened the door with rouge all over
his fingers. ‘Oh, hello, Glenda. How’s it going?’

She thumped a wad of orders on the table proudly and opened the
suitcase. It was empty. ‘And I need a lot more samples,’ she said.

‘Oh, that’s wonderful,’ said the dwarf. ‘When did you get these?’

‘This morning.’

It had been _easy_. Door after door seemed to have opened for her and
every time a little voice in her head said, ‘Are you doing the right
thing?’ a slightly deeper voice, which sounded remarkably like Madame
Sharn, said, ‘He wants to make it. You want to sell it. They want to buy
it. The dream goes round and round and so does the money.’

‘The lipstick went down very well,’ she said. ‘Those troll girls put it
on with a trowel and I’m not kidding. So what you ought to do, sir, is
sell a trowel. A pretty one, in a nice box with sprinkles on it.’

He gave her an admiring look. ‘This isn’t like you, Glenda.’

‘Not sure about that,’ said Glenda, as more samples were dropped into
the battered case. ‘Have you thought about getting into shoes?’

‘Do you think it would be worth a try? They don’t normally wear shoes.’

‘They didn’t wear lipstick until they moved here,’ said Glenda. ‘It
could be the coming thing.’

‘But they’ve got feet like granite. They don’t _need_ shoes.’

‘But they’ll _want_ them,’ said Glenda. ‘You could be in on the ground
floor, as it were.’

Stronginthearm looked puzzled and Glenda remembered that even city
dwarfs were used to the topsy-turvy language of home. ‘Oh, sorry, I
meant to say the top floor.’

‘And then there’s dresses,’ said Glenda. ‘I’ve been looking around and
no one makes proper dresses for trolls. They’re just outsized human
dresses. And they’re cut to make the troll look smaller, but they’d be
better if they were cut to make them look bigger. More like a troll and
less like a fat human. You know, you want the clothing to shout, “I’m a
great big troll lady and proud of it”.’

‘Have you been hit on the head with something?’ said Stronginthearm.
‘Because, if so, I’d like it to drop on me.’

‘Well, it’s spreading the dream, isn’t it?’ said Glenda, carefully
arranging the samples in her suitcase. ‘It’s a bit more important than I
thought.’

She made fourteen more successful calls before calling it a day, posted
the orders through Stronginthearm’s letterbox and, with a light case and
uncharacteristically light heart, went back to work.

***

Ridcully turned the corner and there, right in front of him, was . . .
His mind spun as it sought for the correct mode of address:
‘Archchancellor’ was out of the question, ‘Dean’ too obvious an insult,
‘Two Chairs’ ditto with knobs on, and ‘ungrateful, backstabbing, slimy
bastard’ took too long to say. What the hell was the bastard’s name?
Great heavens, they’d been friends since their first day at UU . . .
‘Henry!’ he exploded. ‘What a pleasant surprise. What brings you here to
our miserable and sadly out-of-date little university?’

‘Oh, come now, Mustrum. When I left, the lads were pushing back the
boundaries of knowledge. It’s been a bit quiet since, I gather. By the
way, this is Professor Turnipseed.’

There appeared from behind the self-styled Archchancellor of Brazeneck,
like a moonlet moving out of the shadow of a gas giant, a sheepish young
man who instantly reminded Ridcully of Ponder Stibbons, although for the
life of him he couldn’t make out why. Perhaps it was the look of someone
permanently doing sums in his head, and not just proper sums either, but
the sneaky sort with letters in them.

‘Oh, well, you know how it is with boundaries,’ Ridcully mumbled. ‘You
look at what’s on the other side and you realize why there was a
boundary in the first place. Good afternoon, Turnipseed. Your face is
familiar.’

‘I used to work here, sir,’ said Turnipseed sheepishly.

‘Oh yes, I recall. In the High Energy Magic Department, yes?’ ‘A coming
man, our Adrian,’ said the former Dean, proprietorially.

‘We have our own High Energy Magic Building now, you know. We call it
the Higher Energy Magic Building, but I stress that this is only to
avoid confusion. No slight on good old UU is intended. Adopt, adapt,
improve, that’s my motto.’

Well, if you adapted it then it’s now grab, copy and look innocent,
Ridcully thought, but carefully. Senior wizards never rowed in public.
The damage was apt to be appalling. No, politeness ruled, but with
sharpened edges.

‘I doubt there will be any confusion, Henry. We are the senior college,
after all. And of course I am the _only_ Archchancellor in these parts.’

‘By custom and practice, Mustrum, and times are changing.’

‘Or being changed, at least. But I wear the Archchancellor’s Hat, Henry,
as worn by my predecessors down the centuries. The Hat, Henry, of
supreme authority in the affairs of the Wise, the Cunning and the
Crafty. The hat, in fact, on my head.’

‘It isn’t, you know,’ said Henry cheerfully. ‘You are wearing the
everyday hat that you made yourself.’

‘_It would be on my head if I wanted it to be!_’

Henry’s smile was glassy. ‘Of course, Mustrum, but the authority of the
Hat has often been challenged.’

‘Almost correct, old chap. In fact, it is the ownership of the Hat that
has, in the past, been disputed, but the Hat itself, never. Now, I note
that you yourself are wearing a particularly spiffy hat of a
magnificence that goes beyond the sublime, but it is just a hat, old
boy, just a hat. No offence meant, of course, and I am sure that in
another millennium it will have become weighted with dignity and wisdom.
I can see that you have left plenty of room.’

Turnipseed decided to make a run for the lavatories right now, and with
a muted apology pushed past Ridcully and sped away.

Oddly enough, the sudden lack of an audience lowered the tension rather
than increased it.

Henry pulled a slim packet out of his pocket. ‘Cigarette? I know that
you roll your own, but Verdant and Scour make these specially for me and
they are rather fine.’

Ridcully took one, because a wizard, however haughty, who would not
accept a free smoke or a drink would be in his coffin, but he took care
not to notice the words ‘Archchancellor’s Choice’ in garish type on the
packet.

As he handed the packet back, something small and colourful dropped out
on to the floor. Henry, with an agility unexpected in a wizard so far up
the main sequence as described in the well-known Owlspring/Tips
Diagram,¹⁵ reached down quickly and snatched it up, muttering something
about ‘not letting it get dirty’.

‘You could eat your dinner off these floors,’ said Ridcully sharply, and
probably would, he added to himself.

‘Only the collectors get so annoyed if there is a speck of dust on them
and I give mine to the butler’s little boy,’ Henry went on blithely. He
turned the pasteboard over and frowned. ‘Notable Wizards of our Time,
No. 9 of 50: Dr Able Baker, BC (Hons), Fdl, Kp, PdF (escrow), Director
of Blit Studies, Brazeneck. I’m sure he’s already got this one.’ He
dropped it into a waistcoat pocket. ‘Never mind, good for swapsies.’

Ridcully could assess things quite fast, especially when fuelled by
banked fires of rage.

‘The Wizla tobacco, snuff and rolling paper company,’ he said, ‘of
Pseudopolis. Hmm, clever idea. Who’s in this from UU?’

‘Ah. Well, I have to admit that the Assembly and people of Pseudopolis
are rather . . . patriotic in their outlook—’

‘I think the word is “parochial”, don’t you?’

‘Harsh words, considering that Ankh-Morpork’s the smuggest, most
self-satisfied city in the world.’ This was self-evidently true, so
Ridcully decided he hadn’t heard it.

‘You on one of these cards, then?’ he grunted.

‘They insisted, I’m afraid,’ said Henry. ‘I was born there, you see.
Local boy and all that.’

‘And no one from UU,’ said Ridcully flatly.

‘Technically no, but Professor Turnipseed is in there as the inventor of
Pex.’ As Henry said it, guilt and defiance fought for space in the
sentence.

‘Pex?’ said Ridcully slowly. ‘You mean like Hex?’

‘Oh, no, not at all like Hex. Certainly not. The principle is quite
different.’ Henry cleared his throat. ‘It’s run by chickens. They
trigger the morphic resonator, or whatever it’s called. Your Hex, as I
recall, utilizes ants, which are far less efficient.’

‘How so?’

‘We get eggs we can eat.’

‘That doesn’t sound all that different, you know.’

‘Oh, come now. They are hundreds of times bigger! And Pex is in a
purpose-built room, not strung haphazardly all over the place. Professor
Turnipseed knows what he is doing, and even you, Mustrum, must
acknowledge that the river of progress is fed by a thousand springs!’

‘And they didn’t all rise in bloody Brazeneck!’ said Ridcully.

They glared at one another. Professor Turnipseed poked his head around
the corner and pulled it back very quickly.

‘If we were the men our fathers were, we’d be throwing fireballs by
now,’ said Henry.

‘The point is taken,’ said Ridcully. ‘Although, I must point out, our
fathers were not wizards.’

‘That’s right, of course,’ said the former Dean. ‘Your father was a
butcher, as I recall.’

‘That’s right. And your father owned a lot of cabbage fields,’ said
Ridcully.

There was a moment’s silence and then the former Dean said, ‘Remember
the day we both turned up at UU?’

‘We fought like tigers as I recall,’ said Ridcully.

‘Good times, when you come to remember them,’ said the Dean.

‘Of course, we’ve all passed a lot of water over the bridge since then,’
said Ridcully. There was another pause and he added, ‘Fancy a drink?’

‘I don’t mind if I do,’ said the former Dean.

‘So you are trying to play football?’ said Henry as they progressed
majestically towards the Archchancellor’s office. ‘I did see something
about it in the paper, but I thought it was a joke.’

‘Why, pray?’ said Ridcully as they began to walk across the Great Hall.
‘We have a fine sporting tradition, as well you know!’

‘Ah yes, tradition is the scourge of endeavour. Be sensible, Mustrum.
The leopard may change his shorts, but I think he’d have a job getting
into the ones he wore forty years ago. Oh, I see that you still have
Mister Stibbons here?’

‘Er . . .’ began Ponder, looking from one to the other.

Ponder Stibbons had once got one hundred per cent in a prescience exam
by getting there the previous day. He could see a little storm cloud
when it was beginning to grow.

‘How’s the football going, lad?’

‘Oh, it seems to be going very well, Archchancellor. Good to see you
again, Dean.’

‘Archchancellor,’ purred the former Dean. ‘I wonder how good you would
be against _my_ university.’

‘Well, we have a pretty nifty team built here,’ said Ridcully, ‘and,
while it is our intention to play our first game against a local side, I
would take great pleasure in showing Brazeneck a thing or two on the
field.’ By now they were almost in the middle of the Great Hall and
their presence, not unexpectedly, had stopped play.

‘Archchancellor, I really feel that it might be a good idea to—’ Ponder
began, but his voice was drowned out by the roar of approval that rang
out from all sides around the Great Hall.

‘And the prize would be?’ said Henry, smiling at the crowd.

‘What?’ spluttered the Archchancellor. ‘What prize?’

‘We picked up a few rowing trophies when we were lads, didn’t we?’

‘I believe the Patrician has got something planned for the league, yes.’

‘I think that refreshments will be laid out in the Blue refectory
shortly,’ said Ponder with a kind of desperate, sweaty cheerfulness.
‘There will, of course, be cake, but also, I believe, an interesting
assortment of curries.’

On many occasions this might have worked, but the two senior wizards had
locked glares and would not so much as blink, even for a slice of
Ploughman’s Pie.

‘But we men of craft are not interested in such paltry baubles as cups
and medals, are we?’ said Henry. ‘For us it’s huge great big baubles or
nothing, is that not right, Mustrum?’

‘You are after the Hat,’ said Ridcully flatly. The air between them was
humming.

‘Yes, of course.’

There followed the menacing silence of a clash of wills, but Ponder
Stibbons decided that as he was, technically, twelve important people at
the university, he formed, all by himself, a committee, and since he was
therefore, de facto, very wise, he should intervene.

‘And _your_ stake, Dea— Sir, would be . . . ?’

Ridcully turned his head slightly and growled, ‘He doesn’t have to have
one. I have rather walked into this . . .’

There was a stirring from the more senior wizards, and Ponder heard a
whispered phrase. ‘Dead man’s pointy shoes?’

‘No, I forbid it!’ said Ponder.

‘You forbid it?’ said Henry. ‘You are but a chick, young Stibbons.’

‘The accumulated votes of all the posts I hold on the University Council
mean that I do, technically, control it,’ said Ponder, trying to stick
out a skinny chest that was never built for sticking, but still buoyed
up and awash with righteous rage and a certain amount of terror about
what might happen when it ran out of steam.

The contenders relaxed a little more in the presence of this turning
worm.

‘Didn’t anyone notice that you were getting all this power?’ said
Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir, me. Only I thought it was responsibility and hard work. None
of you ever bother with details, you see. Technically, I have to report
to other people, but usually the other people are _me_. You have no
idea, sirs. I’m even the Camerlengo, which means that if you drop dead,
Archchancellor, from any cause other than legitimate succession under
the Dead Man’s Pointy Shoes tradition, I run this place until a
successor is elected which, given the nature of wizardry, will mean a
job for life, in which case the Librarian, as an identifiable and
competent member of the senior staff, will try to discharge his duties,
and if he fails, the official procedure is for wizards everywhere to
fight among themselves for the Hat, causing fire, destruction, doves,
rabbits and billiard balls to appear from every orifice and much loss of
life.’ After a short pause he continued. ‘Again. Which is why some of us
get a little worried when we see powerful wizards squabbling like this.
To conclude, gentlemen, I have spoken at some length in order to give
you time to consider your intentions. _Somebody_ has to.’

Ridcully cleared his throat. ‘Thank you for your input, Stibbons. We
shall discuss this matter further. Definitely something that needed to
be said. These aren’t the old days, after all.’

‘Your point is taken,’ said Henry, ‘except that, technically, these are
going to be somebody else’s old days.’

Ponder’s chest was still going up and down.

‘A very good point,’ said Ridcully.

‘I believe I heard mention of a curry?’ said Henry, with equal care. It
was like listening to two ancient dragons talking to each other with the
help of an even older book of etiquette written by nuns.

‘It’s a long time until lunch.¹⁶ I tell you what, why don’t you accept
the hospitality of my university? I believe we have left your room
_exactly_ as it was, although I understand some quite amazing things
have crawled out under the door. And perhaps you might like to stay on
for tomorrow’s banquet?’

‘Oh? Are you having a banquet?’ said Henry.

‘Indeed so, and I would be delighted if you would accept, old boy. We’ll
be entertaining some of the solid citizenry. Salt-of-the-earth fellows,
you understand. Wonderful people if you don’t watch them eat, but quite
good conversationalists if you give them enough beer.’

‘Funnily enough, I find that works with wizards too. Well, I must
accept, of course. I haven’t been to a banquet in ages.’

‘You haven’t?’ said Ridcully. ‘I thought _you_ would have a banquet
every night.’

‘We have a limited budget, you know,’ said the Archchancellor of
Brazeneck. ‘It’s a governmental grant thing, you see.’

The wizards fell silent. It was as if a man had just told you his mother
had died.

Ridcully patted him on the hand. ‘Oh, I’m so sorry.’ He paused at the
doors of the Hall and turned back to Ponder. ‘We will be having some
high-level discussions, Stibbons. Keep them on their toes! The lads will
help! Find out what football wants to be!’

The older members of the faculty exhaled as the two heads left. Most of
them were old enough to recall at least two pitched battles among
factions of wizards, the worst of which had only been brought to a
conclusion by Rincewind, wielding a half-brick in a sock . . .

Ponder looked across at Rincewind now, and he was hopping awkwardly on
one leg, trying to put a sock back on. He thought it better not to
comment. It was probably the same sock.

The Chair of Indefinite Studies slapped Ponder on the back. ‘Well done,
lad. Could have been a nasty incident there.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

‘I’m sorry we seem to have loaded you down a bit. I’m sure it wasn’t
deliberate.’

‘I’m sure it wasn’t, too, sir. Very little around here is.’ Ponder
sighed. ‘I’m afraid that unthinking delegation and prevarication and
procrastination are standard practice here.’ He looked expectantly at
the remaining members of the Council. He wanted to be disappointed, but
knew he wouldn’t be.

‘A very bad state of affairs indeed,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

The Chair looked grave. ‘Hm . . .’

So go on, thought Ponder, say it. I know you’re going to, you just won’t
be able to stop yourself, you really won’t—

‘I think, Stibbons, that you should sort it out when you have a moment,’
said the Chair.

‘Bingo!’

‘I beg your pardon, Stibbons?’

‘Oh, nothing, sir, not really. I was just pondering, as it were, on the
unchangeable nature of the universe.’

‘I’m glad somebody is. Keep it up.’ The Lecturer in Recent Runes looked
around and added, ‘It all seems to have quietened down. That curry
sounds amusing.’

There was a general movement towards the doors on the part of those
wizards who were well endowed with years, gravitation or both, but the
scratch match went on among those less magnetically attracted to knives
and forks.

Ponder sat down, his clipboard balanced on his lap. ‘I don’t have the
faintest idea what I’m doing here,’ he declared to the world around him.

‘May I be of some worth, sir?’

‘Mister Nutt? Oh, well, it’s very kind of you, but I don’t think that
your skill with a candle can be of much—’

‘In games of this nature there are three classes of things to be
considered: one, the rules of the game in all their detail; two the
correct skills, actions and philosophies required for success, and
three, an understanding of the real nature of the game. May I continue?’

‘Huh,’ said Ponder, in that slight daze that overcame everyone hearing a
Nutt lecture for the first time.

‘Got a fine jaw on him, ain’t he?’ said Trev. ‘He can say the long words
where the likes of you an’ me would ’ave to stop for a rest ’alfway
through! Me, anyway,’ he trailed off.

‘Er, do continue, Mister Nutt.’

‘Thank you, sir. As I understand it, the purpose of this game is to
score at least one more goal than your opponents. But our two teams just
ran around, with everyone trying to kick the ball at once. Oh, goals
were scored, but only opportunistically. As in chess, you must secure
the king, your goal. Yes, you are going to say that you have the
custodian of the goal, but he is only one man, figuratively speaking.
Every ball he saves shames the team members who let the opponents get so
close. Yet at the same time, they must maximize their chances of getting
the ball into the opposing goal. This is a problem I will have to
address. I have mentioned chess, but this game, and particularly the
ease with which the ball takes flight, means that the activity can go
from one end of the play to the other in seconds, just as one dwarf
piece can upset the whole board in a game of Thud.’

He smiled up at their expressions and added, ‘You know, this game is
surely one of the simplest. Any little boy knows how to play it . . .
and yet playing it optimally requires superhuman talents.’ He thought
for a moment and added, ‘Or possibly subhuman. Certainly the willing
sublimation of the ego, which takes us into the realms of the
metaphysical. So simple and yet so complex. You know, this is wonderful.
I am quite thrilled!’

The ring of silence around him was not ominous, but the air choked with
bafflement. Finally, the wizard Rincewind said, ‘Er, Mister Nutt, I
thought you told us we just had to get the ball between the pointy
hats?’

‘Professor Rincewind, you run very well, but you don’t do anything with
it. Professor Macarona, you attempt to score as soon as you get the ball
irrespective of anything else that is happening. Dr Hix, you cheat and
foul constantly—’

‘Excuse me, skull ring,’ Hix intervened. ‘I am required to attempt to
break the rules, under college statutes.’

‘Within acceptable limits,’ Ponder added quickly.

‘Bledlow Nobbs (no relation), you have a furiously powerful kick,’ Nutt
continued, ‘but you don’t seem to care where the ball goes so long as it
gets there. All of you have strengths and weaknesses and it might be
possible to make use of both of them. That is, if you want to win. But
for now, a good exercise would be to get a lot more of these balls and
learn how to control them. Running while kicking the ball ahead of you
simply means that you will lose it to an opponent. You must learn to
keep it at your feet. You were all looking down to check that you had
the ball. Gentlemen, if you need to check that you still have the ball,
you either do not have it or you will lose it in the next fraction of a
second. Now, if you will excuse me, Mister Trev and I will get into
trouble if we don’t get the chandelier back up soon.’

The spell broke.

‘What?’ said Ponder. ‘I mean, what? Stay there, Mister Nutt!’

Nutt immediately hunched and stared at his feet in their clumsy shoes.
‘I am sorry if I have transgressed in any way. I was only seeking
worth.’

‘Worth?’ said Ponder, looking at Trev for some kind of map of this new
territory.

‘That’s how he talks, that’s all,’ said Trev. ‘He ’asn’t done anythin’
wrong, so why shout at him like that? They were some bloody good ideas!
You shouldn’t pick on ’im just ’cos he’s small and talks posh.’

Nutt seemed noticeably taller a little while ago, Ponder thought. Is he
really just hunched up? ‘I wasn’t exactly shouting at him,’ he said. ‘I
just wondered what he’s doing dribbling candles! I mean, I know that’s
what he’s doing, but why?’

‘Ah, you have to have dribbled candles, sir,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no
relation), ‘and to my mind, the dribbling has been particularly fine
just lately. Often, when I’m walking the corridors of a night, I think
to myself—’

‘Good heavens, man, he’s erudite! He radiates learning! He’s a
polymath!’ said Ponder.

‘Are you saying he’s too smart to be a candle dribbler?’ said the
bledlow, a militant look in his eye. ‘You wouldn’t want a stupid
dribbler, would you? You’d get, like, manky dribbles all over the
place.’

‘I simply meant that—’

‘. . . and blobs,’ said the bledlow firmly.

‘But you must admit that it is strange that—’

Probably everyone wants him dead.

Ponder stopped as the chasm of memory opened. ‘That makes no sense. It
can’t be true!’

‘Sir?’

He realized that all the footballers were staring at him. Ridcully had
refused to say any more, and in Ponder’s crowded mind he’d settled for
believing that Nutt was on the run in some way. It was not unknown.
Occasionally a novice wizard working in a small town might find it a
good idea to hurry back for a swift refresher course in the safety of
the university’s hospitable stones until his little mistake had been
rectified/forgotten/erased/caught and bottled. There had always been
others given sanctuary for mysterious reasons. The politics of wizardry
were either very simple, and resolved by someone ceasing to breathe, or
as complex as one ball of yarn in a room with three bright-eyed little
kittens.

But Nutt . . . What crime could he have done? And then you had to factor
in that it was Ridcully who had allowed him to come here and indeed had
put Ponder in this position. The sensible thing, therefore, was to –
just get on with it.

‘I think Mister Nutt has some very good ideas,’ he said carefully, ‘and
I think he should continue. Do carry on, Mister Nutt.’

Watching Nutt look up was like watching the sun rise, but a hesitant sun
afraid that any moment the gods might slap it back down into the night,
and hungry for reassurance that this would not be so.

‘I am worthy?’

‘Well, er . . .’ Ponder began, and saw Trev nodding frantically.

‘Well, er, yes, it would seem so, Mister Nutt. I’m amazed at your
insight in so short a time.’

‘I have a talent for pattern recognition in developing situations.’

‘Really? Oh. Good. Carry on, then.’

‘Excuse me, I have a question, if you would be so good?’

Looks like a bag of second-hand clothes, talks like a retired
theologian, Ponder thought. ‘Ask away, Mister Nutt.’

‘Can I carry on with the dribbling?’

‘What? Do you want to?’

‘Yes, thank you. I enjoy it and it does not take me long.’

Ponder glanced at Trev, who shrugged, made a face and nodded.

‘But I have a favour to ask,’ Nutt went on.

‘I rather expected you would,’ said Ponder, ‘but I’m sorry to say that
the budget this term means—’

‘Oh no, I don’t want any money,’ said Nutt. ‘I don’t really spend it
anyway. I just want Mister Trev in the team. He is very modest, but you
should know that he is a genius with his feet. I cannot see how you
could lose with him in the team.’

‘Oh no,’ said Trev, waving his hands and backing away. ‘No! Not me! I’m
not a footballer! I just kick tin cans around!’

‘Thought that was at the heart and soul of foot-the-ball, isn’t it?’
said Ponder, who’d never been allowed to play in the street.

‘I thought it was when early blokes kicked a dead enemy’s head around,’
Bledlow Nobbs (no relation) volunteered.

A throat was cleared. ‘Unlikely in my opinion,’ said Hix. ‘Unless it’s
in a bag or some sort of metal brace, and then you have the problem of
weight, because a human head comes in at around ten pounds, which is a
pain in the foot, I should think. Scooping it out would work for a
while, of course, but mind you wire the jaw, because no one wants to be
bitten in the foot. I do have some heads on ice if anyone wants to
experiment. It’s amazing, but there are still those who leave their
bodies to necromancy. There’s some strange people out there.’

At this point, the head of the Department of Post-Mortem Communications
realized that he was not taking his audience with him.

‘There’s no need to look at me like that,’ he grumbled. ‘Skull ring,
remember? I have to know this wretched stuff.’

Ponder coughed politely. ‘Mister, er, Likely, isn’t it? Your colleague
speaks very highly of you. Won’t you join us?’

‘Sorry, guv, but I promised my old mum that I’d never play football.
It’s a good way of gettin’ your head caved in!’

‘Trev Likely?’ roared Bledlow Nobbs (no relation). ‘Are you Dave
Likely’s lad? He—’

‘Scored four goals, yeah, yeah, yeah,’ said Trev. ‘And then died in the
street with the rain washing his blood down the gutter and someone’s
smelly overcoat over him. The Prince of Football?’

‘Do we need a little talk, Mister Trev?’ Nutt said urgently.

‘No. No. I’m okay. Okay?’

‘This isn’t that kind of football, Trev,’ said Nutt soothingly.

‘Yeah, I know. But I promised my old mum.’

‘Then at least show them your moves, Mister Trev,’ Nutt pleaded. He
turned to the players. ‘You must see this!’

Trev sighed, but Nutt knew just how to wheedle. ‘All right, if it shuts
you up,’ he said, and pulled a tin can out of his pocket, to much
laughter.

‘See?’ he complained to Nutt. ‘They just think it’s a joke.’

Nutt folded his arms. ‘Show them.’

Trev dropped the can on to his foot and with hardly any effort flicked
it on to his shoulder, where it rolled around his neck to his other
shoulder and, after a tiny pause, righted itself. He shrugged it on to
his other foot, spun it into the air, and let it tumble and spin on the
toe of his boot with a faint rattling noise.

Trev winked at Ponder Stibbons. ‘Don’t move, guv.’

The can sprang off the boot and up into the air, then, as it fell, he
hit it with a roundhouse kick, driving it at Ponder. The people behind
Ponder dived out of the way as it growled past his face and went into
orbit, appearing for a moment to give him a silver necklace until it
broke away and dropped into Trev’s hand like a beached salmon.

In the silence, Ponder pulled his thaumometer out of his pocket and
glanced at it.

‘Natural background,’ he said flatly. ‘No magic involved. How did you do
that, Mister Likely?’

‘You just ’ave to get the hang of it, guv. Getting the spins is the
thing, but if I ’ave to think too much it don’t work.’

‘Can you do it with a ball?’

‘Dunno, never tried. But prob’ly no. Can’t get the long spin and the
short spin, see? But you ort to be able to get somethin’ out of a ball.’

‘But how would that help us?’ said Hix.

‘Mastery of the ball is everything,’ said Nutt. ‘The planned rule will,
I think, allow the keeper of the goal to handle the ball. This is vital.
There is, however, no explicit ban on nodding the ball, kneeing the ball
or blocking the ball with the chest and letting it drop neatly on to the
foot. Remember, gentlemen, this ball flies. It will spend a lot of time
in the air. You must learn not to think just about the ground.’

‘I feel sure that using the head would be considered illegal,’ said
Ponder.

‘Sir, you presume a rule where there is none. Remember what I said about
the real nature of the game.’

Ponder saw Nutt’s little half-smile, and gave in. ‘Mister Nutt, I am
delegating the selection and training of our football team to you. You
will report to me, of course.’

‘Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. I will need the power to sequester team
members from their normal duties when required.’

‘Well, I suppose I must agree to that. Very well, I shall leave the team
in your hands,’ said Ponder, thinking: how many bags of old clothes use
the word ‘sequester’ as if they’re used to it? Still, Ridcully likes the
little goblin, if that’s what he is, and I’ve never seen the point of
team games.

‘May I also, sir, request a very small budget?’

‘Why?’

‘With all due respect to the exigencies of university finances,’ said
Nutt, ‘I believe it is very necessary.’

‘Why?’

‘I wish to take the team to the ballet.’

‘That’s ridiculous!’ Ponder snapped.

‘No, sir, it’s essential.’

The next day there was a piece in the _Times_ about the mysterious
disappearance of the fabulous ‘Jewels’, which made Glenda smile. They
just haven’t read their fairy stories, she thought as she left the
house. If you want to find a beauty, you look for her in the ashes.
Because Glenda was Glenda and would always irredeemably be Glenda to the
core, she added: although the ovens in the Night Kitchen are
scrupulously maintained at all times and all ashes are immediately
disposed of.

To her surprise, Juliet stepped out of her doorway at almost the same
time and looked as if she was almost awake. ‘Do you think they’ll let me
in on the banquet?’ she said as they waited for the bus.

Theoretically yes, Glenda thought, but probably no, because she was a
Night Kitchen girl. Even though she was Juliet, she would be tarred by
Mrs Whitlow as a Night Kitchen girl. ‘Juliet, you shall go to the
banquet,’ she said aloud, ‘and so shall I.’

‘But I think Mrs Whitlow won’t like that,’ said Juliet.

Something was still bubbling inside Glenda. It had started in Shatta and
lasted all day yesterday and there was still some left today. ‘I don’t
care,’ she said.

Juliet giggled and looked around in case Mrs Whitlow was hiding near the
bus stop.

And I really don’t care, Glenda thought. I don’t care. It was like
drawing a sword.

Ponder’s office always puzzled Mustrum Ridcully. The man used filing
cabinets for heavens’ sake. Ridcully worked on the basis that anything
you couldn’t remember wasn’t important and had developed the floor-heap
method of document storage to a fine art.

Ponder looked up. ‘Ah, good morning, Archchancellor.’

‘Just had a look in at the Hall,’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘Our lads were all doing ballet.’

‘Yes, Archchancellor.’

‘And there were some girls from the Opera House with those short
dresses.’

‘Yes, Archchancellor. They’re helping the team.’

Ridcully leaned over and put huge knuckles either side of the paper
Ponder was working on. ‘_Why?_ ’

‘Mister Nutt’s idea, Archchancellor. Apparently they must learn balance,
poise and elegance.’

‘Have you ever seen Bledlow Nobbs try to stand on one leg? Let me tell
you, it’s an immediate cure for melancholy.’

‘I can imagine,’ said Ponder, not looking up.

‘I thought the idea was to learn how to kick the ball into the goal.’

‘Ah, yes, but Mister Nutt has a philosophy.’

‘Does he?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘They’re runnin’ about all over the place, I know that,’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, Mister Nutt and Mister Likely are preparing a little something
extra for the banquet,’ said Ponder, getting up and opening the top
drawer of a filing cabinet. The sight of filing cabinets opening tended
to remind Ridcully that he should be elsewhere, but on this occasion the
ruse failed to work.

‘Oh, and I believe we have some fresh balls.’

‘Mister Snorrisson knows an opportunity when he sees one.’

‘So it’s all going well, then?’ said Ridcully, in a kind of mystified
voice.

‘Apparently so, sir.’

‘Well, I suppose I’d better leave it alone,’ said Ridcully. He
hesitated, feeling at a bit of a loose end, and found another thread to
pull. ‘And how are those rules coming along, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Oh, quite well, thank you, Archchancellor. I’m keeping in some of the
ones from the street game, of course, to keep everybody happy. Some of
them are quite strange.’

‘Mister Nutt is quite a decent chap, it appears.’

‘Oh yes, Archchancellor.’

‘Very good idea of his to redesign the goal, I thought. Makes it more
fun.’

‘Aren’t you going to train, sir?’ said Ponder, pulling another document
towards him.

‘I am the captain! I do not need to train.’ Ridcully turned to leave and
stopped with his hand on the doorknob. ‘Had a long chat with the former
Dean last night. Decent soul at heart, of course,’ he said.

‘Yes, I understand the atmosphere in the Uncommon Room was very
convivial, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. And expensive, he added to
himself.

‘You know young Adrian Turnipseed is a professor?’

‘Oh, yes, Archchancellor.’

‘You wanna be one?’

‘Not really, Archchancellor. I think there should be one or two posts in
this institution that I don’t hold.’

‘Yes, but they’ve just called their machine Pex! Hardly a great leap of
ingenuity, is it?’

‘Oh, there are some significant differences. I believe he’s using
chickens to generate the blit diametric,’ said Ponder.

‘Apparently so,’ said Ridcully. ‘Something like that, anyway.’

‘Hmmm,’ said Ponder. And it was quite a solid hmmm, possibly one you
could moor a small boat to.

‘Something wrong?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, er, not really, Archchancellor. Did the former Dean mention
anything about the need to totally rebuild the morphic resonator to
allow for the necessary changes in the blit/slood interface?’

‘Shouldn’t think so,’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh,’ said Ponder, his face blank. ‘Well, Adrian is bound to get round
to that. He _is_ very clever.’

‘Yes, but it was all based on _your_ work. _You_ built Hex. And now
they’re putting out that he’s some big clever clogs. He’s even on a
cigarette card.’

‘That’s nice, sir. It’s good when researchers get recognition.’

Ridcully felt like a mosquito that was trying to sting a steel
breastplate. ‘Hah, wizardry has certainly changed since my day,’ he
said.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder noncommittally.

‘And by the way, Mister Stibbons,’ said Ridcully as he opened the door,
‘my day isn’t over yet.’

There was a yell in the distance. And then a crash. Ridcully smiled. The
day had suddenly brightened up.

When he and Ponder reached the Great Hall, most of the team were
gathered around one of their members lying on the floor, with Nutt
kneeling over him.

‘What’s happened here?’ Ridcully demanded.

‘Badly bruised, sir. I shall put a compress on it.’

‘Ah.’ His gaze fell upon a large, brass-bound chest. It looked at first
sight like any other chest, until you saw the tiny little toes poking
out.

‘Rincewind’s luggage,’ he growled. ‘And where that is, Rincewind can’t
be far in front. Rincewind!’

‘Actually, it wasn’t my fault,’ said Rincewind.

‘He’s right, sir,’ said Nutt. ‘I have to apologize for the fact that
this was a group misapprehension. I understand it is a remarkably
magical chest on hundreds of little legs and I am afraid that the
gentlemen here believed that it would play football like stink, as they
put it. In which surmise, I have to say, they were proved wrong.’

‘I tried to tell them,’ said the former Dean from the edge of the crowd.
‘Morning, Mustrum. Good team you have here.’

‘All its feet do is get in each other’s way,’ said Bengo Macarona. ‘And
if it does get on top of the ball, it spins out of control and, alas, it
crashed into Mister Sopworthy here.’

‘Oh, well, we learn by our mistakes,’ said Ridcully. ‘And now, do you
happen to have something _nice_ to show me?’

‘I think I have the very thing, Archchancellor,’ said a cheerful but
reedy voice behind him.

Ridcully turned and looked into the face of a man with the shape and
urgency of a piccolo. He seemed to be vibrating on the spot.

‘Professor Ritornello, Master of the Music,’ Ponder whispered into
Ridcully’s ear.

‘Ah, Professor,’ said Ridcully smoothly, ‘and I see you have the choir
with you.’

‘Yes indeed, Archchancellor, and I must tell you, I am thrilled and
filled with inner light by what I have witnessed this morning! Without
ado, I have penned a chant, such as you asked for!’

‘Did I?’ said Ridcully, out of the corner of his mouth.

‘You will remember that chanting was mentioned and so I thought it best
to alert the professor,’ whispered Ponder.

‘Another pp, eh? Oh, well.’

‘Happily, it is based on the traditional plainchant or stolation form
and is a valedicta, or hail to the winner. May I?’ said Professor
Ritornello. ‘It is a cappella, of course.’

‘Go ahead, by all means,’ said Ridcully.

The Master of the Music pulled a short baton out of his sleeve. ‘I’ve
put the name of Bengo Macarona in there for a marker at the moment,
because he has apparently scored two fine “goals”, as I believe they are
called,’ he said, dealing carefully with the word as one might deal with
a large spider in the bathtub. Then he caught the eyes of his little
flock, nodded, and:

  Hail the unique qualities of Magister Bengo Macarona! Of Macarona the
  unique qualities Hail! Hail the! Hail the! The singular talent
  possessed by no other! Hail! Hail the! Hail the bountiful gods! Who to
  the, two the— SINGULA SINGULAR SINGULA!

After a minute and a half of this Ridcully coughed loudly, and the
Master waved the choir into a stuttering silence.

‘Is there something untoward, Archchancellor?’

‘Er, not as such, Master, but, er, do you not feel that it is a bit too,
well, long?’ Ridcully was aware that the former Dean was not trying very
hard to suppress a snigger.

‘Not at all. In fact, sir, I intend that when it is finished it will be
scored for forty voices and, though I dare to say so, will be my
masterwork!’

‘But it is something for _football fans_ to sing, you see?’ said
Ridcully.

‘Well then,’ said the Master, holding his baton in a rather threatening
manner, ‘is it not the duty of the educated classes to raise the
standards of the lower orders?’

‘He’s got a point there, Mustrum,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
and Ridcully felt his grandfather kick him in the heredity, and was glad
that maid wasn’t here – what was her name now? Oh, yes, Glenda, smart
woman – but although she was not there he saw something of her
expression in Trev Likely’s face.

‘During the week, possibly,’ he snapped, ‘but not on Saturdays, I think.
But very well done, anyway, and I look forward to hearing more of your
efforts.’

The Master of the Music flounced out with the choir flouncing out in
perfect unison behind him.

Ridcully rubbed his hands together. ‘Well, gentlemen, perhaps you could
show me your moves.’

While the players spread out in the Hall, Nutt said, ‘I must say that
Professor Macarona is excelling at the game. He clearly has excellent
ball skills.’

‘I’m not surprised,’ said Ridcully brightly.

‘The Librarian is, of course, an excellent keeper of the goal.
Especially since he can stand in the middle and reach either side of it.
I believe that it will be very hard for any of our opponents to get past
him. And, of course, you will be partaking also, Archchancellor.’

‘Oh, you don’t become Archchancellor if you don’t get the hang of things
quickly. I will just watch for now.’

He watched. After the second occasion when Macarona, like a silver
streak, ran the length of the Hall to flick the ball into the opponents’
goal, Ridcully turned to Ponder and said, ‘We’re going to win, aren’t
we?’

‘If indeed he is still playing for you,’ put in the former Dean.

‘Oh, come now, Henry. Can we at least agree to just play one game at a
time here?’

‘Well, I think today’s session should end pretty soon, sir,’ said
Ponder. ‘It’s the banquet tonight after all and it will take some time
to get the place ready.’

‘Excuse me, guv, that’s right,’ said Trev behind him, ‘and we’ve got to
get the chandelier down an’ put new candles in.’

‘Yes, but we have been practising a little demonstration for tonight.
Maybe the Archchancellor would like to see it,’ said Nutt.

Ridcully looked at his watch. ‘Well, yes, Mister Nutt, but time is
getting on and so I look forward to seeing it later. Splendid effort all
round, though,’ he boomed.

The night market was setting up in Sator Square as Glenda and Juliet
arrived for work. Ankh-Morpork lived on the street, where it got its
food, entertainment and, in a city with a ferocious housing shortage, a
place to hang around until there was space on a floor. Stalls had been
set up anywhere, and flares filled the early-evening air with stink and,
almost as a by-product, a certain amount of light.

Glenda could never resist looking, especially now. She was very good at
all sorts of cookery, she really was, and it was important to keep that
knowledge at the calm centre of her spinning brain. And there was Verity
Pushpram, queen of the sea.

Glenda had a lot of time for Miss Pushpram, who was a self-made woman,
although she could have used some help when it came to her eyes, which
were set so far apart that she rather resembled a turbot.

But Verity, like the ocean that was making her fortune these days, had
hidden depths, because she’d made enough to buy a boat, and then another
boat and a whole aisle in the fish market. But she still womanhandled
her barrow to the square most evenings, where she sold whelks, shrimps,
leather crabs, blossom prawns, monkey clams and her famous hot fish
sticks.

Glenda often bought from her; there was the kind of respect you give to
an equal who is, crucially, no threat to your own position.

‘Going to the big bun fight, girls?’ said Verity cheerfully, waving a
halibut at them.

‘Yes,’ said Juliet proudly.

‘What, both of you?’ said Verity, with a glance towards Glenda, who
said, firmly, ‘The Night Kitchen is expanding.’

‘Oh well, so long as you’re having fun,’ said Verity, looking, in
theory, from one to the other. ‘Here, have one of these, they’re lovely.
My treat.’

She reached down and picked a crab out of a bucket. As it came up it
turned out that three more were hanging on to it.

‘A crab necklace?’ giggled Juliet.

‘Oh, that’s crabs for you,’ said Verity, disentangling the ones who had
hitched a ride. ‘Thick as planks, the lot of them. That’s why you can
keep them in a bucket without a lid. Any that tries to get out gets
pulled back. Yes, as thick as planks.’ Verity held the crab over an
ominously bubbling cauldron. ‘Shall I cook it for you now?’

‘No!’ said Glenda, much louder than she had intended.

‘Are you okay, dear?’ Verity enquired. ‘You look a bit ill.’

‘I’m fine. Fine. Just a touch of a sore throat, that’s all.’ Crab
bucket, she thought. I thought Pepe was talking nonsense. ‘Erm, can you
just truss it up for us? It’s going to be a long night.’

‘Right you are,’ said Miss Pushpram, expertly wrapping the unresisting
crab in twine. ‘You know what to do, that’s certain. Lovely crabs,
these, real good eating. But thick as planks.’

Crab bucket, thought Glenda as they hurried towards the Night Kitchen.
That’s how it works. People from the Sisters _disapproving_ when a girl
takes the trolley bus. That’s crab bucket. Practically everything my mum
ever told me, that’s crab bucket. Practically everything I’ve ever told
Juliet, that’s crab bucket, too. Maybe it’s just another word for the
Shove. It’s so nice and warm on the inside that you forget that there’s
an outside. The worst of it is, the crab that mostly keeps you down is
you . . . The realization had her mind on fire.

A lot hinges on the fact that, in most circumstances, people are not
allowed to hit you with a mallet. They put up all kinds of visible and
invisible signs that say ‘Do not do this’ in the hope that it’ll work,
but if it doesn’t, then they shrug, because there is, really, no real
mallet at all. Look at Juliet talking to all those nobby ladies. She
didn’t know that she shouldn’t talk to them like that. And it worked!
Nobody hit her on the head with a hammer.

And custom and practice as embodied by Mrs Whitlow was that the Night
Kitchen staff should not go above stairs, to where the light was
comparatively clean and had not already been through a lot of other
eyeballs. Well, Glenda had done that, and nothing bad had happened, had
it? So now Glenda strode towards the Great Hall, her serviceable shoes
hitting the floor enough to hurt. The Day girls said nothing as she
marched in behind them. There was nothing for them to say. The real
unwritten rule was that girls on the dumpy side didn’t serve at table
when guests were present, and Glenda had decided tonight that she
couldn’t read unwritten rules. Besides, there was a row already going
on. The servants who were laying out the cutlery were trying to keep an
eye on it, which subsequently meant that more than one guest had to eat
with two spoons.

Glenda was amazed to see the Candle Knave waving his hands at Trev and
Nutt, and she headed for them. She did not like Smeems very much; a man
could be dogmatic, and that was all right, or he could be stupid, and no
harm done, but stupid and dogmatic at the same time was too much,
especially fluxed with body odour.

‘What’s this all about?’

It worked. The right tone from a woman with her arms folded always
bounces an answer out of an unprepared man before he has time to think,
and even before he has time to think up a lie.

‘They raised the chandelier! They raised it without lighting the
candles! We won’t have enough time now to get it down and up again
before the guests come in!’

‘But, Mister Smeems—’ Trev began.

‘And all I get is talking back and lies,’ Smeems complained bitterly.
‘But I can light them from here, Mister Smeems.’ Nutt spoke quietly,
even his voice huddling.

‘Don’t give me that! Even wizards can’t do that without getting wax all
over the place, you little—’

‘That’s enough, Mister Smeems,’ said a voice that to Glenda’s surprise
turned out to be hers. ‘_Can_ you light them, Mister Nutt?’

‘Yes, miss. At the right time.’

‘There you are, then,’ said Glenda. ‘I suggest you leave it to Mister
Nutt.’ Smeems looked at her, and she could see there was, as it were, an
invisible mallet in his thinking, a feeling that he might get into some
trouble here.

‘I should run along now,’ she said.

‘I can’t stand around. I’m a man with responsibilities.’ Smeems looked
wrong-footed and bewildered, but from his point of view absence was a
good idea. Glenda almost saw his brain reach the conclusion. Not being
there diluted the blame for whatever it was that was going to go wrong.
‘Can’t stand around,’ he repeated. ‘Ha! You’d all be in the dark if it
wasn’t for me!’ With that, he grabbed his greasy bag and scuttled off.

Glenda turned to Nutt. He can’t possibly make himself smaller, she told
herself. His clothes would fit him even worse than they do already. I
must be imagining it.

‘Can you really light the candles from here?’ she said aloud. Nutt
carried on staring at the floor.

Glenda turned to Trev. ‘Can he really—’ but Trev was not there, because
Trev was leaning against the wall some distance away talking to Juliet.

She could read it all at a glance, his possessive stance, her modestly
downcast eyes: not hanky panky, as such, but certainly overture and
beginners to hanky panky. Oh, the power of words . . .

As you watch, so are you watched. Glenda looked down into the
penetrating eyes of Nutt. Was that a frown? What had he seen in her
expression? More than she wanted, that was certain.

The tempo in the Hall was increasing. The football captains would be
assembling in one of the anterooms, and she could imagine them there, in
clean shirts, or at least in shirts less grubby than usual, dragged here
from the various versions of Botney Street all over the city, staring up
at the wonderful vaulting and wondering if they were going to walk out
of there dead. Huh, she tagged on to that thought, more likely it would
be dead drunk. And, just as her brain began to pivot around that new
thought, a severe voice behind her said, ‘Hwe do not usually expect to
see you in the Great Hall, Glenda?’

It had to be Mrs Whitlow. Only the housekeeper would pronounce ‘we’ with
an H and finish a plain statement as if it were a question. Besides,
without turning round, Glenda heard the clink of her silver chatelaine,
reputed to hold the one key that could open any lock in the university,
and the creaking of her fearsome corsetry.¹⁷

Glenda turned. There is no mallet! ‘I thought you might need a few extra
hands tonight, Mrs Whitlow,’ she said sweetly.

‘Nevertheless, custom and practice—’

‘Ah, dear Mrs Whitlow, I think we’re ready to let them through now. His
lordship’s coach will shortly be leaving the palace,’ said the
Archchancellor, behind them.

Mrs Whitlow could loom. But mostly only horizontally. Mustrum Ridcully
could out-loom her by more than two feet. She turned hurriedly and gave
the little half-curtsy which, he’d never dared tell her, he always found
mildly annoying.

‘Oh, and Miss Glenda, isn’t it?’ said the Archchancellor happily. Good
to see you up here. Very useful young lady, Mrs Whitlow. Got initiative,
fine grasp of things.’

‘How kind of you to say so. She is one of my best girls,’ said the
housekeeper, spitting teeth and taking care not to meet Glenda’s
suddenly cherubic gaze.

‘Big chandelier not lit, I see,’ said Ridcully.

Glenda stepped forward. ‘Mister Nutt is planning a surprise for us,
sir.’

‘Mister Nutt is full of surprises. We’ve had an amazing day here today,
Miss Glenda,’ said Ridcully. ‘Our Mister Nutt has been teaching the lads
to play football _his_ way. Do you know what he did yesterday? You’ll
never guess. Tell them, Mister Nutt.’

‘I took them along to the Royal Opera House to watch the dancers in
training,’ said Nutt nervously. ‘You see, it is very important that they
learn the skills of movement and poise.’

‘And then when they came back,’ said Ridcully, with the same, slightly
threatening joviality, ‘he had them playin’ here in the Hall
blindfolded.’

Nutt coughed nervously. ‘It is vital for them to keep track of every
other player,’ he said. ‘It is essential that they are a team.’

‘And then he took them to see Lord Rust’s hunting dogs.’

Nutt coughed again, even more embarrassed. ‘When they hunt, every dog
knows the position of every other dog. I wanted them to understand the
duality of team and player. The strength of the player is the team and
the strength of the team is the player.’

‘Did you hear that?’ said Ridcully. ‘Great stuff! Oh, he’s had them
running up and down here all day long. Balancing balls on their heads,
doing big diagrams on a blackboard. You’d think it was some kind of
battle being planned.’

‘It is a battle,’ said Nutt. ‘I mean, not with the opposing team, as
such, but it is a battle between every man and himself.’

‘That sounds very Uberwaldian,’ said Ridcully. ‘Still, they all seem
full of vim and vigour and ready for the evening. I think Mister Nutt is
planning one of those sunny luminair things.’

‘Just a little something to capture people’s attention,’ said Nutt.

‘Anything going to go off bang?’ said Ridcully.

‘No, sir.’

‘Promise? Personally I like the occasional bit of Sturm and Drang, but
Lord Vetinari is a tad particular about that sort of thing.’

‘No thunder and lightning, sir. Possibly a brief haze, high up.’

It seemed to Glenda that the Archchancellor was paying some thoughtful
attention to Nutt.

‘How many languages do you speak, you . . . Nutt?’

‘Three dead and twelve living, sir,’ said Nutt.

‘Really. Really,’ said Ridcully, as though filing this away and trying
not to think _How many of them were alive before you murdered them?_
‘Well done. Thank you, Mister Nutt, and you too, ladies. We will bring
them in shortly.’

Glenda took this opportunity to get out of Mrs Whitlow’s way. She was
not pleased to see that Trev and Juliet had already taken a slightly
earlier opportunity to get out of hers.

‘Do not worry about Juliet,’ said Nutt, who had followed her.

‘Who said I was worried?’ Glenda snapped.

‘You did. Your expression, your stance, the set of your body, your . . .
reactions, your tone of voice. Everything.’

‘You have no business to be looking at my everything – I mean the set of
my body!’

‘It is simply the way you stand, Miss Glenda.’

‘And you can read my mind?’

‘It may appear that way. I am so sorry.’

‘And Juliet. What was she thinking?’

‘I am not sure, but she likes Mister Trev, she thinks he is funny.’

‘So have you read Trev’s everything? Bet that was a dirty book!’

‘Er, no, miss. He is worried and confused. I would say he is trying to
see what kind of man he is going to be.’

‘Really? He’s always been a scallywag.’

‘He is thinking of his future.’

Across the Hall, the big doors opened just as the last scurrying
servants reached their stations.

This made no impression on Glenda, lost in thought as she wrestled with
the prospect that a leopard might change his shorts. He has been a bit
quiet lately, I must admit. And he did write her that lovely poem . . .
That should mean a lot, a poem. Who’d have thought it? It’s not like him
at all—

With atomic speed Nutt was suddenly missing, and the doors stood wide,
and here came the captains with their retinues, and all of them were
nervous and some of them were wearing unaccustomed suits, and some of
them were walking a little unsteadily even now, because the wizards’
idea of an aperitif had bite, and in the kitchen plates would be being
filled and the chefs would be cursing and the ovens clanging as they . .
. as they . . . What was the menu, anyway?

Life as an unseen part of Unseen University was a matter of alliances,
feuds, obligations and friendships, all stirred and twisted and woven
together.

Glenda was good at it. The Night Kitchen had always been generous to
other toilers and right now the Great Hall owed her favours, even if all
she had done was keep her mouth shut. Now she bore down on Shiny Robert,
one of the head waiters, who gave her the cautious nod due to someone
who knew things about you that you wouldn’t want your mother to know.

‘Got a menu?’ she asked. One was produced from under a napkin. She read
it in horror.

‘That’s not the stuff they like!’

‘Oh dear, Glenda,’ Robert smirked. ‘Are you saying it’s too good for
them?’

‘You’re giving them Avec. Nearly every dish has got Avec in it, but
stuff with Avec in the name is an acquired taste. I mean, do these look
to you like people who habitually eat in a foreign language? Oh dear,
and you are giving them beer! Beer with Avec!’

‘A choice of wines is available. They are choosing beer,’ said Robert
coldly.

Glenda stared at the captains. They seemed to be enjoying themselves
now. Here was free food and drink and if the food tasted strange there
was plenty of it, and the beer tasted welcomely familiar and there was
lots of that, too.

She didn’t like this. Heavens knew that football had got pretty
disgusting these days, but . . . well, she couldn’t quite work out what
she was uneasy about, but—

‘’scuse me, miss?’

She looked down. A young footballer had decided to confide in the only
uniformed woman he could see who was not carrying at least two plates at
once.

‘Can I help?’

He lowered his voice. ‘This chutney tastes of fish, miss.’

She looked at the other grinning faces around the table. ‘It’s called
caviar, sir. It’ll put lead in your pencil.’

The table, as one well-oiled drinker, guffawed, but the youth only
looked puzzled. ‘I haven’t got a pencil, miss.’ More amusement.

‘There’s not a lot of them around,’ said Glenda, and left them laughing.

‘So kind of you to invite me, Mustrum,’ said Lord Vetinari, waving away
the hors d’œuvres. He turned to the wizard on his right. ‘And the
Archchancellor formerly known as Dean is back with you, I see. That is
capital.’

‘You may remember that Henry went to Pseudopolis – Brazeneck, you know.
He is, er . . .’ Ridcully slowed.

‘The new Archchancellor,’ said Vetinari. He picked up a spoon and
perused it carefully, as if it were a rare and curious object. ‘Dear me.
I thought that there could be only one Archchancellor. Is this not so?
One above all others and one Hat, of course? But these are wizardly
matters, of which I know little. So do excuse me if I have
misunderstood.’ In the gently turning bowl of the spoon his nose went
from long to short. ‘However, it occurs to me, as an onlooker, that this
could lead to a little friction, perhaps.’ The spoon stopped in mid
twirl.

‘A soupçon, perhaps,’ said Ridcully, not looking in the direction of
Henry.

‘That much, indeed? But I surmise from the absence of people being
turned into frogs that you gentlemen have forgone the traditional option
of magical mayhem. Well done. When it comes to the pinch, old friends,
united by the bonds of mutual disrespect, cannot bring themselves to
actually kill one another. We have hope. Ah, soup.’

There was a brief interregnum as the ladle went from bowl to bowl, and
then the Patrician said, ‘Could I assist you? I am without any bias in
this matter.’

‘Excuse me, my lord, but I think it might be said that you would favour
Ankh-Morpork,’ said the Archchancellor formerly known as Dean.

‘Really? It might also be said that it would be in my interest to weaken
the perceived power of this university. You take my meaning? The
delicate balance between town and gown, the unseen and the mundane? The
twin foci of power. It might be said that I could take the opportunity
to embarrass my learned friend.’ He smiled a little smile. ‘Do you still
own the official Archchancellor’s Hat, Mustrum? I notice that you don’t
wear it these days and tend to prefer the snazzy number with the rather
attractive drawers and the small drinks cabinet in the point.’

‘I never liked wearing the official one. It grumbled all the time.’

‘It really can talk?’ said Vetinari.

‘I think the word “nag” would be far more accurate, since its only topic
of conversation has been how much better things used to be. My only
comfort here is that every Archchancellor over the last thousand years
has complained about it in exactly the same way.’

‘So it can think and speak?’ said Vetinari innocently.

‘Well, I suppose you could put it like that.’

‘Then you can’t own it, Mustrum: a hat that thinks and speaks cannot be
enslaved. No slaves in Ankh-Morpork, Mustrum.’ He waved a finger
waggishly.

‘Yes, but it is the look of the thing. What would it look like if I gave
up the uniqueness of Archchancellorship without a fight?’

‘I really could not say,’ said Lord Vetinari, ‘but since just about
every genuine battle between wizards has hitherto resulted in wholesale
destruction, I feel that you would at least look a little embarrassed.
And, of course, I will remind you that you were quite happy that
Archchancellor Bill Rincewind at Bugarup University cheerfully calls
himself Archchancellor.’

‘Yes, but he’s a long way away,’ said Ridcully. ‘And Fourecks doesn’t
really count as anywhere, whereas in Pseudopolis we are talking about a
Johnny-come-lately of an organization and its—’

‘So are we then merely arguing over the question of distance?’ said
Vetinari.

‘No, but—’ said Ridcully and stopped.

‘Is this worth the argument, I ask you?’ said Vetinari. ‘What we have
here, gentlemen, is but a spat between the heads of a venerable and
respected institution and an ambitious, relatively inexperienced, and
importunate new school of learning.’

‘Yes, that’s what we’ve got all right,’ said Ridcully.

Vetinari raised a finger. ‘I hadn’t finished, Archchancellor. Let me see
now. I said that what we have here is a spat between an antique and
somewhat fossilized, elderly and rather hidebound institution and a
college of vibrant newcomers full of fresh and exciting ideas.’

‘Here, hang on, you didn’t say that the first time,’ said Ridcully.

Vetinari leaned back. ‘Indeed I did, Archchancellor. Do you not remember
our talk about the meaning of words a little while ago? Context is
everything. I suggest, therefore, that you allow the head of Brazeneck
University the opportunity to wear the official Archchancellor’s Hat for
a short time.’

You had to pay close attention to what Lord Vetinari said. Sometimes the
words, while clearly docile, had a tendency to come back and bite.

‘Play the football for the Hat,’ said Vetinari.

He looked at their faces. ‘Gentlemen. Gentlemen. Do take a moment to
consider this. The importance of the Hat is enhanced. The means by which
the wizards strive are not primarily magical. The actual striving and
indeed the rivalry will, I think, be good for both universities and
people will be interested, whereas in the past when wizards have argued
they have had to hide in the cellars. Please do not answer me too
quickly, otherwise I will think you have not thought about this enough.’

‘As a matter of fact, I can think very fast indeed,’ said Ridcully. ‘It
will simply be no contest. It will be totally unfair.’

‘It certainly will,’ said Henry.

‘Ah, you both feel that it will be totally unfair,’ said Vetinari.

‘Indeed. We have a much younger faculty and the brisk and healthy
playing fields of Pseudopolis.’

‘Capital,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘It seems to me that we have a challenge.
University against university. City, as it were, against city. Warfare,
as it were, without the tedious necessity of picking up all those heads
and limbs afterwards. All things must strive, gentlemen.’

‘I suppose I have to agree,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s not as if I’m going to
lose the Hat in any case. I must note, though, Havelock, that you do not
allow many challenges to your position.’

‘Oh, but I am challenged very frequently,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘It’s
just that they don’t win. Incidentally, gentlemen, I did notice in
today’s paper that the new voters of Pseudopolis yesterday voted not to
have to pay taxes. When you see the president again, please don’t
hesitate to tell him that I will be more than happy to advise him when
he feels it is necessary. Cheer up, gentlemen. Neither of you has got
exactly what you want, but both of you have got exactly what you
deserve. If the leopard can change his shorts, a wizard can change his
hat. And the leopard must change his shorts, gentlemen, or we are all
doomed.’

‘Are you referring to the Loko business?’ said Henry. ‘You needn’t look
surprised.’

‘I don’t intend to. I am surprised,’ said Vetinari, ‘but please credit
me with not looking surprised unless, of course, there is some advantage
in doing so.’

‘We are going to have to do something. The expedition found a nest of
the damn things!’

‘Yes. Children, which they killed,’ said Vetinari.

‘Pups that they exterminated!’

‘Indeed? And what do you suggest?’

‘We are talking about a very evil force here!’

‘Archchancellor, I see evil when I look in my shaving mirror. It is,
philosophically, present everywhere in the universe in order,
apparently, to highlight the existence of good. I think there is more to
this theory, but I tend to burst out laughing at this point. I take it
that you are behind the idea of an expeditionary force to Far Uberwald?’

‘Of course!’ said the former Dean.

‘It has been tried once before. It was tried twice before that. Why is
there a certain cast of the military mind which leads sensible people to
do again, with gusto, what didn’t work before?’

‘Force is all they understand. You must know that.’

‘Force is all that’s been tried, Archchancellor Henry. Besides, if they
are animals, as some people claim, then they understand nothing, but if,
as I am convinced, they are sapient creatures, then some understanding
is surely required by us.’

The Patrician took a sip of his beer. ‘I have told this to few people,
gentlemen, and I suspect never will again, but one day when I was a
young boy on holiday in Uberwald I was walking along the bank of a
stream when I saw a mother otter with her cubs. A very endearing sight,
I’m sure you will agree, and even as I watched, the mother otter dived
into the water and came up with a plump salmon, which she subdued and
dragged on to a half-submerged log. As she ate it, while of course it
was still alive, the body split and I remember to this day the sweet
pinkness of its roes as they spilled out, much to the delight of the
baby otters who scrambled over themselves to feed on the delicacy. One
of nature’s wonders, gentlemen: mother and children dining upon mother
and children. And that’s when I first learned about evil. It is built in
to the very nature of the universe. Every world spins in pain. If there
is any kind of supreme being, I told myself, it is up to all of us to
become his moral superior.’

The two wizards exchanged a glance. Vetinari was staring into the depths
of his beer mug and they were glad that they did not know what he saw in
there.

‘Is it me or is it rather dark in here?’ said Henry.

‘Good heavens, yes! I forgot about the chandelier!’ exclaimed Ridcully.
‘Where is Mister Nutt?’

‘Here,’ said Nutt, rather closer than Ridcully would have preferred.
‘Why?’

‘I said I would be ready when you needed me, sir.’

‘What? Oh, yes, of course you did.’ He’s short and polite and amazingly
helpful, he told himself. Nothing to worry about at all . . . ‘Well,
show us how to light the candles, Mister Nutt.’

‘Could I possibly have a fanfare, sir?’

‘I doubt it, young man, but I will bring the Hall to attention.’

Ridcully picked up a spoon and tapped the side of a wine glass, in the
time-honoured ‘Look, everybody, I’m trying to make a loud noise very
quietly!’ procedure, which has successfully eluded after-dinner speakers
ever since the invention of glasses, spoons and dinners.

‘Gentlemen, pray silence, an expectant one, followed by appreciative
applause for the lighting of the chandelier!’

There was the silence.

As a round of applause was followed by some more silence, people turned
around in their chairs for a better view of nothing to see.

‘Would you please puff on your pipe and hand it to me, sir?’ said Nutt.

Shrugging, Ridcully did so. Nutt took it, raised it in the air and—

What happened? It was a topic of conversation for days. Did the red fire
come up from the pipe or down from the ceiling or simply out of the
walls? All that was certain was that the darkness was suddenly fractured
by glowing zigzags that vanished in a blink, leaving a total blackness
which cleared like the sky at dawn as all at once every candle, in
perfect unison, glowed into life.

As the applause began to mount, Ridcully looked along the table at
Ponder, who waved his thaumometer, shook his head and shrugged.

Then the Archchancellor turned to Nutt, took him out of earshot of the
table and for the benefit of watchers shook him by the hand.

‘Well done, Mister Nutt. Just one thing: that wasn’t magic, because we
would know, so how was it done?’

‘Well, initially, dwarfish alchemy, sir. You know, the kind that works?
It is how they light the big chandeliers in the caverns under Bonk. I
worked that out by tests and analysis. All the candle wicks are
connected by a network of black cotton thread, which terminates in one
single thread, which barely shows up in this Hall. You see, the thread
is soaked in a formula which burns with extreme but brief ferocity when
dry. My slightly altered solution burns considerably faster even than
that, consuming the thread until it is nothing but gas. It is quite
safe. Only the tips of the candle wicks are treated, you see, and they
light as normal. You might be interested, sir, in the fact that the
flame travels so fast as to be instantaneous by any human measure.
Certainly faster than twenty miles a second, I calculate.’

Ridcully was good at looking blank. You couldn’t deal with Vetinari on a
regular basis without being able to freeze your expression at will. But,
right now, he didn’t have to try.

Nutt looked concerned. ‘Have I failed to achieve worth, sir?’

‘What? Ah. Well.’ Ridcully’s face thawed. ‘A wonderful effort, Nutt.
Well done! Er, how did you get hold of the ingredients?’

‘Oh, there is an old alchemy room in the cellars.’

‘Hmm. Well, thank you again,’ said Ridcully. ‘But as Master of this
university I must ask you not to talk to anyone about this invention
until we have spoken again on the matter. Now, I must get back to the
events in hand.’

‘Don’t you worry, sir, I will see that it does not fall into the wrong
hands,’ said Nutt, bustling off.

Except, of course, that _you_ are the wrong hands, Ridcully thought, as
he returned to the table.

‘An impressive display,’ said Vetinari, as Ridcully took his seat again.
‘Am I right in thinking, Mustrum, that the Mister Nutt you referred to
is indeed, as it were, _the_ Mister Nutt?’

‘That’s right, yes, quite a decent chap.’

‘And you’re letting him do alchemy?’

‘I think it was his own idea, sir.’

‘And he’s been standing here all this time?’

‘Very keen. Is there a problem, Havelock?’

‘No, no, not at all,’ said Vetinari.

It was indeed an impressive display, Glenda acknowledged, but while she
watched it she could feel Mrs Whitlow’s gaze on her. In theory Glenda’s
activities would merit another kind of firework display later on, but it
wasn’t going to happen, was it? She had nailed the invisible hammer. But
there were other, if less personal, matters on her mind.

Stupid, silly, and thoughtless though some of her neighbours were, it
was up to her, as ever, to protect their interests. They had been
dropped into a world they didn’t understand, so she had to understand it
for them. She thought this because as she prowled between the tables she
could make out a certain type of _clink, clink_ noise, and, sure enough,
the amount of silverware on the tables appeared to be diminishing. After
watching carefully for a moment or two, she walked up behind Mr Stollop
and without ceremony pulled three silver spoons and a silver fork out of
his jacket pocket.

He spun around and then had the decency to look a bit embarrassed when
he saw that it was her.

Glenda didn’t have to open her mouth.

‘They’ve got so many,’ he protested. ‘Who needs all those knives and
forks?’

She reached into the man’s other pocket and pulled out three silver
knives and a silver salt cellar.

‘Well, there’s such a lot,’ said Stollop. ‘I didn’t think they’d miss
one or two.’

Glenda stared at him. The clinking of cutlery disappearing from the
tables had been a small but noticeable part of the ambient noise for
some time. She leaned down until her face was an inch away from his.

‘Mr Stollop. I wonder if that’s what Lord Vetinari is expecting you all
to do.’ His face went white. She nodded. ‘Just a word to the wise,’ she
said.

And words spread fast. As Glenda walked on she was gratified to hear
behind her, spreading along the tables, more clinking as a tide of
cutlery flowed swiftly out of pockets and back on to the tables. The
tinkling flew up and down the tables like little fairy bells.

Glenda smiled to herself and hurried off to dare everything. Or at least
everything that she dared.

Lord Vetinari stood up. For some inexplicable reason he needed no
fanfare. No ‘Would you put your hands together for’, no ‘Lend me your
ears’, no ‘Be upstanding for’. He simply stood up and the noise went
down. ‘Gentlemen, thank you for coming, and may I thank you,
Archchancellor Ridcully, for being such a generous host this evening.
May I also take this opportunity to put your minds at rest.

‘You see, there appears to be a rumour going around that I am against
the playing of football. Nothing could be further from the truth. I am
completely in favour of the traditional game of football and, indeed,
would be more than happy to see the game leave the fusty obscurity of
the back streets. Moreover, while I know you have your own schedule of
games, I personally propose a league, as it were, of senior teams, who
will valiantly vie with one another for a golden cup—’

There were cheers, of a beery nature.

‘—or should I say gold-ish cup—’

More cheers and more laughter.

‘—based on the recently discovered ancient urn known as The Tackle,
which, I am sure, you have all seen?’

General sniggering.

‘And if you haven’t, then your wives certainly have.’

Silence, followed by a tsunami of laughter which, like most tidal waves,
had a lot of froth on the top.

Glenda, lurking among the serving girls, was taken aback and affronted
at the same time, which was a bit of a squeeze, and wondered . . . So,
he’s planning something. They’re lapping it up along with the beer, too.

‘Never seen that before,’ said a wine waiter beside her.

‘Seen what before?’

‘Seen his lordship drinking. He doesn’t even drink wine.’ Glenda looked
at the skinny black figure and said, enunciating carefully, ‘When you
say he does not drink wine, do you mean he does not _drink_ wine, or he
does not drink . . . _wine_ ?’

‘He doesn’t have a bloody drink. That’s all I’m saying. That’s Lord
Vetinari, that is. He’s got ears everywhere.’

‘I can only see two, but he’s quite handsome, in a way.’

‘Oh, yeah, the ladies like him,’ said the waiter and sniffed. ‘Everyone
knows he’s got something going on with that vampire up in Uberwald. You
know? The one who invented the Temperance League? Vampires who don’t
suck blood? Hello, what’s this...?’

‘Let no one suppose that I am alone in a desire to see a better future
for this great game,’ Vetinari was saying. ‘Tonight, gentlemen, you will
see football, hear football and if you don’t duck, gentlemen, you might
even eat football. Here to display a marriage of football from the past
and I dare hope from the future, I present to you the first team of
Unseen University . . . Unseen Academicals!’

The candles went out, all at once, even the ones high up in the
chandelier; Glenda could see pale ghosts of smoke rising in the gloom.
Beside her, Nutt started counting under his breath. One, two . . . At
the count of three, the candles at the far end of the Hall burst into
life again, revealing Trevor Likely, wearing his most infectious grin.

‘Evenin’ all,’ he said, ‘an’ to you too, your lordship. My, but ain’t
you lookin’ quite the swell tonight.’ As breaths were indrawn all around
the Hall Trev pulled out his tin can, dropped it on to his foot and
flicked it up on to his shoulder, where it travelled around the back of
his neck and down his other arm.

‘At the start people used to kick rocks. That was sort of stupid. Then
they tried skulls, but you had to get ’em off people and that led to
fightin’.’

Beside Glenda, Nutt was still counting . . .

‘An’ now we’ve got what we call a ball,’ Trev continued, as his tin can
rolled and climbed around him, ‘but it ain’t all that, ’cos it’s a lump
of firewood. You can’t kick it ’less you’ve got big heavy boots on. It’s
slow. It’s heavy. It don’t live, gentlemen, and football should live . .
.’

The doors at the other end of the Hall opened and Bengo Macarona trotted
in, bouncing the new football. Its _gloing, gloing_ echoed around the
Hall. Some of the football captains had got to their feet, craning for a
better view.

‘And with the old football, you couldn’t do this,’ said Trev, and dived
for the floor as Macarona spun in one balletic movement and sent the
ball screaming up the aisle like an angry hornet.

Some scenes are only ever a memory rather than an experience, because
they happen too fast for immediate comprehension, and Glenda watched the
subsequent events on the internal screen of horrified recollection.
There were the two Archmages and the Tyrant of the city, watching with
frozen interest as the spinning globe hummed towards them, dragging
terrible consequences in its wake, and then there was the Librarian
rising out of nowhere, stopping it dead in mid air with a hand like a
shovel.

‘That’s us, gentlemen. And we’ll take on the first team that joins us on
the Hippo on Saturday at one o’clock. We’ll be training all around the
city. You can join in if you like. And don’t worry if you don’t have the
balls! We’ll give you some!’ The candle flames went out, which was just
as well because it is hard to riot in the dark. When the flames rose
again in their eerie way, shouting, arguments, laughter and even
discussion were taking place on every table. Quietly, too, the servants
went to and fro with their flagons. There always seemed to be another
one, Glenda noticed.

‘What have they been drinking?’ she whispered to the nearest waiter.

‘Winkle’s Old Peculiar, Mages’ Special. It’s top stuff.’

‘What about his lordship?’

He grinned. ‘Ha. Funny thing, some of ’em have asked me that, too. Just
the same as the guests. Poured out of the same flagon, just like for
everyone else, so it’s—’ He stopped.

Lord Vetinari was on his feet again. ‘Gentlemen, who among you will
accept the challenge? It need not be Dimwell, it need not be Dolly
Sisters, it need not be the Nappers, it just has to be a team,
gentlemen; the Unseen Academicals will take on the best of you, in the
best traditions of sportsmanship. I have set the date of the game for
Saturday. As far as the Academicals are concerned, you can watch them
train and Mister Stibbons will give you all the advice you may need.
This will be a fair match, gentlemen, you have my word on it.’ He
paused. ‘Did I mention that when it is presented, the very nearly gold
urn will be full of beer? The concept is quite popular, I gather, and I
predict that for a reasonable period the golden cup will quite
miraculously stay full of beer, no matter how many drink thereof. I
shall personally see to it.’

This got a big cheer, too. Glenda felt embarrassed for the men, but
angry at them too. They were being led by the nose. Or, more accurately,
by the beer.

Vetinari didn’t need whips and thumbscrews; he just needed Winkle’s Old
Peculiar, Mages’ Special, and he was leading them like little lambs –
and matching them pint for pint. How could he manage that? _Hey, look at
me_, he’s saying, _I’m just like you_, and he’s not like them at all.
They can’t have someone killed – she paused the thought to allow
consideration of some of the street fights when the pubs shut, and
amended it to – and get away with it.

‘My friend the Archchancellor has just informed me that, of course, the
Unseen Academicals will not on any account resort to magic! Nobody wants
to see a team of frogs, I am sure!’

There was general laughter at this lame joke, but the plain fact was
that right now they would have laughed at a paper bag.

‘This will be a proper football match, gentlemen, no trickery, only
skills,’ said the Patrician, his voice sharp again. ‘And on that note I
am decreeing a new code, based on the hallowed and traditional rules of
football so recently rediscovered, but including many familiar ones of
more recent usage. The office of referee is there to ensure obedience to
the rules. There must be rules, my friends. There must be. There is no
game without rules. No rules, no game.’

And there it was. No one else seemed to notice, through the fumes, the
razor blade glittering for a moment in the candyfloss. Rules? thought
Glenda. What are these new rules? I never knew there were rules. But
Lord Vetinari’s assistant, whoever he was, was quietly putting a few
sheets of paper in front of each man.

She remembered old Stollop’s bafflement when confronted with a mere
envelope. Some of them could read, surely? But how many of them could
read _now_ ?

His lordship had not finished. ‘Finally, gentlemen, I would like you to
peruse and sign the copies of the rules Mister Drumknott has given you.
And now I understand the Archchancellor and his colleagues are looking
forward to seeing you in the Uncommon Room for cigars and, I believe, an
exceptionally rare brandy!’

Well, that would about wrap it up, wouldn’t it? The footballers were
used to just beer. To be fair, they were used to lots of just beer.
Nevertheless, if she was any judge, and she was pretty good, they would
now be very nearly falling-down drunk. Although some seasoned captains
could stand up for some time while being, technically, falling-down
drunk. And there is nothing more embarrassing than seeing a falling-down
drunk except for when it is a falling-down drunk who is still standing
up. And that was amazing: the captains were the type of men who drank in
quarts, and could belch the national anthem and bend steel bars with
their teeth, or even somebody else’s teeth. Okay, they had never had
much in the way of schooling, but why did they have to be so dumb?

‘Tell me,’ murmured Ridcully to Vetinari as they watched the guests file
out unsteadily, ‘are you behind the discovery of the urn?’

‘We have known one another for quite some time, Mustrum, have we not,’
said Vetinari, ‘and as you know, I would not lie to you.’ He paused for
a moment and added, ‘Well, of course I _would_ lie to you in acceptable
circumstances, but on this occasion I can truthfully say that the
discovery of the urn came as a surprise to me as well, albeit a pleasant
one. Indeed, I assumed that you gentlemen had had something to do with
it.’

‘We didn’t even know it was there,’ said Ridcully. ‘Personally, I
suspect that religion is involved.’

Vetinari smiled. ‘Well, of course, classically, gods play with the fates
of men, so I suppose there is no reason why it shouldn’t be football. We
play and are played and the best we can hope for is to do it with
style.’

It might have been possible to cut the air in the Uncommon Room with a
knife, had anyone been able to find a knife. Or hold a knife the right
way if found. From the point of view of the wizards, it was business as
usual, but while a number of captains were being wheeled away in a
wheelbarrow, thoughtfully stationed there earlier in the evening, there
were enough visitors still standing to make for a damp, hot hubbub. In
an unregarded corner, the Patrician and the two Archchancellors had
found a space where they could relax unheeded in the big chairs and
settle a few matters.

‘You know, Henry,’ said Vetinari to the former Dean, ‘I think it would
be a very good idea if you were to referee the match.’

‘Oh, come on! I think that would be most unfair,’ said Ridcully.

‘To whom, pray?’

‘Well, er,’ said Ridcully. ‘There could be a question of rivalry between
wizards.’

‘But on the other hand,’ said Vetinari, his voice all smoothness, ‘it
might also be said that, for political reasons, another wizard would
have a vested interest in not allowing a fellow Archmage to be seen to
be bested by people who, despite their often amazing talents, skills,
features and histories, are nevertheless lumped together in the term
ordinary people.’

Ridcully raised a very big brandy glass in the general direction of the
edge of the universe. ‘I have every faith in my friend Henry,’ he said.
‘Even though he’s a little bit on the tubby side.’

‘Oh, unfair!’ snapped Henry. ‘A large man may be quite light on his
feet. Is there any chance of me having the poisoned dagger?’

‘In these modern times,’ said Vetinari, ‘I’m sorry to say that a whistle
of some sort will have to suffice.’

At which point someone tried to slap Vetinari on the back.

It happened with remarkable speed and ended possibly even faster than it
began, with Vetinari still seated in his chair with his beer mug in one
hand and the man’s wrist gripped tightly at head height. He let go and
said, ‘Can I help you, sir?’

‘You’re that Lord Veterinary, ain’t ya? I seed you on them postage
stamps.’

Ridcully glanced up. Some of Lord Vetinari’s clerks were briskly heading
towards them, along with some of the slurred speaker’s friends, who
could be defined at this point as people who were slightly more sober
than he was and right now were sobering up very, very fast, because when
you have just slapped a tyrant on the back you need all the friends you
can get.

Vetinari nodded at his gentlemen, who evaporated back into the crowd,
and then he snapped his fingers at one of the waiters. ‘A chair here,
please, for my new friend.’

‘Are you sure?’ said Ridcully, as a chair was pushed under the man who,
by happy coincidence, was falling backwards in any case.

‘I mean,’ said the man, ‘everary one saysh you’re a bit of a wnacker,
but I saysh you’re awright over thish football fing. ’Sno future in jus’
shlogging away. I should know, I got kicked inna head quite a few
times.’

‘Really?’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘And what is your name?’

‘Swithin, shir,’ said the man.

‘Any other name, by any chance?’ said Vetinari.

‘Dustworthy,’ he said. He raised a finger in a kind of salute. ‘Captain,
the Cockbill Boars.’

‘Ah, you aren’t having a good season,’ said Vetinari. ‘You need fresh
blood in the squad, especially since Jimmy Wilkins got put into the
Tanty after eating someone’s nose. Naphill walked all over you because
you lost your backbone when both of the Pinchpenny brothers were taken
to the Lady Sybil, and you’ve been stuck down in the mud for three
seasons. Okay, everyone says that Harry Capstick is making a very good
showing since you bought him from Treacle Mine Tuesday for two crates of
Winkle’s Old Peculiar and a sack of pork scratchings, which is not bad
for a man with a wooden leg, but there’s never anyone in support.’

A circle of silence spread outwards from Vetinari and the swaying
Swithin. Ridcully’s mouth had dropped open and Henry’s brandy glass
remained half empty, an unusual occurrence for a glass that’s been in
the hands of a wizard for more than fifteen seconds.

‘Also, I’m hearing that your pies are leaving a lot to be desired, such
as dead, cooked, organic content,’ continued Vetinari. ‘Can’t get the
Shove behind you when the pies are seen to walk about.’

‘My ladsh,’ said Swithin, ‘are the besht there ish. It’sh not their
fault they’re up againsht better people. They never getsh a chance to
play shomeone they can beat. They alwaysh gives it one hundred and
twenty pershent and you can’t give more than that. Anyhow, how come you
know all this shtuff ? It’s not like we’re big in the league.’

‘Oh, I take an interest,’ said Vetinari. ‘I believe that football is a
lot like life.’

‘There ish that, shir, there ish that. You does your besht and then
shomeone kicksh you inna fork.’

‘Then I strongly advise you to take an interest in our new football,’
said Vetinari, ‘which will be about speed, skill and thinking.’

‘Oh, yeah, right, I can do all them,’ said Swithin, at which point he
fell off his chair.

‘Does this poor man have any friends here?’ said Vetinari, turning to
the crowd.

There was some diffidence among them concerning whether or not it was a
good idea to be friends with Swithin at this point.

Vetinari raised his voice: ‘I would just like a couple of people to take
him back to his home. I would like them to put him to bed and see that
no trouble comes to him. Perhaps they ought to stay with him until
morning too, because he just might try to commit suicide when he wakes
up.’

‘New Dawn For Football’ said the _Times_ when Glenda picked it up the
next morning. As was its wont when it was reporting something it thought
was particularly important, the paper’s headline was followed by two
others in descending sizes of font: ‘Footballers Sign Up For The New
Game’ was on the next line down and then on the next ‘New Balls A
Success’.

To Glenda’s surprise and dismay, Juliet still had a place on the front
page, with the picture of her used smaller than yesterday, under the
headline ‘Mystery Lady Vanishes’, and a paragraph which simply said that
no one had seen the mystery model, Jewels, since her debut (Glenda had
to look this one up) two days ago. Honestly, she thought, not finding
somebody is news? And she was surprised that there was room for even
this, since most of the front page was dedicated to the football, but
the _Times_ liked to start several stories on the front page and then,
just when they were getting interesting, whisk them off to page 35, or
somewhere, to end their days behind the crossword and the permanent
advert for surgical trusses.

The leader column inside was headed ‘Score One For Vetinari’. Glenda
never normally read the leader column because there was only a certain
number of times she was prepared to see the word ‘however’ used in a
120-word article.

She read the front-page story at first glumly and then with rising
anger. Vetinari had done it. He had got them drunk and the fools had
signed away their football for a pale variety cooked up by the palace
and the university. Of course, minds are never quite that simple. She
had to admit to herself that she hated the stupidity of the present
game. She hated the idiot fighting and mindless shoving, but it was hers
to hate. It was something that people themselves had put together and
rickety and stupid though it was, it was theirs. And now the nobs were
again picking up something that wasn’t theirs and saying how wonderful
it was. The old football was going to be banned. That was another little
razor blade in Lord Vetinari’s alcoholic candyfloss.

She was also deeply suspicious about the urn, the picture of which, for
some reason, was still on her kitchen table. Since what was claimed to
be the original rules was written in an ancient language, how could
anyone other than a nob know what they meant? She ran her eye down the
description of the new rules. Some of the rules of old street football
had survived in there like monsters from another era. She recognized one
that she had always liked: the ball shall be called the ball. The ball
is the ball that is played as the ball by any three consecutive players,
at which point it is the ball. She’d loved it when she first read it for
the sheer stupidity of its phraseology. Apparently, it had been added on
a day, centuries ago, when an unfortunately severed head had rolled into
play and had rather absent-mindedly replaced the ball currently in play
on account of some body, formerly belonging to the head, now lying on
the original ball. That kind of thing stuck in the memory, especially
because after the match the owner of the head was credited with scoring
the winning goal.

That rule and a few others stood out as remnants of a vanished glory in
the list of Lord Vetinari’s new regulations. A few nods at the old game
had been left in as a kind of sop to public opinion. He should not be
allowed to get away with it. Just because he was a tyrant and capable of
having just about anybody killed on a whim, people acted as if they were
scared of him. Someone ought to tell him off. The world had turned
upside down several times. She hadn’t quite got her bearings, but making
sure that Lord Vetinari did not get away with it was suddenly very
important. It was up to the people to decide when they were being stupid
and old-fashioned; it wasn’t up to nobs to tell them what to do.

With great determination she put on her coat over her apron and, after a
moment’s thought, took two freshly made Jammy Devils from her cupboard.
Where a battering ram cannot work, really good short-crust pastry can
often break through.

In the Oblong Office, the Patrician’s personal secretary looked at the
stopwatch.

‘Fifty seconds slower than your personal best, I’m afraid, my lord.’

‘Proof indeed that strong drink is a mocker, Drumknott,’ said Vetinari
severely.

‘I suspect that no further proof is needed,’ said Drumknott, with his
little secretarial smile.

‘Although I would, in fairness, point out that Charlotte of the _Times_
is emerging as the most fearsome crossword compiler of all time, and
they are a pretty fearsome lot. But her? Initialisms, odds and evens,
hidden words, container reverses, and now diagonals! How does she do
it?’

‘Well, you did it, sir.’

‘I undid it. That is much easier.’ Vetinari raised a finger. ‘It is that
woman who runs the pet shop in Pellicool Steps, depend upon it. She
hasn’t been mentioned as a winner recently. She must be compiling the
things.’

‘The female mind is certainly a devious one, my lord.’

Vetinari looked at his secretary in surprise. ‘Well, of course it is. It
has to deal with the male one. I think—’

There was a gentle tap at one of the doors. The Patrician turned back to
the _Times_ while Drumknott slipped out of the room. After some
whispered exchanges, the secretary returned.

‘It would appear that a young woman has got in via the back gate by
bribing the guards, sir. They accepted the bribes, as per your standing
orders, and she has been shown into the anteroom, which she will soon
find is locked. She wishes to see you because, she says, she has a
complaint. She is a maid.’

Lord Vetinari looked over the top of the paper. ‘Tell her I can’t help
her with that. Perhaps, oh, I don’t know, a different perfume would
help?’

‘I mean she is a member of the serving classes, sir. Her name is Glenda
Sugarbean.’

‘Tell her—’ Vetinari hesitated, and then smiled. ‘Ah, yes, Sugarbean.
Did she bribe the guards with food? Something baked, perhaps?’

‘Well done, sir! A large Jammy Devil apiece. May I ask how—?’

‘She is a cook, Drumknott, not a maid. Show her in, by all means.’

The secretary looked a little resentful. ‘Are you sure this is wise,
sir? I have already told the guards to throw the foodstuffs away.’

‘Food cooked by a Sugarbean? You may have committed a crime against high
art, Drumknott. I shall see her now.’

‘I must point out that you have a full schedule this morning, my lord.’

‘Quite so. It is your job to point this out, and I respect that. But I
did not return until half past four this morning and I distinctly
remember stubbing my toe on the stairs. I am as drunk as a skunk,
Drumknott, which of course means skunks are just as drunk as I. I must
say the term is unfamiliar to me, and I had not thought hitherto of
skunks in this context, but Mustrum Ridcully was kind enough to
enlighten me. Allow me, then, a moment of indulgence.’

‘Well, you are the Patrician, sir,’ said Drumknott. ‘You can do as you
please.’

‘That is kind of you to say so, but I did not, in fact, need reminding,’
said Vetinari, with what was almost certainly a smile.

When the severe thin man opened the door, it was too late to flee. When
he said, ‘His lordship will see you now, Miss Sugarbean,’ it was too
late to faint. What had she been thinking of ? Had she been thinking at
all?

Glenda followed the man into the next room, which was oak panelled and
sombre and the most uncluttered office she had ever seen. The room of
the average wizard was so stuffed with miscellaneous things that the
walls were invisible. Here, even the desk was clear, apart from a pot of
quill pens, an inkwell, an open copy of the _Ankh-Morpork Times_ and –
her eye stayed fixed on this one, unable to draw itself away – a mug
with the slogan ‘To the world’s Greatest Boss’. It was so out of place
it might have been an intrusion from another universe.

A chair was quietly placed behind her. This was just as well, because
when the man at the desk looked up she sat down abruptly.

Vetinari pinched the bridge of his nose and sighed. ‘Miss . . .
Sugarbean, there are whole rooms in this palace full of people who want
to see me, and they are powerful and important people, or at least they
think they are. Yet Mister Drumknott has kindly inserted in my schedule,
ahead of the Postmaster General and the Mayor of Sto Lat, a meeting with
a young cook with her coat on over her apron and an intent, it says
here, of “having it out with me”. And this is because I take notice of
incongruity, and you, Miss Sugarbean, are incongruous. What is it you
want?’

‘Who says I want anything?’

‘Everyone wants something when they are in front of me, Miss Sugarbean,
even if it is only to be somewhere else.’

‘All right! You made all the captains drunk last night and got them to
sign that letter in the paper!’

The stare did not flicker. That was much worse than, well, anything.

‘Young lady, drink levels all mankind. It is the ultimate democrat, if
you like that sort of thing. A drunk beggar is as drunk as a lord, and
so is a lord. And have you ever noticed that all drunks can understand
one another, no matter how drunk they are and how different their native
tongues? I take it for a certainty that you are a relation to Augusta
Sugarbean?’ The question, tagged on to the praises of inebriation, hit
her between the eyes, scattering her thoughts.

‘What? Oh. Well, yes. That’s right. She was my grandmother.’

‘And she was a cook at the Guild of Assassins when she was younger?’

‘That’s right. She always made a joke about how she wouldn’t let them
use any—’ She stopped quickly, but Vetinari finished the sentence for
her.

‘—of her cakes to poison people. And we always obeyed, too, because as
you surely know, miss, no one likes to upset a good cook. Is she still
with us?’

‘She passed on two years ago, sir.’

‘But since you are a Sugarbean, I assume you have acquired a few more
grandmothers as a replacement? Your grandmother was always a stalwart in
the community and you must take all those little dainties for someone?’

‘You can’t know that, you’re only guessing. But all right, they’re for
all the old ladies that don’t get out much. Anyway, it’s a perk.’

‘Oh, but of course. Every job has its little perks. Why, I don’t expect
Drumknott here has bought a paperclip in his life, eh, Drumknott?’

The secretary, tidying papers in the background, gave a wan little
smile.

‘Look, I only take leftovers—’ Glenda began, but this was waved away.

‘You are here about the football,’ said Vetinari. ‘You were at the
dinner last night, but the university likes its serving girls to be tall
and I have an eye for such things. Therefore, I assume you made it your
business to be there without bothering your superiors. Why?’

‘You’re taking their football away from them!’

The Patrician steepled his fingers and rested his chin on them while he
looked at her.

He’s trying to make me nervous, she thought. It’s working, oh, it’s
working.

Vetinari filled in the silence. ‘Your grandmother used to do people’s
thinking for them. That trait runs in families, always on the female
side. Capable women, scurrying about in a world where everyone else
seems to be seven years old and keeps on falling over in the playground,
picking them up and watching them run right out there again. I imagine
you run the Night Kitchen? Too many people in the big one. You want
spaces you can control, beyond the immediate reach of fools.’

If he’d added ‘Am I right?’ like some windbag seeking applause, she
would have hated him. But he was reading her from the inside of her
head, in a calm, matter-of-fact way. She had to suppress a shiver,
because it was all true.

‘I’m taking nothing from anybody, Miss Sugarbean. I am simply changing
the playground,’ the man went on. ‘What skill is there in the mob
pushing and shoving? It is nothing more than a way of bringing on a
sweat. No, we must move with the times. I know the _Times_ moves with
me. The captains will moan, no doubt, but they are getting old. Dying in
the game is a romantic idea when you are young, but when you are older
the boot is in the other ear. They know this, even if they won’t admit
it, and while they will protest, they will take care not to be taken
seriously. In fact, far from taking, I am giving much. Acceptance,
recognition, a certain standing, a gold-ish cup and the chance to keep
what remains of their teeth.’

All she could manage after this was, ‘All right, but you tricked them!’

‘Really? They did not have to drink to excess, did they?’

‘You knew they would!’

‘No. I _suspected_ they might. They could have been more cautious. They
_should_ have been more cautious. I’d prefer to say that I led them
along the correct path with a little guile rather than drove them along
it with sticks. I possess many types of stick, Miss Sugarbean.’

‘And you’ve been spying on me! You knew about the dainties.’

‘Spying? Madam, it was once said of a great prince that his every
thought was of his people. Like him, I watch over my people. I am just
better at it, that’s all. As for the dainties business, that was a
simple deduction from the known facts of human nature.’

There was a lot that Glenda wanted to say, but in some very definite way
she sensed that the interview – or at least the part of it that involved
her opening her mouth – was over. Nevertheless, she said, ‘Why aren’t
you drunk?’

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘You must weigh about half of what they do and all of ’em went home in
wheelbarrows. You drank as much as them and you look fresh as a daisy.
What is the trick? Did you get the wizards to magic the beer out of your
stomach?’

She had stopped pushing her luck a long time ago. Now it was out of
control, like a startled carthorse that can’t stop because of the huge
load bouncing and rumbling along behind it.

Vetinari frowned. ‘My dear lady, anyone drunk enough to let wizards, who
themselves had just been partaking copiously of the fruit of the vine, I
might add, take anything out of him would already be so drunk as to be
dead. To forestall your next comment, the hop is also, technically, a
vine. I am, in fact, drunk. Is this not so, Drumknott?’

‘You did indeed consume some twelve pints of very strong malted
beverage, sir. Technically, you must be drunk.’

‘Idiosyncratically put, Drumknott. Thank you.’

‘You don’t act drunk!’

‘No, but I do act sober quite well, don’t you think? And I must confess
that this morning’s crossword was something of a tussle. Procatalepsis
and pleonasm in one day? I had to use the dictionary! The woman is a
fiend! Nevertheless, thank you for coming, Miss Sugarbean. I recall your
grandmother’s bubble and squeak with great fondness. If she had been a
sculptress, it would have been an exquisite statue, with no arms and an
enigmatic smile. It is such a shame that some masterpieces are so
transitory.’

The proud cook in Glenda rose unstoppably. ‘But she passed the recipe on
to me.’

‘A legacy better than jewels,’ said Vetinari, nodding.

Actually a few jewels would not have gone amiss, Glenda reflected. But
there was a secret of Bubble and Squeak, of course, right out there in
the open where everyone could miss it. And as for the Truth of
Salmagundi . . .

‘I believe this audience is at an end, Miss Sugarbean,’ said Vetinari.
‘I have so much to do and so have you, I am sure.’ He picked up his pen
and turned his attention to the documents in front of him. ‘Goodbye,
Miss Sugarbean.’

And that was it. Somehow, she was at the door, and it had almost closed
behind her when a voice said, ‘And thank you for your kindnesses to
Nutt.’

The door clicked shut, nearly hitting her in the face as she spun round.

‘Was that a wise thing for me to have said, do you think?’ said
Vetinari, when she had gone.

‘Possibly not, sir, but she will merely assume it is her that we are
watching,’ said Drumknott smoothly.

‘Possibly we should. That’s a Sugarbean woman for you, Drumknott, little
domestic slaves until they think someone has been wronged and then they
go to war like Queen Ynci of Lancre, with chariot wheels spinning and
arms and legs all over the place.’

‘And no father,’ observed Drumknott. ‘Not very good for a child in those
days.’

‘Only served to make her tougher. One can only hope she doesn’t take it
into her head to enter politics.’

‘Is that not what she is doing now, sir?’

‘Well noted, Drumknott. Do I _appear_ drunk?’

‘In my opinion no, sir, but you seem unusually . . . talkative.’

‘Coherently?’

‘To the minutest scruple, sir. The Postmaster is waiting, sir, and some
of the guild leaders want to talk to you urgently.’

‘I suspect they want to play football?’

‘Yes, sir. They intend to form teams. I cannot for the life of me
understand why.’

Vetinari put down his pen. ‘Drumknott, if you saw a ball lying
invitingly on the ground, would you kick it?’

The secretary’s forehead wrinkled. ‘How would the invitation be couched,
sir?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘Would it be, for example, a written note attached to the ball by person
or persons unknown?’

‘I was rather inclining to the idea that you might perhaps feel simply
that the whole world was silently willing you to give said ball a hearty
kick?’

‘No, sir. There are too many variables. Possibly an enemy or japester
might have assumed that I would take some action of the kind and made
the ball out of concrete or similar material, in the hope I might do
myself a serious or humorous injury. So, I would check first.’

‘And then, if all was in order, you would kick the ball?’

‘To what purpose or profit, sir?’

‘Interesting question. I suppose for the joy of seeing it fly.’

Drumknott seemed to consider this for a while, and then shook his head.
‘I am sorry, sir, but you have lost me at this point.’

‘Ah, you are a pillar of rock in a world of changes, Drumknott. Well
done.’

‘I was wondering if I could just add something, sir,’ said the secretary
solemnly.

‘The floor is yours, Drumknott.’

‘I would not like it thought that I do not buy my own paperclips, sir. I
enjoy owning my own paperclips. It means that they are mine. I thought
it helpful I should tell you that in a measured and nonconfrontational
way.’

Vetinari looked at the ceiling for a few moments and then said: ‘Thank
you for your frankness. I shall consider the record straightened and the
matter closed.’

‘Thank you, sir.’

Sator Square was where the city went when it was upset, baffled or
fearful. People who had no real idea why they were doing so congregated
to listen to other people who also did not know anything, on the basis
that ignorance shared is ignorance doubled. There were clusters of
people there this morning and several scratch teams, for it is written,
or more probably scrawled on a wall somewhere, that wherever two or more
are gathered together, at least one will have something to kick. Tin
cans and tightly wound balls of rag were annoying adults on all sides,
but as Glenda hurried nearer, the big doors of the university opened and
Ponder Stibbons stepped out, somewhat inexpertly bouncing one of the
wretched new leather balls. _Gloing!_ Silence clanged, as rolling cans
rattled on unheeded. All eyes were on the wizard and on the ball. He
threw it down and there was a double _gloing!_ as it bounced off the
stones. And then he kicked it. It was a bit wussy as kicks went, that
kick, but no one in the square had ever kicked anything even one tenth
as far, and every male chased after it, propelled by ancient instinct.

They’ve won, Glenda thought glumly. A ball that goes _gloing!_ when
others go _clunk_ . . . Well, where’s the contest?

She hurried on to the back entrance. In a world that was getting too
complicated, where she could barge in on the black-hearted Tyrant and
walk out unscathed, she needed a place to go that wasn’t spinning. The
Night Kitchen was as familiar as her bedroom, _her_ place, under _her_
control. She could face anything there.

There was a figure lounging against the wall by the rubbish bins, and
for some reason she identified it right away, despite the heavy cloak
and the hat pulled down over the eyes; no one she had ever met could
relax as perfectly as Pepe.

‘Wotcher, Glenda,’ said a voice from under the hat.

‘What are you doing here?’ she said.

‘Do you know how hard it is to find somebody in this city when you can’t
tell anyone what they look like and aren’t really sure you can remember
their name?’ said Pepe. ‘Where’s Jools?’

‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘I haven’t seen her since last night.’

‘It might be a good idea to find her before other people do,’ said Pepe.

‘What people?’ said Glenda.

Pepe shrugged. ‘_Everybody_,’ he said. ‘They’re mostly looking in the
dwarf districts right now, but it can only be a matter of time. We can’t
move down at the shop for them and it was all I could do to sneak out.’

‘What are they after her for?’ said Glenda, panic rising. ‘I saw in the
paper that people were trying to find her, but she hasn’t done anything
wrong!’

‘I don’t think you exactly grasp what’s going on,’ said the (possible)
dwarf. ‘They want to find her to ask her a lot of questions.’

‘Has this got anything to do with Lord Vetinari?’ said Glenda
suspiciously.

‘I wouldn’t have thought so,’ said Pepe.

‘What sort of questions, then?’

‘Oh, you know – What is your favourite colour? What do you like to eat?
Are you an item with anybody? What advice do you have for young people
today? Do you wax? Where do you get your hair done? What is your
favourite spoon?’

‘I don’t think she’s got a favourite spoon,’ said Glenda, waiting for
the world to make some sense.

Pepe patted her on the shoulder. ‘Look, she’s on the front page of the
paper, isn’t she? And the _Times_ keeps on at us about wanting to do a
lifestyle profile of her. That might not actually be a bad thing, but
it’s up to you.’

‘I don’t think she’s got a lifestyle,’ said Glenda, a little bewildered.
‘She’s never said. And she doesn’t wax. She hardly even dusts. Anyway,
just tell them all that she doesn’t want to talk to anybody.’

Pepe’s expression went strange for a moment, then he said with care,
like a man, or dwarf, struggling to be heard across a cultural divide,
‘Do you think I was talking about furniture?’

‘Well, what else? And I don’t think her housework is anyone else’s
business.’

‘Don’t you understand? She’s popular, and the more we tell people they
can’t talk to her, the more they want to, and the more you say no the
more interested they become. People want to know all about her,’ said
Pepe.

‘Like what her favourite spoon is?’ said Glenda.

‘I might have been a bit ironic,’ said Pepe. ‘But there’s newspaper
writers all over the city looking for her and _Bu-bubble_ want to do a
two-page spread on her.’ He paused. ‘That means they’ll write about her
and it’ll take two pages,’ he volunteered helpfully. ‘The Low King of
the dwarfs has said that she is an icon for our times, according to
_Satblatt_.’

‘What’s _Satblatt_ ?’ said Glenda.

‘Oh, the dwarf newspaper,’ said Pepe. ‘You’ll probably never see it.’

‘But she was just in a fashion show!’ wailed Glenda. ‘She was just
walking up and down! I’m sure she doesn’t want to get involved in all
that sort of thing.’

Pepe gave her a sharp look. ‘Are you?’ he said.

And then she thought, really thought about Juliet, who would read
_Bu-bubble_ from cover to cover, wouldn’t generally go near the _Times_,
but would absorb all kinds of rubbish about frivolous and silly people.
People that glittered. ‘I don’t know where she is,’ she said. ‘I really
haven’t seen her since yesterday.’

‘Ah, a mystery disappearance,’ said Pepe. ‘Look, we’re already learning
about this sort of thing down at the shop. Can we go somewhere a bit
more private? I hope none of them followed me up here.’

‘Well, I can smuggle you in through the back entrance, as long as there
isn’t a bledlow around,’ said Glenda.

‘Fine by me. I’m used to that sort of thing.’

She led him through the doorway and into the maze of cellars and yards
that contrasted rather interestingly with the fine frontage of Unseen
University.

‘Got anything to drink?’ said Pepe behind her.

‘Water!’ snapped Glenda.

‘I’ll drink water when fish climb out of it to take a piss, but thank
you all the same,’ said Pepe.

And then Glenda caught the smell of baking coming from the Night
Kitchen. She was the only one who _baked_ in _her_ kitchen! No one else
was supposed to bake in _her_ kitchen. Baking was her responsibility.
Hers. She ran up the steps with Pepe behind her and noted that the
mystery cook had yet to master the second most important rule of
cooking, which was to tidy things up afterwards. The place was a mess.
There were even lumps of dough on the floor. In fact, it looked as
though it had been possessed by some kind of frenzy. And in the middle
of it all, curled up on Glenda’s battered and slightly rancid old
armchair, was Juliet.

‘Just like _Sleeping Beauty_, ain’t it?’ said Pepe behind her.

Glenda ignored him and hurried along the rows of ovens. ‘She’s been
baking pies. What on earth did she want to come along and bake pies for?
She’s never been any good at baking pies.’ That’s because I’ve never let
her bake a pie, she told herself. _That’s because as soon as she found
anything difficult you took it away and did it yourself_, her inner
voice scolded.

Glenda opened oven door after oven door. They had arrived just in time.
By the smell of it, a couple of dozen assorted pies were cooked to a
turn.

‘How about a drink?’ said Pepe, in whom thirst sprang eternal. ‘I’m sure
there’s brandy. Every kitchen has some brandy in it somewhere.’

He watched as Glenda pulled the pies out, using her apron to protect her
hands. Pepe regarded the pies with the indifference of a man who likes
to drink his meals and listened to Glenda’s sotto voce monologue as pie
after pie was laid out on the table.

‘I never told her to do this. Why did she do this?’ Because I did tell
her to do this, sort of, that’s why. ‘And these are not half bad pies,’
she said more loudly. In surprise.

Juliet opened her eyes, looked around blearily, and then her face
contorted in panic.

‘It’s okay, I’ve taken them all out,’ said Glenda. ‘Well done.’

‘I didn’t know what else to do and Trev was busy with the footballing
and I thought they would be wantin’ pies tomorrow and I thought I better
do some,’ said Juliet. ‘Sorry.’

Glenda took a step backwards. How to begin? she wondered. How to unravel
it and then ravel it all back up again in a better shape because she had
been wrong? Juliet hadn’t just walked up and down with clothes on, she
had become some kind of a dream. A dream of clothes. Sparkling and alive
and tantalizingly possible. And in Glenda’s memory of the fashion show,
she literally shone, as if being lit from the inside. It was a kind of
magic and it shouldn’t be making pies. She cleared her throat.

‘I’ve taught you a lot of things, haven’t I, Juliet?’ said Glenda.

‘Yes, Glenda,’ said Juliet.

‘And they’ve always been useful, haven’t they?’

‘Yes, Glenda. I remember it was you that said I should always keep my
hand on my ha’penny and I’m very glad that you did.’

There was a strange noise from Pepe, and Glenda, feeling her face go
red, didn’t dare look at him.

‘Then I’ve got a bit more advice for you, Juliet.’

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘First, never, ever apologize for anything that doesn’t need apologizing
for,’ said Glenda. ‘And especially never apologize for just being
yourself.’

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘Got that?’

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘No matter what happens, always remember that you now know how to make a
good pie.’

‘Yes, Glenda.’

‘Pepe is here because _Bu-bubble_ wants to write something about you,’
said Glenda. ‘Your picture was in the paper again this morning and—’
Glenda stopped. ‘She is going to be all right, isn’t she?’ she said.

Pepe paused in the act of surreptitiously removing a bottle from a
cupboard. ‘You can trust me and Madame on that,’ he said. ‘Only people
who are very trustworthy would dare to look as untrustworthy as me and
Madame.’

‘And all she will have to do is show off clothes— Don’t drink that,
that’s cider vinegar!’

‘I’m only drinking the cider bit,’ said Pepe. ‘Yes, all she’ll have to
do is show off clothes, but to judge from the mob back at the shop
there’s going to be people who want her to show off shoes, hats,
hairstyles...’

‘No hanky panky,’ said Glenda.

‘I don’t think you’ll find, anywhere in the world, a greater expert in
both hanky and panky than Madame. In fact, I would be surprised if you,
Glenda, knew one hundredth of the hanky and panky that she does,
especially as she invented quite a lot of it herself. And since we’ll
notice it when we see it, we’ll keep an eye on her.’

‘And she’s got to eat proper meals and get a good night’s sleep,’ said
Glenda.

Pepe nodded, although she expected that both those concepts were quite
alien to him.

‘And paid,’ she added.

‘We’ll cut her in on the profits if she works exclusively for us,’ said
Pepe. ‘Madame wants to talk to you about that.’

‘Yes, someone might want to pay her more than you do,’ said Glenda.

‘My, my, my. How fast we learn. I’m sure Madame will have great fun
talking to you.’

Juliet looked from one to the other, sleep still wreathing her face.
‘You want me to go back to the shop?’

‘I don’t want you to do anything,’ said Glenda. ‘It’s up to you, okay?
It’s just up to you, but it seems to me that if you stay here then
basically what you’ll be doing is pies.’

‘Well, not just pies,’ said Juliet.

‘Well, no, fair enough, there are also flans, bubble and squeak and
assorted late-night dainties,’ said Glenda. ‘But you know what I mean.
On the other hand, you could go and show off all these fancy clothes and
go to lots of fancy places a long, long way from here and see a lot of
new people and you’d know that if it all goes pear-shaped you could
always make it pie-shaped.’

‘Hah, nice one,’ said Pepe, who’d found another bottle.

‘I really would like to go,’ said Juliet.

‘Then go _now_. I mean right _now_, or at least as soon as he’s finished
drinking the ketchup.’

‘But I’ll have to go back for my stuff!’

Glenda reached down inside her vest and pulled out a burgundy-coloured
booklet with the seal of Ankh-Morpork on it.

‘What’s that?’ said Juliet.

‘Your bank book. Your money’s safe in the bank and you can take it out
any time you want.’

Juliet turned the bank book over and over in her hands. ‘I don’t fink
anyone in my family’s ever been in a bank except for Uncle Geoffrey and
they caught up with ’im even before he got home.’

‘Keep quiet about it. Don’t go home. Buy yourself lots of new stuff. Get
yourself sorted out and then go back and see your dad and everybody when
you have. The point is, even if you don’t go right away, in your mind
you should always be going. But the important thing is to go right now.
Move out. Get on. Climb up. All the things I should have done.’

‘What about Trev?’ said Juliet.

Glenda had to think about that. ‘How are things with you and Trev, then?
I saw you two talking last night.’

‘Talking is allowed,’ said Juliet defensively. ‘Anyhow, he was only
telling me how he was going to get himself a better job.’

‘Doing what?’ said Glenda. ‘I’ve never seen him doing a straight day’s
work in all the years I’ve known him.’

‘He says he’s going to find something,’ said Juliet. ‘He said Nutt told
’im to. He said Nutt said that when Trev finds out who Trev is, like, he
will, like, know what he can do. So I told ’im he was Trevor Likely, and
he said that was, you know, helpful.’

I’m stuck, aren’t I? Glenda told herself. I’m talking about changing and
getting out, so I have to allow that maybe he’s going to, too. Aloud,
she said, ‘It’s up to you. It’s all up to you, but just mind that he
keeps his hands to himself.’

‘He always keeps his hands to himself,’ said Juliet. ‘It’s a bit
worryin’. I’ve never had to think about kneeing him in the tonker, not
once.’

There was a strangled laugh from Pepe, who had just discovered the
wow-wow sauce. The bottle was almost empty and, in theory, he should
have no stomach left.

‘Never, ever?’ said Glenda, mystified at this unnatural history.

‘No, he’s always very polite and just a bit sad.’

That must mean he’s planning something, Glenda’s inner self provided.
She said, ‘Well, it’s up to you. I can’t help here, but remember, you’ve
always got your knee.’

‘And what about . . . ?’ Juliet began.

‘Look,’ said Glenda firmly, ‘either you go off now and see the world and
earn lots of money and get your picture in the papers and all of the
other things I know you would really like to do, or you have to sort it
out for yourself.’

‘We’re going to be here for some time,’ said Pepe. ‘You know, this sauce
would be nice with a little bit of vodka in it. It really would give it
a little bit of zest. A little bit of sparkle. Come to think of it, a
lot of vodka would be even better.’

‘But I love ’im!’ Juliet wailed.

‘That’s all right, then, stay here,’ said Glenda. ‘Have you even
kissed?’

‘No! He never quite gets round to it.’

‘Perhaps he’s one of those gentlemen who don’t like the ladies,’ said
Pepe primly.

‘And we could really do without your input,’ snapped Glenda, turning on
him.

‘I mean, for some of the others, like Rotten Johnny, I nearly wear my
knee out, but Trev’s just . . . sweet, all the time.’

‘Look, I know you told me to keep out of this, and I know I’ve been a
terrible sinner in my time and hope to remain so, but I have been around
the houses more times than a postman and the reason for this imp ass is
obvious,’ Pepe volunteered. ‘He’s got the nous to see that she’s so
beautiful that she should be painted standing on some shell somewhere
without her vest on and little fat pink babies inexplicably zooming
around all over the place and he’s some kid with nothing more than a bit
of street smarts. I mean, it’s pointless, isn’t it? He’s not going to
stand a chance and he knows it, even if he doesn’t know he knows it.’

‘I’d give him a kiss if he wanted one and would definitely not knee him
in the tonker,’ said Juliet.

‘You have to sort it out,’ said Glenda. ‘I can’t sort it out for you. If
I tried, it would get sorted out all wrong.’

‘But—’ Juliet began.

‘No, that’s it,’ said Glenda. ‘Off you go, buy yourself lots of nice
stuff – it’s your money. And if you don’t look after her, Mister Pepe, a
knee would only be the start.’

Pepe nodded and very gently tugged Juliet away and down the stone steps.

Now what would I do at this point if I were in a romantic novel? Glenda
said to herself as the footsteps died away. Her reading had left her
pretty much an expert on what to do if you were in a romantic novel,
although one of the things that really annoyed her about romantic
novels, as she had confided to Mr Wobble, was that no one did any
cooking in them. After all, cooking was important. Would it hurt to have
a pie-making sequence? Would a novel called _Pride and Buns_ be totally
out of the question? Even a few tips on how to make fairy cakes would
help, and be pretty much in period as well. She’d be a little happier
if, even, the lovers could be thrown into the mixing bowl of life. At
least it would be some acknowledgement that people actually ate food.

Around about now she knew, and knew all through her body, that she
should be dissolving into a flood of tears. She started cleaning up the
floor. Then she cleaned up the ovens. She always left them sparkling,
but that was no reason not to clean them again. She used an old
toothbrush to ease minute amounts of dirt from odd corners, scoured
every pot with fine sand, emptied the grates, riddled the cinders, swept
the floor, tied two brooms together to dislodge the spider’s webs of
years from the high wall, and scrubbed again until the soapy water
poured down the stone stairs and washed away the footprints.

Oh, yes – and one other thing. There were some anchovies on the freezing
slab. She warmed up a couple and went to the large three-legged cauldron
in the corner of the kitchen where last night she had chalked the words
‘Do Not Touch’. She took off the lid and peered into its depths. The
crab that Verity Pushpram had given her last night, which seemed a very
long time ago now, waved its eyeballs at her.

‘I wonder what would have happened if I had left the lid off ?’ she
said. ‘I wonder how fast crabs learn?’

She dropped in the soggy anchovies, which seemed to meet with crabby
approval. With that done, she stood in the middle of the kitchen and
looked for something else to clean. The black iron would never shine,
but every surface had been scrubbed and dried. As for the plates, you
could eat your dinner off them. If you wanted a job done properly, you
had to do it yourself. Juliet’s version of cleanliness was next to
godliness, which was to say it was erratic, past all understanding and
was seldom seen.

Something brushed against her face. She absent-mindedly swiped at it and
found her fingers holding a black feather. Those wretched things in the
pipes. Someone ought to do something about them. She took her longest
broom and banged on a pipe. ‘Go on! Get out of there!’ she yelled. There
was a scuffling in the darkness and a faint ‘Awk! Awk!’

‘’scuse me, miss,’ said a voice, and she looked down the steps into the
misshapen face of . . . What was his name? Oh, yes. ‘Good morning,
Mister Concrete,’ she said to the troll. She couldn’t help but notice
the brown stains coming from his nose.

‘Can’t find Mister Trev,’ Concrete stated.

‘Haven’t seen him all morning,’ said Glenda.

‘Can’t find Mister Trev,’ the troll repeated, louder.

‘Why do you need him?’ said Glenda. As far as she knew, the vats just
about ran themselves. You told Concrete to dribble candles and he
dribbled candles until he’d run out of candles.

‘Mister Nutt sick,’ said Concrete. ‘Can’t find Mister Trev.’

‘Take me to Mister Nutt right now!’ said Glenda.

It’s a bit harsh to call anybody a denizen, but the people who lived and
worked in the candle vats fitted the word to a T. The vats were, in
fact, their den. If you ever saw them anywhere in the underground maze,
they were always scuttling very fast, but most of the time they just
worked and slept and stayed alive. Nutt was lying on an old mattress
with his arms wrapped tightly around himself. Glenda took one look and
turned to the troll. ‘Go and find Mister Trev,’ she said.

‘Can’t find Mister Trev,’ said the troll.

‘Keep on looking!’ She knelt down beside Nutt. His eyes had rolled back
inside his head. ‘Mister Nutt, can you hear me?’

He seemed to wake. ‘You must go away,’ he said. ‘It will be very
dangerous. The door will open.’

‘What door is that?’ she said, trying to remain cheerful. She looked at
the denizens, who were watching her with a kind of meek horror. ‘Can’t
one of you find something to put over him?’ The mere question sent them
scurrying in panic.

‘I have seen the door, so it will open again,’ said Nutt.

‘I can’t see any door, Mister Nutt,’ said Glenda, looking around.

Nutt’s eyes opened wide. ‘It’s in my head.’

There was no privacy to the vats; it was just a wider room off the long,
endless corridor. People went past all the time.

‘I think you may have been overdoing it, Mister Nutt,’ said Glenda. ‘You
rush around working all hours, worrying yourself sick. You need a rest.’
To her surprise, one of the denizens turned up holding a blanket, quite
large parts of which were still flexible. She put it over him just as
Trev arrived. He had no choice about arriving as Concrete was dragging
him by the collar. He looked down at Nutt and then up at Glenda. ‘What’s
happened to him?’

‘I don’t know.’ She raised a finger to her head and swivelled it a
little, the universal symbol for ‘gone nuts’.

‘You must go away. Things will be very dangerous,’ Nutt moaned.

‘Please tell us what is going on,’ said Glenda. ‘Please tell me.’

‘I can’t,’ said Nutt. ‘I cannot say the words.’

‘There are words you want to say?’ said Trev.

‘Words that don’t want to be said. Strong words.’

‘Can’t we help?’ Glenda persevered.

‘Are you sick?’ said Trev.

‘No, Mister Trev. I passed an adequate bowel motion this morning.’ That
was a flash of the old Nutt – precise, but slightly odd.

‘Sick in the head?’ said Glenda. That came out of desperation.

‘Yes. In the head,’ said Nutt. ‘Shadows. Doors. Can’t tell you.’

‘Is there anyone who can cure that kind of sickness?’

Nutt didn’t answer for a while and then said, ‘Yes. You must find me a
philosopher trained in Uberwald. They will help the thoughts come
straight.’

‘Isn’t that what you did for Trev?’ said Glenda. ‘You told him what he
was thinking about his dad and everything, and that made him a lot
happier, didn’t it, Trev?’

‘Yes, it did,’ said Trev. ‘And there’s no need to elbow me in the ribs
like that. It really did help. Couldn’t you be hypnotized?’ he said to
Nutt. ‘I saw a man in the music hall once and he just waved his shiny
watch at them and it’s amazing the kind of things they did. Barked like
dogs, even.’

‘Yes. Hypnosis is an important part of the philosophy,’ said Nutt. ‘It
helps to relax the patient so that the thoughts get a chance to be
heard.’

‘Well, there you are, then,’ said Glenda. ‘Why not try doing it on
yourself? I’m sure I could find something shiny for you to wave.’

Trev pulled his beloved tin can out of his pocket. ‘Tra-la. And I think
I’ve got a piece of string here somewhere.’

‘That is all very well, but I would not be able to ask myself the right
kinds of questions because I will have been hypnotized. How the
questions are posed is very important,’ said Nutt.

‘I know what,’ said Trev. ‘I’ll tell you to ask yourself to ask the
right questions. You’d know what questions to ask if it was someone
else, wouldn’t you?’

‘Yes, Mister Trev.’

‘You didn’t need to hypnotize Trev,’ Glenda pointed out.

‘No, but his thoughts were close to the surface. I fear that mine will
not be so easy to access.’

‘Can you really be hypnotized to ask yourself the right questions?’

‘In _The Doors of Deception_, Fussbinder did report on a way of
hypnotizing himself,’ said Nutt. ‘It is conceivably possible . . .’ His
voice trailed off.

‘Then let’s get on with it,’ said Trev. ‘Better out than in, as my old
granny used to say.’

‘I think perhaps that it is not such a good idea.’

‘Didn’t do me any harm,’ said Trev robustly.

‘The things that I do not know . . . The things that I do not know . .
.’ muttered Nutt.

‘What about them?’ said Glenda.

‘The things that I do not know...’ said Nutt, ‘I think are behind the
door, because I think I put them there because I think I do not want to
know them.’

‘So you must know what it is you don’t want to know?’ said Glenda.

‘Yes.’

‘Well, how bad could it be?’ said Trev.

‘Perhaps it is very bad,’ said Nutt.

‘What would you say if it was me?’ said Glenda. ‘I want the truth, now.’

‘Well,’ said Nutt, stuttering slightly, ‘I think I would say that you
should look behind the door to face the things that you do not want to
know so we may confront them together. That would certainly be the
advice of Von Kladpoll in _Doppelte Berührungssempfindung_. Indeed,
doing so would almost be a fundamental part of the analysis of the
hidden mind.’

‘Well then,’ said Glenda, standing back.

‘But what sort of bad things could possibly be in your head, Miss
Glenda?’ said Nutt, managing gallantry even in the fetid circumstances
of the vats.

‘Oh, there’s a few,’ said Glenda. ‘You don’t go through life without
picking up a few.’

‘I’ve had dreams in the night,’ said Nutt.

‘Oh, well, everyone has bad dreams,’ said Glenda.

‘These were more than dreams,’ said Nutt. He unfolded his arms and held
up a hand.

Trev whistled.

Glenda said, ‘Oh,’ and then, ‘Should they be like that?’

‘I have no idea,’ said Nutt.

‘Do they hurt?’

‘No.’

‘Well, maybe that sort of thing ’appens when goblins get a bit older,’
said Trev.

‘Yes, perhaps they need claws,’ said Glenda.

‘Yesterday was wonderful,’ said Nutt. ‘I was part of the team. The team
were around me. I was happy. And now . . .’

Trev held up a piece of grubby string and the battered but shiny tin
can. ‘Perhaps you _should_ find out?’

‘I might be getting all this wrong,’ said Glenda, ‘but if you don’t want
to know what the things are that you don’t want to know, then that means
that there are going to be even more things that you don’t want to know
and I imagine that sooner or later, if that goes on, your head will cave
in around the hole.’

‘There is something in what both of you say,’ said Nutt reluctantly.

‘Then give me a hand to put him on the couch,’ said Trev. ‘Should he be
covered in sweat like that?’

‘I don’t think so,’ said Glenda.

‘I would be happier if you chained me down,’ said Nutt.

‘What? Why do you think we should do that?’ said Glenda.

‘I think you should beware. Some things leak around the door. They may
be bad.’

Glenda looked at the claws. They were a shiny black and, in their way,
quite neat, but it was hard to imagine them being used for, say,
painting a picture or cooking an omelette. They were claws, and claws
were for clawing, weren’t they? But this was Mr Nutt. Even with claws it
was still Mr Nutt.

‘Shall we get started?’ said Trev.

‘I insist on the chains,’ said Nutt. ‘There are all sorts of metal
things in the old storeroom four doors down. I saw chains there. Please
hurry.’

Automatically Glenda looked down at the claws and saw they had grown
longer. ‘Yes, Trev, please hurry.’

Trev followed her gaze and said brightly, ‘I’ll be back before you know
I’ve gone.’

In fact, it was less than a couple of minutes, and she could hear the
clanking as he dragged them all the way down the passageway.

Glenda was fighting tears at the simple strangeness of the whole
business. Nutt lay there, looking at the ceiling, as they lifted him on
to the couch and carefully wrapped the chains around him.

‘There’s padlocks, but there’s no keys. I can close them, but I can’t
open them.’

‘Close them,’ said Nutt.

Glenda had very seldom cried, and she was trying not to now. ‘I don’t
think we should be doing this,’ she said. ‘Not here in the vats. People
are watching.’

‘Please swing your pendulum, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt.

Trev shrugged and did so.

‘Now you have to start telling me that I am feeling sleepy, Mister
Trev,’ said Nutt.

Trev cleared his throat and swung the shiny can back and forth. ‘You are
definitely feelin’ sleepy. Extremely sleepy.’

‘That is good. I am feeling enormously sleepy,’ said Nutt wearily. ‘And
now you must ask me to analyse myself.’

‘What does that mean?’ said Glenda sharply, always on the lookout for
dangerous words.

‘I’m sorry,’ said Nutt. ‘I mean, help me examine in detail the workings
of my own mind by means of question and answer.’

‘But I don’t know the questions to ask,’ said Trev.

‘I do,’ said Nutt patiently, ‘but you must instruct me to do it.’

Trev shrugged. ‘Mister Nutt, you must find out what is wrong with Mister
Nutt,’ he said.

‘Ah yes,’ said Nutt, his tone of voice changing slightly. ‘Are ve
comfortable, Mister Nutt? Yes, thank you. The chains hardly chafe at
all. Verrry good. Now, tell me about your mother, Mister Nutt. I am
familiar with the concept, but I never had a mother as I recall. Thank
you for asking anyway,’ said Nutt.

And so the monological dialogue began. The other two sat on the stone
steps as the quiet voice unravelled itself until: ‘Ah yes, ze library.
Is zere something in ze library, Mister Nutt?’

‘There are many books in the library.’

‘What else is in ze library, Mister Nutt?’

‘There are many chairs and ladders in the library.’

‘And what is in ze library zat you do not want to tell me about, Mister
Nutt?’

They waited. At last, the voice said, ‘There’s a cupboard in the
library.’

‘Is zere anything special about zis cupboard, Mister Nutt?’

Another pause, another faint little voice: ‘I must not open the
cupboard.’

‘Why is half of him talking like someone from Uberwald?’ said Glenda to
Trev, forgetting the notoriously acute sense of hearing.

‘Questions asked in a mild Uberwaldian accent in examinations of zis
nature appear to put ze patient more at ease,’ said Nutt. ‘And now I
would be pleased if you would not make wiz ze interruptions.’

‘Sorry,’ said Glenda.

‘Don’t mention it. So, why must you not open ze cupboard, Mister Nutt?’

‘Because I promised Ladyship that I would not open the cupboard.’

‘And did you open ze cupboard, Mister Nutt?’

‘I promised Ladyship that I would not open the cupboard.’

‘And did you open ze cupboard, Mister Nutt?’

A much longer pause this time. ‘I promised Ladyship that I would not
open the cupboard.’

‘Did you learn many things in ze castle, Mister Nutt?’

‘Many things.’

‘Did you learn how to make ze lockpicks, Mister Nutt?’

‘Yes.’

‘Where is ze door now, Mister Nutt?’

‘It is in front of me.’

‘You opened ze door, Mister Nutt. You think you did not, but you did.
And now it is very important zat you open ze door again.’

‘But what is inside the door is wrong!’

The two eavesdroppers craned to hear.

‘Nothing is wronk. Nothing is wronk at all. In ze past, you opened ze
door in the foolishness of chilthood. Now, to understand ze door, you
must open it with ze wisdom of ze adult. Open ze door, Mister Nutt, and
I will walk with you to it.’

‘But I no longer have the lockpick.’

‘Nature will provide, Mister Nutt.’

Glenda shivered. It had to be her imagination, but they didn’t seem to
be in the candle vats any more.

A corridor stretched in front of Nutt. He felt everything drop away from
him. Chains, clothes, flesh, thoughts. All there was was the corridor
and, drifting gently towards him, the cupboard. It was glass-fronted.
Light glinted off the bevelled edges. He raised a hand and extended the
claw. It cut through wood and glass as if they were air. There was one
shelf in the cupboard and one book on the shelf. There was a title on it
in silver and chains around it in steel. These were much easier to break
through than last time as well. He sat down on a chair that had not been
there until he sat down and he began to read the book. The book was
called _ORC_.

When the scream came, it didn’t come from Nutt, but from overhead in the
tangle of pipes. A skinny woman in a long black robe, perhaps a witch,
Glenda thought, shocked by the suddenness, dropped down on to the
flagstones and looked around like a cat.

No, more like a bird, Glenda thought. Jerky.

And then it opened its mouth and screamed: ‘Awk! Awk! Danger! Danger!
Beware! Beware!’ It made a lunge towards the couch, but Trev stepped in
the way. ‘Foolish! The orc will eat your eyes!’

And now this was a duet, because another of the creatures had slid down
out of the gloom on what might have been a billowing cloak, or might
have been wings. They never stopped moving, each in a different
direction, trying to get closer to the couch.

‘Do not be afraaaid,’ squawked one of them, ‘we are on your siiide. We
are here to protect you.’

Glenda, trembling in shock, managed to stand up. She folded her arms.
She always felt better like that. ‘Who do you think you are – dropping
out of the ceiling and shouting at people? And you’re shedding feathers.
That’s disgusting. This is a— this is quite near a food-preparation
area.’

‘Yeah, push off,’ said Trev.

‘That’s telling them,’ said Glenda out of the corner of her mouth. ‘I
bet that took a lot of thinking.’

‘You do not understand,’ said a creature. The faces really were strange,
as if someone had made a bird out of a woman. ‘You are in great danger!
Awk!’

‘From you?’ said Glenda.

‘From the orc,’ said the creature. And the word was a scream. ‘Awk!’

In the shadows in front of the open cupboard the soul of Nutt turned a
page. He felt someone at his elbow and looked up into the face of
Ladyship.

‘Why did you tell me not to open the book, Ladyship?’

‘Because I wanted you to read it,’ said her voice. ‘You had to find the
truth for yourself. That is how we all find the truth.’

‘And if the truth is terrible?’

‘I think you know the answer to that one, Nutt,’ said the voice of
Ladyship.

‘The answer is that, terrible or not, it is still the truth,’ said Nutt.

‘And then?’ said her voice, like a teacher encouraging a promising
pupil.

‘And then the truth can be changed,’ said Nutt.

‘Mister Nutt is a goblin,’ said Trev.

‘Yeah, right,’ said the creature. And the phrase seemed incredibly
exotic for someone whose face was looking more birdlike all the time.

‘If I scream, a lot of people will come running,’ said Glenda.

‘And what will they do?’ said the creature.

And what would they do? Glenda thought. They would stand around saying
‘What’s all this then?’ and asking all the same questions we are. She
shuffled again as one of the things tried to get to the couch.

‘The orc will kill,’ said a third voice, and another of the things
dropped down almost in front of Glenda’s face. Its breath was like
carrion.

‘Mister Nutt is kind and gentle and has never hurt anyone,’ said Glenda.

‘Who didn’t deserve it,’ said Trev hurriedly.

‘But now the orc knows it is an orc,’ said a creature. And now they were
milling backwards and forwards in a ghastly pavane.

‘I don’t think you’re allowed to touch us,’ said Trev. ‘I really don’t
think you can touch us.’

He sat down suddenly beside the recumbent Nutt and dragged Glenda down
next to him. ‘I think you ’ave to obey rules,’ said Trev. The moving
figures stopped instantly. That was somehow creepier than their
movement. They stood there as frozen as statues.

‘They’ve got talons,’ said Glenda, quietly. ‘I can see their talons.’

‘Pounces,’ said Trev.

‘What’re you talking about?’

‘Those big claws are called pounces. The ones at the back are called
talons – the ones they carry the prey off with. Everyone gets that
wrong.’

‘Except you,’ said Glenda. ‘You’re like the big expert on horrible
birdlike creatures all of a sudden.’

‘I can’t help it. Sometimes you just pick stuff up,’ said Trev.

‘We must protect you,’ said one of the females.

‘We don’t need protecting from Mister Nutt! He’s our friend,’ said
Glenda.

‘And how many of your friends have claws?’

‘What have we got to worry about here, in Unseen University, which has
got great big thick walls and is pretty much generally crawling with
wizards?’

One of the women stretched her neck until her face was a few inches from
Trev’s. ‘There is an orc in here with you.’

There was a clink of chain. Nutt had moved slightly.

‘You work for somebody, don’t you?’ said Trev. ‘You’ve got tiny little
heads. You can’t ’ave enough brains to think this up for yourself. Do
the wizards know you’re here?’

Glenda screamed. She had never screamed before, not in a proper way,
straight up from the bottom of her terror. Cutting her finger while
using the knife carelessly didn’t count and almost certainly would never
have been so loud. The scream echoed along the passages, bounced into
the cellars and made the undercrofts ring.¹⁸

Glenda screamed a second time and, as her lungs had got into practice,
she managed to make this one even louder. There were hurrying footsteps
from both directions.

That was reassuring.

She was not certain how reassuring was the little clink and sliding of
metal that suggested a chain had broken.

The creatures went into an instant panic, trying to take wing at once.
They were as clumsy as herons and got in one another’s way.

‘And don’t come back!’ she yelled as they disappeared back into the
dark. Then she turned to Trev, her heart thumping, and said, ‘What _is_
an orc?’

‘I dunno. I think it’s some kind of old bogey man,’ said Trev.

‘And what were those things?’

‘I know it sounds silly,’ said Trev, ‘but we saw one of them the other
night, and he seems to think they’re, like . . . friends.’

Butchers, bakers, butlers and bledlows came hurrying out of the dark
corridors and one of them was Bledlow Nobbs (no relation), who was
inexplicably wearing just his official hat, a string vest and a pair of
shorts, far too short and far too tight for a man the size of Bledlow
Nobbs (no relation).

He looked at Glenda and then glared at Trev. People like Trev were, as
far as Bledlow Nobbs (no relation) was concerned, an automatic enemy.
‘Did you scream? What’s been going on?’ he said.

‘I’m sorry, I made an improper suggestion,’ Trev said. He looked at
Glenda, his expression saying, ‘Help me out here.’

‘I’m afraid I let my girlish modesty get the better of me,’ she said,
cursing him with her eyes.

‘It must have been a pretty strange suggestion,’ said a baker, who
seemed to think that an extremely long loaf would have been a suitable
aid to combat, but he was grinning – and grinning was good.

If this ends up with no more than sniggering and grinning then we’ll all
be happy, Glenda thought. Hard to live down afterwards, but still good.

‘But what’s that bloke chained to that bed for?’ said the bledlow.

‘Yeah, what kind of improper suggestions go on around here?’ said the
baker. He really was having fun.

I am going to kill someone before the end of all this and it might just
have to be myself, thought Glenda.

‘Isn’t that Mister Nutt?’ said the bledlow. ‘We’re supposed to be in
training in five minutes.’

There was another clink behind Glenda and Nutt’s voice said, ‘Don’t
worry, Alphonse, I often do this trick. Dynamic tension you know, helps
build up the muscles.’

‘Alphonse?’ said the baker, looking incredulously at the bledlow. ‘I
thought your name was Alfred, Alf for short. Alphonse is a Quirmian name
if ever I’ve heard one. You’re not from there, are you?’ That was an
accusation as much as a question.

‘What’s wrong with Alf being short for Alphonse?’ said the bledlow. He
had very large hands that might have troubled even Mustrum Ridcully in a
game of pat-a-cake. Also, his ears were going red, never a good sign in
a man of his size.

‘Oh, I never said it wasn’t a nice name,’ said the baker, belatedly
using his loaf. ‘But I would never have figured you for an Alphonse. It
just goes to show that you never can tell.’

‘I am an orc,’ said Nutt quietly.

‘Actually, Alphonse is quite a nice name,’ the baker went on. ‘The
phonse spoils it a bit, but the Alf I quite like.’ He paused and turned
to Nutt. ‘What do you mean, “orc”?’

‘An orc,’ said Nutt again.

And away in the distant central heating pipes there was a scream of
‘Awk! Awk!’

‘Don’t be daft, there’s no such thing as orcs any more. They all got
killed off hundreds of years ago. Bloody hard to kill, too, I read
somewhere,’ said a butler.

‘In the latter part of your statement you are substantially correct,’
said Nutt, still chained to the couch. ‘However, nevertheless, I am an
orc.’

Glenda looked down. ‘You told me you’re a goblin, Mister Nutt. You told
me you’re a goblin.’

‘I was misinformed,’ said Nutt. ‘I _know_ I am an orc. I think I have
always known that I am an orc. I have opened the door and read the book
and I know the truth of my soul and I am an orc, and for some reason I
am an orc with a terrible urge to smoke a cigar.’

‘But they were like these big horrible monsters that wouldn’t stop
fighting and were quite happy to tear off their own arm to use as a
weapon,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no relation). ‘There was an article about
them in _Bows & Ammo_.’

Every eye turned to Nutt’s arms. ‘Certainly that is the judgement of
history,’ said Nutt. He looked up at Glenda. ‘I am so sorry,’ he said.
‘I disobeyed, everybody does it, you see. Schnouzentintle says as much
in his book _The Obedience of Disobedience_. So I wondered what was in
the cupboard. And I already had some expertise with lockpicks. I opened
the cupboard, I read the book and . . .’ His chains clinked as he
shifted position. ‘I disobeyed. I think everybody does it. We are very
good at hiding from ourselves what we do not want to know. Believe me; I
was very good at keeping that from myself. But it leaks out, you see, in
dreams and things when you have dropped your guard. I _am_ an orc. There
is no doubt about that.’

‘Okay, right, if you are an orc, right, then why are you not tearing my
head off?’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no relation).

‘Would you like me to?’ said Nutt.

‘Well, as it happens, no!’

‘Who cares?’ said Trev. ‘It’s all ancient history anyway. These days you
see vampires hangin’ around all over the place. An’ we’ve got trolls and
golems and zombies and all kinds of people just graftin’ away. Who cares
what ’appened ’undreds of years ago?’

‘Hang on a minute. Hang on a minute,’ said the butler. ‘He’s not tearing
your head off ’cos he’s chained down.’

‘So, why did you get us to chain you down?’ said Glenda.

‘So I wouldn’t tear off anybody’s head. I suspected the truth, although
I didn’t know what it was that I suspected. At least, I think it works
like that.’

‘So that means you can’t escape and tear us all limb from limb,’ said
Bledlow Nobbs (no relation). ‘No offence meant, but does this mean you
won’t be training us?’

‘I am sorry,’ said Nutt, ‘but as you can see, I’m rather
inconvenienced.’

‘Have you all gone loony?’ Astonishingly, this came from Juliet,
standing in the corridor. ‘He’s Nutt. He potters around making candles
and stuff. I see ’im around all the time and ’e’s never ’olding someone
else’s leg _or_ head. And ’e likes his football, too!’

Glenda thought she could actually hear Trev’s heartbeat. She hurried
over to the girl. ‘I told you to go,’ she hissed.

‘I’ve come back to tell Trev about everythin’. After all, he did write
such a lovely poem.’

‘She’s got a point,’ said a man in a butcher’s apron. ‘I’ve seen him
running around everywhere and I’ve never seen him carrying any limbs.’

‘That’s true,’ said the baker. ‘And anyway, didn’t he do all those
lovely candles at the banquet last night? That doesn’t sound very
orc-like to me.’

‘And,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no relation), ‘he was training us yesterday
and he never once said, “Get in there, lads, and tear their ’eads off
”.’

‘Oh, yes,’ said the butler, who was making no friends as far as Glenda
was concerned. ‘Humans don’t tear off heads, not like orcs.’

An ‘Awk! Awk!’ echoed in the distance.

‘He’s been teaching us kinds of stuff you’d never think about,’ said the
bledlow, ‘like playing the game with a blindfold on. Amazing stuff. More
like filosopy than football, but damn good stuff.’

‘Tactical thinking and combat analysis is part of the orc make-up,’ said
Nutt.

‘See! No one who uses make-up is going to tear your head off, right?’

‘Didn’t you meet my ex-wife?’ said the baker.

‘Well, I’d draw the line if you wore make-up,’ said the butcher to
general amusement. ‘Being an orc is one thing, but we don’t want a funny
one.’

Glenda looked down at Nutt. He was crying.

‘My friends, I thank you for your trust in me,’ he said.

‘Well, you know, you’re like part of the team,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no
relation), whose smile almost managed to conceal his nervousness.

‘Thank you, Mister Nobbs, that means a lot to me,’ said Nutt, standing
up.

That was quite a complex movement.

It stayed in Glenda’s mind for ever afterwards as a kind of slow-motion
scene of bursting chains and cracking wood when Nutt stood up as though
he had been restrained by cobwebs. Pieces of chain spun off and hit the
wall. Padlocks broke. As for the couch, barely one piece remained
attached to another. It dropped to the floor as so much firewood.

‘RUN FOR IT, LADS!’

You would have needed some kind of special micrometer to work out which
man said it first, but the stampede along the corridor was swift and
over very quickly.

‘You know,’ said Trev, after a few moments’ silence, ‘at one point I
thought this was all goin’ very well.’

‘Those women,’ said Glenda, ‘what were they?’

Nutt stood forlornly in the wreckage; a length of chain slithered off
him like a serpent and landed on the flagstones. ‘Them?’ he said. ‘They
are the Little Sisters of Perpetual Velocity. They come from Ephebe. I
think the name for their species is Furies. I think Ladyship sent them
in case I tried to hurt anybody.’ The words came out without emphasis or
emotion.

‘But you haven’t hurt anyone,’ said Glenda.

‘But they ran away,’ said Nutt, ‘because of what I am.’

‘Well, you know, they’re ordinary people,’ said Glenda. ‘They’re—’

‘Twits,’ said Trev.

Nutt turned and walked down the opposite corridor, kicking off the
remnants of wood and chain. ‘But the world is _full_ of ordinary
people.’

‘You can’t just let ’im go like that,’ said Juliet. ‘You just can’t.
Look at ’im! ’e looks like ’e’s been kicked.’

‘I’m ’is boss, that’s my job,’ said Trev.

Glenda caught Trev by the arm. ‘No, I’ll sort this out. Now, you listen
to me, Trev Likely, under all that gab, you’re a decent sort, so I’ll
tell you this: see Juliet over there? You know her, she works in the
kitchens. You wrote her a lovely poem, _didn’t you_? Ever heard of
Emberella? Everyone’s heard of Emberella. Well, you might not be my
first choice for Prince Charming, but there’s probably plenty worse.’

‘What the hell are you talkin’ about?’ said Trev.

‘Juliet’s going to be leaving soon, isn’t that right, Jools?’

Juliet’s face was a picture. ‘Well, er—’

‘And that’s because she’s been that girl in the papers.’

‘What, the shiny dwarf one? With a beard?’

‘That’s her!’ said Glenda. ‘She’s going to go off with the circus, well,
you know what I mean. With the fashion show, at least.’

‘But she hasn’t got a beard,’ said Trev.

Blushing, Juliet delved into her apron and to Glenda’s surprise produced
the beard. ‘They let me keep it,’ she said, with a nervous giggle.

‘_Right_,’ said Glenda. ‘You say you love him. Trev, I don’t know
whether you love her or not, time to make up your mind. You’re both
grown up, well, strictly speaking, and so you better sort yourselves
out, ’cos I don’t see any fairy godmothers around. As for Mister Nutt,
he hasn’t got _anyone_.’

‘She’s gonna leave the city?’ said Trev, realization dawning slowly
through a male mind.

‘Oh, yes. For quite a long time, I suspect,’ said Glenda.

She watched his face carefully. You haven’t got much learning and you
haven’t opened a book in your life, Trevor Likely, but you are smart and
you must know there is a wrong way and a right way to reply to what I
have just told you.

She watched the high-speed changes around his eyes as he thought, and
then he said, ‘Well, that’s nice. It’s the kind of thing she’s always
dreamed of. I’m very happy for her.’

You cunning bastard, you actually got it right, Glenda thought. You’re
not appearing to be thinking about yourself at all, ’cos you know I’d
have no time for you if you were. And who knows, you might just be
genuine. In fact, heavens help me, I think you are, but I’d pull all my
own teeth out rather than tell you.

‘She likes you, you like her and I’ve made a lot of silly mistakes. The
two of you, sort out what you want to do. And now, if I were you I’d
run, before anyone else beats you to it. And can I offer you a word of
advice, Trev? Don’t be smart, be clever.’

Trev took Glenda by the shoulders and kissed her on both cheeks. ‘Was
that smart _or_ clever?’

‘Get away with you, Trev Likely!’ she said, pushing him away, in the
hope that he wouldn’t notice her blush. ‘And now I’m going to see where
Mister Nutt has gone.’

‘I know where he’s gone,’ said Trev.

‘I thought I just told you two to go off and live happily ever after,’
said Glenda.

‘You won’t find ’im without me,’ said Trev. ‘I’m sorry, Glenda, but we
like him too.’

‘Do you think we should tell somebody?’ said Juliet.

‘And what will they do?’ Glenda snapped. ‘It’ll just be like that lot
back there. All hanging around in the hope that somebody will come up
with an idea. Anyway,’ she added, ‘I’m sure the wizards upstairs know
all about him. Oh yes, I bet they do.’

She had to admit, ten minutes later, that Trev had been right. She
probably wouldn’t have noticed the door on the other side of another
cluttered, abandoned cellar. Light shone from under the door.

‘I followed ’im once,’ said Trev. ‘Everyone should have a place to call
their own.’

‘Yes,’ said Glenda, and she pushed open the door. She might as well have
opened an oven. There were candles of every size and every colour and
many of them were burning.

And in the middle of it was Nutt, sitting behind a ramshackle table,
which was covered with candles. In front of him they burned in every
colour. He was staring at them with a blank expression, and did not look
up as they approached. ‘You know, I fear that I will never really get
the hang of blue,’ he said, as if to the air. ‘Orange, of course, is
ridiculously easy and red goes without saying and green is not difficult
at all, but the best blue I could achieve, I have to admit, is very
largely green . . .’ His voice trailed off.

‘Are you all right?’ said Glenda.

‘Do you mean, am I all right apart from being an orc?’ said Nutt, with a
very small smile.

‘Well, yes, but that’s not really your fault.’

‘It can’t really be true, can it?’ said Trev.

Glenda turned on him.

‘What good is it saying that?’ she said.

‘Well, they were supposed to have died out hundreds of years ago.’

‘Annihilated,’ said Nutt. ‘But some survived. I fear that when this
oversight is revealed, there will be those who will endeavour to rectify
the situation.’

Trev looked blankly at Glenda. ‘He means he thinks they’re going to try
to kill him,’ she said.

Nutt stared at his candles. ‘I must accumulate worth. I must be helpful.
I must be friendly. I must make friends.’

‘If anyone comes to hurt you,’ said Glenda, ‘I will kill them. I’m sure
you won’t try to pull a leg off, but I might. Trev, this needs a woman’s
touch.’

‘Yes, I can see that.’

‘That wasn’t clever, Trev Likely. No, Mister Nutt, you stay there,’ said
Glenda, dragging Trev and Juliet back out into the corridor. ‘Off you
go, I want to talk to him alone.’

Nutt hung his head as she stepped back in. ‘I’m sorry I’m spoiling it
for everyone,’ he said.

‘What’s happened to your claws, Mister Nutt?’

He stretched out his arm and with a faint noise the claws extended.

‘Oh, well, that’s convenient,’ said Glenda. ‘At least that means you can
change your shirt.’

She thumped the table so the candles jumped. ‘And now, get up!’ she
screamed. ‘You are supposed to be training the team, Mister Nutt, don’t
you remember? You’re supposed to be going out there and showing them how
to play the football!’

‘I must accumulate worth,’ said Nutt, staring at the candles.

‘Then train the team, Mister Nutt! How can you be so certain that the
orcs were that bad in any case?’

‘We did terrible things.’

‘They,’ said Glenda. ‘They, not we, not you. And one thing I am certain
of is that in a war no one is going to say that the other side is made
up of very nice people. Now, how about you just run along to training?
How hard can it be?’

‘You saw what happened,’ said Nutt. ‘It could be very bad indeed.’ He
picked up a nearly blue candle. ‘I must think.’

‘Okay,’ said Glenda.

She shut the door carefully behind her, walked a little way along the
corridor and looked up at the dripping pipes. ‘I know someone is
listening. I could hear the creaking pipes. Come out right now.’

There was no reply. She shrugged and then hurried along the labyrinth
until she reached the steps to the Library, ran up them and headed for
the Librarian’s desk.

As she approached it, his big grinning face appeared above it. ‘I want—’
she began.

The Librarian rose slowly, put a finger to his lips and placed a book on
the table in front of her. The three-letter title, silver on black, was
_ORC_.

He looked her up and down, as if trying to reach a conclusion, then
opened the book, and turned the pages with exquisite care, given the
thickness of those fingers, until he found the page he had been looking
for. He held it up in front of her. There had been no time for breakfast
today, but it’s still possible to throw up when there’s nothing left to
throw. And if you needed to vomit, the woodcut held up beneath the
Librarian’s hands would be a sure-fire medicine.

He put the book down on the desktop, reached down again and produced a
barely used handkerchief and, after some rummaging around, a glass of
water.

‘I don’t have to believe that,’ said Glenda. ‘It’s a drawing. It’s not
real.’

The Librarian’s thumb went up and he nodded. He put the book under one
arm and grabbed her with another and led her with surprising speed out
of the door into the great maze of halls and corridors of the
university.

Their breathless journey finished in front of a door on which was
painted ‘Department of Post-Mortem Communications’. The paint, however,
had peeled somewhat and under the bright new title could just be made
out the letters NECR and what could possibly be one half of a skull.

The door opened – any door pushed by the Librarian would assuredly open.
Glenda heard the clink of the catch falling on to the floor inside.

In the middle of the floor that was revealed stood a hideous figure. Its
horrifying countenance had less than the effect it might have done,
because from it dangled a quite readable label that said ‘Boffo Novelty
and Joke Emporium. Improved Necromancer’s Mask. Sale Price AM$3’. This
was removed to reveal the more salubrious countenance of Dr Hix.

‘There really is no need to—’ he said, and then spotted the Librarian.
‘Oh, can I help you?’

The Librarian held up the book and Dr Hix groaned. ‘That again,’ he
said. ‘All right, what do you want?’

‘We’ve got an orc down in the cellars,’ said Glenda.

‘Yes, I know,’ said Dr Hix.

The Librarian had a big face, but it nevertheless was not large enough
to accommodate all of the surprise he wished to show. The head of the
Department of Post-Mortem Communications shrugged and sighed. ‘Look,’ he
said, as if weary of having to explain so often, and sighed again. ‘I am
supposed to be the bad person as defined by university statute, right? I
am supposed to listen at doors. Supposed to dabble in the black arts.
I’ve got the skull ring. I’ve got the staff with the silver skull on
it—’

‘And a joke-shop mask?’ said Glenda.

‘Quite serviceable as a matter of fact,’ said Hix, haughtily. ‘Rather
more frightening than the original thing and washable, which is always a
consideration in this department. Anyway, the Archchancellor was down
here weeks ago, after the same stuff you are, I very much imagine.’

‘Were the orcs terrible creatures?’ said Glenda.

‘I think I can probably show you,’ said Hix.

‘This gentleman has already shown me the picture in the book,’ said
Glenda.

‘Was it the one with the eyeballs?’

Glenda found the memory only too vivid. ‘Yes!’

‘Oh, there’s worse than that,’ said Hix happily. ‘And I suppose you want
the proof?’ He half turned his head. ‘Charlie?’ A skeleton walked out
through black curtains at the far end of the room. It was holding a mug.
There was something curiously depressing about the slogan on said mug,
which ran: ‘Necromancers Do It All Night’.

‘Don’t be scared,’ said Dr Hix.

‘I’m not,’ Glenda said, terrified to her insteps. ‘I’ve seen the insides
of a slaughterhouse. It’s part of the job and, anyway, he’s polished.’

‘Thank you very much,’ the skeleton articulated.

‘But “Necromancers Do It All Night”? That’s a bit pathetic, isn’t it? I
mean, don’t you think it’s trying a bit too hard?’

‘It was hard enough to get that one made,’ said Dr Hix. ‘We’re not the
most popular department in the university. Charlie, the young lady wants
to know about orcs.’

‘Again?’ said the skeleton, handing the mug to the doctor. It had a
rather hoarse voice, but on the whole far less dreadful than it might
have been. Apart from anything else, his bones were, well, apart from
anything else, and floated in the air as if they were the only visible
parts of an invisible body. The jaw moved as Charlie went on: ‘Well, I
think we’ve still got the memory in the sump ’cos, you remember, we
called it up for Ridcully. I haven’t got round to wiping it yet.’

‘Memory of what?’ said Glenda.

‘It’s a kind of magic,’ said Hix loftily. He continued. ‘It would take
too long to explain.’

Glenda didn’t like this. ‘Let’s have it in a nutshell, then.’

‘Okay. We’re now quite certain that what we call the passage of time is
in fact the universe being destroyed and instantly rebuilt in the
smallest instant of eventuality that it is possible to have. While the
process is instant at every point, nevertheless to renew the whole
Universe takes approximately five days, we believe. Interestingly
enough—’

‘Can I have it in a smaller nut?’

‘So you don’t want to hear about Houseman’s theory of the Universal
Memory?’

‘Possibly the size of a walnut,’ said Glenda.

‘Very well, then, can you imagine this: current thinking is that the old
universe is not destroyed in the instant the new universe is created, a
process which, incidentally, has been happening an untold billion number
of times since I have been talking—’

‘Yes, I can believe that. Can we try for a pistachio?’ said Glenda.

‘Copies of the universe are kept. We don’t know how, we don’t know
where, and it beats the hell out of me trying to imagine how it all
works. But we’re finding that it is sometimes possible to, er, read this
memory in certain circumstances. How am I doing in terms of nut
dimensions?’

‘You’ve got some kind of magic mirror?’ said Glenda flatly. ‘That’s it,
if you want the size of a pine nut,’ said Hix.

‘Pine nuts are actually seeds,’ said Glenda smugly. ‘So, what you’re
saying is that everything that happens stays happened somewhere and you
can look at it if you have the knowing?’

‘That is a magnificent distillation of the situation,’ said Hix. ‘Which
is incredibly helpful while at the same time inaccurate in every
possible way. But, as you put it, we use a’ – and here he gave a little
shudder – ‘magic mirror, as you put it. We recently looked at the battle
of Orc Deep for the Archchancellor. That was the last known battle in
which the race known as orcs were deployed.’

‘Deployed?’ said Glenda.

‘Used,’ said Hix.

‘_Used?_ And you can find something like that in the total history of
everything there has ever been?’

‘Ahem. It helps to have an anchor,’ said Hix. ‘Something that was
present. And all I am going to tell you, young lady, is that there was a
piece of a skull found on that battlefield, and since it was a skull
that firmly puts it into the responsibility of my department.’ He turned
to the Librarian. ‘It’s okay to show her, isn’t it?’ he said. The
Librarian shook his head. ‘Good. That means I can do it, then, under
university statute. A certain amount of surreptitious disobedience is
demanded of me. We have it set up on an omniscope. Since my colleague is
so certain that I should not be doing this, he will not mind if I do.
It’s only a very brief fragment of time, but it did impress the
Archchancellor, if impress is the right word.’

‘I just want to get something clear,’ said Glenda. ‘You can actually
disobey the orders of someone like the Archchancellor?’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Hix. ‘I am under instruction to do so. It is _expected_
of me.’

‘But how can that possibly work?’ said Glenda. ‘What happens when he
gives you an instruction that he doesn’t want you to disobey?’

‘It works by common sense and good will on all sides,’ said Hix. ‘If,
for example, the Archchancellor gives me a command that absolutely must
not be disobeyed, he will add something like, “Hix, you little worm (by
university statute), if you disobey this one, I’ll smack your head.”
Though in reality, a word to the wise, madam, is sufficient. It’s all
done on the basis of trust, really. I am trusted to be untrustworthy. I
don’t know what the Archchancellor would do without me.’ ‘Yeah, right,’
said Charlie, grinning.

A few minutes later, Glenda was in another dark room, standing in front
of a round, dark mirror, at least as high as she was. ‘Is this going to
be like the Moving Pictures?’ she said sarcastically.

‘An amusing comparison,’ said Hix. ‘Except for, one, there is no popcorn
and, two, you would not want to eat it if there was. What might be
called the camera in this case was the last thing one of the human
fighters saw.’

‘Is this the person whose skull you’ve got?’

‘Well done! I see you have been following things,’ said Hix.

There was a moment of silence. ‘This is going to be scary, isn’t it?’

‘Yes,’ said Hix. ‘Nightmares? Very probably. Even I think it’s extremely
disconcerting. Are you ready, Charlie?’

‘Ready,’ said Charlie, from somewhere in the darkness. ‘Are you sure,
miss?’

Glenda wasn’t sure, but anything would be better than facing Hix’s
know-it-all smile. ‘Yes,’ she said, keeping her voice firm.

‘The fragment we are able to show lasts less than three seconds, but I
doubt whether you will want to see it again. Are we ready? Thank you,
Charlie.’

Glenda’s chair went backwards very quickly and Hix, who had been
hovering, caught her. ‘The only known representation of an orc in
battle,’ said Hix, standing her upright. ‘Well done, by the way. Even
the Archchancellor swore out loud.’

Glenda blinked, trying to slice slightly less than three seconds out of
her memory. ‘And that’s true, is it?’ But it had to be true. There was
something about the way the image was sticking to the back of her brain
that declared the truth of it.

‘I want to see it again.’

‘You what?!’ said Hix.

‘There’s more to it,’ said Glenda. ‘It’s only a part of a picture.’

‘It took us hours to work that out,’ said Hix severely. ‘How did you
spot it the very first go?’

‘Because I knew it had to be there,’ said Glenda.

‘She’s got you there, boss,’ said Charlie.

‘All right. Show it again and this time magnify the right-hand corner.
It’s very blurry,’ he said to Glenda.

‘Can you stop it?’ said Glenda.

‘Oh, yes. Charlie has worked that one out.’

‘Then you know the bit I mean.’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘Then show me it again.’

Charlie disappeared behind his curtain. There were a few flashes of
light and then . . .

‘There!’ She pointed at the frozen image. ‘That’s men on horseback,
isn’t it? And they’ve got whips. I know it’s blurry, but you can tell
that they’ve got whips.’

‘Well, yes, of course,’ said Hix. ‘It’s quite hard to get anything to
run into a hail of arrows unless you give it some encouragement.’

‘They were weapons. Living creatures as weapons. And they don’t look so
different from humans.’

‘A lot of really interesting stuff happened under the Evil Emperor,’
said Hix, conversationally.

‘Evil stuff,’ said Glenda.

‘Yes,’ said Hix, ‘that was rather the point. Evil Emperor. Evil Empire.
It did what it said on the iron maiden.’

‘And what happened to them?’

‘Well, officially they’re all dead,’ said Hix. ‘But there have been
rumours.’

‘And men drove them into battle,’ said Glenda.

‘If you want to put it like that, I suppose so,’ said Hix, ‘but I’m not
certain that changes anything.’

‘I think it changes everything,’ said Glenda. ‘It does if all that
people talk about are the monsters and not the whips. Things that look
very much like people, well, a kind of people. What can you make from
people if you really try?’

‘It’s an interesting theory,’ said Hix. ‘But I don’t think you can prove
it.’

‘When Kings fight other Kings and win, they chop off the other King’s
head, don’t they?’ said Glenda.

‘Sometimes,’ said Hix.

‘I mean, you can’t blame a weapon for how it’s used. What’s it they say?
People can’t help how they were made. I think the orcs were made.’

Glenda glanced at the Librarian, who looked at the ceiling.

‘You work as a cook, don’t you? Would you like to work for my
department?’

‘Everyone knows women can’t be wizards,’ said Glenda.

‘Ah, yes, but Necro— Post-Mortem Communications is different,’ said Hix
proudly. And added, ‘We could do with some sensible people here, heavens
know. And the feminine touch would be very welcome. And don’t think I
would require you to just come and do the dusting. We treasure our dust
in this place and your cookery skills will be invaluable. After all,
basic butchery is all part of the job. And I do believe that Boffo’s
shop has a rather good female Necromancer’s costume in their sale, isn’t
that right, Charlie?’

‘Ten dollars including lace-up bodice. A bargain in anybody’s money,’
said Charlie from behind his curtain. ‘Very slinky.’

There had been no reply because Glenda’s mouth had stuck in the act of
opening, but she finally managed a polite, but firm, ‘No.’

The head of the Department of Post-Mortem Communications gave a little
sigh. ‘I thought as much, but we are part of the scheme of things. Light
and dark. Night and day. Sweet and sour. Good and evil (within
acceptable college statutes). It just helps if you can have sensible and
reliable people on both sides, but I’m glad that we’ve been able to be
of assistance. We don’t see many people down here. Well, not people as
such.’

This time Glenda walked along the corridor. ‘Orc,’ she thought. ‘A thing
that just kills.’ Every time she blinked, the image came back to her.
The teeth and claws of a creature in full leap seen, as far as one could
tell, by whoever it was it was leaping at. Fighters you couldn’t stop.
And Nutt had been killed, according to Trev, and then sort of became
unkilled again before going back to Unseen University and eating all the
pies.

There was an awfully big gap in all this, but men with whips filled it.
You can’t have something that just fights, she thought. It has to do
other things as well. And Nutt isn’t any stranger than most of the
people you see around these days. It’s not a lot to go on, though, but
then again, the Evil Emperor was a sorcerer, everyone knew that.
Everyone knows you can’t help how you’re made. Well, it’s worth a try.
It’s a little bit of uncertainty.

As soon as she arrived back outside Nutt’s special place, she sensed
that it would be empty. She pushed the door open and there was a
definite absence of candles and, more importantly, a very noticeable
absence of Nutt. But I told him to go and help them train. That’s where
he’s gone, to go and train, definitely, she said to herself. So no need
to worry, then.

On edge, feeling that something was nevertheless wrong, she forced
herself back to the Night Kitchen.

She was nearly there when she met Mr Ottomy, his scrawny Adam’s apple as
red and glistening as chicken giblets.

‘So, we’ve got a man-eating orc down here, have we?’ he said. ‘People
aren’t going to stand for that. I heard somewhere that they could go on
fighting while their heads are chopped off.’

‘That’s interesting,’ said Glenda. ‘How did they know which way to go?’

‘Ah-ah! They could smell their way,’ said the bledlow.

‘How could they do that with their heads chopped off? Are you telling me
they had a nose up their arse?’ She was shocked at herself for saying
that, it was bad language, but Ottomy was bad language made solid.

‘I don’t hold with it,’ he said, ignoring the question. ‘You know
something else I heard? They were kind of made. When the Evil Emperor
wanted fighters he got some of the Igors to turn goblins into orcs.
They’re not really proper people at all. I’m going to complain to the
Archchancellor.’

‘He already knows,’ said Glenda. Well, he must do, she thought. And
Vetinari, too, she added to herself. ‘You’re not going to make trouble
for Mister Nutt, are you?’ she said. ‘Because if you are, Mister Ottomy’
– she leaned forward – ‘you will never be seen again.’

‘You shouldn’t threaten me like that,’ he said.

‘You’re right, I shouldn’t,’ said Glenda. ‘I should have said that you
will never be seen again, you egregious slimy little twerp. Go and tell
the Archchancellor if you like and see how much good that does you.’
‘They ate people alive!’ said Ottomy.

‘So did trolls,’ said Glenda. ‘Admittedly they spat them out again, but
not in much of a state to enjoy life. We used to fight dwarfs once and
when they cut you off at the knees they weren’t joking. We know, Mister
Ottomy, that the leopard can change his shorts,’ she sniffed, ‘and it
might be a good idea if you did, too. And if I hear of any trouble from
you, you will hear from me. Up there it’s the Archchancellor. Down here
in the dark, it’s cutlery.’

‘I’ll tell him what you said,’ said the luckless bledlow, backing away.

‘I would be very grateful if you did,’ said Glenda. ‘Now push off.’

Why do we tell one another that the leopard cannot change his shorts?
she mused as she watched him scurry away. Has anyone ever seen a leopard
wearing shorts? And how would they be able to put them on if they had
them? But we go on saying it as if it was some kind of holy truth, when
it just means that we’ve run out of an argument.

***

There was something she had to do, now what was it? Oh, yes. She went
over once again to the cauldron on which she had chalked ‘Do Not Touch’
and lifted up the lid. The beady eyes stared up at her from the watery
depths and she went away and got a few scraps of fish, which she dropped
towards the waiting claws. ‘Well, I know what to do with you, at least,’
she said.

A fully working kitchen holds a great many things, not least of which is
a huge collection of ways of committing horrible murder, plus multiple
ways of getting rid of the evidence. This wasn’t the first time the
thought had crossed her mind. She was quite glad about it. For now, she
selected a really thick pair of gloves from a drawer, put her old coat
on again, reached into the cauldron and picked up the crab. It snapped
at her. She knew it would. Never, ever expect gratitude from those you
help.

‘Tide’s turning,’ she told the crustacean, ‘so we’re going to take a
little walk.’ She dropped it into her shopping bag and headed across the
university lawns.

A couple of graduate wizards were working in the university boatyard
nearby. One looked at her and said, ‘Are you supposed to be walking on
the university lawns, madam?’

‘No, it is absolutely forbidden to kitchen staff,’ said Glenda.

The students looked at one another. ‘Oh, right,’ said one of them.

And that was it.

As easy as that.

It was only a metaphorical hammer. It only hit you if you allowed it to
be there.

She pulled the crab out of her bag and it waved its claws irritably.
‘See that over there?’ she said, waving her own spare hand. ‘That’s Hen
and Chickens Field.’ It’s doubtful whether the crab’s beady eyes could
focus on the grassy waste across the river, but at least she pointed it
in the right direction. ‘People think it’s because there was chickens
kept there,’ she went on conversationally while the two wizards looked
at one another. ‘As a matter of fact, that’s not so. It used to be where
people were hanged, and so when they walked out from the old gaol that
used to be over there, the priest in front of the procession with his
billowing robes seemed to lead the line of doomed men and gaolers like a
hen leading its chicks. That sort of thing is what we call a droll sense
of humour in these parts and I haven’t got the faintest idea why I’m
talking to you. I’ve done my best. You now know more than any other
crab.’

She walked down to the very edge of what passed for water as the river
flowed through the city, and dropped the crab into it. ‘Stay clear of
crab pots and don’t come back.’ She turned round and realized the
wizards had been watching her. ‘Well?’ she snapped. ‘Is there any law
about talking to crabs around here?’ She then gave them a little smile
as she walked past.

Back in the long corridors she wandered, feeling a little light-headed,
towards the vats. Some of its denizens eyed her nervously as she passed
through, but there was no sign of Nutt, not that she was looking for him
at all. As she walked on towards the Night Kitchen, Trev and Juliet
appeared. Glenda couldn’t help but notice that Juliet had a somewhat
bright-eyed and ruffled look. That is, she couldn’t help but notice
because she made a point of noticing every time. Semi-parental
responsibility was a terrible thing.

‘What are you _still_ doing here?’ she said.

They looked at her and there was more in their expressions than mere
embarrassment.

‘I come back to say goodbye to the girls and I ’ad to wait for Trev
because of the training.’

Glenda sat down. ‘Make me a cup of tea, will you?’ And because old
habits died hard she added, ‘Boil water in the kettle, two spoons of tea
in the pot. Pour water from kettle into pot when it boils. Do not put
tea in kettle.’ She turned to Trev. ‘Where’s Mister Nutt?’ she said,
non-chalance booming in her voice.

Trev looked down at his feet. ‘I don’t know, Glenda,’ he said. ‘I’ve
been—’

‘Busy,’ Glenda completed.

‘But no hanky panky,’ said Juliet quickly.

Glenda realized that right now she would not have minded if there had
been hanky panky or even spanky. There were things that were important
and things that weren’t, and times when you knew the difference.

‘So, how did Mister Nutt get on, then?’

Trev and Juliet looked at one another. ‘We don’t know. He wasn’t there,’
said Trev.

‘We kind of thought ’e might be with you,’ said Juliet, handing her a
cup of what you get when you ask for a cup of tea from someone who tends
to confuse the recipe even at the best of times.

‘He wasn’t in the Great Hall?’ said Glenda.

‘No, ’e wasn’t there— Wait one moment.’ Trev ran down the steps and
after a few seconds they heard his footsteps coming back. ‘His toolbox
’as gone,’ said Trev. ‘I mean, it wasn’t much. He made it outta bits he
found in the cellars, but as far as I know it’s all ’e owned.’

I knew it, thought Glenda. Of course I knew it. ‘Where could he be? He’s
got nowhere else to go but here,’ she said.

‘Well, there is that place up in Uberwald he talks about quite a lot,’
said Trev.

‘That’s getting on for about a thousand miles away,’ said Glenda.

‘Well, I suppose he thinks he might as well be there as here,’ said
Juliet innocently. ‘I mean, Orc, I’d want to run away from a name like
that if I was me.’

‘Look, I’m sure he’s just wandered off somewhere in the building,’
Glenda said, believing absolutely that he hadn’t. But if I believe he’s
going to be around the next corner or has just nipped off to . . .
powder his nose, or has just wandered away for half an hour – which, of
course, is his right; perhaps he needs to go and buy a pair of socks? –
if I keep believing he’ll turn up any minute, he might, even though I
know he won’t.

She put down the cup. ‘Half an hour,’ she said. ‘Juliet, you go and
check around the Great Hall. Trev, you go down the tunnels that way.
I’ll go down the tunnels this way. If you find anyone you can trust, ask
’em.’

A little more than half an hour later, Glenda was the last to turn up
back in the Night Kitchen. She very nearly half expected that he would
be there and knew that he wouldn’t. ‘Would he know about getting on a
coach?’ she said.

‘I doubt ’e’s ever seen one,’ said Trev. ‘You know what I would do if I
was ’im? I’d just run. It was like when Dad died, I spent all night
walkin’ around the city. I wasn’t bothered where I went. Just went.
Wanted to run away from bein’ me.’

‘How fast can an orc run?’ said Glenda.

‘Much faster than a man, I bet,’ said Trev. ‘An’ for a long time, too.’

‘Listen.’ This was Juliet. ‘Can’t you ’ear it?’

‘Hear what?’ said Glenda.

‘Nothing,’ said Juliet.

‘Well?’

‘What happened to Awk! Awk!?’

‘I think we’ll find them where we find him,’ said Trev.

‘Well, he can’t run all the way back to Uberwald,’ said Glenda. ‘_You_
couldn’t.’

At last Glenda said it: ‘I think we should go after him.’

‘I’ll come,’ said Trev.

‘Then I’m goin’ to come, too,’ insisted Juliet. ‘Besides, I’ve still got
the money and you’re goin’ to need it.’

‘Your money’s in the bank,’ said Glenda, ‘and the bank is shut. But I
think I’ve got a few dollars in my purse.’

‘Then, excuse me,’ said Trev, ‘I won’t be a moment. I think there’s
somethin’ we ought to take . . .’

***

The driver of the horse bus to Sto Lat looked down and said, ‘Two
dollars fifty pence each.’

‘But you only go to Sto Lat,’ said Glenda.

‘Yes,’ said the man calmly. ‘That’s why it says Sto Lat on the front.’

‘We might ’ave to go a lot further,’ said Trev.

‘Just about every coach in this part of the world goes through Sto Lat,’
he said.

‘How long will it take to get there?’

‘Well, this is the late-night bus, okay? It’s for people who’ve got to
be in Sto Lat early and haven’t got much money, and there’s the rub,
see? The less the money, the slower the travel. We get there in the end.
Somewhere around about dawn, in fact.’

‘All night? I think I could walk it faster.’

The man had the quiet, friendly air about him of someone who had found
the best way to get through life was never to give much of a stuff about
anything. ‘Be my guest,’ he said. ‘I’ll wave to you as we go past.’

Glenda looked down the length of the coach. It was half full of the kind
of people who took the overnight bus because it wasn’t very expensive;
the kind of people, in fact, who had brought their own dinner in a paper
bag, and probably not a new paper bag at that.

The three of them huddled. ‘It’s the only one we can afford,’ said Trev.
‘I don’t think we can even afford travel for one on the mail coaches.’

‘Can’t we try and bargain with him?’ said Glenda.

‘Good idea,’ said Trev. He walked back to the coach.

‘Hello again,’ said the driver.

‘When are you gonna leave?’ said Trev.

‘In about five minutes.’

‘So everyone who’s gonna be riding is on the coach.’

Glenda glanced past the driver. The passenger behind him was very
meticulously peeling a hardboiled egg.

‘Could be,’ said the driver.

‘Then why not leave right now,’ said Trev, ‘and go faster? It’s very
important.’

‘_Late-night_,’ said the driver. ‘That’s what I said.’

‘Supposing I was to threaten you with this lead pipe, would you go any
faster?’ said Trev.

‘Trevor Likely!’ said Glenda. ‘You can’t go around threatening people
with lead pipes!’

The driver looked down at Trev and said, ‘Can you run that past me
again?’

‘I told you that I had this length of lead pipe,’ said Trev, banging it
gently against the bus’s door. ‘Sorry, but we really need to get to Sto
Lat.’

‘Oh, right, yes,’ said the driver, ‘I see your lead pipe,’ and he
reached down to the other side of his seat, ‘and I will raise you this
battle-axe and would remind you that if I were to cut you in arf, the
law would be on my side, no offence meant. You must think I am some kind
of fool, but you’re all hopping about like nits on a griddle, so what’s
this all about then?’

‘We’ve got to catch up with our friend. He could be in danger,’ said
Trev.

‘And it’s very romantic,’ said Juliet.

The driver looked at her.

‘If you ’elp us catch up wiv him, I’ll give you a big kiss,’ she said.

‘There!’ said the driver to Trev. ‘Why didn’t _you_ think of that?’

‘All right, I’ll give you a kiss as well,’ said Trev.

‘No thanks, sir,’ said the driver, clearly enjoying himself. ‘In your
case I think I’ll go for the lead pipe, although please don’t try
anything ’cos it’s a devil’s own job to get the bloodstains off the
seats. Nothing seems to shift them.’

‘Okay, I’ll try to hit you with the lead pipe,’ said Trev. ‘We’re
desperate.’

‘And we’ll give you some money,’ said Juliet.

‘Sorry?’ said the driver. ‘Do I get the kiss, the money _and_ the lead
pipe? I mean, I’d rather forgo the lead pipe for another kiss.’

‘Two kisses, a whole three dollars and no lead pipe,’ said Juliet.

‘Or just the lead pipe and I’ll take my chances,’ said Trev.

Glenda, who had been watching them with a fascinated horror, said, ‘And
I’ll give you a kiss as well if you like.’ She couldn’t help noticing
that this didn’t move the stakes either way.

‘But what about my passengers?’ said the driver.

All four of them looked into the back of the bus and realized that they
were the subject of at least a dozen fascinated stares. ‘Go for the
kiss!’ said a woman, holding a large laundry basket in front of her.

‘And the money!’ said one of the men.

‘I don’t give a stuff if she kisses him or hits him on the head with the
lead pipe, so long as they drop us off first,’ said an old man towards
the back of the bus.

‘Do any of us get kissed as well?’ said one half of a couple of giggling
boys.

‘If you like,’ said Glenda viciously. They slumped back into their
seats.

Juliet grabbed the driver’s face and there was, for what seemed slightly
too long, by the internal clocks of both Glenda and Trev, the sound of a
tennis ball being sucked through the strings of a tennis racket. Juliet
stepped back. The driver was smiling, in a slightly stunned and
cross-eyed way. ‘Well, that was pretty much of a lead pipe!’

‘Perhaps I’d better drive,’ said Trev.

The driver smiled at him. ‘I’ll drive, thank you very much, and don’t
kid yourself, mister, I know a dicey one when I see one and you don’t
come close. My old mum would be more likely to hit me with a lead pipe
than you. Throw it away, why don’t you, or someone will give you a
centre parting you won’t forget in a hurry.’

He winked at Juliet. ‘What with one thing or another it’s a good idea to
give the horses a bit of a run every now and again. All aboard for Sto
Lat.’

The horse buses did not usually travel very fast and the driver’s
definition of a run was only marginally faster than what most people
would call a walk, but he managed to get them up to something that at
least meant they did not have the time to get bored by a passing tree.

The bus was for people, as the driver had pointed out, who couldn’t
afford speed but could afford time. In its construction, therefore, no
expense had been attempted. It was really no more than a cart with
double seats all the way along it from the driver’s slightly elevated
bench. Tarpaulins on either side kept out the worst of the weather but
fortunately still let in enough of the wind to mitigate the smell of the
upholstery, which had experienced humanity in all its manifold moods and
urgencies.

Glenda got the impression that some of the travellers were regulars. An
elderly woman was sitting quietly knitting. The boys were still engaged
in the furtive giggling appropriate to their age, and a dwarf was
staring out of the window without looking at anything in particular. No
one really bothered about talking to anybody, except a man right at the
back, who was having a continuous conversation with himself.

‘This isn’t fast enough!’ Glenda shouted after ten minutes of bouncing
over the potholes. ‘I could run faster than this.’

‘I don’t think he’s gonna get that far,’ said Trev.

The sun was going down and the shadows were already drawing across the
cabbage fields, but there was a figure on the road ahead, struggling.
Trev jumped off.

‘Awk! Awk!’

‘It’s those wretched things,’ said Glenda, running up behind him. ‘Give
me that lead pipe.’

Nutt was half crouched in the dust on the road. The Sisters of Perpetual
Velocity were half flying and half flapping around him while he tried to
protect his face with his hands. The passengers of the bus were quite
unnoticed until the lead pipe arrived, followed very shortly by Glenda.
It didn’t have the effect she’d hoped. The Sisters were indeed like
birds. She couldn’t so much hit them as bat them through the air.

‘Awk! Awk!’

‘You stop trying to hurt him!’ she screamed. ‘He hasn’t done anything
wrong!’

Nutt raised an arm and grabbed her wrist. There wasn’t much pressure,
but somehow she couldn’t move it at all. It was as if it had suddenly
been embalmed in stone. ‘They’re not here to hurt me,’ he said. ‘They’re
here to protect you.’

‘Who from?’

‘Me. At least that’s how it’s supposed to go.’

‘But I don’t need any protection from you. That doesn’t make any sense.’

‘They think you might,’ said Nutt. ‘But that is not the worst of it.’

The creatures were circling and the other passengers, sharing the
endemic Ankh-Morpork taste for impromptu street theatre, had piled out
and had become an appreciative audience, which clearly discomforted the
Sisters.

‘What is the worst of it, then?’ said Glenda, waving the pipe at the
nearest Sister, which jumped back out of the way.

‘They may be right.’

‘All right, so you’re an orc,’ said Trev. ‘So they used to eat people.
Have you eaten anyone lately?’

‘No, Mister Trev.’

‘Well, there you are, then.’

‘You can’t arrest someone for something he hasn’t done,’ said one of the
bus passengers, nodding sagely. ‘A fundamental law, that.’

‘What’s an orc?’ said the lady next to him.

‘Oh, back in the olden days up in Uberwald or somewhere they used to
tear people to bits and eat them.’

‘That’s foreigners for you,’ said the woman.

‘But they’re all dead now,’ said the man.

‘That’s nice,’ said the woman. ‘Would anyone like some tea? I’ve got a
flask.’

‘All dead, except me. But I am afraid that I am an orc,’ said Nutt. He
looked up at Glenda. ‘I’m sorry,’ he said. ‘You have been very kind, but
I can see that being an orc will follow me around. There will be
trouble. I would hate you to be involved.’

‘Awk! Awk!’

The woman unscrewed the top of her flask. ‘But you’re not about to eat
anyone, are you, dear? If you feel really hungry I’ve got some
macaroons.’ She looked at the nearest Sister and said, ‘What about you,
love? I know none of us can help how we’re made, but how come you’ve
been made to look like a chicken?’

‘Awk! Awk!’

‘Danger! Danger!’

‘Dunno about that,’ said another passenger. ‘I don’t reckon he’s going
to do anything.’

‘Please, please,’ said Nutt. There was a box lying on the road beside
him. He tore it open frantically and started to pull things out of it.

They were candles. Knocking them over in his haste, picking them up in
shaking fingers only to knock them over again, he finally had them
upright on the flints of the road. He pulled matches out of another
pocket, knelt down and once again got his shaking fingers tangled in
themselves as he struggled to strike a match. Tears streamed down his
face as the light of the candles rose.

Rose . . . and changed.

Blues, yellows, greens. They would go out for a few smoky seconds and
then light again a different colour, to the oohs and aahs of the crowd.

‘See! See!’ said Nutt. ‘You like them? You like them?’

‘I think you could make yourself a lot of money out of that,’ said one
of the passengers.

‘They’re lovely,’ said the old lady. ‘Honestly, the things you young
people can do today.’

Nutt turned to the nearest Sister and spat, ‘I am not worthless, I have
worth.’

‘My brother-in-law runs a novelty shop down in the smoke,’ said the
erstwhile expert in orcs. ‘I’ll write his address down for you if you
like? But I reckon that thing would go down very well on the kiddies’
birthday circuit.’

Glenda had watched all of this open-mouthed, as the kind of democracy
practised by reasonable and amiable but not very clever people, the
people whose education had never involved a book but had involved lots
of other people, surrounded Nutt in its invisible, beneficent arms.

It was heartwarming, but Glenda’s heart was a little bit calloused on
this score. It was the crab bucket at its best. Sentimental and
forgiving; but get it wrong – one wrong word, one wrong liaison, one
wrong thought – and those nurturing arms could so easily end in fists.
Nutt was right: at best, being an orc was to live under a threat.

‘You lot have got no right treating the poor little devil like that,’
said the old lady, waving a finger at the nearest Sister. ‘If you want
to live here, you have to do things our way, all right? And that means
no pecking at people. That’s not how we do things in Ankh-Morpork.’

Even Glenda smiled at that one. Pecking was a picnic compared with what
Ankh-Morpork could offer.

‘Vetinari’s letting all sorts in these days,’ said another passenger. ‘I
won’t hear a word said against the dwarfs—’

‘Good,’ said a voice at his back. He moved aside and Glenda saw the
dwarf standing behind him.

‘Sorry, mate, I didn’t see you there, what with you being so little,’
said the man who had nothing against dwarfs. ‘As I was saying, you lot
just settle down and get on with it and are no trouble to anybody, but
we’re getting some weird ones now.’

‘That woman they put in the Watch last month, for one,’ said the old
lady. ‘The weird one from out Ephebe way. Gust of wind caught her
sunglasses and three people turned into stone.’

‘She was a Medusa,’ said Glenda, who had read about that in the _Times_.
‘The wizards managed to turn them back again, though.’

‘Well, what I’m saying is,’ started the man who had nothing against
dwarfs, ‘we don’t mind anyone, so long as they mind their own business
and don’t do any funny stuff.’

This was the rhythm of the world to Glenda; she’d heard it so many
times. But the feeling of the crowd was now very much against the
Sisters. Sooner or later somebody was going to pick up a stone. ‘I’d get
out of here now,’ she said, ‘get out and go back to the lady you work
for. I should do that right now, if I were you.’

‘Awk! Awk!’ one of them screeched.

But there were brains in those strange-shaped heads. And the three
Sisters were clearly bright enough to want to keep them there and ran
for it, hopping and leaping like herons until what seemed like cloaks
turned out to be wings, which pounded on the air as they sought for
height. There was a final scream of ‘Awk! Awk!’

The driver of the horse bus coughed. ‘Well, if that’s all sorted out
then I suggest you all get back on board, please, ladies and gentlemen.
And whoever. And don’t forget your candles, mister.’

Glenda helped Nutt on to a wooden seat. He was holding his toolbox
tightly across his knees, as if it would offer some sort of protection.
‘Where were you trying to go?’ she said as the horses began to move.

‘Home,’ said Nutt.

‘Back to Her?’

‘She gave me worth,’ said Nutt. ‘I was nothing and she gave me worth.’

‘How can you say you were nothing?’ said Glenda. On the pair of seats in
front of them, Trev and Juliet were whispering together.

‘I _was_ nothing,’ said Nutt. ‘I _knew_ nothing, I _understood_ nothing,
I had no understanding, I had no skill—’

‘But that doesn’t mean someone is worthless,’ said Glenda firmly.

‘It does,’ said Nutt. ‘But it does not mean they are bad. I was
worthless. She showed me how to gain worth and now I have worth.’

Glenda had a feeling they were working from two different dictionaries.
‘What does “worth” mean, Mister Nutt?’

‘It means that you leave the world better than when you found it,’ said
Nutt.

‘Good point,’ said the lady with the macaroons. ‘There’s far too many
people around the place who wouldn’t dream of doing a hand’s turn.’

‘All right, but what about people who’re blind, for example?’ This from
the hardboiled-egg man, sitting on the other side of the bus.

‘I know a blind bloke in Sto Lat who runs a bar,’ said an elderly
gentleman. ‘Knows where everything is and when you put your money on the
counter he knows if it’s the right change just by listening. He does all
right. It’s amazing, he can pick out a dud sixpence halfway across a
noisy bar.’

‘I don’t think there are absolutes,’ said Nutt. ‘I think what Ladyship
meant was that you do the best you can with what you have.’

‘Sounds like a sensible lady,’ said the man who had nothing against
dwarfs.

‘She’s a vampire,’ said Glenda maliciously.

‘Nothing against vampires, just so long as they keep themselves to
themselves,’ said the macaroon lady, who was now engaged in licking
something revoltingly pink. ‘We’ve got one working down at the kosher
butcher’s on our street, and she’s as nice as you like.’

‘I don’t think it’s about what you end up with,’ said the dwarf. ‘It’s
about what you end up with compared with what you started with.’

Glenda leaned back with a smile as attempts at philosophy bounced their
way from seat to seat. She wasn’t at all certain about the whole thing,
but Nutt was sitting there looking far less bedraggled and the rest of
them were treating him as one of themselves.

There were dim lights ahead in the darkness. Glenda slipped from her
seat and went up ahead to the driver. ‘Are we nearly there yet?’

‘Another five minutes,’ said the driver.

‘Sorry about all that silly business with the lead pipe,’ she said.

‘Didn’t happen,’ said the man cheerfully. ‘Believe me, we get all sorts
on the night bus. At least no one’s thrown up. Quite an interestin’ lad
you’ve got back there with you.’

‘You’ve no idea,’ said Glenda.

‘Of course, all he’s saying is you’ve got to do your best,’ said the
driver. ‘And the more best you’re capable of, the more you should do.
That’s it, really.’

Glenda nodded. That did seem to be it, really. ‘Do you go straight
back?’ she said.

‘No. Me and the horses are stopping here and will go back in the
morning.’ He gave her the wry look of a man who’s heard a great many
things, and surprisingly seen a great many things, when to those behind
him he was just a head facing forward keeping an eye on the road. ‘That
was a wonderful kiss she give me. I’ll tell you what, the bus will be in
the yard, there’s plenty of straw around and if anyone was to have a bit
of a kip, I wouldn’t know about it, would I? We’ll leave at six with
fresh horses.’ He grinned at her expression. ‘I told you, we get all
sorts on the late-night bus: kids running away from home, wives running
away from husbands, husbands running away from other wives’ husbands.
It’s called an omnibus, see, and omni means everything and damn near
everything happens on this bus, that’s why I have the axe, see? But the
way I see it, life can’t be all axe.’ He raised his voice: ‘Sto Lat
coming up, folks! Return trip six o’clock prompt.’ He winked at Glenda.
‘And if you’re not there, I’ll go withoutcha,’ he said. ‘You’ve got to
catch the bus at bus-catching time.’

‘Well, this hasn’t been so bad, has it?’ said Glenda, as the lights of
the city grew bigger.

‘My dad’s going to fret,’ said Juliet.

‘He’ll think you’re with me.’

Trev said nothing. By the rules of the street, being exposed in front of
your want-to-be girlfriend as the kind of man who can so easily be seen
not to be the kind of man that would have the guts to belt someone over
the head with a length of lead pipe was extremely shaming, although no
one seemed to have noticed this.

‘Looks like a bit of trouble ahead,’ the driver called back. ‘The Lancre
Flyer ain’t gone.’

All they could see were flares and lantern lights, illuminating the big
coaching inn outside the city gate, where several coaches were standing.
As they drew nearer, he called to one of the skinny, bandy-legged and
weaselly-looking men who seemed to self-generate around any
establishment that involved the movement of horses. ‘Flyer not gone?’ he
enquired.

The weaselly man removed a cigarette end from his mouth. ‘’orse frowed a
shoe.’

‘Well? They’ve got a smith ’ere, ain’t they? Speed the mails and all
that.’

‘He’s not speedin’ nuffink on account of him just laminating his hand to
the anvil,’ said the man.

‘There’ll be the devil to pay if the Flyer don’t go,’ said the driver.
‘That’s post, that is. You should be able to set your watch by the
Flyer.’

Nutt stood up. ‘I could certainly re-shoe a horse for you, sir,’ he
said, picking up his wooden toolbox. ‘Perhaps you had better go and tell
someone.’

The man sidled off and the bus came to rest in the big yard, where a
rather better dressed man came hurrying up. ‘One of you a smith?’ he
enquired, looking directly at Glenda.

‘Me,’ said Nutt.

The man stared. ‘You don’t look much like a smith, sir.’

‘Contrary to popular belief, most smiths are on the wiry side rather
than bulky. It’s all a matter of sinews rather than muscle.’

‘And you know your way around an anvil, do you?’

‘You would be amazed, sir.’

‘There’s shoes in the smithy,’ said the man. ‘You’ll have to work one to
size.’

‘I know how to do that,’ said Nutt. ‘Mister Trev, I would be glad if you
would come and help me with the bellows.’

The inn was huge and crowded, because as with coaching inns everywhere
its day lasted for twenty-four hours and not a moment less. There were
no meal times, as such. Hot food for those who could afford it was
available all the time and cold cuts of meat were on a large trestle in
the main room. People arrived, were emptied and refilled in the
speediest time possible and sent on their way again because the space
was needed for the next arrivals. There never seemed to be a moment
without the jangle of harnesses. Glenda found a quiet corner. ‘I tell
you what,’ she said to Juliet, ‘go and fetch some sandwiches for the
lads.’

‘Fancy Mister Nutt being a blacksmith,’ said Juliet.

‘He’s a man of many parts,’ said Glenda.

Juliet’s brow wrinkled. ‘’ow many parts?’

‘It’s just a figure of speech, Juliet. Off you go now.’ She needed time
to think. Those strange flying women. Mister Nutt. It was all a lot to
take. You start the day and it’s just another day and here you are,
having mercifully not ended up as a highwayman, sitting in another city
with nothing more than the clothes you’re standing up in, not knowing
what is going to happen next.

Which, in a way, was exciting. She had to analyse that feeling for
several moments because excitement was not a regular feature of her
life. Pies, on the whole, do not excite. She got up and wandered
unheeded through the crowds, with the vague idea of seeing what the
kitchens were like, but found her path blocked by someone whose sweating
face, flustered air and rotund body suggested he was the innkeeper. ‘If
you could just wait a moment, ma’am,’ he said to her and then addressed
a woman who was emerging from what looked like a private dining room.
‘So nice to see you again, your ladyship,’ he said, bobbing up and down
a little. ‘It’s always an honour to have you grace our humble
establishment.’

Ladyship.

Glenda looked up at the woman who was everything she had pictured when
Nutt had first talked about her. Tall, thin, dark, forbidding, to be
feared. Her expression was stern and she said, in what to Glenda were
posh tones, ‘Far too noisy in here.’

‘But the beef was superb,’ said another voice and Glenda realized that
Ladyship had almost eclipsed a smaller woman, quite pleasant, not
particularly tall and with a slightly fussy air about her.

‘Are you Lady Margolotta?’ said Glenda.

The tall lady gave her a look of brief disdain and swept on towards the
main doors, but her companion stopped and said, ‘Do you have business
with her ladyship?’

‘Is she coming to Ankh-Morpork?’ Glenda asked. ‘Everybody knows she’s
Lord Vetinari’s squeeze.’ She felt instantly embarrassed as she said the
word; it conjured up images that simply could not fit into the available
space in her brain.

‘Really?’ said the woman. ‘They are certainly very close friends.’

‘Well, I want to talk to her about Mister Nutt,’ said Glenda.

The woman gave her a worried look and pulled her over to an empty bench.
‘There has been a problem?’ she said, sitting down and patting the wood
beside her.

‘She told him he was worthless,’ said Glenda. ‘And sometimes I think all
he worries about is being worthy.’

‘Are you worthy?’ said the woman.

‘What sort of question is that to ask a stranger?’

‘An interesting and possibly revealing one. Do you think the world is a
better place with you in it, and would you do me the courtesy of
actually thinking about your answer rather than pulling one off the
“affronted” rack? I’m afraid there’s far too much of that these days.
People believe that acting and thinking are the same thing.’

Faced with that, Glenda settled for, ‘Yes.’

‘You’ve made it better, have you?’

‘Yes. I’ve helped lots of people and I invented the Ploughman’s Pie.’

‘Did the people you helped want to be helped?’

‘What? Yes, they came and asked.’

‘Good. And the Ploughman’s Pie?’

Glenda told her.

‘Ah, you must be the cook at Unseen University,’ said the woman. ‘Which
means that you have access to rather more than the average cook and,
therefore, I would deduce that to keep the pickled onions crisp in the
pie you put them in a cold room at very nearly freezing point for some
time immediately before baking, possibly wrapping them in cheese for the
sake of temporary insulation, and, if you have assembled your pie
correctly and paid attention to temperatures, I think that would do the
trick.’ She paused. ‘Hello?’

‘Are you a cook?’ said Glenda.

‘Good grief, no!’

‘So you worked it out, just like that? Mister Nutt told me her ladyship
employs _very_ clever people.’

‘Well, I’m embarrassed to say it, but that is true.’

‘But she shouldn’t have told Mister Nutt that he’s worthless. She
shouldn’t say that to people.’

‘But he was worthless, yes? He couldn’t even talk properly when he was
found. Surely what she has done has helped him?’

‘But he frets all the time and it’s got out now that he’s an orc. What’s
that all about?’

‘And is he, in your mind, doing anything particularly orcish?’

Reluctantly, Glenda said, ‘Sometimes his fingernails turn into claws.’

The woman looked suddenly concerned. ‘And what does he do then?’

‘Well, nothing,’ said Glenda. ‘They just sort of . . . go back in again.
But he makes wonderful candles,’ she added quickly. ‘He’s always making
things. It’s as if . . . worth is something that drains away all the
time so you have to keep topping it up.’

‘Possibly, now you put it that way, she has been a little too brisk with
him.’

‘Does she love him?’ asked Glenda.

‘I beg your pardon?’

‘I mean, has anyone ever loved him?’

‘Oh, I think she does, in her way,’ said the woman. ‘Although she’s a
vampire, you know. They tend to see the world rather differently.’

‘Well, if I met her I’d give her a piece of my mind,’ said Glenda.
‘Muddling him about. Setting those wretched flying ladies on him. I
wouldn’t let her do that sort of thing.’

‘She’s immensely strong, I’m led to believe,’ said the woman.

‘That doesn’t give her the right,’ said Glenda. ‘And shall I tell you
something? Mister Nutt is right here. Oh yes, out in the yard, shoeing
one of the horses for the Lancre Flyer. He really is amazing.’

‘It sounds like it,’ said the woman with a faint little smile. ‘You
certainly seem to be a vehement supporter.’

Glenda hesitated. ‘Is that something to do with foxes?’ she said.

‘It means with great passion,’ said the woman. ‘Do you have a great
passion for Mister Nutt, Miss Sugarbean? And remember, please, I do like
people to do me the honour of thinking before they speak.’

‘Well, I like him a lot,’ said Glenda hotly.

‘That is charming,’ said the woman. ‘It does occur to me that Mister
Nutt might have achieved more worth than I had previously thought.’

‘So you tell her ladyship what I said,’ said Glenda, feeling her neck on
fire with blushes. ‘Mister Nutt has got friends.’

‘Indeed I will,’ said the woman, standing up. ‘And now if you’ll excuse
me, I’m sure our coach is about to depart. I must fly.’

‘Remember to tell her what I said!’ Glenda shouted after her.

She saw the woman turn to smile at her and then she was lost as a party
arriving from a new coach hurried in from the cold night air.

Glenda, who had stood up at the same time as the woman, sat down
heavily. Who on earth did that woman think she was? Her ladyship’s
librarian, probably. Nutt had mentioned her several times. Altogether
too many ideas above her station for Glenda’s liking. She hadn’t even
had the decency to give Glenda her name.

The faint, distant hunting horns of sheer terror began to sound in the
back of her mind. Had the woman asked Glenda her name? No! But she’d
certainly known it and how would she know about the ‘cook’ at Unseen
University? And she’d been so quick, she’d worked out the Ploughman’s
Pie with a snap of her fingers. That little part of her that had first
been liberated by the sherry chimed in with, _The trouble with you is
that you make assumptions. You see something and you think you know what
you’ve seen. She certainly didn’t sound like a librarian, did she?_

Very slowly, Glenda raised her right hand into a fist and lowered it
into her mouth, and bit down very hard in an attempt to somehow retrieve
the last fifteen minutes from the records of the universe and replace
them with something far less embarrassing, like her knickers falling
down.

Even here, late into the night, the forge was the heart of attention.
Coaches were arriving and leaving constantly. The inn did not run
according to the sun, it ran according to the timetable, and aimless
people waiting for their connections gravitated to the forge as a free
show and a place of comfort in the chilly night air.

Nutt was shoeing a horse. Trev had seen horses being shod before, but
never like this. The animal stood as if transfixed, trembling very
slightly. When Nutt wanted it to move, he clicked his tongue. When he
wanted its leg raised, another click caused this to happen. Trev felt
that he wasn’t watching a man shoeing a horse, but a master
demonstrating his skills to a world of amateurs. When the shoe was on,
the horse walked backwards in front of the crowd, for all the world like
a fashion model, turning as Nutt moved a hand or made a clicking noise.
It didn’t seem to be a particularly happy horse, but, great heavens, it
was certainly an obedient one. ‘Yes, that all seems fine,’ Nutt said.

‘How much is that going to cost us?’ said the coachman. ‘Wonderful job,
if I may say so.’

‘How much? How much? How much?’ said Nutt, turning it over in his mind.
‘Have I earned worth, sir?’

‘I should say so, mate. I’ve never seen a horse shod as smooth as that.’

‘Then worth will do,’ said Nutt. ‘And a ride for myself and my three
friends back to Ankh-Morpork.’

‘An’ five dollars,’ said Trev, coming away from his lounging spot near
the wall with the speed of money.

The coachman sniffed. ‘A bit steep,’ he said.

‘What?’ said Trev. ‘For a late-night job? To better than Burleigh and
Stronginthearm specification? Not a bad deal, I think.’

A murmur from the other watchers backed Trev up. ‘I never seen anyone do
anything like that,’ said Juliet. ‘He’d ’ave ’ad that ’orse dancing if
you’d asked ’im.’

The coachman winked at Trev. ‘All right, lad. What can I say? Old
Havacook there is a good lad, but a bit bad tempered, as it goes. Once
kicked a coachman through the wall. I never thought I’d see him stand
there and lift ’is leg up like a trained lap-dog. Your chum has earned
his money and his ride.’

‘Please take him away,’ said Nutt. ‘But hold him with care because when
he gets a little way away from me he might get a tiny bit frisky.’

The crowd dispersed. Nutt methodically damped down the forge and started
to pack his tools into the box. ‘If we’re going to go back, we’d better
go now. Has anyone seen Miss Glenda?’

‘Here,’ said Glenda, advancing out of the shadows. ‘Trev, you and Jools
go and get us some seats on the coach. I need to talk to Mister Nutt.’

‘Her ladyship was here,’ said Glenda when they’d gone.

‘I would not be surprised,’ said Nutt calmly, snapping the catches shut
on his box. ‘Just about everybody passes through here and she travels a
great deal.’

‘Why were you running away?’

‘Because I know what will happen,’ said Nutt. ‘I am an orc. It’s as
simple as that.’

‘But the people on the bus were on your side,’ said Glenda.

Nutt flexed his hands and the claws slid out, just for a moment. ‘And
tomorrow?’ he said. ‘And if something goes wrong? Everybody knows orcs
will tear your arms off. Everybody knows orcs will tear your head off.
Everybody knows these things. That is not good.’

‘Well, then, why are you coming back?’ Glenda demanded.

‘Because you are kind and came after me. How could I refuse? But it does
not change the things that everybody knows.’

‘But every time you make a candle and every time you shoe a horse, you
change the things that everybody knows,’ said Glenda. ‘You know that
orcs were—’ She hesitated. ‘Sort of made?’

‘Oh, yes, it was in the book.’

She nearly exploded. ‘Well, then, why didn’t you tell me?!’

‘Is it important? We are what we are now.’

‘But you don’t have to be!’ Glenda yelled. ‘Everybody knows trolls eat
people and spit them out. Everybody knows dwarfs cut your legs off. But
at the same time everybody knows that what everybody knows is wrong. And
orcs didn’t decide to be like they are. People will understand that.’

‘It will be a dreadful burden.’

‘_I’ll help!_ ’ Glenda was shocked at the speed of her response and then
mumbled, ‘I’ll help.’

The coals in the forge crackled as they settled down. Fires in a busy
forge seldom die out completely. After a while, Glenda said, ‘You wrote
that poem for Trev, didn’t you?’

‘Yes, Miss Glenda. I hope she liked it.’

Glenda thought she’d better raise this carefully. ‘I think I ought to
tell you that she didn’t understand a lot of the words _exactly_. I sort
of had to translate it for her.’ It hadn’t been too difficult, she
reckoned. Most love poems were pretty much the same under the curly
writing.

‘Did _you_ like it?’ said Nutt.

‘It was a wonderful poem,’ said Glenda.

‘I wrote it for you,’ said Nutt. He was looking at her with an
expression that stirred together fear and defiance in equal measure.

The cooling embers brightened up at this. After all, a forge has a soul.
As if they had been waiting there, the responses lined themselves up in
front of Glenda’s tongue. Whatever you do next is going to be very
important, she told herself. Really, extremely, very important. Don’t
start wondering about what Mary the bloody housemaid would do in one of
those cheap novels you read, because Mary was made up by someone with a
name suspiciously like an anagram for people like you. She is not real
and you are.

‘We had better get on the coach,’ said Nutt, picking up his box.

Glenda gave up on the thinking and burst into tears. It has to be said
that they were not the gentle tears they would have been from Mary the
housemaid, but the really big long-drawn-out blobby ones you get from
someone who very rarely cries. They were gummy, with a hint of snot in
there as well. But they were _real_. Mary the housemaid would just not
have been able to match them.

So, of course, it will be just like Trev Likely to turn up out of the
shadows and say, ‘They’re calling the coach now— Are you two all right?’

Nutt looked at Glenda. Tears aren’t readily retractable, but she managed
to balance a smile on them. ‘I believe this to be the case,’ said Nutt.

Travelling on a fast coach, on even a mild autumn night, those
passengers on the roof experience the temperature that can freeze
doorknobs. There are leather covers and rugs of various age, thickness
and smell. Survival is only possible by wrapping yourself in the biggest
cocoon you can achieve, preferably with somebody else next to you; two
people can heat up faster than one. In theory, all of this could lead to
hanky panky, but the seats of the coach and the rockiness of the road
mean that such things are not uppermost in the traveller’s mind, which
dreams longingly of cushions. Furthermore, there was a fine rain now.

Juliet craned her head to look at the seats behind, but there were just
the mounds of damp rugs that were the coach company’s answer to the cold
night air. ‘You don’t think they’re sweet on each other, do you?’ she
said.

Trev, who was himself cocooned in rugs, only managed a grunt, but then
went on, ‘I think ’e admires her. He always seems a bit tongue-tied when
’e’s near her, that’s all I know.’

This _had_ to be a romance, Glenda thought. It wasn’t like the ones
peddled every week by Iradne Comb-Buttworthy. It felt more real – more
real and very, very strange.

‘Did you know that all of the orcs were hunted down after the war? All
of them, children too,’ Nutt said.

And people don’t say things like that in a romantic situation, thought
Glenda. But it still _is_, she added.

‘But they were forced,’ she replied. ‘They had children. Okay?’ Should I
tell him about the magic mirror? she wondered. Would it make things
better? Or worse?

‘They were very bad times,’ said Nutt.

‘Well, look at it like this,’ said Glenda. ‘Most of the people who talk
about orcs now don’t know what they’re on about, but the only orc they
are ever going to _see_ is you. You making beautiful candles. You
training the football team. That will mean a lot. You’ll show them that
orcs don’t go around pulling people’s heads off. That’ll be something to
be proud of.’

‘Well, in fairness, I have to say that when I think of the amount of
radial force that must have been necessary to effectively unscrew a
human head against its owner’s wishes, I am a little impressed. But
that’s now, sitting here with you. Then, I wanted to go up to the hills.
I think that’s how we must have survived. If you didn’t keep away from
humans you died.’

‘Yes, that’s a very good point,’ said Glenda, ‘but I think you should
keep it to yourself for now.’ She noticed a surprised owl, lit up
briefly by the coach’s lamps.

Then she said, keeping her eyes straight ahead, ‘The thing about the
poem . . .’

‘How did you know, Miss Glenda?’ said Nutt.

‘You talk about kindness a lot.’ She cleared her throat. ‘And under the
circumstances, I think Glenda is sufficient.’

‘You were kind to me,’ said Nutt. ‘You are kind to everybody.’

Glenda swiftly put aside a vision of Mr Ottomy and said, ‘No, I’m not,
I’m shouting at everyone all the time!’

‘Yes, but it’s for their own good.’

‘What do we do now?’ Glenda said.

‘I have no idea. But can I tell you something very interesting about
ships?’

It wasn’t exactly what Glenda had expected, but somehow it was one
hundred per cent Nutt. ‘Please tell me the interesting thing about
ships,’ she said.

‘The interesting thing about ships is that the captains of ships have to
be very careful when two ships are close together at sea, particularly
in calm conditions. They tend to collide.’

‘Because of the wind blowing, and that?’ said Glenda, thinking: In
theory this is a romantic-novel situation and I am about to learn about
ships. Iradne Comb-Buttworthy never puts a ship in her books. They
probably don’t have enough reticules.

‘No,’ said Nutt. ‘In fact, to put it simply, each ship shields the other
ship from lateral waves on one side, so by small increments outside
forces bring them together without their realizing it.’

‘Oh! It’s a metaphor?’ said Glenda, relieved. ‘You think we’re being
pushed together.’

‘It’s something like that,’ said Nutt. They rocked as the coach hit a
particularly nasty pothole.

‘So, if we don’t do anything we’ll just get closer and closer?’

‘Yes,’ said Nutt.

The coach jumped and rattled again, but Glenda felt as if she was
travelling over very thin ice. She’d hate to say the wrong thing.

‘You know Trev said that I’d died?’ Nutt continued. ‘Well, that was
true. Probably. Ladyship said that we were made from goblins for the
Evil Emperor. The Igors did it. And they put in something very strange.
It’s a part of you that isn’t quite a part of you. They called it the
Little Brother. It’s tucked in deep inside and absolutely protected and
it’s like having your own hospital with you all the time. I know that I
was hit very hard, but the Little Brother kept me alive and simply cured
things again. There are ways to kill an orc, but there are not many of
them and anyone trying them out on a living orc is not going to have
very much time to get it right. Does that worry you at all?’

‘No, not really,’ said Glenda. ‘I don’t really understand it. I think
it’s more important just to be who you are.’

‘No, I don’t think I should be who I am, because I am an orc. But I have
some plans in that direction.’

Glenda cleared her throat again. ‘This thing with the ships . . . Does
it happen quite quickly?’

‘It starts quite slowly, but it’s quite quick towards the end,’ said
Nutt.

‘The thing is,’ said Glenda, ‘I mean, I can’t just walk away from my
job, and there’s old ladies I go and visit, and you’ll be busy with the
football . . .’

‘Yes. I think we should be doing the things we should be doing, and it’s
the last training day tomorrow, which is actually today now,’ said Nutt.

‘And I’ve got to make a lot of pies.’

‘It’s going to be a very busy time for both of us,’ said Nutt solemnly.

‘Yes. Um, er, do you mind me saying . . . in your lovely poem . . . the
line “The crypt’s a handsome place to be, but none I think leave after
tea” didn’t quite—’

‘Didn’t quite work? I know,’ said Nutt. ‘I feel rather bad about that.’

‘Oh, please don’t! It’s a wonderful poem!’ Glenda burst out, and felt
the ripples in the calm sea.

The rising sun managed to peek around the vast column of smoke that
forever rose from Ankh-Morpork, City of Cities, illustrating almost up
to the edge of space that smoke means progress or, at least, people
setting fire to things. ‘I think we’re going to be so busy that we’re
not going to have much time for . . . ourselves,’ said Glenda.

‘I quite agree,’ said Nutt. ‘Leaving things alone would definitely be
our wisest move.’

Glenda felt light as air as the coach trundled down Broad Way, and it
wasn’t just from lack of sleep. That stuff about boats, I really hope he
doesn’t think it’s all about ships.

There was a crowd outside the university when they arrived, just as
yesterday, but it seemed to have a different complexion now. People were
staring at her and Nutt, and there was something wrong with the way they
were looking.

She reached over to the mound that was Trev, pretended not to hear a
girlish giggle and said, ‘Trev. Could you, er, have a look at this. I
think there’s going to be trouble.’

Trev, very tousled, stuck his head out and said, ‘Hmm, me too. Let’s all
nip in around the back.’

‘We could stay on and get off at the Post Office,’ said Glenda.

‘No,’ said Trev. ‘We ’aven’t done anythin’ wrong.’

As they dismounted from the coach a small boy said to Nutt, ‘Are you the
orc, mister?’

‘Yes,’ said Nutt, as he helped Glenda down. ‘I am an orc.’

‘Cool! Have you ever twisted someone’s head off?’

‘I don’t believe so. I am sure I would have remembered,’ said Nutt.

This got if not applause then a certain amount of approval from some of
the bystanders. It’s his voice, thought Glenda. He sounds posher than a
wizard. You can’t imagine a voice like that with its hands around
somebody’s head.

At this point the back gate opened and Ponder Stibbons came hurrying
through. ‘We saw you from the Hall,’ he said, grabbing Nutt. ‘Come in
quick. Where have you all been?’

‘We ’ad to go to Sto Lat,’ said Trev.

‘On business,’ said Juliet.

‘Personal,’ said Glenda, daring Ponder to object. ‘Is there something
wrong?’

‘There was something in the paper this morning. We have not been having
a very nice time,’ said Ponder, towing them into the relative safety of
the undercrofts.

‘’ave they been sayin’ somethin’ nasty about Mister Nutt?’ said Trev.

‘Not exactly,’ said Ponder. ‘The editor of the _Times_ came round, in
person, and was knocking on the door to see the Archchancellor at
midnight. He wanted to know all about you.’ This was said directly to
Nutt.

‘I bet it was bloody Ottomy that told them,’ growled Glenda. ‘What have
they done?’

‘Well, of course, you know there was all that trouble over the Medusa in
the Watch a little while ago,’ Ponder began.

‘Yes, but you wizards sorted that out,’ said Trev.

‘But no one likes being turned into stone, even if it’s just for half an
hour.’ Ponder sighed. ‘The _Times_ has done one of their thoughtful
pieces. I suppose it isn’t too bad. It quoted the Archchancellor, who
says that Mister Nutt is a hardworking member of the university staff
and there have been no incidents of anyone’s leg being torn off.’

‘They put it like that?’ said Glenda, wide-eyed.

‘Oh, you know the sort of thing if you read the papers a lot,’ said
Ponder. ‘I seriously think they think that it’s their job to calm people
down by first of all explaining why they should be overexcited and very
worried.’

‘Oh, yes, I know they do that,’ said Glenda. ‘How would people get
worried if they weren’t told how to be?’

‘Well, it wasn’t all that bad,’ said Ponder, ‘but a few of the other
papers have picked it up as well and some of the facts have become . . .
elastic. The _Inquirer_ said Nutt is training the football team.’

‘That’s true,’ said Glenda.

‘Well, actually it’s me. I am merely delegating the task to him. I hope
that’s understood? Anyway, they did a cartoon about it.’

Glenda put a hand over her eyes. She hated cartoons in newspapers. ‘Was
it a football team of orcs?’ she said.

Ponder’s look was almost admiring. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘And they did an
article about raising important questions about Vetinari’s open-door
policy, while saying at the same time that rumours that Mister Nutt had
to be chained down were quite likely false.’

‘What about the _Tanty Bugle_ ?’ said Glenda. ‘They never write anything
unless it’s got blood and horrible murder in it.’ She paused and then
added, ‘Or pictures of girls without their vests on.’

‘Oh, yes,’ said Ponder. ‘They did a rather grainy picture of a young
lady with enormous melons.’

‘D’you mean—’ Trev began.

‘No, they were just enormous melons. The green ones. Slightly warty. She
won a contest for growing them, apparently, but in the caption it said
that she’s worried that she won’t be able to sleep easily in her bed now
that orcs are coming into the city.’

‘Is Lord Vetinari doing anything about this?’

‘I haven’t heard,’ said Ponder. ‘Oh, and _Bu-bubble_ want to interview
Mister Nutt. What they call a lifestyle piece.’ He said the words as if
trying to hold them at arm’s length.

‘Have people turned up for training?’ said Nutt calmly.

‘Oh, yes. The ground is heaving.’

‘So we’ll go and train them,’ said Nutt. ‘Don’t worry, I won’t twist
anybody’s head off.’

‘No, don’t make jokes,’ said Glenda. ‘I think this could be terribly
bad.’

‘We know something’s going on with the teams,’ said Ponder. ‘And there
were lots of fights during the night.’

‘About what?’

‘About who’s going to play us.’ Ponder stopped and looked Nutt up and
down. ‘Commander Vimes is back in town and would like to lock you up,’
he said. ‘Only in protective custody, of course.’

‘You mean put him somewhere where they can all find him?’ said Glenda.

‘I would say that the chances of a mob breaking into Pseudopolis Yard
are remote,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, but you’re locking him up. That’s what it would be. He’d be locked
up and coppers chat like everyone else. The orc would be locked up in
prison and if people don’t know why, they’ll make it up, that’s how
people are. Can’t you wizards do something?’

‘Yes,’ said Ponder. ‘We can do practically anything, but we can’t change
people’s minds. We can’t magic them sensible. Believe me, if it were
possible to do that, we would have done it a long time ago. We can stop
people fighting by magic and then what do we do? We have to go on using
magic to stop them fighting. We have to go on using magic to stop them
being stupid. And where does all that end? So we make certain that it
doesn’t begin. That’s why the university is here. That’s what we do. We
have to sit around not doing things because of the hundreds of times in
the past it’s been proved that once you get beyond the abracadabra, hey
presto, changing-the-pigeons-into-ping-pong balls style of magic you
start getting more problems than you’ve solved. It was bad enough
finding ping-pong balls nesting in the attics.’

‘Ping-pong balls nestin’?’ said Trev.

‘I don’t want to talk about it,’ said Ponder glumly.

‘I remember when one of you gentlemen got hungry in the night and cast a
spell for a baked potato,’ said Glenda.

Ponder shuddered. ‘That was the Bursar,’ he said. ‘He really does get
confused about the decimal point.’

‘I remember all those wheelbarrows,’ said Glenda, slightly amused at
Ponder’s discomfort. ‘Days and days it took to get them all out. I heard
we were feeding every beggar in the city and every pig farm out as far
as Sto Lat for weeks.’

Ponder nearly gave a harrumph. ‘Well, yes, there’s an example of why we
have to be careful.’

‘But there’s still going to be a match tomorrow and I would like to
conclude my training programme,’ said Nutt.

‘Ah, there’s another problem. You know Lord Vetinari is allowing the
Hippo to be used for the game? Well, some of the teams are doing their
training there now. You know, a bit of a kick-about, and so on. It’s all
about who will be playing Unseen Academicals.’

‘But that’s the other side of the city,’ said Glenda.

‘Commander Vimes has said the Watch will provide an escort,’ said
Ponder. ‘Just for protection, you know?’

‘Whose?’ said Glenda. ‘You can see what’s going on here. People will see
Mister Nutt as the problem.’

‘Oh, it’s all fun and games until someone loses a head,’ said a voice
behind Glenda. She recognized that voice and it always sounded as if it
was trying to put its hand up her jumper.

‘Pepe? What the hell are you doing here?’

‘And how did you get in?’ Ponder demanded. ‘The Watch are all around
this place.’

Pepe barely gave him a glance. ‘And who are you, smart boy?’

‘I run this university!’

‘Then I should go away and run it, because you’re not going to be any
good around here.’

‘Is this – person – known to you, miss?’ Ponder demanded.

‘Er, yes. He, er, designs clothes.’

‘I am a fashionista,’ said Pepe. ‘I can do things with clothing that you
wouldn’t think were possible.’

‘I’d believe that, at least,’ said Trev.

‘And I know a thing or two about riots and mobs.’

An idea struck Glenda and she whispered to the irate Ponder, ‘Very big
in dwarf circles, sir. Knows a lot of influential people.’

‘So do I,’ said Ponder. ‘Actually, I am one,’ he wailed. ‘But _I_ had to
do the training _myself_ yesterday and I couldn’t remember all of the
things Mister Nutt comes up with so I had them running on the spot,
which I don’t think is very helpful.’

‘There’s somethin’ goin’ bad,’ said Trev. ‘I know about this city. I’ll
go and check a few things out. It’s not as if you really need me.’

‘I do,’ said Juliet.

Trev hesitated, but Nutt had shown him how to do this. He extended a
hand and blew her a kiss as he went through the door.

‘Did you see that?’ said Juliet. ‘He blew me.’

Glenda looked at Pepe, whose eyes were turned up so far in his head that
she could see the whites – although they were red.

A short while later, when most of the UU squad headed for the Hippo with
Glenda and Juliet trailing after them like camp followers, half a dozen
watchmen appeared from the various places that they had selected for a
quiet smoke and fell in after them, trying to make it look as if they
all just happened to be strolling in the same direction.

_Trev was right_, Glenda thought. _It is going bad_.

Trev had not gone very far when his street sense told him he was being
followed. He jinked in and out of a few alleys and waited at the next
corner to confront the follower . . . The follower who wasn’t there. The
alley behind him was empty all the way to the last street. He realized
this at the same time as someone pressed what definitely felt like a
knife to his neck.

‘Cor, this takes me back and so it does,’ said a voice. ‘I reckon I can
still remember every back alley in this place.’

‘I know you, it’s Pepe, isn’t it? You’re a dwarf?’ said Trev, trying not
to turn round.

‘Sort of a dwarf,’ said Pepe.

‘But I don’t have no argument with you, do I?’ said Trev.

Something small and shiny appeared on the edge of Trev’s vision. ‘Sample
piece of moonsilver,’ said Pepe’s voice. ‘I could do more damage with a
broken champagne bottle – and I have, believe you me. I wouldn’t
threaten a bloke like you with a knife, not with that little girl doting
on you like she is. She seems very happy with you and I’d like to keep
her happy.’

‘Somethin’s goin’ down on the street,’ said Trev.

‘What, the whole street? Sounds like fun.’

‘Somethin’s gone wrong, ’asn’t it?’ said Trev.

Only now did Pepe enter his field of view. ‘Not really my problem at
all,’ he said. ‘But there’re some kinds of people I just don’t like.
I’ve seen too many of ’em, bullies and bastards. If you want to learn
athletics very quickly, be born around here with a talent for design and
maybe a few other little preferences. Lord Vetinari has got it all
wrong. He thought he could take on the football and it’s not working.
It’s not like the Thieves’ Guild, see. He had it easy with the Thieves’
Guild. That’s because the Thieves’ Guild is organized. Football ain’t
organized. Just because he’s won over the captains don’t mean that
everyone’s going to meekly get into line after them. There was fights
all over the place last night. Your chums with their shiny new football
and their shiny new jerseys are going to get creamed tomorrow. No, worse
than creamed – cheesed.’

‘I thought you were just someone who made clothes?’ said Trev.

‘Just. Someone. Who. Made. Clothes. Just someone?! I am not anyone. I am
Pepe and I don’t make clothes. I create gorgeous works of art that just
happen to require a body to show them off as they should be seen.
Tailors and dressmakers make clothes. I forge history! Have you heard
about micromail?’

‘Got yer. Yep,’ said Trev.

‘Good,’ said Pepe. ‘Now, what have you heard about micromail?’

‘Well, it doesn’t chafe.’

‘It’s got one or two other little secrets, too . . .’ said Pepe.
‘Anyway, I can’t say I’ve got any time for the wizards, myself. Snooty
lot. But it’s not going to be a game out there tomorrow, it’s going to
be a war. Do you know a bloke called Andy? Andy Shank?’

Trev’s heart sank. ‘What’s he gotta do with it?’

‘I just heard the name, but I reckon I know the type. Lord Vetinari has
done what he wanted. He’s broken the football, but that’s leaving a lot
of sharp bits, if you get my meaning.’

‘The Watch’ll be there tomorrow,’ said Trev.

‘What’s this? What’s this? A street face like you being glad that the
Watch is going to be anywhere?’

‘There’ll be a lot of people watching.’

‘Yeah, won’t that be fun?’ said Pepe. ‘And, you know, there’s people in
this city that would watch a beheading and hold their kiddies up for a
better view. So I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’m not going to give you an
edge, the last thing you’ll want to see tomorrow is an edge. I’ll give
you something that’s much better than an edge. After all, you’re Dave
Likely’s lad.’

‘I’m not playing,’ said Trev. ‘I promised my ol’ mum.’

‘You promised your old mum?’ said Pepe. There wasn’t even any attempt to
hide the disdain. ‘And you think that makes any difference, do you?
You’ve got a star in your hand, lad. You’ll play, all right, so I’ll
tell you what I’ll do. You come along and see me round the back entrance
of Shatta, sorry about that, it sounds better in Dwarfish, and kick on
the door round about midnight. You can bring a chum with you if you
like, but you better bloody well come.’

‘Why do I ’ave to kick the door?’ said Trev.

‘Because you’ll have a bottle of best brandy in each hand. Don’t thank
me. I’m not doing it for you. I’m protecting my investment and, on the
way, that means protecting yours as well. Off you go, boy. You’re late
for training. And me? I’m a soddin’ genius!’

Trev noticed more watchmen around as he headed onwards. They could be
absolute bastards if they felt like it, but Sam Vimes had no use for
coppers that couldn’t read the streets. The Watch was jumpy.

Carter used to live in his mum’s cellar until she rented it out to a
family of dwarfs, and now he lived in the attic, which baked in the
summer and froze in the winter. Carter survived because the walls were
insulated with copies of _Bows & Ammo_, _Back Street Pins_, _Stanley
Howler’s Stamp Monthly_, _Giggles, Girls and Garters_, _Golem Spotter
Weekly_, and _Fretwork Today_. These were only the top layer. In
self-defence against the elements, he glued old copies over the larger
cracks and holes in the roof. As far as Trev knew, Carter had never
persevered beyond a week with any of the hobbies indicated by his rather
embarrassing library except, possibly, the one notoriously associated
with the centrefolds of _Giggles, Girls and Garters_.

Mrs Carter opened the door to him and indicated the stairs with all the
hearty welcome and hospitality that mothers extend to their sons’
no-good street friends. ‘He’s been ill,’ she announced, as if it were a
matter of interest rather than concern.

This turned out to be an understatement. One of Carter’s eyes was a
technicolor mess and there was a livid scar on his face. It took some
time for Trev to find this out because Carter kept telling him to go
away, but since the ramshackle door was held shut with a piece of
string, the application of Trev’s shoulder had seen to that, at least.

Trev stared at the boy, who shrank back into his unspeakably dreadful
bed as if he was expecting to be hit. He didn’t like Carter. No one
liked Carter. It was impossible. Even Mrs Carter, who in theory at least
should entertain some lukewarm affability to her son, didn’t like
Carter. He was fundamentally unlikeable. It was a sad thing to have to
say, but Carter, farting or otherwise, was a wonderful example of
charisntma. He could be fine for a day or two and then some utterly
stupid comment or off-key joke or entirely inappropriate action would
break the spell. But Trev put up with him, seeing in him, perhaps, what
Trev might have been had he not been, in fact, Trev. Maybe there was a
bit of Carter the Farter in every bloke at some time in his life he had
thought, but with Carter it wasn’t just a bit, it was everything.

‘What ’appened?’ Trev said.

‘Nuffin’.’

‘This is Trev. I know about nothin’ ’appenin’. You need to get to the

hospital with that.’

‘It’s worse than it looks,’ Carter moaned.

Trev cracked. ‘Are you bloody stupid? That cut’s a quarter of an inch
from your eye!’

‘It was my fault,’ Carter protested. ‘I upset Andy.’

‘Yeah, I can see where that’d have been your fault,’ Trev said.

‘Where were you last night?’ said Carter.

‘You wouldn’t believe me.’

‘Well, it was a bloody war, that’s what it was.’

‘I found it necessary to spend a little time down the Lat. There was
fightin’, wasn’t there?’

‘The clubs ’ave signed up to this new football and some people ain’t
’appy.’

Trev said, ‘Andy?’ and looked at the livid, oozing scar again. Yep, that
looked like Andy being unhappy.

It was hard to feel sorry for someone as basically unlikeable as Carter,
but just because he had been born with Kick Me Up The Arse tattooed on
to his soul was no reason for doing it. Not to Carter. That was like
pulling wings off flies.

‘Not just Andy,’ said Carter. ‘There’s Tosher Atkinson and Jimmy the
Spoon and Spanner.’

‘Spanner?’ said Trev.

‘And Mrs Atkinson.’

‘_Mrs Atkinson?_ ’

‘And Willy Piltdown, Harry Capstick and the Brisket Boys.’

‘Them? But we _hate_ them. Andy hates them. They hate Andy. One foot on
their turf and you get sent home in a sack!’

‘Well, you know what they say,’ said Carter. ‘My enemy’s enemy is my
enemy.’

‘I think you got that wrong,’ said Trev. ‘But I know what you mean.’

Trev stared at nothing, utterly aghast. The subjects of that litany of
names were Faces. Hugely influential in the world of the teams and, more
importantly, among the supporters. They owned the Shove. Pepe had been
right. Vetinari thought the captains were in charge and the captains
were not in charge. The Shove was in charge and the Faces ran the
Shove.¹⁹

‘There’s going to be a team put together for tomorrow and they’ll try to
get as many of them in as possible,’ Carter volunteered.

‘Yeah, I heard.’

‘They’re going to show Vetinari what they think of his new football.’

‘I didn’t hear the name of the Stollops there,’ Trev said.

‘I hear their dad’s got them doing choir practice every night,’ said
Carter.

‘The captains did sign up,’ said Trev, ‘so it’ll look bad for them. But
’ow much do you think Andy and his little chums care ’bout that?’ He
leaned forward. ‘Vetinari’s got the Watch, though, ’asn’t he? And you
know about the Watch. Okay, so there’s some decent bastards among ’em
when you get ’em by theirselves, but if it all goes wahoonie-shaped
they’ve got big, big sticks and big, big trolls and they’ve not got to
bother too much about who they hit because they’re the Watch, which
means it’s all legal. And, if you get ’em really pissed off, they’ll add
a charge of damaging their truncheons with your face. And talking of
faces, exactly ’ow come you’re a quarter-inch away from being a
candidate for a white stick?’

‘I told Andy I didn’t think it was a good idea,’ said Carter.

Trev couldn’t hide his surprise. Even that much bravery was alien to
Carter. ‘Well, as it ’appens, it might be a blessin’ in disguise. You
just stay here in bed and you won’t end up stuck between the Old Sam and
Andy.’ He stopped because of a rustling noise.

Since Carter glued pages of his used magazines to the walls with
flour-and-water paste, the attic was home to some quite well fed mice,
and for some reason, one of them had just gnawed its way to freedom via
the chest of last year’s Miss April, thus giving her a third nipple,
which was, in fact, staring at Trev and wobbling. It was a sight to put
anyone off their tea.

‘What’re you goin’ to do?’ said Carter.

‘Anything I can,’ said Trev.

‘You know Andy’s out to get you? You and that weird bloke.’

‘I’m not afraid of Andy,’ said Trev. As a statement, this was entirely
true. He was not frightened of Andy. He was mortally terrified to his
boots and back again, with a visceral fear that dripped off his ribs
like melting snow.

‘Everyone’s afraid of Andy, Trev. If they’re smart,’ said Carter.

‘Hey, Fartmeister, I’m Trevor Likely!’

‘I think you’re goin’ to need a lot more than that.’

***

I am going to need a lot more than that, thought Trev, travelling at
speed across the city. If even Pepe knew there was something on the
boil, then surely the Old Sam would know too? Oops.

He sprinted quickly to the horse bus’s rear platform and landed in the
road before the conductor was anywhere near. If they didn’t catch you on
the bus then they couldn’t catch you at all, and while they were issued
with those big shiny choppers to deter non-paying passengers, everyone
knew that a) they were too scared to use them and b) the amount of
trouble they would get into if they actually whacked a respectable
member of society did not bear thinking of.

He darted through the alley into Cockbill Street, spotted another bus
plodding its way in the right direction, jumped on to the running board
and held on. He was lucky this time. The conductor gave him a look and
then very carefully did not see him.

By the time he reached the big junction known as Five Ways, he had
travelled almost the width of the city at an average speed faster than
walking pace and had hardly had to run very far at all. A near perfect
result for Trev Likely, who wouldn’t walk if he could ride.

And there, right in front of him, was the Hippo. It used to be a
racetrack until all that was moved up to the far end of Ankh. Now, it
was just a big space that every large town needs for markets, fairs, the
occasional insurrection and, of course, the increasingly popular
cart-tail sales, which were very fashionable with people who wanted to
buy their property back.

It was full today, without even a stolen shovel to be seen. All over the
field, people were kicking footballs about. Trevor relaxed a little.
There were pointy hats in the distance and no one seemed to be doing any
murder.

‘Wotcher, howya doing?’

He adjusted his eyeline down a little bit. ‘How’s it goin’, Throat?’

‘I’m hearing you’re kind of associated with Unseen Academicals,’ said
Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler, the city’s most enterprising but inexplicably
least successful businessman.

‘Don’t tell me you’ve come to sell pies?’

‘Nah, nah, nah,’ said Dibbler. ‘Too many amateurs here today. My pies
aren’t just knocked up out of rubbish for a load of drunken old football
fans.’

‘So _your_ pies are for—?’ Trev left the question hanging in the air
with a noose on the end of it.

‘Anyway, pies are so yesterday,’ said Dibbler dismissively. ‘I am on the
ground floor of football memorabilityness.’

‘What’s that, then?’

‘Like genuine autographed team jerseys and that sort of thing. I mean,
look here.’ Dibbler produced from the large tray around his neck a
smaller version of what one of the new _gloing! gloing!_ footballs would
be if it were about a half of the size and had been badly carved out of
wood. ‘See those white patches? That’s so they can be signed by the
team.’

‘You’re goin’ to get them signed, are you?’

‘Well, no, I think people would like to get that done themselves. The
personal touch, you know what I mean?’

‘So they’re actually just painted balls of wood and nothin’ else?’ said
Trev.

‘But authentic!’ said Dibbler. ‘Just like the shirts. Want one? Five
dollars to you, and that’s cutting me own throat.’ He produced a skimpy
red cotton item and waved it enticingly.

‘What’s that?’

‘Your team colours, right?’

‘Two big yellow Us on the front?’ said Trev. ‘That’s wrong! Ours has got
two little Us interlocked on the left breast like a badge. Very
stylish.’

‘Pretty much the same,’ said Dibbler airily. ‘No one’ll notice. And I
had to keep the price down for the kiddies.’

He leaned closer. ‘Anything you can tell me about the game tomorrow,
Trev? Looks like the teams are putting together a tough squad.
Vetinari’s not going to get it all his own way for once?’

‘We’ll play a good game, you’ll see,’ said Trev.

‘Right! Can’t lose with a Likely playing, right?’

‘I just help around the place. I’m not playin’. I promised my ol’ mum
after Dad died.’

Dibbler looked around at the crowded stadium of the Hippo. He appeared
to have something else on his mind other than the need for the next
dollar. ‘What happens if your lot lose?’ he said.

‘It’s only a game,’ said Trev.

‘Ah, but Vetinari’s got his reputation based on it.’

‘It’s a game. One side wins, one side loses. Just a game.’

‘A lot of people aren’t thinking like that,’ said Dibbler. ‘Things
always come out well for Vetinari,’ he went on, staring at the sky. ‘And
that’s the magic, see? Everyone thinks he always gets it right. What do
you think will happen if he gets things wrong?’

‘It’s _just_ a game, Throat, only a game . . . Be seein’ you.’ Trev
wandered onwards. People were putting up tiers of wooden stands on one
side of the arena, and because this was Ankh-Morpork, when two or more
people gathered together thousands turned up just to wonder why.

And there was Mr Ponder Stibbons, sitting at a long table with some of
the football captains. Oh, yes, the Rules Committee. There had been talk
about that. Even with the rules written down, and half of them as old as
the game itself, there were a few things that had to be made clear. He
arrived in time to hear Ponder say, ‘Look, you can’t have a situation in
the new game where people hang around right next to the other team’s
goal.’

‘Worked all right before,’ said one of the captains.

‘Yes, but the ball flies. One really good kick would send it down half
the length of the Hippo. If someone gets that right the goalkeeper
wouldn’t have a chance.’

‘So, what you’re saying,’ said Mr Stollop, who had become a kind of
spokesman for the captains, ‘is that there’s got to be two blokes from
team A in front of a bloke from team B before he scores?’

‘Yes, that’s about right,’ said Ponder stiffly, ‘but one of them is the
goalkeeper.’

‘So, what happens if one of them fellers nips past him downfield before
he kicks the ball?’

‘Then he will be what is traditionally known as off his side,’ said
Ponder.

‘Off his head, more like,’ said one of the captains. And since this had
the same shape as humour, it got a laugh. ‘If that’s true, you could end
up with loads of blokes rushing past one another, all trying to get the
other poor buggers into an unlawful position without any of the poor
devils moving, right?’

‘Nevertheless, we are standing by this rule. We have tried it out. It
allows for free movement on the field. In the old game it wasn’t unusual
for players to bring their lunch and a copy of _Girls, Giggles and
Garters_ and just wait for the ball to come along.’

‘Hello, Trev, how are you getting on?’ It was Andy, and he was standing
behind Trev.

There must be a thousand people here today, Trev thought in a curiously
slow and blissful sort of way. And a lot of watchmen. I can see a couple
of them from here. Andy isn’t going to try anything right here, is he?

Well, yes, he might, because that’s what made him Andy. The little bee
that buzzed in his brain might bang against the wrong bit and he would
carve your face off. Oh, yes, and there was Tosher Atkinson and his mum,
strolling about as if out for a walk.

‘Haven’t seen you about much lately, Trev,’ said Andy. ‘Been busy, I
suspect?’

‘I thought you were lyin’ low?’ said Trev hopelessly.

‘Well, you know what they say. Sooner or later all sins are forgiven.’

In your case, quite a bit later, Trev thought.

‘Besides,’ said Andy, ‘I’m turning over a new leaf, ain’t I?’

‘Oh, yeah?’

‘Got out of the Shove,’ said Andy. ‘Gotta put aside my scallywag ways.
Time to fit in.’

‘Glad to hear it,’ said Trev, waiting for the knife.

‘So I’m a key player for Ankh-Morpork United.’ It wasn’t a knife, but it
had a rather similar effect. ‘Apparently his lordship gave them the
idea,’ Andy said, still speaking in the same greasy, friendly tone. ‘Of
course, no one wants to be the team playing you wizards. So there is,
like, a new one just for the occasion.’

‘I thought you never played?’ said Trev weakly.

‘Ah, but that was in the bad old days before football was open to more
individual effort and enterprise. See this shirt?’ he said.

Trev looked down. He hadn’t thought much about what the man was wearing,
just that he was there.

‘White with blue trim,’ said Andy cheerfully. ‘Very snazzy.’ He turned
around. The numeral 1 was on the back in blue with the name Andy Shank
above it. ‘My idea. Very sensible. Means we’ll know who we are from the
back.’

‘And I told your wizards that your gentlemen ought to do the same,’ said
Mrs Atkinson, surely one of the most feared Faces who had ever wielded a
sharpened umbrella with malice aforethought. Grown men would back away
from Mrs Atkinson, otherwise grown men bled.

Just what we need, thought Trev. Our names on the back as well. Saves
them having the trouble to go round the front before they stab.

‘Still, I can’t stand here chattin’ all day with you. Got to talk to the
team. Got to think about tactics.’

There will be a referee, thought Trev. The Watch will be there. Lord
Vetinari will be there. Unfortunately, Andy Shank will be there, too,
and Nutt wants me as his assistant and so I’ve got to be there. If it
all goes wrong, the floor of the arena isn’t going to be the place to be
and I’ll be in it.

‘And if you’re wondering where that dim little girl of yours is, she’s
back there with the fat girl. Honestly, what must you think of me?’

‘Nothing, right up until you said that,’ said Trev. ‘And now I do.’

‘Give my best to the orc,’ said Andy. ‘Shame to hear he’s the last one.’

They strolled on, but Trev was quick enough to get out of the way before
Mrs Atkinson sliced at his leg with her stick.

Find Juliet. Find Nutt. Find Glenda. Find help. Find a ticket to
Fourecks.

Trev had never fought. Never _really_ fought. Oh, there had been times
when he was younger when he was drawn into a bit of a ruck and it was
politic to be among the other kids, holding a makeshift weapon in his
hands. He’d been so good at appearing to be everywhere, shouting a lot
and then running into the thick of the fray, but never actually catching
up with the real action. He could go to the Watch and tell them . . .
that Andy had been threatening? Andy was _always_ threatening. When
trouble struck in the Shove as it sometimes did, when two tribes were
brought into conjunction, there was always the forest of legs to dive
between and once, when Trev had been really desperate, a number of
shoulders to run across . . . What was he thinking? He wouldn’t be
there. He wasn’t going to play. He’d promised his old mum. Everyone knew
he’d promised his old mum. He’d like to play, but his old mum wouldn’t
like it. It was as if his old mum had written him a note: Dear Andy,
please do not knife Trevor today because he has promised not to play.

He blinked away the sensation that a knife was already hurtling towards
him and heard the voice of Nutt saying, ‘Oh, I have heard about
_Bu-bubble_.’ There was Glenda and Juliet and Nutt and Juliet and a
slightly worried young lady with a notebook and Juliet. There was also
Juliet, but it was hard to even notice her because Juliet was there.

‘She says she wants to write an article,’ said Glenda, who had clearly
waylaid the journalist. ‘Her name is Miss—’

‘Roz,’ said the girl. ‘Everyone’s talking about you, Mister Nutt. Would
you answer a few questions, please? We have a very now audience.’²⁰

‘Yes?’ he ventured.

‘How does it feel to be an orc, Mister Nutt?’

‘I am not sure. How does it feel to be human?’ said Nutt.

‘Have your experiences as an orc affected the way you will play
football?’

‘I will only be playing as a substitute. My role is merely that of a
trainer. And, I have to say, in answer to your question, I’m not sure I
have had many experiences as an orc up until now.’

‘But are you advising the players to rip opponents’ heads off?’ the girl
giggled.

Glenda opened her mouth, but Nutt said solemnly, ‘No, that would be
against the rules.’

‘I hear they think you’re a very good trainer. Why do you think this
is?’

Despite the patent stupidity of the question, Nutt seemed to think
deeply. ‘One must consider the horizons of possibility,’ he said slowly.
‘_E Pluribus Unum_, the many become one, but it could just as easily be
said that the one becomes many, _Ex uno multi_, and indeed, as Von Sliss
said in _The Effluence of Reality_, the one, when carefully considered,
may in fact be a many in different clothing.’

Glenda looked at the girl’s face. Her expression hadn’t moved and
neither had her pencil. Nutt smiled to himself and continued. ‘Now let
us consider this in the light, as it may be, of the speeding ball. Where
it has come from we believe we know, but where it will land is an
everchanging conundrum, even if only considered in four-dimensional
space. And there we have the existential puzzle that confronts the
striker, for he is both striker and struck. As the ball flies, all
possibilities are inexorably linked, as Herr Frugal said in _Das Nichts
des Wissens_, “Ich kann mich nicht genau erinnern, aber es war so etwas
wie eine Vanillehaltige süsse Nachspeisenbeigabe,” although I believe he
was on some medication at the time. Who is mover and who is moved? Given
that the solution can only be arrived at through conceptual
manifestation using, I believe, some perception of transfinite space, it
can clearly be seen that among the possibilities is that the ball will
land everywhere at the same time or turn out never to have been kicked
at all. It is my job to reduce this metaphysical overhead, as it were,
and to give my lads some acceptable paradigm, such as, it might be,
whack it right down the middle, my son, and at least if the goalie stops
it you will have given him a hot handful he won’t forget in a hurry.

‘You see, the thing about football is that it is not about football. It
is a most fascinating multi-dimensional philosophy, an extrusion, as it
were, of what Doctor Maspinder promulgated in _Das Meer von
Unvermeidlichkeit_. Now, you would say to me, I am sure,’ he went on,
‘What of the 4–4–2 or even the 4–1–2–1–2, yes? And my answer to that
would be, there is only the one. Traditionally we say there are eleven
players in the team, but that is because of our rather feeble
perceptions. In truth, there is only the one and therefore, I would
say,’ he gave a little laugh, ‘daring to adapt a line from _The Doors of
Deception_: it does not matter whether you win or lose so long as you
score the most goals.’

The girl looked down at her notepad. ‘Could you give that to me a little
bit more simply?’

‘Oh, I’m sorry,’ said Nutt. ‘I thought I had.’

‘And I think that’s about enough,’ said Glenda, taking the girl by the
arm.

‘But I haven’t asked him about his favourite spoon,’ she wailed.

Nutt cleared his throat. ‘Well, I would have appreciated some notice of
that question because it is quite a large field, but I think the Great
Bronze Spoon of Cladh, which weighed more than a ton, would definitely
have to be a runner, though we must not forget the set of spoons, each
one smaller than a grain of rice, crafted by some unknown genius for the
concubines of the Emperor Whezi. But undoubtedly, from what I can
gather, these were surpassed by the notorious clock-work spoon, devised
by Bloody Stupid Johnson, which could apparently stir coffee so fast
that the cup would actually rise up from the saucer and hit the ceiling.
Oh, to be a fly on that wall, but not too close, obviously. Possibly
less well known is the singing spoon of the learned sage Ly Tin Wheedle,
which could entertain the dinner table by singing comic songs. Among
other great spoons—’

‘That _is_ enough,’ said Glenda, tugging the girl away for her own good.

‘He’s an orc?’ the girl said.

‘So everyone says,’ said Glenda.

‘Were they all like that? I thought it was all about twisting heads
off?’

‘Well, I suspect people get bored with the same old thing.’

‘But how does he know all about spoons?’

‘Believe me, if anyone has ever written _Great Spoons of the World_,
Mister Nutt has read it.’

Trev heard the girl’s plaintive voice as Glenda almost forcibly led her
away, or at least away from Nutt. ‘I really wanted to talk to Jewels,’
Trev heard the girl say, as she walked past Juliet without a glance.
‘But she’s hiding out, everyone says.’

He hurried across and pulled the other two in a huddle towards him.
‘There’s gonna be murder tomorrow,’ he said. ‘The wizards can’t use
magic and Ankh-Morpork United is gonna be made up out of the toughest,
nastiest bunch of buggers that’re outside of the Tanty.’

‘We shall have to change our tactics to suit, then,’ said Nutt.

‘Are you nu— insane? I’m talkin’ about people like Andy, Nutt. An’ he
might not be the worst one.’

‘But everything is a matter of tactics. A respect for strengths and
weaknesses and the proper utilization of the knowledge,’ said Nutt.

‘Listen!’ said Trev. ‘There won’t be time for that sort of thing.’

‘If I may quote—’ Nutt began.

‘I said listen! Do you know any quotes by people who have been knifed in
the back an’ then kicked in the nu—’ He stopped and then continued.
‘Kicked when they’re lyin’ on the ground, yes? Because that’s what you
need to be thinkin’ about at the moment.’

‘The Watch will be there,’ said Nutt.

‘But generally their way of dealing with a complicated event is to get
everyone lyin’ on the ground,’ said Trev. ‘That makes it simpler.’

‘I feel certain that we could beat any team at football,’ said Nutt
soothingly.

Trev looked around him in a desperate search for anyone who might have a
grip. ‘It doesn’t work like that! It’s not about the football!’

‘I don’t think I want to see anyone hurt,’ said Juliet.

‘Then you’ll have to close your eyes,’ said Trev. ‘Nutt, you think that
everythin’ is going to be nice and sportsmanlike ’cos that’s how the new
football has been designed, but it’s the same old people out there. You
know what I think?’

‘My dad says it won’t look very good for Vetinari if the Academicals
lose,’ said Juliet.

‘An’ will he be glad about that?’ said Trev.

‘Well, I suppose, yes, but even Dad says prob’ly better to have bloody
Vetinari than most of the buggers we’ve had.’

That was because the city _worked_, thought Trev. It had been a mess
before Vetinari had taken over and no one knew exactly how he’d done it.
He’d got the Watch working properly. He’d got the war between the dwarfs
and the trolls sorted out. He let people do whatever they liked,
provided they did whatever _he_ liked. And above all, the city was
crammed with people and money. Everyone wanted to live in Ankh-Morpork.
Could he really be shaken down because the new football went bad? Well,
the answer was, of course, yes – because that’s how people were.

Trev mentioned this to Glenda as she came back from ushering the bemused
Roz out of the range of more of Nutt’s philosophy. She looked at Trev
and said, ‘Do you think Vetinari knows about this?’

‘Dunno,’ said Trev. ‘Well, I know he’s s’posed to have lots of spies,
but I dunno whether they’d know about this.’

‘Do you think someone ought to tell him?’ said Glenda.

Trev laughed. ‘What are you suggestin’? That we go over to the palace,
walk right up to him and say, “Excuse us, mister, there are a few things
that have escaped your attention?” ’

‘Yes,’ said Glenda.

‘Thank you, Drumknott, that will be all for now,’ said Vetinari.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Drumknott. He nodded at Lady Margolotta and oiled his
way noiselessly out of the room.

‘Havelock, I appreciate that Drumknott is very competent, but he always
seems to me to be a rather strange little man.’

‘Well, it would be a funny old world if we were all alike, madam,
although I admit not very funny if we were all like Drumknott. But he is
loyal and excessively trustworthy,’ said Vetinari.

‘Hmm,’ said her ladyship. ‘Does he have much of a personal life?’

‘I believe that he collects different types of stationery,’ said
Vetinari.

‘I have sometimes speculated that he might change his life for the
better should he meet a young lady willing to dress up as a manila
envelope.’

They were on the balcony outside the Oblong Office, which offered a
perfect view of the centre of the city while leaving the viewer almost
invisible.

‘The accord is going ahead?’ said Vetinari.

‘Certainly,’ said her ladyship. ‘Peace at last between dwarfs and
trolls.’

Vetinari smiled. ‘The word “peace” is generally defined as a period of
rest and rearmament before the next war. Were many assassinations
necessary?’

‘Havelock, sometimes you are too direct!’

‘I do beg your pardon, it’s just that the progress of history requires
butchers as well as shepherds.’

‘There were no assassinations,’ said her ladyship. She turned her eyes
upwards. ‘There was, however, a terrible mining accident and a rather
unusual rock slide. But, of course, there is still the Loko business to
sort out. The dwarfs still want total extermination.’

‘How many orcs are there?’

‘Nobody knows. Perhaps Nutt will be able to find them.’

‘We must not have genocide,’ said Vetinari. ‘History has a way of
repaying.’

‘He is turning out to be quite a surprise.’

‘So I understand. From the reports I have been receiving, all that the
orcs were not, he is.’

‘But he will remain an orc underneath it all,’ said her ladyship.

‘I wonder what remains under all of us?’ said Vetinari.

‘You’ve taken a very big risk, you know,’ said Lady Margolotta.

‘Madam, this city is all risk, I assure you.’

‘And power is a game of smoke and mirrors,’ said her ladyship, reaching
for the wine.

‘Oddly enough, Commander Vimes reminds me of that nearly every day. No
civil police force could hold out against an irate and resolute
population. The trick is not to let them realize that. Yes?’

There was a knock at the door. It was Drumknott again. ‘I am sorry to
interrupt, sir, madam, but in the circumstances I thought it would be a
good idea.’ He sniffed. ‘It’s the lady with the pies.’

‘Ah, Miss Sugarbean, legendary inventor of the famous Ploughman’s Pie,’
said Vetinari. He glanced at her ladyship. ‘And Mister Nutt’s friend.’
‘I have met her, Havelock. She harangued me.’

‘Yes, she does it very well. You feel as if you’ve had a nice cold bath.
Do show her in, Drumknott.’

‘And there is a young man with her. I recognize him as Trevor Likely,
son of the famous footballer Dave Likely, and I am informed by her that
she has indeed brought you a Ploughman’s Pie.’

‘You would take untested food from a member of the public?’ said her
ladyship, horrified.

‘Certainly from this one,’ said Vetinari. ‘There is no possible way that
she would ever put poison in anything. Not out of respect for me, you
understand, but out of respect for the food. Don’t leave. I think you
will find this . . . interesting.’

The pie was still warm in Glenda’s hands as she stepped into the Oblong
Office. She herself almost froze at the sight of Lady Margolotta, but a
certain robustness kicked in.

‘Do I have to curtsy?’ she said.

‘Not unless you really feel the need.’

‘We’ve come to warn you,’ said Trev.

‘Indeed.’ Vetinari raised an eyebrow.

‘Ankh-Morpork United will walk all over Unseen Academicals with great
big boots on.’

‘Oh, dear. Do you think that will be the case?’

‘They’re not yer average players!’ Trev blurted out. ‘They’re from the
Shove. They go armed.’

‘Ah, yes. Football as warfare,’ said Vetinari. ‘Well, thank you for
telling me.’

Silence fell. Vetinari broke it by saying, ‘Was there anything else you
would like to say?’ He looked at the pie that Glenda was holding out in
front of her like some kind of chastity device.

‘Can’t you do something?’ she said.

‘It’s a game, Miss Sugarbean. Having suggested the match in the first
place, what do you think I would look like if I intervened? There will,
after all, be rules. There will, after all, be a referee.’

‘They won’t care,’ said Trev.

‘Then I suppose the Watch will have to do its duty. And now, if you will
excuse me, I have affairs of state to attend to, but please leave the
pie.’

‘One moment,’ said her ladyship. ‘Why have you come to warn his
lordship, young lady?’

‘Isn’t that the sort of thing I ought to do?’ said Glenda.

‘And you walked in, just like that?’

‘Well, the pie helped.’

‘We have met before, you know,’ said her ladyship.

She stared at Glenda and Glenda stared back, and she finally managed,
‘Yes, I know, and I’m not frightened and I’m not sorry.’

The battle of the stares went on for a year too long and then Lady
Margolotta turned her head away sharply and said, ‘Well, you have got
one of them right, but I am sure I shall enjoy the pie and also the
match.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said Vetinari. ‘Thank you both for calling, but if you will
excuse us we do have matters of state to discuss.’

‘Well!’ said Lady Margolotta as the door shut behind them. ‘What type of
people are you incubating in this city of yours, Havelock?’

‘I imagine some of the very best,’ said Vetinari.

‘Two common people can barge in on you without so much as an
appointment?’

‘But with a pie,’ said Vetinari quickly.

‘You were expecting them?’

‘Let us just say that I was not unduly surprised,’ said Vetinari. ‘I
certainly know about the make-up of Ankh-Morpork United. So does the
Watch.’

‘And you are going to let them into an arena with a bunch of old wizards
who have promised not to do magic?’

‘A bunch of old wizards and Mister Nutt,’ said Vetinari cheerfully.
‘Apparently he’s very good at tactical planning.’

‘I can’t allow that.’

‘This is my city, Margolotta. There are no slaves in Ankh-Morpork.’

‘He is my ward. I expect you will ignore that, though.’

‘I have every intention of doing so. After all, it’s only a game.’

‘But a game is not about games. And what sort of game do you think you
will get tomorrow?’

‘A war,’ said Vetinari. ‘And the thing about war is that it’s about
war.’

Lady Margolotta shot out her long sleeve and a fine steel dagger was
suddenly in her hand.

‘I suggest you cut it in half,’ said Vetinari, indicating the pie, ‘and
I will choose which half to pick up.’

‘But what if one half has more pickled onions than the other?’

‘Then I think that will be open to negotiation. Would you like some more
. . . wine?’

‘Did you see that she tried to stare me down?’ said Margolotta.

‘Yes,’ said Vetinari. ‘I saw that she succeeded.’

When Glenda and Trev got back to the Hippo, Nutt looked at them
expectantly. ‘He hardly listened,’ said Trev.

‘Quite so,’ said Nutt. ‘I am confident of our success on the morrow. I
am quite certain that we will be tactically supreme.’

‘I’m just glad I won’t be playin’, that’s all,’ said Trev.

‘Yes, Mister Trev, that really is a great shame.’

From the nearby table where last-minute adjustments were being made by
the Football League came the voice of somebody saying, ‘Nah, nah. Look,
you’ve still got it wrong. If a bloke from side B is closer to the
goalkeeper – no, I tell a lie – if he’s closer to the goal than the
goalkeeper, then he surely puts one away there and then. Stands to
reason.’

There was a sigh that could only have come from Ponder Stibbons. ‘No, I
don’t think you understand . . .’

Another voice chipped in. ‘If the goalkeeper is that far out of his goal
then he’s a pillock!’

‘Look, let’s start again,’ said another voice. ‘Supposing I’m this bloke
here.’ Trev looked across and saw one of the men flick a screwed-up
piece of paper across the table. ‘Like, I’ve kicked the ball that far
and this is me, this piece of paper. Then what?’ He flicked the paper
once again, which hit Ponder’s pencil.

‘No! I’ve already explained that. And stop flicking bits of paper
around, I find it very confusing.’

‘But it must work if he dribbles on it,’ said a voice.

‘Hold on a minute, though,’ said yet another voice. ‘What happens,
right, if you get the ball in your own half of the field and run all the
way, not passing it to anyone else, and get it into the net?’

‘That would be perfectly legal,’ said Ponder.

‘Yeah, but there’s no way that’s goin’ to happen, is there?’ said the
man who had just flicked a soggy piece of paper and had enjoyed it so
much that he’d flicked another one.

‘But if he tries and succeeds it would be magnificent football, would it
not?’ said Ponder.

‘Where’s our team?’ said Trev, looking around.

‘I’ve suggested they have an early night,’ said Ponder.

‘An early night for wizards is two o’clock in the morning,’ said Glenda.

‘I have also given instructions that the team are to have a special meal
this evening,’ said Nutt. ‘On that note, Miss Glenda, I shall have to
ask you to lock the Night Kitchen.’

***

Stony silence hung over the dining room that evening.

‘I don’t eat salads,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no relation). ‘They gives me
the wind.’

‘How can a man live without pasta?’ said Bengo. ‘This is barbaric!’

‘I hope you notice that my plate is as barren as yours, gentlemen,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Mister Nutt is training us and I’m allowing Mister Nutt the
driver’s seat. Nor is there to be any smoking this evening.’

There was a chorus of dismay and he raised his hand for silence. ‘Also,
his instruction here . . .’ He looked closer at Nutt’s rather untidy
writing and gave a little smile. ‘There is to be no sexual congress.’
This did not meet with the reaction he had expected.

‘That means talking about it, doesn’t it?’ said the Chair of Indefinite
Studies.

‘No, that’s oral sex,’ said Rincewind.

‘No, that’s listening to it.’

Bengo Macarona sat with a dazed look on his face.

‘Now, I don’t want any sneaking off for midnight snacks,’ said Ridcully.
‘There are rules. Mrs Whitlow and Miss Sugarbean have been told that I
fully back Mister Nutt’s authority here. Surely you gentlemen could show
some backbone?’

‘In an attempt to show solidarity with the rest of the team,’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes, ‘I am led to believe that there is some cheese
in the mousetrap in my room.’

Ridcully was left all alone with only the echo of falling chairs for
company.

The Archchancellor repaired to his own room and tossed his hat on to its
stand. There have to be rules, he said to himself, and there has to be a
rule for them and a rule for me. He went to his eight-poster bed and
opened the hatch containing the tobacco jar. It now contained a little
note instead, saying,

  _‘Dear Archchancellor,_

  _In accordance with your ratification of Mister Nutt’s instructions
  that the faculty are not to be allowed food or the implements of
  smoking this evening, I’ve taken the liberty of clearing away your
  cigarettes and pipe tobacco. May I also mention that I have emptied
  the cool cupboard of the usual cold cuts and pickles to avoid
  temptation.’_

‘Bugger,’ said Ridcully under his breath.

He walked to his wardrobe and rummaged in the pocket of his smoking
jacket, coming up with a note that said,

  _‘In accordance with Mister Nutt’s rules, as ratified by yourself,
  Archchancellor_ [and it was remarkable how reproachful Mrs Whitlow
  could make her handwriting], _I have taken the liberty of removing
  your emergency peppermints.’_

‘Change and decay!’ Ridcully declared to the night air. ‘I am surrounded
by traitors! They thwart me at every turn.’ He wandered disconsolately
past his bookcase and pulled out Boddrys’ _Occult Companion_, a book he
knew by heart. And because he knew the book by heart, page 14 opened on
to a neat little cavity, which contained a packet of extra-strong
liquorice mints, an ounce of Jolly Sailor tobacco and a packet of
Wizzla’s . . . And, as it turned out, a small note:

  _‘Dear Archchancellor,_

  _I just didn’t have the heart. Mrs Whitlow.’_

It seemed darker than usual. Generally, the Archchancellor’s rulings
were obeyed, and it seemed to the members of Unseen Academicals that
every door was closed, indeed slammed, as they searched for food. Every
pantry was locked and spell-proofed. The team trudged helplessly from
one hall to another.

‘I do have some reheatable pasta in my room,’ said Bengo Macarona. ‘My
grandmother gave it to me before I came down here. It will keep for ten
years and my grandmother says that it will taste as good after ten years
as it does now. I regret that she may have been telling the truth.’

‘If you get it, we could cook it up in my room,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘If you like. It contains alligator testicles, for nourishment. They are
very popular at home.’

‘I didn’t know alligators had testicles,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

‘They haven’t got ’em any more,’ said Bledlow Nobbs (no relation).

‘I’ve got a biscuit, we could share that out,’ said Ponder Stibbons. He
was immediately pierced by their questioning gazes. ‘No,’ he said, ‘I am
not going to countermand the Archchancellor’s orders any further than
that. I would never hear the last of it, gentlemen. Without a hierarchy
we are nothing.’

‘The Librarian will have some bananas,’ said Rincewind.

‘Are you sure?’ said Macarona.

‘I think the Librarian has a motto in these cases: “If you try to take
my bananas from me, I will reclaim them from your cold dead hands.” ’

Trev, who had been lurking in the shadows, waited until the rumble of
stomachs died away in the distance and then hurried back and knocked on
the bolted door of the Night Kitchen. ‘They’ve all met up and they’re
headed for the Library.’

‘Good, I think he’ll share his bananas with them,’ said Nutt.

‘I don’t really see the point,’ said Glenda.

‘The point is they are friends. Partners in adversity. They are a team.
That is football. You have to train a team to be a team and I will have
no problem with them having a very large breakfast in the morning.’

Nutt was changing, Trev thought. ‘Can I ask you a personal question,
Mister Nutt?’

‘Nearly all the questions people ask me are personal, though do go
ahead, Mister Trev.’

‘Well, er, all right. Sometimes you look big and sometimes you look
small. What’s that all about?’

‘It is something built into us,’ said Nutt. ‘I believe that it is a
product of the morphic field contracting and expanding. It affects your
perceptions.’

‘When you’re upset, you do look very small,’ said Glenda.

‘What size do I look now?’

‘Pretty big,’ said Trev.

‘Good,’ said Nutt, helping himself to a slice of pie. ‘Tomorrow I intend
to look even bigger.’

‘There’s somethin’ else we have to do,’ said Trev. ‘Pepe wants to help
me. He thinks I’m gonna play football.’

‘Well, you are going to play football,’ said Nutt.

‘No! You know this! I promised my ol’ mum and you can’t break a promise
to your ol’ mum, Gods rest her soul. Do you ’ave keys to the wine
cellar, Glenda?’

‘Do you think I’d tell you, Trev Likely?’

‘Thought not. I want two bottles of best brandy. And, er, could you all
come with me, please? I think Pepe means well, but he, er, well, you
know him, it’s midnight and everythin’.’

‘I think I know Pepe,’ said Glenda.

There was a guard on the rear door of Shatta, but before he could even
think of turning away Trev and his bodyguards, Pepe appeared. ‘Cor!
Three chums. I must be very frightening,’ he said, leering. ‘Hello,
chums, got the brandy?’

‘Yes, what’s this all about, Pepe? You’ve been putting the willies up
Trev,’ said Glenda.

‘I never have! I hardly ever put the willies up anyone these days. I
just told him he was going to play in the football.’

‘I promised my ol’ mum,’ said Trev, clinging to the declaration as if it
were a tiny raft in a choppy sea.

‘But you’ve got a star in your hand and you don’t have much of a
choice.’

Trev looked at his palm. ‘Just a lot of lines.’

‘Well there’s them that has the sight and there again there’s them that
don’t. I’m one of those that have. ’s metaphorical, see. But all it is
is that I would like to give you a little something that may be of use
to you tomorrow. What am I saying? It might damn well save your life,’
said Pepe. ‘It’ll certainly save your marriage. I’m sure the ladies here
would like to think that us at Shatta have done the best for you.’

‘For what it’s worth, Trev, I trust Pepe,’ said Glenda.

‘And this is Mister Nutt,’ said Trev. ‘He’s a friend.’

‘Yeah. I know what Mister Nutt is,’ said Pepe. ‘And you can come, too. I
am pleased to make your . . . acquaintance.’

He turned to Glenda. ‘You girls stay here, miss,’ he said. ‘This is no
errand for a lady.’ He ushered the boys into the gloom. ‘What I’m going
to show you gentlemen is top secret and if you cross me, Trev Likely, I
will do things that will make Andy Shank look like a play ground bully.’

‘Andy was a playground bully,’ said Trev, as they reached what was
clearly a forge.

‘Micromail,’ said Pepe with satisfaction. ‘The world hasn’t seen the
half of it yet.’

‘It just looks like fine chain mail,’ said Nutt.

‘It’s strange stuff,’ said the dwarf. ‘I can give you a vest and pair of
shorts and they better both come back here, boy, otherwise said
implications will be performed on your arse and I ain’t kidding. This
stuff isn’t just for making the girls look pretty. You would be amazed
what it can do with just a little change in the alloy.’ He pointed to a
glistening heap. ‘It’s as light as a feather and doesn’t chafe, you
know.’

‘And what else does it do?’

‘I’ll show you in a minute. Slip on a pair of the shorts.’

‘Wot, here?’ said Trev.

Somehow, Pepe looked like a small demon by the light of the forge. ‘Ooh,
look at Mister Bashful!’ said Pepe. ‘Just pull a pair on over your
trousers for now and I’ll tell you what I’ll do, I’ll even turn my back
while you’re doing that.’ He looked away, fiddling with the tools beside
the anvil. ‘Got ’em on?’ he said, after listening to a few minutes of
heavy breathing.

‘Yes, they, er, well, they feel all right.’

‘Okay,’ said Pepe. ‘Could you just wait ’ere one moment.’ He disappeared
into the darkness and, after a succession of strange noises, walked back
into view, slowly and awkwardly.

‘What’s that you’re wearin’, Pepe?’ said Trev. ‘It looks like a mass of
cushions to me.’

‘Oh, just a bit of protection,’ said Pepe. ‘Now if you could just go
back a little way, Mister Nutt, and Trev, if you could oblige me by
putting your hands on your head, it just helps to get the measurements
right.’ He turned his back on them. ‘Okay, Trevor, are your hands on
your head?’

‘Yeah, yeah.’

At which point, Pepe spun round and hit him full force in the groin with
a twenty-four-pound sledgehammer . . .

Surprisingly, the only effect was to send Pepe crashing into the
opposite wall. ‘Perfect!’ said his voice, muffled by the padding.

***

Morning came, but it seemed to Glenda that there was no night and no
day, no work and no play, there was just football, ahead of them all,
drawing them together. In the Great Hall the team had a table all to
themselves. Servants and wizards side by side, filling up as only Unseen
University could.

Football owned the day. Nothing was happening that wasn’t about
football. There were certainly no lectures. Of course, there never were,
but at least today they weren’t being attended because of the excitement
about the upcoming match rather than not being attended because no one
wanted to go to them. And after a while, Glenda became aware of the
sound which was coming from the city itself.

There were crowds outside the university; there were crowds, even now,
queuing to get into the Hippo. The sound of a hundred thousand people at
one purpose rose like the buzz of a distant swarm.

Glenda went back to the sanctuary of the Night Kitchen and tried to pass
some time by doing some baking, but the dough fell from her fingers.

‘Are you upset?’ said Juliet.

‘I hope we’re going to win,’ said Glenda.

‘Well, of course we’re going to win,’ said Juliet.

‘That’s all very well up until the time we lose,’ said Glenda. ‘Yes,
who’s that?’

The door was pushed open and Pepe stepped in, looking smarter than
usual. ‘Hello, ladies,’ he said. ‘Got a little message for you. How was
you expecting to watch the match?’

‘Just so long as we can get close,’ said Glenda.

‘Tell you what, then,’ said Pepe. ‘Madame has got the best seats in the
stadium. Nothing underhand, just open and above-board bribery. Shatta
has got to be seen out and about, you see? Got to keep micromail in the
public eye.’

‘I’d love to!’ Juliet shouted. And even Glenda found that her automatic,
unthinking cynicism was letting her down.

‘There will be sherry,’ said Pepe.

‘Will there be anyone famous there?’ said Juliet.

Pepe walked over and prodded her gently in the chest and said, ‘Yes.
You, miss. Everyone wants to see Jewels.’

It seemed as if the clocks turned backwards. All Watch leave had been
suspended, but it was hard to see what crime there could be in streets
where nobody could move. A flood of humanity, well, mostly humanity,
poured towards the stadium, bounced off it and overflowed and backfilled
more and more of the city. The game was in the Hippo, the crowd
stretched back to Sator Square and eventually the pressure of so many
eyeballs on the hands of so many clocks moved time forwards.

Only the team, and Trev, remained in the Great Hall, everyone else
having left much earlier in a fruitless attempt at securing a seat. They
milled around aimlessly prodding the ball to one another until Ponder,
Nutt and the Archchancellor turned up.

‘Well, big day, lads!’ said Ridcully. ‘Looks like there’s going to be a
nice day for it as well. They’re all over there waiting for us to give
them a show. I want you to approach this in the best traditions of
Unseen University sportsmanship, which is to cheat whenever you are
unobserved, though I fear that the chance of anyone being unobserved
today is remote. But in any case, I want you all to give it one hundred
and ten per cent.’

‘Excuse me, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder Stibbons. ‘I understand the
sense of what you are saying, but there is only one hundred per cent.’

‘Well, they could give it one hundred and ten per cent if they tried
harder,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, yes and no, sir. But, in fact, that would mean that you had just
made the one hundred per cent bigger while it would still be one hundred
per cent. Besides, there is only so fast a man can run, only so high a
man can jump. I just wanted to make the point.’

‘Good point, well made,’ said Ridcully, dismissing it instantly. He
looked around at the faces. ‘Ah, Mister Likely, I suppose there is
nothing I can do that would get you on to the team? Dave Likely’s boy
playing for Unseen Academicals would be a bit of a feather in our cap.
And I see my colleague Professor Rincewind has humorously already put a
white one in his.’

‘Well, sir, you know how I’m fixed,’ Trev mumbled.

‘Your old mum,’ said Ridcully, nodding understandingly.

‘I promised her,’ said Trev. ‘I know she’s passed away, but I’m certain
that she still watches over me, sir.’

‘Well, that’s nice and does you credit. Is there anything else that can
be said? Let me think. Oh yes, gentlemen – Mrs Whitlow, as is her wont
on these occasions, has organized her maids to dress up in appropriate
costume and cheer us on from the sidelines.’ His face was a blank mask
as he continued. ‘Mrs Whitlow unaccountably takes an enthusiastic and
uncharacteristically athletic part in these things. There will be high
kicking, I am told, but if you are careful where you let your gaze fall,
you should see nothing that will upset you too much.’

‘Excuse me, sir,’ said Rincewind. ‘Is it true that some of the men in
Ankh-Morpork United are just a bunch of thugs from the Shove?’

‘That might be a bit harsh,’ Ridcully began.

‘Excuse me, sir,’ said Trev, ‘that is quite true. I would say about half
of them are honest cloggers and the rest of them are bastards.’

‘Well, I’m sure we will overcome,’ said Ridcully jovially.

‘I would also like to make a few comments before we leave, sir,’ said
Nutt. ‘A few words of advice, perhaps? In these few days I have taught
you everything I know, even if I do not know how I know it. As you know,
I am an orc and whatever else we were, we were team players. You are
playing, therefore, not as individuals, but as a team. I think it was
Von Haudenbrau who said—’

‘I don’t think we’ve got very much time to get through the crowds,’ said
Ridcully, who had been expecting this. ‘Thank you, Mister Nutt, but I
really think we ought to get going.’

Those watching from above would have seen the cramped streets of the
city waver as the red caterpillar that was the Unseen Academicals made
its way to the ground. There were cheers and there were boos and because
this was Ankh-Morpork, usually the cheers and the booing were done
alternately by everyone concerned.

By the time Lance-Constable Bluejohn of the Watch and two other trolls
had forcibly prised open the gates against the pressure of bodies, the
noise was just one great hammer of sound. The troll officers opened a
path for them with the forethought and delicacy that has made police
crowd control such a byword. It led to a fenced-off and heavily guarded
area, in the centre of which was the Archchancellor formerly known as
Dean, the entire team of Ankh-Morpork United and His Grace the Duke of
Ankh, Commander of the City Watch, Sir Samuel Vimes, with a face like a
bad lunch. ‘What the hell are you clowns proposing to do to my city?’ he
demanded and looked up at Vetinari in his box in the middle of the
stand. He raised his voice. ‘I’ve been grafting like mad this last month
on getting the KV Accord sorted out and it turns out that just when the
dwarfs and the trolls are shaking hands and being jolly good pals, you
lot are starting another KV of your very own.’

‘Oh, come now, Sam,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s only a jolly day out.’

‘People are queueing up at the gates,’ said Vimes. ‘The _actual_ city
gates. How much of this is magical?’

‘None, Sam, as far as we’re aware. There will be no magic used during
the game, this has been discussed and agreed and the D—’ Ridcully
swallowed hard. ‘The Archchancellor of Brazeneck University is making
himself responsible for thaumic damping of the stadium.’

‘Then let me tell you this,’ said the commander. ‘None of my men will
set a foot on the field of play, no matter what happens. Do I make
myself clear?’

‘As crystal, Sam.’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor, for now I am Commander of the City Watch, not
Sam, if it’s all the same to you,’ said Vimes. ‘The whole damn city is
an accident waiting to— no, an accident that already has happened and
anything that goes bad will get worse very quickly. I’m not going to
have it said that the Watch were the problem. Honestly, Mustrum, I
really would have expected better from you.’

‘That will be Archchancellor,’ said Ridcully coldly.

‘As far as I’m concerned,’ said Vimes, ‘this is a scuffle between rival
gangs. Do you know what my job is, Archchancellor? It’s to keep the
peace, and for two pins, I’d arrest the whole boiling of ya, but his
lordship won’t have it.’

Ridcully coughed. ‘May I extend my congratulations, sir, on the very
good work you have been doing in Koom Valley.’

‘Thank you,’ said Vimes. ‘And so I suspect you can imagine how cheerful
I am to see you involved in another kind of war.’ The commander turned
to Archchancellor Henry. ‘Nice to see you again, sir,²¹ it’s good to see
that you’ve moved up in the world. I’m formally telling you that I am
laying down the law, here, and as the referee, you have to pick it up.
Inside these lines it’s football – step over the line and it’s me.’ He
turned back to Ridcully. ‘Mind how you go, Archchancellor.’

He departed, watchmen falling into place behind him.

‘Well, now, I suspect the good commander has a lot on his mind these
days,’ said Archchancellor Henry, brightly. He pulled out his watch. ‘I
would like to speak to the team captains.’

‘Well, I know I’m one of them,’ said Ridcully.

A man stepped forward from the ranks of United.

‘Joseph Hoggett, of the Pork Packers, as it happens. Captain, for my
sins.’

Hoggett held out his hand to Ridcully and, to his credit, hardly winced
when it was taken in a firm handshake.

‘Well, gentlemen,’ said the former Dean. ‘I am sure you know the rules,
we’ve been through them often enough. I want a good clean game. One
long, er, peep from my whistle means that I am interrupting play for an
infringement or injury or for some other reason at that point known only
to myself. One even longer peep, which I suppose will be more of a
parrp, will mean the end of one half and time for refreshment, after
which the game will recommence. During the interval, I believe that
there will be a marching display by the Ankh-Morpork accordion band, but
I suppose these things are sent to try us. May I remind you gentlemen
that you change ends at the half-time. Also, please impress on your team
that the goal they are aiming for should not be behind them. If I see
any serious infringement, that player will be removed from the pitch. A
considerably longer parrp, which as far as I am concerned will continue
until I am out of breath, will mark the end of the game. May I also
remind you, as Commander Vimes has reminded us, that within these four,
rather sticky lines of chalk, I am a wielder of power second only to the
gods themselves, and then only perhaps. If at any time it becomes clear
that the rules themselves are impractical, I will change them. When I
blow the whistle, I shall raise my staff and unleash a spell which will
prevent any further magic being used within these hallowed lines until
the close of play. Is that understood?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Mr Hoggett.

‘Mustrum?’ said the former Dean, in a meaningful voice.

‘Yes, yes, all right,’ grumbled Ridcully. ‘You are making the most of
your little moment, aren’t you? Let’s get on with it, shall we?’

‘Gentlemen, would you please form up your teams for the singing of the
National Anthem. Mister Stibbons, I believe you have found me a
megaphone, thank you very much.’ He raised the horn to his lips and
shouted through it, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, be upstanding for the
National Anthem.’

The singing of the National Anthem was always a ragged affair, the good
people of Ankh-Morpork feeling that it was unpatriotic to sing songs
about how patriotic you were, taking the view that someone singing a
song about how patriotic they were was either up to something or a Head
of State.²²

An additional problem today lay in the acoustics of the arena, which
were rather too good, coupled with the fact that the speed of sound at
one end of the stadium was slightly off beat compared with the other
end, a drawback exacerbated when both sides tried to recover the gap.

These acoustical anomalies did not count for much if you were standing
next to Mustrum Ridcully, as the Archchancellor was one of those
gentlemen who will sing it beautifully, correctly enunciated and very,
very loudly.

‘ “When dragons belch and hippos flee, my thoughts, Ankh-Morpork, are of
thee,” ’ he began. ’

Trev noticed, to his surprise, that Nutt was standing stiffly to
attention. His own mouth operating on automatic, he looked along the
massed rank of Ankh-Morpork United. About fifty-fifty, he thought. Half
of them decent old cloggers and half of them Andy and his chums. His
gaze lighted on Andy just as he thought that and Andy flashed him a
little smile and pointed a finger briefly. But I’m not playing, Trev
thought, because of my old mum. He glanced down at the palm of his hand,
no star there, he was sure of that. Anyway, he thought, staring at the
opponents, when it all goes bad the referee is a wizard, after all.

‘ “Let others boast of martial dash, for we have boldly fought with
cash,” ’ roared the crowd at various pitches and speeds.

I mean, Trev thought, he wouldn’t switch off his own magic, would he?

‘ “We own all your helmets, we own all your shoes.” ’

I mean, he really wouldn’t do that, would he? The only person who could
stop it if it all went wrong wouldn’t have made a mistake like that?

‘ “We own all your generals – touch us and you’ll lose.” ’

Yes, he has done! He has done just that!

‘ “Morporkia! Morporkia! Morporkia owns the day,” ’ Trev shouted to
quell his own rising panic. He has done that, we all saw him! He’s kept
his own staff inside the field where you can’t do magic. He looked at
Andy and Andy nodded. Yes, he had worked it out as well.

‘ “We can rule you wholesale. Touch us and you’ll pay.” ’

It is considered in the Sto Plains that only scoundrels know the second
verse of their national anthem, since anyone spending time memorizing
that would be up to no good purpose. The Ankh-Morpork national anthem,
therefore, had a second verse that was deliberately written as _ner ner
ners_ and the occasional coherent word desperately trying to stay
afloat, on the basis that this is how it would sound in any case. Trev
listened to it with even more agony than usual.

But everyone joined in cheerful unison for the last line, which
everybody knew, ‘ “We can rule you wholesale, credit where it’s due.” ’

Glenda, one arm as far across her bosom as it would go, risked a look at
what would still probably be called the Royal Box, just as Vetinari
raised the gold-ish coloured urn and a cheer went up. Ankh-Morpork was
not particularly keen on cheering the Patrician but it would cheer money
any day of the week. Yet it seemed to Glenda that there was some strange
harmonic to the cheer, coming up from under the ground itself, as if the
place was one huge mouth . . . Then the feeling went away. And the day
came back.

‘Gentlemen? Team players to their places,’ said the Archchancellor of
Brazeneck, haughtily.

‘Er, can I have a word with you, sir?’ said Trev, sidling up as quickly
as possible.

‘Ah, yes. Dave Likely’s boy,’ said the former Dean. ‘We are about to
play football, Mister Likely, I’m sure you’ve noticed.’

‘Yes, sir, well, er, but . . .’

‘Do you know of any good reason why I should hold up the game?’ the
referee demanded.

Trev gave up.

Henry produced a coin from his waistcoat pocket. ‘Mustrum?’ he said.

‘Heads,’ said the Archchancellor, and he turned out to be wrong.

‘Very well, Mister Hoggett . . . and who has the ball?’

Gloing! Gloing!

Nutt picked the ball out of the air and handed it over. ‘Me, sir.’

‘Ah, you are the coach for the Academicals.’

‘Yes, but a player as well should it become necessary.’

‘Gentlemen, you will see that I am placing the ball in the centre of the
pitch.’ It’s true that the Archchancellor formerly known as Dean did
rather relish the occasion. He took a few steps back, paused for
dramatic effect, produced a whistle from his pocket and flourished it.
He gave a blow that only a man of that size could give; his face began
to twitch and go red. He raised his megaphone to his lips and shouted,
‘ANY BOY WHO HAS NOT BROUGHT HIS KIT WILL PLAY IN HIS PANTS!’ followed
by Ponder Stibbons shouting, ‘I want to know who gave that to him!’

The crowd roared and you could hear the laugh going away in the
distance, rolling down the streets as every listener in the crowded city
passed it on, bringing back such memories that at least two people
started to forge letters from their mother.

In his goal, the Librarian swung himself to the top of his posts to get
a better look. In his goal, Charlie Barton, goalkeeper for United,
methodically lit his pipe. And the man with the biggest problem within
the ground that day, apart possibly from Trev, was the editor of the
_Times_, Mr William de Worde, who had not trusted any underling with the
reporting of this unique, most prestigious occasion, but wasn’t at all
sure how it should be done.

At the whistle, he’d managed:

  The United chief, should I say chief? There must be a better word for
  him, but I can sort that out in the office, does not actually appear
  to know what to do next. Archchancellor Ridcully (BF, No, no, I’ll
  fill that in later) has kicked the ball hard towards, well, actually
  it has hit Jimmy Wilkins, formerly of the Miners, who seems uncertain
  as to what to do with it. No, no, he’s picked it up! He’s picked up
  the ball! The referee, who is the former Dean of Unseen University,
  has called him over for what I imagine is to be a refresher course in
  the rules of this new game of football.

A megaphone, thought de Worde, that’s what I need, an extremely big
megaphone so I can tell everyone what’s going on.

  The ball has been handed to, let me see, number sixty-nine, oh yes,
  the multi-talented Professor Bengo Macarona, who according to the
  regulations, the new rules, is allowed what is known as a free kick
  from where the infringement took place and it’s, and here comes, Bengo
  Maca— sorry, Professor Bengo Macarona for Unseen Academicals and— oh
  my word! It has gone right down the pitch at shoulder height, making a
  noise like a partridge (check with Nature Notes correspondence on
  whether I have the correct simile). The ball has hit Mr Charlie ‘Big
  Boy’ Barton in the stomach with such force as to carry him into the
  back of the net! What a display! And this would appear to be a goal!
  At least one goal, I should think! And the crowd are on their feet,
  though technically most of them were there already, anyhow [he wrote
  conscientiously, with a journalist’s well-known desire to get things
  right]. And yes, they are celebrating the hero of the moment and the
  refrain coming from the lips of the Academicals’ supporters in their
  unique patois seems to be: ‘One Makaronah, there’s only one Makaronah,
  one Makaronaah.’²³ No, no. Something seems to be happening; Macarona
  has left the pitch and is talking animatedly to the crowd. He appears
  to be haranguing them. Those he has been talking to look subdued.

At this point, one of the editor’s assistants hurried over with a brief
digest of what had transpired on the other side of the pitch. De Worde
wrote quickly, hoping that his home-made shorthand would not fail him:

  With that hot-blooded resolve that is so lovably typical of the native
  Genuan, Professor Macarona is apparently insisting that any
  celebratory chanting should include his full name and full list of
  honours and is helpfully writing them down. There also appears to be a
  bit of a hiatus around United’s goal as some of Charlie Barton’s team
  mates help him find his pipe and also, it transpires [the editor of
  the _Times_ liked the word transpire], the other half of the pork pie
  it transpired he had been eating at the time the goal was scored. It
  appears that, not unlike many of us, he had underestimated the speed
  of the new ball.

  And now the ball appears to be back in the centre of the pitch where
  there is another argument going on.

‘But they’ve just scored a goal!’ said Mr Hoggett.

‘Yes, quite so,’ said the former Dean, wheezing gently. ‘That means that
they get to kick off next.’

‘That means we don’t, but we’ve just lost a goal!’

‘Yes, but that’s what the rules say.’

‘But that’s not fair, we want a kick, they kicked it last.’

‘But it’s not about the kicks, Mister Hoggett, it’s what you do with
them.’

  And Archchancellor Ridcully runs towards the ball. He turns swiftly
  and has kicked the ball towards his own goal!

The editor wrote furiously:

  Almost all of United’s team are running up to take advantage of this
  strange faux pas, not entirely cognisant [the editor liked that word,
  too, it was so much better than aware] but the famous Librarian of
  Unseen University has just—

He stopped, blinked and grabbed one of his assistants who had turned up
with a full list of Bengo Macarona’s honours and pushed him down in the
chair.

‘Write down everything that I say!’ he shouted. ‘And I hope your
shorthand is better than mine, and if it isn’t you’ll be sacked in the
morning. This is insane!’

  They did it on purpose, I’ll swear they did it on purpose. He kicked
  the ball directly at his own goalkeeper, knowing, I swear, that he
  could take advantage of the Librarian’s renowned upper body strength
  to throw the ball almost the entire length of the pitch. And there is
  Bengo Macarona, more or less unnoticed by his opponents, heading
  towards the missile while United have streamed away from their
  citadel, like the ill-fated Maranids during the first Prodostian war
  [the editor liked to think of himself as a classicist].

‘I’ve never seen anything like it!’ he shouted at his almost deafened
assistant. ‘They’ve got United all in the wrong place.’

  And there goes Macarona. The ball appears to be attached to his feet.
  And there ahead of him appears to be the only member of the luckless
  United squad that knows what’s going on. Mr Charles ‘Big Boy’ Barton,
  who nevertheless is staggering out of the goalmouth, like the Giant
  Octopal, upon seeing the hordes of the Mormidons.

The editor fell silent, forgetting everything as the ground between the
two men shortened by the moment. ‘Oh, no!’ he said.

There was a huge cheer from the crowd. ‘What happened?’ said the
assistant, pencil poised.

‘Didn’t you see it? Didn’t you see it?’ said the editor. His hair was
dishevelled and he looked like a man nearing madness. ‘Macarona ran
round him! I don’t know how the ball stayed at his feet.’

‘Do you mean he dodged past him, sir?’ said the assistant.

The noise of the crowd would have been incandescent had it been visible.
‘Another goal,’ said the editor slumping. ‘Two goals in as many minutes!
No, he didn’t dodge him, he ran around him! Twice! And I’ll swear, ended
up going faster.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said the assistant, still writing. ‘I went to a lecture about
that sort of thing, once. It was about how things don’t hit the world
turtle, sir. It was like a slingshot effect, he may have picked up
additional speed as he rounded the goalkeeper’s enormous girth, sir.’

‘And listen to the crowd roar!’ said the editor. ‘And write it down.’

‘Yes, sir, that would be: One Professor Macarona D.Thau (Bug), D.Maus
(Chubb), Magistaludorum (QIS), Octavium (Hons), PHGK (Blit), DMSK, Mack,
D.Thau (Bra), Visiting Professor in Chickens (Jahn the Conqueror
University (Floor 2, Shrimp Packers Building, Genua)), Primo Octo
(Deux), Visiting Professor of Blit/Slood Exchanges (Al Khali), KCbfJ,
Reciprocating Professor of Blit Theory (Unki), D.Thau (Unki), Didimus
Supremius (Unki), Emeritus Professor in Blit Substrate Determinations
(Chubb), Chair of Blit and Music Studies (Quirm College for Young
Ladies), there’s only one Professor Macarona D.Thau (Bug), D.Maus
(Chubb), Magistaludorum (QIS), Octavium (Hons), PHGK (Blit), DMSK, Mack,
D.Thau (Bra), Visiting Professor in Chickens (Jahn the Conqueror
University (Floor 2, Shrimp Packers Building, Genua)), Primo Octo
(Deux), Visiting Professor of Blit/Slood Exchanges (Al Khali), KCbfJ,
Reciprocating Professor of Blit Theory (Unki), D.Thau (Unki), Didimus
Supremius (Unki), Emeritus Professor in Blit Substrate Determinations
(Chubb), Chair of Blit and Music Studies (Quirm College for Young
Ladies), there’s only oooonnnnnnne Professor Bengo Macarooonaah D.Thau
(Bug), D.Maus (Chubb), Magistaludorum (QIS), Octavium (Hons), PHGK
(Blit), DMSK, Mack, D.Thau (Bra), Visiting Professor in Chickens (Jahn
the Conqueror University (Floor 2, Shrimp Packers Building, Genua)),
Primo Octo (Deux), Visiting Professor of Blit/Slood Exchanges (Al
Khali), KCbfJ, Reciprocating Professor of Blit Theory (Unki), D.Thau
(Unki), Didimus Supremius (Unki), Emeritus Professor in Blit Substrate
Determinations (Chubb), Chair of Blit and Music Studies (Quirm College
for Young Ladies), oooonnnnnnnly one Professor Bengo Macaroooonaaaah
D.Thau (Bug), D.Maus (Chubb), Magistaludorum (QIS), Octavium (Hons),
PHGK (Blit), DMSK, Mack, D.Thau (Bra), Visiting Professor in Chickens
(Jahn the Conqueror University (Floor 2, Shrimp Packers Building,
Genua)), Primo Octo (Deux), Visiting Professor of Blit/Slood Exchanges
(Al Khali), KCbfJ, Reciprocating Professor of Blit Theory (Unki), D.Thau
(Unki), Didimus Supremius (Unki), Emeritus Professor in Blit Substrate
Determinations (Chubb), Chair of Blit and Music Studies (Quirm College
for Young Ladies). But wouldn’t he be off-the-side, sir?’

‘That would indeed appear to be the complaint of the luckless warriors
of United,’ said the editor. ‘They are clustering around the referee and
what would I give to be a fly on that wall?’

‘There is no wall, sir.’

‘It would seem—’ and the editor stopped dead. ‘Who is that?’

‘What is that, sir?’

‘Look over there at the stands! The upper-class stands, I might add, to
which we were not invited.’

The sun usefully took this opportunity to appear from behind the clouds
and the bowl of the Hippo seemed to fill with light.

‘That’s the micromail girl, sir,’ said the assistant.

Even some of the protesting United team were looking up at the stands
now. She hurt the eyes, but they were dragged towards it again.

‘I’ve got her picture on my bedroom wall,’ said the assistant. ‘Everyone
has been looking for her.’ He coughed. ‘They say it doesn’t chafe, you
know.’

Now, all the footballers on the field, bar the unfortunate Charlie
Barton, who was having a dizzy spell, were clustered around the referee,
who said, ‘I repeat; it was a perfectly acceptable goal. A trifle unkind
and showy, perhaps, but nevertheless entirely within the rules. You’ve
watched the Unseen lads training. The game moves about. It doesn’t send
you a clacks to tell you what’s happening next.’

A voice a little lower down said, ‘It is an elementary mistake to
believe that even the most doughty keeper of the net can singlehandedly
defend against the full might of the opposing team.’ This was Nutt.

‘Mister Nutt, you are not supposed to tell them that sort of thing,’
said Ridcully.

Mr Hoggett looked downcast. A man betrayed by team, history and
expectations. ‘I can see we’ve got a lot to learn,’ he said.

Trev pulled Nutt off to one side. ‘And this is where it all goes bad,’
he said.

‘Oh, come now, Mister Trev. We’re doing very well. Bengo is, anyway.’

‘I’m not watching him. I’m watching Andy and Andy is watchin’ Bengo.
They’re bidin’ their time. They’re lettin’ the poor old buggers get into
a hell of a fix and then they’ll just take over.’

And then Trev was given a short lesson in why wizards are wizards.

‘I have a modest proposal and I wonder if you will hear me out, referee.
While we at Unseen University are absolute novices, we have had rather
more time to get to grips with the new football than our current
opponents have. Therefore, I propose to give them one of our goals,’
said Ridcully.

‘You can’t do that, sir!’ said Ponder.

‘Why, is it against the rules?’ Ridcully’s tone deepened and became
noticeably more pompous. ‘I ask you, are good sportsmanship, fellowship
and generosity against the rules, pray?’ By the end of the sentence, his
voice was audible nearly to the very back of the stadium.

‘Well, of course there is nothing against it, sir. There isn’t a rule
stopping you washing your laundry during the middle of the game – and
that is because no one would do it.’

‘Right. Mister Hoggett? One of our goals is now yours. We are, as it
were, level.’

Hoggett, transfixed, looked around at his fellow players, ‘Well, er, if
you insist, sir.’

‘Wouldn’t dream of taking no for an answer,’ said Ridcully expansively.

‘What in the world made him do that?’ said the editor of the _Times_, as
an exhausted runner brought him the news.

‘It was a very generous gesture.’

‘Why did you do it?’ said Ponder to Ridcully.

‘I am totally transparent, Stibbons. Generous to a fault, that’s me.
It’s not my fault that they do not know they are inferior and this will
play on their minds for the rest of the game.’

‘That’s rather . . . cunning, sir.’

‘Yes, it is, isn’t it? I’m rather proud of it. And once again, we get to
kick first. No wonder this is such a popular game.’

‘That was a remarkable piece of psychology there,’ said Nutt to Trev as
they walked back to the sidelines. ‘Somewhat cruel, possibly, but
clever.’

Trev said nothing. There was the shrill call of the whistle for the game
to resume, followed instantly by the referee screaming, ‘A LITTLE BIT OF
HAIL WON’T HURT YOU, BOY, IT’S HEALTHY AND WILL DO YOU GOOD.’

‘That’s magic,’ said Trev. ‘Should that be happening?’

‘No,’ said Ponder Stibbons behind him. ‘It’s just possession.’

‘Yes, the game is all about possession, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt.

Trev looked up again at the stand. There was the shining shape of
Juliet, only a few feet away from Vetinari himself and flanked by Glenda
and Pepe. She could be a goddess. It’s never going to happen, is it? he
said to himself. Not her and a boy from the candle vats.

Not really going to happen. Not now.

And then Bengo screamed and it seemed as though every voice in the
stadium joined in one communal ‘OOOOOH!’

And the whistle blew again.

‘What happened, sir?’ said the editorial assistant.

‘Can’t exactly be sure. They got the ball to Macarona again and then he
collided with a couple of United players and they all ended up in a
heap.’

Nutt, the first to reach the stricken Macarona, looked up at Trev
gravely. ‘Both patellas dislocated,’ he said. ‘We’ll need a couple of
men to take him down to the Lady Sybil.’

The former Dean looked around at the clustered footballers. ‘So, what
happened here, Mister Shank?’ he said as perspiration dripped off his
chin.

Andy momentarily lifted a finger to his forelock.

‘Well, sir, I was rushing forward according to the rules to tackle

Mister Macarona and I had no idea at all that Jimmy the Spoon, here, had
got exactly the same idea and was coming from a different direction and
suddenly we were all there together going arse over tip, if you would
excuse my Klatchian.’

Trev glowered.

The look on Andy’s face was transparent. He was lying. He knew he was
lying. He knew everyone else knew he was lying and he didn’t care. In
fact, he rather enjoyed the situation. Andy’s boots looked heavy enough
to moor a boat.

‘They got ’im like the meat in a sandwich, sir,’ Trev complained to the
referee.

‘Can you substantiate that, young man?’

‘Well, you can see what’s happened to the poor bugger.’

‘Yes, but do you have any evidence of collusion?’

Trev went blank and Nutt supplied in a whisper, ‘Can you prove it was a
set-up?’

‘Can anyone?’ said the referee, looking around the players. No one
could. Trev wondered how many might, were it not for the fact that Andy
was standing there, innocent as a shark. ‘I am the referee, gentlemen,
and I can only referee what I see and I saw nothing.’

‘Yes, because they made sure of that,’ said Trev. ‘Anyway, listen to the
crowd. _They_ all saw it!’

‘Look! They’ve got boots on them that could strip bark,’ Ridcully
protested.

‘Yes, indeed, Mustrum, I mean, sorry, captain, but as yet there are no
rules about which boots should be worn and at the very least these are
the boots that have been traditionally worn for the game of
foot-the-ball.’

‘But they are man traps!’

‘I can certainly see what you are getting at, but what would you like me
to do?’ said Henry. ‘I have a suspicion that if I cancel this match at
this point you and I would not get out of here alive, because even if we
ourselves did escape the wrath of the crowd, we would by no means escape
the wrath of Vetinari. The game _will_ continue. Unseen Academicals can
play a substitute and I will, let me see—’ He pulled out a notebook.
‘Ah, yes, I will award a free kick at the very point where this
unfortunate incident took place. And may I add that I will look askance
at any future “incidents”. Mister Hoggett, I trust that you will make
this clear to your team.’

‘Blow that for a game of soldiers!’ Trev yelled. ‘They just took out our
best player an’ you’re gonna let ’em walk away grinning?’

But the referee was, after all, the former Dean. A man used to
head-to-head confrontations with Mustrum Ridcully. He gave Trev a chilly
look and turned very deliberately to the Archchancellor and said, ‘And I
trust you, too, captain, will impress upon your team that my decisions
are final. There will be a five-minute interlude for you to do this and
can some of you fellows take poor Professor Macarona off the field and
see if you can find some quack to look at him.’

A voice behind him bellowed, ‘You have one right here, sir.’ They
turned. A figure slightly larger than life, wearing a top hat and
carrying a small bag, nodded at them.

‘Doctor Lawn,’ said Ridcully. ‘I wouldn’t have expected to see you
here.’

‘Really?’ said the doctor. ‘Wouldn’t have missed it for the world. Now
some of you men drag him over to that corner and I’ll take a look at
him. I’ll send my bill to you, shall I, Mustrum?’

‘Wouldn’t you like to take him somewhere nice and quiet?’ said the
referee.

‘No fear! I want to keep my eye on the play.’

‘They’re gettin’ away with it,’ said Trev, as he walked back to the
line. ‘Everyone knows they’re gettin’ away with it.’

‘We still have the rest of the team, Mister Trev,’ said Nutt, lacing up
his boots. He had, of course, made them himself. They looked like foot
gloves. ‘And me of course, I am the first substitute. I promise that I
will do my best, Mister Trev.’

Thus far, it had been a rather boring afternoon for the Librarian after
his one little moment in the sun. It really was rather dull between the
goal posts and he was getting hungry and so was pleasantly surprised by
the appearance of a large banana in front of the goal. It was later
agreed that, in a footballing context, mysteriously appearing fruit
should have been greeted with a certain amount of caution. But he was
hungry, it was a banana and the metaphysics were sound. He ate it.

Glenda, up in the stand, wondered if she was the only one to have seen
the startlingly yellow fruit in its trajectory and then saw, looking up
at her from the crowd, with a big grin on her face, Mrs Atkinson, mother
of Tosher, himself something of an unguided weapon. Anyone who had ever
been in the Shove knew her as a perpetrator of all kinds of inventive
assaults. She had always got away with it because no one in the Shove
would hit an old lady, especially one standing next to Tosher.

‘Excuse me,’ said Glenda, standing up. ‘I’ve got to get down there right
now.’

‘Not a chance, love,’ said Pepe. ‘It’s shoulder-to-shoulder. A Shove and
a half.’

‘Look after Juliet,’ said Glenda. She leaned forward and tapped on the
shoulder of the nearest man. ‘I’ve got to get to the bottom of this as
soon as possible. Mind if I jump?’

He looked past her at the glittering figure of Juliet and said, ‘Not at
all, if you get your girlfriend to give me a big kiss.’

‘No, but I’ll give you one.’

‘Er, don’t trouble yourself, miss, but come on then, give me your hand.’

It was a reasonably fast descent, as she was passed from hand to hand,
accompanied by ribaldry, much genial horseplay and a definite feeling of
satisfaction on Glenda’s part that she was wearing her biggest and most
impenetrable pants.²⁴

Elbowing and kicking people out of the way, she reached the goal just as
the banana was consumed in one gulp and stood panting helplessly in
front of the Librarian. He gave her a wide smile, looked thoughtful for
a moment and went over backwards.

High up in the stand, Lady Margolotta turned to Vetinari. ‘Is that part
of the game?’

‘I fear not,’ he said.

Ladyship yawned. ‘Well, it relieves the boredom, at least. They’ve spent
far more time arguing than playing.’

Vetinari smiled. ‘Yes, madam. It does look as if football is very much
like diplomacy: short periods of fighting followed by long periods of
negotiation.’

Glenda prodded the Librarian. ‘Hello? Are you all right?’ All she could
hear was a gurgling. She cupped her hands, ‘Man— er, someone down,
here!’

To another chorus of boos, and, because this was Ankh-Morpork, cheers,
the travelling committee, which was what the game had now become,
hastened over to the Unseen Academicals’ goal.

‘Someone threw a banana and I saw who did it and I think it’s poisoned,’
said Glenda, all in one breath.

‘He’s breathing very heavily,’ said Ridcully. The comment was
unnecessary as the snores were making the goal rattle.

He crouched down and put his ear to the Librarian’s chest. ‘I don’t
think he’s been poisoned,’ he said.

‘Why’s that, Archchancellor?’ said Ponder.

‘Because if anyone has poisoned our Librarian,’ said Ridcully, ‘then,
although I am not, by nature, a vindictive man, I will see to it that
this university hunts down the poisoner by every thaumic, mystic and
occult means available and makes the rest of their life not only as
horrible as they can imagine it, but as horrible as I can imagine it.
And you can depend on it, gentlemen, that I have already started work on
it.’

Ponder looked around until he saw Rincewind. ‘Professor Rincewind. You
were, I mean you are, his friend, can’t you stick your fingers down his
throat or something?’

‘Well, no,’ said Rincewind. ‘I am very attached to my fingers and I like
to think of them as attached to me.’

The noise of the crowd was getting louder. They were here to see
football, not a debate.

‘But Doctor Lawn is still here,’ Rincewind volunteered. ‘He makes a
living out of sticking his hand in things. He’s got the knack.’

‘Ah, yes,’ said the referee. ‘Perhaps we can impose upon him to take
another patient.’ He turned to Ridcully. ‘You must play your other
substitute.’

‘That would be Trevor Likely,’ said the Archchancellor.

‘No!’ blurted out Trev. ‘I promised my ol’ mum.’

‘I thought you were part of the team?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, yes, sir, sort of . . . helpin’ out and all that . . . I promised
my ol’ mum, sir, after Dad died. I know I was down on the list, but who
would have thought it would have turned out like this?’

Ridcully stared at the sky. ‘Well, it seems to me, gentlemen, that we
cannot ask a man to break a promise made to an old mum. That would be a
crime more heinous than murder. We will have to play with ten men. It
appears that we will have to go without.’

Up in his ramshackle box, the editor of the _Times_ picked up his
notebook and said, ‘I’m going down there. It’s ridiculous to sit up here
like this.’

‘You’re going on the pitch, sir?’

‘Yes. At least that way I can see what’s happening.’

‘I don’t think the referee will allow that, sir!’

‘You’re not going to play, Trev?’ said Glenda.

‘I told you! How many times do I need to tell people? I promised my ol’
mum!’

‘But you are part of the team, Trev.’

‘I promised my ol’ mum!’

‘Yes, but I am sure she’d understand.’

‘That’s easy for you to say. We’ll never know, will we?’

‘Not necessarily,’ said a voice cheerfully.

‘Oh, hello, Doctor Hix,’ said Glenda.

‘I couldn’t help overhearing your conversation, and if Mister Likely
could tell me where his mother is buried, and the referee was to give us
a little leeway in regard to time, well it could be possible that I—’

‘Don’t you put a shovel anywhere near my ol’ mum!’ Trev screamed, tears
rolling down his face.

‘I’m sure we all understand, Trev,’ said Glenda. ‘It’s always difficult
with old mums,’ and she added, not really thinking what she was saying,
‘and I think Juliet will understand.’

She took him by the hand and towed him off the pitch. Trev had been
right. It was all going wrong. The buoyant certainties of the beginning
of the game were fading.

‘You gave away a goal, sir,’ said Ponder as he and Ridcully lined up for
the next encounter.

‘I have great faith in Mister Nutt in goal,’ said Ridcully. ‘And I’ll
show them what happens to people who try to poison a wizard.’ The
whistle blew.

‘GET DOWN AND GIVE ME TWENTY! I’m sorry, gentlemen, I don’t quite know
why I said that...’

What happens to people who try to poison a wizard, at least in the short
run, is that they have an advantage in a game of football. The absence
of Professor Macarona was a deadly blow. He had been the pillar around
which the university strategy had been built. Emboldened, United went
for the kill.

Even so, the editor of the _Times_ thought, as he lay down at the very
edge of the pitch alongside his iconographer, the wizards were just
about managing to hold their own. He scribbled as fast as he could,
trying hard to ignore the gentle shower of pie wrappings, banana skins,
empty greasy pea bags and the occasional beer bottle being tossed on to
the pitch. And who is that with the ball now? He glanced at the little
crib-sheet of numbers he had managed to jot down. Ah, right. United had
broken into the UU side of the field and there was Andy Shank, an
unpleasant man by all accounts and . . . surely that wasn’t a normal
footballing procedure. Other players had lined up around him. So he was
running in the middle of a group of bodyguards. Even the other team
members themselves did not seem to know what was going on, but Mr Shack
nevertheless managed a creditable strike at the goal, which was expertly
snatched out of the air by . . . Mister Nutt. He glanced at his
crib-sheet, ah yes, the orc, and added in his notebook: ‘who is clearly
adept at grasping big round objects’. But then he felt ashamed and
crossed it out. Despite where we are lying, he said to himself, we are
_not_ the gutter press.

The orc.

Nutt danced back and forth outside his goal, trying to find someone who
looked in a position to be able to do something with a ball.

‘Can’t hang around all day, Orc,’ said Andy, staying in front of him.
‘Got to let it go soon, Orc. Not much help for you now, is there, Orc?
They say you’ve got claws. Show us your claws, Orc. That will bust your
ball.’

‘I believe that you are a man with unresolved issues, sir.’

‘What?’

Nutt dropkicked the ball over Andy’s head and somewhere in the mob that
fought for it there was a crunch, which was followed by a yell, which
was followed by the whistle and the whistle was followed by the chant.
It began somewhere in the region of Mrs Atkinson, but spread oh so
quickly: ‘Orc! Orc! Orc! Orc! Orc! Orc! Orc!’

Ridcully got to his feet, standing unsteadily. ‘The buggers have got me,
Henry,’ he yelled, in a voice that could hardly be heard over the chant.
‘Kneecap! Bloody kneecap!’

‘Who did it?’ the referee demanded.

‘How should I know? It’s a bloody mess, just like the old game! And
can’t you get them to stop that bloody chant? That’s not the sort of
thing we want to hear.’

Archchancellor Henry raised his megaphone. ‘Mister Hoggett?’

The captain of United pushed his way through the rabble, looking very
sheepish.

‘Can’t you control your fans?’

Hoggett shrugged. ‘Sorry about that, sir, but what can you do?’

Henry looked around the Hippo. What could anyone do? It was the mob. The
Shove. No one was in charge. It hadn’t an arse to kick, a wrist to be
slapped or even an address. It was just there and it was shouting
because everybody else was.

‘Well, then can you at least control your team?’ he said. To his
surprise Mr Hoggett looked down.

‘Not entirely, sir. Sorry about that, sir, it’s how things are.’

‘One more incident of this kind and I will cancel the match. I suggest
you leave the field of play, Mustrum. Who is the substitute captain?’
‘Me!’ said Ridcully, ‘but under the circumstances I appoint Mister Nobbs
as my deputy.’

‘Not Nobby Nobbs?’ exclaimed the former Dean.

‘No relation,’ said Bledlow Nobbs very quickly.

‘Well, that was a good choice at least,’ said Trev, sighing. ‘Nobbsy is
a clogger at heart.’

‘But it’s not supposed to be about clogging,’ said Glenda. ‘And you know
what?’ she added, raising her voice against the steel roar of the crowd.
‘Whatever the old Dean thinks he can’t stop the game, now. This place
would just blow up!’

‘You think so?’ said Trev.

‘Listen,’ said Glenda. ‘Yes, I think you’re right. You ought to get out
of here.’

‘Me? Not a chance.’

‘But you could make yourself useful and get Juliet out. Get her as far
as Vimesy and his lot. I bet they’re waiting right outside the gates. Do
it right now while you can still get down the steps. Won’t get a chance
once they start to play again.’

As he left, Glenda walked unheeded down the touchline, to the little
area where Dr Lawn was standing guard over his patients.

‘You know that little bag you brought with you, sir?’

‘Yes?’

‘I think you’re going to need a bigger bag. How’s Professor Macarona?’

The professor was lying on his back, staring at the sky and wearing an
expression of bland happiness. ‘Sorted him out easily enough,’ said the
doctor. ‘He won’t be playing again any time soon. I’ve given him a
little something to make him happy. Correction, I have given him a big
something to make him happy.’

‘And the Librarian?’

‘Well, I got a couple of lads to help me turn him upside down and he’s
been throwing up a lot. He’s still pretty groggy, but I don’t think it’s
too bad. He’s as sick as a parrot.’²⁵

‘This wasn’t how it was supposed to go, you know,’ said Glenda out of a
feeling that she should defend the bloody mess.

‘It generally isn’t,’ said the doctor.

They turned as the noise of the nearby crowd changed. Juliet was coming
down the steps glittering. The silence followed her like a lovesick dog.
So did Pepe and the reassuring bulk of Madame Sharn, who might be a
useful barricade in case the Hippo became a cauldron. Trev, tagging
along behind them, seemed like an afterthought in comparison.

‘All right, dear, what’s this all about?’ said Pepe.

‘I ain’t going,’ said Juliet, ‘not while Trev’s in here. I ain’t leaving
without Trev. Pepe says he’s going to win the match.’

‘What have you been saying?’ said Glenda.

‘He’ll win,’ said Pepe, winking. ‘He’s got a star in his hand. You want
to see him do it, missy?’

‘What are you playin’ at?’ said Trev, angrily.

‘Oh, I’m a bit of a conjurer, me. Or maybe a fairy godmother.’ Pepe
gestured around the arena. ‘See that lot? Their ancestors screamed to
see men killing one another and beasts tearing decent folks apart. Men
with spears fighting men with nets and all that kind of ugly shite.’

‘And they have cart-tail sales here every other Sunday,’ added Glenda.
‘It’s always been the same,’ said Pepe. ‘It’s one big creature. Never
dies. Crying and screaming and loving and hating all down the
generations and you can’t tame it and you can’t stop it. Just for you,
young lady, and for the soul of Mister Trev, I’m going to throw it a
bone. Won’t take a mo’.’

His slim and slightly spidery form disappeared back up the steps just as
the whistle blew. Glenda made out Bledlow Nobbs taking the kick, but
Ridcully had made the mistake of thinking that a man who was as big as
he was was as clever as he was. And there it was, it was the old game
all over again. United were stampeding down the pitch, the old cloggers
making way for Andy’s army as they bore down against Nutt. The kick took
him in the chest and lifted him into the back of the goal. The whistle
blew and was followed by, ‘DON’T TOUCH THAT, BOYO! YOU DON’T KNOW WHERE
IT’S BEEN!’ which was followed by, ‘I really am very sorry about that, I
don’t know why it happens,’ which was followed by . . . absolute
silence.

Which was broken by one voice, ‘Likely. Likely. Likely.’ It started up
in the stand, somewhere near where Pepe had gone.

The beast had forgotten the name ‘Orc’, but certainly remembered the
name ‘Likely’, a name that had fed it so often, a name it had given
birth to and eaten, a name that was football, the very heart of the
beast. And here, on this broken field, it was a name to conjure with.
‘LIKELY! LIKELY! LIKELY!’ Hardly a grown man hadn’t seen him. He was the
legend. Even after all these years, it was a name that cut through other
loyalties. You told your grandchildren about him. You told them how he
lay there bleeding and maybe how you dipped your handkerchief in his
blood and kept it for a souvenir.

‘Likely,’ intoned the baritone of Madame Sharn.

‘Likely,’ whispered Glenda and then ‘LIKELY!’ She could see the little
figure running along the top of the stands, the chant tailing after it.

Tears streamed down Trev’s face. Mercilessly, Glenda looked him in the
eye. ‘Likely! Likely!’

‘But my ol’ mum!’ Trev wept.

Then Juliet leaned over and kissed him and for a moment, the tears were
silver. ‘Likely?’

Trev stood clutching and unclutching his hands as the chant went on,
then he gave a sort of shrug. Then he took his battered tin can out of
his jacket pocket and handed it to Glenda, before turning to face the
pitch again. ‘I’m sorry, Mum,’ he said, taking off his jacket, ‘but this
is football. And I don’t even have a jersey.’

‘We thought of that,’ said Glenda. ‘When they were being made.’ She
pulled one out of the depths of her bag.

‘Number four. That was my dad’s number.’

‘Yes,’ said Glenda. ‘We know. Listen to ’em cheering, Trev.’

Trev looked like someone trying to find an escape clause. ‘I’ve never
even trained with the new football. You know me, it’s always been the
tin can.’

‘It’s a football. It’s just a football,’ said Nutt. ‘You’ll get the hang
of it in a second.’

The former Dean strode up. ‘Well, this is all very gratifying with a
touch of welcome pathos, ladies and gentlemen, but it is time we
continued this football match and I would be very grateful if all
non-players could stand back behind the touchlines,’ he said, shouting
to make himself heard above the noise of the crowd.

Trev left Nutt at the goal. ‘Don’t you worry, Mister Trev,’ said the
orc, grinning. ‘With me saving and you striking we can’t lose. They
won’t get me the same way a second time.’ He lowered his voice and
grabbed Trev’s shoulder. ‘When it starts to get hot down this end, run
like stink towards the other and I’ll make sure you get the ball.’ Trev
nodded and walked across the turf to the cheers of the crowd.

The editor of the _Times_ later reported as follows:

  At this point, United seemed to feel that they had a working strategy
  and poured every resource into the university side in a mêlée that was
  clearly beyond the referee to control.

  The plucky orc custodian had also learned a lesson and two or three
  times recovered the day with magnificent saves, on one occasion
  kicking the ball, in our opinion, directly at the head of one of the
  milling opponents, stunning him and then catching it upon the rebound,
  dropping it on to the boot and sending it far into the opposing half
  where Trevor Likely, son of the famous football hero, ran pell-mell
  towards the goal where Mr Charlie Barton had happily been provided
  with a chair, a table, a late lunch and two stalwart defenders, whose
  clear purpose it was to see that none shall pass.

  All breathing in the park surely ceased as the young paladin fired off
  a tremendous shot, which was, alas, out by a few inches and only
  served to rattle the woodwork and rebounded towards the defenders.
  Nevertheless, Likely tackled like a man possessed and spirits lifted
  once again as the two defenders got in each other’s way just
  sufficiently for the boy to once again power the sphere back towards
  its intended resting place.

  Your correspondent believes that even the supporters of United joined
  in the groan as once again this second shot failed to find a slot and
  this time rebounded almost to the feet of H. Capstick, who lost no
  time in sending it screaming towards the Academicals’ end before it
  could do more harm.

  Once again, the indefatigable Mr Nutt warded off a number of attacks
  while the rather pathetic remnant of the university boys’ defence
  proved that prowess with the magic wand is of little avail if you do
  not know what your feet are for.

  At this point, Master of the Dark Arts Dr J. Hix was summarily
  dismissed from the field after the crowd’s persistent chant of ‘Who’s
  the bastard in the black?’ alerted the referee to his attempts at
  endeavouring to strike down F. Brisket, one of the notorious Brisket
  boys, with the soul-eating dagger of the Deadly Vampyre Spider Queen.
  Which, as it transpired, turned out to be neither magical nor, as it
  turned out, made of metal, but one of a number of similar items
  available in Boffo’s Joke Emporium, Tenth Egg Street. Ranting
  apparently fearful oaths about university statute, Dr Hix had to be
  dragged from the field by members of his own team, leaving our
  spirited magicians in an even more depleted spell of difficulty,
  probably wishing they had a magic carpet to get them out of there!

At least Dr Hix’s tirade and attempts to drag the ground with him bought
them some time. Glenda ran on to the pitch to a dishevelled and downcast
Trev.

‘What happened, Trev?’ she said. ‘You had it right there in front of
you. You had it in your hands, well, on your boot, anyway.’

‘It doesn’t do what I want,’ said Trev.

‘You’re supposed to make it do what you want. It’s just a football.’

‘Yeah, but I’m tryin’ to learn with all of this goin’ on.’

‘Well, at least you nearly did it. We haven’t lost yet and it’s still
only the first half.’

When play was resumed, according to the editor of the _Times_:

  A certain amount of backbone had been retrieved by the men in pointy
  hats and captain Nobbs led a concerted attack in an attempt to further
  interfere with Charlie Barton’s lunch, but to the dismay of all, the
  son of Dave Likely still appeared to have only a nodding acquaintance
  with the art of goal scoring and it appeared very much that his only
  chance of putting one away would be to have the ball wrapped up and
  sent via the Post Office.

  And then, to the shock of all, the occult gang appeared to prove that
  they were far better at billiards than football when another of
  Likely’s powerful, but directionless, attempts rebounded again off the
  goal on to the head of Professor Rincewind, who was, in fact, running
  in the opposite direction, and was in the back of the goal before
  anyone, including Charlie, knew where it was.

  This got a cheer, but only because the game now appeared, in our
  opinion, to be a comedy routine. Alas, there was no comedy about the
  fact that in several parts of the Hippo, fights were breaking out
  between gangs of rival supporters, doubtless inspired by some of the
  shameful performances on the pitch...

As the two sides trooped or hobbled back to their places, the referee
called the captains together. ‘Gentlemen, I’m not quite sure what we are
doing here, but I am quite certain that it’s not exactly football and I
look forward to the inquiry later on. In the meantime, before anyone
else is injured and especially before the crowd start to tear this place
apart and eat one another, I will tell you that the next goal scored
will be the last one, even though we are still only in the first half.’
He looked meaningfully at Hoggett and said, ‘I sincerely hope that some
players will examine their consciences. If I may coin a phrase,
gentlemen, it’s sudden death either way. I will give you a few minutes
to impress this upon your teams.’

‘I am sorry, sir,’ said Hoggett, looking around, ‘some of my lads are
not people I would have chosen, if you get my drift. I’ll give them a
good talking to.’

‘In my opinion that would only work if you were hitting them with a
hammer at the same time, Mister Hoggett. They are a disgrace. And do you
also understand me, Mister Nobbs?’

‘I think we’d like to carry on, too. Never say die.’

‘And I would not like to see death here, either, but I suspect that your
request for extra time is in the hope that Mister Likely will learn how
to play football, but I fear that will not happen in a month of
Sundays.’ ‘Well, yes, sir, but can’t you—’ Hoggett began.

‘Mister Hoggett, I have spoken and I am the referee and right now I am
the nearest thing to the gods.’

_I am the nearest thing to the gods_. It came back as an echo. Softer.
Brighter. He looked around, ‘What? Did you chaps say something?’
_Nearest thing to the gods_. There was a sound like _gloing!_ But the
ball was still in his hands, wasn’t it? He stared at it. And was it just
him, or was there something in the air? Something . . . in the air . . .
the silveryness of fine winter days.

Trev did an embarrassingly jiggly little run on the spot as he waited.
When he looked up, there was Andy Shank watching him.

‘Your dear old dad must be ’aving a fit,’ said Andy cheerfully.

‘I know you, Andy,’ said Trev wearily, ‘I know what you do. You corner
some poor tosser and taunt ’im until ’e loses ’is rag and so ’e starts
it, doesn’t ’e? I’m not risin’ to it, Andy.’

‘Not risin’ to anythin’ very much, are you?’

‘Not listenin’, Andy,’ said Trev.

‘Oh, I reckon you are.’

Trev sighed again. ‘I’ve been watchin’ you. You and your chums are
bloody masters at stickin’ the boot in when the ref ain’t lookin’ and
what ’e don’t see ’e can’t do nothin’ about.’

Andy lowered his voice. ‘Well, I can do something about you, Trev. You
won’t be walking out of this place, I swear it. You’ll be carried out.’

There was the sound of the whistle, followed by the unstoppable ‘ANY BOY
WHO HAS NOT BROUGHT HIS KIT WILL PLAY IN HIS PANTS!’

‘Sudden death,’ the former Dean said and the sides collided, Andy
emerging with the ball at his feet and his dishonour guard flanking him
at either side.

Ponder Stibbons, in the path of their advance, calculated quite a lot of
things very quickly, such as speed, wind direction and the likelihood of
being physically trodden into the turf. He made an effort at any rate,
but ended up flat on his back after the collision. As the editor of the
_Times_ put it: in this scene of despair, dismay and disarray, one lone
defender, Nutt, stood in the way of United’s winning goal...

There was a roar immediately behind Nutt. He daren’t look round, but
someone landed on top of the goal, making it shake, dropped down and
indicated by means of one huge and horny thumb that Mr Nutt’s assistance
was no longer required. There was a green crust around the Librarian’s
mouth, but this was nothing to the fire in his eyes.

At this point, according to the editor of the _Times_:

  Seemingly nonplussed by the return of the wizards’ famous man of the
  forest, Shank essayed another attempt at the winning score, which was
  stopped one-handed by the Librarian and effortlessly thrown back into
  United’s turf. With everything to play for, it seemed to us that every
  man on the pitch was chasing the ball as if they were a pack of boys,
  scuffling in the gutter for the traditional tin can. However, Mr
  Nobbs, who we are assured is no relation, was able to make some space
  to give the unlucky Mr Likely another attempt at following in his
  father’s footsteps, which he failed to do by the width, from our
  estimation, of about half of one inch and the ball was snatched up by
  Big Boy Barton who then collapsed, choking, having stuffed, we
  understand, a considerable amount of pie into his face to keep his
  hands free.

‘It shouldn’t be like this,’ said Glenda, and the thought echoed back in
her head: _It shouldn’t be like this_. ‘Trev has to win, it can’t go any
other way.’ And her voice came back again; could you get echoes in your
own head? They were going to lose, weren’t they? They were going to lose
because Andy knew how to break the rules.

The rules.

I am the rules.

She looked around, but apart from the doctor and his groaning or, in
Ridcully’s case, cursing charges, there was no one near her apart from
Juliet who was watching the game with her normal, faint smile.

‘Good heavens. All he needs is to get only one goal,’ said Glenda aloud.

_I am the goal_, said the quiet voice from nowhere.

‘Did you hear that?’ said Glenda.

‘Wot?’ said Juliet. She turned and Glenda could see that she was crying.
‘Trev’s going to lose.’

I am the ball.

This time it had come from her pocket, and she pulled out Trev’s tin
can.

As Doctor Lawn gave a groan and hurried back up the pitch towards the
choking Charlie (as the _Times_ later put it), she followed him and
caught up with Mr Nobbs. ‘If you ever want a cup of tea and a piece of
cake again in your life, Mr Nobbs, you kick the ball towards me. You
will know where I am, because I will be screaming and acting silly. Do
what I say, okay?’

_Do what she says, okay?_ he heard her voice echo. ‘And what will you
do, throw it back?’

‘Something like that,’ said Glenda.

‘And what good is this going to do?’

‘It’s going to win you the match, that’s what. Can you remember rule
202?’

She left him wondering and then hurried along to Mrs Whitlow and the
cheerleaders who, right now, had nothing to cheer about. ‘I think we
should give the boys a really good display at this time,’ she suggested.
‘Don’t you agree, Juliet?’

Juliet, who had been dutifully following her said, ‘Yes, Glenda.’

_Yes, Glenda_. And there it was again. One sentence. Two voices.

Mrs Whitlow was not the sort of person who would take an instruction
from the head of the Night Kitchen, but Glenda leaned forward and said,
‘It’s the Archchancellor’s special request.’

The resurrection of Big Boy Barton was not an easy job and there were
possibly fewer volunteers for putting their fingers down his throat than
there had been for the Librarian. And his emptying and cleaning up took
a little more time.

As the referee summoned the teams back into position, Glenda arrived out
of breath and handed him a piece of paper. ‘What’s this?’

‘It’s the rules, sir, but you will see that I have put a ring around one
of them.’

He glanced at it, and said dismissively, ‘Looks like a lot of nonsense
to me.’

‘It’s not, sir, not if you look at it a bit at a time, sir, it’s the
rules, sir.’

Archchancellor Henry shrugged and stuffed the paper into his pocket.

For a moment, Bledlow Nobbs glanced at Glenda, defiantly out of place
amongst the cheerleaders. Glenda was known to be generous to her friends
and she made the best tea in the university. This wasn’t about football,
this was about a hot mug of tea and possibly a doughnut. He leaned down
to Nutt. ‘Glenda says I’ve got to remember rule 202,’ he said.

Nutt’s face brightened. ‘Clever idea and of course it will work. Did she
tell you to kick the ball out of the pitch?’

‘Yes, that’s right. Are we going to cheat?’ said Bledlow Nobbs.

‘No. We are going to stick to the rules. And the thing about sticking to
the rules is that it’s sometimes better than cheating.’

Nobbs’s chance came soon enough, surprisingly with an obviously
misdirected pass from Hoggett. Had Hoggett been standing very close when
they had been talking? And had he just said ‘Go for it?’ It sounded very
much like it. He kicked the ball straight towards the cheerleaders,
where Glenda snatched it out of the air and pushed it into the folds of
Mrs Whitlow’s skirt. ‘You haven’t seen this, ladies, you haven’t seen
where it is and you’re not moving for anyone, okay?’

As the crowd booed and cheered, she pulled the tin can out of her bag
and held it up in the air. ‘Ball lost!’ she yelled. ‘Substitute ball!’
and threw the can directly towards the bledlow, who was quick enough to
flick it on to Nutt. Before any other player had moved, it landed with a
little _gloing!_ sound on the end of Trev Likely’s boot...

According to the editor of the _Times_:

  We have been assured that no magic was used on the day of the match
  and it is not my place to contradict the honourable faculty of Unseen
  University. All your correspondent will say is that Trevor Likely
  kicked the ‘ball’, against all probability, towards the Academicals’
  goal, where he stood, apparently waiting for the stampede of the
  enraged United squad. What followed, your correspondent must declare,
  was not just a goal, but it was a punishment and it was a retribution.
  It was writing the name Likely, for the second time, in the annals of
  football history, as Trevor, famous son of a famous father, wiped the
  floor with United, wrung them out and did it all over again. Running.
  Dodging. Sometimes obligingly kicking the ‘ball’ directly towards a
  defender who then found it heading off in quite a different direction,
  which just happened to be where Likely was now. He taunted them. He
  played with them. He caused them to collide with one another as they
  both went for a ball that, inexplicably, was no longer where they were
  sure it had been. And it must have come as a relief to the more steady
  members of United when he relented and skipped the ‘ball’ over the
  head of their standby keeper, Micky Pulford (latterly of the Whopping
  Street Wanderers) and into the net, where it circled and then returned
  to land precisely on the tip of Likely’s boot. The silence...

. . . spread like warm butter. Glenda was sure she could hear distant
birdsong or, possibly, the noise of worms under the turf, but definitely
the sound from Dr Lawn’s impromptu field hospital, the sound of ‘Big
Boy’ Barton chucking up again.

And then, where silence had reigned, sound poured like the gush of water
from a broken dam. It was physical and it was complex. Here and there
the spectators started chanting. All the chants of all the teams, united
and harmonizing in one perfect moment.

Glenda watched in amazement as Juliet . . . It was like the fashion show
all over again. She seemed to light up from the inside, bars of golden
light floating away from the micromail. She started to run towards Trev,
tearing off her beard, and, Glenda could see, gradually rising from the
ground as though she was running up a stairway.

It was a strange and wonderful sight, and not even Charlie Barton, still
throwing up, could detract from it.

‘ ’scuse me,’ said Mister Hoggett. ‘That was a goal, wasn’t it?’

‘Yes, Mister Hoggett, I think it was,’ said the referee.

Hoggett was pushed out of the way by Andy Shank. ‘No! It went to one
side! Are you bloody blind, or what? And it was a tin can.’

‘No, Mister Shank, it was not. Gentlemen, can you not see what’s
happening in front of your faces? Look, everything that happened was
perfectly legal under the rules of the game, rule 202, to be precise.
It’s a fossil, but it _is_ a rule, and I can assure you that no magic
was used. But right now, gentlemen, can you not see the golden lady
floating up in the air?’

‘Yeah, right, that’s just more weird kids’ stuff, just like that goal.’

‘This is football, Mister Shank, it’s all weird kids’ stuff.’

‘So the game is over,’ said Mr Hoggett.

‘Yes, Mister Hoggett, it is. Apart from, and I insist on drawing your
attention to it, a beautiful golden lady floating over the pitch. Am I
the only one seeing this?’

Hoggett glanced towards the rising Juliet. ‘Yeah, right, very pretty,
but we’ve lost, have we?’

‘Yes, Mister Hoggett, you have clearly and emphatically lost.’

‘And, just to be precise,’ said Hoggett, ‘there are no more, like,
rules, are there?’

‘No, Mister Hoggett, you are no longer subject to the rules of
football.’

‘Thank you for that clarification, your worship, and may I also thank
you on behalf of United for the way you handled the trying events of
this afternoon.’

With this, he turned and punched Andy full in the face. Mister Hoggett
was a mild man, but years of lifting a pig carcass in each hand meant
that he had a punch that even Andy’s thick skin had to reckon with. Even
so, after Andy had blinked a few times he managed to say, ‘You bastard.’

‘You lost us the game,’ said Hoggett. ‘We could have won fair and
square, but you had to muck it up.’ And those around him felt able to
murmur in support of the accusation.

‘Me? It wasn’t me! It was that bloody Trev Likely and his little orc
chum. They was using magic. You can’t say that wasn’t magic.’

‘Just skill, I assure you,’ said the former Dean. ‘Amazing skill,
certainly, but he is well known for his prowess with the tin can, which
itself is a veritable icon of football.’

‘Where is that bloody Likely, anyway?’

Glenda, eyes fixed on the centre of the pitch, said in the voice of
someone half hypnotized, ‘He’s rising up in the air as well.’

‘Look, you can’t tell me that’s not magic,’ Andy insisted.

‘No,’ said Glenda. ‘You know what, I think it’s religion. Can’t you
hear?’

‘I can’t hear anything, dear, with all the noise from the crowd,’ said
the former Dean.

‘_Yes_,’ said Glenda. ‘_Listen_ to the crowd.’

He did. It was a roar, a great sky-filling roar, old and animal and
coming up from the gods knew where, but inside it, travelling like a
hidden message, he made out the words. They swam into focus, if indeed
the ear could focus and if he was actually hearing them with his ears.
They might have been coming through his bones...

  If the striker thinks he scores

  Or if the keeper cries in shame

  They understand not the crowd’s applause

  I make, and hear and earn again

  For I am the crowd and I am the ball

  I am the triumph and the blame

  I am the turf, the pies, the All

  Always and ever, I am the Game.

  It matters not who won or lost

  Nothing is the score you made

  Fame is a petal that curls in the frost

  But I will remember how you played.

_And it stays there_, Glenda thought, _like sound in a banner. Everybody
one part of it._

Juliet and Trev began to float down, hand in hand, turning gently until
they landed lightly on the turf, still kissing. A sort of reality began
to leak back into the arena, and there are some people who, even when
hearing the voice of the nightingale, will say ‘What’s that bloody
noise?’

‘Cheatin’ bastard,’ said Andy and launched himself directly at Trev,
covering the ground at speed as the boy stood there with a very bemused
but happy expression on his face. He did not notice the hellbent Andy
until a huge boot kicked him squarely in the groin, so hard that the
eyes of all male watchers watered in sympathetic pain.

For the second time in twenty-four hours, Trev felt the micromail _sing_
as the thousands of links moved and just as quickly settled down again.
It was as if a little breeze had blown up his pants. Apart from that, he
hadn’t felt a thing.

Andy, on the other hand, had. He was lying on the ground, bent double,
making a sort of whistling noise through his teeth.

Someone slapped Trev on the back. It was Pepe.

‘You _did_ put my pants on, didn’t you? Well, obviously not my pants.
You’d have to be suicidal to want to put my pants on. Anyway, I’ve come
up with a name for the stuff: I’m going to call it Retribushium. Can’t
ever say it will be an end to war, ’cos I can’t imagine anything putting
an end to war, but it sends the force back the way it came. Didn’t chafe
either, did it?’

‘No,’ said Trev, amazed.

‘Well, it did for him! My word, though, he’s a game one. That reminds
me, I’ll need a picture of you in them.’

Andy was rising slowly, elevating himself to the vertical almost by
willpower alone. Pepe grinned, and somehow it seemed obvious to Trev
that anyone who was going to get up and try any threats with Pepe
grinning at him was more than suicidal.

‘Got a knife, have you, you little squirt?’ said Andy.

‘No, Andy,’ said Nutt behind him. ‘No more. The game is over. Fortune
has favoured Unseen Academicals and I believe the traditional ending is
to exchange shirts in an atmosphere of good fellowship.’

‘But not pants,’ said Pepe under his breath.

‘What do you know about that sort of thing?’ growled Andy. ‘You’re a
bloody orc. I know all about you people. You can tear arms and legs off.
You’re black magic. I’m not scared of you.’ He came at Nutt with
commendable speed for a man in such pain.

Nutt dodged. ‘I believe there is a peaceful solution to the obvious
enmity between us.’

‘You what?!’

Pepe and some of the footballers were closing in. Andy had not been
making friends. Nutt waved them away.

‘I’m sure I could help you, Andy. Yes, you are right, I am an orc, but
doesn’t an orc have eyes? Doesn’t an orc have ears? Doesn’t an orc have
arms and legs?’

‘Yeah, at the moment,’ said Andy, and leaped.

What happened next happened so fast that Trev didn’t see the middle of
it. It started with Andy jumping and finished with him sitting on the
ground with Nutt’s hands clamped around his head, claws out. ‘Let me see
now,’ Nutt mused as the man struggled in vain. ‘Twisting the skull with
enough force to snap the spine and spinal column should not present much
difficulty since it is a non-rotating joint. And, of course, the ear
holes and eye sockets allow for extra grip in the manner of a bowling
ball,’ he added happily.

There was a horrified hush as he continued. ‘Using the unit of
measurement of force invented by Sir Rosewood Bunn, I should think that
a mere 250 Bunns should do the trick. But, of course, and possibly
surprisingly, it is the tearing of the skin, tendons and muscles that
would present me with some difficulty. You are a young man and the
tensile strength would be quite high. I imagine the skin alone would
require a force of about a thousand Bunns.’

Andy yelped as his head was gently twisted.

‘Oh, I say! Look here now!’ said Ridcully. ‘A joke is a joke and all
that, but...’

‘From then on it gets rather messy,’ said Nutt. ‘Muscle would tear off
the bones comparatively easily.’

Andy gave another strangled yelp.

‘But taking it all in all, I would think a force of between three to
five Kilobunns should do the trick.’ He paused. ‘Just my little joke,
Andy. I know you like a laugh. I would also, I believe, be quite capable
of putting one hand down your throat and pulling out your stomach.’

‘Go ahead,’ croaked Andy.

And around the arena of the Hippo, the beast smelled blood. After all,
it wasn’t just horse racing that had taken place in the Hippo over the
centuries. The comparatively small amount of blood that had been shed
today was nothing compared with the oceans of the centuries gone by, but
the beast knew blood when it smelled it. The cheering and the chanting
now picked up, and the words grew louder and louder as people rose to
their feet: _Orc! Orc! Orc!_

Nutt stood impassively and then turned to the former Dean. ‘Could I
please ask everyone else to leave? This may become messy.’

‘Oh, come on!’ said Trev. ‘No way.’

‘Ah, well,’ said Nutt, ‘maybe just the ladies?’

‘Not likely,’ said Glenda.

‘In that case, would you please be so kind as to lend me your megaphone,
referee, and I would be grateful if you would instruct some of the
stronger players on the field to restrain Mister Shank who is, I
believe, sadly not in his right mind.’

Wordlessly it was handed over. Nutt took it as the storm of _Orc! Orc!_
grew louder, walked a little way from the rest of the group and stood
there impassively with his arms folded until the taunting stopped out of
sheer lack of momentum. With every eye watching him, he raised the
megaphone to his lips and said, ‘Gentlemen. Yes, indeed, I am an orc and
will always be one. And may I say that it’s been a privilege to play
here today and to see you all. But I do gather now that being an orc in
this city may be seen as something of a problem to some of you.’ He
paused. ‘So I would ask you to excuse me if I request that this matter
be sorted out between us now.’

There was laughter and some jeers from various parts of the ground, but
also, it seemed to Glenda, the beast was calling upon itself for
silence. In that pin-drop silence the thud of the megaphone hitting the
ground could be heard in every corner. Then Nutt rolled up his sleeves
and lowered his voice so that people had to strain to listen.

He said, ‘Come on if you think you’re hard enough.’

First there was shock and then the silence of disbelief and the whisper
of every head turning to every other head and saying, ‘Did he really say
that?’ and then someone high in the stands started to clap, at first
slowly and then at an accelerating tempo, as it reached the crowd’s
tipping point, when not clapping would be unthinkable. Ceasing to clap
was also unthinkable and within a minute the applause was a storm.

Nutt turned back to the rest of the team with tears streaming down his
face. ‘Do I have worth?’ he said to Glenda.

She ran towards him and hugged him. ‘You always did.’

‘Then when the match is over there are things we have to do.’

‘But it’s been over for ages,’ said Glenda.

‘No, it’s not over until the referee blows his whistle. Everyone knows
that.’

‘By Io he’s right,’ said Ridcully. ‘Go on, Dean. Give it the works!’

The Archchancellor of Brazeneck University felt gracious enough to let
that one pass. He put the gigantic whistle to his lips, filled his lungs
with air and sent the pea rattling. Despite everything, the shade of
Evans the Striped had the last word: ‘NO BOY IS TO FIDDLE ABOUT IN THE
SHOWERS!’

As the crowd streamed down from the stands, trampling the now sacred
turf, Ridcully tapped a gloomy Mr Hoggett on the shoulder and said, ‘It
would be my privilege to change shirts with you, sir.’ He dropped his
hat on the ground, pulled off his shirt and revealed a chest so hairy
that it looked like two sleeping lions. The United shirt he received in
return was somewhat of a tight fit, but that was unimportant because, as
Andy had predicted, the Unseen Academicals were indeed picked up by the
yelling crowd (except for Mrs Whitlow who fought back) and carried in
glory through the city. It was a triumph. Whether you won or lost, it
was still a triumph.²⁶

 

You think it’s all over?

 

The wizards of Unseen University knew how to party. Pepe and Madame
Sharn²⁷ were impressed. However, business was business and they had to
think about Juliet. ‘I can’t see her anywhere,’ said Madame.

‘I think I saw two of her a while ago,’ said Pepe. ‘These fellows do
themselves well – I have never seen such a large cheeseboard. It almost
makes celibacy seem worthwhile.’

‘Oh, do you think so?’

‘No. By the way, have you noticed that very tall wizard giving you the
eye, my dear?’

‘That’s Professor Bengo Macarona. Do you think he—’ Madame began.

‘Without a shadow of a doubt, my dear. I know he’s hurt his legs, but I
doubt if that would be a problem.’

Once again, Madame craned to search the crowd for the glittering figure.
‘I do hope our young model is not getting involved in any hanky panky.’

‘How could she? She’s totally surrounded by admirers.’

‘It’s still possible.’

In fact, Juliet and Trev were sitting in the darkness of the Night
Kitchen. ‘I’ll find somethin’ to do,’ said Trev. ‘I’ll go wherever you
go.’

‘You ought to stay here and play football,’ said Juliet. ‘You know what
some people said when we were drinking? They said Dave Likely was your
father.’

‘Well, yes, that’s true.’

‘Yes,’ said Juliet, ‘but they used to say you were his son.’

‘Well, maybe a bit of football,’ Trev conceded, ‘but I don’t think I’ll
get away with the tin can again.’

They kissed.

There and then, that was all that appeared necessary.

However...

Glenda and Nutt had also wanted to find a place a little out of the way
and, if possible, dark. Fortuitously she had pulled out of her pocket a
pair of tickets, placed there by Dr Hix in his attempt to spread
darkness and despondency throughout the world by the means of amateur
dramatics, to the Dolly Sisters Players’ production of _Starcrossed_ by
Hwel the Playwright. They sat hand in hand, watching it solemnly,
feeling the ripples move them, then discussed it as they walked back
through the city, carefully skirting the chanting bands of happy,
drunken supporters.

‘What did you think?’ said Nutt, after a while. ‘About the play, I
mean.’

‘I don’t see that it was that romantic,’ said Glenda. ‘To be honest, I
thought it was a bit silly.’

‘It is widely regarded as one of the great romantic plays of the last
fifty years,’ said Nutt.

‘Really? But what type of example are they setting? First of all, didn’t
anyone in Genua, even in those days, know how to take a pulse? Is a
little first-aid knowledge too much to expect? Even a hand mirror would
have helped and there are quite a number of respectable places where you
can take a pulse.’

‘I think that’s because neither of them were thinking about themselves,
perhaps,’ said Nutt.

‘Neither of them was thinking at all,’ said Glenda, ‘and they certainly
weren’t thinking about each other as people. A little common sense and
they would be alive. It’s made-up, like books. I don’t think anyone
sensible would act like that.’

He squeezed her hand. ‘Sometimes you speak like Ladyship,’ he said, ‘and
that reminds me.’

‘Reminds you of what?’

‘It’s time for me to meet my maker.’

Andy Shank walked unsteadily among the night-time alleys, secure in the
knowledge that they contained nothing worse than him, a belief which, as
it happened, was in error.

‘Mister Shank?’

‘Who’s asking?’ he said, turning around and reaching instinctively into
his coat for his new cutlass.

But another knife, silver and thin, sliced twice and a foot expertly
stamped the length of his shin and forced him to the ground. ‘Me! I’m
the happy ending. You can call me the good fairy. Don’t worry, you’ll be
able to see by the time you wipe the blood out of your eyes and, as they
say, now you won’t have to pay for a drink in any bar in this town,
though I suspect you never have.’

His attacker leaned nonchalantly against the wall.

‘And the reason I am doing this, Mister Shank, is that I am a bastard. I
am an old bugger. I am a sod. They let you get away with it because they
were nice people and, you know, the world needs someone like me to set
the balance square. Since before you were born I have known people like
you. Tormentors, bullies and thieves. Ah yes, thieves. Thieves of other
people’s self-respect. Thieves of their peace of mind. Now Mister Nutt,
he’s an orc and I’ve heard that he can talk people better. Well, so be
it, say I. If it works, he’s a genius, but that don’t square things, not
in my book, so I thought you ought to meet Pepe, just to say hello. If I
ever see you again, they’ll never find all the pieces, but just to show
that I have a decent streak, here’s something to put on your wounds.’

Something landed softly near Andy’s groping hand.

Andy, dripping blood and snot on to the pavement, reached around quickly
as the trim little footsteps disappeared, thinking only of getting the
blood out of his eyes and revenge and retribution out of his heart. And
in the circumstances, therefore, he should not have wiped the half-lemon
across his face.

You think it’s all over?

 

It is a regrettable fact that when two people are dining at a very large
and impressive dining table they sit at the opposite ends of the long
axis. This is incredibly stupid and makes conversation difficult and the
passing of food impossible, but even Lord Vetinari and Lady Margolotta
had apparently signed up to the idea.

On the other hand, they both ate very little and so there wasn’t very
much to pass.

‘Your secretary seems to be getting on very well with my librarian,’
said Lady Margolotta.

‘Yes,’ observed Vetinari. ‘Apparently they are comparing ring binders.
He has invented a new one.’

‘Well, for the proper working of the world,’ said Lady Margolotta, ‘it
is essential that ring binders are important to at least one person.’
She put down her glass and looked towards the door.

‘You seem nervous,’ said Vetinari. ‘Are you wondering how he will come?’

‘He has had a very long day and a remarkably successful one. And you say
he’s gone to an amateur dramatics performance?’

‘Yes, with that very forthright young lady who makes the pies,’ said
Vetinari.

‘I see,’ said Lady Margolotta. ‘He must know I am here and he’s gone off
with a cook?’

There was just a trace of a smile on Vetinari’s lips. ‘Not any cook. A
genius amongst cooks.’

‘Well, I must admit to being surprised,’ said her ladyship.

‘And upset?’ said Vetinari. ‘A little jealous, perhaps?’

‘Havelock, you go too far!’

‘Would you expect otherwise? Besides, you must surely realize that his
triumph is yours too?’

‘Did I tell you that I’ve seen some of them?’ said Margolotta after a
while.

‘The orcs?’

‘Yes. They really are wretched. Of course, people say that about the
goblins and while it is true that they religiously save their own snot,
and, frankly, just about everything else, at least there is a logic to
it.’

‘Well, a religious logic, at least,’ murmured Vetinari. ‘They tend to be
quite stretchable.’

‘The Igors made them from men, did you know?’

Vetinari, still holding his glass, walked to the other end of the table
and picked up the pepperpot. ‘No. However, now you tell me, it’s
patently obvious. Goblins would not have been nearly ferocious enough.’

‘And they had nothing,’ said Margolotta. ‘No culture, no legends, no
history – he could give them those.’

‘Everything they are not, he is,’ said Vetinari, adding, ‘but that’s an
enormous weight you’re putting on his shoulders.’

‘How much is on mine? How much of a weight is on yours?’

‘It’s rather like being a carthorse,’ said Vetinari. ‘After a while one
ceases to notice, it’s just the way of life.’

‘They deserve their chance and it must be taken now, while the world is
at peace.’

‘Peace?’ said Vetinari. ‘Ah, yes, defined as a period of time to allow
for preparation for the next war.’

‘Where did you learn such cynicism, Havelock?’

Vetinari spun around and began his absent-minded walk along the length
of the table again. ‘Well, mostly from you, madam, though I have to say
that the credit is not all yours, since I have had an extended period of
further education as tyrant of this city.’

‘I think you allow them too much freedom.’

‘Oh, yes, I do. That’s why I am still tyrant of this city. The way to
retain power, I have always thought, is to ensure the absolute
unthinkability of oneself not being there. I shall help you in any way I
can, of course. There should be no slaves, even slaves to instinct.’

‘One person can make a difference,’ said Margolotta. ‘Look at Mister
Shine who is now Diamond King of Trolls. Look at yourself. If men can
fall—’

Vetinari gave a sharp laugh. ‘Oh, they can, indeed.’

‘—then orcs can rise,’ said Margolotta. ‘If that is not true then the
universe is not true.’

There was a velvet-like knock at the double doors and Drumknott entered.
‘Mister Nutt is here, sir.’ He added with a certain disdain, ‘And he’s
with that . . . woman, who cooks in the university.’

Vetinari glanced at Margolotta. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I think we should see
him in the main hall.’

Drumknott coughed. ‘I think I should tell you, sir, that Mister Nutt
acquired entrance to the building through gates that were securely
locked.’

‘Did he tear them off their hinges?’ asked Vetinari with apparent
enthusiastic interest.

‘No, sir, he lifted the gates bodily off their hinges and stacked them
neatly against the wall.’

‘Ah, then there is still hope for the world.’

‘And the guards?’

Drumknott glanced for a moment at Lady Margolotta. ‘I have taken the
precaution of stationing some of them inconspicuously in the Great Hall
gallery with crossbows.’

‘Stand them down,’ said Vetinari.

‘Stand them down?’ said Margolotta.

‘_Stand them down_,’ said Vetinari again, directly to Drumknott. He
extended his arm to her ladyship. ‘I think the term is, as they put it,
_alea iacta est_. The die, your ladyship, is cast, and we should both
see how it falls.’

‘Will you get into trouble for that?’ said Glenda, staying close to Nutt
as they walked up the steps.

The main hall of the palace was an intimidating place when empty,
because it had been designed for exactly that purpose.

‘Why didn’t you just knock like everyone else?’

‘My dear Glenda, I am not like anyone else and neither are you.’

‘Then what are you going to do?’

‘I don’t know. What will Ladyship do? I have no idea, although I am
becoming aware of how she thinks and there are a few possibilities I
have in mind.’

They watched two figures coming down the broad staircase that extended
up into the rest of the building. It had been built to accommodate
hundreds; the two people coming down looked uncharacteristically small.

‘Ah, Mister Nutt,’ said Vetinari as they had almost reached the bottom
step, ‘and Miss Sugarbean. I must add my congratulations to the pair of
you on the wonderful, albeit surprising, success of Unseen Academicals.’

‘I think you are going to have to make a lot of changes to the rules,
sir,’ said Nutt.

‘Such as?’ said Vetinari.

‘I think you need assistants for the referee. His eyes can’t be
everywhere,’ said Nutt, ‘and there do need to be some more rules.
Although Mister Hoggett did the honourable thing, I think.’

‘And Professor Rincewind might make a very capable attacker, if only you
could persuade him to take the ball with him,’ said Vetinari.

‘I would never tell the Archchancellor this, my lord, but I think he may
be better in a more defensive role.’

‘Who would you suggest as an alternative?’ said Vetinari.

‘Well, Charlie, the animated skeleton who works in the Department of
Post-Mortem Communications, did very well in trials. And, after all,’ he
paused for a moment, ‘yes, after all, none of us can help how we’re
made.’

They turned at a tap, tap, tapping behind them. It was Lady Margolotta’s
foot.

Nutt gave a little bow. ‘Ladyship. I trust I find you in adequate
health.’

‘And you likewise, Nutt,’ said Lady Margolotta.

Nutt turned to Glenda. ‘What was that term you used once?’

‘In the pink,’ said Glenda.

‘Yes, that’s right, I am deeply in the pink,’ said Nutt. ‘And it’s
Mister Nutt, if you please, your ladyship.’

‘Would the two of you care to join us upstairs for a late supper?’ asked
Vetinari, watching them both very carefully.

‘No, I don’t think we will impose, but thank you very much. I have a lot
to do. Lady Margolotta?’

‘Yes?’

‘Would you come here, please?’

Glenda watched the expressions: Vetinari’s faint smile, her look of
affront, Nutt’s confidence. The rustle of her long, black dress was an
audible intoxication as she walked the last few steps towards the orc
and stopped. ‘Do I have worth?’ asked Nutt.

‘Yes, Nutt, you do.’

‘Thank you,’ said Nutt, ‘but I am learning that worth is something that
must be continuously accumulated. You asked me to be becoming. Have I
become?’

‘Yes, Nutt, you have become.’

‘And what is it you want me to do now?’

‘Find the orcs that still live in Far Uberwald and bring them back out
of the dark.’

‘Then there are more orcs, like me?’ said Nutt.

‘A few dozen, perhaps,’ said Margolotta, ‘but in truth I could hardly
say they are like you. They are a sorry bunch.’

‘Is it they who should be sorry?’ said Nutt.

Glenda watched the faces. Amazingly, Lady Margolotta looked taken aback.

‘Many bad things were done under the Evil Empire,’ she said. ‘The best
we can do now is undo them. Will you assist in this endeavour?’

‘In every way that I can,’ said Nutt.

‘I would like you to teach them civilized behaviour,’ said Ladyship
coldly.

He appeared to consider this. ‘Yes, of course, I think that would be
quite possible,’ he said. ‘And who would you send to teach the humans?’

There was a brief outburst of laughter from Vetinari, who immediately
cupped his hand over his mouth. ‘Oh, I do beg your pardon,’ he said.

‘But since it falls to me,’ continued Nutt, ‘then, yes, I shall go into
Far Uberwald.’

‘Pastor Oats will be very pleased to see you, I’m sure,’ said
Margolotta.

‘He’s still alive?’ said Nutt.

‘Oh, yes, indeed, he is still quite young after all, and walks with
forgiveness at his side. I think he would feel it very appropriate if
you were to join him. In fact, he has told me on one of his all too
infrequent visits that he would be honoured to pass the rate of
forgiveness on to you.’

‘Nutt doesn’t need forgiveness!’ Glenda burst out.

Nutt smiled and patted her hand. ‘Uberwald is a wild country for a man
to travel in,’ he said, ‘even a holy man. Forgiveness is the name of
Pastor Oats’s double-headed battle-axe. For Mister Oats the crusade
against evil is not a metaphor. Forgiveness cut through my chains. I
will gladly carry it.’

‘The kings of the trolls and the dwarfs will give you all the help that
they can,’ said Ladyship.

Nutt nodded. ‘But first I have a small favour to ask you, my lord,’ he
said to Vetinari.

‘By all means, ask.’

‘I know the city has a number of golem horses. I wonder if I could
borrow one of them?’

‘Be my guest,’ said the Patrician.

Nutt turned to Glenda. ‘Miss Sugarbean. Juliet told me that you secretly
want to ride through Quirm on a warm summer’s evening, feeling the wind
in your hair. We could leave now. I have saved money.’

All kinds of reasons why she shouldn’t foamed in Glenda’s head.
Everywhere were responsibilities, commitments and the never-ending
clamour of wanting. There were a thousand and one reasons why she should
say no.

‘Yes,’ she said.

‘In that case, then, we will not take up any more of your valuable time,
my lord, my lady, and will head off to the stables.’

‘But—’ Lady Margolotta began.

‘I think all that needs to be said has been,’ said Nutt. ‘I will, _we_
will, of course, visit you shortly when I have settled my affairs here
and I look forward very much to doing so.’ He nodded to them and, with
Glenda walking on air beside him, went back the way they had come.

‘Wasn’t that nice?’ said Vetinari. ‘Did you see that they held hands all
the time?’

At the doorway, Nutt turned round. ‘Oh, just one more thing. Thank you
for not posting archers up in the gallery. That would have been so . . .
embarrassing.’

‘I shall drink to your success, Margolotta,’ said Vetinari as their
footsteps died away. ‘You know, I seriously intended to proposition Miss
Sugarbean to be my cook.’ He sighed again. ‘Still, what is a pie to a
happy ending?’

 

You think it’s all over?

 

The following morning Ponder Stibbons was at work in the High Energy
Magic Building when Ridcully limped in. There was a glowing silver band
around his knee. ‘Grapeshot’s Therapeutic Squeezer,’ he announced. ‘A
simple little spell. I’ll be right as rain in no time. Mrs Whitlow
wanted me to put a stocking on it, but I told her that I’m not
interested in that sort of thing.’

‘I’m glad to see that you’re in such good spirits, Archchancellor,’ said
Ponder, working his way down a long calculation.

‘Have you had a chance to see the papers yet this morning, Mister
Stibbons?’

‘No, sir. What with the football business, I’m a little behind with my
work.’

‘It may interest you to know that late last night a seventy-foot-high
chicken broke out of what they are pleased to call the Higher Energy
Magic Building at Brazeneck and is apparently rampaging through
Pseudopolis while being pursued by most of the faculty, who, I assume,
would be quite capable of terrorizing the city all by themselves. Henry
has just had a frantic clacks and has had to rush off.’

‘Oh, that is very disturbing, sir.’

‘Yes, it is, isn’t it?’ said Ridcully. ‘Apparently it’s laying eggs very
fast.’

‘Ah, that sounds like a quasi-expansion blit phenomenon adapting itself
to a living organism,’ said Ponder. He turned the page, his pencil
moving neatly across the column of figures.

‘The former Dean has egg all over his face,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, I’m sure that Professor Turnipseed will be able to bring things
back under control,’ said Ponder. The tone of his voice was entirely
unchanged.

There was a busy little silence and Ridcully said, ‘How long do you
think we should give him to get it under control?’

‘What size are the eggs?’

‘Eight or nine feet high, apparently,’ said Ridcully.

‘With calcium shells?’

‘Yes, quite thick, so I’m told.’

Ponder looked thoughtfully at the ceiling. ‘Hmm, that’s not too bad,
then. If you’d said steel it would have been rather worrying. It sounds
very much like a blit devolution, possibly caused by . . . lack of
experience.’

‘I thought you taught Mister Turnipseed everything you know,’ said
Ridcully, looking happier than Ponder had seen him in a very long time.

‘Well, sir, perhaps there was something he didn’t quite grasp. Are
people at risk?’

‘The wizards have told everyone to stay indoors.’

‘Well, sir, I think if I got some of my equipment together we could
leave about teatime.’

‘I’ll come, too, of course,’ said Ridcully. He looked at Ponder. ‘And—’

‘What?’ said Ponder. He looked at Ridcully’s grin. ‘Yes, it might be a
good idea if one of the gentlemen from the _Times_ came along to take
pictures. They might be very good for instructional purposes.’

‘An extremely good plan, Mister Stibbons, and I think we should take the
senior faculty as well. They will lend some much-needed . . .’ He
snapped his fingers. ‘What’s the word?’

‘Confusion,’ said Ponder.

‘No, not that,’ said Ridcully.

‘Appetite?’ said Ponder. ‘Weight?’

‘Something like that . . . Ah, gravitas. Oh, yes, lots of gravitas. We
aren’t the kind of fellows who run around chasing strange birds. I’ll
see you after lunch. And now I have other matters to deal with.’

‘Yes, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder. ‘Oh, and, um . . . What about the
proposed football match?’

‘_Regrettably_, it appears that it will have to wait until they have
rebuilt the university.’

‘That’s a shame, Archchancellor,’ said Ponder.

He carried on with the calculation until the very last figures danced
into place, made sure the Archchancellor had left, gave a very small
smile, which you might not have noticed had you not expected it, and
then pulled another ledger towards him.

It was another good day.

 

It is now!

 

FOOTNOTES

¹ Technically, the city of Ankh-Morpork is a Tyranny, which is not
always the same thing as a monarchy, and in fact even the post of Tyrant
has been somewhat redefined by the incumbent, Lord Vetinari, as the only
form of democracy that works. Everyone is entitled to vote, unless
disqualified by reason of age or not being Lord Vetinari.

And yet it does work. This has annoyed a number of people who feel,
somehow, that it should not, and who want a monarch instead, thus
replacing a man who has achieved his position by cunning, a deep
understanding of the realities of the human psyche, breathtaking
diplomacy, a certain prowess with the stiletto dagger, and, all agree, a
mind like a finely balanced circular saw, with a man who has got there
by being born.²

However, the crown has hung on anyway, as crowns do – on the Post Office
and the Royal Bank and the Mint and, not least, in the sprawling,
brawling, squalling consciousness of the city itself. Lots of things
live in that darkness. There are all kinds of darkness, and all kinds of
things can be found in them, imprisoned, banished, lost or hidden.
Sometimes they escape. Sometimes they simply fall out. Sometimes they
just can’t take it any more.

² A third proposition, that the city be governed by a choice of
respectable members of the community who would promise not to give
themselves airs or betray the public trust at every turn, was instantly
the subject of music-hall jokes all over the city.

³ That is to say Glenda officially sleeps in the old iron bedstead; in
reality most of her sleeping is done in a huge and ancient armchair in
the Night Kitchen, where she has very nearly mastered the art of doing
without proper sleep altogether. So many crumbs, spoons, bits of pie
dough, books and spilt drinks have gone down the sides of the cushions
of that chair that it might well now harbour a small, thriving
civilization.

⁴ Strictly speaking, Dr Hix, spelled with an X, was the son of Mr and
Mrs Hicks, but a man who wears a black robe with nasty symbols on it and
has a skull ring would be mad, or let us say even madder, to pass up the
chance to have an X in his name.

⁵ The Egregious Professor of Grammar and Usage would have corrected this
to ‘she was not she’, which would have caused the Professor of Logic to
spit out his drink.

⁶ Employing professional dribblers might seem extravagant for a body
like Unseen University. Nothing could be further from the truth. No
traditional wizard worth his pointy hat could possibly work by the light
of pure, smooth, dare one say virgin undribbled candles. It would just
not look right. The ambience would be totally shattered. And when it did
happen, the luckless wizard would mess about, as people do, with
matchsticks and bent paperclips, to try to get nice little dribbles and
channels of wax, as nature intended. However, this sort of thing never
really works and invariably ends with wax all over the carpet and the
wizard setting himself on fire. Candle dribbling, it has been decreed,
is a job for a dribbler.

⁷ Originally the Explorers’ Society until Lord Vetinari forcibly
insisted that most of the places ‘discovered’ by the society’s members
already had people living in them, who were already trying to sell
snakes to the newcomers.

⁸ There are those who say that sherry should not be drunk early in the
morning.They are wrong.

⁹ In short, every wizard knew that, whatever you did, you’d get some
wizards creeping off to do weird and messy magic in some cave somewhere.

¹⁰ Hix had flatly refused to wear trousers. No self-disrespecting dark
wizard would dream of wearing such common garb as a trouser, he
declared. It totally spoiled the effect.

¹¹ In fact, Juliet’s rising from beneath the cart passed relatively
unnoticed by all except an art student who was almost blinded by the
light at the spectacle, and many years later painted the picture known
as _Beauty Arising from the Pease Pudding Cart Attended by Cherubs
Carrying Hot Dogs and Pies_. It was widely regarded as a masterpiece,
although no one could ever work out exactly what the hell it was all
about. But it was beautiful and so it was true.

¹² But you’d got another eye, right? And now you had solid proof that
you were a hard man, especially if you got one of those scars that run
across the eye and down the cheek. Get a black eye-patch, and you would
never have to wait to be served at a bar ever again.

¹³ Dwarfs have a straightforward approach to alcoholic drink: beer,
mead, wine, sherry – one large size fits all.

¹⁴ You didn’t get anywhere at Unseen University without being able to
understand the vast number of meanings that can be carried by the word
_ook_.

¹⁵ This diagram was devised to chart the tendency of wizards, who start
out small and pale, to progress through the craft getting bigger and
cholerically redder until at last they swell up and explode in a cloud
of pomposity.

¹⁶ This may not be true. Wizards tend to think it’s a long time to the
next meal, right up until they are consuming it.

¹⁷ It is said that if you want to stand up to someone you should picture
them naked. In the case of Mrs Whitlow this would be, as Ponder Stibbons
might put it, contra-indicated.

¹⁸ Contrary to popular belief and hope, people don’t usually come
running when they hear a scream. That’s not how humans work. Humans look
at other humans and say, ‘Did you hear a scream?’ because the first
scream might just have been you screaming inside your head, or a horse
backfiring.

¹⁹ One other reason that you could call them Faces was that crude
drawings of them appeared on Watch posters, with hopeful messages asking
people to let the Watch know if said person had been seen around and
about.

²⁰ An archbishop in a house of negotiable affection might have looked a
little more puzzled than Nutt right now, but the amount of said
puzzlement depends on how many archbishops you know.

²¹ Policemen have a way of pronouncing the word ‘sir’, as if they would
really like to spell it ‘cur’.

²² i.e., up to something.

²³ In his seat, the university’s Master of the Music fumbled for his
notebook and wrote down rapidly: Macarona Unum Est. Certes Macarona Est.
And couldn’t wait to get back to the choir.

²⁴ This was slightly modified when she realized that none of the
spectators had tried any hanky panky whatsoever.

²⁵ According to _Fletcher’s Avian Nausea Index_, parrot sickness stands
at number five in the ‘wishing yourself dead’ index. The highest level
of sickness is that suffered by the great Combovered Eagle which can
vomit over three countries at once.

²⁶ It is traditional on these occasions for the conquering heroes to
spray bottles of champagne on the crowd. This did not happen. If a
wizard succeeds in getting the cork out of a champagne bottle, he
certainly does not intend to pour it away.

²⁷ Who was the same shape as most of the wizards and felt doubly at
home.

[About the Author]

TERRY PRATCHETT is the acclaimed creator of the Discworld® series,
started in 1983 with _The Colour of Magic_ and now, with _Snuff_,
numbering thirty-nine novels. Worldwide sales of his books are in excess
of 70 million, and they have been translated into thirty-seven
languages. Terry Pratchett was awarded an OBE in 1998, and was knighted
for services to literature in 2009.

 

 

[Introducing Discworld]

The Discworld Series is a continuous history of a world not totally
unlike our own except that it is a flat disc carried on the backs of
four elephants astride a giant turtle floating through space, and that
it is peopled by, among others, wizards, dwarves, policemen, thieves,
beggars, vampires and witches. Within the history of Discworld there are
many individual stories, which can be read in any order, but reading
them in sequence can increase your enjoyment through the accumulation of
all the fine detail that contributes to the teeming imaginative
complexity of this brilliantly conceived world.

 

[The Discworld series]

[Have you read them all?]

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC
(illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE &
HIS EDUCATED RODENTS (for younger readers)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN (for younger readers)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY (for younger readers)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD!

35. WINTERSMITH (for younger readers)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT (for younger readers)

39. SNUFF

OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III:
DARWIN’S WATCH
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION
(with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK
(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO
(with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK
(with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK
(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW?
(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD
(with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD
(compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD
(with Jacqueline Simpson)

DISCWORLD MAPS

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK
(with Stephen Briggs)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE –
A DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN
(with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT
(illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS
(with Neil Gaiman)

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNGER READERS

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND*

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

*www.ifnotyouthenwho.com

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

 

UNSEEN ACADEMICALS
A CORGI BOOK: 9780552153379
VERSION 1.0 EPUB ISBN: 9781407047294

 

First published in Great Britain

in 2009 by Doubleday

an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Corgi edition published 2010

 

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett 2009

Discworld® and Unseen University® are trademarks

registered by Terry Pratchett.

 

Terry Pratchett has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and

Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the author of this work.

 

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

 

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

 

A CIP catalogue record for this book

is available from the British Library.

 

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be

found at www.randomhouse.co.uk

The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009
