[Art_title_page.jpg]

DEDICATION

For Rob . . . for in between his days off.

For Emma . . . for helping me understand goblins.

And for Lyn . . . for always.

CONTENTS

Cover

Title Page

Dedication

Begin Reading

Epilogue

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright

About the Publisher

Footnotes

[20_Compass.ai]

BEGIN READING

The goblin experience of the world is the cult or perhaps religion of
Unggue. In short, it is a remarkably complex resurrection-based religion
founded on the sanctity of bodily secretions. Its central tenet runs as
follows: everything that is expelled from a goblin’s body was clearly
once part of them and should, therefore, be treated with reverence and
stored properly so that it can be entombed with its owner in the
fullness of time. In the meantime the material is stored in unggue pots,
remarkable creations of which I shall speak later.

A moment’s distasteful thought will tell us that this could not be
achieved by any creature, unless in possession of great wealth,
considerable storage space and compliant neighbors.

Therefore, in reality, most goblins observe the Unggue Had—what one
might term the common and lax form of Unggue—which encompasses earwax,
finger- and toenail clippings, and snot. Water, generally speaking, is
reckoned as not unggue, but something which goes through the body
without ever being part of it: they reason that there is no apparent
difference in the water before and after, as it were (which sadly shines
a light on the freshness of the water they encounter in their
underground lairs). Similarly feces are considered to be food that has
merely undergone a change of state. Surprisingly, teeth are of no
interest to the goblins, who look on them as a type of fungus, and they
appear to attach no importance to hair, of which, it has to be said,
they seldom have very much.

At this point, Lord Vetinari, Patrician of Ankh-Morpork, stopped reading
and stared at nothing. After a few seconds, nothing was eclipsed by the
form of Drumknott, his secretary (who, it must be said, had spent a
career turning himself into something as much like nothing as anything).

Drumknott said, “You look pensive, my lord,” to which observation he
appended a most delicate question mark, which gradually evaporated.

“Awash with tears, Drumknott, awash with tears.”

Drumknott stopped dusting the impeccably shiny black lacquered desk.
“Pastor Oats is a very persuasive writer, isn’t he, sir…?”

“Indeed he is, Drumknott, but the basic problem remains and it is this:
humanity may come to terms with the dwarf, the troll and even the orc,
terrifying though all these may have proved to be at times, and you know
why this is, Drumknott?”

The secretary carefully folded the duster he had been using and looked
at the ceiling. “I would venture to suggest, my lord, that in their
violence we recognize ourselves?”

“Oh, well done, Drumknott, I shall make a cynic of you yet! Predators
respect other predators, do they not? They may perhaps even respect the
prey: the lion may lie down with the lamb, even if only the lion is
likely to get up again, but the lion will not lie down with the rat.
Vermin, Drumknott, an entire race reduced to vermin!”

Lord Vetinari shook his head sadly, and the ever-attentive Drumknott
noticed that his lordship’s fingers had now gone back, for the third
time that day, to the page headed “Unggue Pots” and he seemed, quite
unusually, to be talking to himself as he did so…

“These are traditionally crafted by the goblin itself, out of anything
from precious minerals to leather, wood or bone. Among the former are
some of the finest eggshell-thin containers ever found in the world. The
plundering of goblin settlements by treasure hunters in search of these,
and the retaliation by the goblins themselves, has colored human-goblin
relationships even to the present day.”

Lord Vetinari cleared his throat and continued, “I quote Pastor Oats
again, Drumknott: ‘I must say that goblins live on the edge, often
because they have been driven there. When nothing else can survive, they
do. Their universal greeting is, apparently, “Hang” which means
“Survive.” I know dreadful crimes have been laid at their door, but the
world itself has never been kind to them. Let it be said here that those
who live their lives where life hangs by less than a thread understand
the dreadful algebra of necessity, which has no mercy and when necessity
presses in extremis, well, that is when the women need to make the
unggue pot called “soul of tears,” the most beautiful of all the pots,
carved with little flowers and washed with tears.’ ”

Drumknott, with meticulous timing, put a cup of coffee in front of his
master just as Lord Vetinari finished the sentence and looked up. “ ‘The
dreadful algebra of necessity,’ Drumknott. Well, we know about that,
don’t we?”

“Indeed we do, sir. Incidentally, sir, we have received a missive from
Diamond King of Trolls, thanking us for our firm stance on the drugs
issue. Well done, sir.”

“Hardly a concession,” Vetinari observed, waving it away. “You know my
position, Drumknott. I have no particular objection to people taking
substances that make them feel better, or more contented or, for that
matter, see little dancing purple fairies—or even their god if it comes
to that. It’s their brain, after all, and society can have no claim on
it, providing they’re not operating heavy machinery at the time.
However, to sell drugs to trolls that actually make their heads explode
is simply murder, the capital crime. I am glad to say that Commander
Vimes fully agrees with me on this issue.”

“Indeed, sir, and may I remind you that he will be leaving us very
shortly. Do you intend to see him off, as it were?”

The Patrician shook his head. “I think not. The man must be in terrible
turmoil, and I fear that my presence might make things worse.”

Was there a hint of pity in Drumknott’s voice when he said, “Don’t blame
yourself, my lord. After all, you and the commander are in the hands of
a higher power.”

His Grace, the Duke of Ankh, Commander Sir Samuel Vimes of the
Ankh-Morpork City Watch, was feverishly pushing a pencil down the side
of his boot in order to stop the itching. It didn’t work. It never did.
All his socks made his feet itch. For the hundredth time he considered
telling his wife that among her sterling qualities, and they were many,
knitting did not feature. But he would rather have chopped his foot off
than do so. It would break her heart.

They were dreadful socks, though, so thick, knotted and bulky that he
had had to buy boots that were one and a half times bigger than his
feet. And he did this because Samuel Vimes, who had never gone into a
place of worship with religious aforethought, worshipped Lady Sybil, and
not a day went past without his being amazed that she seemed to do the
same to him. He had made her his wife and she had made him a
millionaire; with her behind him the sad, desolate, penniless and
cynical copper was a rich and powerful duke. He’d managed to hold on to
the cynical, however, and a brace of oxen on steroids would not have
been able to pull the copper out of Sam Vimes; the poison was in too
deep, wrapped around the spine. And so Sam Vimes itched, and counted his
blessings until he ran out of numbers.

Among his curses was doing the paperwork.

There was always paperwork. It is well known that any drive to reduce
paperwork only results in extra paperwork.

Of course, he had people to do the paperwork, but sooner or later he
had, at the very least, to sign it and, if no way of escape presented
itself, even read it. There was no getting away from it: ultimately, in
all police work, there was a definite possibility that the manure would
hit the windmill. The initials of Sam Vimes were required to be on the
paper to inform the world that it was his windmill, and therefore his
manure.

But now he stopped to call through the open door to Sergeant
Littlebottom, who was acting as his orderly.

“Anything yet, Cheery?” he said, hopefully.

“Not in the way I think you mean, sir, but I think you’ll be pleased to
hear that I’ve just had a clacks message from Acting Captain Haddock
down in Quirm, sir. He says he’s getting on fine, sir, and really
enjoying the avec.”*

Vimes sighed. “Anything else?”

“Dead as a doorknob, sir,” said the dwarf, poking her head around the
door. “It’s the heat, sir, it’s too hot to fight and too sticky to
steal. Isn’t that wonderful, sir?”

Vimes grunted. “Where there are policemen there’s crime, sergeant,
remember that.”

“Yes, I do, sir, although I think it sounds better with a little
reordering of the words.”

“I suppose there’s no chance at all that I’ll be let off?”

Sergeant Littlebottom looked concerned. “I’m sorry, sir, I think there’s
no appeal. Officially Captain Carrot will relieve you of your badge at
noon.”

Vimes thumped his desk and exploded. “I don’t deserve this treatment
after a lifetime of dedication to the city!”

“Commander, if I may say so, you deserve a lot more.”

Vimes leaned back in his chair and groaned. “You too, Cheery?”

“I really am very sorry, sir. I know this is hard for you.”

“To be forced out after all this time! I begged, you know, and that
doesn’t come easy to a man like me, you can be sure. Begged!”

There was a sound of footsteps on the stairs. Cheery watched as Vimes
pulled a brown envelope out of his desk drawer, inserted something into
it, licked it ferociously, sealed it with a spit and dropped it on his
desk, where it clanged. “There,” he said, through gritted teeth. “My
badge, just like Vetinari ordered. I put it down. It won’t be said they
took it off me!”

Captain Carrot stepped into the office, ducking briefly as he came
through the door. He had a package in his hand and several grinning
coppers were clustered behind him.

“Sorry about this, sir, higher authority and all that. If it’s any help
I think you’ve been lucky to be let off with two weeks. She was
originally talking about a month.”

He handed Vimes the package and coughed. “Me and the lads had a bit of a
whip-round, commander,” he said with a forced grin.

“You know, I prefer something sensible like Chief Constable,” said
Vimes, grabbing the package. “Do you know, I reckoned that if I let them
give me enough titles I’d eventually get one I could live with.”

Vimes tore open the package and pulled out a very small and colorful
bucket and spade, to the general amusement of the surreptitious
onlookers.

“We know you’re not going to the seaside, sir,” Carrot began, “but…”

“I wish it was the seaside,” Vimes complained. “You get shipwrecks at
the seaside, you get smugglers at the seaside and you get drownings and
crime at the flaming seaside! Something interesting!”

“Lady Sybil says you’re bound to find lots to amuse yourself with, sir,”
said Carrot.

Vimes grunted. “The countryside! What’s to amuse you in the countryside?
Do you know why it’s called the countryside, Carrot? Because there’s
bloody nothing there except damn trees, which we’re supposed to make a
fuss about, but really they’re just stiff weeds! It’s dull! It’s nothing
but a long Sunday! And I’m going to have to meet nobby people!”

“Sir, you’ll enjoy it. I’ve never known you to take even a day off
unless you were injured,” said Carrot.

“And even then he worried and grumbled every moment,” said a voice at
the doorway. It belonged to Lady Sybil Vimes, and Vimes found himself
resenting the way his men deferred to her. He loved Lady Sybil to
distraction, of course, but he couldn’t help noticing how, these days,
his bacon, lettuce and tomato sandwich had become, not as it had been
traditionally, a bacon, tomato and lettuce and had in fact become a
lettuce, tomato and bacon sandwich. It was all about health, of course.
It was a conspiracy. Why did they never find a vegetable that was bad
for you, hey? And what was so wrong with onion gravy anyway? It had
onions in it, didn’t it? They made you fart, didn’t they? That was good
for you, wasn’t it? He was sure he had read that somewhere.

Two weeks holiday with every meal overseen by his wife. It didn’t bear
thinking about, but he did anyway. And then there was Young Sam, growing
up like a weed and into everything. A holiday in the fresh air would do
him good, his mother said. Vimes hadn’t argued. There was no point in
arguing with Sybil, because even if you thought that you’d won, it would
turn out, by some magic unavailable to husbands, that you had, in fact,
been totally misinformed.

At least he was allowed to leave the city wearing his armor. It was part
of him, and just as battered as he was, except that, in the case of the
armor the dents could be hammered out.

Vimes, with his son on his knee, stared out at the departing city as the
coach hurried him toward a fortnight of bucolic slumber. He felt like a
man banished. But, to look on the bright side, there was bound to be
some horrible murder or dreadful theft in the city which for the very
important purposes of morale, if nothing else, would require the
presence of the head of the Watch. He could but hope.

Sam Vimes had known ever since their marriage that his wife had a place
out in the country. One of the reasons he knew this was because she had
given it to him. In fact, she had transferred all the holdings of her
family, said family consisting solely of her at that point, to him in
the old fashioned but endearing belief that a husband should be the one
doing the owning.* She had insisted.

Periodically, according to the season, a cart had come from the country
house all the way to their home in Scoone Avenue, Ankh-Morpork, loaded
with fruits and vegetables, cheeses and meats; all the produce of an
estate that he’d never seen. He wasn’t looking forward to seeing it now.
One thing he knew about the country was that it squelched underfoot.
Admittedly most of the streets of Ankh-Morpork squelched underfoot, but,
well, that was the right kind of squelch and a squelch that he had
squelched ever since he could walk and, inevitably, slip.

The place was officially called Crundells, although it was always
referred to as Ramkin Hall. Apparently it had a mile of trout stream
and, Vimes seemed to recall from the deeds, a pub. Vimes knew how you
could own a pub but he wondered how you could own a trout stream
because, if that was your bit, it had already gurgled off downstream
while you were watching it, yes? That meant somebody else was now
fishing in your water, the bastard! And the bit in front of you now had
recently belonged to the bloke upstream; that bloated plutocrat of a fat
neighbor now probably considered you some kind of poacher, that other
bastard! And the fish swam everywhere, didn’t they? How did you know
which ones were yours? Perhaps they were branded—that sounded very
countryside to Vimes. To be in the countryside you had to be permanently
on the defensive; quite the opposite of the city.

Uncharacteristically for him, Lord Vetinari laughed out loud. He very
nearly gloated at the downfall of his enemy and slammed his copy of the
Ankh-Morpork Times, open at the crossword page, on to his desk.
“Cucumiform, shaped like a cucumber or a variety of squash! I thumb my
nose at you, madam!”

Drumknott, who was carefully arranging paperwork, smiled and said,
“Another triumph, my lord?” Vetinari’s battle with the chief crossword
compiler of the Ankh-Morpork Times was well known.

“I am sure she is losing her grip,” said Vetinari, leaning back in his
chair. “What is it that you have there, Drumknott?” He pointed at a
bulky brown envelope.

“Commander Vimes’s badge, sir, as delivered to me by Captain Carrot.”

“Sealed?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Then it doesn’t have Vimes’s badge in it.”

“No, sir. A careful fingertip examination of the envelope suggests that
it contains an empty tin of Double Thunder snuff. A conclusion confirmed
by a casual sniff, my lord.”

A still ebullient Vetinari said, “But the captain must have realized
this, Drumknott.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Of course, that would be in the nature of the commander,” said
Vetinari, “and would we have him any other way? He has won a little
battle and a man who can win little battles is well set up to win big
ones.”

Unusually, Drumknott hesitated a little before saying, “Yes, sir.
Apropos of that, it was Lady Sybil who suggested the trip to the
countryside, was it not?”

Vetinari raised an eyebrow. “Why yes, of course, Drumknott. I can’t
imagine who would propose otherwise. The brave commander is well known
for his dedication to his work. Who else but his loving wife could
possibly persuade him that a few weeks of jolly holiday in the
countryside would be a good thing?”

“Who indeed, sir,” said Drumknott, and left it at that, because there
was no point in doing anything else. His master appeared to have sources
of information unavailable even to Drumknott, however hard he tried, and
only the heavens knew who all those were who scuttled in darkness up the
long stairs. And thus life in the Oblong Office was a world of secrets
and considerations and misdirections, where the nature of truth changed
like the colors of the rainbow. He knew this because he played a not
insignificant role in the spectrum. But to know what Lord Vetinari knew
and exactly what Lord Vetinari thought would be a psychological
impossibility, and a wise man would accept that and get on with his
filing.

Vetinari stood up and stared out of the window. “This is a city of
beggars and thieves, Drumknott, is it not? I pride myself that we have
some of the most skilled. In fact, if there were such a thing as an
inter-city thieving contest, Ankh-Morpork would bring home the trophy
and probably everyone’s wallets. Theft has a purpose, Drumknott, but one
intrinsically feels that while there are things by nature unavailable to
the common man, there are also things not to be allowed to the rich and
powerful.”

Drumknott’s understanding of his master’s thought processes would appear
to an outsider to be magical, but it was amazing what could be gleaned
by watching what Lord Vetinari was reading, listening to apparently
pointless observations and integrating those, as only Drumknott could
integrate, into current problems and concerns. He said, “Is this now
about the smuggling, sir?”

“Quite so, quite so. I have no problem with smuggling. It involves the
qualities of enterprise, stealth and original thinking. Attributes to be
encouraged in the common man. In truth, it doesn’t do that much harm and
allows the man in the street a little frisson of enjoyment. Everyone
should occasionally break the law in some small and delightful way,
Drumknott. It’s good for the hygiene of the brain.”

Drumknott, whose cranial cleanness could never be in dispute, said,
“Nevertheless, sir, taxes must be levied and paid. The city is growing.
All of this must be paid for.”

“Indeed,” said Vetinari. “I could have taxed all kinds of things, but I
have decided to tax something that you could eminently do without. It’s
hardly addictive, is it?”

“Some people tend to think so. There is a certain amount of grumbling,
sir.”

Vetinari did not look up from his paperwork. “Drumknott,” he said. “Life
is addictive. If people complain overmuch, I think I will have to draw
that fact to their attention.”

The Patrician smiled again and steepled his fingers. “In short,
Drumknott, a certain amount of harmless banditry amongst the lower
classes is to be smiled upon if not actively encouraged, for the health
of the city, but what should we do when the highborn and wealthy take to
crime? Indeed, if a poor man will spend a year in prison for stealing
out of hunger, how high would the gallows need to be to hang the rich
man who breaks the law out of greed?”

“I would like to reiterate, sir, that I buy all my own paper clips,”
said Drumknott urgently.

“Of course, but in your case I am pleased to say that you have a brain
so pristine that it sparkles.”

“I keep the receipts, sir,” Drumknott inisted, “just in case you wish to
see them.” There was silence for a moment, then he continued. “Commander
Vimes should be well on his way to the Hall by now, my lord. That might
prove a fortunate circumstance.”

Vetinari’s face was blank. “Yes indeed, Drumknott, yes indeed.”

The Hall had been a full day’s journey, which in coaching terms really
meant two, with a stay at an inn. Vimes spent the time listening for the
sound of overtaking horsemen from the city bringing much-to-be-desired
news of dire catastrophe. Usually Ankh-Morpork could supply this on an
almost hourly basis but now it was singularly failing to deliver its
desperate son in his hour of vegetation.

The other sun was setting on this particular son when the coach pulled
up outside a pair of gates. After a second or two, an elderly man, an
extremely elderly man, appeared from nowhere and made a great show of
opening said gates, then stood to attention as the coach went through,
beaming in the knowledge of a job well done. Once inside, the coach
stopped.

Sybil, who had been reading, nudged her husband without looking up from
her book and said, “It’s customary to give Mr. Coffin a penny. In the
old days my grandfather kept a little charcoal brazier in the coach, you
know, in theory to keep warm but mostly to heat up pennies to red heat
before picking them up in some tongs and tossing them out for the
gatekeeper to catch. Apparently everybody enjoyed it, or so my
grandfather said, but we don’t do that anymore.”

Vimes fumbled in his purse for some small change, opened the carriage
door and stepped down, much to the shock of the aforesaid Mr. Coffin,
who backed away into the thick undergrowth, watching Vimes like a
cornered animal.

“Nice job, Mr. Coffin, very good lifting of the latch there, excellent
work.” Vimes proffered the coin and Mr. Coffin backed further away, his
stance suggesting that he was going to bolt at any moment. Vimes flicked
the coin in the air and the fearful man caught it, deftly spat on it and
melted back into the scenery. Vimes got the impression that he resented
the lack of hiss.

“How long ago did your family stop throwing hot money at the servants?”
Vimes said, settling back into his seat as the coach progressed.

Sybil laid aside her book. “My father put a stop to it. My mother
complained. So did the gatekeepers.”

“I should think so!”

“No, Sam, they complained when the custom was stopped.”

“But it’s demeaning!”

Sybil sighed. “Yes, I know, Sam, but it was also free money, you see. In
my great-grandfather’s day, if things were busy, a man might make
sixpence in a day. And since the old boy was almost permanently sozzled
on rum and brandy he quite often threw out a dollar. One of the real
old-fashioned solid-gold dollars, I mean. A man could live quite well
for a year on one of those, especially out here.”

“Yes, but—” Vimes began, but his wife silenced him with a smile. She had
a special smile for these occasions; it was warm and friendly and carved
out of rock. You had to stop discussing politics or you would run right
into it, causing no damage to anything but yourself. Wisely, with a
wisdom that had been well learned, Sam Vimes restricted himself to
staring out of the window.

With the gate far behind he kept looking, in the fading light, to see
the big house that was apparently at the center of all this, and
couldn’t find it until they had rattled along an avenue of trees, past
what some wretched poet would have had to call “verdant pastures,”
dotted with almost certainly, Vimes considered, sheep, through manicured
woodland, and then reached a bridge that would not have been out of
place back in the city.* The bridge spanned what Vimes first thought was
an ornamental lake but turned out to be a very wide river; even as they
trundled over it, in dignified splendor, Vimes saw a large boat
travelling along it by some means unknown, but which, to judge from the
smell as it went past, must have something to do with cattle. At this
point Young Sam said, “Those ladies haven’t got any clothes on! Are they
going to have a swim?”

Vimes nodded absently because the whole area of naked ladies was not
something you wanted to discuss with a six-year-old boy. In any case,
his attention was still on the boat; white water churned all around it
and the seamen on the deck made what was possibly a nautical gesture to
Lady Sybil or, quite possibly, one of the naked ladies.

“That is a river, isn’t it?” said Vimes.

“It’s the Quire,” said Lady Sybil. “It drains most of the Octarine grass
country and comes out in Quirm. If I recall correctly, however, most
people call it ‘Old Treachery.’ It has moods, but I used to enjoy those
little riverboats when I was a child. They really were rather jolly.”

The coach rumbled down the far end of the bridge and up a long drive to,
yes, the stately home, presumably so called, Vimes thought, because it
was about the size of the average state. There was a herd of deer on the
lawn, and a big herd of people clustered around what was obviously the
front door. They were shuffling into two lines, as though they were a
wedding party. They were, in fact, some kind of guard of honor, and
there must have been more than three hundred there, from gardeners
through to footmen, all trying to smile and not succeeding very well. It
reminded Vimes of a Watch parade.

Two footmen collided while endeavoring to place a step by the coach, and
Vimes totally spoiled the moment by getting out of the opposite door and
swinging Lady Sybil down after him.

In the middle of the throng of nervous people was a friendly face, and
it belonged to Willikins, Vimes’s butler and general manservant from the
city. Vimes had been adamant about that, at least. If he was going to
the countryside, then he would have Willikins there. He pointed out to
his wife that Willikins was definitely not a policeman, and so it was
not the same as bringing your work home. And that was true. Willikins
was definitely not a policeman, because most policemen don’t know how to
glass up somebody with a broken bottle without hurting their hands or
how to make weapons of limited but specific destruction out of common
kitchen utensils. Willikins had a history that showed up when he had to
carve the turkey. And now Young Sam, seeing his scarred but familiar
smile, ran up through the row of hesitant employees to cuddle the butler
at the knees. For his part, Willikins turned Young Sam upside down and
spun him around before gently putting him back on the gravel, the whole
process being a matter of huge entertainment to a boy of six. Vimes
trusted Willikins. He didn’t trust many people. Too many years as a
copper made you rather discriminating in that respect.

He leaned toward his wife. “What do I do now?” he whispered, because the
ranks of worried half-smiles were unnerving him.

“Whatever you like, dear,” she said. “You’re the boss. You take Watch
parade, don’t you?”

“Yes, but I know who everyone is and their rank and, well, everything!
It’s never been like this in the city!”

“Yes, dear, that’s because in Ankh-Morpork everybody knows Commander
Vimes.”

Well, how hard could it be? Vimes walked up to a man with a battered
straw hat, a spade and, as Vimes neared, a state of subdued terror even
worse than that of Sam Vimes himself. Vimes held out his hand. The man
looked at it as if he had never seen a hand before. Vimes managed to
say, “Hello, I’m Sam Vimes. Who are you?”

The man thus addressed looked around for help, support and guidance or
escape, but there was none; the crowd was deathly silent. He said,
“William Butler, your grace, if it’s all the same to you.”

“Pleased to meet you, William,” said Vimes, and held out his hand again,
which William almost leaned away from before offering Vimes a palm the
texture of an ancient leather glove.

Well, thought Vimes, this isn’t too bad, and he ventured into unknown
territory with, “And what’s your job around here, William?”

“Gardener,” William managed, and held up his spade between himself and
Vimes, both as a protection and as exhibit “A,” proof positive of his
bona fides. Since Vimes himself was equally at sea, he settled for
testing the blade with his finger and mumbling, “Properly maintained, I
see. Well done, Mr. Butler.”

He jumped when there was a tap on his shoulder and his wife said, “Well
done, yourself, dear, but all you really needed to do is go up the steps
and congratulate the butler and the housekeeper on the wonderful turnout
of the staff. We’ll be here all day if you want to chat to everybody.”
And with that, Lady Sybil took her husband firmly by the hand and led
him up the steps between the rows of owlish stares.

“All right,” he whispered, “I can see the footmen and the cooks and
gardeners, but who are those blokes in the thick jackets and the bowler
hats? Have we got the bailiffs in?”

“That is reasonably unlikely, dear. In fact, they are some of the
gamekeepers.”

“The hats look wrong on them.”

“Do you think so? As a matter of fact they were designed by Lord Bowler
to protect his gamekeepers from vicious attacks by poachers. Deceptively
strong, I’m told, and much better than steel helmets because you don’t
get the nasty ringing in your ears.”

Clearly unable to hide their displeasure that their new master had
chosen to shake the hand of a gardener before addressing either of them,
the butler and housekeeper, who shared the traditional girth and
pinkness that Vimes had learned to expect on these occasions, were aware
that their master had not come to them and, he noticed, were coming to
him as fast as their little legs would carry them.

Vimes knew about life below stairs, hell, yes, he did! Not so long ago a
policeman summoned to a big house would be sent around to the back door
to be instructed to drag away some weeping chambermaid or
not-very-bright boot boy accused without evidence of stealing some ring
or silver-handled brush that the lady of the house would probably find
later, perhaps when she had finished the gin. That wasn’t supposed to be
what coppers were for, although in reality, of course it was what
coppers were for. It was about privilege, and young Vimes had hardly
worn in his first pair of policeman’s boots when his sergeant had
explained what that meant. It meant private law. In those days an
influential man could get away with quite a lot if he had the right
accent, the right crest on his tie or the right chums, and a young
policeman who objected might get away without a job and without a
reference.

It wasn’t like that now, not even close.

But in those days young Vimes had seen butlers as double-traitors to
both sides and so the large man in the black tailcoat got a glare that
skewered him. The fact that he gave Vimes a little nod did not help
matters. Vimes lived in a world where people saluted.

“I am Silver, the butler, your grace,” the man carefully intoned
reprovingly.

Vimes immediately grabbed him by the hand and shook it warmly. “Pleased
to meet you, Mr. Silver!”

The butler winced. “It’s Silver, sir, not Mister.”

“Sorry about that, Mr. Silver. So what’s your first name?”

The butler’s face was an entertainment. “Silver, sir! Always Silver!”

“Well, Mr. Silver,” said Vimes, “it’s an item of faith with me that once
you get past the trousers all men are the same.”

The butler’s face was wooden as he said, “That is as maybe, sir, but I
am and always will be, commander, Silver. Good evening, your grace, ”
the butler turned, “and good evening, Lady Sybil. It must be seven or
eight years since anyone from the family came to stay. May we look
forward to further visits? And might I please introduce to you my wife,
Mrs. Silver, the housekeeper, whom I think you have not met before?”

Vimes could not stop his mind translating the little speech as: I am
annoyed that you ignored me to shake hands with the gardener…which, to
be fair, was not deliberate. Vimes had shaken the gardener’s hand out of
sheer, overpowering terror. The translation continued: and now I am
worried that we might not be having such an easy life in the near
future.

“Hold on a minute,” said Vimes, “my wife is a Grace as well, you know,
that’s a bit more than a lady. Syb— Her Grace made me look at the score
chart.”

Lady Sybil knew her husband in the way people living next door to a
volcano get to know the moods of their neighbor. The important thing is
to avoid the bang.

“Sam, I have been Lady Sybil to all the servants in both our houses ever
since I was a girl, and so I regard Lady Sybil as my name, at least
among people I have come to look on as friends. You know that!” And, she
added to herself, we all have our little quirks, Sam, even you.

And with that scented admonition floating in the air, Lady Sybil shook
the housekeeper’s hand, and then turned to her son. “Now it’s bed for
you, Young Sam, straight after supper. And no arguing.”

Vimes looked around as the little party stepped into the entrance hall
which was to all intents and purposes an armory. It would always be an
armory in the eyes of any policeman although, undoubtedly, to the
Ramkins who had put the swords, halberds, cutlasses, maces, pikes and
shields on every wall, the assemblage was no more than a bit of
historical furniture. In the middle of it all was the enormous Ramkin
coat of arms. Vimes already knew what the motto said, “What We Have We
Keep.” You could call it…a hint.

Soon afterward Lady Sybil was busily engaged in the huge laundry and
ironing room with Purity the maid, whom Vimes had insisted she take on
after the birth of Young Sam, and who, both he and his wife believed,
had an understanding with Willikins, although exactly what it was they
understood remained a speculation. The two women were engrossed in the
feminine pastime of taking clothes out of some things, and putting them
into other things. This could go on for a long time, and included the
ceremony of holding some things up to the light and giving a sad little
sigh.

In the absence of anything else to do, Vimes headed back out to the
magnificent flight of steps, where he lit a cigar. Sybil was adamant
about no smoking in the house. A voice behind him said, “You don’t need
to do that, sir. The Hall has a rather good smoking room, including a
clockwork air extractor, which is very posh, sir, believe me, you don’t
often see them.” Vimes let Willikins lead the way.

It was a pretty good smoking room, thought Vimes, although his
first-hand experience of them was admittedly limited. The room included
a large snooker table and, down below, a cellar with more alcohol than
any reformed alcoholic should ever see.

“We did tell them I don’t drink, didn’t we, Willikins?”

“Oh yes, sir. Silver said that generally the Hall finds it appropriate—I
think his words were—to keep the cellar full in case of arrivals.”

“Well, it seems to me to be a shame to pass up the opportunity,
Willikins, so be my guest and pour yourself a drink.”

Willikins perceptibly recoiled. “Oh no, sir, I couldn’t possibly do
that, sir.”

“Why not, man?”

“It’s just not done, sir. I would be the laughingstock of the League of
Gentlemen’s Gentlemen if I was so impertinent as to have a drink with my
employer. It would be getting ideas above my station, sir.”

This offended Vimes to his shakily egalitarian core,* who said, “I know
your station, Willikins, and it’s about the same station as mine when
the chips are down and the wounds have healed.”

“Look, sir,” said Willikins, almost pleading. “Just occasionally we have
to follow some rules. So, on this occasion I won’t drink with you, it
not being Hogswatch or the birth of an heir, which are accounted for
under the rules, but instead I’ll follow the acceptable alternative,
which is to wait until you’ve gone to bed and drink half the bottle.”

Well, thought Vimes, we all have our funny little ways, although some of
Willikins’ would not be funny if he was angry with you in a dark alley;
but he brightened as he watched Willikins rummage through a well-stocked
cocktail cabinet, meticulously dropping items into a glass shaker.*

It should not be possible to achieve the effect of alcohol in a drink
without including alcohol, but among the skills that Willikins had
learned, or possibly stolen, over the years was the ability to mix out
of common household ingredients a totally soft drink that nevertheless
had very nearly everything you wanted in alcohol. Tabasco, cucumber,
ginger and chili were all in there somewhere and beyond that it was best
not to ask too many questions.

Drink gloriously in hand, Vimes leaned back and said, “Staff okay,
Willikins?”

Willikins lowered his voice. “Oh, they’re skimming stuff off the top,
sir, but nothing more than usual in my experience. Everyone sneaks
something, it’s the perk of the job and the way of the world.”

Vimes smiled at Willikins’ almost theatrically wooden expression and
said loudly for the hidden listener, “A conscientious man, then, is he,
Silver? I’m very glad to hear it.”

“Seems like a steady one to me, sir,” said the manservant, rolling his
eyes toward heaven and pointing a finger to a small grille in the wall:
the inlet to the fabled extractor, which no doubt needed a man behind
the scenes to wind the clockwork, and would any butler worth his bulging
stomach forgo an opportunity to keep tabs on what the new master was
thinking? Would he hell.

It was perks, wasn’t it? Of course people here would be on the take. You
didn’t need evidence. It was human nature. He had constantly suggested
to Sybil—he wouldn’t have dared insist—that the place be closed down and
sold to somebody who really wanted to live in what he had heard was a
creaking, freezing pile that could have housed a regiment. She would not
hear of it. She had warm childhood memories of the place, she said, of
climbing trees and swimming and fishing in the river, and picking
flowers and helping the gardeners and similar jolly rural enterprises
that were, to Vimes, as remote as the moon, given that his adolescent
preoccupations had had everything to do with just staying alive. You
could fish in the River Ankh, provided you took care not to catch
anything. In fact it was amazing what you could catch by just letting
one drop of the Ankh pass your lips. And as for picnicking, well, in
Ankh-Morpork when you were a kid sometimes you nicked and sometimes you
picked, mostly at scabs.

It had been a long day and last night’s sleep in the inn had not been
salubrious or restful, but before he got into the huge bed Vimes opened
a window and stared out at the night. The wind was murmuring in the
trees; Vimes mildly disapproved of trees, but Sybil liked them and that
was that. Things that he didn’t care to know about rustled, whooped,
gibbered and went inexplicably crazy in the darkness outside. He didn’t
know what they were and hoped never to find out. What kind of noise was
this for a man to go to sleep to?

He joined his wife in the bed, thrashing around for some time before he
found her, and settled down. She had instructed him to leave the window
open to get some allegedly glorious fresh air, and Vimes lay there
miserably, straining his ears for the reassuring noises of a drunk going
home, or arguing with the sedan-chair owner about the vomit on the
cushions, and the occasional street fight, domestic disturbance or even
piercing scream, all punctuated at intervals by the chiming of the city
clocks, no two of which, famously, ever agreed; and the more subtle
sounds, like the rumble of the honey wagons as Harry King’s night-soil
collectors went about the business of business. And best of all was the
cry of the night watchman at the end of the street: Twelve o’clock and
all is well! It wasn’t so long ago that any man trying this would have
had his bell, helmet and quite probably his boots stolen before the
echoes had died away. But not anymore! No, indeedy! This was the modern
Watch, Vimes’s Watch, and anyone who challenged the watchman on his
rounds with malice aforethought would hear the whistle blow and very
quickly learn that if anybody was going to be kicked around on the
street, it wasn’t going to be a watchman. The duty watchmen always made
a point of shouting the hour with theatrical clarity and amazing
precision outside Number One Scoone Avenue, so that the commander would
hear it. Now, Vimes stuck his head under an enormous pillow and tried
not to hear the tremendous and disturbing lack of noise whose absence
could wake a man up when he had learned to ignore a carefully timed
sound every night for years.

But at five o’clock in the morning Mother Nature pressed a button and
the world went mad: every blessed bird and animal and, by the sound of
it, alligator vied with all the others to make itself heard. The
cacophony took some time to get through to Vimes. The giant bed at least
had an almost inexhaustible supply of pillows. Vimes was a great fan of
pillows when away from his own bed. Not for him one or even two sad
little bags of feathers as an afterthought to the bed—no! He liked
pillows to burrow into and turn into some kind of soft fortress, leaving
one hole for the oxygen supply.

The awful racket was dying down by the time he drifted up to the linen
surface. Oh yes, he recalled, that was another bloody thing about the
country. It started too damn early. The commander was, by custom,
necessity and inclination a nighttime man, sometimes even an all-night
man; alien to him was the concept of two seven o’clocks in one day. On
the other hand, he could smell bacon, and a moment later two nervous
young ladies entered the room carrying trays on complex metallic things
which, unfolded, made it almost but not totally impossible to sit up and
eat the breakfast they contained.

Vimes blinked. Things were looking up! Usually Sybil considered it her
wifely duty to see to it that her husband lived forever, and was
convinced that this happy state of affairs could be achieved by feeding
him bowel-scouring nuts and grains and yogurt, which to Vimes’s mind was
a type of cheese that wasn’t trying hard enough. Then there was the sad
adulteration of his mid-morning bacon, lettuce and tomato snack. It was
amazing but true that in this matter the watchmen were prepared to obey
the boss’s wife to the letter and, if the boss yelled and stamped, which
was perfectly understandable, nay forgivable, when a man was forbidden
his mid-morning lump of charred pig, would refer him to the instructions
given to them by his wife, in the certain knowledge that all threats of
sacking were hollow and if carried out would be immediately rescinded.

Now Sybil appeared among the pillows and said, “You’re on holiday,
dear.” What you could eat on holiday also included two fried eggs, just
as he liked them, and a sausage—but not, unfortunately, the fried slice,
which even on holiday was apparently still a sin. The coffee, however,
was thick, black and sweet.

“You slept very well,” said Sybil, as Vimes stared at the unexpected
largesse.

He said, “No, I didn’t, dear, not a wink, I assure you.”

“Sam, you were snoring all night. I heard you!”

Vimes’s grasp of successful husbandry prevented him from making any
further comment except, “Really? Was I, dear? Oh, I am sorry.”

Sybil leafed through a small pile of pastel envelopes that had been
inserted into her breakfast tray. “Well, the news has got around,” she
said. “The Duchess of Keepsake has invited us to a ball, Sir Henry and
Lady Withering have invited us to a ball, and Lord and Lady Hangfinger
have invited us to, yes, a ball!”

“Well,” said Vimes, “that’s a lot of—”

“Don’t you dare, Sam!” his wife warned and Vimes finished lamely,
“…invitations? You know I don’t dance, dear, I just shuffle about and
tread on your feet.”

“Well, it’s mainly for the young people, you see? People come for the
therapeutic baths at Ham-on-Rye, just down the road. Really, it’s all
about getting the daughters married to suitable gentlemen, and that
means balls, almost continuous balls.”

“I can manage a waltz,” said Vimes, “that’s just a matter of counting,
but you know I can’t stand all those jumping-about ones like Strip the
Widow and the Gay Gordon.”

“Don’t worry, Sam. Most of the older men find a place to sit and smoke
or take snuff. The mothers do the work of finding the eligible bachelors
for their daughters. I just hope that my friend Ariadne will find
suitable husbands for her girls. She had sextuplets, very rare, you
know. Of course, young Mavis is very devout, and there is invariably a
young clergyman looking for a wife and, above all, a dowry. And Emily is
petite, blonde, an excellent cook but rather conscious of her enormous
bosom.”

Vimes stared at the ceiling. “I suspect that not only will she find a
husband,” he forecast, “a husband will find her. Call it a man’s
intuition.”

“And then there’s Fleur,” said Lady Sybil, not rising to the bait. “She
makes quite nice little bonnets, so I understand.” She thought for a
moment and added, “oh, and then there’s Jane. And, er, Amanda, I think.
Apparently quite interested in frogs, although I fear I may have
misheard her mother. Rather a strange girl, according to her mother, who
doesn’t seem to know what to make of her.”

Vimes’s lack of interest in other people’s children was limitless, but
he could count. “And the last one?”

“Oh, Hermione, she may be difficult as she has rather scandalized the
family, at least in their opinion.”

“How?”

“She’s a lumberjack.”

Vimes thought for a moment and said, “Well, dear, it is a truth
universally acknowledged that a man with a lot of wood must be in want
of a wife who can handle a great big—”

Lady Sybil interrupted sharply: “Sam Vimes, I believe that you intend to
make an indelicate remark?”

“I think you got there before me,” said Vimes, grinning. “You generally
do, dear, admit it.”

“You may be right, dear,” she said, “but that is only to forestall you
from saying it aloud. After all, you are the Duke of Ankh and widely
regarded as Lord Vetinari’s right-hand man, and that means a certain
amount of decorum would be advisable, don’t you think?”

To a bachelor this would have appeared to be gentle advice; to an
experienced husband it was a command, all the more powerful because it
was made delicately.

So, when Sir Samuel Vimes and Commander Vimes and His Grace the Duke of
Ankh* walked out after breakfast, they were all on their best behavior.
As it turned out, other people weren’t.

There was a maid sweeping in the corridor outside the bedroom who took
one frantic look at Vimes as he strolled toward her and turned her back
on him, and remained staring fixedly at the wall. She appeared to be
trembling with fear, and Vimes had learned that in these circumstances
the last thing any man should do is ask a question or, above all, offer
to lend a helping hand. Screaming could result. She was probably just
shy, he told himself.

But it seemed that shyness was catching: there were maids carrying trays
or dusting or sweeping as he walked down through the building, and every
time he came near one she turned her back crisply and stood staring at
the wall as if her life depended on it.

By the time he reached a long gallery lined with his wife’s ancestors,
Vimes had had enough, and when a young lady carrying a tea tray spun
around like the dancer on the top of a musical box he said, “Excuse me,
miss, am I as ugly as all that?” Well, that was surely better than
asking her why she was so rude, wasn’t it? So why in the name of any
three gods did she start to run away, crockery rattling as she headed
down the hall? Among the various Vimeses it was the Commander who took
over; the Duke would be too forbidding and the Blackboard Monitor just
wouldn’t do the trick. “Stop where you are! Put down your tray and turn
around slowly!”

She skidded, she actually skidded and, turning with perfect grace while
still clutching the tray, slowed gently to a stop, where she stood
shaking with anxiety as Vimes caught up with her and said, “What’s your
name, miss?”

She answered while keeping her face turned away. “Hodges, your grace,
I’m very sorry, your grace.” The crockery was still rattling.

“Look,” said Vimes, “I can’t think with all that rattling going on! Just
put it down carefully, will you? Nothing bad is going to happen to you,
but I’d like to see who I’m talking to, thank you very much.” The face
turned reluctantly toward him.

“There,” he said. “Miss, er, Hodges, what is the matter? You don’t have
to run away from me, surely?”

“Please, sir,” and with that the girl headed for the nearest grezen
baize door and vanished through it. It was at this point that Vimes
realized there was another maid only a little way behind him,
practically camouflaged by her dark uniform and facing the wall and,
indeed, trembling. She was surely a witness to all that had happened, so
he walked carefully toward her and said, “I don’t want you to say
anything. Just nod or shake your head when I ask you a question. Do you
understand?” There was a barely perceptible nod. “Good, we make
progress! Will you get into trouble if you say anything to me?”

Another microscopic nod.

“And is it likely that you’ll get into trouble because I’ve talked to
you?” The maid, rather inventively, gave a shrug.

“And the other girl?” Still with her back to him, the unseen girl stuck
out her left hand with the thumb emphatically turned down.

“Thank you,” said Vimes, to the invisible informant. “You’ve been very
helpful.”

He walked thoughtfully back upstairs, through an avenue of turned backs,
and was thankful to encounter Willikins in the laundry on the way. The
batman did not turn his back on Vimes, which was a relief.*

He was folding shirts with the care and attention he might otherwise
have marshaled for the neat cutting off of a defeated opponent’s ear.
When the cuffs of his own spotlessly clean jacket slid up a little you
could just see part of the tattoos on his arm but not, fortunately,
spell out anything they said. Vimes said, “Willikins, what are the
whirling housemaids all about?”

Willikins smiled. “Old custom, sir. A reason to it, of course—there
often is if it sounds bloody stupid. No offense, commander, but knowing
you I’d suggest that you let twirling housemaids spin until you have got
the lie of the land, as it were. Besides, her ladyship and Young Sam are
in the nursery.”

A few minutes later Vimes, after a certain amount of trial and error,
walked into what was, in a musty kind of way, a paradise.

Vimes had never had much in the way of relatives. Not many people are
anxious to let it be known that their distant ancestor was a regicide.
All that, of course, was history and it amazed the new Duke of Ankh that
the history books now lauded the memory of Old Stoneface, the watchman
who executed the evil bastard on the throne and had suddenly struck a
blow for freedom and law. History is what you make it, he had learned,
and Lord Vetinari was a man with the access to and the keys of a whole
range of persuasive mechanisms left over, as luck would have it, from
the regicide days and currently still well oiled in the cellar. History
is, indeed, what you make it and Lord Vetinari could make it…anything he
wanted. And thus the dreadful killer of kings was miraculously
gone—never been there, you must be mistaken, never heard of him, no such
person—and replaced with the heroic, if tragically misunderstood, Slayer
of Tyrants Stoneface Vimes, the famous ancestor of the highly respected
His Grace the Duke of Ankh, Commander Sir Samuel Vimes. History was a
wonderful thing, it moved like the sea and Vimes was taken at the flood.

Vimes’s family had lived a generation at a time. There had never been
heirlooms, family jewels, embroidered samplers stitched by a long-dead
aunt, no interesting old urns found in granny’s attic which you hoped
that the bright young man who knew all about antiques would tell you was
worth a thousand dollars so that you could burst with smugness. And
there was absolutely no money, only a certain amount of unpaid debt. But
here in the playroom, neatly stacked, were generations of toys and
games, some of them a little worn from long usage, particularly the
rocking horse, which was practically life-size and had a real leather
saddle with trappings made from (Vimes discovered to his incredulity by
rubbing them with a finger) genuine silver. There was also a fort, big
enough for a kid to stand in and defend, and a variety of child-sized
siege weapons to assault it, possibly with the help of boxes and boxes
of lead soldiers, all painted in the correct regimental colors and in
fine detail. For two pins Vimes would have got down on hands and knees
and played with them there and then. There were model yachts, and a
teddy bear so big that for one horrible moment Vimes wondered whether it
was a real one, stuffed; there were catapults and boomerangs and
gliders…and in the middle of all this, Young Sam stood paralysed, almost
in tears with the knowledge that no matter how hard he tried he just
couldn’t play with everything all at once. It was a far cry from the
Vimes childhood, and playing poo sticks with real poo.

While the apple of their eyes tentatively straddled the rocking horse,
which had frighteningly big teeth, Vimes told his wife about the
objectionable spinning housemaids. She simply shrugged, and said, “It’s
what they do, dear. It’s what they’re used to.”

“How can you say that? It’s so demeaning!”

Lady Sybil had developed a totally calm and understanding tone of voice
when dealing with her husband. “That’s because, technically speaking,
they are demeaned. They spend a lot of time serving people who are a lot
more important than they are. And you are right at the top of the list,
dear.”

“But I don’t think I’m more important than them!” Vimes snapped.

“I think I know what you’re saying, and it does you credit, it really
does,” said Sybil, “but what you actually said was nonsense. You are a
Duke, a Commander of the City Watch and,” she paused.

“A Blackboard Monitor,” said Vimes automatically.

“Yes, Sam, the highest honor that the King of the Dwarfs can bestow.”
Sybil’s eyes glittered. “Blackboard Monitor Vimes; one who can erase the
writings, somebody who can rub out what is there. That’s you, Sam and if
you were killed the chanceries of the world would be in uproar and, Sam,
regrettably they would not be perturbed at the death of a housemaid. She
held up a hand because he’d opened his mouth and added, “I know you
would be, Sam, but wonderful girls though I’m sure they are, I fear that
if they were to die a family and, perhaps, a young man would be
inconsolable, and the rest of the world would never know. And you, Sam,
know that this is true. However, if you were ever murdered, dread the
thought and indeed I do every time you go out on duty, not only
Ankh-Morpork but the world would hear about it instantly. Wars might
start and I suspect that Vetinari’s position might become a little
dangerous. You are more important than girls in service. You are more
important than anybody else in the Watch. You are mistaking value for
worth, I think.” She gave his worried face a brief kiss. “Whatever you
think you once were, Sam Vimes, you’ve risen, and you deserved to rise.
You know the cream rises to the top!”

“So does the scum,” said Vimes automatically, although he immediately
regretted it.

“How dare you say that, Sam Vimes! You may have been a diamond in the
rough, but you’ve polished yourself up! And however you cut it, husband
of mine, although you are no longer a man of the people, it certainly
seems to me that you are a man for the people, and I think the people
are far better off for that, d’you hear?”

Young Sam looked up adoringly at his father, while the rocking horse
rocked into a gallop. Between son and spouse, Vimes never had a chance.
He looked so crestfallen that Lady Sybil, as wives do, tried a little
consolation.

“After all, Sam, you expect your men to get on with their duties, don’t
you? Likewise the housekeeper expects the girls to get on with theirs.”

“That’s quite different, really it is. Coppers watch people, and I’ve
never told them that they can’t pass the time of day with somebody.
After all, that somebody might provide useful information.” Vimes knew
that this was technically true, but anybody who was seen giving anything
more useful than the time of day to a policeman in most streets of the
city would soon find a straw would be necessary to help him eat his
meals. But the analogy was right, anyway, he thought, or would have
thought, had he been a man to whom the word analogy came easily. Just
because you were a member of somebody’s staff didn’t mean you had to act
like some kind of clockwork toy…

“Shall I tell you the reason for the spinning housemaids, Sam?” said
Sybil, as Young Sam cuddled the huge teddy bear, who frightened him by
growling. “It was instituted in my grandfather’s time at the behest of
my grandmother. In those days we entertained all the time with scores of
guests on some weekends. Of course, a number of these guests would be
young men from very good families in the city, quite well educated and
full of, shall I say, vim and vigor.”

Sybil glanced down at Young Sam and was relieved to see he was now
lining up some small soldiers. “The maids, on the other hand, in the
very nature of things are not well educated and I’m ashamed to say might
have been slightly too compliant in the face of people whom they had
come to think of as their betters.” She was starting to blush, and she
pointed down at Young Sam, who she was glad to see was still paying no
attention. “I’m sure you get the picture, Sam? Absolutely sure, and my
grandmother, whom you would almost certainly have hated, had decent
instincts, and therefore decreed that all the housemaids should not only
refrain from talking to the male guests, but should not make eye contact
with them either, on pain of dismissal. You might say she was being
cruel to be kind, but not all that cruel, come to think of it. In the
fullness of time, the housemaids would leave the Hall with good
references and not be embarrassed about wearing a white dress on their
wedding day.”

“But I’m happily married,” Vimes protested. “And I can’t imagine
Willikins risking the wrath of Purity, either.”

“Yes, dear, and I’ll have a word with Mrs. Silver. But this is the
country, Sam. We do things a little more slowly here. Now, why don’t you
take Young Sam out to see the river? Take Willikins with you—he knows
his way around.”

Young Sam did not need very much in the way of entertainment. In fact he
made his own entertainment, manufacturing it in large quantities out of
observations of the landscape, the stories that had lulled him to sleep
at bedtime last night, some butterfly thought that had just sped across
his mind and, increasingly, he’d talk about Mr. Whistle, who lived in a
house in a tree but was sometimes a dragon. He also had a big boot and
didn’t like Wednesdays because they smell funny and he had a rainbrella.

Young Sam was thus totally unfazed by the countryside, and ran ahead of
Vimes and Willikins, pointing out trees, sheep, flowers, birds,
dragonflies, funny-shaped clouds and a human skull. He seemed quite
impressed by the find and rushed to show it to his daddy, who stared at
it as if he had seen, well, a human skull. It had clearly been a human
skull for quite a long time, however, and appeared to have been looked
after, to the point of being polished.

As Vimes turned it over in his hands, searching forensically for any
sign of foul play, there was a flip-flop sound approaching through the
shrubbery, accompanied by a vocal number on the subject of what a person
unknown would do to people who stole skulls off him. When the bushes
parted said person unknown turned out to be a man of uncertain age and
teeth, a grubby brown robe and a beard longer than any Vimes had seen
before, and Vimes was a man who had often been inside Unseen University,
where wizards considered that wisdom was embodied in the growing of a
beard that would keep the knees warm. This one tailed cometlike behind
its owner. It caught up with him when his hugely sandaled feet slithered
to a stop, but its momentum meant that it began to pile up on his head.
Possibly it carried wisdom with it, because its owner was bright enough
to stop dead when he saw the look in Vimes’s eye. There was silence,
apart from the chuckling of Young Sam as the endless beard, with a life
of its own, settled on the man like the snows of winter.

Willikins cleared his throat, and said, “I think this is the hermit,
commander.”

“What’s a hermit doing here? I thought they lived up poles in deserts!”
Vimes glared at the raggedy man, who clearly felt that an explanation
was called for and was going to deliver it whether it was called for or
not.

“Yes, sir, I know, sir, that is a popular delusion, and personally I’ve
never given it much credence, on account of the difficulty of dealing
with what I might call the bathroom necessities and similar. I mean,
that sort of thing might be all right in foreign parts, where there’s
sunshine and lots of sand, but it wouldn’t do for me, sir, no indeed.”

The apparition held out a grubby hand that was mostly fingernails and
went on, proudly, “Stump, your grace, although I’m not often stumped,
haha, my little joke.”

“Yes, it is,” said Vimes, keeping his eyes blank.

“Indeed it is, sir,” said Stump. “The only one I’ve got. I’ve been
following the noble profession of herming here for nigh on fifty-seven
years, practicing piety, sobriety, celibacy and the pursuit of the true
wisdom in the tradition of my father and grandfather and
great-grandfather before me. That’s my great-grandfather you are
holding, there, sir,” he added cheerfully. “Lovely sheen, hasn’t he?”
Vimes managed not to drop the skull he was holding. Stump went on, “I
expect your little boy wandered into my grotto, sir, no offense meant,
sir, but the village lads round here are a bit frolicsome sometimes and
I had to get granddad out of the tree only two weeks ago.”

It was Willikins who found the mental space to say, “You keep your
great-grandfather’s skull in a cave?”

“Oh yes, gentlemen, and my father’s. Family tradition, see? And my
grandfather’s. Unbroken tradition of herming for nearly three hundred
years, dispensing pious thinking and the knowledge that all paths lead
but to the grave, and other somber considerations, to all those who seek
us out—who are precious few these days, I might add. I hope my son will
be able to step into my sandals when he’s old enough. His mother says
that he’s turning out a very solemn young man, so I live in hopes that
one day he might be giving me a right good polishin’ up. There’s plenty
of room on the skull shelf back in the grotto, I’m pleased to say.”

“Your son?” said Vimes. “You mentioned celibacy?”

“Very attentive of you, your grace. We get a week’s holiday every year.
A man cannot live by snails and herbs of the riverbank alone…”

Vimes delicately indicated that they had ground to cover, and left the
hermit carefully carrying the family relic back to his grotto, wherever
that was. When they seemed to be safely out of earshot he said, waving
his hands in the air, “Why? I mean…why?”

“Oh, quite a few of the really old ancestral homes had a hermit on the
strength, sir. It was considered romantic to have a grotto with a hermit
in it.”

“He was a bit whiffy on the nose,” said Vimes.

“Not allowed to bathe, I believe, sir, and you should know, sir, that he
gets an allowance consisting of two pounds of potatoes, three pints of
small beer or cider, three loaves of bread and one pound of pork
dripping per week. And presumably all the snails and herbs of the
riverbank he can force down. I looked at the accounts, sir. Not a bad
diet for an ornamental garden feature.”

“Not too bad if you throw in some fruit and the occasional laxative, I
suppose,” said Vimes. “So Sybil’s ancestors used to come along and talk
to the hermit whenever they were faced with a philosophical conundrum,
yes?”

Willikins looked puzzled. “Good heavens, no, sir, I can’t imagine that
any of them would ever dream of doing that. They never had any truck
with philosophical conundra.* They were aristocrats, you see?
Aristocrats don’t notice philosophical conundra. They just ignore them.
Philosophy includes contemplating the possibility that you might be
wrong, sir, and a real aristocrat knows that he is always right. It’s
not vanity, you understand, it’s built-in absolute certainty. They may
sometimes be as mad as a hatful of spoons, but they are always
definitely and certainly mad.”

Vimes stared at him in admiration. “How the hell do you know all this,
Willikins?”

“Watched them, sir. In the good old days when her ladyship’s granddad
was alive he made certain that the whole staff of Scoone Avenue came
down here with the family in the summer. As you know, I’m not much of a
scholar and, truth to tell, neither are you, but when you grow up on the
street you learn fast because if you don’t learn fast you’re dead.”

They were now walking across an ornamental bridge, over what was
probably the trout stream and, Vimes assumed, a tributary of Old
Treachery, a name whose origin he had yet to comprehend. Two men and one
little boy, walking over a bridge that might be carrying crowds, and
carts and horses. The world seemed unbalanced.

“You see, sir,” said Willikins, “being definite is what gave them all
this money and land. Sometimes lost it for them as well, of course. One
of Lady Sybil’s great-uncles once lost a villa and two thousand acres of
prime farmland by being definite in believing that a cloakroom ticket
could beat three aces. He was killed in the duel that followed, but at
least he was definitely dead.”

“It’s snobbishness and I don’t like it,” Vimes said.

Willikins rubbed the side of his nose. “Well, commander, it ain’t
snobbishness. You don’t get much of that from the real McCoy, in my
experience. The certain ones, I mean…they don’t worry about what the
neighbors think or walking around in old clothes. They’re confident,
see? When Lady Sybil was younger the family would come down here for the
sheep-shearing, and her father would muck in with everybody else, with
his sleeves rolled up and everything, and he’d see to it that there was
a round of beer for all the lads afterward, and he’d drink with them,
flagon for flagon. Of course, he was a brandy man mostly, so a bit of
beer wouldn’t have him on the floor. He never worried about who he was.
He was a decent old boy, her father—and her granddad, too. Certain, you
see, never worried.”

They walked along an avenue of chestnut trees for a while and then Vimes
said, morosely, “Are you saying that I don’t know who I am?”

Willikins looked up into the trees and replied, thoughtfully, “It looks
as though there’ll be a lot of conkers this year, commander, and if you
don’t mind me suggesting it, you might think of bringing this young lad
down here when they start falling. I was the dead-rat conkers champion
for years when I was a kid, until I found out that the real things grew
on trees and didn’t squish so easily. As for your question,” he went on,
“I think Sam Vimes is at his best when he’s confident that he’s Sam
Vimes. Good grief, and they are fruiting early this year!”

The avenue of chestnut trees ended at this point and before them lay an
apple orchard. “Not the best of fruit, as apples go,” said Willikins as
Vimes and Young Sam crossed over to it, raising the dust on the chalky
road. The comment seemed inconsequential to Vimes, but Willikins
appeared to consider the orchard very important.

“The little boy will want to see this,” Willikins said enthusiastically.
“Saw it myself when I was the boot boy. Totally changed the way I
thought about the world. The third earl, ‘Mad’ Jack Ramkin, had a
brother called Woolsthorpe, probably for his sins. He was something of a
scholar and would have been sent to the university to become a wizard
were it not for the fact that his brother let it be known that any male
sibling of his who took up a profession that involved wearing a dress
would be disinherited with a cleaver.

“Nevertheless, young Woolsthorpe persevered in his studies of natural
philosophy in the way a gentleman should, by digging into any
suspicious-looking burial mounds he could find in the neighborhood,
filling up his lizard press with as many rare species as he could
collect, and drying samples of any flowers he could find before they
became extinct. The story runs that, on one warm summer day, he dozed
off under an apple tree and was awakened when an apple fell on his head.
A lesser man, as his biographer put it, would have seen nothing untoward
about this, but Woolsthorpe surmised that, since apples and practically
everything else always fell down, then the world would eventually become
dangerously unbalanced…unless there was another agency involved that
natural philosophy had yet to discover. He lost no time in dragging one
of the footmen to the orchard and ordering him, on pain of dismissal, to
lie under the tree until an apple hit him on the head! The possibility
of this happening was increased by another footman who had been told by
Woolsthorpe to shake the tree vigorously until the required apple fell.
Woolsthorpe was ready to observe this from a distance.

“Who can imagine his joy when the inevitable apple fell and a second
apple was seen rising from the tree and disappearing at speed into the
vaults of heaven, proving the hypothesis that what goes up must come
down, provided that what goes down must come up, thus safeguarding the
equilibrium of the Universe. Regrettably, this only works with apples
and, amazingly, only the apples on this one tree, Malus equilibria! I
hear someone has worked out that the apples at the top of the tree fill
with gas and fly up when the tree is disturbed so that it can set its
seeds some way off. Wonderful thing, nature, shame the fruit tastes like
dog’s business,” Willikins added as Young Sam spat some out. “To tell
you the truth, commander, I wouldn’t give you tuppence for a lot of the
upper classes I’ve met, especially in the city, but some of them in
these old country houses changed the world for the better. Like Turnip
Ramkin, who revolutionized agriculture…”

“I think I’ve heard of him,” said Vimes. “Wasn’t he something to do with
planting root crops? Wasn’t that how he got his nickname?”

“Very nearly right, sir,” said Willikins. “In fact, he invented the seed
drill, which meant more reliable crops and a great saving in seed corn.
He only looked like a turnip. People can be so cruel sometimes, sir.
There was also his brother, ‘Rubber Ramkin,’ who devised not only rubber
boots but also rubberized fabric, even before the dwarfs did. Very
interested indeed in rubber, so I heard, but it takes all sorts to make
a world and it would be a funny old place if we were all the same, and
especially if we were all like him. Dry feet and dry shoulders, sir,
what every farmworker prays for! I did a spell cutting cabbages one
winter, sir, weather as cold as charity and rain coming down so fast it
had to queue up to hit the ground. I blessed his name then, so I did,
even if it was true what they said about the young ladies, who I heard
actually enjoyed the experience…”

“This is all very well,” said Vimes, “but it doesn’t make up for all the
stupid, arrogant—”

This time it was Willikins who interrupted his master. “And then there
was the flying machine, of course. Her ladyship’s late brother put a lot
of work into the project, but it never got off the ground. Flying
without a broomstick or a magic spell was his goal, but regrettably he
fell victim to the outbreak of crisms, poor lad. There’s a model of it
in the nursery, as a matter of fact. It runs on rubber bands.”

“I expect there was plenty of material around the place, unless Rubber
Ramkin tidied up after himself,” said Vimes.

The tour continued, across meadows of what Vimes decided to call cows
and around fields of standing corn. They navigated their way around a
ha-ha, kept their distance from the ho-ho and completely ignored the
he-he, then climbed a gentle path up a hill on which was planted a grove
of beech trees and from which you could see practically everywhere, and
certainly to the end of the universe, but that probably involved looking
straight up with no beech trees in the way. It was even possible to make
out the tall cloud of smoke and fumes that rose from the city of
Ankh-Morpork.

“This is Hangman’s Hill,” said Willikins, as Vimes got his breath back.
“And you might not want to go any further,” he said as they neared the
summit, “unless, that is, you want to explain to your young lad what a
gibbet is.”

Vimes looked questioningly at his servant. “Really?”

“Well, as I say, this is Hangman’s Hill. Why do you think they named it
that, sir? ‘Black Jack’ Ramkin was regrettably mistaken when he made an
enormous drunken wager with one of his equally drunk drinking pals that
he could see the smoke of the city from his estate. He was told by a
surveyor, who had tested the hypothesis, that the hill was thirty feet
too short. Pausing only to attempt to bribe the surveyor and when
unsuccessful to subsequently horsewhip the same, he rallied all the
working men from this estate and all the others round here and set them
to raise the hill by the aforesaid thirty feet, a most ambitious
project. It cost a fortune, of course, but every family in the district
probably got warm winter clothes and new boots out of it. It made him
very popular, and of course he won his bet.”

Vimes sighed. “Somehow I think I know the answer to this, but I’m going
to ask anyway: how much was the bet?”

“Two gallons of brandy,” said Willikins triumphantly, “which he drank in
one go while standing on this very spot, to the cheers of the assembled
workforce, and then, according to legend, rolled all the way down to the
bottom, to more cheers.”

“Even when I was a boozer I don’t think I could have taken two gallons
of brandy,” said Vimes. “That’s twelve bottles!”

“Well, toward the end I expect a lot of it went down his trousers, one
way or the other. There were plenty like him, even so…”

“All down his trousers,” Young Sam piped up, and dissolved into that
curious hoarse laughter of a six-year-old who thinks he has heard
something naughty. And by the sound of it the workmen who had cheered
the old drunk had thought the same way. Cheering a man drinking a year’s
wages in one go? What was the point?

Willikins must have read his thoughts. “The country isn’t as subtle as
the city, commander. They like big and straightforward things here, and
Black Jack was as big and as straight as you could hope for. That’s why
they liked him, because they knew where they stood, even if he was about
to fall down. I bet they boasted about him all over the Shires. I can
just imagine it. Our drunken old lord can outdrink your drunken old lord
any day of the week, and they would be proud of it. I’m sure you thought
you were doing the right thing when you shook hands with the gardener,
but you puzzled people. They don’t know what to make of you. Are you a
man or a master? Are you a nob or one of them? Because, commander, from
where they sit no man can be both. It would be against nature. And the
countryside doesn’t like puzzles, either.”

“Big puzzled trousers!” said Young Sam and fell on the grass,
overwhelmed with humor.

“I don’t know what to make of me either,” said Vimes, picking up his son
and following Willikins down the slope. “But Sybil does. She’s got me
marked down for balls, dances, dinners, and, oh yes, soirées,” he
finished, in the tones of a man genetically programmed to distrust any
word with an acute accent in it. “I mean, that sort of thing in the city
I’ve come to terms with. If I reckon that it’s going to be too bloody
dreadful I make certain I get called out in an emergency halfway
through—at least I used to, before Sybil twigged on. It’s a terrible
thing when a man’s employees take their orders from his wife, you know?”

“Yes, commander. She has given the kitchen staff orders that no bacon
sandwiches are to be prepared without her express permission.”

Vimes winced. “You brought the little cookery kit, didn’t you?”

“Unfortunately, her ladyship knows about our little cookery kit,
commander. She has forbidden the kitchen to give me bacon unless the
order comes directly from her.”

“Honestly, she’s as bad as Vetinari! How does she find out all this
stuff?”

“As a matter of fact, commander, I don’t think she does, at least as an
actual fact. She just knows you. Perhaps you should think of it as
amiable suspicion. We should be getting along, commander. I’m told there
is chicken salad for lunch.”

“Do I like chicken salad?”

“Yes, commander, her ladyship tells me that you do.”

Vimes gave in. “Then I do.”

Back in Scoone Avenue, Vimes and Sybil generally took only one meal a
day together, in the kitchen, which was always pleasantly snug by then.
They sat facing one another at the table, which was long enough to carry
Vimes’s huge collection of sauce bottles, mustard pots, pickles and, of
course, chutneys, Vimes being of the popular persuasion that no jar of
pickles is ever truly empty if you rattle the spoon around inside it
long enough.

Things were different at the Hall. For one thing there was far too much
food. Vimes had not been born yesterday, or even the day before, and
refrained from commenting.

Willikins served Vimes and Lady Sybil. Strictly speaking it wasn’t his
job while they were away from home, but strictly speaking most
gentlemen’s gentlemen didn’t carry a set of brass knuckles in their
well-cut jacket either.

“And what did you boys do this morning?” said Sybil cheerfully, as the
plates were emptied.

“We saw the stinky bone man!” said Young Sam. “He was like all beard,
but stinky! And we found the smelly apple tree which is like poo!”

Lady Sybil’s placid expression did not change. “And then you came down
the roly-poly hill, didn’t you? And what about the ha-ha, the ho-ho and
the he-he?”

“Yes, but there’s all cow poo! I treaded in it!” Young Sam waited for an
adult response, and his mother said, “Well, you’ve got your new country
boots, haven’t you? Treading in cow poo is what they’re for.”

Sam Vimes watched his son’s face glow with impossible pleasure as his
mother went on. “Your grandfather always told me that if I saw a big
pile of muck in a field I should kick it around a bit so as to spread it
evenly, because that way all the grass will grow properly.” She smiled
at Vimes’s expression and said, “Well, it’s true, dear. A lot of farming
is about manure.”

“Just so long as he understands that he doesn’t start kicking up the
gutters when he gets back to the city,” Vimes said. “Some of that stuff
will kick back.”

“He should learn about the countryside. He should know where food comes
from and how we get it. This is important, Sam!”

“Of course, dear.”

Lady Sybil gave her husband a look only a wife can give. “That was your
put-upon-but-dutiful voice, Sam.”

“Yes, but I don’t see—”

Sybil interrupted him. “Young Sam will own all this one day and I’d like
him to have some idea about it all, just as I’d like you to relax and
enjoy your holiday. I’m taking Young Sam over to Home Farm later on, to
see the cows being milked, and to collect some eggs.” She stood up. “But
first I’m going to take him down to the crypt, to see his ancestors.”
She noted her husband’s look of panic and added, quickly, “It’s all
right, Sam, they aren’t walking around; they are, in fact, in very
expensive boxes. Why don’t you come too?”

Sam Vimes was no stranger to death, and vice versa. It was the suicides
that got him down. They were mostly hangings, because you would have to
be extremely suicidal to jump into the River Ankh, not least because you
would bounce several times before you broke through the crust. And they
all had to be investigated, just in case it was a murder in disguise,*
and whereas Mr. Trooper, the current city hangman, could drop someone
into eternity so quickly and smoothly that they probably didn’t notice,
too often Vimes had seen what amateurs managed to do.

The Ramkin family crypt reminded him of the city morgue after hours. It
was crowded; some coffins were stacked edgewise, as though they were on
shelves in the mortuary, but, it was to be hoped, they didn’t slide out.
Vimes watched warily as his wife carefully took their son from plaque to
plaque reading out the names and explaining a little about every
occupant, and he felt the cold, bottomless depths of time around him,
somehow breathing from the walls. How could it feel for Young Sam to
know the names of all those grandfathers and grandmothers down the
centuries? Vimes had never known his father. His mum told him that the
man had been run over by a cart, but Vimes suspected that if this was
true at all, then it was probably a brewer’s cart, which had “run him
over” a bit at a time for years. Oh, of course there was Old Stoneface,
the regicide, now rehabilitated and with his own statue in the city
which was never graffitied because Vimes had made it clear what would
happen to the perpetrator.

But Old Stoneface was just a point in time, a kind of true myth. There
wasn’t a line between him and Sam Vimes, only an aching gulf.

Still, Young Sam would be a duke one day, and that was a thought worth
hanging on to. He wouldn’t grow up worrying about what he was, because
he would know, and the influence of his mother might just outweigh the
enormous drag factor of having Samuel Vimes as a father. Young Sam would
be able to shake up the world the right way. You need confidence to do
that, and having a bunch of (apparently) loony but interesting ancestors
could only impress the man in the street, and Vimes knew a lot of
streets, and a lot of men.

Willikins hadn’t entirely told the truth. Even city people liked a
character, especially a black-hearted one or one interesting enough to
materially add to the endless crazy circus show which was the street
life of Ankh-Morpork, and while having a drunkard for a father was a
social faux pas, having a great-great-great-grandfather who could drink
so much brandy that his urine must surely have been inflammable, and
then, according to Willikins, proceeded to go home to a meal of turbot
followed by roast goose (with appropriate wines) and then played a hand
of saddle pork* with his cronies until dawn, winning back his earlier
losses…Well, people loved that sort of thing, and that sort of person,
who kicked the world in the arse and shouted at it. That was an ancestor
to be proud of, surely?

“I think…I’d like to go for a walk by myself,” said Vimes. “You know,
have a look round, poke about a bit, get the hang of this countryside
business at my own pace.”

“Willikins ought to accompany you, dear,” said Lady Sybil, “just in
case.”

“In case of what, my dear? I walk around the streets of the city every
night, don’t I? I don’t think I need a chaperone for a stroll in the
country, do I? I’m trying to get into the spirit of things. I’ll look at
daffodils to see if they fill me with joy, or whatever it is they’re
supposed to do, and keep an eye open for the very rare grebe warbler and
watch the moles take flight. I’ve been reading the nature notes in the
paper for weeks. I think I know how to do this by myself, dear. The
commander of the Watch is not afraid to spot the spotted flycatcher!”

Lady Sybil had learned from experience when it was wise not to argue,
and contented herself with saying, “Don’t upset anybody, at least, will
you, dear?”

After ten minutes of walking, Vimes was lost. Not physically lost but
metaphorically, spiritually and peripatetically lost. The fragrances of
the hedgerows were somehow without body compared with the robust stinks
of the city, and he had not the faintest idea what was rustling in the
undergrowth. He recognized heifers and bullocks, because he often walked
through the slaughterhouse district, but the ones out here weren’t
bewildered by fear and stared at him carefully as he walked past as if
they were calmly taking notes. Yes—that was it! The world was back to
front! He was a copper, he had always been a copper, and he would die a
copper. You never stopped being a copper, on the whole, and as a copper
he walked around the city more or less invisible, except to those people
who make it their business to spot coppers, and whose livelihood depends
upon their spotting coppers before coppers spot them. Mostly you were
part of the scenery, until the scream, the tinkle of broken glass and
the sound of felonious footsteps brought you into focus.

But here everything was watching him. Things darted away behind a hedge,
flew up in panic or just rustled suspiciously in the undergrowth. He was
the stranger, the interloper, not wanted here.

He turned another corner, and there was the village. He had seen the
chimneys some way off, but the lanes and footpaths criss-crossed one
another in a tangle, repeated in the overflowing hedgerows and trees,
that made tunnels of shade—which were welcome—and played merry hells
with his sense of direction, which was not.

He had lost all his bearings and was hot and bothered by the time he
came out into a long dusty lane with thatched cottages on either side
and halfway down a large building which had “pub” written all over it,
particularly by the three old men who were sitting on the bench outside
it eyeing the approaching Vimes hopefully in case he was the kind of man
who would buy another man a pint. They wore clothes that looked as if
they had been nailed on. Then, when he got closer, one said something to
the other two and they stood up as he passed, index fingers touching
their hat brims. One of them said, “Garternoon, yer grace,” a phrase
which Vimes interpreted after a little thought. There was also a slight
and meaningful tip of the empty tankards to indicate that they were, in
fact, empty tankards and therefore an anomaly in need of rectification.

Vimes knew what was expected of him. There wasn’t a pub in Ankh-Morpork
which didn’t have the equivalent three old men sunning themselves
outside and ever ready to talk to strangers about the good old days,
i.e., when the tankards they were nursing still had beer in them. And
the form was that you filled them up with cheap ale and got a “Well,
thank you, kind sir,” and quite possibly little bubbles of information
about who had been seen where doing what and with whom and when, all
grist to the copper’s mill.

But the expressions on these three changed when another of them
whispered hurriedly to his cronies. They pushed themselves back on the
wooden seat as if trying to make themselves inconspicuous while still
clasping the empty flagons because, well, you never knew. A sign over
the door proclaimed that this was the Goblin’s Head.

Opposite the pub was a large open space laid, as they say, to grass. A
few sheep grazed on it and toward the far end was a large stack of wood
licker wicker wood hurdles, the purpose of which Vimes could not guess.
He was, however, familiar with the term “village green,” although he had
never seen one. Ankh-Morpork wasn’t very big on greens.

The pub smelled of stale beer. This helped as a bulwark against
temptation, although Vimes had been clean for years, and could face the
occasional sherry at official events, because he hated the taste of it
anyway. The smell of antique beer had the same effect. By the pitiful
light of the tiny windows Vimes made out an elderly man industriously
polishing a tankard. The man looked up at Vimes and gave him a nod, the
basic nod which is understood everywhere as meaning “I see you, you see
me, it’s up to you what happens next,” although some publicans can put
an inflection on a nod which also manages to convey the information that
there might just be a two-foot length of lead piping under the counter
should the party of the second part want to start anything, as it were.

Vimes said, “Do you serve anything that isn’t alcoholic?”

The barman very carefully hung the tankard on a hook over the bar and
then looked directly at Vimes and said, without rancor, “Well, you see,
sir, this is what we call a pub. People gets stuffy about it if I leaves
out the alcohol.” He drummed his fingers on the bar for a moment and
went on, uncertainly, “My wife makes root beer, if that takes your
fancy?”

“What kind of root?”

“Beetroot, as it happens, sir. It’s good for keeping you regular.”

“Well, I’ve always thought of myself as a regular kind of person,” said
Vimes. “Give me a pint—no, make that half a pint, thanks.” There was
another nod and the man disappeared briefly behind the scenes and came
back with a large glass overflowing with red foam. “There you go,” he
said, putting it carefully on the bar. “We don’t put it in pewter
because it does something to the metal. This one is on the house, sir.
My name is Jiminy, landlord of the Goblin’s Head. I dare say I know
yours. My daughter is a maid at the big house, and I treat every man
alike, the reason being that the publican is a friend to any man with
money in his pockets and also, if the whim takes him, perhaps even to
those who temporarily find themselves stony broke, which does not, at
the moment, include them three herberts outside. The publican sees all
men after a couple of pints, and sees no reason to discriminate.”

Jiminy winked at Vimes, who held out his hand and said, “Then I’ll
happily shake the hand of a republican!”

Vimes was familiar with the ridiculous litany. Every man who served
behind a bar thought of himself as one of the world’s great thinkers and
it was wise to treat him as such. After the handshake he added, “This
juice is pretty good. Rather tangy.”

“Yes, sir, my wife puts chilli peppers in it, and celery seed to make a
man think that he’s drinking something with bones in.”

Vimes leaned on the bar, inexplicably at peace. The wall over the bar
was hung with the heads of dead animals, particularly those possessed of
antlers and fangs, but it came as a shock to spot, in the grubby light,
a goblin’s head. I’m on holiday, he thought, and that probably happened
a long time ago, ancient history, and he left it at that.

Mr. Jiminy busied himself with the dozens of little tasks that a barman
can always find to do, while occasionally glancing at his single
customer. Vimes thought for a moment and said, “Can you take a pint to
those gentlemen outside, Mr. Jiminy, and put a brandy in each one so
that a man knows he’s drinking something?”

“That would be Long Tom, Short Tom and Tom Tom,” said Jiminy, reaching
for some mugs. “Decent lads—triplets, as it happens. They earn their
keep but, as you might say, they shared one brain out between all three
of them and it wasn’t that good a brain to start with. Very good when it
comes to scaring crows, though.”

“And were all named Tom?” said Vimes.

“That’s right. It’s by way of being a family name, see, their dad being
called Tom also. Maybe it saves confusion, them being easily confused.
They’re getting on a bit now, of course, but if you give them a job they
can do then they’ll do it well, and won’t stop until you tell them to.
No beggars in the countryside, see? There’s always little jobs that need
doing. By your leave, sir, I’ll give them short measure on the brandy.
They don’t need too much confusing, if you get my drift.”

The publican put the mugs on a tray and disappeared out into the bright
sunshine. Vimes moved swiftly behind the bar and back again without
stopping. A few seconds later he was leaning nonchalantly on the bar as
three faces peeped in through the open door. With a look of some
apprehension three thumbs-up salutes were aimed at Vimes and the faces
were hauled back out of sight again, presumably in case he exploded or
developed horns.

Jiminy came back with the empty tray, and gave Vimes a cheerful smile.
“Well, you’ve made some friends there, sir, but don’t let me keep you.
I’m sure you’ve got a lot to do.”

A copper, thought Vimes. I recognize a police truncheon when I see one.
That’s the copper’s dream, isn’t it—to leave the streets behind and run
a little pub somewhere, and because you’re a copper and because being a
copper never leaves you, you will know what is going on. I know you and
you don’t know that I do. And from where I’m sitting I call that a
result. You wait, Mr. Jiminy. I know where you live.

Now Vimes could hear slow and heavy footsteps in the distance, getting
closer. He saw the local men as they arrived in their working clothes
and carrying what most people would call agricultural implements, but
which Vimes mentally noted as offensive weapons. The troupe stopped
outside the door and now he heard whispering. The three Toms were
imparting today’s news, apparently, and it seemed to be received with
either incredulity or scorn. Some sort of conclusion was being reached,
not happily.

And then the men lurched in, and Vimes’s mind clocked them for ready
reference. Exhibit one was an elderly man with a long white beard and,
good heavens, a smock. Did they really still wear those? Whatever his
name the others probably called him “Granddad.” He shyly touched his
forefinger to his forehead in salute and headed for the bar, job safely
done. He had been carrying a big hook, not a nice weapon. Exhibit two
carried a shovel, which could be an ax or a club if a man knew what he
was doing. He was smocked up too, didn’t catch Vimes’s eye, and his
salute had been more like a begrudged wave. Exhibit three, who was
holding a toolbox (terrific weapon if swung accurately) scurried past
with speed and barely glanced in Vimes’s direction. He looked young and
rather weedy, but nevertheless you can get a good momentum on one of
those boxes. Then there was another elderly man, wearing a blacksmith’s
apron, but the wrong build, so Vimes marked him down as a farrier. Yes,
that would be it, short and wiry, would easily be able to get under a
horse. The man presented a reasonable attempt at a forelock salute, and
Vimes was unable to make out any dangerous bulges concealed by the
apron. He couldn’t help this algebra; it was what you did when you did
the job. Even if you didn’t expect trouble, you, well, expected trouble.

And then the room froze.

There had been some desultory conversation in the vicinity of Jiminy but
it stopped now as the real blacksmith came in. Bugger. All Vimes’s
warning bells rang at once, and they weren’t tinkly bells. They clanged.
After a brief glower round the room the man headed for the bar on the
course that would take him past, or probably over, or even through Sam
Vimes. As it was, Vimes carefully pulled his mug out of harm’s way so
that the man’s undisguised attempt to “accidentally” spill it failed.

“Mr. Jiminy,” Vimes called out, “a round of drinks for these gentlemen,
all right?”

This caused a certain amount of cheerfulness among the other newcomers,
but the smith slammed a hand like a shovel down on the wood so that
glasses jumped.

“I don’t care to drink with them as grinds the faces of the poor!”

Vimes held his gaze, and said, “Sorry, I didn’t bring my grinder with me
today.” It was silly, because a couple of sniggers from hopeful drinkers
at the bar merely stoked whatever fires the blacksmith had neglected to
leave at work, and made him angry.

“Who are you to think you’re a better man than me?”

Vimes shrugged, and said, “I don’t know if I am a better man than you.”
But he was thinking: you look to me like a big man in a small community,
and you think you’re tough because you’re strong and metal doesn’t sneak
up behind you and try to kick you in the goolies. Good grief, you don’t
even know how to stand right! Even Corporal Nobbs could get you down and
be kicking you industriously in the fork before you knew what was
happening.

Like any man fearing that something expensive could get broken, Jiminy
came bustling across the floor and grabbed the smith by one arm, saying,
“Come on, Jethro, let’s have no trouble. His grace is just having a
drink the like of which any man is entitled to…”

This appeared to work, although aggression smouldered on Jethro’s face
and indeed in the surrounding air. By the look on the faces of the other
men, this was a performance they were familiar with. It was a poor
copper who couldn’t read a pub crowd, and Vimes could probably write a
history, with footnotes. Every community has its firebrand, or madman,
or self-taught politician. Usually they are tolerated because they add
to the gaiety of nations, as it were, and people say things like “It’s
just his way,” and the air clears and life goes on. But Jethro, now
sitting in the far corner of the bar nursing his pint like a lion
huddled over his gazelle, well, Jethro, in the Vimes lexicon of risk,
was a man likely to explode. Of course the world sometimes needed
blowing up, just so long as it didn’t happen where Vimes was drinking.

Vimes was becoming aware that the pub was filling up, mostly with other
sons of the soil, but also with people who, whether they were gentlemen
or not, would expect to be called so. They wore colorful caps and white
trousers and spoke continuously.

There was also further activity outside; horses and carriages were
filling the lane. Hammering was going on somewhere and Jiminy’s wife was
now manning or, more correctly, womaning the bar while her husband ran
back and forth with his tray. Jethro remained in his corner like a man
biding his time, occasionally glaring daggers, and probably fists as
well with an option on boots, if Vimes so much as looked at him.

Vimes decided to take a look out of the grubby pub window. Regrettably,
the pub was that most terrifying of things, picturesque, which meant
that the window consisted of small round panes fixed in place with lead.
They were for letting the light in, not for looking out of, since they
bent light so erratically that it nearly broke. One pane showed what was
probably a sheep but which looked like a white whale, until it moved,
when it became a mushroom. A man walked past with no head until he
reached another pane and then had one enormous eyeball. Young Sam would
have loved it, but his father decided to give eventual blindness a miss
and stepped out into the sunshine.

Ah, he thought, some kind of game.

Oh well.

Vimes wasn’t keen on games because they led to crowds, and crowds led to
work for coppers. But here in fact he wasn’t a copper, was he? It was a
strange feeling, so he left the pub and became an innocent bystander. He
couldn’t remember when he had been one before. It felt…vulnerable. He
strolled over to the nearest man, who was hammering some stakes into the
ground, and asked, “What’s going on here, then?” Realizing that he had
spoken in copper rather than in ordinary citizen, he added quickly, “If
you don’t mind me asking?”

The man straightened up. He was one of the ones with the colorful caps.
“Haven’t you ever seen a game of crockett, sir? It’s the game of games!”

Mr. Civilian Vimes did his best to look like a man eager for more
delicious information. Judging by his informant’s enthusiastic grin, he
was about to learn the rules of crockett, whether he wanted to or not.
Well, he thought, I did ask…

“At first sight, sir, Crockett might seem like just another ball game
wherein two sides strive against one another by endeavoring to propel
the ball by hand or bat or other device into the opponents’ goal of some
sort. Crockett, however, was invented during a game of croquet at St.
Onan’s Theological College in Ham-on-Rye, when the novice priest Jackson
Fieldfair, now the Bishop of Quirm, took his mallet in both hands, and
instead of giving the ball a gentle tap…”

After that Vimes gave up, not only because the rules of the game were
incomprehensible in their own right, but also because the extremely
enthusiastic young man allowed his enthusiasm to overtake any
consideration of the need to explain things in some sensible order,
which meant that the flood of information was continually punctuated by
apologetic comments on the lines of “I’m sorry, I should have explained
earlier that a second cone is not allowed more than once per exchange,
and in normal play there is only one tump, unless, of course, you’re
talking about royal crockett…”

Vimes died…The sun dropped out of the sky, giant lizards took over the
world, the stars exploded and went out and all hope vanished with a
gurgle into the sink-trap of oblivion, and gas filled the firmament and
combusted and behold there was a new heaven, one careful owner, and a
new disc, and lo, and possibly verily, life crawled out of the sea, or
possibly didn’t because it had been made by the gods—that was really up
to the bystander—and lizards turned into less scaly lizards, or possibly
did not, and lizards turned into birds, and worms turned into
butterflies, and a species of apple turned into bananas, and possibly a
kind of monkey fell out of a tree and realized that life was better when
you didn’t have to spend your time hanging onto something, and, in only
a few million years, evolved trousers and ornamental stripy hats and
lastly the game of crockett and there, magically reincarnated, was
Vimes, a little dizzy, standing on the village green looking into the
smiling countenance of an enthusiast.

He managed to say, “Well, that’s amazing, thank you so very much. I look
forward to enjoying the game.” At which point, he thought, a brisk walk
home might be in order, only to be foiled by a regrettably familiar
voice behind him saying, “You, I say you, yes, you! Aren’t you Vimes?”

It was Lord Rust, usually of Ankh-Morpork, and a fierce old warhorse,
without whose unique grasp of strategy and tactics several wars would
not have been so bloodily won. Now he was in a wheelchair, a newfangled
variety pushed by a man, whose life was, knowing his lordship, quite
probably unbearable.

But hatred tends not to have a long half-life and in recent years Vimes
had regarded the man as now no more than a titled idiot, rendered
helpless by age, yet still possessed of an annoying horsy voice that,
suitably harnessed, might be used to saw down trees. Lord Rust was not a
problem anymore. There were surely only a few more years to go before he
would rust in peace. And somewhere in his knobbly heart Vimes still
retained a slight admiration for the cantankerous old butcher, with his
evergreen self-esteem and absolute readiness not to change his mind
about anything at all. The old boy had reacted to the fact that Vimes,
the hated policeman, was now a duke, and therefore a lot more nobby than
he was, by simply assuming that this could not possibly be true, and
therefore totally ignoring it. Lord Rust, in Vimes’s book, was a
dangerous buffoon but, and here was the difficult bit, an incredibly, if
suicidally, brave one. This would have been absolutely ticketyboo were
it not for the suicides of those poor fools who followed him into
battle.

Witnesses had said that it was uncanny: Rust would gallop into the jaws
of death at the head of his men and was never seen to flinch, yet arrows
and morningstars always missed him while invariably hitting the men
right behind him. Bystanders—or rather people peering at the battle from
behind comfortingly large rocks—had testified to this. Perhaps he was
capable of ignoring, too, the arrows meant for him. But age could not be
so easily upstaged, and the old man, while no less arrogant, had a
sunken look.

Rust, most unusually, smiled at Vimes and said, “First time I’ve ever
seen you down here, Vimes. Is Sybil going back to her roots, what?”

“She wants Young Sam to get some mud on his boots, Rust.”

“Well done, her, what! It’ll do the boy good and make a man of him,
what!”

Vimes never understood where the explosive whats came from. After all,
he thought, what’s the point of just barking out “What!” for absolutely
no discernible reason? And as for, “What what!” well, what was that all
about? Why what? Whats seemed to be tent-pegs hammered into the
conversation, but what the hells for, what?

“So not down here on any official business, then, what?”

Vimes’s mind spun so quickly that Rust should have heard the wheels go
round. It analyzed the tone of voice, the look of the man, that slight,
ever so slight but nevertheless perceptible hint of a hope that the
answer would be “no,” and presented him with a suggestion that it might
not be a bad idea to drop a tiny kitten among the pigeons.

He laughed. “Well, Rust, Sybil has been banging on about coming down
here since Young Sam was born, and this year she put her foot down and I
suppose an order from his wife must be considered official, when!” Vimes
saw the man who pushed the enormous wheelchair trying to conceal a
smile, especially when Rust responded with a baffled “What?”

Vimes decided not to go with “Where” and instead said, in an offhand
way, “Well, you know how it is, Lord Rust. A policeman will find a crime
anywhere if he decides to look hard enough.”

Lord Rust’s smile remained, but it had congealed slightly as he said, “I
should listen to the advice of your good lady, Vimes. I don’t think
you’ll find anything worth your mettle down here!” There was no “what”
to follow, and the lack of it was somehow an emphasis.

It was often a good idea, Vimes had always found, to give the silly bits
of the brain something to do, so that they did not interfere with the
important ones which had a proper job to fulfil. So he watched his first
game of crockett for a full half-hour before an internal alarm told him
that shortly he should be back at the Hall in time to read to Young
Sam—something that with any luck did not have poo mentioned on every
page—and tuck him into bed before dinner.

His prompt arrival got a nod of approval from Sybil, who gingerly handed
him a new book to read to Young Sam.

Vimes looked at the cover. The title was The World of Poo. When his wife
was out of eyeshot he carefully leafed through it. Well, okay, you had
to accept that the world had moved on and these days fairy stories were
probably not going to be about twinkly little things with wings. As he
turned page after page, it dawned on him that whoever had written this
book, they certainly knew what would make kids like Young Sam laugh
until they were nearly sick. The bit about sailing down the river almost
made him smile. But interspersed with the scatology was actually quite
interesting stuff about septic tanks and dunnakin divers and gongfermors
and how dog muck helped make the very best leather, and other things
that you never thought you would need to know, but once heard somehow
lodged in your mind.

Apparently it was by the author of Wee and if Young Sam had one vote for
the best book ever written, then it would go to Wee. His enthusiasm was
perhaps fanned all the more because a rare imp of mischief in Vimes led
him to do all the necessary straining noises.

Later, over dinner, Sybil quizzed him about his afternoon. She was
particularly interested when he mentioned stopping by to watch the
crockett.

“Oh they still play it? That’s wonderful! How did it go?”

Vimes put down his knife and fork and stared thoughtfully at the ceiling
for a moment or two, then said, “Well, I was talking to Lord Rust for
some of the time, and I had to leave, of course, because of Young Sam,
but fortune favored the priests, when their striker managed to tump a
couple of the farmers by a crafty use of the hamper. There were several
appeals to the hat man about this, because he broke his mallet in so
doing, and in my opinion the hat man’s decision was entirely correct,
especially since the farmers had played a hawk maneuver.” He took a deep
breath. “When play recommenced, the farmers still had not found their
stride but got a breathing space when a sheep wandered onto the pitch
and the priests, assuming that this would stop play, relaxed too soon,
and Higgins J. fired a magnificent handsaw under the offending
ruminant…”

Sybil finally stopped him when she realized that the meal was growing
very cold, and said, “Sam! How did you become an expert on the noble
game of crockett?”

Vimes picked up his knife and fork. “Please don’t ask me again,” he
sighed. In his head meanwhile a little voice said, Lord Rust tells me
there is nothing here for me. Oh dear, I’d better find out what it is,
what?

He cleared his throat and said, “Sybil, did you actually look at that
book I’m reading to Young Sam?”

“Yes, dear. Felicity Beedle is the most famous children’s writer in the
world. She’s been at it for years. She wrote Melvin and the Enormous
Boil, Geoffrey and the Magic Pillow Case, The Little Duckling Who
Thought He Was an Elephant…”

“Did she write one about an elephant who thought he was a duckling?”

“No, Sam, because that would be silly. Oh, she also wrote Daphne and the
Nose Pickers and Gaston’s Enormous Problem won for her the Gladys H. J.
Ferguson award—the fifth time she’s been given it. She gets children
interested in reading, you see?”

“Yes,” said Vimes, “but they’re reading about poo and brain-dead
ducklings!”

“Sam, that’s part of the commonality of mankind, so don’t be so prudish.
Young Sam’s a country boy now, and I’m very proud of him, and he likes
books. That’s the whole point! Miss Beedle also finances scholarships
for the Quirm College for Young Ladies. She must be quite wealthy now,
but I hear she’s taken Apple Tree Cottage—you can practically see it
from here, it’s on the side of the hill—and I think it right, if you
don’t mind, of course, that we invite her here to the Hall.”

“Of course,” said Vimes, though his dontmindedness was entirely due to
the way his wife’s question had been phrased and the subtle resonances
that Miss Beedle’s attendance was a done deal.

Vimes slept a lot better that night, partly because he could feel that
somewhere in the universe nearby there was a clue waiting for him to
pull. That made his fingers itch already.

In the morning, as he had promised, he took Young Sam horse riding.
Vimes could ride, but hated doing so. Nevertheless, falling off the back
of a pony onto one’s head was a skill that every young man should learn
if only so that he resolved never to do it again.

The rest of the day, however, did not work out well. Vimes, suspicions
filling his mind, was metaphorically and only just short of literally
dragged by Sybil to see her friend Ariadne, the lady blessed with the
six daughters. In actual fact there were only five visible in the
chintzy drawing room when Sybil and he were ushered in. He was feted as
“the Dear Brave Commander Vimes”—he hated that shit, but under Sybil’s
benign but careful gaze he was wise enough not to say so, at least not
in those precise words. And so he grinned and bore it while they
fluttered around him like large moths, and he waved away yet more
teacakes, and cups of tea that would have been welcome were it not that
they looked and tasted like what proper tea turns into shortly after you
drink it. As far as Sam Vimes was concerned, he liked tea, but tea was
not tea if, even before drinking, you could see the bottom of the cup.

Still worse than the stuff he was being offered was the conversation,
which inclined toward bonnets, a subject on which his ignorance was not
just treasured but venerated. And besides, his breeches were chafing:
wretched things, but Sybil had insisted, saying that he looked very
smart in them, just like a country gentleman. Vimes had to suppose that
country gentleman had different arrangements in the groinal department.

There was, besides himself and Lady Sybil, a young Omnian curate, wisely
dressed in a voluminous black robe, which presumably presented no
groinal problems. Vimes had no idea why the young man was there, but
presumably the young ladies needed somebody to fill with weak tea,
suspect scones and mindless twittering conversation when someone like
Vimes wasn’t there. And it seemed that when the subject of bonnets lost
its fascination the only other topics were legacies and the prospects
for forthcoming balls. And so, inevitably, given his restlessness in
female company, a growing disaffection for urine-colored tea, and small
talk that would barely be visible under a microscope, Vimes said,
“Excuse me asking, ladies, but what is it that you actually, I mean
actually do…For a living, I mean?”

This question elicited five genuinely blank looks. Vimes couldn’t tell
the daughters one from the other, except the one called Emily, who
certainly lodged in the mind and possibly also in doorways, and who now
said, in the tones of one slightly out of her depth, “I do beg your
pardon, commander, but I don’t think we understand what you just
vouchsafed?”

“I meant, well, how do you make a living? Are any of you in employment?
How do you make your daily crust? What work do you do?” Vimes could pick
up nothing from Sybil, because he couldn’t see her face, but the girl’s
mother was staring at him with gleeful fascination. Oh well, if he was
going to get it in the neck he might as well get it all the way down. “I
mean, ladies,” he said, “how do you make your way in the world? How do
you earn your keep? Apart from bonnets, do you have any skills—like
cookery, for example?”

Another daughter, quite possibly Mavis, but Vimes was guessing, cleared
her throat and said, “Fortunately, commander, we have servants for that
sort of thing. We’re gentlewomen, you see? It would be quite, quite
unthinkable for us to go into trade or commerce. The scandal! It’s just
not done.”

By now there appeared to be a competition to see who could terminally
baffle who, or possibly whom, first. But Vimes managed to say, “Don’t
you have a sister in the timber business?”

It was amazing, he thought, that neither their mother nor Sybil was as
yet adding anything to the conversation. And now another sister
(possibly Amanda?) looked about to speak. Why in the world did they all
wear those silly diaphanous dresses? You couldn’t hope to do a day’s
work in something as skimpy as that. Amanda (possibly) said carefully,
“I’m afraid our sister is a bit of an embarrassment to the family, your
grace.”

“What, for getting a job! Why?”

Another one of the girls, and Vimes was in fact getting really confused
at this point, said, “Well, commander, she has no hope of making a good
marriage now…er, not to a gentleman.”

This was becoming a tangle and so Vimes said, “Tell me, ladies, what is
a gentleman?”

After some whispered conversation a sacrificial daughter said, very
nervously, “We understand the gentleman is a man who does not have to
sully his hands by working.”

Adamantium is said to be the strongest of all metals, but it would have
bent around the patience of Sam Vimes as he said, with every syllable
carefully smelted, “Oh, a layabout. And how do you go about snagging
such a gentleman, pray?”

Now the girls looked as if they were indeed praying. One of them managed
to say, “You see, commander, our dear late father was unlucky in the
money market, and I’m afraid that until the death of Great-aunt
Marigold, of whom we have expectations, there is, alas, no money for a
dowry for any of us.”

The heavens held their breath while the concept of a dowry was explained
to Sam Vimes, and ice formed on the windows as he sat in strangulated
thought.

At last, he cleared his throat and said, “Ladies, the solution to your
problem, in my opinion, would be to get off your quite attractive
backsides, go out there in the world and make your own way! A dowry? You
mean some man has to be paid to marry you? What century do you think
you’re living in? Is it just me, or is it the most bloody stupid thing
you could ever imagine?” He glanced at the beautiful Emily and thought,
good grief, men would line up on the lawn to fight one another, my dear.
How come no one’s ever told you? Gentility is all very well, but
practicality has its uses. Get out in the world and let the world see
you and it might find a new word in its vocabulary such as, perhaps,
“wow!” Aloud he continued, “Honestly, there are lots of jobs out there
for a young lady with her wits about her. The Lady Sybil Free Hospital
is always on the lookout for sharp girls to train as nurses, for
example. Good pay, very fetching uniforms, and a fine chance of snagging
a skilled young physician who is on the way to the top, especially if
you get your boot behind him. Plus, of course, as a nurse you inherit an
amazingly large amount of amusing and embarrassing stories about things
which people put…Perhaps this is not the time, but anyway, there is also
the possibility of becoming matron if you reach the specified weight. A
very responsible job, of use to the community at large and giving you at
the end of a long day the satisfaction that you have done some good in
the world.”

Vimes looked around at the pink and white faces contemplating a jump
into the unknown and continued. “Of course, if you really want to stick
with bonnets, then Sybil and I own a decent property in Old Cobblers, in
the big city, which is standing empty. Used to be a tough area, but the
upwardly mobile trolls and vampires are moving in right now, and the
heavy dollar and the dark dollar are not to be sneezed at, especially
because they’ll pay top dollar for what they want. Quite a sophisticated
area, too. People actually put tables and chairs out on the pavement and
they don’t always all get stolen. We could let you have it rent free for
three months to see how you do and then maybe you’d have to learn the
concept of rent, if only for your self-respect. Trust me, ladies,
self-respect is what you get when you don’t have to spend your life
waiting for some rich old lady to pop her clogs. Any takers?”

Vimes took as an optimistic sign the fact that the girls were staring at
one another with what could only be called a wild surmise at the
prospect of not being totally useless ornaments, and so he added, “And
whatever you do, stop reading bloody silly romantic novels!”

There was, however, a pocket—or possibly purse—of resistance to the
revolution. One girl was standing by the curate as if she owned him. She
looked at Vimes defiantly and said, “Please don’t think me forward,
commander, but I’d rather like to marry Jeremy and help him in his
ministry.”

“Very good, very good,” said Vimes. “And you love him and he loves you?
Speak up, the pair of you.” They both nodded, red with embarrassment,
each with one eye on the girl’s mother, whose wide grin suggested that
would be a definite plus. “Well then, I suggest you get yourselves
sorted out, and you, young man, would be advised to find a better-paying
job. Can’t help you with that, but there are loads of religions these
days, and if I were you I’d impress some bishop somewhere with my common
sense, which is what a clergyman needs above everything else…Well,
nearly everything else, and remember there’s room at the top…Although in
the case of religion, not right at the top, eh?” Vimes thought for a
moment and added, “But maybe the best idea, ladies, might be to take a
look around a bit until you find some lad that’s got the makings of a
successful man, noble or not, and if he suits then get behind him,
support him as necessary, help him up when he’s down, and generally be
around when he looks for you, and make certain that he’ll be around when
you look for him. Well, if both of you put your backs into it then it
might turn out to be something good. It has certainly worked once
before, didn’t it, Sybil?”

Sybil burst out laughing and the overwhelmed girls nodded dutifully as
if they actually understood, but Vimes was gratified to feel a gentle
little prod from Lady Sybil that offered hope that he was not going to
pay too high a price from his wife for speaking his mind to these
precious flowers.

He looked around as if seeking to tidy things up. “Well, that seems to
be that, yes?”

“Excuse me, commander?” It took Vimes some time to see where the voice
had come from; this daughter hadn’t spoken a word all afternoon, but had
occasionally scribbled in a notebook. Now she gazed at him with a look
somewhat brighter than those of her sisters.

“Can I help you, miss? And perhaps you’ll tell me your name?”

“Jane, commander. I am endeavoring to be a writer, may I ask if you have
any views on that as an acceptable career for a young lady?”

Jane, thought Vimes, the strange one. And she was. She was just as
demure as the other sisters, but somehow as he looked at her he got the
impression that she was seeing right through him, thoughts and all.

Vimes leaned back in his chair, a little defensively and said, “Well, it
can’t be a difficult job, given that all the words have probably been
invented already, so there’s a saving in time right there, considering
that you simply have to put them together in a different order.” That
was about the limit of his expertise in the literary arts, but he added,
“What sort of thing were you thinking of writing, Jane?”

The girl looked embarrassed. “Well, commander, at the moment I’m working
on what might be considered a novel about the complexities of personal
relationships, with all their hopes and dreams and misunderstandings.”
She coughed nervously, as if apologizing.

Vimes pursed his lips. “Yes. Sounds basically like a good idea, miss,
but I can’t really help you on that—though if I was you, and this is me
talking off the top of my head, I’d be putting in a lot of fighting, and
dead bodies falling out of wardrobes…and maybe a war, perhaps, as a bit
of background?”

Jane nodded uneasily. “A remarkable suggestion, commander, with much to
recommend it, but possibly the relationships would be somewhat
neglected?”

Vimes considered this input and said, “Well, you might be right.” Then,
out of nowhere, possibly some deep hole, a thought struck him, just as
it had many times before, sometimes in nightmares. “I wonder if any
author has thought about the relationship between the hunter and the
hunted, the policeman and the mysterious killer, the lawman who must
think like a criminal sometimes in order to do his job, and may be
unpleasantly surprised at how good he is at such thinking, perhaps. Just
an idea, you understand,” he said lamely, and wondered where the hell it
had come from. Maybe the strange Jane had pulled it out of him and even,
perhaps, could resolve it.

“Would anybody like some more tea?” said Ariadne brightly.

Lady Sybil was very quiet as their coach drove away, and so Vimes
decided to bite the bullet now and get it over with. She was looking
thoughtful, which was always worrying.

“Am I in trouble, Sybil?”

His wife looked at him blankly for a moment and then said, “You mean for
telling that bunch of precious blooms to stop yearning for a life and to
get out there and make one? Good heavens, no! You did everything I would
have expected of you, Sam. You always do. I told Ariadne that you
wouldn’t let her down. She doesn’t have much of an income, and if you
hadn’t given them the righteous word I think she would have eventually
driven them out with a shovel. No, Sam, I just wonder what goes on in
your head, that’s all. I mean, I’m sure some people think being a
policeman is just a job, but you don’t, do you? I’m very proud of you,
Sam, and wouldn’t have you any other way, but I do worry sometimes.
Anyway, well done! I’ll look forward with interest to see what young
Jane writes.”

Next day, Vimes took his little boy fishing, hampered somewhat by a
total lack of knowledge of the art. Young Sam didn’t seem to mind. He
had located a shrimping net among the largesse of the nursery and messed
about in the shallows, chasing crayfish and sometimes going almost rigid
in order to stare at things. Once he got over the shock, Vimes noticed
that Young Sam did this quite happily, and on one occasion pointed out
to his doting father things in the stream “like insects in the water
with a coat made of little pebbles,” which Vimes had to investigate, to
find that this was entirely true. This amazed Sam Vimes even more than
it did his son, who in fact, he told his father as they strolled back
for lunch, had been really looking to see if fish did a poo, a question
that had never exercised Sam Vimes in his life, but which appeared to be
of great importance to his son. So much so that on the way home he had
to be restrained from doubling back to the stream to see if they got out
to do it because otherwise, er, yuck!

Sybil had promised Young Sam another trip around Home Farm in the
afternoon, which left Sam Vimes to his own devices, or such devices as
the policeman could find in the quiet lanes. Vimes was streetwise; he
didn’t know what lanewise might entail, but possibly it would deal with
things like throttling stoats and knowing whether whatever it was that
had just said “moo” was a cow or a bull without having to bend down to
find out.

And as he walked around his rolling acres on his aching feet, wishing
that there were cobblestones under him, once again he could feel the
tingle; the tingle that raises little hairs on a copper’s neck when his
well-honed senses tell him that there was something happening around
here that shouldn’t be, and was crying out to have something done about
it.

But there was another copper here, wasn’t there, a real old flatfoot let
out to grass, but being a copper stained you to the bone; you never got
rid of it. He smiled. Time perhaps to go for a convivial drink with Mr.
Jiminy.

The Goblin’s Head was bare of customers at this time of day except the
ever-present trio on the bench outside. Vimes settled himself at the bar
with a glass of Mrs. Jiminy’s root beer and leaned confidentially toward
the barman. “So, Mr. Jiminy, what’s of interest here to an old copper?”

Jiminy opened his mouth, but Vimes went on, “Rosewood truncheon,
Pseudopolis City Watch? I know I’m right. It’s no crime. That’s the
copper’s dream, and you take your trusty truncheon with you to have a
little friend you can depend on if the customer can’t hold his liquor
and won’t take a hint.” Vimes was now settled with one elbow on the bar
and doodling on a small puddle of spilt beer. “But the job follows you,
doesn’t it? And if you run a pub, well that goes double, because you
hear all sorts of things, things you don’t do anything about because you
aren’t a copper anymore, except you know you are. And it must worry you,
somewhere in your soul, that there are things going wrong in these
parts. Even I can tell. It’s the copper’s nose. I can smell it in the
air. It comes up through my boots. Secrets and lies, Mr. Jiminy, secrets
and lies.”

Mr. Jiminy made a point of wiping his cloth over the spilt beer and
said, as if absent-mindedly, “You know, Commander Vimes, things are
different in the country. People think that the country is where you can
go to hide out. It ain’t so. In the city you’re a face in the crowd. In
the country people will stare at you until you’re out of sight, just for
the entertainment value. Like you say, I’m not a copper anymore: I ain’t
got a warrant card, and I ain’t got the inclination. And now, if you
don’t mind, I have some work to do. There’ll be more customers soon.
Watch where you tread, your grace.”

Vimes didn’t let him off the hook. “Interesting thing, Mr. Jiminy: I
know you have the lease on this pub but, amazingly enough, I’m still
your landlord. I’m sorry about that, but before we came down here I
looked at a map and saw a pub on our land, and what a waste, I thought,
but that makes me your landlord. Not very republican of me, I know, but
I just wonder, Mr. Jiminy, if it may be that not everyone in these parts
is not that keen on having the Commander of the City Watch down here in
this quiet little hideaway, hmm?” An image of poor old Lord Rust
artlessly telling him that there was nothing here of interest passed
across Vimes’s inner vision.

Jiminy’s expression was frozen, but Vimes, who knew this game, saw that
tiny twitch which, when decoded, meant, “Yes, but I didn’t say anything
and no one can prove I did. Not even you, my friend.”

Further discussion on the point was interrupted when the sons of the
soil began to come in, one by one, to celebrate the ending of the
working day. This time there was less suspicion in their eyes as they
nodded to Vimes en route to the bar, and so he sat nursing his pint of
spiced-up beetroot juice and just enjoyed the moment. It was a very
short moment, at the end of which the blacksmith swaggered into the bar
and walked straight up to him.

“You are sitting in my seat!”

Vimes looked around. He was sitting on a bench that was
indistinguishable from all the others in the room, but he accepted the
possibility that there was something mystic about the one he was
occupying, picked up his glass and strolled over to an unoccupied one,
where he sat down just in time to hear the blacksmith say, “That one’s
my seat too, understand?”

Oh dear, here was the overture and beginners to a brawl, and Vimes was
no beginner, right enough, and the blacksmith’s eyes held the look of a
man who wanted to punch somebody and very likely thought that Vimes
would make the ideal candidate.

He felt the gentle pressure of his own brass knuckles in his trouser
pocket. Vimes had been economical with the truth when he promised his
wife that he would not take any weapons on holiday with him. However,
he’d reasoned that a knuckleduster was not so much a weapon as a way of
making certain that he stayed alive. It could be called a defensive
instrument, a kind of shield, as it were, especially if you needed to
get your defense in before you were attacked.

He stood up. “Mr. Jethro, I’d be grateful if you’d be so kind as to
choose which chair is yours for the evening, thank you very much, after
which I intend to enjoy my drink in peace.”

Whoever said that a soft answer turneth away wrath had never worked in a
bar. The blacksmith glowered at about the same temperature as his forge.
“I ain’t Jethro to you, not by a long way. You can call me Mr.
Jefferson, do you hear?”

“And you can call me Sam Vimes.” He watched Jefferson very deliberately
place his drink on the bar before he strode toward Vimes.

“I know what I can call you, mister…”

Vimes felt the smooth brass of the surrogate knuckles, polished as they
had been by years of abrasion from his pants and, needless to say, the
occasional chin. As he dug down, they almost leapt to his grasp.

“Sorry about this, your grace,” said Jiminy as he pushed him gently out
of the way and said to the smith. “Well now, Jethro, what’s this all
about, then?”

“Your grace?” sneered Jethro. “I ain’t going to call you that! I ain’t
going to lick your boots like all the others do! Coming back here,
lording it over us, ordering us about as if you owned the place! And
that’s it, isn’t it? You do own the place! One man with all this
country! That’s not right! You tell me, how did that happen? Go on, you
tell me!”

Vimes shrugged. “Well, I’m not an expert, but as I understand it my
wife’s ancestors fought somebody for it.”

The blacksmith’s face bloomed with an evil pleasure as he threw off his
leather apron. “Well, okay. No problem. That’s how it’s done, is it?
Fair enough. Tell you what I’ll do, I’ll fight you for it, here and now,
and, tell you what I’ll do, I’ll fight you with one hand strapped behind
my back, on account of you being a bit shorter than me.”

Vimes heard a slight wooden sound behind him: it was the sound of a
barman stealthily pulling a two-foot-long rosewood truncheon from its
accustomed place under the bar.

Jethro must have heard it too, because he called out, “And don’t you try
anything with that, Jim. You know I’ll have it out of your hands before
you know what’s happening, and this time I’ll shove it where the sun
doesn’t shine.”

Vimes took a look at the rest of the clientele, who were doing
remarkable impersonations of stone statues. “Look,” he said, “you really
don’t want to fight me.”

“I do, indeed I do! You said it yourself. Some ancestor got all of this
by fighting for it, yeah? Who said it’s the time to stop fighting?”

“Burleigh and Stronginthearm, sir,” said a polite yet chilly voice
behind the big man. To Vimes’s shock it was Willikins. “I’m not cruel,
sir, I won’t shoot you in the guts, but I will make you realize how much
you took your toes for granted. No, please do not make any sudden
movements. Burleigh and Stronginthearm crossbows have notoriously
responsive triggers.”

Vimes resumed breathing again when Jethro raised his hands. Somewhere in
all that rage there must have been a halfpennyworth of
self-preservation. Nevertheless the blacksmith glared at him and said,
“You need to be protected by a hired killer, do you?”

“In point of fact, sir,” said Willikins smoothly, “I am employed by
Commander Vimes as a gentleman’s gentleman, and I require this crossbow
because sometimes his socks fight back.” He looked at Vimes. “Do you
have any instructions, commander? and then he shouted, “Don’t move,
mister, because as far as I know a blacksmith needs two hands to work
with.” He turned back to Vimes. “Do excuse that interjection, commander,
but I know his sort.”

“Willikins, I rather think you are his sort.”

“Yes, sir, thank you, sir, and I wouldn’t trust me one little inch, sir.
I knows a bad one when I sees them. I have a mirror.”

“Now, I want you to put that bloody thing down, Willikins. People could
get hurt!” Vimes said in his formal voice.

“Yes, sir, that would have been my intention. I could not face her
ladyship if anything had happened to you.”

Vimes looked from Willikins to Jethro. Here was a boil that needed
lancing. But you couldn’t blame the lad. It wasn’t as if he hadn’t
thought the same way himself, many times. “Willikins,” he said, “please
put that wretched thing down carefully and get out your notebook. Thank
you. Now please write down as follows: “I, Samuel Vimes, somewhat
reluctantly the Duke of Ankh, do intend to Duke it out, haha, with my
friend Jethro…What’s your full name again, Jethro?”

“Now look here, mister, I didn’t—”

“I asked you your damn name, mister! Jiminy, what’s his surname?”

“Jefferson,” said the landlord, holding his truncheon like a security
blanket. “But look, your grace, you don’t want to go…”

Vimes ignored him and went on, “Now where was I? Oh, yes: ‘my friend
Jethro Jefferson, in a friendly fight for the ownership of the Manor and
environs, whatever the hell they are, which will go to the which of us
that does not first cry “uncle,” and should it be myself that utters the
same, there will be no repercussions of any sort upon my friend Jethro,
or on my man Willikins, who pleaded with me not to engage in this
friendly bout of fisticuffs.’ Got that, Willikins? I’ll even give you a
get-out-of-jail-free card to show to her ladyship if I get bruised. Now
give it to me to sign.”

Willikins handed over the notebook with reluctance. “I don’t think it’ll
work on her ladyship, sir. Look, dukes aren’t expected to go around—”
His voice faltered in the face of Vimes’s smile.

“You were going to say that dukes shouldn’t fight, weren’t you,
Willikins? And if you had, I would have said that the word ‘duke’
absolutely means that you do fight.”

“Oh, very well, sir,” said Willikins, “but perhaps you ought to warn
him…?”

Willikins was interrupted by the pub’s customers pushing their way out
at speed and running through the village, leaving Jethro standing alone
and bewildered. Halfway toward the man, Vimes turned to look back at
Willikins and said, “You may think you see me lighting a cigar,
Willikins, but on this occasion, I think, your eyes may turn out to be
at fault, do you understand?”

“Yes, and in fact I am deaf as well, commander.”

“Good lad. Now let’s get outside where there’s less glass and a better
view.”

Jethro looked like a man who had had the ground cut from under his feet
but didn’t know how to fall down.

Vimes lit his cigar and savored, just for a moment, the forbidden fruit.
Then he offered the packet to the blacksmith, who waved it away without
a word.

“Very sensible,” said Vimes. “Now then, I’d better tell you that at
least once a week, even these days, I have to fight people who’re trying
to kill me with everything from swords to chairs and in one case a very
large salmon. They probably don’t actually want to kill me, but they’ll
try to stop me arresting them. Look,” he waved a hand at the landscape
in general, “all this…stuff, just happened, whether I wanted it to or
not. By trade I’m just a copper.”

“Yeah,” said Jethro, glaring at him. “Stamping on the faces of the
struggling masses!”

Vimes was used to this sort of thing, and put it mildly. “Can’t tread on
their faces these days, my grinder gets in the way. All right, not very
funny, I admit.” Vimes was aware that people were coming back down the
lane. They included women and children. It looked as though the pub’s
clientele had roused the neighborhood. He turned to Jethro. “Are we
going to do this by the Marquis of Fantailer’s Rules?”

“What are they?” said the blacksmith, waving at the oncoming horde.

“Rules of sparring by the Marquis of Fantailer,” said Vimes.

“If they was written by a marquis I don’t want no truck with them!”

Vimes nodded. “Willikins?”

“I heard that, commander, and have recorded it in my notebook: ‘refused
Fantailer.’ ”

“Well then, Mr. Jefferson,” said Vimes. “I suggest we ask Mr. Jiminy to
start the proceedings?”

“I want your lackey to write down in that book of his that my mum won’t
get put out of her cottage, whatever happens, right?”

“It’s a deal,” said Vimes. “Willikins, please make a memorandum that Mr.
Jefferson’s old mum should not be thrown out of her cottage, hit with
sticks, put in the stocks, or otherwise manhandled in any way,
understand?”

Willikins, trying ineffectually to hide a smile, licked his pencil and
wrote industriously. Vimes, less noisily, made a mental note and the
note said: “The ferocity is draining out of this lad. He is wondering if
he actually might get killed. I haven’t thrown a punch, not one little
punch, and he is already preparing for the worst. Of course, the right
way about it is to prepare for the best.”

The crowd was growing by the second. Even as Vimes looked on, people
came down the lane carrying a very old man on a mattress, their progress
accelerated by his delight in hitting them on the back of the legs with
his walking stick. Mothers toward the back of the crowd were holding up
their children for a better look and, all unknown, every man had a
weapon. It was like a peasants’ revolt, without the revolt and with a
very polite class of peasant. Men touched their forelocks when Vimes
looked in their direction, women curtsied, or at least bobbed up and
down a bit, disturbingly out of sequence, like organ pedals trembling.

Jiminy approached Vimes and the blacksmith cautiously and, to judge by
the glistening of his face, very apprehensively. “Now then, gents, I’m
choosing to consider this a little demonstration of fisticuffs, a jolly
trial of strength and prowess such as may be found on any summer
evening, all friends under the skin, okay?” There was a pleading look in
his eyes as he went on. “And when you’ve got it out of your systems
there’ll be a pint waiting for each of you on the bar. Please don’t
break anything.” He produced an overused handkerchief from a waistcoat
pocket and held it in the air. “When this touches the ground,
gentlemen…” he said, backing away very quickly.

The slip of linen seemed to defy gravity for a while, but the moment it
touched the ground Vimes caught the blacksmith’s boot in both hands as
it swung toward him and said very quietly to the struggling man, “A bit
previous, weren’t you? And what good has it done you? Hear them all
sniggering? I’ll let you off, this time.”

Vimes gave a push as he loosened his grip on the foot, causing Jethro to
stagger backward. Vimes felt a certain pleasure in seeing the man losing
it this early, but the blacksmith pulled himself together and rushed at
him, and paused, possibly because Vimes was grinning.

“That’s the ticket, my lad,” said Vimes, “you just saved yourself a
dreadful pain in the unmentionables.” He made fists and beckoned
suggestively to his bewildered adversary over the top of his left fist.
The man came swinging and got a kick on the kneecap, which floored him,
and he was picked up by Vimes, which metaphorically floored him again.

“Whyever did you think I was going to box? That’s what we professionals
call misdirection. You want to go for the hug? I would if I were a big
bloke like you, but you ain’t going to get the chance.” Vimes shook his
head sorrowfully. “Should have gone for the Marquis of Fantailer. I
believe that has been carved on many a gravestone.” He took a generous
pull of his cigar; the ash had yet to be disturbed.

Enraged beyond belief, Jethro threw himself at Vimes and caught a
glancing blow to his head, receiving at almost the same time a knee in
the stomach which knocked all the breath out of him. They went down
together with Vimes as the conductor of this orchestra. He made certain
he ended on top, where he leaned down and hissed into Jethro’s ear,
“Let’s see how smart you are, shall we? Are you a man who can control
his temper? ’Cos if you aren’t, then I’ll give you a nose so wide that
you’ll have to hold your handkerchief on the end of a stick. Don’t you,
for one moment, think I’m not capable of it. But I reckon a blacksmith
knows when to cool the metal, and I’m giving you a chance to say that at
least you got the duke on the floor in front of all your friends, and
we’ll stand up and shake hands like the gentlemen neither of us is, and
the crowd will cheer and go into the pub to get happily ratted on the
beer that I shall pay for. Are we men of one accord?”

There was a muffled “Yes,” and Vimes stood up, took the blacksmith’s
hand in his hand and raised it up high, which caused some slight
puzzlement, but when he then said, “Sam Vimes invites you all to take a
drink with him in Mr. Jiminy’s establishment!” everybody shrugged
bewilderment aside to make room for the beer. The crowd surged into the
pub, leaving the blacksmith and Vimes on their own—plus Willikins, who
could be remarkably self-effacing when he wanted.

“Blacksmiths should know about temper, too,” said Vimes, as the crowd
dispersed pubward. “Sometimes cool is better than hot. I don’t know
anything much about you, Mr. Jefferson, but the City Watch needs people
who learn fast and I reckon you would soon make it to sergeant. We could
use you as a smith, too. It’s amazing how dented the old armor can get
when you’re standing on the faces of the poor.”

Jethro stared down at his boots. “All right, you can beat me in a fight,
but that doesn’t mean it’s right, all right? You don’t know the half of
it!”

There were sounds of merriment coming from the pub. Vimes wondered how
embroidered that little scuffle would turn out to be. He turned back to
the smith, who hadn’t moved. “Listen to me, you stupid young fool, I
wasn’t born with a silver spoon in my mouth! When I was a kid the only
spoons I ever saw were made of wood and you were lucky if there was some
edible food on the end of them. I was a street kid, understand? If I had
been dumped out here I would have thought it was paradise, what with
food jumping out on you from every hedge. But I became a copper because
they paid you and I was taught how to be a copper by decent coppers,
because believe me, mister, I wake every night knowing that I could have
been something else. Then I found a good lady and if I were you, kid,
I’d hope that I’d find one of them, too. So I smartened myself up and
then one day Lord Vetinari—you have heard of him, haven’t you, kid?
Well, he needed a man to get things done, and the title opens doors so
that I don’t actually have to kick them open myself, and do you know
what? I reckon my boots have seen so much crime down the years that they
walk me toward it of their own accord, and I know there’s something that
needs kicking. So do you, I can smell it on you. Tell me what it is.”

Jethro still stared at his own boots and said nothing.

Willikins cleared his throat. “I wonder, commander, if it might help if
I had a little talk with the young man, from what you might call a less
elevated position? Why don’t you take a look at the beauties of the
local countryside?”

Vimes nodded. “By all means, if you think it’ll do some good.” And he
went away and examined a honeysuckle hedge with considerable interest,
while Willikins, with his shiny gentleman’s gentleman shoes and his
immaculate jacket, strolled over to Jethro, put an arm around him and
said, “This is a stiletto I’m holding to your throat and it ain’t no
ladies’ shoe, this is the real thing, the cutting edge, as it were. You
are a little twit, and I ain’t the commander and I will slice you to the
bone if you make a move. Got that? Now don’t nod your head! Good, we are
learning, aren’t we? Now, my lad, the commander here is trusted by the
Diamond King of Trolls and the Low King of the Dwarfs, who would only
have to utter a word for your measly carcass to come under the caress of
a large number of versatile axes, and by Lady Margolotta of Uberwald,
who trusts very few people, and by Lord Vetinari of Ankh-Morpork, who
doesn’t trust anybody at all. Got that? Don’t nod! And you, my little
man, have the damn nerve to doubt his word. I’m an easygoing sort of
fellow, but that sort of thing leaves me right out of sorts, I don’t
mind telling you. You understand? I said, do you understand? Oh, all
right, you can nod now. Incidentally, young man, be careful who you call
a lackey, all right? Some people might take violent exception to that
sort of thing. A word to the wise, lad: I know the commander, and you
thought about your old mum and what might happen to her and I reckon
that is why I won’t be seeing you in lavender, because he is a sensitive
soul at heart.”

Willikins’ knife disappeared as quickly as it had come, and with the
other hand the gentleman’s gentleman produced a small brush and tidied
the blacksmith’s collar.

“Willikins,” said Vimes from the distance. “Will you go for a little
walk now, please?”

When his manservant was loitering under a tree a little way further up
the lane, Vimes said, “Sorry about that, but every man has his pride. I
bear that in mind. So should you. I’m a copper, a policeman, and
something here is calling to me. It seems to me that you have something
you’d like me to know and it’s not just about who sits in the high
castle, am I right? Something bad has happened, you are practically
sweating it. Well?”

Jethro leaned toward him and said, “Dead Man’s Copse on the hill.
Midnight. I won’t wait.”

The blacksmith then turned round and walked away without a glance
behind.

Vimes lit a fresh cigar and strolled toward the tree where Willikins was
appearing to enjoy the landscape. He straightened up when he saw Vimes.
“We’d better get a move on, sir. Dinner is at eight o’clock and her
ladyship would like you to be smart. She sets a lot of store by your
being smartly turned out, sir.”

Vimes groaned. “Not the official tights?”

“Happily not, sir, not in the country, but her ladyship was very
specific about my bringing the plum-colored evening dress, sir.”

“She says it makes me look dashing,” said Vimes morosely. “Do you think
it makes me look dashing? Am I a dashing kind of person, would you say?”
The birds started singing from a low branch of the tree.

“I’d put you down as more the sprinting sort, sir,” said Willikins.

They set off home, in silence for a while, which is to say that neither
man spoke while wildlife sang, buzzed and screeched, eventually causing
Vimes to say, “I wish I knew what the hell all those things are.”

Willikins put his head on one side for a moment, then said, “Parkinson’s
warbler, the deep-throated frog-eater and the common creed-waggler,
sir.”

“You know?”

“Oh, yes, sir. I frequent the music halls, sir, and there’s always a
bird or animal impersonator on the bill. It tends to stick. I also know
seventy-three farmyard noises, my favorite of which is the sound of a
farmer who has had one boot sucked from his foot by the muck he’s trying
to avoid and has nowhere else to put his stockinged foot but in the said
muck. Hugely amusing, sir.”

They had reached the long drive to the Hall now, and gravel crunched
beneath their boots. Under his breath, Vimes said, “I’ve arranged to
meet young Mr. Jefferson at midnight in the copse on Hangman’s Hill. He
wishes to tell me something important. Remind me, Willikins, what is a
copse, exactly?”

“Anything between a clump of trees and a small wood. Technically, sir,
the one at the top of Hangman’s Hill is a beech hanger. That just means,
well, a small beech wood on top of a hill. You remember Mad Jack Ramkin?
The bloke that got it made thirty feet higher at great expense? He had
the beech trees planted on the top.”

Vimes liked the crunching of the gravel; it would mask the sound of
their conversation. “I talked to the blacksmith with, I would swear, no
one else in earshot. But this is the country, yes, Willikins?”

“There was a man setting rabbit snares in the hedge behind you,” said
Willikins. “Perfectly normal activity, although to my mind he took too
long over it.”

They crunched onward for a while, and Vimes said, “Tell me, Willikins.
If a man had arranged to meet another man at midnight in a place with a
name like Dead Man’s Copse, on Hangman’s Hill, what would you consider
to be his most sensible course of action, given that his wife had
forbidden him to bring weapons to his country house?”

Willikins nodded. “Why, sir, given your maxim that everything is a
weapon if you choose to think of it as such, I would advise said man to
see whether he has a compatriot what has, for example, acquired the keys
to a cabinet that contains a number of superbly made carving knives,
ideal for close fighting; and I personally would include a side order of
cheesewire, sir, in conformance with my belief that the only important
thing in a fight to the death is that the death should not be yours.”

“Can’t carry cheesewire, man! Not the Commander of the Watch!”

“Quite so, commander, and may I therefore advise your brass knuckles—the
gentleman’s alternative? I know you never travel without them, sir.
There’s some vicious people around and I know you have to be among
them.”

“Look, Willikins, I don’t like to involve you in all this. It’s only a
hunch, after all.”

Willikins waved this away. “You wouldn’t keep me out of it for a big
clock, sir, because all this is tickling my fancy as well. I shall lay
out a selection of cutting edges for you in your dressing room, sir, and
I myself will go up to the copse half an hour before you’re due to be
there, with my trusty bow and an assortment of favorite playthings. It’s
nearly a full moon, clear skies, there’ll be shadows everywhere, and
I’ll be standing in the darkest one of them.”

Vimes looked at him for a moment and said, “Could I please amend that
suggestion? Could you not be there in the second darkest shadow one hour
before midnight, to see who steps into the darkest shadow?”

“Ah yes, that’s why you command the watch, sir,” said Willikins, and to
Vimes’s shock there was a hint of a tear in the man’s voice. “You’re
listening to the street, aren’t you, sir, yes?”

Vimes shrugged. “No streets here, Willikins!”

Willikins shook his head. “Once a street boy always a street boy, sir.
It comes with us, in the pinch. Mothers go, fathers go—if we ever knew
who they were—but the Street, well, the Street looks after us. In the
pinch it keeps us alive.”

Willikins darted ahead of Vimes and rang the doorbell, so that the
footman had the door open by the time Vimes came up the steps. “You’ve
got just enough time to listen to Young Sam read to you, sir,” Willikins
added, making his way up the stairs. “Wonderful thing, reading, I wish
I’d learned it when I was a kid. Her ladyship will be in her dressing
room and guests will be arriving in about half an hour. Must go, sir.
I’ve got to teach that fat toad of a butler his manners, sir.”

Vimes winced. “You’re not allowed to strangle butlers, Willikins. I’m
sure I read it in a book of etiquette.”

Willikins gave him a look of mock offense. “No garrotting will be
involved, sir,” Willikins went on, opening the door to Vimes’s dressing
room, “but he is a snob of the first water. Never did meet a butler who
wasn’t. I just have to give him an orientation lesson.”

“Well, he is the butler, and this is his house,” said Vimes.

“No, sir, it’s your house, and since I am your personal manservant I, by
the irrevocable laws of the servants’ hall, outrank every one of the
lazy buggers! I’ll show them how we do things in the real world, sir,
don’t you worry—”

He was interrupted by a heavy knock at the door, followed by a
determined rattling of the doorknob. Willikins opened the door and Young
Sam stomped in and announced, “Reading!”

Vimes picked up his son and sat him on a chair. “How was your afternoon,
my lad?”

“Do you know,” said Young Sam, as if imparting the results of strict
research, “cows do really big floppy poos, but sheep do small poos, like
chocolates.”

Vimes tried not to look at Willikins, who was shaking with suppressed
laughter. He managed to keep his own expression solemn and said, “Well,
of course, sheep are smaller.”

Young Sam considered this. “Cow poos go flop,” he said. “It never said
that in Where’s My Cow?” Young Sam’s voice betrayed a certain annoyance
that this important information had been withheld. “Miss Felicity Beedle
wouldn’t have left it out.”

Vimes sighed. “I just bet she wouldn’t.”

Willikins opened the door. “I’ll leave you gentlemen to it, then, and
see you later, sir.”

“Willikins?” said Vimes, just as the man had his hand on the doorknob.
“You appear to think that my brass knuckles are inferior to yours. Is
that so?”

Willikins smiled. “You’ve never really agreed with the idea of the
spiked ones, have you, sir?” He carefully shut the door behind him.

Young Sam was already reading by himself these days, which was a great
relief. Fortunately the works of Miss Felicity Beedle did not consist
solely of exciting references to poo, in all its manifestations, but her
output of small volumes for young children was both regular and highly
popular, at least among the children. This was because she had
researched her audience with care, and Young Sam had laughed his way
through The Wee Wee Men, The War with the Snot Goblins, and Geoffrey and
the Land of Poo. For boys of a certain age, they hit the squashy spot.
At the moment he was giggling and choking his way through The Boy Who
Didn’t Know How to Pick His Own Scabs, an absolute hoot for a boy just
turned six. Sybil pointed out that the books were building Young Sam’s
vocabulary, and not just about lavatorial matters, and it was indeed
true that he was beginning, with encouragement, to read books in which
nobody had a bowel movement at all. Which, when you came to think about
it, was a mystery all by itself.

Vimes carried his son to bed after ten minutes of enjoyable listening,
and had managed to shave and get into the feared evening clothes a few
moments before his wife knocked on the door. Separate dressing rooms and
bathrooms, Vimes thought…if you had the money, there was no better way
to keep a happy marriage happy. And in order to keep a happy marriage
happy he allowed Sybil to bustle in, wearing, in fact, a bustle,* to
adjust his shirt, tweak his collar and make him fit for company.

And then she said, “I understand you gave the blacksmith a short lesson
in unarmed combat, my dear…” The pause hung in the air like a silken
noose.

Vimes managed, “There’s something wrong here, I know it.”

“I think so, too,” said Sybil.

“You do?”

“Yes, Sam, but this is not the time. We have guests arriving at any
minute. If you could refrain from throwing any of them over your
shoulder in between courses I would be grateful.” This was a terrific
scolding by Sybil’s normally placid standards. Vimes did what any
prudent husband would do, which was dynamically nothing. Suddenly all
downstairs was full of voices and the noise of carriages crunching over
the gravel. Sybil trimmed her sails and headed down to be the gracious
hostess.

Despite what his wife liked to imply, Vimes was rather good at dinners,
having sat through innumerable civic affairs in Ankh-Morpork. The trick
was to let the other diners do the talking while agreeing with them
occasionally, giving himself time to think about other things.

Sybil had made certain that this evening’s dinner was a light occasion.
The guests were mostly people of a certain class who lived in the
country but were not, as it were, of it. Retired warriors; a priest of
Om; Miss Pickings, a spinster, together with her companion, a
strict-looking lady with short hair and a man’s shirt and pocket watch;
and, yes, Miss Felicity Beedle. Vimes thought he had put his foot in it
when he said, “Oh yes, the poo lady,” but she burst out laughing and
shook his hand, saying, “Don’t worry, your grace, I wash mine thoroughly
after writing!” And it was a big laugh. She was a small woman with the
strange aspect that you see in some people that causes them to appear to
be subtly vibrating even when standing perfectly still. You felt that if
some interior restraint suddenly broke, the pent-up energy released
would catapult her through the nearest window.

Miss Beedle prodded him in the stomach. “And you are the famous
Commander Vimes. Come to arrest us all, have you?” Of course, you got
this all the time if you didn’t stop Sybil accepting the invitation to
yet another posh society do. But while Miss Beedle laughed, silence fell
on the other guests like a cast-iron safe. They were scowling at Miss
Beedle, and Miss Beedle was staring intently at Vimes, and Vimes knew
that expression. It was the expression of somebody with a story to tell.
Certainly this was no time to broach the subject, and so Vimes filed it
under “interesting.”

Whatever Vimes’s misgivings, Ramkin Hall did a damn good dinner and—and
this was the important thing—the dictates of popular social intercourse
decreed that Sybil had to allow a menu full of things that would not be
permitted at home if Vimes had asked for them. It’s one thing to act as
arbiter of your own husband’s tastes, but it is frowned on to do the
same to your guests.

Across the table from him a retired military man was being assured by
his wife that he did not, contrary to what he himself believed, like
potted shrimps. In vain the man protested weakly that he thought he did
like potted shrimps, to get the gentle response, “You may like potted
shrimps, Charles, but they do not like you.”

Vimes felt for the man, who seemed puzzled at having developed enemies
among the lower crustacea. “Well, er, does lobster like me, dear?” he
said, in a voice that did not express much hope.

“No, dear, it does not get on with you at all. Remember what happened at
the Parsleys’ whist evening.”

The man looked at the groaning sideboard and tried: “Do you think the
scallops could get on with me for five minutes or so?”

“Good heavens no, Charles.”

He cast a glance at the sideboard again. “I expect the green salad is my
bosom friend, though, isn’t it?”

“Absolutely, dear!”

“Yes, I thought so.”

The man looked across at Vimes and gave him a hopeless grin followed by,
“I am given to believe that you are a policeman, your grace. That
right?”

Vimes took proper stock of him for the first time: a whiskery old
warrior, now out to grass—and that was probably all his wife was going
to let him eat without an argument. He had burn scars on his face and
hands and the accent of Pseudopolis. Easy. “You were with the Light
Dragons, weren’t you, sir?”

The old man looked pleased. “Well done, that man! Not many people
remember us. Alas, I’m the only one left. Colonel Charles Augustus
Makepeace—strange name for a military man, or perhaps not, I don’t
know.” He sniffed. “We’re just a scorched page in the history of
warfare. I dare say you haven’t read my memoirs, Twenty-four Years
Without Eyebrows? No? Well, you are not alone in that, I have to say.
Met your missus in those days. She told us it would be totally
impossible to breed dragons stable enough for use in warfare. She was
right, and no mistake. Of course, we went on trying, because that’s the
military way!”

“You mean, pile dreadful failure on top of failure?” said Vimes.

The colonel laughed. “Well, it works sometimes! I still keep a few
dragons, though. Wouldn’t be without ’em. A day without a singe is a day
without sunshine. They’re a great saving in matches, and, of course,
they keep undesirables away, too.”

Vimes reacted like an angler who, after some time dozing by the water’s
edge, felt that the fish were rising.

“Oh, you don’t get many of them around here, surely?”

“You think so? You don’t know the half of it, young man. I can tell you
a few stories—” He stopped talking abruptly, and Vimes’s experience of
husbandry told him that the man had just been kicked under the table by
his wife, who did not look happy and, to judge by the lines on her face,
probably never had. She leaned past her husband, who was now accepting
another brandy from the waiter, and said, icily, “As a policeman, your
grace, does your jurisdiction extend to the Shires?”

Another ring in the water, thought the angler inside Vimes’s head. He
said, “No, madam, my beat is Ankh-Morpork and some of the surrounding
area. Traditionally, however, the policeman drags his jurisdiction with
him if he is in hot pursuit in connection with crime committed within
his domain. But, of course, Ankh-Morpork is a long way from here, and I
doubt if I’d be able to run that far.” This got a laugh from the table
in general and a thin-lipped smile from Mrs. Colonel.

Play the fish, play the fish…“Nevertheless,” Vimes continued, “if I was
to witness an arrestable offense here and now, I’d have the authority to
make an arrest. Like a citizen’s arrest, but somewhat more professional,
and after that I’d be required to turn the suspect over to the local
force or other suitable authority, as I deemed fit.”

The clergyman, whom Vimes had noticed out of the corner of his eye, was
taking an interest in this conversation and leaned forward to say, “As
you deem fit, your grace?”

“My grace would not come into it, sir. As a sworn member of the
Ankh-Morpork City Watch it would be my bounden duty to ensure the safety
of my suspect. Ideally I’d look for a lockup. We don’t have them in the
city anymore, but I understand most rural areas still do, even if they
only hold drunks and escaped pigs.”

There was laughter, and Miss Beedle said, “We do have a village
constable, your grace, and he keeps pigs in the lockup down by the old
bridge!”

She looked brightly at Vimes, whose expression was stony. He said, “Does
he ever put people in there? Does he have a warrant card? Does he have a
badge?”

“Well, he puts the occasional drunk in there to sober up, and he says
the pigs don’t seem to mind, but I have no idea what a warrant card is.”

There was more laughter at this but it faded quickly, sucked into
nowhere by Vimes’s implacable silence.

Then he said, “I would not consider him to be a policeman, and until I
found that he was working within a framework of proper law enforcement I
would regard him not as a policeman by my standards but as a slightly
bossy street cleaner. Of some use, but not a policeman.”

“By your standards, your grace?” said the clergyman.

“Yes, sir, by my standards. My decision. My responsibility. My
experience. My arse if things go wrong.”

“But, your grace, as you say, you are outside your jurisdiction here,”
said Mrs. Colonel gently.

Vimes could sense her husband’s nervousness, and it was certainly not to
do with the food. The man was wishing heartily that he wasn’t there. It
was funny how people always wanted to talk to policemen about crime, and
never realize what strange little signals their anxieties betrayed.

He turned to the man’s wife, smiled and said, “But as I’ve said, madam,
if a copper comes across a flagrant crime his jurisdiction reaches out
to him like an old friend. And do you mind if we change the subject? No
offense meant to any of you ladies and gentlemen, but over the years
I’ve noticed that bankers and military men and merchants all get a
chance to eat their dinners at their leisure at affairs like this, while
the poor old copper has to talk about police work, which is most of the
time rather dull.” He smiled again to keep everything friendly, and went
on, “Exceedingly dull around here, I would imagine. From my point of
view, this place is as quiet as the…grave.” Score: one wince from the
dear old colonel, and the priest looking down at his plate, although the
latter shouldn’t be taken too seriously, he thought, because you seldom
saw a clergyman who couldn’t strike sparks with his knife and fork.

Sybil, using her hostess voice, shattered the silence like an
icebreaker. “I think it’s time for the main course,” she said, “which
will be superb mutton avec no talking about police work at all.
Honestly, if you get Sam going he’ll quote the laws and ordinances of
Ankh-Morpork and force standing orders until you throw a cushion at
him!”

Well done, Vimes thought, at least I can now eat my dinner in peace. He
relaxed as the conversation around him became less fraught and once
again replete with the everyday gossip and grumblings about other people
living in the area, the difficulties with servants, the prospects for
the harvest and, oh yes, the trouble with goblins.

Vimes paid attention then. Goblins. The City Watch appeared to contain
at least one member of every known bipedal sapient species plus one
Nobby Nobbs. It had become a tradition: if you could make it as a
copper, then you could make it as a species. But nobody had ever once
suggested that Vimes should employ a goblin, the simple reason being
that they were universally known to be stinking, cannibalistic, vicious,
untrustworthy bastards.

Of course, everybody knew that dwarfs were a chiselling bunch who would
swindle you if they could, and that trolls were little more than thugs,
and the city’s one resident medusa would never look you in the face, and
the vampires couldn’t be trusted, however much they smiled, and
werewolves were only vampires who couldn’t fly, when you got right down
to it, and the man next door was a real bastard who threw his rubbish
over your wall and his wife was no better than she should be. But then
again it took all sorts to make a world. It was not as if you were
prejudiced because, after all, there had been an orc working at the
university, but he liked his football, didn’t he just, and you could
forgive anyone who could score from the center spot and, well, you took
as you found…But not bloody goblins, thank you very much. People hounded
them out if they came into the city and they tended to end up downriver,
working for the likes of Harry King in the bone-grinding,
leather-tanning and scrap-metal industries. A fair walk outside the city
gates and so outside the law.

And now there were some in the vicinity of the Hall, as evidenced by
chickens and cats disappearing, and so on. Well, probably, but Vimes
remembered when people said that trolls stole chickens; there was
nothing of interest to a troll in a chicken. It would be like humans
eating plaster. He certainly did not mention any of this.

Yes, no one had a good word to say about goblins, but Miss Beedle had no
word to say at all. Her gaze remained firmly fixed on Vimes’s face. You
could read a dining table if you learned the knack and if you were a
policeman then you could build a clear picture of what each diner
thought about the others; it was all in the looks. The things said or
not said. The people who were in the magic circle and the people who
weren’t. Miss Beedle was an outsider, tolerated, because obviously there
is such a thing as good manners, but not exactly included. What was the
phrase? Not one of us.

Vimes realized that he was staring at Miss Beedle just as she was
staring at him. They both smiled, and he thought that an inquisitive man
would go and see the nice lady who had written the books that his little
boy enjoyed so much and not because she looked like somebody prepared to
blow so many whistles that it would sound like a pipe band.

Miss Beedle frowned a lot when the talk was about goblins, and
occasionally people, especially the people he had tagged as Mrs.
Colonel, would cast a look at her as one might glance at a child who was
doing something wrong.

And so he maintained a nice exterior air of attention while at the same
time sifting through the affairs of the day. The process was interrupted
by Mrs. Colonel saying, “By the way, your grace, we were very pleased to
hear that you gave Jefferson a drubbing this afternoon. The man is
insufferable! He upsets people!”

“Well, I noticed that he’s not afraid to air his views,” said Vimes,
“but nor are we, are we?”

“But surely you of all people, your grace,” said the clergyman, looking
up earnestly, “cannot possibly believe that Jack is as good as his
master?”

“Depends on Jack. Depends on the master. Depends what you mean by good,”
said Vimes. “I suppose I was a Jack, but when it comes to the
Ankh-Morpork City Watch, I am the Master.”

Mrs. Colonel was about to answer when Lady Sybil said brightly, “Talking
of which, Sam, I had a letter from a Mrs. Wainwright commending you
highly. Remind me to show it to you.”

All long-term couples have their code. Classically there is one that the
wife uses in polite conversation to warn her husband that, because of
hasty dressing, or absent-mindedness, he is becoming exposed in the
crotch department.*

In the case of Vimes and Lady Sybil, any mention of Mrs. Wainwright was
a code that meant, “If you don’t stop annoying people, Sam Vimes, then
there will be a certain amount of marital discord later this evening.”

But this time Sam Vimes wanted the last word, and said, “In fact, come
to think of it, I know quite a few risen Jacks in various places, and
let me tell you, they often make better masters than their erstwhile
masters ever did. All they needed was a chance.”

“Do remind me to show you the letter, Sam!”

Vimes gave in, and the arrival of the ice-cream pudding lowered the
temperature somewhat, especially since her ladyship made certain that
everybody’s glasses remained filled—and in the case of the colonel this
meant an extremely regular top-up. Vimes would have liked to talk to him
further, but he too was under wifely orders. The man had definitely had
something important on his mind that caused the presence of a policeman
to make him very nervous indeed. And the nervousness was apparently
catching.

This wasn’t a posh affair, by any means. Sybil had organized this little
party before building up to anything more lavish, and some fairly
amicable goodbyes were being said long before eleven. Vimes listened
intently to the colonel and his wife as they walked, in his case
unsteadily, to their carriage. All he heard, however, was a hissed, “You
had the stable door open all evening!”

Followed by a growled, “But the horse was fast asleep, my dear.”

When the last carriage had been waved away and the big front door firmly
shut, Sybil said, “Well, Sam, I understand, I really do, but they were
our guests.”

“I know, and I’m sorry, but it’s as if they don’t think. I just wanted
to shake their ideas up a bit.”

Lady Sybil examined a sherry bottle and topped up her glass. “Surely you
don’t think that the blacksmith really had the right to fight you for
this house?”

Sam wished that he could drink, right now. “No, of course not. I mean,
there wouldn’t be an end to it. People have been winning and losing on
the old roulette wheel of fate for thousands of years. I know that, but
you know that I think that if you’re going to stop the wheel then you
have to spare some thought for the poor buggers who’re sitting on zero.”

His wife gently took his hand. “But we endowed the hospital, Sam. You
know how expensive that is. Dr. Lawn will train up anyone who shows an
aptitude for medicine, even if they, in his words, turn up with the arse
hanging out of their trousers. He’s even letting girls train! As
doctors! He even employs Igorinas! We’re changing things, Sam, a bit at
a time, by helping people help themselves. And look at the Watch! These
days a kid is proud to say that his father or even his mother is a
watchman. And people need pride.”

Vimes grasped her hand. He said, “Thank you for being kind to the boy
from Cockbill Street.”

She laughed this away. “I waited a long time for you to turn up, Samuel
Vimes, and I don’t intend to let you go to waste!”

This seemed to Sam Vimes a good time to say, “You don’t mind if
Willikins and I take a little stroll to Dead Man’s Copse before I go to
bed?”

Lady Sybil gave him the smile women give to husbands and small boys.
“Well, I can hardly say no, and there is a strange atmosphere. I’m glad
Willikins is involved. And it’s very pleasant up there. Perhaps you’ll
hear the nightingale.”

Vimes gave her a little kiss before going up to change and said,
“Actually, dear, I’m hoping to hear a canary.”

Probably no duke or even commander of the City Watch had found in their
dressing room anything like that which lay on the bed of Sam Vimes right
now. Pride of place was for a billhook, which was a useful agricultural
implement. He had seen a couple of them being carried earlier in the
day. He reminded himself that “agricultural implement” did not mean “not
a weapon.” They turned up sometimes among the street gangs and were
almost as much to be feared as a troll with a headache.

Then there was a truncheon. Vimes’s own truncheon, which his manservant
had thoughtfully brought along. Of course, it had silverwork on it
because it was the ceremonial truncheon of the Commander of the Watch,
and wasn’t a weapon at all, oh dear me, no. On the other hand, Vimes
knew himself not to be a cheesemonger and therefore it would be somewhat
difficult to explain why he had a foot of cheesewire about his person.
That was going to stay here, but he’d take the billhook. It was a pretty
poor lookout if a man walking on his own land couldn’t take the
opportunity to trim a branch or two. But what to make of the pile of
bamboo which resolved itself into a breastplate of articulated sections
and a most unfetching bamboo helmet? There was a small note on the bed.
It said, in Willikins’ handwriting, “The gamekeeper’s friend, commander.
Yours too!!!”

Vimes grunted and hit the breastplate with his truncheon. It flexed like
a living thing and the truncheon bounced across the room.

Well, we live and learn, Vimes thought, or perhaps more importantly, we
learn and live. He crept downstairs and let himself out into the
night…which was a checkerboard of black and white. He’d forgotten that
outside the city, where the smogs, smokes and steams rendered the world
into a thousand shades of gray, out in places like this there was black
and white, and, if you were looking for a metaphor, there was one, right
there.

He knew the way to the hill, you couldn’t miss it. The moon illuminated
the way as if it had wanted to make things easier for him. Actual
agriculture ran out around here. The fields gave way to furze, and to
turf nibbled by rabbits into something resembling the baize of a snooker
table…although given that rabbits did other things than just eat grass,
he would play snooker with a lot of very small balls. Bunnies scattered
as he climbed and he worried that he was making too much noise, but it
was his land and therefore this was just a walk in the park. So he
walked a little more jauntily, following what seemed to be the only
path, and saw, in the moonlight, the gibbet.

Well, he thought, it says Dead Man’s Copse on the map, doesn’t it? They
used to do a lot of things like this in the old days, didn’t they? And
the metal cage was just there to keep the corpses upright so that the
ravens didn’t have to kneel. Good old-fashioned policing, you could call
it, if you wanted to chill a spine or two. A pile of crumbling ancient
bones at the foot of the gibbet testified to the old-fashioned policing
at work.

Vimes felt the stealthy movement of a knife on the hairs of his neck.

A moment later Willikins got up off the ground and fastidiously brushed
dirt from his clothing. “Oh, well done, sir!” he said, wheezing a
little, owing to the shortness of breath. “I can see that I can’t put
anything across you, commander.” He stopped, held his hand up to his
nose and sniffed. “Blow me down, commander! There’s blood all over my
clothes! You didn’t stick me, did you, sir? You just spun round and
kicked me in the nuts, which I may say, sir, was done most expertly.”

Vimes sniffed. You learned to smell blood. It smelled like metal. Now,
people would say that metal doesn’t smell, it does, but it smells like
blood.

“You got up here on time?” said Vimes.

“Yes, sir. Didn’t see a living soul.” Willikins knelt down. “Didn’t see
a thing. Wouldn’t have seen the blood if you hadn’t kicked me into a
puddle of it. It’s all over the place.”

I wish I had Igor here, thought Vimes. These days he handed over the
forensic to the experts. On the other hand, you acquired a forensics
skill of your own and beyond the smell of blood he could smell butchery
and unbelievable coincidence. Everybody sees everything in the
countryside. Jefferson was going to meet Vimes, but here there was a
definite shortage of Jefferson and no shortage whatsoever of blood
while, at the same time, a noticeable absence of corpse. Vimes’ brain
worked through things methodically. Of course, you took it for granted
that if a citizen was surreptitiously going to tell a policeman a secret
it was likely that somebody did not wish said citizen to say said thing.
And if said citizen was found dead then said policeman, who had been
seen to have a scrap with him earlier, might just be considered to be a
tiny bit guilty when all is said and done, and while all was being said
and all was being done, someone really intent on getting Vimes into
difficulties would have left the corpse of the blacksmith there,
wouldn’t they?

“Found something, sir,” said Willikins, straightening up.

“You what?”

“Found something, sir, felt along the ground, as you might say.”

“But it’s soaked with blood, man!”

This didn’t seem to worry Willikins. “Never minded blood, commander,
leastways when it wasn’t mine.” There was some scrabbling, then light
appeared: Willikins had shifted the trap door of a dark lantern. He
handed it to Vimes and then held something small to the glow. “It’s a
ring, sir. Looks like it’s been made of stone.”

“What? You mean it’s a stone with a hole in it?”

He heard Willikins sigh. “No, sir, it’s polished smooth. And there’s a
claw in it. Looks like goblin to me.”

Vimes thought, all that blood. Severed claw. Goblins aren’t that big.
Somebody bothered to come up here to kill a goblin. Where’s the rest of
it?

In theory, moonlight should help the search, but moonlight is deceptive,
creating shadows where shadows should not be, and the wind was getting
up. Dark lantern or not, there was little he could do here.

The curtains were drawn and a few lights still burned in the Goblin’s
Head. Apparently, there were licensing laws. A good copper should always
be ready to test the strength of them. He led the way round to the back
of the pub and knocked on the little wooden sliding panel set into the
building’s back door. After a few moments Jiminy pulled the sliding
panel aside and Vimes stuck his hand in the hole before the man could
close it again.

“Not you, please, your grace, the magistrates would have my guts for
garters!”

“And I’m sure they’ll be very decorative,” said Vimes, “but it won’t
happen, because I’ll warrant that about a third of your regular
customers are still imbibing intoxicating liquors at this hour, and
probably at least one magistrate is among them…No, I take back that last
remark. Magistrates do their drinking at home, where there are no
licensing laws. I won’t say a word, but it’ll be a bad old day for the
job if a thirsty copper can’t mump a night-time beverage from a former
colleague.” He slapped some coins on the tiny shelf inside the little
panel and added, “That should buy a double brandy for my man here, and
for me the address of Mr. Jefferson, the smith.”

“You can’t treat me like this, you know.”

Vimes looked at Willikins. “Can I?”

The gentleman’s gentleman cleared his throat. “We are now in the world
of feudal law, commander. You own the ground this public house stands
on, but he has rights as strong as your own. If he has paid his rent,
then you can’t even go into the property without his permission.”

“How do you know all this stuff?”

“Well, commander, as you know, I’ve had one or two holidays in the Tanty
in my time, and one thing about prison is there are always a lot of
books about the law lying around, criminals being very keen on going
through the old legal smallprint, just in case it turns out that giving
a rival gang member some cement boots and dropping him in the river
might be legal after all. That kind of learning sticks.”

“But I’m investigating a mysterious disappearance now. The blacksmith
was very keen to see me up the hill, but when I got up there there was
nothing but a load of blood all over the place. Jefferson wanted to tell
me something and you must know what that smells like to a copper.” Even
though I’m not sure, said Vimes to himself. “Definitely something iffy,
that’s for sure.”

The landlord shrugged. “Not my business, squire.”

Vimes’s hand gripped the landlord’s wrist before the man could pull it
away and tugged him so hard that his face was up against the woodwork.

“Don’t you squire me. There’s something going down here, something
wrong; I can feel it in my boots and, believe me, they are the most
sensitive boots that ever were. The man who runs the village pub knows
everything—I know that and so do you. If you’re not on my side you’re in
my way and you know something, I can see it in your eyes. If it turns
out you knew something of importance about the blacksmith you’ll have
invited yourself to be an accessory after the fact, with a free option,
if I can get the bit between my teeth, of before the fact, which leaves
you right in the middle, and that’s a fact.”

Jiminy wriggled, but Vimes’s grip was steely. “Your badge doesn’t work
here, Mr. Vimes, you know that!”

Vimes heard the tiny whine of fear in the man’s voice, but old coppers
were tough. If you weren’t tough, you never became an old copper. “I’m
going to let go, sir,” said Vimes, which is policeman’s code for
“trembling arsehole.” “You think that legally around here I don’t have a
leg to stand on. This may or may not be true, but my man here is not a
policeman and is not accustomed to doing things nicely like we in the
job do, and you might end up without a leg to stand on as well. I’m
telling you this as a friend. We both know this game, eh? I expect you
were working in the bar when the goblin was killed, yes?”

“I didn’t know a bloody goblin was killed, did I? So how would I know
when it may or may not have happened? My advice, sir,” said Jiminy, with
the same coded inflection that Vimes had used, “would be to report the
matter to the authorities in the morning. That would be young Feeney,
calls himself a copper. Look, I came here to retire, Vimes, and staying
alive is part of that. I do not poke my nose into that which does not
concern me. And I know there’s a lot of things that you could do and I
know you ain’t going to do them, but just so’s you don’t go home
empty-handed, Jethro lives where all blacksmiths live, right in the
center of the village overlooking the green. He lives with his old mum,
so I wouldn’t disturb her at this time of night. And now, gents, I’d
better shut the pub. Don’t want to break the law.”

The panel slid back, and there was the sound of a bolt slotting into
place. A moment later, to the time-honored cry of “Ain’t you lot got no
homes to go to?” they heard the front door open and the lane filled with
men trying to get their brains to go in the direction of their feet, or
vice versa.

In the shadows of the pub’s back yard, which smelled of old barrels,
Willikins said, “Would you like to take a bet on whether your blacksmith
is tucked up in his bed tonight, sir?”

“No,” said Vimes, “but this stinks to me. I think I’ve got a murder, but
I haven’t got a corpse, not all of it anyway,” he said, as Willikins
opened his mouth. Vimes grunted. “For it to be definitely murder,
Willikins, you need to be missing an important bit of you that you
really need to stay alive, like your head. Okay, or like your blood, but
it’s difficult to collect that in the dark, isn’t it?”

They set off, and Vimes said, “The one thing you can say about the dead
is that they stay dead, well, generally speaking, and so…it’s been a
long day, and that’s a long walk and old age is creeping on, okay?”

“Not very noticeably from the outside, commander,” said Willikins
loyally.

The door was opened to them by a yawning night footman and as soon as he
had retired Willikins produced from the pocket of his coat the reeking
and severed goblin claw and placed it on the hall table.

“Not much to a goblin once you get past the head, or so they say. See,
there’s the ring on the finger. Definitely looks like stone, pretty good
workmanship for a goblin.”

“Animals don’t wear jewelry,” said Vimes. “You know, Willikins, I’ve
said it before, you’d make a bloody good copper if it wasn’t for the
fact that you’d make a bloody good assassin.”

Willikins grinned. “I did think about the assassins when I was a lad,
sir, but unfortunately I was not of the right social class and, besides,
they have rules.” He helped Vimes out of his jacket and went on, “The
street don’t have rules, commander, except one, which is ‘Survive’ and
my dear old dad would probably turn in his grave if I even thought of
being a copper.”

“But I thought you never knew who your father was?”

“Indeed, sir, that is the case, but one must consider the fact of
heredity.” Willikins produced a small brush and whisked a speck of dirt
off the coat before putting it on a hanger, then went on, “I do feel the
absence of a parent sometimes and I have wondered whether it might be a
sensible idea to go along to the cemetery at Small Gods and shout out
‘Dad, I’m going to be a copper,’ and then see which gravestone revolved,
sir.”

The man was still grinning. Vimes reflected, and not for the first time,
that he had quite an unusual gentleman to be a gentleman’s gentleman,
especially given that neither of them was a gentleman in the first
place. “Willikins, and I mean this most sincerely, if I were you I’d go
instead down to the Tanty and shout it out into the lime pit next to the
gallows.”

Willikins’ grin widened. “Thank you, sir. I don’t have to tell you that
that means a lot to me. If you would excuse me, sir, I’ll go and put my
jacket in the incinerator before retiring.”

Sybil turned over and made a big warm noise when Vimes got into bed next
to her. It had been a long day, and he dropped into that pink
semiconscious stupor that is even better than sleep, waking up slightly
every hour when nobody rang a bell in the street below to say that all
was well.

And he woke up again to hear the sound of heavy cart wheels rumbling
over stones. Half asleep as Vimes was, suspicion woke him the rest of
the way. Stones? It was all bloody gravel around the Hall. He opened a
window and stared out into the moonlight. It was an echo bouncing off
the hills. A few brain cells doing the night shift wondered what kind of
agriculture had to be done at night. Did they grow mushrooms? Did
turnips have to be brought in from the cold? Was that what they called
crop rotation? These thoughts melted into his somnolent brain like
little grains of sugar in a cup of tea, slithering and dripping from
cell to synapse to neurotransmitter until it arrived in the receptor
marked “suspicion,” which if you saw a medical diagram of a policeman’s
brain would probably be quite a visible lump, slightly larger than the
lump marked “ability to understand long words.” He thought, Ah yes,
contraband! and, feeling cheerful, and hopeful for the future, he gently
closed the window and went back to bed.

The food at the Hall was copious and sumptuous and quite probably very
nearly everything else ending in us. Vimes was old enough to know that
the senior staff got to eat the leftovers and therefore made certain
there would be leftovers. With this in mind he had a very large helping
of haddock kedgeree and ate all four rashers of bacon on his plate.
Sybil tut-tutted about this, and Vimes pointed out that he was on
holiday, after all, and on holiday you did not do the things you did on
other days, causing Sybil, with forensic accuracy, to point out that
this should therefore include police work, should it not, but Vimes was
ready, and said that of course he understood this, which was why he was
going to take Young Sam for a walk down to the center of the village to
put his suspicions in the hands of the local policeman. Sybil said, “All
right, then,” in deliberate tones of disbelief, and he was to be sure to
take Willikins with him.

This was another aspect of his wife that puzzled Vimes to the core. In
the same way that Sybil thought that Nobby Nobbs, although a rough
diamond, was a good watchman, she thought that Vimes was safer in the
company of a man who never moved abroad without the weaponry of the
street about his person, and who had once opened a beer bottle with
somebody else’s teeth. This was true, but in some ways very
disconcerting.

He heard the doorbell ring, heard the footman open the front door, heard
a muffled conversation followed by somebody walking on the gravel path
round to the back of the Hall. It wasn’t important, it was just
ambience, and the sound of a footman coming into the room and whispering
to Sybil fell into the same category.

He heard her say, “What? Oh well, I suppose you’d better show him in,”
then snapped to attention when she addressed him. “It’s the local
policeman. Can you see him in the study? Policemen never wipe their feet
properly, especially you, Sam.”

Vimes hadn’t seen the study yet. The Hall seemed never to run out of
rooms. By dint of being pointed the way by a swiveling maid, he arrived
in the study a few seconds before the local copper was shown in by a
footman, who was making a face like a man having to handle a dead rat.
At least, it was presumably the local copper; he looked like the local
copper’s son. Seventeen years old, Vimes reckoned, and he smelled of
pigs. He stood where the footman had deposited him, and stared.

After a while Vimes said, “Can I help you, officer?”

The young man blinked. “Er, am I addressing Sir Samuel Vimes?”

“Who are you?”

This query appeared to take the young man by surprise, and after a while
Vimes took pity on him and said, “Look, son, the correct drill is to say
who you are and then ask me if I am me, so to speak. After all, I don’t
know who you are. You’re not wearing a uniform I recognize, you have
shown me no warrant card or badge and you don’t have a helmet. I assume,
nevertheless, and for the purposes of concluding this interview before
lunchtime, that you are the chief constable in this vicinity? What’s
your name?”

“Er, Upshot, sir, Feeney Upshot…er, Chief Constable Upshot?”

Vimes felt ashamed of himself, but this kid was representing himself as
a police officer and even Nobby Nobbs would have laughed.

Aloud, he said, “Well, Chief Constable Upshot, I am Sir Samuel Vimes,
amongst other things, and I was thinking only just now that I should
talk to you.”

“Er, that’s good, sir, because I was thinking only just now that it was
about time I should arrest you on suspicion of causing the death of
Jethro Jefferson, the smith.”

Vimes’s expression did not change. So, what do I do now? Nothing, that’s
what. You have the right to remain silent, I’ve said that to hundreds of
people, knowing it for the rubbish that it is, and I’m absolutely
certain of one other thing, that I certainly haven’t laid anything more
than an educational hand on that damned blacksmith and therefore it’s
going to be very interesting to find out why this little twerp thinks he
can feel my collar for doing so.

A copper should always be willing to learn, and Vimes had learned from
Lord Vetinari that you should never react to any comment or situation
until you had decided exactly what you were going to do. This had the
dual attraction of preventing you from saying or doing the wrong thing
while at the same time making other people extremely nervous.

“Sorry about that, sir, but it took me an hour to get the pigs out and
make the lockup comfortable, sir, it still smells a bit of disinfectant,
sir, and pig, if it comes to that, but I whitewashed the walls and
there’s a chair and a bed you can curl up on. Oh, and so you don’t get
bored I found the magazine.” He looked hopefully at Vimes, whose
expression had not changed, merely calcified, but after a suitably long
stare Vimes said, “Which magazine?”

“Sir? I didn’t know there was more than one. We’ve always had it. It’s
about pigs. It’s a bit worn now, but pigs is always pigs.”

Vimes stood up. “I’m going to go for a walk, chief constable. You can
follow me if you like.”

“Sorry, sir, but I’ve arrested you!”

“No, son, you haven’t,” said Vimes, heading toward the front door.

“But I definitely told you that you were arrested, sir!” It was almost a
wail.

Vimes opened the front door and started down the steps with Feeney
trotting along behind him. A couple of gardeners who would otherwise
have turned away leaned on their brooms at the sight, suspecting a
cabaret.

“What in the world have you got on you that tells me you are an official
policeman?” enquired Vimes over his shoulder.

“I have the official truncheon, sir. It’s a family heirloom!”

Sam Vimes stopped walking and turned. “Well, my lad, if it’s official
then you’d better let me look at it, hadn’t you? Come on, hand it over.”
Feeney did so.

It was just an oversized blackjack, with the word “law” inexpertly burnt
into it with maybe a poker. Good weight, though. Vimes tapped it in his
palm and said, “You’ve given me to understand that you believe that I’m
potentially a murderer and you’ve handed your weapon to me! Don’t you
think that’s unwise?”

Vimes saw the landscape drift past as he floated over the terrace and
landed on his back in a flower bed, staring at the sky. Feeney’s
concerned face, somewhat overlarge, appeared in his vision. “Sorry about
that, commander. Personally I wouldn’t hurt you for anything, but I
didn’t want to give you the wrong impression. That move translates as
One Man He Up Down Very Sorry.”

Vimes watched the patch of sky above him in a state of inexplicable
peace as the boy said, “You see, my granddad worked on the tall ships
when he was a lad, sailing over to Bhangbhangduc and all them places
where folk is so strange, and when he came back he brought my granny,
Ming Chang, and she taught that to my dad and to me.” He sniffed. “She
died a few months ago, but at least she taught my mum cookery, too. Bung
Ming Suck Dog is still a favorite in these parts and, of course, it’s
not too difficult to get the ingredients, being so close to the sea.
Bong Can Bang Keng doesn’t grow very well around here, although Packed
Shop Chop Muck Dick grows pretty well. Oh, the color is coming back to
your face, sir, I’m very pleased to say.”

Aching at every joint, Vimes pulled himself upright. “Don’t do that
again, d’you hear?”

“I’ll try not to do so, sir, but you are under arrest, sir.”

“I told you, young man, you have not properly arrested me.” Vimes got to
his feet, wheezing a little. “In order to effect a legal arrest, the
arresting officer must be physically touching the suspect while clearly
uttering the words ‘I arrest you,’ like this, although at that time you
need not specify the crime of which your suspect is suspected. While so
doing…” and here Vimes punched the boy so hard in the solar plexus that
he curled up, “…it pays to take care, which you are going to need to do,
my lad, if you intend to arrest me, which I may point out you still have
not done, which is a shame because if you had you would now have a clear
case against me for resisting arrest as well as assaulting a policeman
in the execution of his duty. With the proviso that nothing about you so
far leads me to believe that you truly are a policeman.”

Vimes sat down on a handy stone and watched as Feeney began to unfold.
“I’m Sam Vimes, young man, so don’t try that chop sally stuff on me,
understand?”

Now Feeney’s voice was a sort of attenuated wheeze: “And one day someone
will say to you, ‘Do you know who I am, constable?’ to which you will
reply, ‘Yes, sir, or, as it may be, madam, you are the person I am
interviewing in connection with the aforesaid crime,’ or similar
appropriate wording, which should not include such phrases as ‘You are
going down, chummy,’ or ‘I’ve got you bang to rights and no mistake.’
Ignore, but remember, all threats made. The law is one and immutable. It
does not care who anybody is and at that moment you, in a very real way,
are it, and therefore nor do you.”

Vimes stood with his mouth open as Feeney continued. “We don’t often get
The Times over here, but I bought a load of pig medicine a year ago and
it was wrapped in The Times and I saw your name when you spoke about
being a policeman. It made me feel very proud, sir.”

Vimes remembered that speech. He’d had to write it for the passing-out
parade of some newly trained officers from the Watch School. He had
spent hours trying to get it down, hampered by the fact that for him any
form of literature was in every sense a closed book.

He had shown it to Sybil and asked her whether she thought he should get
somebody to help him with it, and she had patted him on the head and
said, “No, dear, because then it would look like something written by
somebody for somebody else, whereas right now the pure Vimes shows
through, like a radiant beacon.” That had quite cheered him up, because
he had never been a radiant beacon before.

But now his heart sank as his train of thought was interrupted by a very
polite cough and the voice of Willikins, who said, “Excuse me,
commander, I thought it right at this time to introduce the young
gentleman to my friends Mr. Burleigh and Mr. Stronginthearm. Lady Sybil
would not be happy to see you arrested, commander. I fear that you would
find her a bit…acerbic, sir.”

Vimes found his voice. “You’re a bloody fool, man! Put that damn thing
down! You keep it on a hair trigger! Put it down right now!”

Willikins wordlessly set down the shining crossbow on the parapet of the
staircase like a mother putting her baby to bed. There was a twang, and
seventeen yards away a geranium was decapitated. This passed without
notice, except by the geranium and a raggedy figure hiding in the
rhododendrons, that said “Snack!” to itself, but resolutely carried on
staring at Vimes.

The tableau of shock on the steps was interrupted by Lady Sybil, who
could walk very quietly for a large woman. “Gentlemen, what is going on
here?”

“This young man, allegedly the local policeman, wishes to take me into
custody on a charge of suspicion of murder, my dear.”

There passed between husband and wife a look that deserved the status of
telepathy. Sybil stared at Feeney. “Ah, you would be young Upshot, I
suppose. I was sorry to hear about the death of your grandmother, and I
do trust that your mother continues well. I used to visit her when I was
a girl. And you want to arrest my husband, do you?”

Feeney, goggle-eyed, managed an unprofessional “Yes, ma’am.”

Sybil sighed and said sternly, “Well, then, can I hope that at least
this can be done without further vegetable carnage?” She looked at
Vimes. “Is he taking you to prison?”

She turned her attention back to Feeney, a man now confronted by a
cannon loaded with a thousand years of upper-class self-assurance.
“He’ll need fresh clothing, constable. If you tell me where you’re
taking him, and you will tell me where you’re taking him, I’ll
personally bring down suitable garments. Will I need to sew the stripes
on them, or does that happen automatically? And I would be grateful if
you had him back here by teatime, because we’re expecting visitors.”

Lady Sybil took a step forward and Feeney took a step backward to escape
the wrath of the impending bosom. She said, “May I wish you the best of
luck in your undertaking, young man. You’ll need it. Now please excuse
me. I have to go and talk to the cook.”

She swept away, leaving the incredulous Feeney staring after her. Then
the doors that had just closed behind her opened again, and she said,
“Are you still a bachelor, young man?”

Feeney managed a “Yes.”

“Then you are invited to tea,” she said cheerfully. “There are some very
eligible young ladies coming, and I’m sure that they will be most
excited to see a young man who is prepared to dance on the very edge of
hell. Do wear your helmet, Sam, in case there is any police brutality.
Willikins, come with me. I want to have a talk to you!”

Vimes let the silence curdle. After too much of it, Feeney said, “Your
wife is a very remarkable woman, sir.”

Vimes nodded. “You have no idea. What do you want to do now, chief
constable?”

The boy hesitated. That was Sybil for you. Just by speaking calmly and
confidently she could leave you believing that the world had turned
upside down and dropped on to your head.

“Well, sir, I believe I must take you before the magistrates?”

Vimes noted the little question mark. “Who is your boss, Feeney?”

“The aforesaid bench of magistrates, sir.”

Vimes began to walk down the steps, and Feeney hurried after him. Vimes
waited until the boy was racing, and then stopped dead so that he ran
into Vimes. “Your boss is the law, chief constable, and don’t you forget
it. In fact, one of the jobs of the magistrates is to make certain that
you do not! Did you ever take an oath? What did it say? Who was it to?”

“Oh, I remember that all right, sir. It was to the bench of magistrates,
sir.”

“It…was…what?! You made an oath to obey the magistrates? They can’t make
you do that!” He stopped. Remember, in the country there is always
somebody watching you, he thought, and probably listening too.

Feeney looked shocked, so Vimes said, “Get me down to your lockup, kid,
and lock me in. And while you’re about it, lock yourself in with me.
Don’t rush, don’t ask questions, and keep your voice down, apart from
possibly saying things like ‘I have you bang to rights, you miscreant,’
and other rubbish of that general nature, because, young man, I believe
somebody is in real difficulties here and I believe that person is you.
If you have any sense, you’ll keep quiet and take me to your lockup,
okay?”

Eyes wide, Feeney nodded.

It was a pleasant walk down to the lockup, which turned out to be on a
small quay by the river. The area had all the semi-nautical detritus
that a man might expect and there was a swing bridge, presumably to
allow the bigger boats to pass. The sun shone and nothing was happening,
in a slow sort of way. And then there was the much spoken of lockup. It
looked like a giant pepperpot built of stone. A flowering creeper grew
up it, and, next to the door and restrained by a chain, there was an
enormous pig. When it saw their approach it got on its hind legs, and,
tottering somewhat, begged.

“This is Masher,” said Feeney. “His father was a wild boar, his mother
was surprised. See those fangs? No one gives me much trouble when I
threaten to let Masher off his lead, do they, Masher?” He disappeared
behind the lockup and returned immediately with a bucket of swill, into
which Masher tried to bury himself, with hugely contented noises—as
huge, in fact, as his fangs. Vimes was staring at them when a friendly
looking woman wearing an apron bustled out of a thatched cottage,
stopped when she saw Vimes and dropped a curtsy. She looked hopefully at
Feeney. “Who would this fine gentleman be, son?”

“It’s Commander Vimes, Mum…You know, the duke.”

There was a pause while the woman clearly wished that she had been
wearing a better dress, hairdo, and shoes, and had cleaned the privy,
the kitchen, the scullery, and had tidied up the garden, painted the
front door and cleaned the inside of the roof.

Vimes prevented her spin from making a hole in the ground by holding out
his hand, and saying, “Sam Vimes, madam, pleased to make your
acquaintance,” but this only caused her to run indoors in a panic.

“My mum is very keen on the aristocracy,” Feeney confided as he unlocked
the door of the lockup with an unfeasibly large key.

“Why?” said Vimes, mystified. It was reasonably comfortable in the
lockup. Granted, the pigs had left a fragrant memory behind them, but
for a boy from Ankh-Morpork this counted as fresh air. Feeney sat down
beside him on a well-scrubbed bench. “Well, sir, when my granddad was
young, Lord Ramkin gave him a whole half-dollar for opening a gate, just
to let the hunt go by. According to my dad, he said, ‘no canting
hypocrite going on about the rights of man ever gave me as much as a
quarter-farthing so I say here’s to Lord Ramkin, who gave me a whole
half-dollar when he was as pissed as a fart, and never asked for it back
when he were sober. That’s what I call a gentleman.’ ”

Vimes squirmed inside, knowing that the supposedly generous old drunkard
would have had more money than you could ever imagine, and here was a
working man pathetically grateful for a handout from the old
piss-artist. He snarled in his soul to a man long dead. But the part of
him that had been married to Sybil for years whispered, But he didn’t
have to give the man anything, and in those days a whole half-dollar was
probably more money than the old man could imagine! Once Sybil, in one
of their very infrequent arguments, had surprised him by blurting out,
“Well, Sam, my family got its start in life, its grub stake if you like,
by piracy. You should like that, Sam! Good honest manual labor! And look
what it led to! The trouble with you, Sam Vimes, is that you’re
determined to be your very own class enemy.”

“Is there something wrong, commander?” said Feeney.

“Everything,” said Vimes. “For one thing, no policeman swears allegiance
to the civil power, he swears allegiance to the law. Oh, politicians can
change the law, and if the copper doesn’t like it then he can quit, but
while he is in the job it’s up to him to act in accordance with the law
as laid down.” He leaned his back against the stone wall. “You do not
swear to obey magistrates! I’d like to see what it was that you signed—”
Vimes stopped talking because the little metal plate in the lockup door
slid open to reveal Feeney’s mother, looking very nervous.

“I’ve made Bang Suck Duck, Feeney, with swede and chips, and there’s
enough for the duke as well, if he would be so condescending as to
accept it?”

Vimes leaned forward and whispered, “Does she know you’ve arrested me?”

Feeney shuddered. “No, and, sir, please, please don’t tell her, because
I think she’d never let me into the house ever again.”

Vimes walked over to the door and said to the slot, “I shall be honored
by your hospitality, Mistress Upshot.”

There was a nervous giggle from the other side of the slot, and Feeney’s
mother managed to say, “I’m sorry to say we have no silver plates, your
highness!”

At home Vimes and Sybil ate off serviceable earthenware, cheap,
practical and easy to keep clean. He said aloud, “I’m sorry you don’t
have any silver plates, too, Mistress Upshot, and I’ll have a set sent
to you directly.”

There was something like a scuffle from the other side of the slot, at
the same time as Feeney said, “I beg your pardon? Have you gone mad,
sir?”

Well, that would help, Vimes thought. “We’ve got hundreds of damn silver
plates up at the Hall, my lad. Bloody useless, they make the food cold
and they turn black as soon as your back is turned. We appear to be
overrun with silver spoons, too. I’ll see what we’ve got.”

“You can’t do that, sir! She gets scared of having valuables in the
house!”

“Do you have much theft hereabouts, chief constable?” said Vimes,
emphasizing the last two words.

Mr. Feeney opened the door of the lockup and picked up his mother, who
had apparently been stunned by the possibility of owning silver plates,
brushed her down and said over her shoulder, “No, sir, the reason being
no one has anything to steal. My mum always told me money can’t buy you
happiness, sir.”

Yes, Vimes thought, so did my ma, but she was glad enough when I gave
her my first wages, because it meant we could have a meal with meat in
it, even if we didn’t know what kind of meat it was. That’s happiness,
isn’t it? Blimey, the lies we tell ourselves…

When a blushing Mistress Upshot had gone to fetch the meal, Vimes said,
“Between ourselves, chief constable, do you believe that I’m guilty of
murder?”

“No, sir!” said Feeney instantly.

“You said that very quickly, young man. Are you going to say that it’s
copper’s instinct? Because I get the impression you ain’t been a copper
long and haven’t had much to do. I’m no expert, but I don’t reckon pigs
try lying to you very much either.”

Feeney took a deep breath. “Well, sir,” he said calmly, “my granddad was
a wily old bird and he could read people like books. He used to walk me
around the area introducing me to people, sir, and then as they strolled
along he’d tell me their stories, like the one about the man who’d been
caught in flagrante delicto with a common barnyard fowl…”

Vimes listened openmouthed as the pink, well-scrubbed face talked about
the gentle, fragrant landscape as if it was populated by devils from the
most insidious pit. He unrolled a crime sheet that badly needed the
laundry: no major murders, just nastiness, silliness and all the crimes
of human ignorance and stupidity. Of course, where there were people
there was crime. It just seemed out of place in the slow world of big
spaces and singing birds. And yet he’d smelled it as soon as he was here
and now he was in the middle of it.

“You get a tingle,” said Feeney. “That’s what my dad told me. He said
watch, listen and keep your eye on every man. There never was a good
policeman who didn’t have a slice of villain somewhere in him, and this
will call to you. It will say ‘This man has something to hide,’ or ‘This
man is far more frightened than he should be’ or ‘This man is acting too
cocky by half because underneath he’s a bag of nerves.’ It will call to
you.”

Vimes opted for admiration rather than shock, but not too much
admiration. “Well, Mr. Feeney, I reckon your grandfather and your dad
got it right. So I’m sending the right signals, am I?”

“No, sir, none at all, sir. My granddad and my dad could go like that
sometimes. Totally blank. It makes people nervous.” Feeney cocked his
head on one side and said, “Just a moment, sir, I think we have a little
problem…”

The door to the lockup clanged open as Chief Constable Upshot skidded
around to the rear of the squat little building. Something yelped and
squealed and then Vimes, sitting peacefully inside, suddenly had goblins
on his lap. In fact it was only one goblin, but one goblin is more than
sufficient at close quarters. There was the smell, to begin with, and
not to end with either, because it appeared to permeate the world. Yet
it wasn’t the stink—although heavens knew that they stank with all the
stinks an organic creature could generate—no, anyone who walked the
streets of Ankh-Morpork was more or less immune to stinks, and indeed
there was now a flourishing, if that was the word, hobby of
stink-collecting,* and Dave, of Dave’s Pin and Stamp Emporium, was
extending the sign over his shop again. You couldn’t bottle (or whatever
it was the collectors did) the intrinsic smell of a goblin because it
wasn’t so much a stink as a sensation, the sensation in fact that your
dental enamel was being evaporated and any armor you might have was
rusting at some speed. Vimes punched at the thing but it hung on with
arms and legs together, screaming in what was theoretically a voice,
that sounded like a bag of walnuts being jumped on. And yet it wasn’t
attacking—unless you considered the biological warfare. It clung with
its legs and waved its arms, and Vimes just managed to stop Feeney
braining it with his official truncheon, because, once you paid
attention, the goblin was using words, and the words were: Ice! Ice! We
want just ice! Demand! Demand just ice! Right? Just ice!

Feeney, on the other hand, was shouting, “Stinky, you little devil, I
told you what I’d do to you if ever I saw you stealing the pigswill
again!” He looked at Vimes as if for support. “They can give you
horrible diseases, sir!”

“Will you stop dancing around with that damn weapon, boy!” Vimes looked
down at the goblin now struggling in his grasp, and said, “As for you,
you little bugger, stop your racket!”

The little room went silent, apart from the dying strains of “They eat
their own babies!” from Feeney and “Just ice!” from the goblin, simply
and accurately named as “Stinky.”

Not panicking now, the goblin pointed a claw at Vimes’s left wrist,
looked him in the face, and said, “Just ice?” It was a plea. The claw
tugged at his leg. “Just ice?” The creature hobbled to the door and
looked up at the glowering chief constable and then turned to Vimes with
an expression that bored into the man’s face and said very deliberately,
“Just ice? Mr. Po-leess-maan?”

Vimes pulled out his snuffbox. You could say this for the brown stuff:
all that ceremony you went through before you took a pinch gave you
rather more thinking time than lighting a cigar. It also got people’s
attention. He said, “Well now, chief constable, here is somebody asking
you for justice. What are you going to do about it?”

Feeney looked uncertain, and took refuge in a certainty. “It’s a
stinking goblin!”

“Do you often see them around the lockup?” said Vimes, keeping his tone
mild.

“Only Stinky,” said Feeney, glowering at the goblin, who stuck out his
worm-like tongue. “He’s always hanging around. The rest of them know
what happens if they’re caught thieving around here!”

Vimes glanced down at the goblin and recognized a badly set broken leg
when he saw one. He turned the snuffbox over and over in his hands, and
did not look at the young man. “But surely a policeman wonders what has
happened for a wretched thing like this to walk right up to the law and
risk being maimed…again?”

It was a leap in the dark, but, hell, he had leapt so often that the
dark was a trampoline.

His arm itched. He tried to ignore it, but just for a moment there was a
dripping cave in front of him, and no other thought except of terrible
endless vengeance. He blinked and the goblin was tugging at his sleeve
again and Feeney was getting angry.

“I didn’t do that! I didn’t see it done!”

“But you know it happens, yes?” And again Vimes remembered the darkness
and the thirst for vengeance, in fact vengeance itself made sapient and
hungry. And the little bugger had touched him on that arm. It all came
back, and he wished that it hadn’t, because while all coppers must have
a bit of villain in them, no copper should walk around with a piece of
demon as a tattoo.

Feeney had lost his anger now, because he was frightened. “Bishop Scour
says they’re demonic and insolent creations made as a mockery of
mankind,” he said.

“I don’t know about any bishops,” said Vimes, “but something is going on
here and I can feel the tingle, felt it on the day I came here, and it’s
tingling on my land. Listen to me, chief constable. When you apprehend
the suspect you should take the trouble to ask them if they did it, and
if they say no you must ask them if they can prove their innocence. Got
it? You’re supposed to ask. Understand? And my answers are, in order,
hell no and hell yes!”

The little clawed hand scratched at Vimes’s shirt again. “Just ice?”

Vimes thought, Oh well, I thought I’d been gentle with the lad up until
now. “Chief constable, something is wrong, and you know that something
is wrong, and you are all alone, so you’d better enlist the help of
anyone you know that can be trusted. Such as me, for example, in which
case I’ll be the suspect who, having been bailed on my own recognizance
of one penny,” and here Vimes handed a partly corroded small copper disc
to the astonished Feeney, “has been requested to help you with your
inquiries, such as they are, and that will be all fine and dandy and in
accordance with the standard work on police procedure, which, my lad,
was written by me, and you had better believe it. I’m not the law, no
policeman is the law. A policeman is just a man, but when he wakes up in
the morning it is the law that is his alarm clock. I’ve been nice and
kind to you up until now, but did you really think I was going to be
spending the night in a pig pen? Time to be a real copper, lad. Do the
right thing and fudge the paperwork afterward, like I do.”

Vimes looked down at the persistent little goblin. “Okay, Stinky, lead
the way.”

“But my old mum is just coming out with your dinner, commander!”
Feeney’s voice was a wail, and Vimes hesitated. It didn’t do to upset an
old mum.

It was time to let the duke out. Vimes never normally bowed to anybody,
but he bowed to Mistress Upshot, who almost dropped her tray in ecstatic
confusion. “I am mortified, my dear Mistress Upshot, to have to ask you
to keep your Man Dog Suck Po warm for us for a little while, because
your son here, a credit to his uniform and to his parents, has asked me
to assist him in an errand of considerable importance, which can only be
entrusted to a young man with integrity, as your lad here.”

As the woman very nearly melted in pride and happiness Vimes pulled the
young man away.

“Sir, the dish was Bang Suck Duck, we only have Man Dog Suck Po on
Sundays. With mashed carrots.”

Vimes shook Mrs. Upshot warmly by the hand and said, “I look forward to
tasting it later, my dear Mistress Upshot, but if you’ll excuse me, your
son is a stickler for his police work, as I’m sure you know.”

Colonel Charles Augustus Makepeace had long ago, with the expertise of a
lifelong strategist, decided to let Letitia have her way in all things.
It saved so much trouble and left him able to potter around in his
garden, take care of his dragons and to occasionally go trout fishing, a
pastime that he loved. He rented half a mile of stream, but was sadly
now finding it difficult to keep running fast enough. Nowadays he spent
a lot of time in his library, working on the second volume of his
memoirs, keeping from under his wife’s feet and not getting involved.

Until this moment he had been quite happy that she had the role of
chairman of the magistrates because it kept her away from home for hours
at a time. He had never been very much of a one for thinking in terms of
good or bad and guilty or not guilty. He had learned to think in terms
of us and them and dead and not dead.

And therefore he wasn’t exactly listening to the group sitting around
the long table at the other end of the library, talking in worried
voices, but nevertheless he couldn’t help overhearing.

She had signed that damned document! He ought to have tried to talk her
out of it, but he knew where that would have ended. Commander Vimes!
Okay, by all accounts the man was the sort to rush in, and maybe he did
have a scrap with what’shisname the blacksmith, who wasn’t too bad a
cove in his way, bit of a hothead of course but he’d made a damn good
dragon prod only the other day at quite a reasonable price. Vimes? Not a
killer, surely. That’s one thing you learned in the military. You don’t
last long if you’re a killer. Killing as duty called was another thing
entirely. Letitia had listened to that unspeakable lawyer and they had
all agreed that it be signed simply because that wretched Rust fella
wanted it.

He opened this month’s edition of Fang and Fire. Occasionally somebody
lowered their voice, which you couldn’t help thinking was damn
insulting, given that they were sitting in a chap’s library and
especially when the chap hadn’t been consulted. But he didn’t protest.
He had long ago learned not to protest, and so he kept his eyes focused
on the pullout feature on flame-retardant incubators, holding it in
front of him as if to ward off evil.

However, among the words he didn’t hear were, “Of course, he only
married her for her money, you know.” That was his wife’s voice. Then,
“I heard she was desperate to find a husband.” The curiously sharp tone
of that voice identified its owner as Miss Pickings, who, the colonel
couldn’t help noting, as he stared grimly at a full-page advertisement
for asbestos kennels, had clearly been in no hurry to find a husband
herself.

The colonel was, by inclination, a live-and-let-live personality and,
frankly, if a gel wanted to go around with another gel who wears a shirt
and tie, trains horses and has a face like a bulldog licking vinegar off
a thistle, then it was entirely her business. After all, he told
himself, what about old “Beefy” Jackson, eh? Wore a dress every night in
the mess and rather flowery aftershave for a chap, but when the call to
arms came he could fight like a bloody demon. Funny old world.

He tried to find his place on the page again, but was interrupted by the
Very Reverend Mouser. He never could get on with padres, couldn’t see
the point. “I find it very suspicious that the Ramkin family have turned
up here after so many years, don’t you? I keep reading about Vimes in
the newspaper, not the kind of person you can imagine as simply taking a
holiday.”

“According to Gravid, he is known as Vetinari’s terrier,” said Letitia.

At the other end of the room her husband thrust his head even deeper
into his magazine so as not to snigger. Gravid! Who would call their
child Gravid? No one who had ever kept dragons or fish, that was
certain. Of course, there was such a thing as a dictionary, but then the
old Lord Rust had never been the kind of man to open a book if he could
help it. The colonel tried to contemplate an article on the treatment of
Zig-Zag Throat in older males and the wife of his heart continued,
“Well, we don’t want any of Vetinari’s nonsense here. Apparently, his
lordship rather enjoys allowing Vimes to break wind in the halls of the
mighty. Apparently, Vimes is no respecter of rank. Indeed, quite the
reverse. And indeed, it would seem that he is prepared to ambush a
decent working man.”

Funny, thought the colonel, first time I ever heard her call the smith
anything other than a blasted nuisance. It seemed to him that the gossip
around the table was trite, artificial, like the conversation of raw
recruits on the eve of their first battle. He thought, there’s a warrant
out for Commander Vimes, hero of Koom Valley (Bloody good show!
Wonderful execution. Peace in our time between brother troll and brother
dwarf and that sort of thing. Just the job! I’ve seen too much killing
in my time) and now you are going to put him out of a job and a
reputation, just because that greasy lad with a name like a pregnant
frog has charmed you into doing so.

“I understand he has a very violent nature,” said, oh, what was his
name? Bit of a bad hat in the colonel’s opinion. Bought a big villa up
near Overhang, one of Rust’s cronies. Never seemed to do any work. What
was his name, ah yes, Edgehill, not a man that you would trust behind
you or in front of you, but they’d sworn him in even so.

“And he was just a street kid and a drunkard!” said Letitia. “What do
you think of that?”

The colonel paid careful attention to his magazine while his unspoken
thoughts said, Sounds jolly good to me, my dear. All I got when I
married you was the promise of a half-share in your dad’s fish and chip
shop when I left the service, and I never even got that.

“Everybody knows that his ancestor killed a king, so I can’t imagine a
Vimes would jib at killing a blacksmith,” said the Honorable Ambrose.
Bit of a mystery, this one. Something to do with shipping. Sent out from
the city to lie low here because of something to do with a girl. And the
colonel, who spent a lot of time thinking,* had some time ago wondered
to himself how, in these modern days, you got banished from the city
because of a girl, and instinct had told him that possibly it had
something to do with the age of the girl. After incubating that thought
for a while, the colonel had written to his old chum “Jankers” Robinson,
who always knew a thing or two about this and that and one thing and
another and who was now some political wallah in the palace. He had made
an enquiry, as one might, of his friend whom he had once dragged to
safety over the pommel of his saddle before a Klatchian scimitar got
him, and had received a little note with nothing more than “Yes indeed,
under-age, hushed up at great expense,” and after that the colonel had
taken great care never to shake the bastard’s hand again.

Blithely unaware of the thoughts of the colonel, the Honorable Ambrose,
who always seemed to be slightly bigger than his clothes—said clothes
being of a fashion more suited to somebody twenty years his
junior—sneered, “Frankly, I think we’re doing the world a service. They
say that he favors dwarfs and all kinds of low-life. You might expect
anything of a man like that!”

Yes, you might, thought the colonel.

And Miss Pickings said, “But we haven’t done anything wrong…Have we?”

The colonel turned a page and smoothed it down with military exactitude.
He thought, Well, you all condone smuggling when the right people are
doing it because they’re chums, and when they aren’t they’re heavily
fined. You apply one law for the poor and none for the rich, my dear,
because the poor are such a nuisance.

He felt eyes suddenly upon him because marital telepathy is a terrible
thing. His wife said, “It doesn’t do any harm, everybody does it.” Her
head swung round again as her husband turned the page, his eyes fixedly
on the type as he thought, as noiselessly as his brain could contrive:
and of course there was the…incident, a few years ago. Not good, that.
Not good. Not good when little babies of any sort are taken away from
mothers. Not good at all. And you all know it and it worries you, and
well it should.

The room was silent for a moment and then Mrs. Colonel continued. “There
will not be any problems. Young Lord Rust has promised me. We have
rights, after all.”

“I blame that wretched blacksmith,” said Miss Pickings. “He keeps
bringing it back into people’s memories, him and that damn writing
woman.”

Mrs. Colonel bridled at this. “I have no idea what you’re talking about,
Miss Pickings. Legally nothing wrong has happened here.” Her head
swiveled toward her husband. “Are you all right, dear?” she demanded.

For a moment he looked as though he wasn’t and then the colonel said,
“Oh, yes, dear. Right as rain. Right as rain.” But his thoughts
continued: you have partaken in what is, I strongly suggest, a cynical
attempt to ruin the career of a very good man.

“I heard you coughing.” It sounded like an accusation.

“Oh, just a bit of dust or something, dear, right as rain. Right as
rain.” And then he slammed his magazine on to the table. Standing up, he
said, “When I was nothing but a subaltern, dear, one of the first things
I learned was that you never give away your position by frantic firing.
I think I know the type of your Commander Vimes. Young Lord Rust may be
safe, with his money and contacts, but I doubt very much that you all
will be. Who knows what would have happened if you hadn’t been so hasty?
What’s a bit of smuggling? You’ve just pulled the dragon’s tail and made
him angry!”

When his wife regained control of her tongue, she said, “How dare you,
Charles!”

“Oh, quite easily, as it turns out, dear,” said the colonel, smiling
happily. “A bit of smuggling might be considered a peccadillo, but not
when you’re supposed to be upholding the law. It baffles me that none of
you seems to realize that. If you have any sense, ladies and gentlemen,
you will explain that whole unfortunate goblin event to his grace right
now. After all, your chum Gravid organized it. The only little problem
is that you allowed him to do it, as I recall, without so much as a
murmur.”

“But it was not illegal,” said his wife icily.

Her husband didn’t move, but in some ineffable sense he was suddenly
taller. “I think things got a bit tangled: you see, you thought about
things as being legal or illegal. Well, I’m just a soldier and never was
a very good one, but it’s my opinion you were so worried about legal and
illegal that you never stopped to think about whether it was right or
wrong. And now, if you will excuse me, I’m going down to the pub.”

Automatically, his wife said, “No, dear, you know drink doesn’t agree
with you.”

The colonel was all smiles. “This evening I intend to settle my
differences with drink and make it my friend.”

The rest of the magistrates looked at Mrs. Colonel, who glared at her
husband. “I’ll talk to you about this later, Charles,” she growled.

To her surprise, his smile did not change. “Yes, dear, I suspect you
will, but I think you’ll find that I won’t be listening. Good evening to
you all.” There was a click as the door shut behind him. There should
have been a slam, but some doors never quite understand the situation.

The goblin was already moving quite fast with a dot-and-carry-one gait
that was deceptively speedy. Vimes was surprised to find that Feeney
made heavy weather of the little jog toward—he was not
surprised—Hangman’s Hill. He could hear the boy wheezing slightly.
Perhaps you didn’t need to be all that fast to overtake a wayward pig,
but you needed to be very fast indeed to catch up with a young troll
blizzarded to the eyeballs with Slice and you needed lots of stamina to
overtake him and slap the cuffs on him before he came down enough to try
to twist your head off. Policing was obviously very different in the
country.

In the country, there is always somebody watching you, he thought as
they sped along. Well, there was always somebody watching you in the
city, too, but that was generally in the hope that you might drop dead
and they could run off with your wallet. They were never interested. But
here he thought he could feel many eyes on him. Maybe they belonged to
squirrels or badgers, or whatever the damn things were that Vimes heard
at night; gorillas, possibly.

He had no idea what he was going to see, but certainly didn’t expect to
find the top of the hill bright with lines of rope, painted yellow. He
gave it only a second’s glance, however. With their backs to one of the
trees, and looking very apprehensive, were three goblins. One of them
stood up, thus bringing its head and therefore its eyes to a level in
the vicinity of Vimes’s groin, not a good position to find himself. It
held up a wrinkled hand and said, “Vimes? Hang!”

Vimes stared down at it and then at Feeney. “What does he mean, ‘Hang”?”

“Never been quite sure,” said Feeney. “Something like, have a nice day,
I think, but only in goblin.”

“Vimes!” the old goblin continued. “It said be, you be po-leess-maan. It
be big po-leess-maan! If po-leess-maan, then just ice! But just ice it
be no! And when dark inside dark! Dark moving! Dark must come, Vimes!
Dark rises! Just ice!”

Vimes had no idea of the sex of the speaker, or even its age. Dress
wasn’t a clue: goblins apparently wore anything that could be tied on.
Its companions were watching him unblinkingly. They had stone axes,
flint, vicious stuff, but it lost its edge after a couple of blows,
which was no consolation when you were bleeding from the neck. He had
heard that they were berserk fighters, too. Oh, and what was the other
thing people said? Ah yes, whatever you do, don’t let them scratch you…

“You want justice, do you? Justice for what?”

The goblin speaker stared at him and said, “Come with me po-leess-maan,”
the words rolling out like a curse, or, at least, a threat. The speaker
turned and began to walk solemnly down the far side of the hill. The
other three goblins, including the one known to Vimes as Stinky, did not
move.

Feeney whispered, “This could be a trap, sir.”

Vimes rolled his eyes and sneered, “You think so, do you? I thought it
was probably an invitation to a magical show featuring the Amazing Bonko
and Doris and the Collapsing Unicycle Brothers with Fido the Cat. What’s
this yellow rope all about, Mr. Upshot?”

“Police cordon, sir. My mum knitted it for me.”

“Oh yes, I can see she’s managed to work the word PLICE in black in
there several times, too.”

“Yes, sir, sorry about the spelling, sir,” said Feeney, clearly spooked
by the stares. He went on, “There was blood all over the ground, sir, so
I scraped some into a clean jam jar, just in case.”

Vimes paid that no attention, because the two goblin guards had unfolded
and were standing up. Stinky beckoned Vimes to walk ahead of them. Vimes
shook his head, folded his arms and turned to Feeney.

“Let me tell you what you thought, Mr. Upshot. You acted on information
received, didn’t you? And you heard that the blacksmith and I indulged
in a bout of fisticuffs outside the pub the other night, and that is
true. No doubt you were also told that at some time later someone heard
a conversation in which he arranged to meet me up at this place, yes?
Don’t bother to answer, I can see it in your face—you haven’t quite got
the copper’s deadpan yet. Has Mr. Jefferson gone missing?”

Feeney gave up. “Yes, Mr. Vimes.”

He didn’t deserve or perhaps he did deserve, the force with which Vimes
turned on him.

“You will not call me Mr. Vimes, lad, you ain’t earned the right. You
call me ‘Sir’ or ‘Commander,’ or even ‘Your grace’ if you’re dumb enough
to do so, understand? I could have sent the blacksmith home walking very
strangely if I’d had a mind to do so the other night. He’s a big man but
no street hero. But I let him get the steam out of his tubes and calm
down without losing face. Yes, he did say he wanted to meet me up here
last night. When I came up here, with a witness, there was blood on the
ground which I will warrant is goblin blood, and certainly no sign of
any blacksmith. You had a bloody stupid case against me when you came up
to my house and it’s still a bloody stupid case. Any questions?”

Feeney looked down at his feet. “No, sir, sorry, sir.”

“Good, I’m glad. Think of this as a training experience, my lad, and it
won’t cost you a penny. Now, these goblins seem to want us to follow
them and I intend to do so, and I also intend that you will come with
me, understood?”

Vimes looked at the two goblin guards. An ax was waved in a half-hearted
sort of way, indicating that they should indeed be traveling. They set
off and he could hear sorrowful Feeney trying to be brave, but
broadcasting anxiety.

“They’re not going to touch us, kid, first because if they had intended
to do that they’d have done it already, and second, they want something
from me.”

Feeney moved a little closer. “And what would that be, sir?”

“Justice,” said Vimes. “And I think I have a premonition about what that
is going to mean…”

Sometimes people asked Commander Vimes why Sergeant Colon and Corporal
Nobbs were still on the strength, such as it was, of the modern
Ankh-Morpork City Watch, given that Nobby occasionally had to be held
upside down and shaken to reclaim small items belonging to other people,
while Fred Colon had actually cultivated the ability to walk his beat
with his eyes closed, and end up, still snoring, back at Pseudopolis
Yard, sometimes with graffiti on his breastplate.

To Lord Vetinari, Commander Vimes had put forward three defenses. The
first was that both of them had an enviable knowledge of the city and
its inhabitants, official and otherwise, that rivaled Vimes’s own.

The second was the traditional urinary argument. It was better to have
them inside pissing out than outside pissing in. It was at least easy to
keep an eye on them.

And not least, oh my word not least, they were lucky. Many a crime had
been solved because of things that had fallen on them, tried to kill
them, tripped one of them up, been found floating in their lunch, and in
one case had tried to lay its eggs up Nobby’s nose.

And so it was that, today, whatever god or other force it might be that
regarded them as its playthings directed their steps to the corner of
Cheapside and Rhyme Street, and the fragrant Emporium of Bewilderforce
Gumption.*

Sergeant Colon and Corporal Nobbs, as is the way with policemen, entered
the building by the back door and were greeted by Mr. Gumption with that
happy but somewhat glassy smile with which a trader greets an old
acquaintance who he knows will end up getting merchandise with a
discount of one hundred per cent.

“Why, Fred, how nice to see you again!” he said, while awakening the
mystic third eye developed by all small shopkeepers, especially those
who see Nobby Nobbs coming into the shop.

“We were patrolling in the area, Bewilderforce, and I thought I’d drop
in to get my tobacco and see how you were managing, with all this fuss
about the tax and everything?”

The sergeant had to speak up to be heard above the rumbling of the snuff
mill, and the carts that were moving across the factory floor in a
stream. Rows of women at tables were packing snuff and—here, he leaned
sideways to get a better view—the cigarette production line was also
a-bustle.

Sergeant Colon looked around. Policemen always look, on the basis that
there is always something to see. Of course, sometimes they may find it
sensible to forget that they have seen anything, at least officially.
Mr. Gumption had a new tie pin, in which a diamond flashed. His shoes
were also clearly new—bespoke, if Fred Colon was any judge—and a barely
noticeable sniff suggested the wearing of, let’s see now, oh yes, Cedar
Fragrance Pour Hommes, from Quirm at $15 a pop.

He said, “How’s business doing? Is the new tax hitting you at all?”

Mr. Gumption’s visage flew into the expression of a hard-working man
sorely pressed by the machinations of politics and fate. He shook his
head sadly. “We’re barely making ends meet, Fred. Lucky to break even at
the end of the day.”

Oh, and a gold tooth, too, thought Sergeant Colon. I nearly missed that.
Out loud he said, “I’m very sorry to hear that, Bewilderforce, I really
am. Allow me to raise your profits by expending two dollars in the
purchase of my usual three ounces of twist tobacco.”

Fred Colon proffered his wallet and Mr. Gumption, with a scolding noise,
waved it away. It was a ritual as old as merchants and policemen, and it
allowed the world to keep on turning. He cut a length of tobacco from
the coil on the marble counter, wrapped it quickly and expertly, and as
an afterthought reached down and came up with a large cigar, which he
handed to the sergeant.

“Try one of these handsome smokes, Fred, just in, not local, made on the
plantation for our valued customers. No no, my pleasure, I insist,” he
added, as Fred made grateful noises. “Always nice to see the Watch in
here, you know that.”

Actually, Mr. Gumption thought, as he watched the departing policemen,
that was pretty mild: all that the Nobbs creature had done was stare
around.

“They must be coining it,” said Nobby Nobbs as they ambled onward. “Did
you see the ‘staff wanted’ note in their window? And he was writing out
a list of prices on the counter. He’s lowering them! He must have a good
deal going on with the plantation people, that’s all I can say.”

Sergeant Colon sniffed the big fat cigar, the fattest he had ever seen,
which smelled so good it was probably illegal, and he felt the tingle,
the feeling that he had walked into something that was a lot bigger than
it seemed, the feeling that if you pulled a thread something large would
unravel. He rolled the cigar between his fingers the way he had seen
connoisseurs do. In truth, Sergeant Colon was, when it came to tobacco
products, something of a bottom-feeder, cheapness being the overriding
consideration, and the protocol of cigars was unfamiliar to a man who
very much enjoyed a good length of chewing tobacco. What was the other
thing he had seen posh types do? Oh yes, you had to roll it in your
fingers and hold it up to your ear. He had no idea why this had to be
done, but he did it anyway.

And swore.

And dropped it on the ground…

The track from the top of Hangman’s Hill went beyond the trees and down,
mostly through furze bushes and rocky outcrops, with the occasional
patch of raw and useless soil, all substance eroded away. Wild land,
wasteland, home to skinny rabbits, hopeless mice, the occasional
concussed rat, and goblins.

And there among the bushes was the entrance to a cave. A human would
have to bend double to get into that fetid hole and would be an easy
target. But Vimes knew, as he ducked through, that he was safe. He knew
that. He had suspected it out in the daylight, and down in the darkness
he knew. The knowledge was almost physical as wings of darkness spread
over him, and he heard the sounds of the cave, every sound.

He suddenly knew the cave, all the way down to the place where water
could be found, the fungus and mushroom gardens, the pathetically empty
storerooms, and the kitchen. These were human translations, of course.
Goblins generally ate where they could and slept where they fell asleep;
they had no real concept of a room with one particular purpose. He knew
this now as if he had known it all his life, and he had never before
been in any place that a goblin would call home.

But this was the dark, and Vimes and the dark had an…understanding,
didn’t they? At least, that’s what the dark thought. What Vimes thought,
unprosaically, was Damn, here we go again.

He was prodded in the small of his back, and he heard Feeney gasp. Vimes
turned to a grinning goblin and said, “Try that one more time, sunshine,
and I’ll give you a smack around the head, understand?” And that was
what he said, and that was what he heard himself say…Except that
something, not exactly another voice, climbed along his words like a
snake coiling itself around a tree, and both his guards dropped their
weapons and bolted back into the daylight. It was instant. They didn’t
yelp or shout. They wanted to save their breath for running.

“Great hells, Commander Vimes! That was bloody magical!” said Feeney, as
he bent to grope for the fallen axes. Vimes watched in the thick
darkness as he saw the boy’s hands scrabbling and, by luck, find them.

“Drop them! I said drop them right now!”

“But we’re unarmed!”

“Don’t you bloody argue with me, boy!” There were a couple of thumps as
the axes hit the ground.

Vimes breathed again. “Now, we’re going to see that nice senior goblin,
you understand, and we walk without fear because we are the law, you
understand? And the law can go everywhere in pursuit of its inquiries.”

The headroom increased as they walked onward, until Vimes was able to
stand fully upright. Feeney, on the other hand, was having difficulties.
Behind Vimes there was a chorus of thumps, scrapes and words that dear
old mums should not know about, let alone hear. Vimes had to stop and
wait for the boy to catch up, stubbing his feet on easily avoidable
outcrops and banging his head where the ceiling dipped briefly.

“Come on, chief constable!” Vimes shouted. “A copper should have good
night vision! You should eat more carrots with your Bang Sung Suck Dog
or whatever!”

“It’s pitch black, sir! I can’t see my hand in front of my face— Ouch!”
Feeney had walked directly into Vimes. Light dawned, although not on
Feeney.

Vimes looked around the meandering cave. It was lit as if by daylight.
There were no torches, no candles, just a pervading, moderately bright
light—the light he had seen before, years ago now, in a cave, a big
cave, far away, and he knew what it meant: he was seeing darkness,
probably better than the goblins did. The dark had become incredibly
light on that day when Vimes underground, had fought creatures—walking,
speaking creatures—that made their home away from the light, and had
hatched dark plans. But Vimes had fought them, and he had won, and
because of that, the Koom Valley Accord had been written and signed, and
the oldest war in the world had ended in, if not peace, then a place
where the seeds of peace could hopefully be planted. It was good to know
that, because out of the darkness Vimes had acquired…a companion. The
dwarfs had one name for it: the Summoning Dark. And they had any amount
of explanations for what it was: a demon, a lost god, a curse, a
blessing, vengeance made flesh, except that it had no flesh other than
the flesh it borrowed, a law unto itself, a killer but sometimes a
protector, or something that no one could find the right words for. It
could travel through rock, water, air and flesh and, for all Vimes knew,
through time. After all, what limits can you put on a creature made of
nothing? Yes, he had met it and when they parted, for amusement,
playfulness, mischief or simply reward the Summoning Dark had put its
mark on him, drifting through him and leaving that little glowing
tattoo.

Vimes pulled up his shirt sleeve and there it was, and it seemed to be
brighter. Sometimes he met it in dreams, where they nodded at one
another in respect and then went their separate ways. Months, even years
might pass between meetings and he might think it had gone for good, but
its mark was on his forearm. Sometimes it itched. All in all, it was
like having a nightmare on a leash. And now it was giving him sight in
the darkness. But hold on, this was a goblin burrow, not a dwarf cave!
And his own thoughts came right back at him with that slight overtone,
as if they were a duet: “Yes, but goblins steal everything, commander.”

Right here and now, it appeared that goblins had stolen away. The floor
of the cave was covered with debris, rubbish and things that presumably
goblins thought were important, which would probably mean everything,
bearing in mind they religiously collected their own snot. He could see
the old goblin beckoning him to follow before disappearing. There was a
door ahead of him, of goblin manufacture, as was borne out by its look
of rottenness and the fact that it was hanging by one hinge, which broke
when Vimes gave the door a push. Behind him Feeney said, “What was that?
Please, sir, I can’t see a thing!”

Vimes walked across to the boy and tapped him on the shoulder, causing
him to jump.

“Mr. Upshot, I’ll take you up to the entrance so that you can go home,
okay?”

He felt the boy shudder. “No, sir! I’d rather stay with you, if it’s all
the same to you…Please?”

“But you can’t see in the dark, lad!”

“I know, sir. I’ve got some string in my pocket. My granddad said a good
copper should always have a piece of string.” His voice was trembling.

“It is generally useful, yes,” said Vimes, carefully picking it out of
the boy’s pocket. “It’s amazing how helpless a suspect can be with his
thumbs tied together. Are you sure you wouldn’t feel better up in the
fresh air?”

“Sorry, sir, but if it’s all the same to you I think the safest place to
be right now is behind you, sir.”

“You really can’t see a thing, lad?”

“Not a blessed thing, sir. It’s like I’ve gone blind, sir.”

In Vimes’s opinion the young man was about to go postal, and maybe
tethering him to Vimes was better than hearing him knock himself out in
an attempt to flee.

“You’re not blind, lad, it’s just that all that night duty I’ve
done…well, it looks as if I’m better than I thought at seeing in the
dark.”

Feeney shuddered again at Vimes’s touch, but together they succeeded in
linking Chief Constable Upshot to Vimes with about six feet of hairy
string, which smelled of pig.

There were no goblins behind the broken door, but a fire was smouldering
fitfully, with a piece of blessedly unrecognizable meat on a spit above
it. A man might think that a goblin had found a reason to leave his tea
behind in a hurry. And talking of tea, there was a pot, which was to say
a rusty tin can, bubbling in the embers of the fire. Vimes sniffed at
it, and was surprised that it smelled of bergamot, and somehow the idea
of a goblin drinking posh tea with his pinkie extended managed,
temporarily, to overwhelm his incongruity functions. Well, it grew,
didn’t it? And goblins probably got thirsty, didn’t they? Nothing to
worry about. Although if he found a plate of delicate biscuits he would
definitely have to sit down and rest.

He walked on, the light never failing, goblins never appearing. The cave
complex certainly sloped downward, and there were still signs of goblins
everywhere, but of goblins themselves no sign, which in theory should be
a good thing, given that generally the first sign of a goblin would be
one landing on your head and trying to turn it into a bowling ball. And
then there was a flash of color in this drab subterranean landscape of
ices and browns: it was a bunch of flowers, or what had been a bunch
before it had been dropped. Vimes wasn’t an expert on flowers, and when
he bought them for Sybil, at maritally advisable intervals, he generally
stuck to a bunch of roses, or its seemingly acceptable equivalent, one
single orchid. He was vaguely aware of the existence of other flowers,
of course, which brightened up the place, to be sure, but he had never
been one for the names.

There were no roses here, no orchids either. These flowers had been
plucked from hedgerows and meadows and even included the scrawny plants
that managed to hang on and flower in the wilderness up above. Someone
had carried them. Someone had dropped them. Someone had been in a hurry.
Vimes could read it in the flowers. They had fallen from somebody’s open
hand, so that they spread back along their path like a comet tail. And
then more than one person had trampled them underfoot, but probably not
because they were chasing the aforesaid bouquet carrier, but by the look
of it because they wanted to go the way that he or she had run, and even
faster than he or she did.

There had been a stampede, in fact. Scared people running away. But
running away from what?

“You, Commander Vimes, you, the majesty of the law. See how I help you,
commander?” The familiarity of the voice annoyed him; it sounded too
much like his own voice. “But I’m here because they wanted me to come!”
he said to the cave in general. “I wasn’t intending to fight anybody!”
And in his head his own voice told him, “Oh my little ragtag, rubbish
people, who do not trust and are not trusted! Tread with care, Mr.
Policeman; the hated have no reason to love! Oh, the strange and secret
people, last and worst, born of rubbish, hopeless, bereft of god. The
best of luck to you, my brother…my brother in darkness…Do what you can
for them, Mr. Po-leess-maan.”

On Vimes’s wrist the sigil of the Summoning Dark glowed for a moment.

“I’m not your brother!” Vimes shouted. “I’m not a killer!” The words
echoed around the caves, but under them Vimes thought he felt something
slithering away. Could something with no body slither? Gods damn the
dwarfs and their subterranean folklore!

“Are you, er, all right, sir?” came the nervous voice of Feeney behind
him. “Er, you were shouting, sir.”

“I was just cussing because I banged my head on the ceiling, lad,” Vimes
lied. He had to deliver reassurance quickly before Feeney got so
unnerved that he might try to make a break for the exit out of panic.
“You’re doing very well, chief constable!”

“Only, I don’t like the dark, sir, never have…Er, do you think anyone’ll
worry if I have a wee up against the wall?”

“I should go ahead if I was you, lad. I don’t think anything could make
this place smell worse.”

Vimes heard some vague sounds behind him, and then Feeney said, in a
damp little voice, “Er, nature has taken its course, sir. Sorry, sir.”

Vimes smiled to himself. “Don’t worry, lad, you won’t be the first
copper to have to wring out his socks, and you won’t be the last,
either. I remember the first time I had to arrest a troll. Big fellow,
he was, a very nasty character. I was a bit damp around the socks that
day, and I don’t mind admitting it. Think of it as a kind of baptism!”
Keep it jolly, he thought, make a joke of it. Don’t let him dwell on the
fact that we’re walking into the scene of a crime that he can’t see.
“Funny thing—that troll is now my best sergeant, and I’ve relied on him
for my life quite a few times. That just goes to show that you never
know, although what it is we never know I suspect we’ll never know.”

Vimes turned a corner and there were the goblins. He was glad that young
Feeney couldn’t see them. Strictly speaking, Vimes wished he couldn’t
see them either. There must have been a hundred of them, many of them
holding weapons. They were crude weapons, to be sure, but a flint ax
hitting your head does not need a degree in physics.

“Have we got somewhere, sir?” said Feeney behind him. “You’ve stopped
walking.”

They’re just standing there, Vimes thought, as if they’re on parade.
Just watching in silence, waiting for that silence to break.

“There are a few goblins in this cave, lad, and they’re watching us.”

After a few seconds of silence Feeney said, “Could you tell me exactly
what a ‘few’ means, sir?”

Dozens and dozens of owlish faces stared at Vimes without expression. If
the silence was going to be broken by the word “charge” then he and
Feeney would be smears on the floor, which was pretty smeared as it was.
Why did I come in here? Why did I think it was a good thing to do? Oh
well, the lad is a policeman, after all, and it isn’t as if he doesn’t
already have a clothing problem. He said, “I would say there are about a
hundred, lad, all heavily armed, as far as I can see, except for a
couple of broken-down ones right at the front; could be chieftains, I
suppose. Beards you could keep a rabbit in, and, by the look of it, may
have. It looks as if they are waiting for something.”

There was a pause before Feeney said, “It’s been an education, working
with you, sir.”

“Look,” said Vimes, “if I have to turn and run, just hang on, okay?
Running is another skill a policeman sometimes needs.”

He turned to the crowd of impassive goblins and said, “I am Commander
Vimes of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch! How can I help you?”

“Just ice!” The cry caused things to drop from the ceiling. It echoed
around the cave and echoed again, as cavern after cavern picked up the
shout, spun it around, and sent it back. Light rose as torches were
kindled. It took Vimes a few moments to realize this, because the light
he had seen, some curious artificial light that was probably in his
head, had been brighter, and mixed strangely with the smoky orange that
was now filling the cave.

“Well, sir, it looks as though they’re pleased to see us, yes?”

Feeney’s relief and hope should have been bottled and sold to despairing
people everywhere. Vimes just nodded, because the ranks were pulling
apart, leaving a pathway of sorts, at the end of which there was,
inarguably, a corpse. It was a mild relief to see that it was a goblin
corpse, but no corpse is good news, particularly when seen in a grimy
low light and especially for the corpse. And yet something inside him
exulted and cried Hallelujah!, because here was a corpse and he was a
copper and this was a crime and this place was smoky and dirty and full
of suspicious-looking goblins and here was a crime. His world. Yes, here
was his world.

In the Ankh-Morpork City Watch forensic laboratory Igor was brewing
coffee, to the accompaniment of distant rumblings, strange flashes of
light and the smell of electricity. At last he pulled the big red lever
and frothing brown liquid gurgled into a pot, to be subsequently
delivered into two mugs, one of which carried the slogan “Igorth htitch
you up,” while the other was emblazoned with “Dwarfs do it slightly
lower down.” He handed that one to Sergeant Cheery Littlebottom, whose
previous experience as an alchemist meant that she sometimes did duty in
the lab. But at this point the cosiness of morning coffee was
interrupted by Nobby Nobbs, towing Sergeant Colon behind him. “The
sergeant has had a bit of a shock, Igor, so I thought you might be able
to help him.”

“Well, I could give him another one,” Igor volunteered, as Fred Colon
slumped into a chair, which creaked ominously under his weight. The
chair had straps on it.

“Look,” said Nobby, “I’m not mucking about! You’ve heard of the tobacco
that counts? Well, he just had a cigar that cries. I’ve put it in this
’ere evidence bag, as per standing instructions.”

Cheery took the bag and peered inside. “It’s got egg sandwiches in it!
Honestly, Nobby, has anyone explained to you what forensic means?” On
the basis that she probably couldn’t make things actually worse, Cheery
emptied the sandwiches on to the table, where they were joined by one
cigar with mayonnaise. She wiped this down with some care and looked at
it. “Well, Nobby? I don’t smoke and I don’t know much about cigars, but
this one appears to be quite happy at the moment.”

“You have to hold it to your ear,” said Nobby helpfully.

Cheery did so, and said, “All I can hear is the crinkling of the
tobacco, which I suspect hasn’t been properly kept.” The dwarf held the
cigar away from her face and looked at it suspiciously, and then
wordlessly she handed it to Igor, who put it to his ear, or at least the
one that he was currently using, because you never know with Igors. They
looked at one another and Igor broke the silence. “There are such
things, I believe, as tobacco weevils?”

“I’m sure there are,” said Cheery, “but I doubt very much if
they…chuckle?”

“Chuckle? It sounded to me like somebody crying,” said Igor, as he
squinted at the bulging cigar, and added, “We should wash down the table
and clean a scalpel and use the number-two tweezers and two, no, make
that four sterilized surgical masks and gloves. It may be some kind of
unusual insect in there.”

“I held that cigar up to my ear,” said Nobby. “What kind of insect are
we talking about?”

“I’m not sure,” said Igor, “but generally the places in the world where
tobacco is cultivated are known for some remarkably dangerous ones. For
example, the yellow grass weevil of Howondaland has been known to enter
the skull via the ears, lay its eggs in the victim’s brain and leave the
poor victim hallucinating continuously until it has exited via the
nostrils. Death inevitably ensues. My cousin Igor has a tank full of
them. They’re very good at getting skulls scrupulously clean.” Igor
paused. “So I’m told, that is, although I personally cannot confirm
that.” He paused again, then added, “Of course.”

Nobby Nobbs headed for the door, but, unusually, Sergeant Colon did not
follow his friend. Instead, he said, “I’ll just stay with my fingers in
my ears, if it’s all the same to you?”

He craned his head to watch as Igor carefully pulled the cigar apart,
and said conversationally, “They say that the cigars made in foreign
parts are rolled on the thighs of young women. Personally I call that
disgusting.”

There was a tinkle and a glint* and something dropped onto the table.
Cheery leaned cautiously forward. It looked like a small expensive vial
for the most delicate alchemical experiments and yet, she thought later,
it seemed to have movement in it, movement while staying still. Igor
looked over her shoulder and said, “Oh.”

They looked at the vial in silence, silence that was soon broken by
Sergeant Colon. “That looks shiny,” he said. “Is it worth anything?”

Cheery Littlebottom raised her eyebrows at Igor, who shrugged. He said,
“Priceless, I should think, if you could find a buyer with enough money
and the, how shall I put it, right taste in ornamentation.”

“It’s an unggue pot,” Cheery said carefully. “A goblin ceremonial pot,
sarge.”

The dawn of understanding began to flow across Sergeant Colon’s gas
giant of a face. “Ain’t they the things they make to store all their
piss and shit in?” he said, backing away.

Igor cleared his throat and looked at Cheery as he said, icily, “Not
this type, if I’m right, and at least not down here on the Plains. Those
that feel themselves protected in the high mountains make pots, and also
use the unggue brushes and, of course, the unggue masks.” He looked
expectantly, but without any real hope, at the sergeant. Cheery, who had
known him for longer, said, “I understand, sarge, that the goblins on
the Plains think the ones in the mountains are rather strange. As for
this pot,” she hesitated, “I rather fear that this is a particularly
special one.”

“Well, it looks like the little buggers got that right,” said Fred
cheerfully, and, to Cheery’s horror, he snatched up the tiny pot. “It’s
mine, that’s why, far too good for a stinking goblin, but how come it
makes a noise?”

Sergeant Littlebottom looked at Igor’s expression, and, to prevent
trouble in the Forensic Department, she grabbed the sergeant’s arm and
dragged him out of the door, slamming it behind them.

“Sorry about this, sergeant, but I could see that Igor was becoming a
little bit agitated.”

Sergeant Colon brushed himself down with as much dignity as he could
muster, and said, “If it’s valuable, then I want it, thank you so very
much. After all, it was given to me in good faith. Right?”

“Well, of course that is so, sergeant, but you see, it already belongs
to a goblin.”

Sergeant Colon burst out laughing. “Them? What have they got to own
apart from big piles of crap?”

Cheery hesitated. Lazy and bombastic as Fred Colon was, the record
showed that, against all apparent evidence, he had been a helpful and
useful officer. She needed to be tactful.

“Sergeant, can I say right now that I appreciate all the help you have
given to me since I arrived in Pseudopolis Yard? I’ll always remember
you pointing out to me all those places where a watchman could stand out
of the wind and the worst of the rain, and I definitely committed to
memory the list of public houses who would be generous to a thirsty
copper after hours. And indeed I remember you telling me that a copper
should never take a bribe, and why a meal was not a bribe. I cherish
your approval, sergeant, since I know that by upbringing you are not
particularly happy about women in the Watch, and especially when one of
those women is of the dwarf persuasion. I realize that in the course of
your long career you have had to adapt your thinking to meet the new
circumstances. Therefore, I’m proud to be a colleague of yours, Sergeant
Colon, and I hope you’ll forgive me when I tell you that there are times
when you should shut up and get some new ideas in that big fat head of
yours rather than constantly reheating the old ones. You picked up a
little trinket, sergeant, and now it really is yours, more yours than I
think you can possibly imagine. I wish I could tell you more, but I only
know what the average dwarf knows about goblins; and I don’t know too
much about this type of unggue pot but I think, given the floral
decoration and its small size, that it is the one they call the soul of
tears, sergeant, and I think you have made your life suddenly very
interesting because— Can I ask you to put it down for just one moment,
please? I promise most sincerely that I won’t take it away from you.”

Colon’s somewhat piggy eyes looked at Cheery suspiciously, but he said,
“Well, if it gives you any satisfaction.” He went to put the pot on the
nearby windowsill and she saw him shake his hand. “Seems to be stuck
on.”

Cheery thought to herself, so it’s true. Out loud she said, “I’m very
sorry to hear that, sergeant, but you see, in that pot is the living
soul of a goblin child and it belongs to you. Congratulations!” she
said, trying to keep the rising sarcasm out of her voice.

That night Sergeant Colon dreamed he was in a cave with monsters
chattering away at him in their dreadful lingo. He put it down to the
beer, but it was funny the way he couldn’t let the little glittering
thing go. His fingers never quite managed it, however hard he tried.

The mother of Sam Vimes had managed, heavens know how, to scrape up the
penny a day necessary for him to be educated at the Dame School run by
Mistress Slightly.

Mistress Slightly was everything a dame should be. She was fat, and gave
the impression of being made of marshmallows, had a gentle understanding
of the fact that the bladders of small boys are almost as treacherous as
the bladders of old men, and, in general, taught the basics of the
alphabet with a minimum of cruelty and a maximum of marshmallow.

She kept geese, as any self-respecting dame should do. Later in life the
older Vimes had wondered if, underneath the endless layers of
petticoats, Mistress Slightly wore red-and-white spotted drawers. She
certainly had a mob cap and a laugh like rainwater going down a drain.
Invariably, while she gave lessons, she was peeling potatoes or plucking
geese.

There was still a place in his heart for old Mistress Slightly, who
occasionally had a mint in her pocket for a boy who knew his alphabet
and could say it backward. And you had to be grateful to someone who
taught you how not to be afraid.

She had one book in her tiny sitting room, and the first time she had
given it to young Sam Vimes to read he had got as far as page seven when
he froze. The page showed a goblin: the jolly goblin, according to the
text. Was it laughing, was it scowling, was it hungry, was it about to
bite your head off? Young Sam Vimes hadn’t waited to find out and had
spent the rest of the morning under a chair. These days he excused
himself by remembering that most of the other kids felt the same way.
When it came to the innocence of childhood, adults often got it wrong.
In any case, she had sat him on her always slightly damp knee after
class and made him really look at the goblin. It was made of lots of
dots! Tiny dots, if you looked closely. The closer you looked at the
goblin the more it wasn’t there. Stare it down and it lost all its power
to frighten. “I hear that they are wretched, badly made mortals,” the
dame had said sadly. “Half-finished folk, or so I hear. It’s only a
blessing this one had something to be jolly about.”

Later on, because he had been a good boy, she had made him blackboard
monitor, the first time anyone had entrusted him with anything. Good old
Mistress Slightly, Vimes thought, as he stood in this gloomy cave
surrounded by ranks of silent, solemn goblins. I’ll have a bag of
peppermints on your grave if I get out of this alive. He cleared his
throat. “Well now, lad, what we appear to have here is a goblin who has
been in a fight.” He looked down at the corpse, and then to Feeney.
“Perhaps you would care to tell me what you see?”

Feeney was one step away from trembling. “Well, sir, I surmise that it
is dead, sir.”

“And how do you deduce this, please?”

“Er, its head isn’t attached to its body, sir?”

“Yes, we generally recognize that as a clue that the corpse is indeed
dead. Incidentally, lad, you may as well take the string off. I wouldn’t
say this is the best light I’ve ever seen by, but it’ll do. Do you
notice anything else, chief constable?” Vimes tried to keep his tone
level.

“Well, sir, it’s pretty cut about, sir.”

Vimes smiled encouragingly. “Notice anything about that, lad?” Feeney
was making heavy weather of it, but recruits often did at the start,
doing so much looking that they forgot to see. “You’re doing well, chief
constable. Would you care to extrapolate?”

“Sir? Extrapolate, sir?”

“Why would somebody be all cut about on their arms? Think about that.”

Feeney’s lips actually moved as he thought, and then he grinned. “He was
defending himself with his hands, sir?”

“Well done, lad, and people who are defending themselves with their
hands are doing so because they don’t have a shield or a weapon. I would
wager, too, that his head was cut off while he was on the ground. Can’t
exactly put my finger on it, but that looks to me like deliberate
butchering rather than a hasty slice. Everything is messy, but you can
see that the belly has been sliced open, yet there is hardly any blood
around it. He was taken by surprise. And because of the belly would I
know something else about him that I wish I didn’t know,” he said.

“What’s that, sir?”

“He is a she, and she was ambushed, or maybe trapped.” And, he thought,
there’s a claw missing.

After a while it becomes a puzzle, not a corpse, said Vimes to himself
as he knelt down, but never soon enough, and never for long enough.
Aloud he said, “Look at the marks on this leg, lad. I reckon she stepped
in a rabbit snare, probably because she was running away from…somebody.”

Vimes stood up so fast that the watching goblins backed away. “Good
grief, boy, we shouldn’t do that, not even in the country! Isn’t there
some kind of code? You kill the bucks, not the does, isn’t that right?
And this isn’t some spur-of-the-moment thing! Someone wanted to get a
lot of blood out of this lady! You tell me why!”

Vimes wasn’t certain what Feeney would have replied had they not been
surrounded by solemn-faced goblins, which was just as well.

“This is murder, lad, the capital crime! And do you know why it was
done? I’ll wager anything that it was so that Constable Upshot, acting
on information received, would find a lot of blood in Dead Man’s Copse,
where Commander Vimes was apparently going to have a meeting with an
annoying blacksmith, and so, given that both of them were men of quick
temper, quite possibly foul play could have been involved, yes?”

“It’s a legitimate deduction, sir, you must admit that.”

“Of course I do, and now it’s a total bastard of a deduction, and now
you must admit that.”

“Yes, sir, I do, sir, and apologize. However, I’d like to search the
premises for any sign of Mr. Jefferson.” Feeney looked half ashamed,
half defiant.

“And why do you want to do that, chief constable?”

Feeney stuck out his chin. “Because I’ve been shown to be a bloody fool
once, and I don’t intend to be one again. Besides, sir, you might be
wrong. This poor lady might have been in a fight with the blacksmith,
perhaps, I don’t know, but I do know that if I don’t make a search here
in the circumstances, somebody important is bound to ask me why I
didn’t. And that person would be you, wouldn’t it, commander?”

“Good answer, young man! And I have to admit that I’ve been a bloody
fool more times than I can count, so I can sympathize.”

Vimes looked down again at the corpse and it was suddenly urgent to try
to find out what Willikins had done with the claw, complete with ring,
that they had found the previous night. Awkwardly, he said to the
assembled goblins, “I believe that I have found some jewelry belonging
to this young lady and, of course, I shall bring it to you.”

There was not so much as an acknowledgment from the impassive horde.
Vimes considered that thought. Hordes come in killing and stealing. This
lot look like a bunch of worried people. He walked over to a grizzled
old goblin who might have been the one he had seen up on the surface a
thousand years ago, and said, “I’d like to see more of this place, sir.
I’m sorry for the death of the lady. I’ll bring the killers to justice.”

“Just ice!” Once again it echoed around the cave. The old goblin stepped
forward very gently and touched Vimes’s sleeve. “The dark is your
friend, Mr. Po-leess-maan. I hear you, you hear me. In the dark you may
go where you wish. Mr. Po-leess-maan, please do not kill us.”

Vimes looked past the goblin to the ranks behind, most of them as skinny
as rakes, and this, well, chieftain probably, who looked as though he
was decomposing while standing up, didn’t want him to hurt them? He
remembered the scattered flowers. The orphaned bergamot tea. The uneaten
meal. They were trying to hide away from me? He nodded and said, “I do
not attack anyone who isn’t attacking me, sir, and I will not start
today. Can you tell me how this lady came to be…killed?”

“She was thrown into our cave last night, Mr. Po-leess-maan. She had
gone out to check the rabbit snares. Thrown down like old bones, Mr.
Po-leess-maan, like old bones. No blood in her. Like old bones.”

“What was her name?”

The old goblin looked at Vimes as if shocked, and after a moment said,
“Her name was The Pleasant Contrast of the Orange and Yellow Petals in
the Flower of the Gorse. Thank you, Mr. Po-leess-maan of the dark.”

“I’m afraid I’m only just starting to investigate this crime,” said
Vimes, feeling unusually embarrassed.

“I meant, Mr. Po-leess-maan, thank you for believing that goblins have
names. My name is Sound of the Rain on Hard Ground. She was my second
wife.”

Vimes stared at the rugged face that only a mother could tolerate and
perhaps love, searching for any sign of anger or grief. There was just a
sense of sorrow and hopeless resignation at the fact that the world was
as it was and always would be and there was nothing that could be done.
The goblin was a sigh on legs. In dejection he looked up at Vimes and
said, “They used to send hungry dogs into the cave, Mr. Po-leess-maan.
Those were good days; we ate well.”

“This is my land,” said Vimes, “and I think I can see to it that you’re
not disturbed here.”

Something like a chuckle found its way through the old goblin’s ragged
beard. “We know what the law is, Mr. Po-leess-maan. The law is the land.
You say “ ‘This is my land,’ but you did not make the land. You did not
make your sheep, you did not make the rabbits on which we live, you did
not make the cows, or the horses, but you say, ‘These things are mine.’
This cannot be a truth. I make my ax, my pots, and these are mine. What
I wear is mine. Some love was mine. Now it has gone. I think you are a
good man, Mr. Po-leess-maan, but we see the turning of the times. Maybe
a hundred, or two hundred years ago there was in the world what people
called ‘the wilderness,’ or ‘no man’s land,’ or ‘wasteland,’ and we
lived in such places, we are waste people. There was the troll race, the
dwarf race, the human race and I am sorry for the goblin race that we
cannot run so fast.”

Somebody pulled at Vimes’s shirt. This time it was Feeney. “You’d best
be going now, sir.”

Vimes turned. “Why?”

“Sorry, sir, but her ladyship did instruct you to be back for tea.”

“We’re conducting a murder investigation, chief constable! I don’t mean
to be rude, but I’m sure Mr. Rain on Hard Ground here will understand.
We must see for ourselves that the missing blacksmith is not here.”

Feeney fidgeted. “I couldn’t help noticing that her Ladyship was very
expressive on the subject, sir.”

Vimes nodded to the old goblin. “I’ll find out who killed your wife,
sir, and I’ll bring them to justice.” He paused on cue as another chorus
of “Just ice!” echoed around the caves. “But first I must, for police
reasons, inspect the rest of this…establishment, if you have no
objection.”

The goblin looked at him bright-eyed. “And if I object, Mr.
Po-leess-maan?”

Vimes matched his stare. “An interesting question,” he said “and if you
threatened us with violence I would leave. Indeed, if you forbade me to
search then I would leave, and, sir, the worst part is that I would not
come back. Sir, I respectfully ask that I may in the pursuit of my
inquiries be shown around the rest of these premises.”

Was that a smile on the old goblin’s face? “Of course, Mr.
Po-leess-maan.”

Behind the old goblin the rest of the crowd began to move away,
presumably to either make pots or fill them. Rain on Hard Ground, who,
it had to be assumed, because nothing had been said to the contrary, was
either a chieftain (as Vimes would understand it) or simply a goblin
tasked with talking to stupid humans, said, “You are seeking the
blacksmith? He visits us sometimes. There is iron down here, not much,
but he finds it useful. Of course it is no good for pots, but we trade
it for food. I don’t think I have seen him for several days. However, by
all means look for him without hindrance. The dark is in you. I would
not dare to stand in your way, Mr. Po-leess-maan. Such as it is, this
place is yours.”

With that the old goblin beckoned to some juvenile goblins to pick up
all that was left of his wife and drifted away toward another cave
mouth.

“Have you seen a lot of dead bodies, commander?” said Feeney, in a voice
that almost managed not to shake.

“Oh yes, lad, and some of them I helped to make.”

“You’ve killed people?”

Vimes looked at the ceiling so as not to have to look at Feeney’s face.
“I like to think I did my best not to,” he said, “and on the whole I’ve
been good at that, but sooner or later there’s always going to be
somebody who is determined to finish you off and you end up having to
take him down the wrong way because he’s just too damn stupid to
surrender. It doesn’t get any better, and I’ve never seen a corpse that
looked good.”

The funeral group had disappeared into the other cave now, and the two
policemen were left alone, but feeling, however, that around them people
were going about their business.

The old goblin had just stood there and mentioned that the woman was his
wife almost as an afterthought. He hadn’t even raised his voice! Vimes
couldn’t have stood there like that if it had been Sybil’s body on the
ground in front of him, and as sure as hell he would not be polite to
any goblins who were in front of him either. How can you get like that?
How can life so beat you down?

The Street was always with you, just as Willikins had said. And Vimes
remembered the ladies who scrubbed. Cockbill Street got scrubbed so
often that it was surprising it wasn’t now at a lower level than the
ground around it. The doorstep was scrubbed, and then whitened; the red
tiles on the floor inside were scrubbed and then polished with red lead;
and the black cooking stove was blackened even further by being rubbed
ferociously with black lead. Women in those days had elbows that moved
like pistons. And it was all about survival, and survival was all about
pride. You didn’t have much control over your life but by Jimmy you
could keep it clean and show the world you were poor but respectable.
That was the dread: the dread of falling back, losing standards,
becoming no better than those people who bred and fought and stole in
that ferocious turmoil of a rookery known as the Shades.

The goblins had succumbed, had they? Going through the motions now,
while the world gently expelled them, they were giving up, letting
go…but murder was murder in any jurisdiction or none at all. He tied his
thoughts in a knot under his chin, snatched a couple of smouldering
torches and said, “Come on, chief constable, let’s go and fight crime.”

“Yes, sir,” said Feeney, “but can I ask you another question?”

“Of course,” said Vimes, heading toward a tunnel that was perceptibly
sloping downward.

“What’s going on here, sir, if you don’t mind me asking? I mean, I know
that there’s been a murder and maybe some bugger wanted me to think it
was you as done it, but how come, sir, that you understand that heathen
lingo of theirs? I mean, I hear you talking to them, and they must
understand you, ’cos they talk back, sir, but they talk like somebody
cracking walnuts under their foot, sir, and I can’t understand a damn
word of it, sir, if you’ll excuse my Klatchian, not a damn word. I want
an answer, sir, because I feel enough of a bloody fool as it is; I don’t
want to be even more foolish than I feel now.”

Vimes, in the privacy of his own head, tried out the statement, “Well,
since you ask, I have a deadly demon sharing my mind, which seems to be
helping me for reasons of its own. It lets me see in this gloom and
somehow allows me and goblins to communicate. It’s called the Summoning
Dark. I don’t know what its interest in goblins is but the dwarfs think
it brings down wrath on the unrighteous. If there has been a murder I’ll
use any help I can get.” He did not in fact articulate this, on the
basis that most people would have left very quickly by the time he had
finished, so he settled for saying, “I have the support of a higher
power, chief constable. Now, let’s check out this place.” This didn’t
satisfy Feeney, but he appeared to understand that this was all he was
going to get.

It was an eerie journey. The hill was honeycombed with passages natural
and, occasionally, by the look of it, artificial. It was a small city.
There were middens, crude cages now empty of whatever had been in them,
and here and there quite large beds of fungus, in some cases being
harvested very, very slowly, by goblins who barely glanced at the
policemen. At one point they passed an opening which appeared to lead to
a crèche, by the sound of it, in which case baby goblins twittered like
birds. Vimes couldn’t bring himself to look further inside.

As they went lower down they came across a very small rivulet that
trickled out of one wall. The goblins in a rough and ready way had made
a culvert, so that their journey onward was to the sound of running
water. And everywhere there were goblins, and the goblins were making
pots. Vimes was prepared for this, but badly prepared. He had expected
something like the dwarf workshops he had seen in Uberwald—noisy, busy
and full of purposeful activity. But that wasn’t the goblin way. It
appeared that if a goblin wanted to start on a pot, all it needed to do
was find a place to hunker down, rummage through whatever it was it had
in its pockets and get to work, so slowly that it was hard to tell that
anything was going on. Several times Vimes thought he heard the chip of
stone on stone, or the sound of scratching, or what might be sawing, but
whenever he came close to a squatting goblin it politely edged around
and leaned over the work like a child trying to keep a secret. How much
snot, he thought, how many fingernail clippings, how much earwax did a
goblin accumulate in one year? Would an annual pot of snot be something
like a lady’s delicate snuffbox, or would it be a sloshing great
bucketful?

And why not, yes, why not teeth? Even humans were careful when it came
to the escaped teeth, and, come to that, there were people, especially
wizards, who made a point of ensuring that their toenails were put
beyond use. He smiled to himself. Maybe the goblins weren’t all that
stupid, only more stupid than humans were, which, when you came to think
about it, took some effort.

And then, as they crept past a cross-legged goblin, it sat back on its
haunches and held up…light. Vimes had seen plenty of jewels: generations
of rings, brooches, necklaces and tiaras had funneled down the centuries
and into Lady Sybil’s lap, although these days most of them were kept in
a vault. That always amused him.

Sparkle though Sybil’s jewels might, he would have sworn that none of
them could have filled the air with light as much as the little pot did
when its creator held it up for a critical appraisal. The goblin turned
it this way and that, inspecting it like a man thinking of buying a
horse from somebody called Honest Harry. White and yellow beams of light
shimmered as it moved, filling the drab cave with what Vimes could only
think of as echoes of light. Feeney was staring as a child might stare
at his first party. The goblin, however, appeared to sneer at its
creation and tossed it dismissively behind him, where it smashed on the
wall.

“Why did you do that?” Vimes shouted, so loudly that the goblin he was
addressing cowered and looked as if it expected to be struck. It managed
to say, “Bad pot! Bad work! For to be ashamed! Make much better one time
more! Will start now!” It took another terrified look at Vimes and
hurried into the darkness of the cave.

“He smashed it! He actually smashed it!” Feeney stared at Vimes. “He
took one look at it and smashed it! And it was wonderful! That was
criminal! You can’t just destroy something as wonderful as that, can
you?”

Vimes put a hand on Feeney’s shoulder. “I think you can if you’ve just
made it and think you could have done it better. After all, even the
best craftsmen sometimes make mistakes, yes?”

“You think that was a mistake?” Feeney rushed over to where the debris
of the late pot had hit the floor, and picked up a handful of glittering
remains. “Sir, he did throw these away, sir?”

Vimes opened his mouth to reply, but there was a faint noise from
Feeney’s hand: dust was falling between his fingers like the sands of
time. Feeney grinned nervously at Vimes and said, “Maybe it was a bit
shoddy after all, sir!”

Vimes squatted down and ran his fingers through the pile of dust. And it
was just dust, stone dust, no more color or sparkle to it than you would
find in a pebble by the road. There was no trace of the scintillating
rainbow that they had just seen. But on the other side of this cave
another goblin was trying to look inconspicuous as it worked on what was
probably another pot. Vimes stepped over to it with care, because it was
holding its pot as if prepared to use it to defend itself.

Casually, to show that he meant no harm, Vimes put his arms behind his
back and said in tones learned from his wife, “My word! That looks like
a very good pot. Tell me, how do you make a pot, sir? Can you tell me?”

The potter looked down at the thing in its hands, or the thing in its
claws if you wanted to be nasty, and perhaps slightly more accurate, and
said, “I make the pot.” It raised the work in progress.

Vimes wasn’t that good at stone which wasn’t part of masonry, but this
one was slightly yellow and shiny. He said, “Yes, I can see that, but
how do you actually make the pot?” Once again, the potter sought
enlightenment from the universe, looking up and down and everywhere that
Vimes wasn’t. At last inspiration dawned. “I make pot.”

Vimes nodded gravely. “Thank you for sharing the secrets of your
success,” he said and turned to Feeney. “Come on, let’s keep going.”

It seemed that a goblin cave—or lair or burrow, depending on what effect
you wanted to give—was not quite the hellhole that you might have
thought. Instead it was just, well, a hole, stuffy with the smoke of the
innumerable small fires goblins appeared to need, along with the
associated small pile of rotted kindling, and not forgetting the
personal midden.

Goblins old and young watched them carefully as they passed, as if
expecting them to put on a program of entertainment. There were
certainly juvenile goblins. Vimes had to admit that alone among the
talking species, goblin babies were plug ugly, merely small versions of
their parents who themselves were no oil paintings, and not even a
watercolor. Vimes told himself that they could not help it, that some
incompetent god had found a lot of bits left over, and decided that the
world needed a creature that looked like a cross between a wolf and an
ape, and gave them what was surely one of the most unhelpful pieces of
religious dogma, even by the standards of celestial idiocy. They looked
like the bad guys and, without the intervention of the Summoning Dark,
they sounded like them, too. If walnuts could shriek when they were
being cracked, then people would say, “Doesn’t that remind you of a
goblin?” And it appeared that, not content with all this, the laughing
god had apparently given them that worst of gifts, self-knowledge,
leaving them so certain that they were irrevocably walking rubbish that
metaphorically they couldn’t even find the energy to clean the step.

“Oh, blast! I’m treading on something…in something,” said Feeney. “You
seem to be able to see much better than me down here, sir.”

“Good clean living, lad, carrots and whatnot.”

“Jefferson could be in here somewhere. I’m sure there are caves that
we’re missing.”

“I know he’s not in here, lad, only don’t ask me how I know because I
would have to lie to you. I’m going through the motions to help myself
think. It’s an old copper trick.”

“Yes, sir, treading in every motion, I should think!”

Vimes smiled in the gloom. “Well done, lad. A sense of humor is the
copper’s friend. I always say the day isn’t complete without a little
chuckle—” He paused because something had clanged against his helmet.
“We’ve reached Jefferson’s iron workings, my lad. I just found an oil
lamp; I certainly haven’t seen those higher up.” He felt in his pocket
and soon a match flame bloomed.

Well, Vimes thought, it’s not that much of a mine, but I bet it works
out better than paying dwarf prices.

“I can’t see any way out,” Feeney volunteered. “I suppose he drags the
ore out through the main entrance.”

“I don’t think that the goblins are stupid enough to live in a set of
caves that have just one entrance. There’s probably one that doesn’t
even show up on the outside. Look, you can see where somebody’s been
lugging heavy weights across the stone—” Vimes stopped. There was
another human in the cave. Well, thank you, darkness, he thought. I
suppose asking who it is might be in order?

“Sir, I don’t think it’s just mining that goes on here. Take a look at
these,” said Feeney, behind Vimes.

Feeney held out some books, children’s books, by the look of it. They
were grubby—this was, after all, the home of goblins—but Vimes turned to
the first page of the first book and was not surprised to see an
unfeasibly large red apple, currently somewhat soiled by the pressure of
many dirty hands.

A voice in the gloom, a female voice, said, “Not all questions are
answered, commander, but fortunately some answers are questioned. I’m
attempting to teach the goblin children. Of course, I had to bring in an
apple for the young ones to see,” the woman in the shadows added. “Not
many knew what one was, and certainly not what they were called. Troll
language is unbelievably complex compared with what these poor devils
have got. “Good day to you too, Mr. Upshot. Not cowering away from the
truth in your lockup?”

Vimes had spun round when he first heard that voice, and was now staring
with his mouth open. “You? Aren’t you the, er…”

“The poo lady, yes, Commander Vimes. It’s amazing, isn’t it, how people
remember?”

“Well, you must admit that it does—how can I put it?—stick in the mind,
Miss Felicity Beedle.”

“Very well done, commander, considering that we’ve met only once!”

And now Vimes noticed that with her there was a goblin, a young one by
the size of it, but more noticeable because it was staring directly at
him with a keen and interested gaze, quite uncharacteristic of the
goblins that he had seen so far, apart from the wretched Stinky. Feeney,
on the other hand, was taking great care not to catch the lady’s eye,
Vimes noticed.

Vimes smiled at Miss Beedle. “Madam, I reckon I see your name at least
once every day. When I was putting my lad to bed yesterday, do you know
what he said? He said ‘Dad, do you know why cows do big wet sloppy poos
and horses do them all nice and soft and smelling of grass? Because it’s
weird, isn’t it? That you get two different kinds of poo when they’re
both about the same size and it’s the same grass, isn’t it, Dad? Well,
the poo lady says it’s because cows have room in ants, and the ants help
them get, sort of, more food out of their food, but because horses don’t
have room in ants, they don’t sort of chew all that much, so that their
poo is still very much like grass and doesn’t smell too bad.’ ”

Vimes saw that the woman was grinning, and went on, “I believe that
tomorrow he is going to ask his mother if he may chew his dinner very
hard one day, and the next day not do it very much, and see if he gets
different smells. What do you think of that, madam?”

Miss Beedle laughed. It was a very enjoyable laugh. “Well, commander, it
would seem that your son combines your analytical thinking with the
inherited Ramkin talent for experimentation. You must be very proud? I
certainly hope you are.”

“You can bet on that, madam.” The child standing in Miss Beedle’s shadow
was smiling too, the first smile he’d seen on a goblin. But before he
could say anything, Miss Beedle directed a disapproving look at Feeney
and went on, “I only wish I could find you in better company, commander.
I wonder if you know where my friend Jethro is, officer?”

Even in the lamplight, Feeney looked furious, but if you read people,
and Vimes was a ferocious reader, it was clear the fury was spiced with
shame and dread. Then Vimes looked down at the little bench, where there
were a few tools and some more brightly covered books. It was the
streets that had taught Vimes that there were times when you would find
it best to let a nervous person get really nervous, and so he picked up
a book as if the previous dreadful exchange had not taken place, and
said, “Oh, here’s Where’s My Cow?! Young Sam loves it. Are you teaching
it to the goblins, Miss?”

With her eyes still on the agitated Feeney, Miss Beedle said, “Yes, for
what it’s worth. It’s hard work. Incidentally, technically I’m Mrs.
Beedle. My husband was killed in the Klatchian war. I went back to
‘Miss’ because, well, it’s more authory, and besides, it wasn’t as
though I’d had much time to get accustomed to ‘Mrs.’ ”

“I’m sorry about that, madam, Had I known I’d have been a lot less
flippant,” said Vimes.

Miss Beedle gave him a wan smile. “Don’t worry, flippant sometimes does
the trick.” Beside the teacher the little goblin said, “Flip-ant? The
ant is turned over?”

“Tears of the Mushroom is my star pupil. You’re wonderful, aren’t you,
Tears of the Mushroom?”

“Wonderful is good,” said the goblin girl, as though tasting every word.
“Gentle is good, the mushroom is good. Tears are soft. I am Tears of the
Mushroom, this much is now said.”

It was a strange little speech: the girl spoke as if she were pulling
words out of a rack and then tidily putting them back in their places as
soon as they had been said. It sounded very solemn and it came from an
odd, flat, pale face. In a way, Tears of the Mushroom looked handsome,
if not exactly pretty, in what looked like a wraparound apron, and Vimes
wondered how old she was. Thirteen? Fourteen, maybe? And he wondered if
they would all look as smart as this if they got their hands on some
decent clothing and did something about their godawful hair. The girl’s
hair was long and braided and pure white. Amazingly, in this place, she
looked like a piece of fragile porcelain.

Not knowing what to say, he said it anyway: “Pleased to meet you, Tears
of the Mushroom.” Vimes held out his hand. The goblin girl looked at it,
then looked at him, and then turned to Miss Beedle, who said, “They
don’t shake hands, commander. For people who seem so simple they’re
astoundingly complicated.”

She turned to Vimes. “It would seem, commander, that providence has
brought you here in time to solve the murder of the goblin girl, who was
an excellent pupil. I came up here as soon as I heard, but the goblins
are used to undeserved and casual death. I’ll walk with you to the
entrance, and then I’ve got a class to teach.”

Vimes tugged at Feeney to make him keep up as they followed Miss Beedle
and her charge toward the surface and blessed fresh air. He wondered
what had become of the corpse. What did they do with their dead? Bury
them, eat them, throw them on the midden? Or was he just not thinking
right, a thought which itself had been knocking at his brain for some
time. Without thinking, he said, “What else do you teach them, Miss
Beedle? To be better citizens?”

The slap caught him on the chin, probably because even in her anger Miss
Beedle realized that he still had his steel helmet on. It was a corker,
nonetheless, and out of the corner of his stinging gaze he saw Feeney
take a step back. At least the boy had some sense.

“You are the gods’ own fool, Commander Vimes! No, I’m not teaching them
to be fake humans, I’m teaching them how to be goblins, clever goblins!
Do you know that they have only five names for colors? Even trolls have
around sixty, and a lot more than that if they find a paint salesman!
Does this mean goblins are stupid? No, they have a vast number of names
for things that even poets haven’t come up with, for things like the way
colors shift and change, the melting of one hue into another. They have
single words for the most complicated of feelings; I know about two
hundred of them, I think, and I’m sure there are a lot more! What you
may think are grunts and growls and snarls are in fact carrying vast
amounts of information! They’re like an iceberg, commander: most of them
is where you can’t see or understand, and I’m teaching Tears of the
Mushroom and some of her friends so that they may be able to speak to
people like you, who think they are dumb. And do you know what,
commander? There isn’t much time! They’re being slaughtered! It’s not
called that, of course, but slaughter is how it ends, because they’re
just dumb nuisances, you see. Why don’t you ask Mr. Upshot what happened
to the rest of the goblins three years ago, Commander Vimes?”

And with that Miss Beedle turned on her heel and disappeared down into
the darkness of the cave with Tears of the Mushroom bobbing along behind
her, leaving Vimes to walk the last few yards out into the glorious
sunlight.

The feeling that hit Samuel Vimes when he stepped into the vivid light
of day was as if somebody had pushed an iron wire through his body and
then, in one moment, pulled it out again. It was all he could do to keep
his balance and the boy grabbed him by the arm. Full marks, Vimes
thought, for being either smart enough to see how the land lay, or at
least smart enough not to make a run for it just now.

He sat down on the turf, relishing the breeze through the gorse bushes
and sucking in pure fresh air. Whatever you thought about goblins, their
cave had the kind of atmosphere about which people say, “I should wait
two minutes before going in there, if I was you.”

“I’d like to talk with you, chief constable,” he said now. “Copper to
copper. About the past and maybe about the shape of things to come.”

“Actually, I meant to thank you, commander, for thinking that I’m a
policeman.”

“Your father was policeman down here three years ago, yes?”

Feeney stared straight ahead. “Yes, sir.”

“So, what happened with the goblins, Feeney?”

Feeney cleared his throat. “Well, Dad told me and Mum to stay indoors.
He said we was not to look, but he couldn’t tell us not to listen, and
there was a lot of shouting and I don’t know what, and it upset my old
mum no end. I heard later that a load of goblins had been taken out of
the hill, but Dad never spoke about it until much later. I think it
broke him, sir, it really did. He said he watched while a bunch of men,
gamekeepers and roughs mostly, came down from the cave dragging goblins
behind them, sir. Lots of them. He said what was so dreadful was that
the goblins were all sort of meek, you know? Like they didn’t know what
to do.”

Vimes relented a little at the sight of Feeney’s face. “Go on, lad.”

“Well, sir, he told me people came out of their houses and there was a
lot of running about and he started to ask questions and, well, the
magistrates said it was all right because they were nothing more than
vermin, and they were going to be taken down to the docks where they
could earn their living for a change and not bother other people. It was
all right, Dad said. They were going somewhere sunny, a long way away
from here.”

“Just out of interest, Mr. Feeney, how could he know that?”

“Dad said the magistrates were very firm about it, sir. They were just
to be put to work for their living. He said that it was doing them a
favor. It wasn’t as if they were going to be killed.”

Vimes kept his expression deliberately blank. He sighed. “If it was
without their consent, then that would be slavery, and if a slave
doesn’t work for his living he’s dead. Do you understand?”

Feeney looked at his boots. If eyeballs had polish on them his boots
would have been gleaming. “After he told me this, my dad told me that I
was a copper now and I was to look after Mum, and he gave me the
truncheon and his badge. And then his hands started shaking, sir, and a
few days later he was dead, sir. I reckon something snuck up on him,
sir, in his head, like. It overcame him.”

“Have you heard about Lord Vetinari, Feeney? I can’t say I like him all
that much but sometimes he’s bang on the money. Well, there was a bit of
a fracas, as we say, and it turned out that a man had a dog, a half-dead
thing, according to bystanders, and he was trying to get it to stop
pulling at its leash, and when it growled at him he grabbed an ax from
the butcher’s stall beside him, threw the dog to the ground and cut off
its back legs, just like that. I suppose people would say ‘Nasty bugger,
but it was his dog,’ and so on, but Lord Vetinari called me in and he
said to me, ‘A man who would do something like that to a dog is a man to
whom the law should pay close attention. Search his house immediately.’
The man was hanged a week later, not for the dog, although for my part I
wouldn’t have shed a tear if he had been, but for what we found in his
cellar. The contents of which I will not burden you with. And bloody
Vetinari got away with it again, because he was right: where there are
little crimes, large crimes are not far behind.”

Vimes stared at the rolling acres stretching out below: his fields, his
trees, his fields of yellow corn…All his, even though he’d never planted
a seed in his life, except for the time when he was a kid and he tried
to grow mustard and cress on a flannel, which he’d then thrown up
because no one had told him he should have washed the flannel first to
get all the soap out. Not a good background for a landowner. But…His
land, right? And he was sure that neither he nor Sybil had ever said yes
to turning a lot of sad-looking goblins out of the mess they were
pleased to call a home and taking them to who knew where.

“Nobody told us!”

Feeney leaned back to escape that particular ball of wrath. “I wouldn’t
know about that, sir.”

Vimes stood up and stretched his arms. “I’ve heard enough, lad, and I’ve
had enough too! It’s time to report to a higher authority!”

“I think it’d take at least a day and a half to get a galloper to the
city, sir, and you’d have to be lucky with horses.”

Sam Vimes began to walk smartly down the hill. “I was talking about Lady
Sybil, lad.”

Sybil was in a drawing room full of teacups and ladies when Vimes
arrived at the Hall in a run, with Feeney lagging behind. She took one
look at him and said, rather more brightly than warranted, “Oh, I see
you have something to discuss with me.” She turned to the ladies, smiled
and said, “Please do excuse me, ladies. I must just have a brief word
with my husband.” And with that she grabbed Vimes and pulled him none
too gently back into the hallway. She opened her mouth to deliver a
wifely sermon on the importance of punctuality, sniffed and recoiled.
“Sam Vimes, you stink! Did you fall into something rural? I’ve hardly
seen you since breakfast! And why are you still dragging that young
policeman behind you? I’m sure he’s got something more important to do.
Didn’t he want to arrest you? Is he coming to tea? I hope he washes
first.” This was said to Vimes but aimed at Feeney, who was keeping his
distance and looked ready to run.

“That was a misunderstanding,” said Vimes hastily, “and I’m sure that if
I ever find out where my escutcheon is there won’t be a stain on it, but
Mr. Feeney here has been generously and of his own free will imparting
information to me.”

And by the time the husband and wife conversation was in full swing,
containing shouted whispers on the lines of “Surely not!” and “I think
he’s telling the truth,” Feeney looked ready to sprint.

“And they didn’t put up a fight?” said Sybil. The young policeman tried
to avoid her gaze, but she had the kind of gaze that came around to find
you wherever you stood.

“No, your ladyship,” was all he managed.

Lady Sybil looked at her husband and shrugged. “There would be one hell
of a fight with someone who wanted to take me off to a place I didn’t
want to go to,” she said, “and I thought goblins had weapons? Pretty
nasty fighters, so I’ve heard. I’d have thought there’d have been a war!
We would have heard about it! From the way you talk about it, it sounds
as if they were sleepwalking. Or perhaps they were starving? I haven’t
noticed very many rabbits around here, compared with when I was a little
girl. And why leave some behind? It’s all a bit of a puzzle, Sam. Nearly
everyone around here is a family friend—” She held up a hand quickly. “I
wouldn’t dream of asking you to fail in your duty, Sam, you must
understand that, but be careful and be sure of every step. And please,
Sam—and I know you, Sam—don’t go at it like a bull at a gate. People
round here might get the wrong idea.”

Sam Vimes was certain that he did have the wrong idea and his brow
wrinkled as he said, “I don’t know, Sybil, how does a bull go at a gate?
Does it just stop and look puzzled?”

“No, dear, it smashes everything to pieces.”

Lady Sybil gave a warning smile and brushed herself down. “I don’t think
we need detain you any longer, Mr. Upshot,” she said to the grateful
Feeney. “Do remember me to your dear mother. If she doesn’t mind, I’d
like to meet her while I’m down here again to talk about old times. In
the meantime I suggest you leave via the kitchen, no matter what my
husband thinks about a policeman using the servants’ entrance, and tell
Cook to supply you with, well, anything your mother would like.”

She turned to her husband. “Why don’t you escort him down there, Sam?
And since you’re enjoying the fresh air, why not go and find Young Sam?
I think he’s back in the barnyard, with Willikins.”

Feeney was silent as they went down the long corridors, but Vimes sensed
the boy’s mind working its way through a problem, which came out when he
said, “Lady Sybil is a very nice kind lady, isn’t she, sir?”

“I do not need to be reminded of that,” said Vimes, “and I’d like you to
understand that she stands in vivid contrast to me. I get edgy when I
think there’s a crime unsolved. A crime unsolved is against nature.”

“I keep thinking of the goblin girl, sir. She looked like a statue, and
the way she spoke, well, I don’t know what to say. I mean, they can be a
bloody nuisance—they’ll have the laces out of your boots if you don’t
move quick enough—but when you see them in their cave you realize
there’s, well, kids, old granddad goblins and—”

“Old mum goblins?” Vimes suggested quietly.

Once again, Mrs. Upshot’s little boy struggled in the unfamiliar and
terrifying grip of philosophy and fetched up with, “Well, sir, I dare
say cows make good mothers, but at the end of the day a calf is veal on
the hoof, yes?”

“Maybe, but what would you say if the calf walked up to you and said,
‘Hello, my name is Tears of the Mushroom?’ ”

Feeney’s face once again frowned in the effort of novel cogitation. “I
think I’d have the salad, sir.”

Vimes smiled. “You were in a difficult position, lad, and I’ll tell you
something: so am I. It’s called being a copper. That’s why I like it
when they run. That makes it all so simple. They run and I chase. I
don’t know if it’s metaphysical, or something like that. But there was a
corpse. You saw it, so did I and so did Miss Beedle. Keep that in mind.”

Young Sam was sitting on a hay bale in the farmyard, watching the horses
come in. He ran to his dad, looking very pleased with himself, and said,
“Dad, you know chickens?”

Vimes picked up his son and said, “Yes, I have heard of them, Sam.”

Young Sam wriggled out of his father’s grasp as if being picked up and
swung around was inappropriate activity for a serious researcher in
scatological studies, and looked solemn. “Do you know, Dad, that when a
chicken does a poo, there’s a white bit on top which is the wee?
Sometimes it’s like the icing on a bun, Dad!”

“Thank you for letting me know,” said Vimes. “I’ll remember that next
time I eat a bun.” And every time after that, he added to himself. “I
suppose you know everything about poo now, Sam?” Vimes said hopefully,
and he saw Willikins smile.

Young Sam, now staring at a pile of chicken droppings through a little
magnifying glass, shook his head without looking up. “Oh no, Dad, Mr. …”
Here, Young Sam stopped and looked at Willikins hopefully.

Willikins cleared his throat and said, “Mr. Trout, one of the
gamekeepers, was around half an hour ago, and of course your lad will
strike up a conversation with anybody, and the upshot is that young Sam,
it would appear, sir, would like to amass a collection of the droppings
of a number of woodland creatures.”

Gamekeepers, thought Vimes. He ran that across his brain and thought
about who had actually rounded the goblins up three years ago. And then
he thought, how important is that compared with the question who told
them to? I think I’ve got the smell of this place: people do what
they’re told because they’ve always done what they’re told. But
gamekeepers are a canny lot; it’s not just human beings they have to
outsmart. And remember, this is the countryside, where everybody knows
everybody else, and notices everybody else. I don’t think Feeney is
lying, so other people know what happened here one night three years
ago. I mustn’t be a bull at a gate, said Sybil, and she’s right. I need
to know where I’m treading. What happened happened three years ago? I
can afford to take my time over this one. Aloud he said, “How far can I
take this?”

“It seems you’ve had a busy day, sir,” said Willikins. “This morning you
went down to the lockup with a little tit who thinks he is a copper, and
then, in company with a goblin, you and said little tit went up to Dead
Man’s Copse, where you remained for quite some time, until you and the
aforesaid little tit came out and you arrived here, minus one tit just
now.” Willikins grinned at Vimes. “There’s people coming and going down
in the kitchens all the time, sir, and gossip is a kind of currency when
you get beyond the green door. You’ve got to remember, sir, that,
despite Mr. Silver’s dirty looks, I am the top nob below stairs and I
can go where I like and do what I like and they can choke on it if they
like. The whole of the hill is visible from some window or other in this
house, and maids are very cooperative, sir. It seems that all the girls
are busting for a job in the Scoone Avenue establishment. Very keen they
are for the city lights, sir. Very cooperative. Also, I found quite a
good telescope in the study. Remarkable view of Hangman’s Hill, you
know. I could practically read your lips. Young Sam quite enjoyed the
game of searching for Dad.”

Vimes felt a pang of guilt at those words. This was supposed to be a
family holiday, wasn’t it? But…“Someone killed a goblin girl up at Dead
Man’s Copse,” he said, his voice dull. “They made sure there was a lot
of blood to give our keen young copper something that he could think of
as a case. He’s floundering; I don’t think he’s ever seen a corpse
before.”

Willikins looked genuinely taken aback. “What, never? Maybe I’ll retire
down here, except I’d die of boredom.”

A thought struck Vimes and he said, “When you were looking through the
telescope, did you see anyone else go up the hill?”

Willikins shook his head. “No, sir, just you.”

They both turned to watch Young Sam, who was carefully drawing chicken
poo in his notebook, and Willikins said quietly, “You’ve got a good lad
there, very bright. Make the most of the time, sir.”

Vimes shook his head. “Gods know you’re right, but, well, she was cut
about, and with steel, definitely steel. They only have stone weapons.
They cut her about to make certain there was enough blood that even a
stupid flatfoot would spot it. And she was named after the colors of a
flower.”

There was a disapproving noise from Willikins. “Coppers shouldn’t get
sentimental, it’s bad for the judgement. You said it yourself. You find
yourself in some bloody awful domestic scene and you think things could
be improved by kicking the shit out of somebody, only how do you know
when to stop? That’s what you said. You said whacking a bloke in a fight
is one thing, but when he’s been cuffed, it ain’t right.”

To Vimes’s surprise Willikins tapped him on the shoulder in a kindly way
(you’d know it instantly if Willikins tapped you in an unfriendly way).

“Take my advice, commander, and have tomorrow off, too. There’s a
boating house on the lake, and later you could take the little lad out
in the woods, which are, by all accounts, knee-deep in poo of all sorts.
He’ll be in poo heaven! Oh, and he also told me that he wants to go and
see the smelly skull man again. I’ll tell you what, I reckon with a mind
like his, he’ll be Archchancellor of Unseen University by the time he’s
sixty!”

Willikins must have seen the grimace on Vimes’s face, because he went
on, “Why so surprised sir? He might want to be an alchemist, right?
Don’t say you’d want him to be a copper: you wouldn’t, would you? At
least when you’re a wizard people don’t try to kick you in the fork,
right? Of course you do have to go up against dreadful creatures from
hellish dimensions, but they don’t carry knives, and you get training.
Worth thinking about, commander, ’cos he’s growing like a weed and you
should be putting him on the right track through life. And now, if
you’ll excuse me, commander, I’m off to annoy the servants.”

Willikins took a few steps then stopped, looked at Vimes and said, “Look
at it like this, sir, if you take some time off, the guilty will be no
less guilty, and the dead won’t get any less dead, and her ladyship will
not try to behead you with a coat hanger.”

The guests at Lady Sybil’s tea party were leaving when Vimes got back to
the Hall. He scraped the countryside off his boots and headed to the
Hall’s master bathroom.

Of course, there were plenty of bathrooms around the place—probably more
than there were in a street in most of the city, where a tin bath, a jug
and basin, or nothing at all were the ablutions of choice or
necessity…but this bathroom had been built to a design by Mad Jack
Ramkin and resembled the famous bathroom at Unseen University, although,
had Mad Jack designed that one, it would have been called the Obscene
University, since Mad Jack had a healthy (or possibly unhealthy) liking
for the ladies, and in his bathroom it showed, oh dear, it showed. Of
course, the white marble lovelies were dignified with urns, bunches of
marble grapes, and the ever-popular length of gauze which had, happily,
landed in just the right place to stop art becoming pornography. It was
also, in all probability, the only bath that had taps marked hot, cold,
brandy.

And then there were the frescoes, such that if you were a man easily
persuaded then it was a good job there was a cold tap, because not to
put too fine a point on it, as it were, there were a large number of
fine points all over them, yes indeed, and the ladies were only the
start of the problem. There were marble gentlemen, as well, definitely
gentlemen, even the ones with goat’s feet. It was surprising that the
water in the bath didn’t boil of its own accord. He had asked Sybil
about it, and she said that it was an important feature of the Hall, and
gentlemen collectors of antiquities would often visit in order to
inspect it. Vimes had said that he expected that they did, oh yes
indeed. Sybil had said that there was no need for that tone of voice,
because she had occasionally taken a bath there from the time she had
been twelve and had seen no harm in it. It had, she said, stopped her
from being surprised later on.

And now Vimes lay in the luxurious tub, feeling as if he was trying to
fit all the bits of his brain together. He was only vaguely aware of the
bathroom door opening, and of hearing Sybil say, “I’ve put Young Sam to
bed, and he’s sleeping soundly, although I can’t imagine what he might
be dreaming about.”

Then Vimes floated again in the warm steamy atmosphere and was only just
aware of the swish of cloth hitting the floor. Lady Sybil slid in beside
him. The water rose, and so, in accordance with the physics of this
business, did the spirits of Sam Vimes.

A few hours later, almost drowning in the pillows on the huge bed and
floating just above unconsciousness in a warm pink glow, Sam Vimes was
certain that he heard his own voice whispering to him. And it said,
“Think of the things that don’t fit. Wonder why the nice lady of the
nobby classes wanders down into a goblin cave as if it’s a natural thing
to do.” He replied, “Well, Sybil spends half her time at home covered in
heavy protective gear and a flameproof helmet because she likes dragons.
It’s the sort of thing that nobby ladies tend to do.”

He considered what he had to say, and responded to himself, “Yes, but
dragons are what you might call socially acceptable. Goblins, on the
other hand, definitely aren’t. No one has got a good word to say for
goblins, except Miss Beedle. Why not take Young Sam along to see her
tomorrow? After all, she is the one that got him on to this poo
business, and she is a writer, so I expect she’ll be quite glad of the
interruption. Yes, that’d be a good idea, and it’d be educational for
Young Sam and not an investigation at all…” Thus satisfied, he waited
for the onset of sleep, against a chorus of howls, shrieks, mysterious
distant bangs, surreptitious rustlings, screeches, disconcerting ticking
noises, dreadful scratching sounds, terrible flappings of wings very
close, and all the rest of the unholy orchestra that is known as the
peace of the countryside.

He had enjoyed a late-night game of snooker with Willikins, just to keep
his hand in, and Vimes, half listening now to the outlandish cacophony,
wondered whether the solving of a complex crime, one that needed a
certain amount of care, could be compared to a game of snooker. Sure,
there were a lot of red balls and they got in the way, so you had to
knock them down, but your target, your ultimate target, was going to be
the black.

Powerful people lived in the Shires and so he would tread with care.
Metaphorically, Sam Vimes, somewhere in his head, picked up his cue.

Vimes lay back in the bed, enjoying the wonderful sensation of gradually
being eaten by the pillows, and said to Sybil, “Do the Rust family have
a place down here?”

Too late he reflected that this might be a bad move because she might
well have told him all about it on one of those occasions when, so
unusually for a married man, he was not paying much attention to what
his wife was saying, and therefore he might be the cause of grumpiness
in those precious, warm minutes before sleep. All he could see of her
right now was the very tip of her nose, as the pillows claimed her, but
she mumbled, drowsily, “Oh, they bought Hangnail Manor ten years or so
ago, after the Marquis of Fantailer murdered his wife with a pruning
knife in the pineapple house. Don’t you remember? You spent weeks
searching the city for him. In the end everybody seemed to think he’d
gone off to Fourecks and disguised himself by not calling himself the
Marquis of Fantailer.”

“Oh yes,” said Vimes, “and I remember that a lot of his chums were quite
indignant about the investigation! They said that he’d only done one
murder, and it was his wife’s fault for having the bad taste to die
after just one little stab!”

Lady Sybil turned over, which meant that—since she was a woman happily
rich in gravitational attraction—as she turned, the pillow closest to
Sam, acting like a gear in a chain, spun softly in the opposite
direction so that Sam Vimes found himself now lying on his face. He
struck out for the surface again and said, “And Rust bought it, did he?
It’s unusual for the old fart to spend a penny more than he needs to.”

“It wasn’t him, dear, it was Gravid.”

Vimes woke a little more. “The son? The criminal?”

“I believe, Sam, that the word is entrepreneur, and I’d like to go to
sleep now, if it’s all the same to you.”

Sam Vimes knew that the best thing he could say was nothing, and he sank
back into the depths, thinking words like, fiddler, sharp dealer,
inserter of a crafty crowbar between what is right and wrong, and mine
and thine, wide boy, financier anduntouchable …

Gently drifting into a nightmare world where the good guys and bad guys
so often changed hats without warning, Vimes wrestled sleeplessness to
the ground and made certain that it got eight hours.

Next morning Vimes, hand in hand with his son, walked toward the house
of Miss Beedle thoughtfully, not knowing what to expect. He had little
experience of the literary world, much preferring the literal one, and
he had heard that writers spent all day in their dressing gowns drinking
champagne.* On the other hand, as he approached the place up another
little lane, some reconsideration began to take place. For one thing,
the “cottage” had a garden that would do credit to a farm. When he
looked over the fence he saw lines of vegetables and soft fruit, and
there was an orchard and what was probably a pigsty and, over there, a
proper outdoor privy, very professionally done, with the very-nearly
compulsory crescent-moon shape fretsawed into the door, and the log pile
close at hand so that the most efficient use could be made of every trip
down the path. The whole place had a sensible and serious air, and
certainly wasn’t what you would expect of somebody who just mucked about
with words every day.

Miss Beedle opened the door a fraction of a second after he had knocked.
She didn’t look surprised.

“I was rather expecting you, your grace,” she said, “or is it Mr.
Policeman today? From what I hear, it’s always Mr. Policeman one way or
the other.” Then she looked down. “And this must be Young Sam.” She
glanced up at his father and said, “They tend to get rather tongue-tied,
don’t they?”

“You know, I’ve got lots of poo,” said Young Sam proudly. “I keep it in
jam jars and I’ve got a laboratory in the lavatory. Have you got any
elephant poo? It goes”—and here he paused for effect—“dung!”

For a moment Miss Beedle had that slightly glazed sheen often seen on
the face of someone meeting Young Sam for the first time. She looked at
Vimes. “You must be very proud of him.”

The proud father said, “It’s very hard to keep up—I know that.”

Miss Beedle led the way out of the hall and into a room in which chintz
played a major part, and drew young Sam over to a large bureau. She
opened a drawer and handed the boy what looked like a small book. “This
is a bound proof of The Joy of Earwax, and I shall sign it for you if
you like.”

Young Sam took it like one receiving a holy object, and his father,
temporarily becoming his mum, said, “What do you say?” To which Young
Sam responded with a beam and a thank you and a, “Please don’t scribble
on it. I’m not allowed to scribble in books.”

While Young Sam was happily turning the pages of his new book, his
father was introduced to an overstuffed chair. Miss Beedle gave him a
smile and hurried off toward the kitchen, leaving Vimes with not much to
look at except for a room full of bookcases, more overstuffed furniture,
a full-size concert harp, and a wall clock made to look like an owl,
whose eyes swung backward and forward hypnotically in time with the
tick—presumably to the point where you either committed suicide or
picked up the poker in the hearth nearby and beat the damn thing until
the springs broke.

While Vimes was warmly contemplating this he realized that he was being
watched, and he looked round into the worried face and prognathous jaw
of the goblin called Tears of the Mushroom.

Instinctively he looked at Young Sam, and suddenly the biggest raisin in
his cake of apprehension was: what will Young Sam do? How many books has
he read? They haven’t told him nasty tales about goblins, have they, or
read him too many of those innocent, colorful fairytale books which
contained nightmares ready to leap out and some needless fear that would
cause trouble one day?

And what Young Sam did was march across the floor, stop dead in front of
the girl and say, “I know a lot about poo. It’s very interesting!”

Tears of the Mushroom looked frantically for Miss Beedle while Young
Sam, totally at ease, began a brief dissertation on sheep poo. In
response, with words slapping together like little bricks, she said,
“What…is…poo…for?”

Young Sam frowned at this as if somebody was questioning his life’s
work. Then he looked up brightly and said, “Without poo, you would go
off bang!” And he stood there beaming, the meaning of life completely
solved.

And Tears of the Mushroom laughed. It was a rather staccato laugh,
reminding Vimes of the laughter of certain kinds of women, after certain
kinds of too much gin. But it was laughter—straight, genuine and
unaffected—and Young Sam bathed in it, giggling, and so did Sam Vimes,
with sweat beginning to cool on his neck.

Then Young Sam said, “I wish I had big hands like you. What’s your
name?”

In that clipped way Vimes was learning to recognize, the goblin girl
said, “I am the Tears of the Mushroom.”

Instantly Young Sam threw his arms around as much of her as he could
encompass and shouted, “Mushrooms shouldn’t cry!”

The look that the goblin girl gave Vimes was one that he had seen many
times before on the face of someone in receipt of Young Sam’s hugs: a
mixture of surprise and what Vimes had to call non-plussedness.

At this point Miss Beedle came back into the room holding a plate which
she passed to Tears of the Mushroom. “Please be so good as to serve our
guests, my dear.”

Tears of the Mushroom picked up the plate and tentatively pushed it
toward Vimes, and said something that sounded like half a dozen coconuts
rolling downstairs, but somehow managed to include the syllables you and
eat and I make. There seemed to be a pleading in her expression, as if
trying to make him understand.

Vimes stared at her face a while and then thought, Well, I could
understand, couldn’t I? It has to be worth a try, and closed his eyes,
an errand of some dubiousness when you were face-to-longer-face with a
jaw like that. With eyes firmly shut, and one hand over them to cut out
the last vestige of light, he said, “Will you say that again,
young…lady?” And in the darkness of his skull he heard, quite clearly,
“I have baked biscuits today Mr. Po-leees-man. I washed my hands,” she
added nervously. “They are clean and tasty. This I have said and it is a
thing exact.”

Baked by a goblin, thought Vimes as he opened his eyes and took a
knobbly but appetizing-looking biscuit from the plate in front of him,
then shut his eyes again and asked, “Why does the mushroom cry?”

In the dark he heard the goblin girl gasp, and then say, “It cries so
that there are many more mushrooms. This is a certain thing.”

Vimes heard the faint chink of crockery behind him, but as he took his
hands away from his eyes Miss Beedle said, “No, stay in darkness,
commander. So it’s true what the dwarfs say about you.”

“I wouldn’t know. What do the dwarfs say about me, Miss Beedle?”

Vimes opened his eyes. Miss Beedle sat down on a chair almost opposite,
while Tears of the Mushroom waited for more biscuit activity with the
air of someone who would probably wait forever or until told not to. She
looked imploringly at Vimes and then at Young Sam, who was studying
Tears of the Mushroom with interest, although, knowing Young Sam, most
of the interest had to do with the plate of biscuits. So he said, “Okay,
lad, you may ask the lady for a biscuit, but mind your manners.”

“They say that the dark is in you, commander, but you keep it in a cage.
A present from Koom Valley, they say.”

Vimes blinked in the light. “A dwarf superstition in a goblin cave? You
know a lot about dwarfs?”

“Quite a lot,” said Miss Beedle, “but far more about goblins, and they
believe in the Summoning Dark, just like the dwarfs, after all, they are
both creatures of the caves and the Summoning Dark is real. It’s not all
in your head, commander: no matter what you hear, I sometimes hear it
too. Oh dear, you of all people must recognize a substition when you’re
possessed by it? It’s the opposite of a superstition: it’s real even if
you don’t believe in it. My mother taught me that; she was a goblin.”

Vimes looked at the pleasant brown-haired woman in front of him and
said, politely, “No.”

“All right, perhaps you’ll allow me a little theatricality and
misdirection for effect? Truthfully, my mother was found as a child when
she was three and raised by goblins in Uberwald. Until she was about
eleven—and I say about because she was never quite certain about the
passage of time—she pretty much thought and acted like a goblin and
picked up their language, which is insanely difficult to learn if you’re
not brought up to it. She ate with them, had her own plot in the
mushroom farm and was very highly thought of among them for the way she
looked after the rat farm. She once told me that until she met my
father, all her best recollections were of those years in the goblin
cave.”

Miss Beedle stirred her coffee and continued. “And she also told me her
worst recollections, the ones that haunted her nightmares and, I might
say, haunt mine now: of one day after some nearby humans had found out
that there was a golden-haired, pink-cheeked human girl running around
underground with evil, treacherous brutes who, as everybody knows, eat
babies. Well, she screamed and fought as they tried to take her away,
especially since people who she had thought of as family were being
slaughtered around her.”

There was a pause. And Vimes glanced somewhat fearfully at Young Sam,
who, thankfully, had returned to The Joy of Earwax and was therefore
oblivious of all else.

“You haven’t touched your coffee, commander. You’re just holding it in
your hand and looking at me.”

Vimes took a deep draft of very hot coffee, which at the moment suited
him just fine. He said, “This is true? I’m sorry, I don’t know what to
say.”

Tears of the Mushroom was watching him carefully, ready should he feel a
biscuit attack coming on. They were in fact pretty good, and to hide his
confusion he thanked her and took another one.

“Best not to say anything, then,” said Miss Beedle. “All slaughtered,
for no reason. It happens. Everybody knows they’re a worthless people,
don’t they? I tell you, commander, it’s true that some of the most
terrible things in the world are done by people who think, genuinely
think, that they’re doing it for the best, especially if there is some
god involved. Well, it took a lot of those things, and quite a lot of
time, to convince a little girl that she wasn’t one of the nasty goblins
anymore and was really one of the human beings who were not nasty at
all, because one day they were certain she would understand that all
this terrible business with the bucket of cold water and the beatings
every time she spoke in the goblin tongue, or started absentmindedly to
sing a goblin song, was in her best interest. Fortunately, although she
probably didn’t think so at the time, she was strong and clever and she
learned: learned to be a good girl, learned to wear proper dresses and
eat with a knife and fork and kneel down to pray her thanks for all that
she was receiving, including the beatings. And she learned not to be a
goblin so successfully that they allowed her to work in the garden,
where she vaulted over the wall. They never broke her, and she said to
me that there would always be some goblin in her. I never met my father.
According to my mother he was a decent and hardworking man, and a
considerate and understanding one too, I suspect.”

Miss Beedle stood up and brushed at her dress, as if trying to remove
the crumbs of history. Standing there, in the chintzy room with the harp
in it, she said, “I don’t know who those people were who killed the
goblins and beat my mother, but if I ever found out I would slaughter
them without a thought, because good people have no business being so
bad. Goodness is about what you do. Not what you pray to. And that’s how
it went,” she said. “My father was a jeweler, and he soon found out that
my mother was absolutely gifted in that respect, probably because of her
goblin background that led her to have a feel for stones. I’m sure that
made up for having a wife who would swear in goblin when she was
annoyed—and let me tell you a good goblin swear can go on for at least a
quarter of an hour. She wasn’t one for the books, as you might expect,
but my dad had been, and one day I thought, “How hard can writing be?
After all, most of the words are going to be and, the and I and it, and
so on, and there’s a huge number to choose from, so a lot of the work
has already been done for you. That was fifty-seven books ago. It seems
to have worked.”

Miss Beedle sat back down in her chair and leaned forward. “They have
the most complex language you could possibly imagine, commander. The
meaning of every word is contingent on the words around it, the speaker,
the listener, the time of year, the weather, oh, and so many other
things. They have something equivalent to what we think of as poetry;
they use and control fire…And about three years ago nearly all of them
in this countryside were rounded up and carted away, because they were a
nuisance. Isn’t that why you’re here?”

Vimes took a deep breath. “Actually, Miss Beedle, I came here to see my
wife’s family estate and let my lad learn about the countryside. In the
process of which I’ve already been arrested on suspicion of killing a
blacksmith and have seen the brutally slaughtered body of a goblin
woman. On top of this I have no knowledge of the whereabouts of said
blacksmith and, Miss Beedle, would like somebody to enlighten me,
preferably yourself.”

“Yes, I saw the poor thing, and I’m sorry that I can’t tell you where
Jethro is.”

Vimes stared at her and thought, she’s probably telling the truth. “He’s
not hiding in some part of the mine, is he?”

“No, I’ve looked. I’ve looked everywhere. No note, nothing. And his
parents have no idea either. He’s a bit of a free spirit, but he’s not
the sort of person to go away without telling me.” She looked down,
clearly embarrassed.

The silence said a lot. Vimes broke it by saying, “The murder of that
poor girl on the hill will not go unpunished while I live. I’m taking it
personally, you might say. I think someone was trying to set me up and
mud sticks.” He paused. “Tell me—these pots the goblins make. Do they
carry them around all the time?”

“Well, yes, of course, but only the ones they’re filling at the moment,
obviously,” said Miss Beedle, with a trace of annoyance. “Is this
relevant?”

“Well, a policeman, you might say, thinks in goblin language: everything
is contingent on everything else. Incidentally, how many other people
know that you have a tunnel into the hill?”

“What makes you think I have a tunnel going into the hill?”

“Let me see now. This place is practically at the foot of the hill, and
if I lived here I’d have dug out a decent wine cellar for myself. That’s
one reason, and the other is because I saw the flash in your eyes when I
asked you the question. Would you like me to ask you the question
again?”

The woman opened her mouth to speak, and Vimes raised a finger. “Not
finished yet. What isn’t as simple is the fact that the other day you
arrived in the cave without anybody seeing you walk up the hill.
Everyone tells me that there are eyes watching you everywhere in the
country and, as luck would have it, I had a few working for me
yesterday. Please don’t waste my time. You’ve committed no crime that I
know of—you understand being kind to goblins is not a crime?” He thought
about that and added, “Although perhaps some people round here might
think it is. But I don’t and I’m not stupid, Miss Beedle. I saw that
goblin head in the pub. It looked as if it’s been there for years. Now,
I just want to go back up to the cave without anybody seeing me, if you
don’t mind, because I have a few questions to ask.”

Miss Beedle said, “You want to interrogate the goblins?”

“No, that word suggests that I mean to bully them. I simply have to
obtain the information I need to know before I start to investigate the
murder of the girl. If you don’t want to help me, I’m afraid that will
be your choice.”

The next day Sergeant Colon did not turn up for work. Mrs. Colon sent a
note around by a boy as soon as she got back from work herself.*

There was nothing romantic about Fred Colon when she got home, and so
after sweeping the floor, doing the washing-up, wiping all the surfaces
and spending some time teasing out the lumps of mud that had got caught
on the doormat, she made haste to Pseudopolis Yard—after visiting her
friend Mildred who had a rather nice porcelain jug and basin set she
wanted to sell. When she eventually got to the Watch House she explained
that Fred was terribly poorly, and sweating cobs and gabbling about
rabbits.

Sergeant Littlebottom was sent to investigate, and returned looking
solemn as she climbed the steps to Vimes’s office, now occupied by
Captain Carrot. You could tell he was the occupant now not simply
because he was sitting in the chair, which was a persuasive hint, but
also because all the paperwork was done and aligned, a trait which
always impressed Inspector A. E. Pessimal, a small man who had the heart
of a lion and the physical strength of a kitten and the face,
disposition and general demeanor that would make even hardened
accountants say, “Just look at him. Doesn’t he look like a typical
accountant to you?”

But this didn’t worry the lion heart of A. E. Pessimal. He was the
Watch’s secret weapon. There wasn’t a bookkeeper in the city who would
like to see a visit from A. E. Pessimal unless, of course, he was
perfectly innocent—although generally that could be ruled out, because
Mr. and Mrs. Pessimal’s little boy could track an error all the way
through the ledger and down into the cellar where the real books had
been hidden. And all Inspector A. E. Pessimal wanted for his genius was
a meticulously calculated wage and a chance, every now and again, to go
out on the streets with a real policeman, swinging his truncheon and
glaring at trolls.

Carrot leaned back. “So how’s Fred getting on, Cheery?”

“Nothing much that I can see, really, um…”

“That was a big um, Cheery.”

The trouble was that Captain Carrot had a friendly, honest and open
face, that made you want to tell him things. It didn’t help that
Sergeant Littlebottom held a small torch for the captain, even though he
was well and truly spoken for—he was also a dwarf, well, technically,
and you can’t help how you dream. “Well…” she began reluctantly.

Carrot leaned forward. “Yes, Cheery?”

She gave in. “Well, sir, it’s unggue. You come from Copperhead…Did you
run into many goblins up there?”

“No, but I know that unggue is their religion, if you can call it that.”

Cheery Littlebottom shook her head, trying to get out of her mind some
speculation about the part a reasonably high stool might play in a
relationship, and telling herself that Sergeant Hammer-of-Gold, over in
the Dolly Sisters Watch House, caught her eye every time she was busily
catching his eye when they happened to meet on patrol, and was probably
a really good catch if she could pluck up the courage to ask him if he
was actually male.* She said, “Unggue is not a religion, it’s a
superstition. The goblins don’t believe in Tak,* sir, they’re savages,
scavengers, but…” She hesitated again. “There’s something I was told
once, and it’s unbelievable, but sometimes they eat their babies, sir,
or at least, the mother will eat her child, her newborn child, if
there’s famine. Can you believe that?”

Carrot’s mouth dropped open for a moment, and then a small voice said,
“Yes, I think I can, sergeant, if you would excuse my saying so.”

A. E. Pessimal looked defiantly at their expressions and tried to stand
a little straighter. “It’s a matter of logic, you see? No food? But the
mother may survive by reconsuming the child, as it were, whereas, if all
other food has been exhausted, then the child will die. In fact the
child is dead as soon as the conundrum is postulated. The mother, on the
other hand, might, by so doing, survive for long enough for more food to
be found and become available, and in the course of time may bear
another child.”

“You know, that is a very accountancy thing to say!” said Cheery.

A. E. Pessimal remained calm. “Thank you, Sergeant Littlebottom, I shall
take that as a compliment because the logic is impeccable. It’s what is
known as the dreadful logic of necessity. I’m well versed in the
logistics of survival situations.”

The chair creaked as Captain Carrot leaned forward. “No offense meant,
Inspector Pessimal, but may I enquire as to what kind of issues of
survival arise during double-entry bookkeeping?”

A. E. Pessimal sighed. “It can get pretty hazardous as the end of the
fiscal year draws near, captain. However, I take your point and would
like you to understand that I believe I have read every single memoir,
manual, log, and message in a bottle—by which I mean, of course, message
taken from a bottle—that is currently available, and I can assure you
that you would be amazed at the terrible decisions that sometimes have
to be made by a group of people so that some, if not all, may live.
Classically we have the shipwrecked sailors adrift in an open boat far
on the ocean with succor extremely unlikely. Generally, the procedure is
to eat one another’s legs, although sooner or later the supply of legs
is going to run, if I may use the word, out; and then arises the
question who will die so that some may live. Dreadful algebra, captain.”
Only then did A. E. Pessimal blush. “I’m sorry. I know that I am a
small, weak man, but I have amassed a large library; I dream of
dangerous places.”

“Perhaps you should walk through the Shades, inspector,” said Carrot,
“you wouldn’t have to dream. Do carry on, Cheery.”

Cheery Littlebottom shrugged. “But eating your own child, that’s got to
be wrong, yes?”

“Well, sergeant,” said A. E. Pessimal, “I have read about such things
and if you think of the outcomes, which are the death of both mother and
child or the death of the child but the possible life of the mother, the
conclusion must be that her decision is right. In his book A Banquet of
Worms Colonel F. J. Massingham does mention this about the goblins and
apparently, according to the goblins’ world view, a consumed child,
which clearly did emerge from the mother, has been returned whence it
came and will, hopefully, be reborn anew at some future date when
circumstances are more favorable with, therefore, no actual harm done.
You may think that this view does not stand up to scrutiny, but when
you’re faced with the dreadful algebra, the world becomes quite a
different place.”

There was silence while they all contemplated this.

Carrot said, “You know how it is in a street fight, Cheery. Sometimes if
things get hot and you know it’s you or them—that’s when you do the
algebra.”

“Fred doesn’t seem to know where he is,” said Cheery. “He wasn’t running
a temperature and his bedroom isn’t particularly warm, but he acts as if
he’s very hot and he won’t let go of that damn little pot. He shouts if
anyone tries even to get near it. Actually, he screamed at me! And
that’s another thing, his voice has changed, he sounds like a man who’s
gargling rocks. I had a word with Ponder Stibbons at the university, but
they don’t appear to have anyone who knows anything much about goblins.”

Captain Carrot raised his eyebrows. “Are you sure? I know for a fact
that they have a Professor of Dust, Miscellaneous Particles and
Filaments, and you tell me that there’s no expert on an entire species
of talking humanoids?”

“That’s about right, sir. All we could turn up was stuff about what a
bloody nuisance they are—you know the kind of thing.”

“Nobody knows anything about goblins? I mean, stuff worth knowing?”

A. E. Pessimal actually saluted. “Harry King does, captain. There’s
quite a few of them downriver. They don’t come into town much, though.
You may remember that Lord Vetinari was gracious enough to ask for me to
be seconded to the revenue in order that I might go through Mr. King’s
returns, given that all the other tax officers were frightened to set
foot on his property. I myself, sir, was not frightened,” said A. E.
Pessimal proudly, “because I am protected by my badge and the majesty of
the law. Harry King might throw a taxman out of the building, but he’s
clever enough not to try that with one of Commander Vimes’s men, no
indeed!” You could have lit the city with the proud glow from A. E.
Pessimal’s face as he tried to puff out a chest that mostly went in.

It became a little more swollen when Carrot said, “Very well done,
inspector. You’re a mean man with a smoking abacus indeed. I think I
shall pay a visit to our old friend Harry first thing in the morning.”

Vimes did some thinking about the problem of taking Young Sam to a crime
scene, but frankly, the lad was showing himself to be up to just about
any encounter. Besides, any lad wants to go and see where his dad works.
He looked down at his son. “Would you be scared of a long walk in the
dark, lad? With me and these ladies?”

Young Sam looked solemn for a moment and then said, “I think I’ll let
Mr. Whistle do the being scared and then it won’t bother me.”

The door to the secret tunnel, if indeed it was secret, was in Miss
Beedle’s cellar, which had quite a well-appointed wine rack and a
general, not unpleasant smell of, well, a cellar. But once through the
door there was a smell of distant goblins.

It was a long walk in the dark, especially when you were obliged to walk
up quite a steep slope very nearly on hands and knees.

The smell of goblins grew stronger after a while, but during that while,
you tended to get used to it. Here and there light shone into the gloom
from holes to the outside world, which Vimes thought was sensible
engineering until he realized that rabbits used this tunnel too, and had
left plenty of droppings as evidence. He wondered whether he should
pocket a few samples for Young Sam’s collection and suggested this to
Young Sam, toiling manfully behind him, who said, “No, Dad, got rabbits.
Want elephant if we find one.”

Rabbit poo, Vimes noticed, was about the size of a chocolate raisin, a
thought which instantly dragged him back to his youth, when if by some
means, never entirely legal, he had acquired some cash, he would spend
it on a ticket to the fleapit music hall and buy a packet of chocolate
raisins with the change. Nobody knew, or cared to guess, what the things
were that scuttled and scratched down below the seats, but you soon
learned a very important rule: if you dropped your chocolate raisins, it
was vitally important not to pick them up!

Vimes stopped, causing Miss Beedle to walk into the sack of apples that
she had asked him to carry, and got a grip on himself sufficiently to
say, “I’d like a moment or two to catch my breath, Miss Beedle. Sorry,
not as young as I was and all that. I’ll catch you up. What are we
carrying these bags for anyway?”

“Fruit and vegetables, commander.”

“What? To goblins? I’d have thought they found their own food.”

Miss Beedle inched her way around him and climbed on into the dark,
saying, over her shoulder, “Yes, they do.”

Vimes sat with Young Sam for a moment until he felt better and said,
“How are you doing, lad?”

In the dark a small voice said, “I told Mr. Whistle not to worry, Dad,
because he’s a bit silly.”

So is your father, thought Vimes, and is probably going to continue to
be so. But he was on the chase. One way or another he was on the chase.
Who you were chasing could wait. The chasing was the thing.

Anger helped Vimes up the last leg of the climb. Anger at himself and
whoever it was who had punctured his holiday. But it was worrying: he
had wanted something to happen and now it had. Somebody was dead.
Sometimes you had to take a look at yourself and then look away.

He found Miss Beedle and Tears of the Mushroom waiting with a dozen or
so other…ladies. It was a calculated guess, given that he had yet to
find any reliable way of telling one goblin from another—except, of
course, that Tears of the Mushroom was wearing her apron with pockets,
which he hadn’t seen before, and apparently neither had the other
ladies, since Tears of the Mushroom was now the hit of the season as far
as her sisters were concerned, given that they currently wore daring
little outfits of old sacking, plaited grasses and rabbit skin. They
gathered around her chorusing, presumably, the goblin equivalent of “Oh
my dear, you look fabulous.”*

Miss Beedle sidled up to Vimes and said, “I know what you’re thinking,
but it’s a start. Carrying things, useful things, without having to use
your hands—well, that’s a step in the right direction.” She pulled Vimes
a little way from the newly formed goblin branch of the Women’s
Institute, who had by now attracted the attention of Young Sam, whose
cheerful reluctance to be overawed by anything had clearly won over the
girls, resulting in his being where he always felt he should be, the
center of attention. It was a knack.

Miss Beedle went on, “If you want to change a whole people, then you
start with the girls. It stands to reason: they learn faster, and they
pass on what they learn to their children. I suppose you’re wondering
why we were trekking up here with all the sacks?”

Behind them, the apron was being tried on by one girl after another:
this year’s must-have item. Vimes turned back to the woman and said,
“Well, this is just a guess, but I see a lot of rabbit bones around the
place, and I have heard that you can die if you live only on rabbit,
only I don’t know why this is.”

Miss Beedle lit up. “Well, Commander Vimes, you’ve certainly gone up in
my estimation! Yes, rabbit has been the scourge of the goblin nation! I
understand it depletes the body of some vital nutrient if you don’t eat
other things as well. Just about any green stuff will do, but the male
goblins think a proper meal is a rabbit on a stick.” She sighed. “Dwarfs
know about this, and they’re absolutely fanatical about good food, as
you should be if you spend much of your time underground, but nobody
cared to tell the goblins, as if they would listen anyway, and so bad
health and premature death is their lot. Some survive, of course, mostly
those who prefer rat or eat the whole rabbit, not just the more
apparently edible bits, or they simply eat their vegetables.”

She began to unfasten a sack of cabbages and continued, “I was well in
with the wife of the head man here, because he got sick and I made
certain he got a few good meals. Of course he swears it was because he
did the magic, but his wife was remarkably sensible, and the other males
don’t worry about what the girls get up to, so they slip fruit and veg
into their stews, saying they’re magical, and so they have children who
survive and thus we change the world one meal at a time. That is if the
goblins get a chance to live at all.” She looked sadly at the gossiping
girls and said, “What they really need is a first-class theologian,
because, you see, they agree with the rest of the world: they think
they’re rubbish! They think they did something very bad, a long time
ago, and because of it they’ve lived like they do. They think they have
it coming to them, as you might say.”

Vimes frowned. He couldn’t remember ever going into a church or temple
or one of the numerous other places of more or less spirituality for any
other reason than the occasional requirements of the job. These days he
tended to go in for reasons of Sybil, i.e., his wife dragging him along
so that he could be seen, and, if possible, seen remaining awake.

No, the world of next worlds, afterlives and purgatorial destinations
simply did not fit into his head. Whether you wanted it or not, you were
born, you did the best you could, and then, whether you really wanted to
or not, you died. They were the only certainties, and so the best thing
for a copper to do was to get on with the job. And it was about time
that Sam Vimes got back to doing his.

Young Sam at this point had tired of petticoat company and had drifted
over to an elderly goblin man who was working on a pot, and was watching
with extreme fascination, to the apparent pleasure, as far as Vimes
could tell, of the elderly goblin. That’s a lesson to us…I don’t know
what kind of lesson, but it’s a lesson, he thought.

Vimes waited until Miss Beedle returned from discussing the possible new
fashion explosion with the girls, then politely asked her, “Did the
victim have any unggue pots on her?”

“I would be amazed if she hadn’t,” said Miss Beedle. “One or two at the
very least, but probably the quite small ones for use during the day.”

“I see,” said Vimes, “but were any found on her, er, afterward, I mean,
if she was laid out?” He didn’t know what the protocol was and
continued, “Look, Miss Beedle, is it possible that she had an unggue pot
on her that’s now missing? I know they’re valuable, of course—they’re
shiny.”

“I don’t know, but I’ll go and ask the Cold Bone Wakes. He’s the head
goblin. He’ll know.”

That reminded Vimes. Feeling embarrassed, he delved into his pocket and
took out a small package very, very carefully wrapped, and handed it to
Miss Beedle with a pleading look. “I believe this belonged to the dead
girl,” he said. “A stone ring with a little blue bead in it? Can you see
that it gets to someone here who’ll value it?” All she had was a stone
ring, he thought, and even that got taken away.

There were times when the world did not need policemen, because what it
really did need was for somebody who knew what they were doing to shut
it all down and start it all up again so that this time it could be done
properly…

But before despair could entirely set in, Miss Beedle was back, and
excited. “How apposite that you should ask that question, Commander! One
of them was missing! Unggue cat!”

Vimes could register absolute flat-faced incomprehension as well as any
copper born. It radiated a searchlight of ignorance, but that was fine
because Miss Beedle was prepared to be a fountainhead of information.
“I’m sure you know what everybody knows, commander, which is that
goblins do, I might say religiously, store certain bodily secretions in
pots, in the belief that these must be reunited with their corpse when
they are buried. This obligation is called unggue. All goblins must, by
custom, which is very strict among goblins, maintain the Unggue Had, the
trinity of snot, nail clippings and earwax. The missing pot in this case
is the pot of cat, which contains nail clippings. Don’t get misled by
the word ‘cat.’ Felines don’t come into the picture…it’s simply that
there are only so many syllables in the world.”

“And this is the first time you’ve heard that it’s missing, Miss
Beedle?”

“Well, this is my first time down here since yesterday, and it’s a
difficult time to talk to her family, as you may imagine…”

“I see,” said Vimes, though he didn’t, not very much—although he could
sense a tiny bead of light growing in the darkness of his mind. He
glanced again at Young Sam, who was studying the potmaker with every
sign of forensic interest. That’s my boy. He continued, “Did they look
for the pot?”

“Looked everywhere, commander, even outside. And it’ll be quite small.
You see, every goblin makes a set of pots which are kept deep inside the
cave. I don’t know where they are, though in most other things they
trust me. This is because humans steal pots. For this reason, most
goblins make other comparatively small pots for daily use and for when
they leave the cave, and decant them into the larger pots later, in
secret.” She tried to smile, and said, “I’m sure this seems quite
outlandish to you, commander, but the making and maintaining of the pots
is to them a religion in itself.”

At this point Samuel Vimes was not keen to be heard giving his views
about pots, so he contented himself with saying, “Is it possible that
another goblin might have stolen the pot? Anyway, what size is ‘quite
small’?”

Miss Beedle gave him a surprised look. “If you trust me on anything,
commander, trust me on this. No goblin would dream of stealing another
goblin’s pot. The concept of doing so would be totally alien to them, I
assure you. The size? Oh, usually similar to a lady’s compact or perhaps
a snuffbox. They have a shine on them like opals.”

“Yes,” said Vimes, “I know,” and he thought bright colors in the dark.
He said, “I don’t want to be difficult, but could I borrow another of
the poor lady’s pots? I might need one to show people what it is I’m
looking for.”

Miss Beedle looked surprised again. “That would be impossible, but I
think that if I talk to Tears of the Mushroom she might, just might,
loan you one of hers, in which case I may say you will be a very special
person, commander. A pot usually changes hands only because of distress,
but Tears of the Mushroom spends a lot of time with me and has learned,
shall I say, the uses of flexible thinking and, if I may say so, she has
taken a little bit of a shine to you.”

She walked away, leaving the startled Vimes and Young Sam to their own
devices. Here and there, goblins were doing whatever they did, tending
small fires, sleeping, or in many cases fussing with their pots. And a
few just sat there staring blankly at nothing at all, like a policeman
wondering how you spell phantasmagorical.

And a new image dragged itself out of Vimes’s memory. It was of a lot of
little blue men shouting, “Crivens!” Ah yes, the Nac Mac Feegle! They
lived in holes in the ground as well. Admittedly, these were said to be
rather more salubrious than this midden-ridden cave system, but however
you looked at it, they were in the same situation as the goblins. They
lived on the edge too, but they—they danced on the edge, they jumped up
and down on it, made faces at it, thumbed their snotty noses at it,
refused to see the peril of their situation and, in general, seemed to
have a huge appetite for life, alcohol, adventure and alcohol. As a
copper, he shouldn’t say it, because they could be a bloody nuisance,
but there was something commendable about the cheerfully feisty way they
faced, well, everything…

Somebody tugged at his sleeve. He looked down into the face of Tears of
the Mushroom, with Miss Beedle standing over her like a chaperone. The
other goblin girls stood behind the pair of them like an Ephebian
chorus.

The solemn voice from the little face said, “Hearts must give, Mr.
Po-leess-man.”

With dreadfully bad timing, Miss Beedle broke in like an overactive
schoolteacher, and Vimes was privately overjoyed to see a brief look of
annoyance on Tears of the Mushroom’s face.

“She means that if she is to trust you with a pot, then you must trust
her with something equally valuable. I suppose you would call it a
hostage situation.”

No, I wouldn’t, Vimes thought, looking into the dark eyes of the goblin
girl. That was a strange thing: when he got past the features, which at
best could be considered homely, depending on what kind of home you had
in mind, the eyes were as human as you could imagine. They had a depth
that not even the brightest animal could achieve. He reached for his
wallet, and Miss Beedle said sharply, “Money won’t do!”

He ignored her and finished pulling out the picture of Young Sam that he
took everywhere and carefully passed it to Tears of the Mushroom, who
took it as if holding a rare and delicate object—which, from the point
of view of Vimes, it certainly was. She looked at it, then down at the
boy himself, who gave her a cheery smile, and her eyes confirmed that
the grimace on her face was in fact an answering smile. For Young Sam,
the goblin cave was an interesting fairyland. You had to admire his
ability not to be immediately frightened of anything.

Tears of the Mushroom looked back at the picture and then back at Young
Sam and then at the face of Vimes. She tucked the picture carefully into
her apron and pulled out her hand, holding a small, iridescent pot. She
held it out to Vimes, her hand trembling slightly, and he found himself
taking it gingerly in both hands. Then Tears of the Mushroom said in her
strange voice, like a living filing cabinet, “Hearts have given.” Which
almost brought Vimes to his knees.

He thought: it could just as well have been her head grinning on the pub
wall! Someone is going to burn!

In the back of his mind a cheerful voice said, “Well done, Commander
Vimes, at last you are singing from my hymn sheet!”

He ignored it, feeling the little pot; it was as smooth as skin.
Whatever it was made to contain, and he wasn’t going to ask, the
contents were masked by a carved latticework of flowers and mushrooms.

In the cool depths of his cellar, Mr. Jiminy the publican was preparing
for the evening rush when he heard a sound in the darkness among the
barrels. He dismissed it as being yet another rat until a hand was
clamped over his mouth.

“Excuse me, sir, I have reason to believe that you can help me with my
inquiries.” The man struggled, but Vimes knew every trick when it came
to apprehending a suspect. He hissed, “You know who I am, sir, and I
know what you are. We’re both coppers and we’ve been around the houses.
You said that the barman sees everything, hears everything and says
nothing, and I’m a fair man, Mr. Jiminy, but I’m investigating a murder.
A murder, sir, the capital crime, and maybe something much, much worse.
So excuse me if I take the view that those who aren’t behind me are
standing in my way, with all that that entails.”

Jiminy was running out of breath now, and squirming feebly. “Oh, too
much of the booze and too little walking the beat, I fancy,” said Vimes.
“Now, I would not ask a man to break the barman’s solemn oath, so when I
take my hand away, we’ll sit down peacefully and play a little game of
charades. I’m letting go…now.”

The barman wheezed a curse, and added, “You didn’t need to do that,
commander. I’ve got a bad chest, you know!”

“Not as bad as it might otherwise be, Mr. Jiminy. And now a word on the
subject of being too clever.”

The publican glared as Vimes went on, “I’m strictly a copper. I don’t
kill people unless they’re trying to kill me. You may be aware of my
batman, Mr. Willikins. You saw him the other day. Regrettably he’s more
direct, and also extremely loyal. A few years ago, to save my family, he
killed an armed dwarf with a common ice knife. And he has other talents:
among them, I have to say, is that he can iron a shirt as crisply as any
man I know. And, as I say, very loyal indeed. C’mon, Jiminy. I’m a
copper and you’re a copper. You’re still a copper whatever you say—the
stain never leaves you. You know what I can do and I know what you can
do and you’re smart enough to choose the right side.”

“All right, you don’t need to rub it in,” Jiminy grumbled. “We both know
about the ins and outs.” His voice was suddenly and almost theatrically
helpful as he crooned, “How may I help you, officer, just like the good
citizen that I am?”

Vimes carefully pulled out of his coat the little pot. It was indeed
about the size of a snuffbox. The incongruity was not lost on Vimes: in
one pocket he held the glorious gem, quite likely the repository of
goblin snot, and in the other he had his own small snuffbox. How
hilarious would it be if he’d mixed them up?

Jiminy certainly reacted when he saw it, although he probably thought he
hadn’t. There is a subtle difference between hiding your reaction and
showing that you are hiding your reaction.

“All right, all right, Mr. Vimes, you’re right. We don’t have to play
games, old coppers like us. I give in. I know what that is. Seen one
like it recently, as a matter of fact.”

“And?”

“I can give you a name, Mr. Vimes. ’Cos why? Cause he’s a nut job, a toe
rag, and he ain’t from around here. Name of Stratford, or so they call
him. A knife cove, the kind of bloke you never want to see walk through
your pub door, I don’t mind telling you. He isn’t often here, thank
goodness. The other day was the first time I’ve seen him in months. I
don’t know where he kips, but the snotty bugger he was hanging out with
is called Ted Flutter, works for young Lord Rust up at Hangnail. His
lordship is big in tobacco, so they tell me.” Jiminy stopped.

Vimes interpreted this in exactly the way Jiminy wanted, he was sure.
Lord Rust was up to something, Jiminy was insinuating, and throwing a
bone to Vimes to get the man off his back. Some people would have
thought this despicable, but the man was an ex-policeman, after all.

Jiminy gave a little cough as he endeavored to find another victim for
Vimes to pursue. “But Flutter, well, you know, he’s just a bloke. If
someone needs help for something or other, he’s the kind of bloke who’d
be the lookout or be told to take away the bones. When not up to
mischief I think he hangs wallpaper and runs a turkey farm up on the
road toward Overhang. You can’t miss it, it’s a stinky ol’ place and he
doesn’t take care of his birds. Not entirely all there, in my opinion.”

Vimes seized his opening. “Tobacco, eh? Oh yes, Mr. Jiminy, I did think
I smelled rather more tobacco down here than might otherwise be
expected, and, of course, as a policeman, it’s something that I’ll have
to look into, perhaps, when time allows.” He winked, and Jiminy nodded
knowingly.

With the atmosphere now tentatively upbeat, Jiminy said, “They brings a
few barrels up here some nights and then picks it up again as and when.
All right, I know it’s the revenue and all that, but I don’t see the
harm. And since we understand one another so well, Mr. Vimes, I’ve been
here for only three years. I know there was some stuff way back, maybe
they did scrag a few goblins, I don’t know, not my business. Don’t know
why, don’t know who, if you get my meaning?” Jiminy was sweating like a
pig, Vimes noticed.

There are times when reacting the way that simple, common decency
requires fails to serve a higher purpose, and because of this Vimes
merely gave the man a little smile and said, “One day, Mr. Jiminy, I’ll
bring a lady here. I think she’d be very interested to see your
establishment.”

Jiminy was puzzled but had the grace to say, “I’ll look forward to it,
commander.”

“What I’m trying to say,” said Vimes, “is that if this pub still has the
head of a goblin hanging over the bar the next time I’m here there’ll be
a mysterious fire, do you understand? No doubt you want to keep in with
young Lord Rust and his chums, because it always pays to keep in with
the powerful. I know that well enough. You’ll find me a good friend, Mr.
Jiminy, and I’d like to suggest to you that it would not be in your
interest to have Commander Vimes as your enemy. Just a word to the wise,
you know, one copper to another.”

With forced cheerfulness Jiminy said, in a voice that dripped butter and
sugar, “No one ever said that Constable Jiminy didn’t know how the wind
was blowing, and since you’ve been so gracious as to visit my humble
establishment I think I can take the view that the wind has begun to
blow due Vimes.”

Vimes lifted the cellar hatch to depart and said, “Oh, so do I, Mr.
Jiminy, so do I, and if ever the weathercock decides to blow the other
way, I’ll bite its bloody head off.”

Jiminy smiled uncertainly and said, “Do you have jurisdiction here,
commander?”

And was dragged by the shirt to within an inch of Vimes’s face, eyeball
to eyeball, and Vimes said, “Try me.”

Feeling rather chirpy after this interlude, Vimes jogged to the lane
that led to the hill and found Miss Beedle and Tears of the Mushroom at
the door of the cottage. By the look of it they had been picking apples;
several baskets of fruit had been piled up. He thought that Tears of the
Mushroom smiled when she saw him, although how could you tell, really?
Goblin faces were hard to read.

The pot was dutifully traded back for the picture, and Vimes couldn’t
help noticing, because he always made a point of noticing, that both he
and the girl tried surreptitiously to examine their precious items
without causing offense. He was sure he heard Miss Beedle stifle a sigh
of relief. “Did you find the murderer?” she said, leaning forward
anxiously. She turned to the girl. “Go inside, dear, while I talk to
Commander Vimes, will you?”

“Yes, Miss Beedle, I will go inside as you request.”

There it was again: a language of little boxes, opening and shutting as
required. The girl disappeared into the house, and Vimes said, “I have
information that two men were in the pub on the night of the murder, and
one of them certainly had a pot. Neither of them, I’ve been led to
believe, was a pillar of society.”

Miss Beedle clapped her hands. “Well, that’s good, isn’t it? You have
them bang to rights!”

It always embarrassed Samuel Vimes when civilians tried to speak to him
in what they thought was “policeman.” If it came to that, he hated
thinking of them as civilians. What was a policeman, if not a civilian
with a uniform and a badge? But they tended to use the term these days
as a way of describing people who were not policemen. It was a dangerous
habit: once policemen stopped being civilians the only other thing they
could be was soldiers. He sighed. “As far as I know, miss, it is not
illegal to have a goblin pot. Neither is it, strictly speaking, illegal
to be described as not a pillar of society. Do goblins sign their pots
in some way?”

“Oh yes, indeed, commander, goblin pots are always distinctive. Do these
criminals have a modus operandi?”

Vimes’s heart sank. “No, and I don’t think they’d know one if they saw
it.” He tried to say this firmly, because Miss Beedle looked as if she
would at any moment turn out with a magnifying glass and a bloodhound.

Then, falling across his world like a rainbow of sound, came music,
drifting out of the open cottage window. He listened with his mouth
open, entirely forgetting the conversation.

His Grace the Duke of Ankh, Commander Sir Samuel Vimes, was not a man
who made a point of frequenting performances of classical music, or
indeed any music that you couldn’t whistle on the way home. But
apparently being a nob carried with it a requirement to attend the
opera, the ballet and as many musical events as Sybil could drag him to.
Fortunately, they generally had a box, and Sybil, very wisely, having
dragged him to the performance, did not subsequently drag him into
consciousness. But some of it seeped through and it was enough for him
to know that what he was hearing was the real, highbrow stuff: you
couldn’t hum it, and at no point did anybody shout “Whoops! Have a
banana!” It was the pure quill of music, a sound that came close to
making you want to fall on your knees and promise to be a better person.
He turned wordlessly to Miss Beedle, who said, “She’s very good, isn’t
she?”

“That’s a harp, isn’t it? A goblin playing a harp?”

Miss Beedle seemed embarrassed by the fuss. “Certainly, why shouldn’t
she? Strangely enough, her large hands are suited to the instrument. I
don’t think she understands the concept of reading music yet, and I have
to help her tune it, but she does play very well. Heaven knows where
she’s getting the music from…”

“Heaven?” said Vimes, adding urgently, “How long will she be playing?
Have I got time to bring Sybil over here?” He didn’t wait for an answer
but hurried off down the lane, clambered over a gate, caused a flock of
sheep to explode in all directions, swore at a kissing gate, jumped over
the ha-ha, completely ignored the he-he and totally avoided the ho-hum.
He hurtled down the drive, scampered up the steps and, providentially,
went through the front door at exactly the same time as a footman swung
it open.

Sybil was taking tea with a group of ladies, which appeared to be
obligatory procedure in the afternoons, but Vimes leaned against the
wall and panted out, “You must come and listen to this music! Bring
Young Sam! Bring these ladies if they want to come, but whatever you do,
come on! I’ve never heard anything so good!”

Sybil looked around. “Well, we were just breaking up, Sam. You know, you
look very flushed. Is anything the matter?” She looked imploringly at
her friends, who were already rising in their seats, and said, “I do
hope you’ll forgive me, ladies. It’s so very difficult being the wife of
an important man.” There was a slight barb to the last syllable. “I’m
sure, Sam, that whatever it is can wait until I’ve said goodbye to my
guests, yes?”

And so Sam Vimes shook hands, smiled, shook hands, smiled and fretted
until the last twitterer had tweeted and the last lady had left.

Having seen the final carriage away, Lady Sybil came back in, flopped
into a chair in front of Sam and listened to Vimes’s garbled account.

“And this is that young goblin girl Miss Beedle has been teaching to
talk?”

Vimes was almost frantic. “Yes! And she plays wonderful music!
Wonderful!”

“Sam Vimes, when I take you to a concert you fall asleep in ten minutes.
Do you know what? You’ve convinced me. Let’s go, shall we?”

“Where?” said Vimes, in husbandly confusion.

Sybil affected surprise. “Why, to hear the young lady play the harp, of
course. I thought that was what you wanted. I’ll go and get my jacket
while you find Young Sam, please? He’s in the laboratory.”

For Vimes, bewilderment was now accumulating. “The…”

“The laboratory, Sam! You know my family were famous meddlers, don’t
you? Willikins is in there with him, and I believe they’re dissecting
some, shall I say, excrement? Make certain they’ve both washed their
hands—thoroughly,” she added, on the way out of the room. “And tell them
I was emphatic, and tell Young Sam what emphatic means!”

The coach stood empty in the lane. They hadn’t dared knock on the door,
not while that heavenly music was drifting out of the cottage window.
Sybil was in tears, but often she looked up, and said things like, “That
shouldn’t be possible on a harp!” Even Young Sam was transfixed,
standing there with his little mouth open, while the music rushed in
and, for a moment upon the world, lifted all hearts and forgave all
sins—not having its work cut out in the case of Young Sam, a part of
Vimes managed to reflect, but doing a sterling and heavyweight job on
his father. And when the music stopped Young Sam said, “More!” and that
went for his parents, too. They stood there, not looking at one another,
and then the cottage door opened and Miss Beedle stepped out.

“I saw you out there, of course. Do come in, but quietly. I’ve made
lemonade.” She led them through the hall and turned into the living
room.

Tears of the Mushroom must have been forewarned by Miss Beedle. She sat
on a chair next to the harp with her oversized hands clasped demurely
over her apron. Wordlessly, Young Sam walked over to her and cuddled her
leg. The goblin girl looked panicky and Vimes said, “Don’t worry, he
just wants to show that he loves you.” And he thought, I’ve just told a
goblin not to be frightened of my son because he loves her and the world
has turned upside-down and all sins are forgiven, except possibly mine.

As the coach rattled gently back toward Ramkin Hall Lady Sybil said
quietly to Vimes, “I understand that the young lady goblin who
was…murdered could play the harp as well as Miss Mushroom.”

Vimes stirred from his inner thoughts and said, “I didn’t know that.”

“Oh yes,” said Sybil, in a curiously chatty voice. “Apparently Miss
Beedle wants young goblin girls to have something to be proud of.” She
cleared her throat, and, after a pause, said, “Do you have any suspects,
Sam?”

“Oh yes, two. I have the testimony of a reliable witness that they were
in the area after the event, and I’m beginning to consider a chain of
events that might lead me also to the whereabouts of Mr. Jefferson the
smith. This is the countryside, after all. Everyone sees where you go
and you never know who is behind a hedge. I believe they may have heard
him invite me to Dead Man’s Copse on what The Times would call ‘that
fateful night.’ ”

Sybil looked down at Young Sam, dozing between them, and said, “Do you
know where they live?”

“Yes, one of them at least. I think the other one just hangs around, as
they say.” And now the rattle of gravel under wheel told them that they
were going down the long drive.

Sybil cleared her throat again, and in a quiet voice said, “I fear you
may have felt that I was being rather acerbic to you, Sam, on the
subject of letting your professional concerns get in the way of our
holiday. I may, at times, have been somewhat…blunt.”

“Not at all, Sybil, I fully understood your concern.”

It seemed that Lady Sybil really could have done with some cough drops,
but she carried on carefully and said, “Sam, I’d be very grateful if you
could see your way clear to perhaps taking Willikins with you to
wherever it is that these scoundrels poison the world with their
existence, and bring them to justice, if you would be so good.”

He could feel her trembling with rage and said, “I was considering doing
so as soon as possible, my dear, but I must tell you that things may not
go entirely in accordance with the rulebook. After all, I’m out of my
jurisdiction here.”

But his wife said, “You’re a stickler for the book, Sam, and I admire
that, but the jurisdiction of a good man extends to the end of the
world—though who will you take them to? Havelock would hang them, you
know that. But he’s a long way away. Nonetheless, Sam, I am certain of
one thing and it’s this: the worst thing you can do is nothing. Go to
it, Sam.”

“Actually, Sybil, I was considering delivering them to the local
justices.”

“What? They’re a terrible bunch, apparently using what they call the law
here for their own ends! There’ll be an enormous stink!”

Vimes smiled. “Oh dear, do you really think so?”

There was no point going to bed, thought Vimes later that evening, and
so he kissed his wife goodnight and went to the snooker room where
Willikins was idly demonstrating one of the more socially acceptable
skills he had learned during a misspent youth. The man straightened up
when Vimes walked in and said, “Good evening, commander. Would you like
a sustaining drink to be going on with?”

Vimes also indulged in a rare cigar because, well, what good is a
snooker room without smoke twisting among the lights and turning the air
a desolate blue, the color of dead hopes and lost chances?

Willikins, who knew the protocol, waited until Vimes had made his shot
before coughing gently. “Oh, well done, sir, and I understand her
ladyship is somewhat vexed about the goblin situation, sir. I believe
this to be the case, sir, because I met her in the corridor earlier and
she used language I haven’t heard on the lips of a woman since my old
mother passed away, gods bless her soul, if they can find it. But, well
done again, sir.”

Vimes laid his cue aside. “I want to get them all, Willikins. It’s no
good slamming up some local thug.”

“Yes indeed, commander, it’s all about potting the black.”

Vimes looked up from his fiery drink. “I can see you must have played a
lot in your time, Willikins. Did you ever see Pelvic Williams? Very
religious man in his way, lived somewhere in Hen-and-Chickens Court with
his sister, played like I’ve never seen anyone else play before or
since. I swear he could make a ball jump the table, roll along the edge
and drop back onto the cloth just where he wanted it, to drop neatly
into the pocket.” Vimes gave a grunt of satisfaction, and went on, “Of
course, everyone used to say that was cheating, but he used to stand
there, as meek as milk, just repeating ‘The ball dropped.’ Tell you the
truth, the reason he never got beaten up was that it was an education
watching the man. He once sank a ball by bouncing it off the lamp and a
pint mug. But, like he said, the ball dropped.” Vimes relaxed and said,
“The trouble is, of course, that in real life rules are more stringent.”

“Yes indeed, commander,” said Willikins. “Where I used to play the only
rule was that after you’d hit your opponent over the head with your cue
you had to be able to run very fast. I understand from her ladyship that
you might be requiring my assistance tonight?”

“Yes, please. We’re going to the village of Hangnails. It’s about twenty
miles upriver.”

Willikins nodded. “Yes indeed, sir, once the seat of the Hangnail family
and most notably of Lord Justice Hangnail, who famously declared that he
never took account of any plea of not guilty on the basis that
‘criminals always lie’ and was, by happy chance, the Worshipful Master
of the Benevolent Company of Rope Makers and Braiders. With any luck,
we’ll not see his like again.”

“Excellent, Willikins, and we’ll stop en route to pick up our keen young
local constable, who’ll see fair play. I intend to make sure of that.”

“Glad to hear it, sir,” said Willikins, “but bear this in mind: what
does it matter once the ball has dropped?”

It was Mrs. Upshot who opened the cottage door, gave a little scream,
slammed the door, opened the door to apologize for slamming the door,
and then shut the door carefully, leaving Vimes on the doorstep. Thirty
seconds later Feeney opened the door, with his nightshirt tucked into
his trousers. “Commander Vimes! Is something wrong?” he said, trying
valiantly to tuck all the nightshirt inside.

Vimes rubbed his hands together briskly. “Yes, Chief Constable Upshot,
almost everything is, but there is one part that can be made right with
your help. Regarding the murder of the goblin girl, I have sufficient
information to warrant apprehending two men for questioning. This is
your manor, so professionally speaking I think it’s only right and
proper that you assist me with the arrests.”

Vimes took a step into the room so that the face of Willikins was
visible, and went on, “And I think you know Willikins, my manservant,
who has volunteered to drive my coach and, of course, provide me with a
clean white shirt should I need it.”

“Yerrr,” growled Willikins, turning to wink at Vimes.

“Chief Constable Upshot, I’d be obliged if you would arm yourself with
whatever you think you might need and, since you don’t have a pair of
handcuffs worth a damn, oh I’m so sorry, then at least can you source
some rope?”

The face of Feeney Upshot was a whole palette of conflicting emotions.
I’ll be working with the famous Commander Vimes—hooray! But this is big
and serious—oh dear. But it’ll be like being a real policeman—hooray!
But there’s already a hot water bottle in my bed—oh dear. On the other
hand, if it all goes wrong, well, after all, the Duke of Ankh owns most
of this place, so he’ll have to take most of the blame—hooray! And maybe
if I distinguish myself I can get a job in the city, so that my mum can
live in a place where you don’t lie awake at night listening to the mice
fighting the cockroaches—hooray!*

It was a treat for Vimes to watch the lad’s face in the candlelight,
especially as Feeney moved his lips as he thought. And so he said, “I’m
sure, Chief Constable Upshot, that assistance in this matter will be
very helpful to your future career.”

This last comment caused Mrs. Upshot, peering over her son’s shoulder,
to flush with pride and say, “Hark at his grace, Feeney! You could make
something of yourself, just like I’m always telling you! No arguing now,
off you go, my lad.”

This motherly advice was punctuated by Mrs. Upshot bobbing up and down
so fast that she could have been harnessed to a sewing machine. Thank
goodness for old mums, Vimes thought, as Feeney eventually got into the
coach with a flask of hot tea, a spare pair of clean drawers and half an
apple pie.

As the wheels started to turn, and after Feeney had finished waving to
his old mum out of the window, Vimes, balancing carefully against the
rocking, lit the little spirit lamp that was all the coach had for
illumination. He fell back into his seat again and said, “I’d be
grateful, lad, if you would take some time to write down in your
notebook everything I’ve said to you since I arrived this evening. It
might be of assistance to both of us.” Feeney practically saluted, and
Vimes continued, “When we saw the dead goblin girl the other day, Mr.
Feeney, did you make a note of that in your notebook?”

“Yes, sir!” Feeney nearly saluted again. “My granddad told me always to
write everything down in my notebook!”

They bounced in their seats as the coach hit a stone and Vimes said
quietly, “Did he ever tell you to accidentally sometimes turn over two
pages at once so that you had the occasional blank page?”

“Oh, no, sir. Should I?”

The seat bounced them up and down again as Vimes said, “Strictly
speaking, lad, the answer is no, especially if you never work with me.
Now please write it all down, just as I asked. And since I am not as
young as you, I’m going to try to get some rest.”

“Yessir, I understand that, sir. Just one thing, sir? Mr. Stoner, the
Clerk to the Magistrates, came to see me this afternoon, and had a chat
and said not to bother about the goblin girl because goblins are
officially vermin. He was very kind, and brought some brandy for my old
mum, and he said that you were a fine gentleman but tended to get a bee
in your bonnet, sir, what with being upper-class and out of touch, sir.
Sir? Sir? Have you gone to sleep, sir?”

Vimes turned his head and in honeyed tones said, “Did you make a note of
that in your notebook, lad?”

“Oh, yessir!”

“And you still got in this coach with me? Why did you do that, Mr.
Feeney?”

Gravel rattled behind them and it seemed some time before Feeney Upshot
had assembled his thoughts to his satisfaction. He said, “Well,
Commander Vimes, I thought, well, that Mr. Stoner he’s a nob more or
less, and so is Commander Vimes, only he’s a duke and is therefore a
very big nob and if you’re going to get caught between nobs, maybe you’d
better pick the biggest one to be on the side of.” He heard Vimes grunt,
and continued, “And then, sir, I thought, well, I was up there, I saw
that poor creature and what had been done to her, and I remembered that
Stoner had tried to make a fool out of me by making me arrest your good
self, sir, and I thought about the goblins and I thought, well, they’re
mucky and smelly and the old goblin was crying, and animals don’t cry
and goblins, well, they make stuff, beautiful stuff and as for pinching
our pig swill and being generally mucky, we surely ain’t short of humans
around here who are pretty big in that respect, I could tell you some
stories, and so I thought some more and I thought, well, that Mr.
Stoner, I thought he must have got it wrong.”

There was a rumbling as the coach went over a bridge and then the sound
of wheels on packed flints was back. Feeney said anxiously, “Is that all
right, sir?” He waited nervously. And then the voice of Vimes, and this
time sounding rather far away said, “Do you know what that little speech
you made was called, Mr. Feeney?”

“Don’t know, sir, it’s just what I think.”

“It was called redemption, Mr. Feeney. Hold on to it.”

Vimes woke from a doze in which he had dreamed about Young Sam playing a
harp, and by the time he had understood that this was a dream the noise
of the coach wheels had changed as they slowed down and stopped.

Willikins slid open the small slot that allowed discourse between
passenger and coachman and said quietly, “Rise and shine, sir, we’re
about a quarter of a mile from Hangnails, population thirty-seven and
still stupid. And you can smell turkey from here and wish you bloody
well couldn’t, excuse my Klatchian. I surmised that it might be a good
idea to walk quietly the rest of the way, sir.”

Vimes got down from the coach and stamped the cramp out of his limbs.
The air stank with the curiously invasive smell of birds; not even
goblins persecuted the sinuses one half so badly. But this was a tiny
distraction compared with the thrill, yes, the thrill. How long was it
since he had led a dawn raid? Far too long, that’s how long, and now
captains and senior sergeants got the job while he stayed in the office,
being the Ankh-Morpork City Watch. Well, not today.

Whispering as they walked through the knee-high mist, he said, “You,
Chief Constable Upshot, you will hammer on the front door when I give
you the signal, and I will be stationed outside the back door in case
the gentleman does a runner, okay?”

They were nearing the property now, yes, they would just need the two of
them. The farmhouse looked barely big enough to have two doors, let
alone three.

“What shall I say, commander?” hissed Feeney.

“Oh, blimey, you’re the bloody son and grandson of coppers, my lad, what
the hell do you think you should shout? Let me give you a clue. It does
not include the word ‘please.’ I’ll give you a whistle when I’m in
position, got it? Good.”

They walked with care across the stinking yard and Vimes took up station
around the back, where an interesting thought occurred to him and he
made a mental note. He then leaned against the dirty wall of the house a
little bit away from the back door, took a pinch of snuff to clear the
air of turkey and gave one faint whistle.

“Open up in the name of the law! You are surrounded! You have one minute
to open the door! I mean it! Open the door! This is the police!”

Leaning cosily against the wall, Vimes grudgingly rated that as pretty
good for a beginner, with one point taken off for adding “I mean it,”
then, as a man flew out of the back door, he stuck out his boot.

“Good morning, sir. My name is Commander Vimes! I hope you’re in a
position to remember yours!”

In the sheds the turkeys were going insane, causing a slight rise in the
smell. The man struggled to his feet, looking around desperately.

“Oh, yes, you could run, yes, you could do that,” said Vimes in a
conversational tone of voice, “but it might be thought by others that
this might indicate that you knew you had some reason to run. Now,
personally, I would agree that anyone stopped by a copper should run
like buggery, innocent or not, on first principles. Besides, we get so
fat these days that we need the exercise. But do run if you want to, Mr.
Flutter, because I can run too, and very fast.”

By now Flutter was smiling the smile of a man who thinks that this
copper is not very smart.

“I bet you don’t have a magistrate’s warrant, do ya’?”

“Well now, Mr. Flutter, why might you think that, eh? Perhaps you think
the magistrates might not issue a warrant to arrest you, yes? By the
way, thank you for showing me where the tobacco barrels are stored. Your
cooperation will be taken into consideration.”

Some days are bad days, like when you stare right down into the mangled
corpse of a young woman, and then you get good days, when the suspect’s
darting eyes flashing across the yard show you exactly where the loot is
hidden.

“I shall, of course, mention your cooperation to the authorities and, of
course, in the local pub as well, ah, yes.”

And now Mr. Flutter was relishing the thought of being seen as some kind
of grass, so stupidly he went for, “I never told you anything about any
tobacco, and you know it, copper!”

At this point Feeney stepped around the corner with his fearsome club
raised and a look of almost comical aggression on his face. “You want me
to give him the old one-two, commander, just say the word, guv!”

Vimes rolled his eyes in mock despair. “No need for that, Feeney, no
need for that, just when Mr. Flutter here is so anxious to talk to us,
understand?”

Flutter decided that the way forward was an appeal to Feeney. “Look,
Feeney, you know me—”

He got that far and no further because Feeney said, “It’s Constable
Upshot to you, Flutter. My dad had you up before the beaks two dozen
times, you know. He used to call you the bluebottle on account of
whenever there was a load of shit going down he’d find you flapping
about in it. And he told me to watch you, which is what I am doing right
now, in fact.” He glanced at Vimes, who gave him an encouraging nod and
then said, “You see my problem, Mr. Flutter, we’re not here to talk
about contraband tobacco, okay? Now, I never saw myself as a revenuer,
not a popular profession. I’m a copper pure and simple, right, and in my
hand I have this man what is only doing a favor to his employer by
storing a few barrels of tobacco in his shed, but on the other hand,
well, if I found a murderer in the other hand, why, gods bless you, I
might totally forget all about the first hand…Don’t ask me to draw you a
picture, Flutter, because my hands are full.”

Flutter looked aghast. “This is about that goblin, right? Look, it
wasn’t me! Okay, I’m a bit of a naughty boy, I put my hand up to that,
but I ain’t like him! I’m a scallywag, not a damn murderer!”

Vimes looked at Feeney. Some people could be said to be as pleased as
punch. Feeney could be said to look as pleased as Punch, Judy, the dog
Toby, the crocodile and, above all, the policeman, all rolled in
together. Vimes raised his eyebrows in new interrogation, and Feeney
said, “I believe him, chief. He hasn’t got it in him, I swear. The best
he could manage would be knocking over an old lady for her purse, and
even then she’d probably have to be blind too.”

“There, you see!” said Flutter triumphantly. “I’m not really a bad
person!”

“No,” said Vimes, “you’re a veritable choirboy, Mr. Flutter, I can see
that, and I’m rather religious too, and I like chapter and verse, but
are you willing to swear that the individual known as Stratford knifed a
goblin girl to death on Hangman’s Hill in the grounds of Ramkin Hall,
three nights ago?”

Flutter raised a finger. “Can I say that I told him to stop, and he
laughed, and I didn’t know it was a girl neither—I mean, how can you
tell?”

Vimes’s face was deadpan. “Tell me, Ted, what would you have done if you
had known? I’m intrigued.”

Flutter looked down at his feet. “Well, I, well, well, I mean…not a
girl, I mean…well, not a girl…I mean, that’s not right, know what I
mean?”

And you can find someone like this dangerous clown in nearly every
neighborhood, Vimes thought. “Clearly chivalry is not dead, Mr. Flutter.
Okay, Feeney, let’s carry on. Mr. Flutter, why were you on Hangman’s
Hill on the aforesaid night?”

“We were just having a walk,” said Flutter.

Vimes’s face was again deadpan, so deadpan as to be mortified. “Of
course you were, Mr. Flutter. Silly of me to ask the question, really.
Constable Upshot, I can see Willikins over there having a smoke.” He
pushed at the open door and dragged Flutter inside. “Does this building
have a cellar?”

Flutter was one step away from a toilet break, but nevertheless, being
the kind of fool to dig himself in deeper, managed to sneer, “There
might be. So what?”

“Mr. Flutter, I have already told you that I’m a religious man, and
since you would test the patience of a saint I need to spend a moment in
quiet contemplation, understand? I’m sure you know that there’s always
an easy way, and then again, there’s always the hard way. Currently,
this is the easy way, but the hard way is also quite easy, in a manner
of speaking. Before talking to you again I want to be alone with my
thoughts. And it occurs to me, Mr. Flutter, that you might have some
thoughts about, as it were, legging it, and so my colleague, Chief
Constable Upshot, will guard the door and I shall send in my batman, Mr.
Willikins, to keep you company.”

Before Vimes was even able to tap on the window, the door opened and
Willikins, immaculate as ever, stepped into the grubby room, all smart
and crisp with shiny shoes and a hint of pomade on his hair. The three
men then watched Vimes heave at a likely ring on the floor, which pulled
back to reveal the trap door to a dark cellar and a ladder going down.

Vimes said, “Constable Upshot, I need a little time to think in the
darkness. I won’t be long.” He went down the ladder and pulled the trap
door closed behind him.

The darkness said, “Ah, commander, at long last. I suspect that you’re
here to take a witness statement.”

This is wrong, Vimes told himself. How can you take testimony from a
demon, especially when it’s one of no fixed abode? But on the other
hand, who needs a witness statement if you’ve got a confession?

Up above, Ted Flutter’s eyes rolled this way and that as he analyzed the
situation. Let’s see: we have one young twit who is playing at being a
copper, and a snooty butler type, all pink and shiny. I reckon Mrs.
Flutter’s little boy is out of here. At this point, at this very point,
Willikins, without looking at Flutter, reached into his jacket and there
was a slap as he laid down on the table in front of him a steel comb. It
gleamed. And it gleamed even stronger in Flutter’s imagination. He took
one look at Willikins’ expression, and Mrs. Flutter’s little boy decided
he would sit very still until that nice Commander Vimes came back. Out
of another pocket Willikins produced the sharpest-looking knife Flutter
had ever seen and, without paying any attention whatsoever to Flutter,
began to clean his fingernails.

In fact it was only a matter of seconds before the trap door was heaved
back, and Vimes emerged, then nodded to Willikins, who secured the comb
and walked out of the room without a word. Vimes regained the chair.
“Mr. Flutter, I have a witness statement that puts you on Hangman’s Hill
on the night in question with another man, said man being known as
Stratford. The witness tells me that you said to him that you could have
got hold of some turkey blood, but he said that there were rabbits all
over the place and he never missed with his slingshot. At this point the
witness says a young goblin girl came out of the bushes and your
companion struck at her as she was begging for her life—and furiously,
to the extent that you yourself told him, in your words, to leave off,
upon which he turned on you, still holding his knife, described to me as
a machete, so swiftly that you urinated into your boots.

“No, don’t speak, I haven’t finished. Nevertheless, I am informed that
you did say to your companion that you were supposed to leave just
blood, and not, as you put it, ‘guts all over the place,’ whereupon he
forced you to put them back into the cadaver and hide it further down
the hill in some gorse bushes. No, I said don’t talk! In your pocket you
had a pork pie, which you’d brought from home, and three dollars in
cash, which was your payment for this little errand.

“After that you and Stratford walked back some distance to your horses,
which you had temporarily stabled in the tumbledown old barn on the
other side of the village. The horses were a chestnut mare and a gray
gelding, both of them broken down by ill use. In fact, the gelding threw
a shoe as you were leaving, and you had to stop your companion from
killing it there and then. Oh, and the witness told me that you were
naked to the waist when you left, since your shirt was soaked with blood
and you left it in the barn after an argument with Stratford. I’ll
recover it when we get back. Your friend told you to take your trousers
off as well, but you declined; however, I noted splashes of blood on
them earlier. I don’t want to go to the expense of sending a rider back
to the city, where my Igor will ascertain whether the blood is human,
goblin or turkey. I said don’t speak, didn’t I? I haven’t mentioned some
of the other conversation between you and Mr. Stratford, because Feeney
here is listening, and you should be relieved about that; gossip can be
so cruel.

“And now Mr. Flutter, I’m going to stop talking and upon doing so I
would like the first words you utter to be—pay attention—‘I want to turn
King’s evidence.’ Yes, I know we don’t have kings anymore, but nobody
has amended the law. You are a little shit, but I’m reluctantly
persuaded that you were dragged into something beyond your control and
worse than you could have imagined. The good news is that Lord Vetinari
will almost certainly take my advice and you will live. Remember: ‘I
want to turn King’s evidence,’ that’s what I want to hear, Mr. Flutter,
otherwise I’ll go for a walk and Mr. Willikins will comb his hair.”

Flutter, who had listened to most of this with his eyes shut, blurted
out the words so fast that Vimes had to ask him to repeat them more
slowly. When he had finished he was allowed to go to the privy, with
Willikins waiting outside, cleaning his nails with his knife, and Feeney
was sent to feed the frantic turkeys.

For his part, Vimes entered one of the stinking sheds and prodded around
in the dirty straw for what he knew would be there. He was not
disappointed. Sufficiently close to, the smell of tobacco was just
discernible above the stifling stink of turkey. He rolled a barrel out,
found Feeney and said, “I think this is full of tobacco and so I’m
intending to take it as evidence. Your job right now is to scout out a
jemmy for me and somebody known to you as a decent upstanding citizen,
insofar as there might be one around this place.”

“Well, there’s Dave who runs the Dog and Badger,” Feeney volunteered.

“And he is an upstanding citizen?” said Vimes.

“I have seen him sitting down,” said Feeney, “but he knows the score, if
you get my meaning.”

Vimes nodded and waited a few minutes before Feeney returned with a
crowbar, a bandy-legged man and a small tail of people who, for the
moment, until proved otherwise, had to be counted as “innocent
bystanders.”

They gathered around as Vimes prepared to open the barrel. He announced,
“Pay attention, gentlemen. I believe this barrel contains contraband
goods.” He rolled up his sleeves—“You see that I have nothing up my
sleeves, but a crowbar in my hand”—and with some effort on his part the
lid of the barrel came off, and the smell of tobacco was overpowering.
And some of the bystanders decided it was now time to take the wonderful
opportunity for a quick nonchalant walk.

Vimes pulled out bale after bale of brown leaves bound with cotton.
“Can’t take too much on the coach,” he said, “but if Mr. Dave here will,
as an upstanding member of the community, sign to say that he saw me
pull these from a sealed barrel, then you, Mr. Feeney, will take a brief
statement and we can all go about our business.”

Feeney beamed. “Oh, very well spotted, commander! I reckon you could
hide anything in this stink, eh?” After a moment he looked at Vimes and
said, “Commander?”

Vimes appeared to look through him and said, “You’re going to go far,
Chief Constable Upshot. Let’s empty the whole barrel, shall we?”

He didn’t know where the thought had come from. Maybe from first
principles. If you were going to smuggle, where would you stop? What
would your market be? How would you get the best price per pound of
product carried? He pulled and pulled at the bundles, and one, almost at
the bottom of the barrel, was noticeably heavier than the others. Trying
to keep his expression unchanged, he handed the heavy bundle to Feeney
and said, “I’d be grateful if you and Mr. Dave would open this bundle
and tell me what you see inside.” He sat down on the barrel and took a
pinch of snuff while behind him he heard the rustling, and then Feeney
said, “Well, commander, what this appears to be—”

Vimes held up a hand. “Does it look like stone dust to you, Feeney?”

“Yes, but—”

Vimes held up his hand again. “Does it appear to have little red and
blue flecks in it when you hold it to the light?”

Sometimes the ancestral copper in Feeney picked up the vibration. “Yes,
Commander Vimes!”

“Then it’s a good job for you and your friend Dave”—Vimes glanced at the
said Dave for the second time and decided to give him the benefit of the
doubt—“that the two of you are not trolls, because if you were you’d be
stone dead, as it were, right now. The stuff you are holding is Crystal
Slam, I’d bet my badge on it. Troll kids use it as a drug, do you know
that? They take a hit as small as your little pinky and think they can
walk through walls, which they invariably do, too, and when they’ve done
it a few times more they drop down dead. It’s illegal everywhere in the
world, and very difficult to make because the smell when they’re boiling
it up is unmistakable; you get a lot of sparks too. Selling it is a
hanging offense in Ankh-Morpork, Uberwald and every troll city. Diamond
King of Trolls gives a very handsome bounty to anyone who presents him
with evidence of manufacture.”

Vimes looked hopefully at the aforesaid Dave, just in case the man would
take the bait. No, he thought, they wouldn’t do it round here. All this
tobacco must come from somewhere hot, and that means a long way away.

Gingerly, they broke open other barrels and found plenty of tobacco and
several packs of very high-class cigars, one or two of which Vimes put
in his breast pocket for detailed forensic examination later, and,
somewhere at the bottom of every barrel, there were neat packets of
Crystal Slam, Slunkie, Slab, Slice and Slap, all of them very
nasty—although Slap was generally considered to be a recreational drug,
at least if your idea of recreation was waking up in the gutter not
knowing whose head you had on.

As many samples as possible were piled into the coach and Vimes only
stopped when it started to creak. The other barrels were piled up and,
at Vimes’s instigation, a very proud Chief Constable Upshot set fire to
them. When the controlled drugs caught alight there was a brief display
of pyrotechnics and Vimes thought to himself that this was only the
start of the fireworks.

As people came running out to see what was happening, Vimes reassured
them of his bona fides and explained that Mr. Flutter would be away for
a while, and could somebody please look after the birds. The responses
he got made it clear that the neighborhood considered a world without
Mr. Flutter and his stinking turkeys would be a much better world, so
the last thing that Vimes did was to open the sheds and let the wretched
creatures take their chances.

As a last little bright idea, Vimes beckoned to the nervous Dave and
said, “Diamond King of Trolls will be very appreciative of this day’s
work. Of course, as serving officers we wouldn’t be able to take any
remuneration…”

“We wouldn’t?” said Feeney hopelessly.

Vimes ignored this and continued, “I will, however, see to it that your
help today is suitably rewarded.” The publican’s face lit up. Something
about the words diamond and rewarded in the same sentence does that to a
face.

They traveled with the creaking coach doors locked, but with a window
slightly open because Mr. Flutter was currently not somebody you would
wish to be in any confined space with: he appeared to be sweating
turkeys.

King’s evidence! That was a result! Flutter hadn’t thought about
arguing, and Vimes had seen his expression as the Summoning Dark’s
statement was presented to him. Vimes had noticed every wince and shiver
of recollection that, taken together, added up to rights well banged.
King’s evidence! Any man would opt for that to save his skin, or maybe
for a better class of cell. You took King’s evidence to save your
miserable hide and it might indeed do so, but at a price, and that price
was death by hanging if you lied. It was one of the absolutes: lying
when you had turned King’s evidence was the lie of lies. You had lied to
the judge, you had lied to the King, you had lied to society, you had
lied to the world, and thus the cheerful Mr. Trooper would welcome you
to the gallows, and shake your hand to show you there were no hard
feelings, and shortly afterward would pull the lever that would drop you
from the world you had betrayed, and stop…halfway down.

And then, of course, there were the troll drugs. The evidence of their
existence worried Flutter so much that he invented new gods to swear to
that he knew nothing about them. Vimes believed him. As far as Flutter
was concerned, the barrels contained nothing more than tobacco. Good old
tobacco, nothing harmful about tobacco, and smuggling it was, well, it
really was like a game, everybody knew that. Nothing wrong with
outsmarting the revenue, that was what the revenue was for! Vimes
thought, isn’t that how I’ve always said it worked? Little crimes
breeding big crimes. You smile at little crimes and then big crimes blow
your head off.

Flutter was sitting miserably on the opposite seat, possibly fearing
being kicked to death by trolls, but then, as Vimes had noted, Flutter
probably feared everybody. And so Vimes found it in his heart to offer
him not so much a crumb as a bacon sandwich of good news. “You were in
the company of a violent man, Ted. You thought you were just going to
make life difficult for a copper, and suddenly you were an accessory of
the first part to murder and, even if unwittingly, tangled up in
extremely serious troll narcotics, the worst there is. But you’ve got
into bad company, Ted, and I will say so in court.”

Hope appeared in Flutter’s red-rimmed eyes, and he said, “That’s very
kind of you, sir.” That was it. No swagger, no whining, just gratitude
for mercies received and fervently hoped for.

Vimes leaned forward and offered the bewildered man his snuffbox.
Flutter took a large pinch and sniffed it up so hard that the inevitable
sneeze tried to escape via his ears. Ignoring this, and the faint haze
of brown in the air, Vimes leaned back and said cheerfully, “I’ll have a
word with the screws in the Tanty, they always owe me anyway…” Vimes
looked at the hopeful face and thought, Blast it. I know they’re pretty
crowded right now. A squirt like him would be on a hiding to nothing,
whatever I do. Oh well. He carried on, “No, Mr. Flutter, tell you what
I’ll do, at least we’ll put you in a cell in Pseudopolis Yard. How about
that? It can be lonely in a cell all by yourself, but some might
consider that a blessing, especially after fifteen minutes in some parts
of the Tanty and, besides, my lads are fairly chatty when there’s not
much happening. We also have a better class of rat, the straw is fresh
and we don’t gob in your stirabout, and if you’re helpful and don’t keep
people awake at night, then you’ll be as right as rain.”

“You won’t have any trouble from me, commander!” The words came
tumbling, frantic to be heard and terrified that they might not.

“Glad to hear it, Ted,” said Vimes jovially. “I like a man who makes the
right choices! Incidentally, Ted, who suggested you play the little
trick on the hill?”

“Honestly, sir, it was Stratford, sir. He said it would be a little
joke. And I know what you’re going to ask me next, sir, and I asked him
who was behind all this, because it worried me a bit, seeing as I mostly
just breed turkeys and roll barrels around, you understand?” Flutter
assumed the expression of a simple, honest working man. “He said that if
he told me he’d have to kill me, and I said to him, I said, ‘Thank you
all the same, Mr. Stratford, but I won’t put you to the trouble’ and
kept my mouth shut, ’cos he had a funny look in his eye.” Flutter seemed
to think for a moment and added, “He always has a funny look in his
eye.”

Vimes tried to pretend that this was of little interest. Like a man with
a butterfly net, a killing jar and a passion to pin to a cork board the
last of the very rare Lancre blue butterflies, that has just taken its
repose on a thistle nearby, he tried to do nothing to make his quarry
take flight.

In an offhand way he said, “But you do know, don’t you, Ted? I mean,
you’re smart, Ted, underneath it all. A lot of people would say that two
planks are smarter than you, but frankly you can’t make a success of
things in this old world without keeping your eyes open and your ears
too, right?”

But of course, who would tell anything important to a twerp like
Flutter? He wasn’t even a henchman—you needed a certain amount of
tactical thinking before you could properly hench—but henchmen hang
about, and when they’re with someone as thick as Flutter they don’t
always guard their tongues.

Aloud he said, “It’s a shame really, Ted, you being the only one to get
banged up for all this, seeing that all you really did was help out a
mate for a couple of dollars and a pint, don’t you think? Terrible,
ain’t it, that decent folk have to take the rap, yes? Especially when
it’s a big rap.” He stopped talking and watched Flutter’s face.

“Weeeell,” said Flutter, “one day when he was a bit excited he did say
to me that Lord Rust depended on him, took him into his confidence and
everything and made sure his pockets always jingled, but I reckoned that
was nothing but boasting.”

Vimes was impressed at his own patience and said, “Look, Ted, did you
ever hear either of them talk about the goblin girl?”

A horrible grin suffused the man’s face. “I could if you want me to,
commander!”

Vimes stared at Flutter for a moment and said, “Ted, I want to know
things that you have either seen or heard. Not things you may have
imagined and, and this is the important bit, Ted, not things made up to
please me, right? Otherwise I won’t any longer be your friend…” Vimes
stopped to think for a moment. “Did you ever hear Lord Rust or Stratford
say anything about the blacksmith?”

It was an education watching the prisoner rack his brains. He looked
like a big dog chewing a toffee. Apparently he found something because
his next words were, “The blacksmith? I didn’t know that it was about
the blacksmith. Yeah, when we were stacking in the yard young Lord Rust
came up to Stratford and said something like, ‘Any news about our
friend?’ and, well, Stratford said, ‘Don’t you worry sir, he’s going to
see the Queen,’ and they both laughed, sir.” In the silence he said,
“Are you all right, sir?”

Vimes ignored this and said, “Have you any idea what he meant?”

“Nosir,” said Flutter.

“Is there anything called the Queen around here? Maybe a public house,
perhaps? Maybe a riverboat?” Vimes thought, Yes, they all have strange
names, there has to be a Queen among them.

Once again the dog chewed the toffee. “Sorry, commander, I don’t really
know anything about that. No boat on the river called the Queen.”

Vimes left it at that. It was a result. Not the best result. Nothing
that would satisfy Vetinari, but a hint at least of a minor conspiracy
to send Jethro to somewhere he did not want to be. Vimes at least had to
be satisfied.

Vimes realized that Flutter was holding up his hand cautiously, like a
child half-fearful of a reprimand from the teacher.

“Yes, Ted?” he said wearily.

The man lowered his hand. “Will I be able to find a god, sir?”

“What? Find what god?”

Flutter looked embarrassed but recovered manfully. “Well, sir, I’m
hearing about people who go into prison and find a god, sir, and if you
find a god then you get better treatment and maybe you get let out
sooner, on account of praying, and I was wondering if I was in the Watch
House that there might be more or less chance of god availability, if
you get my drift. I don’t want to be a trouble, of course.”

“Well, Ted, if there was any justice in the universe I think there would
be quite a few gods in the Tanty, but if I were you and faced a choice
between the possibility of heavenly intervention, and a definite three
meals a day that haven’t been spat on and no big blokes snoring in your
ear all night and the certain knowledge that if you have to go down on
your knees then it will only be to pray, then I would say heaven can
wait.”

The sun was already well up now and Willikins was keeping them moving at
a good pace. Vimes took notice of that fact. The Street was talking to
him even if it was in fact nothing more than a wide lane. He nudged
Feeney awake. “Soon be home now, lad, and I think Mr. Flutter can be
housed in your lovely lockup, don’t you?”

Flutter looked puzzled, and Vimes said, “Good grief, man. Surely you
didn’t think I could rush you all the way to Ankh-Morpork in one go? As
it is I’ll have to send someone to get someone else to come all the way
down here with the hurry-up wagon! Don’t worry, the lockup is strong and
cozy and made of stone, plus—and I’m led to believe that this is indeed
a big plus, this—Mrs. Upshot will probably make you a delicious Bang
Suck Muck Muck Dog, with carrots and garden peas. Speciality de
Maisonette.”

Rank has its privileges, Vimes thought, when he alighted near the old
lockup a little later. “Chief Constable Upshot, please settle our
prisoner down, see that he gets fed and watered and so on and so forth,
okay, and, obviously, do the paperwork.”

“The what, sir?”

Vimes blinked. “Is it possible, Mr. Feeney, that you don’t know what
paperwork is?”

Feeney was perplexed. “Well, yes, sir, of course, but generally I just
jot down the name in my notebook, sir. I mean, I know who he is, and I
know where he is and what he’s done. Oh, yes, and since the trouble we
had with old Mr. Parsley, after he had a skinful, I also make certain to
check if the prisoner is allergic to anything in Bhangbhangduc cuisine.
It took me all day to clean out the place, on account of there’d been a
tiny bit of winky.” Seeing Vimes’s expression, he went on, “Very popular
herb, sir.”

“Habeas corpus, lad! You want to be the copper here, right? Then Mr.
Flutter is your prisoner! You are responsible for him. If he gets ill,
then he is your problem, if he dies then he is your corpse, and if he
gets out and away then you would find yourself in a situation so
problematical that the word ‘problem’ just would not fit the situation.
I’m trying to be helpful, honestly, but I could just as easily take him
up to the Hall. We’ve got loads of cellars and we could easily bed him
down in one of them, no problem. But then if I have to do that, what
good are you?”

Feeney looked shocked. He pulled himself upright. “I wouldn’t hear of
that, sir, and neither would my ancestors, sir. After all, we’ve never
had anyone who has even been near a murder.”

“Very well, then, give me a receipt for the prisoner, which is a very
important thing, and I’ll go back to the Hall to have a nap.”

Vimes stepped back as a riverboat came into view and a very small tidal
wave of muddy water splashed gently on the little quayside. The boat was
another one with paddle wheels; Sybil had explained all about them. An
ox patiently trod its way around a treadmill in the bilges and wonderful
gearing caused the paddle wheels to turn.

The pilot of this one waved at him. As it went past he saw a woman in
the stern, hanging out clothing, watched by a cat. A good life, at the
speed of an ox, he thought, where probably no one is ever going to try
to kill you. And, just for a moment, he felt jealous, while a line of
barges followed the boat past a flotilla of ducklings. Vimes sighed, got
back in the coach, was driven to the Hall by Willikins and, after a very
brief shower, sank into the pillows and descended into darkness.

People said that these days Ankh-Morpork was moving. Others said that
while this might be true, so was a sufficiently aged cheese. And, like
the hypothetical cheese, it was bursting out of its mold, in this case
the outermost walls, which were, in the words of Lord Vetinari, “a
corset that should be unlaced.” One of the first to let themselves
spread had been Harry King, now, of course, known as Sir Harold King. He
was a scallywag, a chancer, a ruthless fighter and a dangerous driver of
bargains over the speed limit. Since all this was a bit of a mouthful,
he was referred to as a successful businessman, since that more or less
amounted to the same thing. And he had the knack of turning rubbish into
money. As Captains Carrot and Angua walked along the tow path toward the
reedy swamps downriver, Harry King’s flame burned ahead of them. All was
grist to the mills of the King of Muck. His armies of workers swept the
streets, emptied the cesspits, cleaned the chimneys, scoured the middens
of the slaughterhouse district and carried away from those selfsame
houses all those bits of previously living matter that could not, for
the love of decency, be put in a sausage. They said that Harry King
would suck the smoke out of the air if he thought he could get a good
price for it. And if you wanted a job, Harry King would give you one, at
a wage not very much less than you might get elsewhere in the city, and
if you stole from Harry King you would get what you deserved. The mills
of Harry King stank, of course, but now the city itself did not, at
least not as badly as it used to, and some people were complaining about
the loss of the famous Ankh-Morpork smell, rumored to be so strong that
it kept away illnesses and ailments of all sorts and, moreover, put
hairs on your chest and did you good.

Ankh-Morpork being what it was, there was already a Smell Preservation
Society.

The two watchmen began to breathe less deeply as they approached the
smoke and fumes. A small city surrounded the workings, a shanty town
knocked together with Harry’s blessing by the workers themselves
because, after all, that meant they wouldn’t be late for work.

The security officer at the gate opened it instantly as they approached.
Harry was probably not honest, but if there was dishonesty it happened
at times and places that did not concern the Watch, and faded from the
memory of all concerned just as soon as the ripples of the splash had
died away and the tide had gone out.

Also going out as Carrot and Angua climbed the outside steps to the
large office where Harry presided over his kingdom was a man, moving
horizontally at speed, with Harry King’s big hands grasping him by his
collar and the seat of his pants and finally throwing him down the
steps, accompanied by a shout, “You’re fired!” The watchmen stood aside
as the man rolled down from step to step. “And if I see you again, the
dogs is always hungry! Oh, hello, Captain Carrot,” said Harry, his voice
suddenly all matey, “and the charming Miss Angua too. My word, what a
lovely surprise, do come in, always a pleasure to be of assistance to
the Watch!”

“Sir Harry, you really shouldn’t throw people down the steps like that,”
said Carrot.

Harry King looked innocent and spread his huge hands widely, and said,
“What? Are those bloody steps still there? I gave orders to have them
taken away! Thank you for the advice, captain, but the way I see it is
that I caught him trying to steal my money and so if he’s still alive
then on the whole I reckon we’re square. Coffee? Tea? Something
stronger? No, I thought not, but take a seat, no harm in that, at
least.”

They sat down and Carrot said, “We need to talk about goblins.”

Harry King looked blank, but said, “Got a few of them working for me, if
that’s any help. Decent workers, you might be surprised to know. A bit
weird in their ways, not the fastest, but once they’ve got the hang of
what you want them to do you can just leave them to it until you tell
them to stop. I pay them half what I pay humans and I reckon they do
twice as much work, and do it better. Be happy to hire another hundred
if they turned up.”

“But you pay them far less than humans?” said Angua.

Harry gave her a pitying look. “And who else would pay them anything at
all, love? Well, business is business. It’s not like I chain them down.
Okay, not many people would want to employ goblins on account of the
stink, but I know by the wrinkling of your pretty nose, captain, that I
stink too. It goes with the job. Besides, I let them stay on my land and
they make those weird little pots in their spare time, and I see to it
they don’t have much of that, and when they have enough money for
whatever they want, they bugger off back to where they came from. Young
Slick and his granny are the only ones that’s ever stayed. Gonna make a
name for himself, that one.”

“We’d like to talk to some of the goblins about the pots you mentioned,
if that’s okay by you, Harry?” said Carrot.

Harry King smiled and waggled a finger at him. “Now, I’ll take that from
you two, because we’ve all seen a bit of the world and know what’s what,
but outside this office it’s Sir Harry, okay? Personally, I ain’t all
that bothered, but her ladyship is a stickler, oh my word, yes! Nose so
high in the air it brings down sparrows, I’m telling you! Still, I can’t
say it does any harm.” Harry King, or possibly Sir Harold King, thought
for a moment. “Out of interest, why do you want to talk about goblin
pots?”

Angua hesitated, but Carrot said, “We are both very interested in goblin
folklore, Sir Harry.”

Harry King chuckled. “You know, I never could read your face, Captain
Carrot. I’d hate to play poker with you! Okay, it’s not my business,
I’ll take you at your word. Just you go down the steps and make your way
to the sorting belts and find Billy Slick, and tell him that Harry King
would deem it a favor if he would be so good as to take you to see his
old granny, okay? No need to thank me, I suspect old Vimes put in a good
word about me to Vetinari when the medals was being given out, if you
know what I mean. They say one hand washes the other, but I bet that
when it came to old Harry King it had to scrub.”

They found Billy Slick stacking old copies of the Ankh-Morpork Times
onto a truck. You could always recognize a goblin, although this one, in
his grubby overall, looked like any other working man in the place. The
only difference was that he was a goblin working man.

Carrot tapped him gently on the shoulder and Billy looked round. “Oh,
coppers.”

“We’ve come from Harry King, Billy,” said Carrot, adding quickly,
“You’ve done nothing wrong. We just want to learn about unggue pots.”

“You want to learn about unggue?” Billy stared at Carrot. “I know I
ain’t done nothing wrong, guv, and I don’t need you to do the telling of
me and I wouldn’t touch any of those bloody pots to save my life. I’m
working my way up, I am. Can’t be bothered with fairy stories.”

Angua stepped forward and said, “Mr. Slick, this is quite important. We
need to find someone who can tell us about unggue pots. Do you know
anyone who can help?”

Billy looked her up and down superciliously. “You’re a werewolf, ain’t
ya? Can smell you a mile off. And what would you do if I said I didn’t
know anybody?”

“Then,” said Carrot, “we would regrettably have to go about our
business.”

Billy looked sideways at him. “Would that be the business of giving me a
good kicking?”

The morning sun shone on Carrot’s enthusiastically polished breastplate.
“No, Mr. Slick, it would not.”

Billy looked him up and down. “Well, there’s my granny. Maybe she’ll
talk to you, maybe she won’t. I’m only telling you that much because of
Mr. King. She’s right careful about who she talks to, you may bet your
helmet on that. What do you want to talk about pots for, anyway? She
hardly gets out of bed these days. Can’t see her doing a robbery!”

“Nor do we, Billy, we just want some information about the pots.”

“Well, you’ve come to the right lady, she’s an expert, so I reckon,
always fussing about the bloody things. Got a bottle of brandy on you?
She’s not one for strangers, my granny, but I reckon that anyone with a
bottle of brandy is no stranger to Granny as long as the drink holds
out.”

Angua whispered to Carrot, “Harry’s got a huge drinks cabinet in his
office, and it’s not like this is bribery. Worth a try?”

She waited with Billy Slick while Carrot went on the errand, and for
something to say, she said, “Billy Slick doesn’t sound much like a
goblin name?”

Billy made a face. “Too right! Granny calls me Of the Wind Regretfully
Blown. What kind of name is that, I ask you? Who’s going to take you
seriously with a name like that? This is modern times, right?” He looked
at her defiantly, and she thought: and so one at a time we all become
human—human werewolves, human dwarfs, human trolls…the melting pot melts
in one direction only, and so we make progress. Aloud, she said, “Aren’t
you proud of your goblin name?”

He looked at her with his mouth open, showing his pointy teeth. “What?
Proud? Why the fruckle should anyone be proud of being a goblin? Except
my granny, of course. Come along inside, and I surely hope that the
brandy arrives quickly. She can be fretful without the brandy.”

Billy Slick and his granny lived in a building of sorts in the shanty
town. Willow and other saplings had been liberated from the damp swamps
and used to make a reasonably large hemisphere, the size of a small
cottage. It seemed to Angua that some skill and thought had gone into
the construction: smaller twigs and branches had been interwoven with
the structure and some had, as is the way with willow, rooted themselves
and sprouted, and then somebody, presumably Billy Slick, had further
interwoven the new growth so that, in the summertime at least, it was a
pretty good gaff, especially since somebody had meticulously filled most
of the gaps with smaller weaves. Inside, it was a smoky cave, but the
dark-accustomed eye of the werewolf saw that the inner walls had been
lined very carefully with old tarpaulin and any other rubbish that could
be persuaded to bend, to keep away drafts. Okay, it had probably taken
less than two days to build and cost nothing, but the city was full of
people who would have been overjoyed to live there.

“Sorry about this,” said Billy. “I can’t say that Harry is a big payer,
but he turns a blind eye to us snaffling the occasional bits and pieces
if we don’t get cheeky about it.”

“But you’ve even got a stove pipe!” said Angua, astonished.

Billy looked down. “Leaks a bit; waiting for me to solder a few patches
on, that’s all. Wait here, I’ll just make sure she’s ready for you. I
know she’ll be ready for the brandy.”

There was a polite knock on the door which turned out to be courtesy of
Captain Carrot who was on his way back with the brandy. He carefully
opened the battered and many-times-painted outside door and let in some
light. Then he looked around and said, “Very cozy!”

Angua tapped her foot. “Look, he’s even jigsawed broken bits of roof
tile together to make a decent floor cover. There’s some thoughtful
construction going on here.” She lowered her voice and whispered, “And
he’s a goblin. It’s not what I’d expected—”

“Got bloody good hearing as well, miss,” said Billy, re-entering the
room. “Amazing, innit, what tricks us goblins can learn. Cor, you’d
almost think we were people!” He pointed toward a hanging of some sort
of felt that obscured the other end of the room. “Got the brandy wine?
Off we go, then. Hold the bottle out in front of you, that usually does
the trick. Officers, the lady ain’t my granny as such, she’s my
great-granny, but that was too much of a mouthful for me when I was a
little kid, so Granny she became. Let me do the talking, ’cos unless you
are a bloody genius, you won’t understand a blind word she says! Come on
in, quickly, I’ve got to go and make her lunch in half an hour, and,
like I said, you’ve probably got until the drink runs out.”

“I can’t see a thing,” said Carrot, as the felt somberly swung back
behind them, and Angua said, carefully, “I can. Would you be so good as
to introduce us to your great-grandmother, Billy?”

Carrot still fought for any kind of vision but heard what he thought was
the goblin boy speaking, although it sounded as if he was chewing gravel
at the same time. Then, after a sense of movement in the darkness,
another voice, cracking like ice, answered him. Then Billy quite clearly
said, “Regret of the Falling Leaf welcomes you, watchmen, and bids you
give her the bloody brandy right now.”

Carrot held the bottle out in the direction of Billy’s voice, and it was
swiftly passed on to the shape beginning to form in front of him as
sight trickled back. The shape apparently said, according to Billy, “Why
you come to me, po-leess-man? Why you need help from dying lady? What is
unggue to you, Mr. Po-leess-man? Unggue is ours, ours! No good for you
here, big Mr. po-leess-man!”

“What is unggue, madam?” said Carrot.

“No religion, no ringing bellsey, no knees all bendey, no chorus, no
hallelujah, no by your leave, just unggue, pure unggue! Just unggue, who
come when need. Little unggue! When gods wash hands and turn away there
is unggue who roll up the sleeves! Unggue strikes in the dark. If unggue
don’t come himself, he send. Unggue is everywhere!”

Carrot cleared his throat. “Regret of the Falling Leaf, we have a man, a
policeman, a good man, who is dying of unggue. We don’t understand;
please help us understand. In his hand he is holding an unggue pot.”

The screech must have echoed around the works; it certainly made the
little shack rock. “Unggue thief! Pot stealer! Not fit to live!” Billy
translated with every sign of embarrassment. The old goblin woman tried
to stand up and sank back into her cushions, muttering.

Angua tried: “You are wrong, old lady. This pot came to him by chance.
He found it, it is the pot called soul of tears.”

Regret of the Falling Leaf had filled the world with noise. Now she
appeared to empty it with silence. She said, bitterly and come to that,
curiously, considering the fact that her great grandson said she didn’t
know much Ankh-Morporkian, “Found in goblin cave, oh yes! Found on end
of shovel, oh yes! Bad cess to him!”

“No!” Suddenly Carrot was face to face with the goblin woman. “It came
to him by accident, like a curse. He never wanted it and he didn’t know
what it was. He found it in a cigar.”

There was a pause in which, presumably, the old woman was doing some
complex thinking, because she said, “Would you pay me my price, Mr.
Po-leess-man?”

“We gave you the brandy,” said Angua.

“Indeedy, wolf whelp, but that was for consultation only. Now it’s price
for diagnosis and cure, which will be from the snuff mill, two pounds of
sweet raspberry, one pound of angler’s chum, and one pound of Dr.
Varies’ medicated upright mixture, just the job on a winter’s day.”
Something like a laugh escaped from the old goblin woman’s mouth. “Glad
of the fresh air,” she added. “My lad he gets around and about and says
you are trustworthy, but goblins have learned not to rely on word, so we
will seal the bargain the old way, which we have all understood since
time was time.”

The bewildered Billy stood back as a long hand with longer fingernails
extended toward Carrot, who spat on his own hand and slapped it, with no
thought of health and safety, on to the palm of Regret of the Fallen
Leaf who cackled again. “That can’t be broke, that, it can’t be broke.
Never.” After a moment’s hesitation she said in an offhand voice, “Wash
hand after using.”

There was a glug from the brandy bottle, and Billy Slick’s old granny
went on, “A pot of tears, you say?” Angua nodded. “If so, only one
meaning. A poor goblin woman, a starving woman, had to eat her newborn
baby, because she could not feed it. I hear you stop breathing for a
moment. That such things happen? Is awful truth, oh yes. Is often awful
truth in bad country when times are hard and food is nothing. And so,
weeping, she carved a little unggue pot for soul of her baby and cried
life into it and sent it away until better times when baby will come
back.”

Quietly, Carrot said, “Could you tell us anything more, madam?”

The old goblin was silent for a moment and then said, “Inside cigar,
wrapped in tobacco? Ask the man who sell tobacco!”

Billy turned his granny’s brandy bottle upside down and not a drop came
out.

“One last thing, please, madam: how can we help our friend? By the sound
of it he’s dreaming that he’s a goblin!”

Little black eyes shone as the goblin said, “I trusting you for tobacco.
Now trusting you for another bottle of brandy. Find goblin cave! Find
goblin maiden! Only such a one will be able to grasp the pot, in hope
one day of having child! So it goes, no other way. And big problem for
you, Mr. Po-leess-man, is that goblin girl these days are hard to find.
None here. Maybe none anywhere. We shrivel and shrink like old leaves.
Goodbye until more brandy. No! Make that Cognac from Quirm. Special
reserve. Sixty dollars if bought from Horrids on Broadway or two for one
deal at Twister Boote’s bottle shop in the Shades. Slight taste of
anchovy, but no questions asked and none answered.”

The old voice went silent, and gently the watchmen came back to the
stuff of reality around them, troubling images fading into recent
memory.

Carrot managed to say, “I’m so sorry to have to ask, but will this harm
my sergeant? He seems to be having continuous nightmares and we can’t
get the pot out of his hand!”

“Three bottle of brandy, Mr. Po-leess-man?” translated Billy.

Carrot nodded. “Okay.”

“How long pot had him?”

Carrot looked at Angua. “About two days, madam.”

“Then get your man to a goblin cave as quick as you can, Mr.
Po-leess-man. He may live. He may die. Either way, three bottle of
brandy, Mr. Po-leess-man.” Small black eyes twinkled at Carrot. “So nice
to meet a real gentleman. Hurry up, Mr. Po-leess-man.”

The old lady slumped back into her mound of pillows and rugs. The
audience was over, just like the brandy.

“Granny likes you,” said Billy, his voice full of awe as he ushered them
out. “I can tell. She never threw anything at you. Better get her the
snuff and the brandy pretty soon, however, otherwise she might get a bit
stroppy in an occult sort of way, if you hear what I’m saying, or
rather, of course, what I ain’t saying. Nice to meet you folks, but old
man King doesn’t like to see people not working.”

“Excuse me, Billy,” said Carrot, grabbing him by his skinny arm. “Are
there any goblin caves anywhere around here?”

“You got what you wanted, officer. There ain’t none, as far as I know. I
don’t care. You could try up-country, that’s my advice, but I really
don’t care. If you find a goblin cave on a map you can bet your teeth
there won’t be any goblins there anymore, not live ones, at least.”

“Thank you very much for your assistance, Mr. Slick, and may I
congratulate you on having a grandmother with such good grasp of
contemporary vocabulary?” said Carrot.

There was a delighted shriek from the direction of the dome, the walls
of which were very thin.

“Damn right! Granny Slick ain’t so thick!”

“Well, perhaps we have a result,” said Carrot as they headed back into
the city, “but, well, I know Ankh-Morpork is a melting pot of a city,
but don’t you think it’s rather sad when people come here and forget
their ancestry?”

“Yes,” said Angua, not looking at him. “It is.”

When they were back in Pseudopolis Yard, Carrot filled in Cheery with as
much information as he could. “I’d like you to go and see the
tobacconist. Ask him where his tobacco comes from. We know there’s lots
of smuggling going on anyway, so he’ll be worried. It might be a nice
idea to take along an officer whose mere presence will worry him a
little more. Wee Mad Arthur is back from leave.”

Cheery grinned. “In that case, I’ll take him. He worries everybody.”

Mr. Bewilderforce Gumption was having a good day so far. He had been to
the bank to deposit the takings and had bought two tickets to the opera.
Mrs. Gumption would be very pleased about that and certainly more
pleased than she was to be called a Gumption. She was always urging him
into high society or, at least, higher society, but in some ways the
name Gumption always held you back. And now he held open the door to his
emporium and saw the policeman sitting patiently in the chair.

Cheery Littlebottom stood up. “Mr. Bewilderforce Gumption?”

He tried to smile. “I generally see Fred Colon, officer.”

“Yes. And it’s Sergeant Littlebottom. But strangely enough it’s about
Sergeant Colon that I’m visiting you today. Do you remember giving him a
cigar?”

Mr. Gumption was suffering from the illusion that many people have that
policemen don’t see people lying all the time, so he said, “Not as I
recall,” to which Cheery replied, “Mr. Gumption, it is a well-known fact
that Sergeant Colon buys or otherwise procures his tobacco requirements
from your noble establishment.”

Once again Bewilderforce led off on the wrong note. “I want to see my
lawyer!”

“I’d like to see your lawyer as well, Mr. Gumption. Perhaps you’d send
someone to collect him while I and my colleague wait here?”

Bewilderforce looked around bewildered. “What colleague?”

“Oh, aye, that’ll be me well enough,” said the constable known,
sometimes briefly, as Wee Mad Arthur, who had been lurking behind a
packet of cigarettes.

Two police officers are far more than doubly worse than one, and Cheery
Littlebottom took advantage of the sudden panic to say, carefully, “It’s
a very simple question, Mr. Gumption. Where did that cigar come from?”

Cheery was aware that Commander Vimes didn’t like the phrase “The
innocent have nothing to fear,” believing the innocent had everything to
fear, mostly from the guilty but in the longer term even more from those
who say things like “The innocent have nothing to fear”; but
Bewilderforce was fearful—she could see him sweating.

“We know you’re a smuggler, Mr. Gumption, or perhaps I should say that
you take advantage of very good deals when they are, ahem, presented to
you. Right now, however, all I need from you is to tell me where that
cigar came from. Once you’ve been so kind as to tell me that, we’ll walk
out of this building in a happy and cooperative frame of mind.”

Bewilderforce brightened up. Cheery continued, “Of course, other
departments of the Watch might wish to visit you in due course. At the
moment, sir, you just have to deal with me. Do you know where that batch
of cigars came from?”

Valiantly Bewilderforce tried it on. “I buy from dealers all the time,”
he said. “It’d take me ages to go through the records!”

Cheery kept smiling. “No problem there, Mr. Gumption, I’ll call for my
expert colleague Mr. A. E. Pessimal, right now. I don’t know if you know
of him? It’s amazing how quickly he can work through paperwork and I’m
sure he’ll find time in his busy schedule to help you out at no cost
whatsoever.”

Five minutes later a gray-faced and breathless Bewilderforce handed
Cheery a small scrap of paper.

Cheery looked up at him. “Howondaland? I thought that tobacco mostly
came from Klatch?”

Bewilderforce shrugged. “Well, they’ve been starting up plantations in
Howondaland now. Good stuff, too.” Feeling a little bit bolder,
Bewilderforce went on. “All properly paid for, I can tell you. Yes, I
know there’s smuggling going on, but we don’t have any truck with that.
No need to when you can get a pretty good deal by buying in bulk. It’s
all in my ledgers. Every invoice. Every payment. All set down properly.”

Cheery relented. A. E. Pessimal could probably find something to excite
him somewhere in the Gumption ledgers. After all, business was business.
But there was business and there was bad business. It didn’t do to get
complicated. She stood up. “Thank you very much for your assistance, Mr.
Gumption. We’ll trouble you no further.”

Bewilderforce hesitated and said, “What’s up with Fred Colon? He’s a bit
of a scrounger, I don’t mind saying, but I would hate anything to have
happened to him. It wasn’t…poison or anything, was it?”

“No, Mr. Gumption. His cigar started singing to him.”

“They don’t usually do that,” said Bewilderforce nervously. “I’ll have
to check my stock.”

“Please do that, sir. And while you’re doing so perhaps you’ll look out
for this little list of snuff products?”

The tobacconist took it from her carefully. His lips moved and he said,
“That’s quite a lot of snuff, you know.”

“Yes, sir,” said Cheery. “I’m authorized to pay cash down.”

Bewilderforce looked extremely bewildered. “What? Policemen pay?”

Walking the streets in the company of Wee Mad Arthur presented a
difficulty even for a dwarf like Cheery Littlebottom. He was around six
inches high, so if you spoke to him while you walked you sounded like a
madman. On the other hand, he heartily disliked being picked up. You
just had to put up with it. Most people made a slight detour if they saw
Wee Mad Arthur in any case.

They arrived back at the Watch House and reported to Carrot and the
first thing he said to Cheery was, “Do you know where there are any
goblin caves, Cheery?”

“No, sir. Why do you ask?”

“I’ll explain later,” said Carrot. “It’s fairly unbelievable. Did you
find out anything from old Gumption?”

Cheery nodded. “Yes, sir. Sergeant Colon’s haunted cigar came from
Howondaland, no doubt about it.”

Carrot stared at her. “I didn’t think there were goblins in Howondaland?
All Jolson’s family come from there.” He snapped his fingers. “Hang on
one moment.” He ran down the corridor to the canteen and came back
followed by Constable Precious Jolson, a lady for whom the word large
simply would not do. Everything about her was, as it were, family-sized,
including her good nature. Everybody liked Precious. She seemed to be a
fountainhead of jolliness with always a cheerful word for anybody, even
when she was picking up a brace of drunks and throwing them into the
hurry-up wagon.

After brief questioning Precious said, “Dad sent me over there last
year, remember, wanted me to find my roots. Can’t say I took to it,
really. Nice weather. Not much to do. Not very exciting really, unless
you try to stroke one of the cats, they get kind of stroppy. Never heard
of goblins there, not the sort of place for them, I suspect. Excuse me,
captain, can I get back to my tea now?”

The silence that followed was broken by Carrot, who said, “Howondaland
is months away by boat, and broomsticks don’t work very well over water,
even if we could persuade the wizards to lend us one. Any ideas?”

“Crivens!” said Wee Mad Arthur. “No problemo! I reckon I could get there
in less than a day, ye ken.”

They stared at him. Wee Mad Arthur was small enough to ride on the back
of any bird larger than a medium-sized hawk—his aerial broadcasts from
the sky concerning traffic hold-ups in the city* were a regular feature
of Ankh-Morpork street life—but all the way to another continent?

He grinned. “As ye ken, I was away for a wee while lately, making the
acquaintance o’ my brothers, the Nac mac Feegle? Weel, they fly the
birds a lot, and there’s a thing they have called the craw step, ye ken?
And I reckon I’m canny enough to use it, ye ken.”

“That’s three kens in one speech, Wee Mad Arthur,” said Angua, to
laughter from the rest of the watchmen. “You really got into the Feegle
thing, didn’t you!”

“Oh, ye may scoff, but I’m the only one of ye scunners who knows why we
get so many big birds flying over the city at this time o’ year.
Ankh-Morpork is hot! See the big plume of smoke and fumes? That’s all
heat. It lifts ye up, a free ride that puts the wind under your wings.
Have ye heard of the surreptitious albatross? No, because only me and
the Professor of Ornithology at the university know about it, and he
only knows because I told the scunner. Outside the mating season it
never touches ground. That’s not the only thing that’s odd. It’s an
eagle masquerading as a type of albatross. Ye could call it a shark o’
the sky, and I reckon one of them will do me nicely. They like the city.
They hover up where you’ll never see them unless you really know how to
look. There’s always one about, and I could leave today. What you say?”

“But, constable,” said Carrot, “you’ll freeze that high up in the sky,
won’t you?”

“Oh aye, I ken my thermal drawers may not be sufficient, which is why
the word ‘brandy’ is about to enter this conversation. Trust me on this,
captain. I reckon I can be back within twa days.”

“How many is that?” said Angua.

Wee Mad Arthur rolled his eyes. “Two, captain, for the likes o’ you.”

In fact it took Wee Mad Arthur only an hour to identify the
peaceful-looking bird drifting happily high above the city with the meal
it had just had courtesy of a seagull, the feathers of which were even
now drifting gently toward the cityscape below. The surreptitious
albatross had no enemies that it couldn’t easily digest, and paid little
attention to the nondescript and relatively harmless hawk soaring toward
it, right up until it found Wee Mad Arthur landing on its back. It
struggled but was unable to reach the Feegle, because he was sitting
comfortably and had his hands around its neck; Wee Mad Arthur tended
toward the swift methods of domesticating wildlife.

The surreptitious albatross fought for yet more height by constantly
spiraling up on the huge wide pillar of free lift—as Ankh-Morpork was
known and understood by the avian community—and Wee Mad Arthur passed
the time by memorizing a tiny penciled map of the world. Really, it
wasn’t difficult. On the whole, continents aren’t hard to find, and
neither are the edges of continents, where by general consensus, you
tended to find ships moored. Wee Mad Arthur was the world expert at
looking for things from above, which amused him, given that most people
who wanted to see Wee Mad Arthur had to look down.

Oh well, he thought, let’s go!

It was called the craw step, and the Nac mac Feegle of the chalk country
had carefully shown their brother how it works when you are sitting on
top of a large bird.

People in Ankh-Morpork looked up at the bang high above and then, given
that the sky was still clear, lost interest. Meanwhile, on one
astonished surreptitious albatross sat one hugely satisfied Feegle, who
settled down in the feathers and began to eat a piece of the single
hardboiled egg and two-inch slice of bread that were his rations for the
trip,* while the universe rushed past them making a noise like
weeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee.

Darkness had lasted about four hours when Vimes was woken by a small boy
bouncing up and down on the bed, and therefore on Sam Vimes, and saying,
“Willikins has found a bird that just died. Dad! Mum says I can di…ssect
it if you say it’s all right, Dad!”

Vimes managed a mumbled, “Yes, all right, if your mother says so,”
before slipping back into the black. And the black spread around him. He
heard himself thinking: the Summoning Dark could tell me everything I
need to know, and that is the truth. But would the truth that it told me
be the truth, and how would I know that? If I rely on it then in some
way I become its creature. Or perhaps it becomes mine? Perhaps we have
an accord and it helped me under Koom Valley and because of that the
world is a better place? Surely the darkness has no reason to lie? I’ve
always liked the night, the dead of night, those nights that are sheer
blackness, making dogs nervous and causing sheep to leap their hurdles
out of terror. Darkness has always been my friend, but I cannot let it
be my master, though sooner or later I will have to take an oath, and if
I lie, me, the chief policeman, then what am I? How could I ever again
rebuke a copper for looking the other way?

He turned over among the pillows. And yet the cause is good. It is a
good cause! The man Stratford did kill the goblin girl, I have the
evidence of his associate and the word of a being whose assistance has
been of material use to society. Admittedly, I have put a man in fear,
but then, people like Flutter are always in fear, and better that he
fears me than Stratford, because I at least know when to stop. He’s just
another red ball on the baize, and for that matter, I suppose, so is
Stratford. He’ll have a boss. They always have a nobby boss because
nearly everybody around here is either a worker or nobby, and as far as
I know practically everybody doesn’t have a good word to say for
goblins. It’s a target-rich environment, and the trouble with a
target-rich environment is that it is useless if you don’t know which
target you have to aim at.

Vimes dropped back into deep sleep, and was almost instantly shaken
awake by the best efforts of his son, industriously pounding on the heap
that was Vimes in slumber. “Mum says to come, Dad. She says there’s a
man.”

Vimes wasn’t a dressing-gown type of person, so he struggled back into
his clothing and made himself as presentable as a man could who needed a
shave and didn’t appear to have the time to get one.

There was a man sitting in the lounge, wearing a fantailer hat, jodhpurs
and a nervous smile, three things that mildly annoyed Vimes. A nervous
smile generally meant that somebody was after something they shouldn’t
have; he personally thought a fantailer looked silly; and as for the
jodhpurs, no man should meet a copper if he is wearing trousers that
make his legs look as though he has just burgled a house full of
silverware and shoved it hastily down his trousers. In fact, Vimes
thought he could see the outline of a teapot, but possibly that was his
eyes playing mischievous tricks on him.

The wearer of this presumably self-inflicted triple misfortune stood up
as Vimes entered. “Your grace?”

“Sometimes,” said Vimes. “What can I do for you?”

The man looked apprehensively at Lady Sybil, who was sitting comfortably
in the corner with a little smile on her face, and said, “Your grace,
I’m afraid I must serve you with this Cease and Desist order, on behalf
of the board of magistrates for this county. I am very sorry about this,
your grace, and I hope you will understand that it does go against the
grain to have to do this to a gentleman, but no one is above the law and
the law must be obeyed. I myself am William Stoner, clerk to said
justices—” Mr. Stoner hesitated because Vimes had strolled over to the
door.

“Just making sure you don’t leave in a hurry,” said Vimes, as he locked
the door. “Do sit down, Mr. Stoner, because you’re just the man I want
to talk to.”

The clerk sat down carefully, clearly not wanting to be that man. He
held in front of him a scroll with a red wax seal affixed, the kind of
thing believed to make a document official—or at least expensive and
difficult to understand, which, in fact, amounts to the same thing.

Suddenly, Vimes realized that all those years being confronted by Lord
Vetinari had in fact been a masterclass, had he but known. Well, it was
time for the examination. He went back to his chair, sat back
comfortably, steepled his fingers together and frowned at the clerk over
the top of them for ten whole seconds, a length of time that used to
unnerve him every time it happened, and so should surely work on this
little tit.

Then he cracked the silence with, “Mr. Stoner, several nights ago murder
was committed on my land. Landownership means something around here,
doesn’t it, Mr. Stoner? It appears that this was done to implicate me in
the disappearance of one Jethro Jefferson, a blacksmith. You may
consider me somewhat offended, but that was nothing like the amount of
offense I experienced when I met Constable Feeney Upshot, our local
copper, a decent lad, kind to his old mum, who nevertheless seemed to
feel that he answered to a mysterious board of magistrates, rather than
to the law. The magistrates? Who are the magistrates? Some kind of local
body? There appears to be no oversight on these people, no circuit judge
and— I haven’t finished talking yet!”

Mr. Stoner, his face gray, sank back into his seat. So did Vimes, trying
not to catch Sybil’s eye in case she laughed. He made his face a mask of
calm again and continued, “And it appears, Mr. Stoner, that officially,
in this parish, goblins are vermin. Rats are vermin, so are mice, and I
believe that pigeons and crows may be also. But they don’t play the
harp, Mr. Stoner, they don’t make exquisitely configured pots, and, Mr.
Stoner, they do not beg for mercy, although I must say I’ve seen the
occasional mouse attempt it by wriggling its nose winsomely, which did
indeed lead me to put the hammer down. But I digress. Goblins may be
wretched, unhygienic and badly fed, and in that they are pretty much
like the commonality of most of mankind. Where will your magistrates put
the ruler, Mr. Stoner? Then again we don’t use a ruler in Ankh-Morpork,
because once the goblins are vermin, then the poor are vermin, and the
dwarfs are vermin, and the trolls are vermin. She wasn’t vermin and she
pleaded not to die.”

He leaned back and waited for Mr. Stoner to realize that he did in fact
have the power of speech. When he did so, the clerk dealt with his
situation in true clerkly fashion, by ignoring it. “Nevertheless, Mr.
Vimes, you are out of your jurisdiction and, I may say, encouraging
Constable Upshot in ways of thinking and, I might say, behavior that
will bode ill for him in his career—”

The clerk got no further than that because Vimes interrupted with, “What
career? He has no career! He’s a copper all by himself, except maybe for
some pigs. He’s a good lad at heart, doesn’t scare easy, and he writes
with a clear, round hand and can spell, too, which in my book makes him
automatically sergeant material. As for bloody jurisdiction, murder is
the crime of crimes. According to the Omnians it was the third crime
ever committed!* I know of no society anywhere in the world that doesn’t
consider it a crime to be pursued with vigor, understand? And as for the
law, don’t try to talk to me about the law. I am not above the law, but
I stand right underneath it, and I hold it up! And currently I work with
Mr. Feeney, and we have an accessory to murder in his cell, and justice,
not convenience, will be served.”

“Well done, Sam,” said Sybil loyally, giving the small but distinctive
clap that people give when they want other people to join in.

Mr. Stoner, on the other hand, simply said, “Well done, sir, but
nevertheless my instructions are to arrest you. The magistrates have
sworn me in as a policeman, you see, and young Upshot has been relieved
of his duties.” He winced, because of the sudden freeze.

Vimes stood up and said, “I don’t think I’m going to allow you to arrest
me today, Mr. Stoner! I dare say Sybil will allow you a cup of tea,
should you want it, but I’m going to see Chief Constable Upshot.” And he
stood up, unlocked the door and walked out of the room, out of the Hall
and, at a reasonable speed, headed down to the lockup.

Halfway down, Willikins overtook him, saying, “I couldn’t help hearing
all that garbage, commander, on account of how I was listening at the
door as per section five of the gentleman’s gentleman’s code. What a
nerve! You’ll need me to watch your back!”

Vimes shook his head. “I don’t think a civilian should get involved,
Willikins.”

Willikins had to run faster, because Vimes was speeding up, but he
managed to gasp out, “That is a hell of a thing for you to say to me,
commander.” And hurried on regardless.

Something was going on at the lockup—it looked to Vimes as though it
might be a domestic disturbance, a ruckus, possibly a fracas or even a
free-for-all, in which case it was definitely unlucky for some. A happy
thought occurred: yes, maybe it was an affray, always a useful word
because nobody is quite certain what it means, but it sounds dangerous.

Vimes burst out laughing as soon as he saw what was going on. Feeney was
standing in front of the lockup, his face beetroot red and his ancestral
truncheon in his hands. Quite possibly it had already been used on the
small mob trying to assault the lockup, because there was a man lying on
the floor clutching his groin and groaning. However, Vimes’s lengthy
experience told him that the man’s carefully targeted misfortune had a
lot to do with Mrs. Upshot, who was in a semicircle of men, all of them
ready to jump back as soon as she waved her broomstick at them. “Don’t
you dare say my lad Feeney ain’t a copper! He is a copper, and so was
his dad, and his granddad and his great-granddad before him.” She paused
for a moment and went on, grudgingly, “Pardon me, I tell a lie, he was a
criminal, but anyway that’s nearly like being a copper!”

The broomstick made a whooshing sound as she swung it backward and
forward. “I know you lot! Some of you is gamekeepers, and some of you is
smugglers, and a few of you is bastards, excuse my Klatchian!” By now
she had caught sight of Vimes, and pausing only to bring her broomstick
down like a mallet on the foot of a man who made a step in the wrong
direction, she pointed her finger at Vimes and yelled, “See him? Now he
is a gentleman, and also a great copper! You can tell a real copper,
like my Henry, gods bless his soul, and Commander Vimes too, ’cos
they’ve got proper badges what have been used to open thousands of beer
bottles, I dare say, and believe me one of them would hurt you if they
tried to stick it up your nose. The flimsy bits of cardboard you boys is
waving makes me laugh! Come any further, Davey Hackett,” she said to the
nearest man, “and I will shove this broomstick in your ear, trust me, I
will!”

Vimes scanned the mob, trying to sort out the vile and dangerous from
the innocent and stupid, and was about to brush off a fly from his head
when he heard the gasp from the crowd, and saw the arrow on the cobbles
and Mrs. Upshot looking at her broom falling into two pieces.

In theory, Mrs. Upshot should have screamed, but she had been around
coppers for a long time, and so, face red, she pointed at the broken
broom and said, as only an old mum could say, “That cost half a dollar!
They don’t grow on trees, you know! It wants paying for!”

Instantly there was the jingle of frantic hands in pockets. One man with
great presence of mind removed his hat and coins showered into it. Since
many of these coins were dollars and half-dollars snatched in haste,
Mrs. Upshot would clearly be self-sufficient in broomsticks for life.

But Feeney, who had been simmering, smacked the hat to the ground just
as it was proffered. “No! That’s like a bribe, Ma! Someone shot at you.
I saw the arrow, it came straight out of this lot, right out the middle!
Now I want you to go inside, Ma, ’cos I’m not going to lose you as well
as Dad, understand? Damn well get inside the house, Ma, the reason
being, the moment you shut the door I intend to show these gentlemen
their manners!”

Feeney was on fire. If a chestnut had fallen on his head it would have
exploded, and his rage, pure righteous rage—the kind of rage in which a
man might find the idea and the inclination and, above all, the stamina
to beat to death everyone around him—was a pant-wetting concern to the
befuddled citizens quite outweighing the secondary one, which was that
there was at least six dollars of anybody’s money lying there on the
cobbles, and how much of it could they get away with reclaiming?

Vimes did not say a word. There was no room to say a word. A word might
dislodge the brake that held retribution in check. Feeney’s ancestral
club over his shoulder looked like a warning from the gods. In his hands
it would be sudden death. No one dared run; of a certainty, to run would
be to make yourself a candidate for whistling oaken crushing.

Now, perhaps, was the time. “Chief Constable Upshot, may I have a word,
as one policeman to another?”

Feeney turned on Vimes a bleary look, like a man trying to focus from
the other end of the universe. One of the outlying men took this as a
cue to leg it, and behind the crowd there was a thump and the voice of
Willikins, saying, “Oh, I do beg your pardon, your grace, but this
gentleman stumbled over my feet. Regrettably, I have very large feet.”
And, to accompany the apology, Willikins held up a man whose nose would
probably look a lot better by the end of next week.

All eyes turned to Willikins, except those of Vimes—because there in the
shadows, keeping his distance from the mob, was that bloody lawyer
again. Not with the mob, obviously, a respectable lawyer could not be
part of a mob, oh no, he was just there watching.

Feeney glared at the rest of the men, because tripping can come so
easily to a man. “I appreciate your man’s assistance, commander, but
this is my manor, if you know what I mean, and I will have my say.”

Feeney was panting heavily, but his gaze swept backward and forward to
find the first man to move or even look like someone about to move some
time in the future. “I am a policeman! Not always a good one or a clever
one, but I am a policeman and the man in my lockup is my prisoner, and
I’ll defend him to the death, and if it’s the death of some bastards who
stood in front of my old mum with crossbows they didn’t know how to use,
well, so be it!” He lowered his voice to less than a scream. “Now, I
know you, just like my father did, and granddad too—well some of you at
least—and I know you ain’t as bad as all that—”

He stopped for a moment, staring. “What are you doing here, Mr. Stoner?
Standing there next to a mob? Have you been making a few pockets
jingle?”

“That statement is actionable, young man,” said Stoner.

Vimes carefully made his way to Stoner and whispered, “I won’t say
you’re pushing your luck, Mr. Stoner, because your luck ran out the
moment you set eyes on me.” He tapped the side of his nose. “A word to
the wise: I’ve got big feet too.”

Oblivious to this, Feeney went on, “What I want you all to know is that
a few nights ago a goblin girl up on the hill was chopped up while she
was pleading for her life. That’s bad. Very bad! And one reason is that
a man who can chop up a goblin girl will chop up your sister one day.
But I will help my…” Feeney hesitated and then said, “colleague,
Commander Vimes, and will bring those responsible to justice. And that
ain’t all, oh dear me not by a long chalk, because you see I know, just
like you do, that three years ago a load of goblins were grabbed in the
night and rounded up to be sent down the river. My poor old dad did what
he was told and turned a blind eye, but I ain’t doing the same thing. I
don’t know if any of you helped, and right now that don’t concern me
overmuch, ’cos folks around here tend to do what they’re told, although
maybe some like doing what they’re told more than others.”

Feeney turned around, making certain that all knew they were included.
“And I know something else! I know that late yesterday, when we were
actually on the way to Hangnails, a bunch of goblins from Overhang were
grabbed and put on an ox boat down the river to—”

“What! Why haven’t you told me all this before?” Vimes shouted.

Feeney didn’t look in his direction, keeping his gaze on the mob. “What
before? Sorry, commander, but it’s been all go and I only found out just
before this bunch arrived, since when it’s all got busy. The boat
probably came past here while we were still opening barrels in
Hangnails. This lot wanted me to hand over my—your—our prisoner, and
then of course my old mum got involved, as it were, and you know it’s
always difficult when it involves an old mum. I never told anyone to
move, did I?!”

This was to a man in some distress who was almost bent double with his
hands on his groin.

“I’m very sorry, er, Feeney, er, Constable, er, Chief Constable Upshot,
but I really need the privy, if it’s all the same to you, please,
thanking you very much?”

Vimes looked down at the crouching man and said, “Oh, dear me, it’s you,
Mr. Stoner! Willikins! Do take him somewhere where he can go about his
business, will you? But be sure to bring him back here. And if it turns
out that he didn’t really need to do any business, do him the courtesy
of making sure that he does.” He wanted to say a great deal more at this
time, but this was, after all, Feeney’s patch and the lad was
surprisingly good at it, when it came to pushing people who pushed old
mums.

And the boy hadn’t finished yet; his mood had simply moved from molten
steel to cold, hard iron. “Before I tell you what happens next,
gentlemen, I’d like to draw your attention to the goblin sitting up
there in the tree, watching you all. All you who are locals know Stinky,
and you know sometimes you give him a kick, or sometimes he blags a
cigarette off you, and sometimes he runs you a little errand, yes?”

There was a sense of sweating relief among the crowd that the worst
appeared to be over now. In fact it had only just begun. “Commander
Vimes would like you to know, and so indeed would I, that the law
applies to everybody, and that means it applies to goblins as well.”

There was a certain amount of nodding at that and Feeney continued, “But
if the law applies to goblins then goblins have rights and if goblins
have rights then it would be right to have a goblin policeman attached
to the Shire force.”

Vimes looked at Feeney with amazement and a not inconsiderable amount of
admiration. That had got them: they had all been nodding and he had led
them by the nod and before they knew it they were nodding at a goblin
officer.

“Well, gentlemen, I am intending to make Stinky a probationary special
constable, just so he can keep me up to date with what’s happening up on
the hill. He’ll have a badge, and anyone giving him a kick from now on
will be assaulting a police officer in the course of his duty. I think
the penalty for doing that is not just being hanged, but also to let you
bounce up and down for a bit afterward. This is an internal force
decision, which does not require the authority of any magistrate. Is
that not so, Commander Vimes?”

Vimes was amazed at how his mouth responded without any reference to his
brain. “Yes, Chief Constable Upshot, as per section 12, part 3 of the
Laws and Ordinances of Ankh-Morpork, generally considered a model for
police procedure,” he added confidently, knowing that no one present
would have ever clapped eyes on them and would quite likely not be able
to read them even if they had.

Inside Vimes winced. He’d got away with having dwarfs, trolls and
finally even werewolves and vampires in the Watch, albeit on certain
obvious conditions, but that had been the result of leverage over the
years. Vetinari always said, “What is normal? Normal is yesterday and
last week and last month taken together.” And, Vimes supposed, they had
slipped things in one at a time to allow normal to gradually
evolve—although Mr. Stinky, or rather Probationary Special Constable
Stinky, had really better confine his policing activities to the cave.
Yes, not such a bad idea at that, indeed if only he could get them to
leave chickens alone maybe normal would have a chance. After all, people
seemed quite easy about having their rights and liberties taken away by
those they looked up to, but somehow a space on the perch was a slap in
the face, and treated as such.

And now Feeney, getting out of breath, was nearly talked out. “I can’t
force any of you to tell me anything, but is there any one of you
anxious to help me with my inquiries?”

Vimes tried not to let anyone see his expression, least of all Feeney.
Of course, Captain Carrot had once been like that and—was it
possible?—maybe even young Sam Vimes had been like that too, but surely
anyone could see that you never expect people who are part of a crowd to
put up their hand and pipe up, “Yes, constable! I’d be very happy to
tell you everything I know, and I’d like these fine gentlemen here to be
my witnesses.”

What you did do after a performance like that was just wait, wait until
somebody sidles up and whispers something when you are alone, or just
tilts his head in the right direction, or, and this had happened to
Vimes, writes three initials in the spilled beer on a bar top and
industriously wipes it clean within two seconds. Some bright spark would
think: you never know your luck; after all, Feeney could be a coming
man, right? And a happy relationship might come in handy, one day.

Vimes blew away the pink cloud of embarrassment. “Well, gentlemen,
speaking as commander of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch, it seems to me
that your senior police officer is being considerably lenient with you.
I would not be, so be grateful for him. How many of these…” and here
Vimes inserted a sneer, “gentlemen do you really know, Chief Constable
Upshot?”

“Oh, about half of them, commander, that’s to say their names, families,
home addresses and similar. The rest of them are from other places. I
can’t say that they’re all angels, but they’re mostly not too bad.”

This sensible little speech in the circumstances earned Feeney a few
smirks and a certain relieved look all round, and, happily, an opening
for Vimes, who said, “So which one of them had an arrow ready in his
crossbow, do you think, Mr. Feeney?”

But before Feeney had time to open his mouth Vimes had spun round to
confront the returning Mr. Stoner, whose digestion had let him down.
Willikins, whose instincts seldom failed, was still keeping an eye on
him. Loudly and cheerfully Vimes said, “I see that my good friend Mr.
Stoner is back, and he’s a lawyer and I’m a policeman and we know how to
talk to one another. Do come this way, Mr. Stoner.”

He grabbed the unwilling lawyer gently but firmly by the arm and led him
some way from the crowd, who watched, Vimes was pleased to see, with
immediate deep suspicion.

“You are a lawyer, are you not, Mr. Stoner? Not a criminal lawyer by any
chance?”

“No, your grace, I specialize mostly in land and property matters.”

“Ah, far less dangerous,” said Vimes, “and I suppose you’re a member of
the Ankh-Morpork bar, presided over by my old chum Mr. Slant?” He had
said it convivially, but Vimes knew that the name of the old zombie
would strike terror into any lawyer’s heart—although whether Mr. Slant
still had one of his own was questionable. And now Mr. Stoner must be
thinking quite quickly. If he had any sense, and read his Law Journal
between the lines, he would be aware that while Mr. Slant would bow
(rather stiffly) to the rich and influential, he did not like mistakes,
and he did not like seeing the law being brought into disrepute by inept
lawyers and laymen, believing that this particular duty should be left
to senior lawyers, such as Mr. Slant, who could do it with care and
panache and AM$300 an hour. And Mr. Stoner should be thinking that,
since it appeared that landowners around here had made up the law to
suit themselves, which was the prerogative of the legal profession as a
whole, Mr. Slant would not be a happy zombie; and, as custom and
practice now dictated that he should no longer walk around groaning with
his hands held out directly in front of him (one of them perhaps holding
a severed head for effect), he was known to vent his still considerable
spleen on snotty young lawyers with ideas above their station by talking
to them for some time in a calm, low voice, causing them to say
afterward that the severed head was, by contrast, the vegetarian option.

Vimes watched the young man’s face as he considered his meager options
and found that there was no plural.

“I did endeavor to properly advise the justices as to their situation,
of course,” he said, like a man rehearsing a plea, “but I’m sorry to say
that they took the view that since they own the land hereabouts, then
they decide the law of said land. I have to say that they are, in
themselves, quite decent people.”

Vimes was surprised at how well his temper was keeping these days. He
said, “Land, I quite like land, it’s one of my favorite things for
standing on. But land, and landlord, and law, well…A man might get quite
confused, yes? Especially in the presence of a pretty good fee? And it’s
quite easy for people to be jolly decent people when they can afford to
hire thoroughly un-decent people, people that don’t even need orders,
just a nod and a wink.”

At this point there was a roll of thunder, not really appropriate to the
last comment, and therefore without occult significance. Nevertheless,
it was a giant roll that trundled around the sky, dropping blocks of
sound. Vimes looked up and saw a horizon the colors of a bruise, while
all round him the air was calm and warm and insects and other creatures
that he couldn’t guess at were buzzing in the undergrowth. Satisfied
that he need not look for cover yet, he turned his attention back to the
squirming lawyer.

“May I suggest, Mr. Stoner, that you suddenly develop a pressing reason
to go to the city and possibly talk to some of the senior lawyers there?
I suggest that you describe yourself as foolish, and when they see your
damp trousers, that will act as corroboration, believe me. If necessary,
I might find it in my heart to make a statement on your behalf, to the
effect that I think you were silly and badly led rather than criminal.”

The look of gratitude read well, and so Vimes added, “Why don’t you try
criminal law? It’s mostly grievous bodily harm and murderers these days.
You could call it ointment for the soul. Just a couple of things,
though: what do you know about goblins being sent downriver? And what do
you know about the disappearance of Jefferson the blacksmith?”

It’s never nice to face a difficult question when you’re thinking about
getting on a horse and travelling long distances at speed. “I can assure
you, your grace,” replied the man, “that I know nothing about the
disappearance of the smith, if indeed he hasn’t simply gone to work
elsewhere. And goblins? Yes, I know that some were sent away some years
ago, but I took up this post two years back and I cannot comment on
those circumstances.” He added primly, “I have no knowledge whatsoever
of any goblins being dispossessed of their accommodation lately, as the
chief constable appears to believe.”

Turning his back so the craning crowd could not easily see what was
happening, Vimes glared at him. “I congratulate you on your careful
ignorance, Mr. Stoner.” He then grabbed the prim lawyer by the neck and
said, “Listen to me, you little shit. What you tell me may strictly
speaking be true, but you are a bloody stupid lawyer if you haven’t
realized that a bunch of landowners cannot decide all by themselves that
anything they want to do is the law. If you want to keep in with both
sides, Mr. Stoner, and I imagine that you do, then you might find a
moment in your busy schedule to tell your former employers that
Commander Vimes knows all about them and Commander Vimes knows what to
do about them. I know who they are, Mr. Stoner, because Chief Constable
Upshot has given me a list of names.”

Vimes gently released the pressure and said quietly, “Very soon this
will be an unfortunate place for you, Mr. Stoner.” Then, turning, so
that the crowd could see, he took the bewildered lawyer’s hand, shook it
lavishly and said loudly, “Thank you very much for such valuable
information, sir. It’ll make my investigations a whole lot simpler, I
can tell you! And I’m sure that Chief Constable Upshot will feel exactly
the same way. It would be a much easier life for all of us if other
upstanding folk were so quick to assist the police with their
inquiries.” He looked at the stricken lawyer and said more quietly, “I
am no judge, but some of those men have a certain look about them. I
know the sort, probably got more teeth than brain cells, and now, Mr.
Lawyer, they’re wondering how much you know and how much you’ve told me.
I wouldn’t stop to pack if I was you, and I hope you’ve got a fast
horse.”

The lawyer left at speed and, at a meaningful nod from Feeney, so did
the mob, more or less evaporating into the scenery; and Vimes thought,
another one snookered. Get the reds, get the colors, but sooner or later
you’re after the black.

And now he was left with the company of only Willikins and the chief
constable, who looked around like someone realizing that he might not
only have bitten off more than he could chew, but also more than he
could lift. He straightened up when he saw Vimes looking at him. It was
time for a little reinforcement, so Vimes walked over and slapped the
lad on the back. “Well, I don’t know, I’m sure! Well done, Chief
Constable Upshot, and this time I’m not laughing at you, Feeney, I’m not
making fun, I’m not talking you down, and I cannot believe that you are
the lad I met only a few days ago! You stood up to them, right enough! A
bunch of dangerous idiots! With a lawyer!”

“They shot an arrow at my old mum! Oh, they said they didn’t, ’cos they
was hoping to frighten us off! They said they had no arrows! So I said,
quick as a wink, well, you wouldn’t have any arrows now if you’d shot
them at my old mum, would you? So that proves it, I told them, I said,
that’s logic, and they didn’t know what to say!”

“Well, I’m at a loss for words myself, Feeney, because it seems to me
that I heard you say some more goblins were sent downriver yesterday.
How did you find that out?”

Feeney waved a thumb in the direction of the lockup and grinned. “Here’s
the key, sir, just you go and talk to our prisoner. You’ll love it, sir,
he was beside himself when he knew they were coming for him and he sang
like a nightingale, didn’t he just!”

“Generally, we say that they sing like a canary,” said Vimes, turning
toward the stubby little building.

“Yes, sir, but this is a rural police station, sir, and I know my birds,
sir, and he sang like a nightingale, right enough! A beautiful watery
cadence, sir, second only to the trill of the robin in my opinion,
possibly occasioned by his being really, really scared, sir. I’ll have
to slosh a bucket in there in a minute.”

“Well done again, Feeney! Might I suggest at this time that you go in
and see to your old mum? She’ll be worried about you. Old mums do worry,
you know.”

Wee Mad Arthur was impressed. Why hadn’t anybody told him about the craw
step before? Well, it was only recently that he had learned that he was,
by birth, a Nac mac Feegle instead of, as he had been given to
understand, the child of peaceful, shoe-making gnomes. Feegles did not
wear shoes and neither were they peaceful. Like many people before and
after, Wee Mad Arthur had always thought that he was in the wrong life.

When the truth had fortuitously been uncovered, it all seemed to make
sense. He could be proud of being a Nac mac Feegle, albeit one who
enjoyed the occasional visit to the ballet and could read a menu in
Quirmian and, for that matter, read at all.

He cruised above the warm blue skies of Howondaland in great circles and
enjoying himself no end. The whole continent! There were people on it,
so he understood, but mostly what he was seeing from the air was either
desert, mountain or, most of all, green jungle. He allowed the albatross
to drift on the thermals as his keen eyes searched for what he suspected
might be there. It was, in fact, not a thing, as such, but a concept:
rectangular. People who planted things liked rectangular. It was
orderly. It made things easy.

And there it was! Right down there on the coast. Definitely rectangular
and quite a lot of it. After a brief meal of hardboiled egg he persuaded
the bird to perch in a treetop. Jumping to the ground was no fearsome
undertaking for one of Feegle stock.

As evening began to fall, Wee Mad Arthur walked through line after line
of fragrant tobacco plants. But also noticeably rectangular, in this
land where geometry was rare, were the sheds, visible not far away.

He moved stealthily to begin with and increasingly more stealthily when
he saw the pile, white and complex in the gloaming. The whiteness
consisted of bones. Small bones, not Feegle but far too small for human;
and then, when he investigated further, he saw the corpses. One of them
was still moving, more or less.

Wee Mad Arthur recognized a goblin when he saw one. There were enough
people who did not like Feegles for Feegles not to be too snotty on the
subject of goblins. They were a damn nuisance, but even Feegles would be
happy to agree that so were they themselves. And being a nuisance is not
something you should die of. In short, Wee Mad Arthur recognized this
situation as very bad.

He took a look at the one who was moving. There were wounds all over it.
One leg was twisted back on itself and suppurating scars covered its
body. Wee Mad Arthur knew death when he saw it and that was in the air
right now. He looked at the pleading in the goblin’s one remaining eye,
took out his knife and ended its suffering.

While he was staring at this, a voice behind him said, “And where the
hell did you escape from?”

Wee Mad Arthur pointed to his badge, which to him was the size of a
shield, and said, “Ankh-Morpork City Watch, ye ken?”

The burly human stared at him and said, “There ain’t no law here,
whatever you are, you little squirt.”

As Commander Vimes always said in his occasional rousing speeches to his
men, it was the mark of a good officer if he or she is able to improvise
in unfamiliar circumstances. Wee Mad Arthur recalled the words very
clearly. “Nobody expects you to be a first-class lawyer,” Vimes had
said, “but if you have evidence that suggests that your proposed action
is, on the face of it, justified, then you should take it.”

And then Wee Mad Arthur, ticking off points in his head, thought:
slavery is illegal. I know it used to be done, but I don’t know anywhere
it’s done anymore. The dwarfs don’t do it and neither do the trolls and
I know that Lord Vetinari is dead against it. He checked all this again
to make certain that he had got it right, and then looked up at the
scowling human and said, “Excuse me, sir? What was that you just said to
me?”

The man smiled horribly, grasping the handle of his whip. “I said, there
ain’t no law here, you rabid little skunk.”

There was a pause and Wee Mad Arthur glanced down at the dead goblin on
the stinking bone-filled midden. “Guess again,” he said.

As battles go, it was one of the most one sided, because that side
belonged to Wee Mad Arthur. There were only a dozen or so guards on the
plantation, because starving creatures in chains do not, as a rule,
fight back. And they never knew who they were fighting. It was some kind
of force that sped backward and forward across the ground and then up
your trouser leg, leaving you in no heart whatsoever for fighting or,
for that matter, anything else.

Punches came out of nowhere. Those who ran were tripped. Those who
didn’t were left unconscious. It was, of course, an unfair fight. It
generally is if you are fighting even one Nac mac Feegle, even if you
are a platoon.

Afterward, Wee Mad Arthur found chains in some of the huts and carefully
chained every recumbent guard. Only then did he open the other huts.

The iron door of the lockup slammed against the stone as Vimes entered;
nevertheless he was taking care where he placed his feet.

And Mr. Flutter sang, he certainly sang. Vimes was in no ornithological
position to judge the singing in terms of nightingale or robin
equivalent, but even if he had sung like a frog it would not have
mattered, because he sang about a moocher called Benny No-Nose, who hung
about as such men do in the hope of picking up unconsidered trifles and
had traded a pair of boots—“I don’t know where they came from, and no
more do you, okay?”—for a turkey the very evening before the nightmare
began for Ted.

“Well, sir,” Flutter told him. “You asked me about what happened years
ago, see, and what with one thing and another, what might have happened
yesterday didn’t cross my mind, if you see what I mean? It was all so
sudden like. Anyway, yeah, he said they’d coupled a tender behind a
two-oxen riverboat that very afternoon, and it smelled to him like
goblins, him living near their cave in Overhang, and you never forget
that smell, or so he said to the dockmaster, a man known to one and all
as Wobbly No-Name, on account of him often walking funny when the drink
is on him, and was told, ‘Yeah, they’re sending them down while the
going is good, and you never saw them, and neither did I, understand?’
Someone must think it very important ’cos Stratford is on the boat.
Someone must have stamped their foot about that because Stratford, well,
he don’t like boats. Don’t like water, come to that. Won’t travel on a
boat at all if he can help it.”

Vimes didn’t whoop. He didn’t even smile, he hoped—you made sure you
didn’t if you could help it—but he gave himself a point for being civil
to Flutter. You couldn’t get off Feegle free after a charge of accessory
to murder, but there were ways and ways of doing time, and if this all
worked out as he hoped it would, Flutter might find that time would pass
comfortably, and even, perhaps, faster than usual.

He said, “Well, thank you, Ted, I’ll look into it. In the meantime, I’ll
leave you in the capable hands of Chief Constable Upshot, to whom a
prisoner is as sacred as his dear old mum, trust me.” He pulled out the
key to let himself out, and then paused as if an important point had
just aimlessly struck him. “A two-oxen boat? Does that go twice as
fast?”

And now Flutter was a riverboat expert. “Not really, but you can pull
more load, even through the night, see? Now, your one-ox boat has to
stop overnight at a cattle landing, so as the beast can have its rations
and a jolly good chew and some shut-eye before dawn and there’s a cost
in time and money, right there.”

Prisoner or not, Ted was now a self-styled lecturer to the unfortunately
ignorant. “But with two oxen, well, one can be taking a bit of a rest
while the other is keeping the boat moving. I reckon there were three
barges behind that one, not too much for one ox downstream at this time
of year.” He sniffed. “I wanted to be an ox boat pilot, but of course,
the bloody Zoons* had got it sewn up. I did do a season on one, mucking
out and feeding, but I prefer turkeys.”

“And the name of the boat?” said Vimes carefully.

“Oh, everybody knows it! It’s the biggest on the river. Everybody knows
the Wonderful Fanny!”

Internal monologues can play themselves out quite fast, and Vimes’s
went: Let me think. Ah yes, almost certainly there was a captain who had
a wife who was probably named Francesca at birth, but that’s too much of
a mouthful, and he named his boat after her because he loved her very
much. And there you have it. There is no need to dwell on the subject,
because there are only so many words, letters and syllables available to
the tongue, and if you can’t come to terms with that then you might as
well never get out of bed. And so, having got his brain sorted out, he
released the clamps on his silly-embarrassed-face reflex and said,
“Thank you for your cooperation, Ted, but if you had told us earlier we
might have been able to catch the damn boat!”

Flutter looked at him in astonishment. “Catch the Fanny? Bless you, sir,
a man with one leg could do that! She’s a bulk carrier, not a streaker!
Even going all night she won’t have got much past Fender’s Bend by now.
There are bends all the way, you see? I reckon you never get more than
half a mile without a bend! And it’s full of rocks, too. Seriously, you
have to zigzag so much on Old Treachery that you’re often crossing your
own wake.”

Vimes nodded at this. “One last thing, Ted. Remind me again…What exactly
does Mr. Stratford look like?”

“Oh, you know the type, sir, sort of average. Dunno how old he is. Maybe
twenty-five. Maybe twenty. Sort of mousy hair. No scars that show,
amazingly.” Ted looked embarrassed at this paucity of information and
shrugged. “Sort of average height, sir.” He scrabbled for details and
gave up. “To tell you the truth, he sort of looks like everyone else,
sir, that is until he gets angry”—Ted’s face lit up—“and that, sir, is
when he looks like Stratford.”

Willikins was sitting on the bench under the chestnut tree with his
hands resting peacefully on his knees. He was good at it. He had a
talent for resting that had escaped Vimes. It must be a servant thing,
Vimes thought: if you don’t have anything to do, don’t do anything. And
right now he could do with a rest. Maybe evidence was going downstream
even as he stood there, but by the sound of it at a speed that could
almost be overtaken on foot. Regrettably Sybil was right. At his age you
had to be sensible. You sometimes had to catch your breath, while you
still had some. He sat down beside the man, and said, “An interesting
day, Willikins.”

“Indeed, yes, commander, and may I say that young Constable Upshot
handled his responsibilities with great aplomb. You have a talent for
inspiring people, sir, if I may say so.”

There was silence for a while, and then Vimes said, “Well, of course, we
were helped by the fact that some bloody fool actually let an arrow go!
You could see them thinking about what might happen if you’re one of the
gang that killed a dear old lady. That’s a kind of trouble you don’t get
out of easily. That opened them up! And it was obviously a real stroke
of luck for us,” Vimes added, without turning his head. He let the
silence continue as the storm raged in the distance, while, nearby,
whatever it was that was chirruping in the bushes carried on doing so in
the warm, sultry afternoon.

“It puzzles me, though,” he went on, as if a thought had only just
crossed his mind. “If it was someone in the front of the crowd who had
loosed his crossbow then surely I would have seen it, and if it was one
toward the back then he would have to have been clever and skilful
enough to sight through maybe a very narrow space. That would be very
clever shooting, Willikins.”

Willikins was still staring placidly ahead. Vimes’s sideways glance
spotted no hint of moisture on his brow. Then the gentleman’s gentleman
said, “I expect these country lads excel at trick shooting, commander.”

Vimes slapped him on the back and laughed. “Well, that’s the funny
thing, don’t you think? I mean, did you see their gear? It was low-grade
stuff, in my opinion, not well maintained, the kind of stuff that
granddad brought back from some war, whereas that arrow, I recognized
that evil little package as a custom-made bolt for the Burleigh and
Stronginthearm Piecemaker Mark IX, you remember?”

“I am afraid you will have to refresh my memory, commander.”

Vimes was beginning to enjoy himself and said, “Oh, you must! Only three
of them were made, and two of them are still under wizard-assisted lock
and key in the company vaults and the other—surely you remember this?—is
locked safely in that little vault that we made in the cellar in Scoone
Avenue last year? You and I poured concrete while Sybil and the lad were
out, and rubbed dirt all over the floor so that you had to know it was
there in order to find it. It’s a hanging matter for anyone to be found
with one of them, according to Vetinari, and the Assassins’ Guild told
the Times that hanging would be a picnic compared with what would happen
to anyone they found in possession of one of those. I mean, think about
it: can’t hardly tell it’s a crossbow. Silent, folds up and fits in a
pocket in an instant, easily concealed and deadly in the hands of a
skilled man, such as you or I.” Vimes laughed again. “Don’t be
surprised, Willikins, I recall your prowess with even a standard
military bow during the war. Heavens know what someone like you could
manage with the damn Piecemaker. I just wonder how one turned up out
here in the country. After all, Feeney confiscated all the weapons he
found, but maybe one of those chaps had hidden it in his boot. What do
you think?”

Willikins cleared his throat. “Well, commander, if I may speak freely, I
might surmise that there are many workers at Burleigh and
Stronginthearm, which is one factor, and, of course, the directors of
the most famous weapons producer on the Plains might also have decided
to hide away a few souvenirs before the range was banned, and who knows
where they might have got to. I can think of no other explanation.”

“Well, of course you may be right,” said Vimes. “And while it’s a
terrifying thought that one of these things might be out on the streets
somewhere, I must admit that the idiot who used it really helped us out
of a difficult situation.” He paused for a while and then said, “Have
you had a pay rise lately, Willikins?”

“I am entirely satisfied with my remuneration, commander.”

“It is entirely deserved, but to be on the safe side, I’d like you, as
soon as we are back home, to check in the cellar just in case, will you?
Because obviously, if there are more of those bloody things out there, I
want to make certain that I’ve still got one too.” And as Willikins
turned away Vimes continued, “Oh, and Willikins, it’s a damn good job
for you that Feeney cannot put two and two together.”

Was that the faintest sigh of relief? Surely not. “I will expedite that
as soon as we enter the building, commander, and I am certain that
should you yourself want to go down there some time later to make a
personal check, you will find it resting where it has always been.”

“I’m sure I shall, Willikins; but I wonder if you could solve a problem
for me? I have to catch the Wonderful Fanny.”

He added hurriedly, “Which is a boat, of course.”

“Yes, sir, I am aware of the vessel in question. Remember that I’d
already been here for some time before you and her ladyship arrived, and
I happened to be near the river when she went upstream. I recall the
people pointed her out to me. I was given to understand that she was
going up to Overhang to load up, probably with iron ore brought down
from the dwarf mine, which rather surprised me, given that normally they
smelt directly at their mines and export the bar-stock, this being a
more economical method, sir.”

“Fascinating,” said Vimes, “but I think that however slow it goes, I
ought to get after her.”

Feeney was just emerging from the cottage.

“I’ve heard about the…the boat, lad. We should get going while it’s
still light.”

Feeney actually saluted. “Yes, I have that in hand, sir, but what about
my prisoner? I mean, my old mum could give him his meals and empty his
bucket for him, won’t be the first time she’s had to do that sort of
thing, but I don’t like leaving her by herself, right now, if you get my
thinking?”

Vimes nodded. Back home he only had to snap his fingers for a watchman
to become immediately available, but now…Well, he had no choice.
“Willikins!”

“Yes, commander?”

“Willikins, against my better judgement and I dare say yours, I hereby
appoint you to the rank of Special Constable and I command you to take
the prisoner back to the Hall and keep him under lock and key there.
Even a bloody army would be mad to attack the Hall with Sybil in it. But
just in case, Willikins, I can think of no man better suited to guard my
family.”

Willikins beamed and saluted. “Yes, sir, orders received and understood,
sir. You can depend on me, sir, only…er, well, when we get back to the
city could you, er, please not let anyone know that I was a copper for a
while? I have friends, sir, dear friends who have known me for a long
time and they would cut my ears off if they heard I was a copper.”

“Well, far be it from me to whiten a man’s name against his will,” said
Vimes. “Do we have an understanding? I’d be grateful if you could
refrain from too much adventureishness. Just guard the prisoner and
ensure that no harm comes to him. If this means a little judicious harm
has to come to someone else, I will regretfully accept the fact.”

Willikins looked solemn. “Yes, sir, fully understood, sir. My comb will
not leave my pocket.”

Vimes sighed. “You have a great many things in your pockets, Willikins.
Ration their usage, man. And by the way, please tell Sybil and Young Sam
that Daddy is chasing the bad men and will see them again soon.”

Feeney looked from Vimes to Willikins. “Glad that’s sorted out,
gentlemen,” he said, and smiled nervously. “Now, if you’re ready,
commander, we’ll just go along to the livery stable and pick up a couple
of horses.” With that he began to walk smartly down to the village,
leaving Sam Vimes no alternative but to follow.

Vimes said, “Horses?”

“Absolutely, commander. From what I hear we should catch up with the
Fanny in an hour. To tell you the truth, we could probably outrun it,
but it’s best to be on the safe side, don’t you think?”

Feeney looked sheepish for a moment and then added, “I don’t usually
ride much, sir, but I’ll try not to disgrace myself in front of you.”

Vimes opened his mouth. Then Vimes shut his mouth, trapping the words:
Lad, I’d rather ride a pig than a horse, if it’s all the same to you? I
mean, pigs just run along, but horses? Most of the time I’ve got nothing
against horses, and then I come down very firmly against horses, and
then I’m shot up in the air again so that once more I have nothing
against horses, but I know that in half a second the whole damn thing
starts again, and yes before you come out with the whole business of
“It’s all right if you rise up when they go down” let me say that has
never ever worked for me, because then I’m either above and a little
behind the horse or against the horse so firmly that I’m really glad
that Sybil and I have decided to have only one child…

Feeney was, however, in keen and chattering form. “I expect there were a
lot of horses at Koom Valley, eh, sir?”

And Vimes was stuck. “Actually, lad, the trolls have no use for them and
the dwarfs are said to eat them, on the quiet.”

“Gosh, that must’ve been a blow to a fighting man like yourself,
commander?”

Fighting man? Maybe, Vimes thought, at least when no alternative
presents itself, but how in the seven hells did you get the idea that
I’m comfortable even looking at horses? And why are we still walking
toward some barn that is going to be full of the wretched things,
stamping and snorting and dribbling and rolling their eyes backward like
they do? Well, I’ll tell you why. It’s because I’m too damn scared to
tell Feeney that I’m too damn scared. Hah, the story of my life, too
much of a damn coward to be a coward!

Now Feeney pushed aside a heavy wooden gate, which, to Vimes’s
susceptible ear, creaked like a fresh gallows, and he groaned as they
stepped through. Yes, it was a livery stable, and it made Vimes
liverish. And there they were, the inevitable hangers-on: bandy-legged,
no more than one button on their coats, and a certain suggestion of rat
about the nose and wishbone about the legs. You could have played
crockett with them. Every one of them would have a straw in his mouth,
presumably because that’s what they lived on. And, helplessly, Vimes was
introduced to men who knew they had heard of him, very big policeman
certainly, while Feeney painted a picture of him as just the sort of man
who would insist on riding the swiftest beast that they had installed in
the stalls.

Two evil-looking mounts were led out, and Feeney generously brought the
larger over to Vimes. “There you go, sir. Back in the saddle again, eh?”
he said, and handed the reins to Vimes.

While Feeney was negotiating the hire, Vimes felt something tug at his
leg and he looked down into the grinning face of Special Constable
Stinky, who hissed, “Big trouble, fellow po-leess-maan colleague? Big
trouble for a man scared of horses. Damn right!? Hate horse, can smell
fear. You take me, po-leess-maan. I fix. No worry. You need Stinky
anyway, yes? You find frightened goblin? Panic panic panic! But Stinky
say shut gob goblins, this man despite appearances not too much of an
arsehole, yes indeed!”

The wretched little goblin lowered his cracked voice still further, and
added, so that Vimes could barely hear it, “And Stinky never ever said
anything about po-leess-maan’s shirt-washing man and very cross bow,
hey? Mr. Vimes? There is no race so wretched that there is not something
out there that cares for them, Mr. Vimes.”

The words hit Vimes like a slap in the face. Had the little bugger said
that? Had Vimes really heard it? The words had dropped into the
conversation as if from somewhere else, somewhere very elsewhere. He
stared at Stinky, who rattled his teeth at him cheerfully and swung
himself dreadfully under the horse just as, on the other side of the
yard, the brains trust of debating equestrian experts settled the
negotiations with Feeney. The apparent boss spat on his hand and Feeney,
against all public safety procedures, spat on his hand and then shook
hands and then money changed hands, and Vimes hoped that it washed its
hands.

Then, in front of Vimes, possibly to its own amazement, the horse knelt
down. Vimes had only seen that in a circus, and everyone else acted as
if they’d never seen it at all.

Stinky had miraculously disappeared, but when incredulous eyes are
watching, as the venerable philosopher Ly Tin Weedle says, you have to
do something or be considered, in the great scheme of things, a tit. And
so Vimes went bowlegged and shuffled along the horse as nonchalantly as
he could, and made the strange clicking noise that he’d heard ostlers
use for every command, and the horse got to its hooves, raising Vimes as
gently as a cradle to the astonishment and subsequent wild applause of
the bandy-legged throng, who clapped and said things like, bless you,
sir, you ought to get a job in a circus! And at the same time Feeney was
all admiration, unfortunately.

The wind was blowing up, but there was still some daylight left, and
Vimes let the constable lead the way at a gentle trot, which indeed
turned out to be gentle.

“Looks like rain coming in, commander, so I reckon we’ll take it a
little gently until we get down past Piper’s Holding, and then round by
the shallows at Johnson’s Neck, where we can canter around the melon
plantation, and by then we should be able to see the Fanny. Is that all
right by you, sir?”

Sam Vimes solemnly waited for a few seconds to give the impression that
he had the faintest idea about the local landscape, and then said,
“Well, yes, I think that should be about right, Feeney.”

Stinky dragged himself up the horse’s mane, grinning again, and held up
a large thumb, fortunately his own.

Feeney gathered up the reins. “Good, sir, then I think we’d better
bustle!”

It took Vimes a little while to fully understand what was going on.
There was Feeney, on his horse, there was the statutory clicking noise,
and then no Feeney, no horse, but quite a lot of dust in the distance
and the cracked voice of Stinky saying, “Hold on tight, Mr.
Po-leess-maan!” And then the horizon jumped toward him. Galloping was
somehow not as bad as trotting, and he managed to more or less lie on
the horse and hope that somebody knew what was going on. Stinky appeared
to be in charge.

The track was quite wide and they thundered along it, trailing white
dust; and then suddenly they were heading downward while the land on
Vimes’s right was going up and the river was appearing behind some
trees. He knew already that it was a river that saw no point in
hurrying. After all, it was made up of water, and it is generally agreed
that water has memory. It knew the score: you evaporated, you floated
around in a cloud until somebody organized everybody, and then you all
fell down as rain. It happened all the time. There was no point in
hurrying. After your first splash, you’d seen it all before.

And so the river meandered. Even the Ankh was faster—and while the Ankh
stank like a drain, it didn’t wobble slowly backward and forward, from
one bank to the other, as Old Treachery did, as if uncertain about the
whole water cycle business. And as the river wiggled like a snake, so
did the banks, which, in accordance with the general placid and
unhurried landscape, were overgrown and thick with vegetation.

Nevertheless, Feeney kept up the pace, and Vimes simply clung on, on the
basis that horses probably didn’t willfully try falling into water of
their own accord. He remained lying flat because the increasingly low
branches and tangled foliage otherwise threatened to smite him off his
mount like a fly.

Ah yes, the flies. The riverside bred them by the million. He could feel
them crawling over his hair until some leaf or twig swatted them off.
The likelihood of spotting the Wonderful— boat without having one’s head
smacked off seemed extremely little.

And yet here, suddenly, was a respite for Vimes’s aching backside, the
sand bar with a few logs marooned on it, and Feeney just reining his
horse to a stop. Vimes managed to get upright again, just in time, and
both men slid to the ground.

“Very well done, commander! You were born in the saddle, obviously! Good
news! Can you smell that?”

Vimes sniffed, giving himself a noseful of flies and a very heavy stink
of cattle dung. “Hangs in the air, don’t it?” said Feeney. “That’s the
smell of a two-oxen boat, right enough! They muck out as they go, you
know.”

Vimes looked at the turgid water. “I’m not surprised.” Perhaps, he
thought, this might be the time to have a little discussion with the
kid. He cleared his throat and looked blankly at the mud as he got his
thoughts in order; a little trickle of water dribbled over the bar, and
the horses shifted uneasily.

“Feeney, I don’t know what we’ll be getting into when we catch up with
the boat, understand? I don’t know if we can turn it round, or get the
goblins out and then get them home overland, or if we’ll even have to
ride it down all the way to the coast, but I’m in charge, do you
understand? I’m in charge because I am very used to people not wanting
to see me in front of them, or even alive.”

“Yessir,” Feeney began, “but I think—”

Vimes plowed on. “I don’t know what we’re going to find, but I suspect
that people who try to take over boats, even a floating dung machine
like the Fanny, probably get treated by the crew as pirates immediately,
and so I’m going to give the orders and I want you to do exactly what I
tell you, okay?”

For a while it looked as though Feeney was going to object, and then he
simply nodded, patted his mount and waited, while another tiny wave
splashed beside the horses. The sudden silence of someone normally so
talkative disconcerted Vimes, and he said, “Are you waiting for
something, Feeney?”

Feeney nodded and said, “I didn’t wish to interrupt you, commander, and
as you say, you are in charge, but I was waiting until you said
something I wanted to hear.”

“Oh yes? Such as?”

“Well, sir, to begin with I’d like to hear you say that it’s time to
mount up and get out of here really fast because the water is rising and
soon the alligators will wake up.”

Vimes looked around. One of the logs, which he had so carelessly
dismissed, was extending legs. He landed on the back of his horse with
the reins in his hand in little more than a second.

“I’ll take that order as a given, then, shall I?” shouted Feeney as he
sped after Vimes.

Vimes did not attempt to slow down until he judged them high enough up
the bank not to be of interest to anything that lived in water, and then
waited for Feeney to catch up.

“All right, Chief Constable Upshot, I’m still in charge, but I agree to
respect your local knowledge. Will that satisfy you? Where is the water
coming from?”

It certainly was rising: when they had started out you would have needed
a ruler to be certain that it was flowing at all, but now little waves
were dancing after one another and a light rain was starting to fall.

“It’s that storm coming up behind us,” said Feeney, “but don’t worry,
sir, all that means is that the Fanny will tie up if it gets too strong.
Then we can just climb on board.”

The rain was falling faster now and Vimes said, “What happens if it
decides to carry on? It’s not too far off sundown, surely?”

“That won’t be a problem, commander, don’t you worry!” shouted Feeney
with infuriating cheeriness. “We’ll stay on the trails. No water ever
gets up that far. Besides, wherever she is, the Fanny will have running
lights on, red ones, oil lamps as a matter of fact. So don’t worry,”
Feeney finished. “If she’s still on the river we’ll find her, sir, one
way or the other, and may I ask, sir, what your intentions are then?”

Vimes wasn’t certain, but no officer ever likes to say that, so instead
he parried with a question himself. “Mr. Feeney, you make this river
sound like a picnic! Look over there!” He pointed across the river to a
spot where the water spun and gurgled and was almost visibly rising as
they stared at it.

“Oh,” said Feeney, “you always get debris coming down Old Treachery. The
only time to worry is if you get a damn slam.* They only happen very
rarely when circumstances are right, sir, and you can be sure the
captain will have the Fanny well out of any danger if one of those
should happen. Besides, he can’t possibly navigate the river in bad
weather at night; Old Treachery is full of snags and sand bars. It would
be suicidal, even for a pilot as good as Mr. Sillitoe!”

They rode on in silence, except for the terrible swirling and gurgling
of dark waters down in the torrent below the bank. Only a little
daylight remained now and it was a dirty orange, helped out occasionally
by flashes of lightning, followed by stone-cracking thunder. In the
woods on either side of the river trees lit and occasionally burned,
which was, Vimes thought, at least a help to navigation. The rain was
soaking his clothing now, and so he shouted in a voice which betrayed
his belief that he would not like the answer to what he was about to
ask, “Apropos of nothing, and just to pass the time, lad, would you tell
me what exactly a damn slam is?”

Feeney’s voice was initially drowned by a thunder-roll behind them, but
on the next go he managed, “It’s an occasional phenomenon caused by a
storm getting stuck in the valley and the debris of the storm getting
piled up in a certain way, sir…”

Stinky scrambled up from who would dare to speculate where and up onto
the horse’s head. He glowed with a faint blue corpse light. Vimes
reached out a finger to touch him and a tiny blue flame danced across
his hand. He knew it. “St. Ungulant’s fire,” he said aloud, and wished
that he was in a position to use it to light his last cigar, even if it
was an exhalation of the corpses of the drowned. Sometimes you just
needed a little tobacco.

Feeney was staring at the blue light with an expression of such horror
that Vimes hardly dared to disturb him. But he said, “Then what happens,
lad?”

Lightning, with a sense for the dramatic moment, illuminated Feeney’s
face as he turned. “Well, commander, the debris will build up and up and
tangle until it’s one mass, and the river is building up so much behind
it that sooner or later it’ll overcome the strength of the natural dam,
which will plow down the river, mercilessly sweeping up or capsizing
everything in its path, all the way to the sea, sir. That’s why this
river is called ‘Old Treachery’!”

“Well, of course,” said Vimes. “I’m a simple man from the city who
doesn’t know very much about these things, but I take it that a build-up
of debris which plows its way downriver sweeping up or capsizing
everything in its path all the way down to the sea is generally
considered to be a bad thing?”

There was a long-drawn-out creak behind them as another tree was hit by
a flash. “Yes, sir. You left out the word ‘mercilessly,’ sir,” said
Feeney, carefully. “I think we really should try to catch up with the
Fanny as quickly as possible.”

“I think you’re right, lad, and right now I suggest—”

Whatever it was that Stinky was doing, and whatever it was that Stinky
actually was, the horses were already becoming skittish to the point of
bolting. There was so much water in the air and so little light left
that the difference between the river and the shore could only be judged
by seeing which one you fell into.

And there was solid rain now, rain that blew from every direction,
including upward, and the symphony of dark destruction was punctuated by
the sound of banks slipping inexorably into the churning water. The
horses were now frantic and direction had no meaning, and nor did warmth
and the world was nothing but darkness, water, cold despair and two red
eyes.

Feeney saw them first and then Vimes picked up the smell. It was the
rich, desperate smell of oxen getting really worried and was thick
enough to stink its way out of the turmoil. Amazingly, the boat was
still churning the water, making progress of sorts despite the fact that
its trailing flotilla of barges was jack-knifing, tangling and generally
swishing across the river like the tail of an angry cat.

“Why didn’t she tie up somewhere?” shouted Feeney to the storm. It
sounded like despair, but Vimes dismounted, grabbed the sticky shape of
Stinky and slapped his horse on the rump. It certainly stood a better
chance by itself now than it did with him, after all.

And then for a moment his inner eyes looked at Koom Valley. He had
nearly died that day as water poured off the valley walls and thundered
through the endless caves in the limestone, smacking him against the
walls, banging him on the floors and ceilings and finally dropping him
on a tiny beach of sand, in utter darkness. And the darkness had been
his friend, and Vimes had floated on the face of the darkness, and there
he had found enlightenment growing, and understood that fear and rage
could be hammered into a sword, and the desire to once again read a book
to a child could be forged into a shield and armor for a ragged dying
castaway, who thereafter shook hands with kings.

After that, what could be frightening about rescuing goblins and who
knew how many other people from a floundering boat on a black and
treacherous river in thundering, steaming darkness?

He was running now along the squelching bank, water pouring down his
neck. But running wasn’t enough. You had to think. You thought that the
pilot of the boat knew the river and knew the boat. He could have moored
at any time, couldn’t he? And he hadn’t done so, but he clearly wasn’t a
fool, because even having known the river for only a few hours, Vimes
could see that no fool would survive on it for more than a few journeys.
It was built to be a trap for the stupid.

On the other hand, if you were not stupid then being an ox-boat pilot
was a pretty good gig: you’d have prestige, respect, responsibility and
a steady wage for a steady job, in addition to the envy of all the
little boys on every landing stage. Sybil had told him all about them,
with some enthusiasm, one evening. So why, in such a decent position,
would a man pilot such a valuable boat with a valuable cargo down a
river on an evening that promised annihilation around every snake-like
bend when no blame would attach to mooring up for a while?

Money? No, Vimes thought. They call this river Old Treachery, and surely
money wasn’t any good to you when you were sinking dreadfully in its
muddy embrace. Besides, Vimes knew men like that, and they tended to be
proud, self-reliant and impossible to bribe. He probably wouldn’t
jeopardize the boat, even if you held a knife to his throat— But
traditionally the family comes too; the pilot was always working from
home, wasn’t he?

And what would a desperate pilot do then? What would he do if a knife
was held to the throat of a wife, or a child? What else could he do but
sail on, trusting a lifetime of experience to see them all to safety?
And it wouldn’t be one unwelcome guest, no, because then you would try
to run the boat heavily aground while you, muscles tensed, would rely on
the confusion to leap at the fallen man and strangle him with your bare
hands, but that would only work if he hadn’t brought along an ally. And
so then you stayed at the wheel, hoping and praying, and expecting, at
any moment, the rumble of the damn slam.

Feeney was sprinting along the bank after him now, and managed to pant,
“What are we going to do, sir? Seriously, what are we going to do!”

Vimes ignored Feeney for a moment. Rain, boiling surf and fallen logs
were enough to contend with, but he kept his eye on the line of barges.
Right now there was a rhythm as they snaked back and forth, but it was
constantly interrupted by bits of driftwood and whatever attempt at
steering was happening along there in the wheelhouse. Every time the
rearmost barge hit the bank there was a moment, one precious little
moment, when a man might jump aboard, if that man were foolish.

So he jumped, and realized that a jump would have to beget another jump
and failure to keep the rhythm would mean falling back into the torrent,
but jumping on to the next barge, which was swinging and bucking in the
swell, you just hoped that you didn’t get a foot stuck between the two
of them, because two twenty-five-foot barges colliding as a sandwich
with your foot in the middle would do more than just leave a bruise. But
Stinky ran and jumped and pirouetted just ahead of him and Vimes was
quick enough to get the message, landing squarely on the next barge, and
so, surprisingly, did Feeney, who actually laughed, although you had to
be within a foot of him to hear that.

“Well done, sir! We did this when I was a lad…every boy did…the big ones
were best…”

Vimes had got his breath back after the first two jumps. According to
what Feeney had told him, the Wonderful Fanny was a bulk carrier, big
and slow, but it could take any load. There could be anything in these
barges, he thought, but there was no smell of goblins yet and there were
two barges still to go and weather that was trying to get even worse.

With that thought, there was Stinky again, who apparently could come and
go without ever being seen either coming or going. And he still glowed
faintly. Vimes had to crouch to speak to him. “Where are they, Stinky?”

The goblin farted, quite probably as a clown does, more for
entertainment than relief. Clearly happy at the response, he cracked,
“Number one barge! Easy to get to! Easy to feed!”

Vimes eyed the distance to the barge immediately behind the Fanny.
Surely there had to be some kind of walkway? Some means of getting into
the barges so that the crew could access the cargo? He turned again to
Feeney, dripping with rain and illumined by another flash of lightning.
“How many crew, do you think?”

Even this close, Feeney had to shout. “Probably two men, or a man and
boy, down below in what they call the cowshed! Along with the engineer,
and generally a loadmaster or cargo captain! Sometimes a cook, if the
captain’s wife doesn’t want to do the job, although mostly they do, and
then one or two lads learning the business and acting as general
lookouts and wharf rats!”

“Is that all? No guards?”

“No, sir, this ain’t the high seas!”

Two barges crashed together, sending up a plume of water that succeeded
in at last filling Vimes’s boots right to the top. There was no point in
emptying them, but he managed to growl through the storm, “I’ve got news
for you, lad. The water’s getting higher.”

He steeled himself for the jump on to the next erratic barge and
wondered: Even so, where are the people? Surely they don’t all want to
die? He waited and jumped again as the barge presented itself, and
landed heavily just in time to see his sword cartwheeling roguishly into
the stormy water. Cursing, and struggling to keep his balance, he
awaited the next opportunity to narrowly survive and this time succeed.
He leapt again and almost fell backward between the crashing timbers
but, balancing perilously, fell forward instead and fell in and right
through a tarpaulin, into an indistinct face which cried, “Please!
Please don’t kill me! I’m just a complicated chicken farmer! I’m not
carrying any weapons! I don’t even like killing chickens!”

Vimes had managed to land with his arms around a plump man who would
have screamed again had Vimes not clamped a hand over his mouth and
hissed, “This is the police, sir. Sorry for the inconvenience, sir, but
who the hell are you and what is going on? Come on, there’s no time to
waste.” He pushed the man further into the barge and a soggy darkness
and a recognizable smell told Sam Vimes that whether the frantic speaker
was complicated or not he wasn’t lying about the chickens. From the
clucking, feathery gloom in the wire baskets beyond, there emanated yet
another smell, announcing that a large number of chickens, never the
most stoical creatures at the best of times, were now very frightened.

A vague silhouette demanded, “The police? Here? Pull the other leg,
mate! Who do you think you are? Bloody Commander Vimes?”

The barge bucked again and an errant egg spun out of the darkness and
smacked into Vimes’s face. He wiped it off, or at least spread it around
a bit and said, “Well, well, sir, are you always this lucky?”

His name was false; in full it was Praise and Salvation False, and
inevitably, when you have a false name you will insist on explaining
why, even when imminent watery death is not only staring you in the eye
but also everywhere else, possibly including both your trouser legs.
“You see, sir, my family originally came from Klatch, and our name was
Thalassa but, of course, over a period of time people tend to
mispronounce the way they—”

Vimes interrupted him, because that was a more acceptable alternative to
throttling him. “Please, Mr. False, can you tell me what’s been
happening on the Fanny?”

“Oh dear, it was terrible, it really was extremely terrible! There was
shouting and yelling and I’m sure I heard a woman screaming! And now we
keep hitting the bank, or at least that’s what it sounds like! And the
storm, sir, it’ll have us under in two shakes of a lamb’s tail, I’m
certain of it!”

“And you didn’t go forward to see, Mr. False?” said Vimes.

The man looked startled. “Commander, I breed complicated chickens, sir,
extremely complicated chickens. I don’t know anything about fighting!
Chickens never get all that aggressive! I’m really sorry, sir, but I
didn’t go to see in case I saw, sir, see? And if I saw, sir, then I’m
sure people would see me, sir, and since I reasoned that they would be
people who were alive after other people might possibly be dead, sir,
and maybe had a responsibility for said deaths, sir, I made certain that
they didn’t see me, sir, if you see what I mean? Besides, I have no
weapons, weak lungs and a wooden toe. And I’m alive, at the moment.”

In truth, Vimes thought there was an inescapable logic to all this, so
he said, “Don’t worry about it, Mr. False, I bet you’ve got enough to do
with your complicated chickens. So, no weapons at all, then?”

“I’m very sorry to disappoint you, commander, but I’m not a strong man.
It was all I could do to drag my toolbox on board!”

Vimes’s face stayed blank. “Toolbox? You have a toolbox?”

Mr. False clutched the wall again as the barge bounced off something it
shouldn’t have, and said, “Well, yes, of course. If we manage to get off
at Quirm I’ve got a site that I must make ready for a hundred chicken
houses, and if you want a job done properly these days then you have to
do it yourself, right?”

“You’re telling an expert,” said Vimes as another crash sent them both
staggering. “I wonder if I could take a look at this toolbox of yours?”

There are times in the symphony of the world, when its aural
kaleidoscope of crashes, thunderbolts, screams and storms suddenly
merges into one great hallelujah! And the contents of the chicken
farmer’s innocent toolbox, which contained nothing not made of ordinary
iron and steel and wood, nevertheless gleamed in the eyes of Commander
Sam Vimes like the hosts of heaven. Mallets, hammers, saws, oh my! There
was even a large spiral awl! What could Willikins have managed with a
toy like that? Hal-le-lu-jah! Oh, and here was a crowbar! Vimes balanced
it in his hand, and felt the Street rise until it touched his feet. The
complicated chicken man had heard a woman screaming…

Vimes spun around as the tarpaulin was pushed aside and Feeney dropped
into the barge in a flurry of spray. “I know you didn’t give me the
signal, commander, but I thought I’d better tell you the water is going
down.”

Vimes saw Mr. False close his eyes and groan, but turned back to Feeney
and said, “Well, that’s a good thing, isn’t it? The water? Going down?”

“No, it isn’t, sir!” yelled Feeney. “It’s still raining hard and the
water level is going down, and that means that upstream of us enough
broken trees and bushes and mud and other junk are piling up to make a
dam which is getting bigger and bigger and growing out sideways as the
water builds up behind it, sir. Can you see what I mean?”

Vimes did. “Damn slam?”

Feeney nodded. “Damn right! We have two choices: would you rather die on
the river or under it? What are your orders, please, sir?”

Another collision shook the barge, and Vimes stared at darkness. In this
terrible twilight somebody was managing to stop this boat from
foundering. A woman had screamed and Vimes had a crowbar. Almost
absent-mindedly he reached down into the open toolbox and picked up a
sledgehammer, handing it to Feeney. “There you go, lad. I know you’ve
got your official firewood, but things might get up close and personal.
Chalk it up to the dreadful algebra of necessity, but try not to hit me
with it.”

He heard the voice of Feeney saying, more frantically this time, “What
are we going to do, commander?!”

And Vimes blinked and said, “Everything!”

The wind caught the tarpaulin as Vimes pulled it open, and it flapped
off across the river, leaving the complicated chicken farmer living in
hope and broken eggs. They pulled themselves out into the darkness,
their shadows dancing to the rhythm of the lightning. How the hell was
the pilot navigating in all this? Lamps up front? Surely they could do
nothing on a night like this except show up the darkness. But although
there was a suspicion, at every bang and bounce, that the Fanny was in
real trouble, Vimes could hear now the splashing of the paddle wheels
like one solid dependable theme in the cacophony, a regular, reassuring
sound. It was making way. There was some order in the world, but how
could the pilot manage the chaos? How could you steer when you couldn’t
see?

Feeney had explained in a hurry and Vimes had expressed utter disbelief
even faster. “It’s true, sir! He knows every bend in the river, he knows
the wind, he knows how fast we’re going and has a stopwatch and an
hourglass in reserve. He takes a turn when it’s time to take it. Okay,
he’s shaving the banks a bit with the old Fanny, but she’s pretty
tough.”

They jumped together on to the last barge and found a hatch that was
locked. However, a crowbar is a universal pass key. And there, under the
hatch, were goblins, tied hand and foot, every one, and they had been
stacked like cabbages. There were hundreds of them. Overwhelmed, Vimes
looked around for Stinky, who turned out to be behind him.

“Okay, my friend, over to you. We’ll cut them loose, certainly, but I
wouldn’t mind a bit of reassurance that I won’t suddenly have a load of
angry goblins twisting my head backward and forward to see which way
would take it off, understand?”

Stinky, already as skinny as a skeleton, looked even thinner when he
shrugged. He pointed at the groaning heaps. “Too sore, too stiff, too
hungry, too…” Stinky looked closely at a goblin at the bottom of a pile
and touched a flaccid hand, “too dead to chase anyone, Mr.
Po-leess-maan. Hah! But later, give food, give water and they chase. Oh,
they chase like the buggery, you bet! Once I talk to them, oh you bet!
But I will say to them, po-leess-maan, him big arsehole, okay, but kind
arsehole. I will say to them, you whack him, I whack you on account that
I po-leess-maan now. Special Po-leess-maan Stinky!”

Vimes considered that was the best valedictory he could expect in the
circumstances. Just then Feeney managed to lever the lid off a large
drum, one of several rolling around on the deck. Immediately the
terrible stench in the barge doubled in intensity, and he backed away
with his hands over his mouth. Stinky, on the other hand, sniffed
approvingly. “Hot damn! Turkey gizzards! Food of the gods! Bastard
murder voyage, but okay catering.”

Vimes stared at him. Well, okay, he thought, he hangs around near humans
so he picks up a vocabulary, maybe that is suspiciously clever. Perhaps
Miss Beedle gave him language lessons? Or maybe he’s just some occult
adventurer from hell knows where having fun at the expense of a
hardworking copper. Not for the first time.

Feeney was already cutting ropes, and Vimes tried to resurrect as many
goblins as he could in a hurry. It was no errand for anyone with a
concern for hygiene or even a notion of what the word meant—though after
an hour in a storm on Old Treachery, it had no meaning anyway. They
staggered up, and fell down again, found their way to the upended barrel
of dead turkey bits and stumbled over slippery decks to a sloshing and
now half-empty water trough that Feeney had found and was filling by the
simple expedient of sticking a bucket over the side. They were coming
back to life; mostly they were coming back to life.

The barge bounced off a bank again, and amid tumbling goblins Vimes
grabbed for a handhold. Half the entire barge was full of barrels which,
if you sniffed anywhere near them, were certainly not full of sweet
roses. He braved the rocking deck again and said, “I don’t think all
this is for a little voyage to the seaside, do you? There’s more barrels
of stinking turkey entrails than this lot of poor devils could possibly
get through in a week! Someone was expecting a long journey! Good
grief!”

The barge had smacked into something and, by the sound of breaking
glass, that something had been smashed. Feeney stood up, holding on to a
rope, and, wiping turkey gizzard off his coat, said, “Voyage, sir. Not
journey, sir. You wouldn’t need all this stuff if you’re traveling on
land. I reckon they’re bound for somewhere a long way away.”

“Do you think it’ll be a holiday of sun, sea, surf and fun?” said Vimes.

“No, sir,” said Feeney, “and they wouldn’t like it if it was, would
they? Goblins like the dark.”

Vimes slapped him on the shoulder. “Okay, Chief Constable Upshot, don’t
hit somebody who surrenders and, if a man drops his weapon, be a little
bit wary of him until you’re certain he hasn’t got another one tucked
away somewhere, right? If in doubt, knock ’em out. And you know how to
do that: use the old Bang Suck Cling Buck on them, eh?!”

“Yes, sir, that’s a recipe for shoe polish, sir, but I’ll bear it in
mind.”

Vimes turned to Stinky, who already looked slightly fatter than usual.
“Stinky, I don’t have the faintest idea what is going to happen next. I
can see your chums are starting to look alive, and so you’ve got the
chance that we all get, sink or swim, and I can’t say better than that.
Come on, let’s go, Feeney.”

This close, the Wonderful Fanny was now a rolling, creaking mess,
half-covered by flying weeds and sticks. Apart from the storm and the
clanging and creaking of the mechanisms, it was silent.

“Okay,” said Feeney quietly, “we’d better go in by the cattle door at
the stern, sir, or as you would say, ‘the back.’ It won’t be a difficult
jump, there’s lots of handholds because the loadmaster has to come out
here to see to the barges. Can you see that double door and the little
wicket gate? We go in that way. There’ll likely be more cargo along the
cattle ramp, because a loadmaster never wastes floor space, and then we
go midships…”

“That is to say ‘the middle of the ship’?” said Vimes.

Feeney smiled. “Yes, sir, and watch out because it’s a mass of
machinery. You’ll see what I mean, because you’re smart. Take the wrong
step and you could fall into a gear or on top of an ox, never a happy
occasion. It’s noisy, smelly and dangerous, so if there are many bandits
on this boat I wouldn’t expect to find them there.”

I would, Vimes thought; our Mr. Stratford is the kind of maniac who
would want to keep going in suicidal circumstances. Why? So that the
cargo is a long way away before anyone knows about it? And Stratford
works for Lord Rust and the Rusts believe the world belongs to them.
We’re taking goblins somewhere, but they want to keep them alive—why?

The shock of another collision brought him back to the dreadful here and
now, and he said, “I’d expect to find any crew here being watched like
hawks in case they put a spanner in the works.”

“Oh, very smart, sir, very smart indeed. There has to be some light in
there for safety’s sake, but not much and all behind glass ’cos of…”

Feeney hesitated, so Vimes suggested, “Fire, perhaps? I’ve never known
an engineer who doesn’t shove grease wherever he can.”

“Oh, it’s not exactly the grease, sir, it’s the beasts. The gas does
build up, so it does! And if the glass breaks, well, it’s regrettably
spectacular. Two years ago the Glorious Peggy was blown out of the water
for just such a reason!”

“Do they eat the Hang Suck Butt Dog with turnips around here?”

“No, sir, not as far as I know, but Bhangbhangduc fusion cookery is very
popular on the boats, it’s true. Anyway, further on you’ll find the
pilot’s cabin, the sleeping quarters and then the wheelhouse, which has
very wide windows, which is another good reason to attack from behind.”

Refreshingly, it was a short leap with a good handhold at the end of it.
Vimes had no worries about being heard. The deck creaked under his feet
as he crept inside the Wonderful Fanny and sidled toward the middle of
the ship, or whatever the hell the real term for it was, but then she
creaked everywhere, and all the time, and groaned, too. The boat was so
noisy that a sudden patch of silence might have drawn attention to
itself. And I’m looking for somebody who looks like everybody else, he
thought, right up until he looks like the vicious killer he is. Well,
that seems straightforward.

Vimes was vaguely aware of huge wheels spinning frantically off to
either side and chains traveling overhead and now, here, at the top of
the flight of stairs, was somebody who clearly wasn’t where they should
have been…

It was a woman, with a small girl clinging to her dress. They had been
loosely tied to a creaking beam, and a small oil lamp overhead held them
in the center of its circle of light. And this was probably because
there was a man sitting a little way away from them on a stool, with a
crossbow lying on his lap.

And here was a puzzle because a length of string had been tied to each
of his legs. One length of string ran across the floor and disappeared
downward into what was, to judge by the heat, the farmyard stink and the
occasional bellow of troubled ungulate, the cowshed that Vimes had just
passed. The other string disappeared forward toward the wheelhouse.

The woman spotted him and immediately clasped the child to her chest and
very slowly put a finger to her lips. He had to hope that the man hadn’t
noticed, and did not have to hope that the woman realized that he was
there to rescue her, not to add to her troubles. That wasn’t necessary,
but he did feel better that she was a lady fast on the uptake. He held
up a hand in front of Feeney, but the lad was definitely future captain
material; he hadn’t moved at all. Like Vimes, he had become an observer.
And Vimes observed, and let the dark rise up to assess the situation in
its own inimitable way. This wasn’t the Summoning Dark, or at least he
fervently hoped not. It was just his own human darkness and internal
enemy, which knew his every thought, which knew that every time
Commander Vimes dragged some vicious and inventive murderer to such
mercy or justice as the law in its erratic wisdom determined, there was
another Vimes, a ghost Vimes, whose urge to chop that creature into
pieces on the spot had to be chained. This, regrettably, was harder
every time, and he wondered if one day that darkness would break out and
claim its heritage, and he wouldn’t know…the brakes and chains and doors
and locks in his head would have vanished and he wouldn’t know.

Right now, as he looked at the frightened child, he feared that moment
was coming closer. Possibly only the presence of Feeney was holding the
darkness at bay, the dreadful urge to do the hangman out of his
entitlement of a dollar for the drop, thruppence for the rope and
sixpence for his beer. How easy it is to kill, yes, but not when a smart
young copper who thinks you are a good guy is looking to you. At home,
the Watch and his family surrounded Vimes like a wall. Here the good guy
was the good guy because he didn’t want anyone to see him being bad. He
did not want to be ashamed. He did not want to be the darkness.

The bow was pointed at the two hostages and its holder had surely been
told to fire if a leg pull sounded the alarm. Would he do it? You needed
to age a bit for the dark to start trickling in, although there were
always one or two who were born as darkness on legs, who would kill for
a pastime. Was he one? Even if he wasn’t, would he panic? How light was
the trigger? Could a sudden jerk set it off?

Outside, the storm raged. Whether the water was going down or not didn’t
seem all that important, given there was so much of the damn stuff
around already. The woman was watching him out of the corner of her eye.
Oh well, every moment counted…

Timing his steps carefully, as if a footstep would be heard in all the
thunder and creaking, Vimes crept up to the unsuspecting guard, clamped
both hands around his neck and jerked upward. The arrow thudded into the
ceiling.

“I don’t want anybody to get hurt.” Vimes tried to say it in a friendly
way, but went on, “If you think you can pull strings, kid, then let me
tell you that you’ll run out of gasp before I run out of squeeze. Chief
Constable Upshot, grab that weapon and tie up this gentleman’s legs. You
may keep his weapon. I know you like them.”

He must have inadvertently decreased the pressure, for his captive said
hoarsely, “I don’t want to kill anybody, sir, please! They gave me the
bow and told me I was to fire if the boat stopped or I got a pull on the
ropes! Do you think I’d do that, sir? Do you really think I’d do that? I
was only sitting here in case one of them came in! Please, sir, I never
came along for anything like this! It’s Stratford, sir, he’s a total
nutjob, sir, a bloody killer, he is!”

There was a crash and the whole boat shook. Maybe the pilot’s stopwatch
had let him down. “What’s your name, mister?”

“Eddie, sir, Eddie Brassbound. I’m just a water rat, sir!” The man was
trembling. Vimes could see his hand shaking. He turned to the woman with
the child, who was being supported now by Feeney, touched his forelock
and flashed his carefully secreted badge. “Madam, I’m Commander Vimes of
the Ankh-Morpork City Watch. Has this man mishandled you or the little
girl in any way?”

The woman had barely moved. She reminded him of the younger Sybil, calm
and collected and much more likely to fight than scream, but she
wouldn’t fight until she was ready. “It was done pretty slick,
commander, just when I was putting Grace to bed. The bastards came on as
owners of some cargo and acted like decent boys until my husband said he
reckoned the weather was going to get really bad. I was in the galley, I
heard a lot of yelling and then we were put down here. Personally, sir,
I would deem it a favor if you killed every man jack of them, but life
can’t be all fun. As far as this one is concerned, well, he could have
been less gentlemanly, so although I’d like you to throw him into the
river I wouldn’t object if you refused to tie a heavy weight to his
leg.”

Feeney laughed. “Wouldn’t need weights, ma’am! The river is having a
party and we’re all guests! I’m a pretty good swimmer, and I wouldn’t
dare jump into what’s out there.”

Vimes grabbed Brassbound and stared into his eyes. After a moment he
said, “No, I know a killer’s eyes when I see them. That doesn’t mean you
ain’t a pirate, though, so we’re going to keep an eye on you, okay, so
don’t try anything. I’m trusting you. Heavens help you if I’m wrong.”

Brassbound opened his mouth to speak, but Vimes added quickly, “You
could make your life a little easier and possibly longer, Mr.
Brassbound, if you were to tell me how many of your jolly parcel of
rogues there are on the Fanny.”

“Don’t know, sir. Don’t know who’s still alive, see?”

Vimes looked at the woman as the boat gave a lurch. It was a strange
sensation—for a moment Vimes felt almost weightless—and there was a
commotion behind them in the cowshed among the great spinning wheels.
When he got his balance he managed to say, “I take it that you are Mrs.
Sillitoe, madam?”

She nodded. “Yes, I am, commander,” she said as the little girl clung
more tightly to her. “I know my husband is still alive, because so are
we…at the moment.” She stopped as another surge lifted the entire boat,
then the Fanny came down with a splash and a spine-numbing thump,
followed by the long-drawn-out bellow of a bullock who had had enough,
and the start of a scream.

Vimes, Feeney and Brassbound picked themselves up off the floor. Mrs.
Sillitoe and her daughter were, amazingly, still vertical and Mrs.
Sillitoe wore a grim smile. “That sound you heard was one of the pirates
dying, I’m extremely pleased to say! That means everyone else in the
cowshed is alive. Shall I tell you why? He almost certainly didn’t hop!
Those lifts and drops are little slams to me: somewhere behind us a damn
slam is getting so big that bits of it are calving off and coming down
all the way to us at speed, you see, raising the water level and
dropping it again like a stone as they go past—and that’s when you have
to know enough to dance to the rhythm! Because if you don’t dance to the
rhythm of the slam you’ll dance with the Devil soon enough! A man went
down there with a crossbow when the fighting started. By the sound of it
he wasn’t familiar with the dance. I expect it was Ten Gallon Charlie
who got him when he was on the ground, poor lamb. Charlie is the Bullock
Wrangler. If he hits a man once, no one will ever have to hit him
again.” Mrs. Sillitoe said that in a matter-of-fact, satisfied voice.
“If you want to try to steal from our riverboat you have to be prepared
for some considerable inconvenience.”

And I thought the city was on the tough side, Vimes thought. He noticed
that a prudent Feeney had rearmed the confiscated crossbow and said,
“I’m going below to make certain. Mrs. Sillitoe, how many other pirates
do you think there are?”

“There were four that came aboard as owners of the cargo.” She began to
tick them off on her fingers. “Mr. Harrison the loadmaster got one of
them, but another one stabbed him, the devil. I know only one of them
went down to the cowshed, and another one helped this simpering little
bastard rig up the ropes so that if anybody was left to try any funny
business we were hostage, and then that other man went up to the
wheelhouse. I was told that we would be all right, provided my husband
gets the cargo to Quirm.” The little girl clung to her dress as the
woman continued, her face wooden. “Personally, I don’t believe it, but
he hasn’t harmed my husband yet. He’s counting, all the time he’s
counting. My husband is listening to Old Treachery and remembering!
Trying to out-think sixty miles of murderous water! And if he dies, it
wins, wherever you are…”

“Feeney, keep your crossbow pointing at this gentleman, will you?” said
Vimes. “And if he makes any movement whatsoever, up to and including
trying to blow his nose, you have my full authority to shoot him
somewhere where it will be seriously inconvenient.”

Vimes headed to the steps and nodded to Feeney and Mrs. Sillitoe, raised
a finger and said, “Be with you in just one minute!” And hurried down
into the hot and noisome heart of the Wonderful Fanny. Snooker, Vimes
thought. Knocking the balls until you have the right one right on cue.

He felt pressure on his feet surge as the vessel lifted, and instantly
jumped into the air, landing neatly as the Fanny slapped back down into
the water.

He was confronted by a man who would surely make even Willikins think
twice. “You’d be Ten Gallons? Mrs. Sillitoe sent me down here. I’m
Commander Vimes, Ankh-Morpork City Watch!”

And the man with a face like a troll and a body to match said, “Heard
about you. Thought you were dead!”

“I generally look like this at the end of boat trips, Mr. Gallons,” said
Vimes. Then, pointing to an apparent corpse on the floor between them,
“What happened to him?”

“I fink he is dead,” Ten Gallons leered. “I’ve never seen a man
suffocated by his own nose before.”

It was hard to hear anything down in the cowshed given the complaining
of the oxen and the ominous whirring of overstressed gears, but Vimes
shouted, “Did he have a crossbow?”

Ten Gallons nodded and fingers thicker than Vimes’s wrist unhooked said
weapon off a nail on the wall. “Would come with you, mister, but it’s
all the three of us can do to hold things together down here!” He spat.
“Ain’t really any hope anyway, the damn slam is right behind us! See you
on the other side, copper!”

Vimes nodded at him, examined the crossbow for a moment, made a little
adjustment and, satisfied, climbed up the steps.

Vimes looked at the few people left on the Wonderful Fanny who weren’t
pouring water on the backs of steaming oxen or trying to hold the boat
in one piece and above water. The shocks were indeed getting closer
together, he was sure of it, and surely, once there was a big enough
hole, the whole damn dam would give way.

All the occupants of the cabin except Brassbound, who fell over, jumped
together as yet another surge raised the boat.

There was a sharp intake of breath from Feeney as Vimes went over to the
trembling Brassbound, who had clearly realized that he was likely to be
the unlucky winner of the first-over-the-side contest. And Feeney
actually groaned when Vimes handed the man the recovered crossbow
saying, “I told you, Chief Constable, I know a killer when I see one and
I need back-up and I’m sure that our Mr. Brassbound is very eager to get
himself promptly on to the good side of the law right now, a decision
that might well make him look better in court. Am I not right, Mr.
Brassbound?”

The young man nodded fervently.

Vimes added, “I’d rather have you down here, Feeney. Until I know
exactly who is still on this tub, I’d like you to look after the ladies.
Right now I’m not sure I know who’s alive and who’s dead.”

“The Fanny is not a tub, commander,” said Mrs. Sillitoe sharply, “but
I’ll forgive you this one time.”

Vimes gave her a little salute as all but Brassbound jumped and once
again the idiot floundered.

Vimes turned toward the stairs. “It’s going to be Stratford up there
with the pilot, isn’t it, Mr. Brassbound?”

Another, bigger surge this time, and Brassbound landed heavily. He
managed to get out, “And he’s heard about you, you know how it is, and
he’s determined to get down to the sea before you catch up with him.
He’s a killer, sir, a stone killer! Don’t give him a chance, sir, I beg
you for all our sakes, and do it quickly for yours!” The air was
electric, truly electric. Everything metal shook and jangled. “They say
the dam is going to break pretty soon,” said Brassbound.

“Thank you for that, Mr. Brassbound. You sound like a sensible young man
to me and I’ll say so to the authorities.”

The worried young man’s face was wreathed in smiles as he said, “And
you’re the famous Commander Vimes, sir! I’m glad to be at your back.”

There were a lot of steps up to the wheelhouse. The pilot was king and
rode high over the river, monarch of all he surveyed even if, as now,
rain hammered at the expensive glass windows as if it found such solid
slabs of sky offensive. Vimes stepped inside quickly. It was hardly
worth shouting, given that the storm drowned out everything, but you had
to be able to say that you’d said it: “Commander Vimes, Ankh-Morpork
City Watch! Statute of necessary action!” Which didn’t exist, but he
swore to himself that he would damn well get it enacted as soon as he
got back, even if he had to call in favors from all over the world. A
lawman faced with a dreadful emergency should at least have some kind of
figleaf to shove down the throats of the lawyers!

He could see the back of Mr. Sillitoe’s head with his pilot’s cap. The
pilot paid Vimes no attention, but a young man was standing looking at
Vimes in knock-kneed, pants-wetting horror. The sword he had been
carrying landed heavily on the deck.

Brassbound was hopping from one foot to the other. “You’d better take
care of him right now, commander, he’ll have a trick or two up his
sleeve and no mistake!”

Vimes ignored this and carefully patted the young man down, freeing up
one short knife, the sort a river rat might carry. He used it to cut a
length of rope and tied the man’s hands together behind him. “Okay, Mr.
Stratford, we’re going downstairs. Though if you’d like to dive into the
water first I won’t stop you.”

And then the man spoke for the first time. “I ain’t Stratford, sir,” he
said, pleading. “I’m Squeezy McIntyre. That’s Stratford behind you with
the crossbow pointing at you, sir.”

The man formerly known as Brassbound gave a chuckle as Vimes turned. “Oh
my, oh my, the great Commander Vimes! I’ll be damned if you ain’t as
dumb as a pile of horseshit! You know the eyes of a killer when you see
them, do you? Well, I reckon I’ve killed maybe sixteen people, not
including goblins, of course, they don’t count.”

Stratford sighted on Vimes and grinned. “Maybe it’s my boyish features,
would you say? What kind of bloody fool cares about the goblins, eh? Oh,
they say they can talk, but you know how those little buggers can lie!”
The tip of the crossbow drifted back and forward hypnotically in
Stratford’s hands. “I’m curious, though. I mean, I don’t like you, and
sure as salvation I’m going to shoot you, but do me a favor and tell me
what you saw in my eyes, okay?”

Squeezy took the opportunity to hop desperately down the steps just as
Vimes said, with a shrug, “I saw a goblin girl being murdered. What lies
did she tell you? I know the eyes of a murderer, Mr. Stratford, oh I
surely do, because I’ve looked into eyes like that many times. And if I
need reminding, I look into my shaving mirror. Oh, yes, I recognize your
eyes and I’m interested to see what you’re going to do next, Mr.
Stratford. Though now I come to think about it, maybe it wasn’t sensible
of me to give you that crossbow. Maybe I really am stupid, because I’m
offering you the opportunity to surrender to me here and now and I’m
doing it only once.”

Stratford stared with his mouth open and then said, “Hell, commander,
I’ve got the drop on you, and you want me to surrender to you? Sorry,
commander, but I’ll see you again in hell!”

There was a space in the world for the crossbow to sing when the
grinning Stratford pulled the trigger. Unfortunately, the sound that it
made approximated to the word thunk. He stared at it.

“I took the safety pin out and stamped it into the dung,” said Vimes.
“You can’t fire it without the pin! Now, I expect you have a couple of
knives about your person, and so if you fancy cutting your way out past
me, then I’d be happy to accommodate you, although I’ll tell you that
firstly you won’t succeed, and secondly, if you manage to get past a boy
who grew up on the streets of Ankh-Morpork there’s a man down there with
a punch that can fell an elephant, and if you knife him you’ll just make
him more annoyed—”

The surge this time was bigger than ever, and Vimes banged his head on
the cabin’s roof before coming down again in front of Stratford and
kicking him smartly in the official police officer method and also the
groin.

“Oh, come on, Mr. Stratford, don’t you have a reputation to keep up?
Feared killer? You should spend some time in the city, my lad, and I’ll
make certain you do.” Stratford fell backward and Vimes continued, “And
then you’ll hang, as is right and proper, but don’t worry—Mr. Trooper
does a nifty noose and they say it hardly hurts at all. Tell you what,
just to get the adrenaline pumping, Mr. Stratford, imagine I’m the
goblin girl. She begged for her life, Mr. Stratford, remember that? I
do! And so do you. You fell down at the first surge, Mr. Stratford.
River rats know what to do. You didn’t, although I must say you’ve
covered it very well. Whoops!”

This was because Stratford had indeed tried his hand with a knife. Vimes
twisted his wrist and flung the blade down the stairs just as the glass
in the wheelhouse smashed and a branch longer than Vimes plowed across
the room, shedding leaves and dragging torrential rain and darkness
behind it.

Both the lamps had gone out and, as it turned out, so had Stratford,
hopefully through a shattered window, possibly to his death, but Vimes
wasn’t sure. He would have preferred definitely. But there was no time
to fret about him, because now came another surge, and water poured in
through the glassless windows.

Vimes jerked open the little gate to the pilot’s deck and found Mr.
Sillitoe struggling up out of the pile of storm-washed debris. He was
moaning, “I’ve lost count, I’ve lost count!”

Vimes pulled him upward and helped him into his big chair, where he
banged on the arms in frustration. “And now I can’t see a damned thing
in all this murk! Can’t count, can’t see, can’t steer! Won’t survive!”

“I can see, Mr. Sillitoe,” said Vimes. “What do you want me to do?”

“You can?”

Vimes stared out at the homicidal river. “There’s a thundering great
rock coming up on the left-hand side. Should it be doing that? Looks
like there’s a busted landing stage there.”

“Ye gods! That’s Baker’s Knob! Here, let me at the wheel! How close is
it now?”

“Maybe fifty yards?”

“And you can see it in all this? Damn me, mister, you must have been
born in a cave! That means we ain’t that far from Quirm now, a touch
under nineteen miles. You think you could stand lookout? Is my family
okay? That little snot threatened to harm them if I didn’t keep the
Fanny on schedule!” Something big and heavy bounced off the roof and
spun away into the night, and the pilot went on, “Gastric Sillitoe,
delighted to make your acquaintance, sir.” He stared ahead. “I’ve heard
of you. Koom Valley, right? Happy to have you aboard.”

“Er, Gastric? Whole tree spinning in current near left-hand shore, ten
yards ahead! Nothing much to see on right.”

The wheel spun frantically again. “Obliged to you, sir, and I surely
hope you won’t take it amiss if I say that we generally talk about port
and starboard?”

“Wouldn’t know about that, Gastric, never drank starboard. Mass of what
looks like smashed logs ahead, forty yards, looks like small stuff, and
I see a faint light high up on our right, can’t tell how far away.”
Vimes ducked and a jagged log bounced off the back of the wheelhouse.
Beside him the pilot sounded as if he had got a grip on things now.

“Okay, commander, that would be Jackson’s Light, very welcome sight! Now
I’ve found my bearings and an hourglass that ain’t busted, I’d be
further in your debt if you’d go below and tell Ten Gallons to cut loose
the barges? There’s a chicken farmer on one of them! Best to get him on
board before the dam breaks.”

“And hundreds of goblins, Gastric.”

“Pay them no mind, sir. Goblins is just goblins.”

For a moment Vimes stared into the darkness, and the darkness within the
darkness, and it said to him, “You’re having fun, aren’t you, commander!
This is Sam Vimes being Sam Vimes in the dark and the rain and the
danger and because you’re a copper you’re not going to believe that
Stratford is dead until you see the corpse. You know it. Some people
take a devil of a lot of killing. You know you saw him go out of the
cabin, but there’s all kinds of ropes and handholds on the boat, and the
bugger was wiry and limber, and you know, just as day follows night,
that he’ll be back. Double jeopardy, Commander Vimes, all the pieces on
the board, goblins to save, a murderer to catch—and all the time, when
you remember, there is a wife and a little boy waiting for you to come
back.”

“I always remember!”

“Of course you do, Commander Vimes,” the voice continued, “of course you
do. But I know you, and sometimes a shadow passes every sun.
Nevertheless, the darkness will always be yours, my tenacious friend.”

And then reality either came back or went away and Vimes was saying, “We
bring the goblins aboard, Gastric, because they…Yes, they are evidence
in an important police investigation!”

There was a further surge, and this time Vimes landed up on the deck,
which was a little bit softer now because of the ragged carpet of leaves
and branches. As he got up Mr. Sillitoe said, “Police investigation, you
say? Well, the Fanny has always been a friend of the law but, well, sir,
they stink like the pits of hell, and that’s the truth of it! They’ll
frighten the oxen something terrible!”

“Do you think they aren’t frightened already?” said Vimes. “Er, small
logjam ahead on the right. All clear on the left.” Vimes sniffed. “Trust
me, sir, by the smell of it they’re pretty nervous as it is. Can’t you
just stop and tie us up to the bank?”

Sillitoe’s laugh was brittle. “Sir, there are no banks now, none that
I’d try to get to. I know this river and it’s angry and there’s a damn
slam coming. Can’t stop it any more than I could stop the storm. You
signed up for the long haul, commander: either we race the river or we
fold our hands, pray to the gods and die right now.” He saluted.
“Nevertheless, I can see you’re a man, sir, who does what he sees needs
doing, and, by hokey, I can’t argue with that! You’ve done a man’s job
as it is, Commander Vimes, and may the gods go with you. May they go
with all of us.”

Vimes ran down the steps and grabbed Feeney in passing as he danced over
the heaving floor to the cowshed. “Come on, lad, it’s time to ditch the
barges. There’s too much of a drag. Mr. Ten Gallons? Let’s get those
doors open, shall we? Mr. Sillitoe has put me in charge down here. If
you want to argue, feel free!”

The huge man didn’t even attempt an argument, and punched the doors
open.

Vimes swore. Mr. Sillitoe had been right. There was roaring not far
behind them and a river of lightning and blue fire was sweeping down the
valley like a tide. For a moment he was hypnotized, and then got a grip.
“Okay, Feeney, you start getting the goblins on board and I’ll fetch our
chicken farmer! The bloody iron ore can sink for all I care.”

In the glaring light of the damn slam Vimes jumped twice to land on the
barge from which was already coming the squawking of terrified birds.
Water poured off him as he dragged open the hatch and shouted, “Mr.
False! No, don’t start grabbing the chickens! Better off farmer with no
chickens than a load of chickens with no farmer! Anyway, they’ll
probably float, or fly, or something!”

He coaxed the frightened man on to the next barge to find that it was
still full of bewildered goblins. Feeney was looking out from the open
door at the rear of the Fanny, and above the roar and hissing Vimes
heard him shout, “It’s Mr. Ten Gallons, sir! He says no goblins!”

Vimes glanced behind them, and then turned back to Feeney. “Very well,
Mr. Feeney, keep an eye on the goblins’ barge while I discuss matters
with Mr. Ten Gallons, understand?”

He flung Mr. False on to the deck of the Fanny and looked around for Ten
Gallons. He shook his head. What a copper that man would make if
properly led by human beings. He sighed. “Mr. Ten Gallons? I told you,
Mr. Sillitoe has given me carte blanche. Can we discuss the matter of
the goblins?”

The giant growled, “I ain’t got no cart and I don’t know no Blanche, and
I ain’t having no goblins on my deck, okay?”

Vimes nodded, poker-faced, and looked exhaustedly at the deck. “Is that
your last word, Mr. Ten Gallons?”

“It damn well is!”

“Okay, this is mine.”

Ten Gallons went over backward like a tree and began to sleep like a
log.

The street never leaves you…

And what the University of the Street told you was that fighting was a
science, the science of getting the opponent out of your face and
facedown on the ground with the maximum amount of speed and the minimum
of effort. After that, of course, you had a range of delightful
possibilities and the leisure in which to consider them. But if you
wanted to fight fair, or at least more fair than most of the other
street options, then you had to know how to punch, and what to punch and
from precisely which angle to punch it. Of course, his treasured brass
knuckles were an optional but helpful extra but, Vimes thought as he
tried to wring some blood back into his fingers, probably any court,
after sight of Ten Gallons, would have forgiven Vimes, even if he used a
sledgehammer.

He looked at the brass knuckles. They hadn’t even bent: good old
Ankh-Morpork know-how. The country may have the muscle but the city has
got the technology, he thought, as he slipped them back in his pocket.

“Okay, Mr. Feeney, let’s get them in, shall we? Find Stinky, he’s the
brains of the outfit.”

Possibly Stinky was the brains of the outfit. Even at the end Vimes was
never certain just what Stinky was. But the goblins, spurred by his
crunchy chattering, ran and leapt like ugly gazelles past Vimes and into
the boat. He took one look at the growling death behind them, made the
last jump into the boat and helped Feeney shut and bolt the doors. And
that meant that now, with the ventilation gone, the bulls in the
basement were getting nostrils full of goblin. It wasn’t, Vimes thought,
all that bad when you got used to it—more alchemical than midden—but
down below there was a lot of shouting and a jerk as the beasts tried to
stampede inside their treadmill.

Vimes ignored it, despite the shuddering of the boat, and shouted, “Let
go of the barges, chief constable! I hope you really do know how!”

Feeney nodded and opened the hatch in the floor. Spray blew in and
stopped when he knelt down and stuck his hand into the hole.

“Takes quite a few turns before they drop, commander. If I was you I’d
be holding on to something when the iron ore goes!”

Vimes elbowed his way through the terrified goblins, pulled himself with
care up into the wheelhouse again, and tapped Gastric on the shoulder.
“We’re dropping the barges any minute!” The pilot, still clinging to the
wheel and squinting into the dark, gave a brief nod; nothing less than a
scream would be heard in the wheelhouse now. The wind and debris had
smashed every window.

Vimes looked out of the rear window and saw the great, floating, flying
desolation of lightning-laced wood, mud and tumbling rock closing in.
For a moment he thought he saw a naked marble lady tumbling with the
debris and clutching her marble shift as if defending the remains of her
modesty from the deluge. He blinked and she was gone…Perhaps he’d
imagined it…He shouted, “I hope you can swim, sir?” just as the damn
slam caught up and the apparition called Stratford dived through the
window and was fielded neatly by Vimes, to Stratford’s great surprise.

“Do you think I’m a baby, Mr. Stratford? Do you think that I don’t
think?”

Stratford squirmed out of Vimes’s grip, spun neatly and threw a punch
which Vimes very nearly dodged. It was harder than he had expected, and,
to give a devil his due, Stratford knew how to defend and, perish the
thought, was younger than Vimes, much younger. Yes, you could tell the
eyes of a murderer, at least after they had done more than three or so
and got away with it. Their eyes held the expression some gods probably
had. But a killer in the process of trying to kill was always absorbed,
constantly calculating, drawing upon some hideous strength. If you cut
their leg off they wouldn’t notice until they fell over. Tricks didn’t
work, and the floor was slippery with the debris of half a forest. As
they kicked and punched their way back and forth across the wheelhouse
deck, Stratford was winning. When had Vimes last eaten, or had a decent
drink of water, or slept properly?

And then from below was the cry “Barges away!” And the Wonderful Fanny
bucked like a thoroughbred, throwing both of the fighters to the floor,
where Vimes barely had room to kick and fend off blows. Water poured
over them, filling the cabin to waist level, reducing Vimes’s stamina to
almost nothing. Stratford had his hands around his throat, and Vimes’s
world turned dark blue and full of chuckling water, banging against his
ears. He tried to think of Young Sam and Sybil, but the water kept
washing them away…except that the pressure was suddenly gone, and his
body, deciding that his brain had at last gone on holiday, flailed
upward.

And there was Stratford, kneeling in water that was falling away very
fast, a matter probably of no concern to him now since he was holding
his head and screaming, owing to the fact that suddenly there was
Stinky, spreadeagled on Stratford’s head, reaching down and kicking and
scratching anything that could be kicked off, scratched or, to one
lengthy scream, pulled.

His Grace the Duke of Ankh, assisted by Sir Samuel Vimes, with the help
of Commander Vimes, got to his feet, with the last-minute assistance of
Blackboard Monitor Vimes, and all of them coalesced into one man as he
leapt across the shaking deck just too late to stop Stratford pulling
Stinky—and a certain amount of hair—off his head, and throwing him to
the streaming deck and stamping on him heavily. There was no mistaking
it. He’d heard the crack of bones even while airborne, and so what hit
Stratford was the full force of the law, and its rage.

The street is old and cunning; but the street is always willing to learn
and that is why Vimes, in mid air, felt his legs unfold and the full
majesty of the law hit Stratford with the traditionally unstoppable One
Man He Up Down Very Sorry. Even Vimes was surprised and wondered if he
would be able to do it again.

“We’re on the wave!” Gastric shouted. “We’re on it, not under it! We’re
surfing all the way to Quirm, commander! There’s light ahead! Glory be!”

Vimes grunted as he wrapped the last of the rope from his pocket around
the stunned Stratford, tying him tightly to a stanchion. “Sink or swim,
you’re going to pay, Mr. Stratford, from heaven, hell or high water, I
don’t care which.”

And then there was a creaking and a bellowing as the frantic oxen
redoubled their attempts to escape the stench of the goblins immediately
behind them, a surge skyward and while it would be most poetic to say
that the waters were on the face of the earth, in truth they were mostly
on the face of Samuel Vimes.

Vimes woke in damp and utter darkness with sand under his cheek. Some
parts of his body reported for duty, others protested that they had a
note from their mother. After a while little insistent clues evolved:
there was the sound of surf, the chatter of people and, for some reason,
what sounded like the trumpeting of an elephant.

At this point something stuck a finger in one of his nostrils and pulled
hard. “Upsee-daisy, Mr. Po-leess-maan, otherwise you biggest pancake I
ever seen! Upsee-daisy! Save Goblins! Big hero! Hurrah! Everybody get
clap!”

It was a familiar voice, but it couldn’t have been Stinky, because Vimes
had seen the little goblin completely crushed. But Vimes tried to pull
himself up anyway and this was almost impossible because of the stinking
fishy-smelling debris that covered him like a shroud. He couldn’t bring
his arm around to swat whatever blasted thing it was that was still
tugging at his nostril, but he did manage to at least raise himself
enough to realize that there was a lot of debris on top of him.

He could make out what seemed like the thump of an elephant’s footfall,
and in his state of comfortable hallucination wondered idly what an
elephant was doing at the seaside, and how much care said elephant would
take to avoid just another load of flotsam. This thought crystallized
just as the tugging at his nose stopped and the cracked voice shouted,
“Rise and shine, Mr. Vimes, ’cos here come Jumbo!”

Vimes managed the champion press-up of all time and sprang clear,
dripping driftwood and barnacles, just as a foot the size of a dustbin
thumped down where his head had been.

“Hooray, no flattery for Mr. Vimes!”

Vimes looked down and saw, about half an inch from the family-sized
toenail of the elephant, who incidentally now wore an expression of some
embarrassment, the figure of Stinky bouncing up and down excitedly on
the tip of its trunk. Other people had spotted Vimes too, and were
hurrying toward him, and it was with a terrifying relief that he spotted
the distinctive helmets of the Quirm City Watch, which he had always
thought were far too fussy and militaristic for proper coppers, but now
viewed as shining beacons of sanity.

An officer with a captain’s helmet said, “Commander? Are you all right?
Everyone thought you’d been washed away!”

Vimes tried to brush mud and sand off his torn shirt and managed to say,
“Well, the lads back in Ankh-Morpork gave me a bucket and spade for my
holiday, so I thought I ought to try it out. Never mind about me, what
about the Fanny? What about the people?”

“All fine, sir, as far as we can tell. A few bangs and bruises, of
course. It was amazing, sir, the men who look after the elephants at
Quirm Zoo saw it happen! They take the creatures down to the surf in the
morning to have a wash and a bit of a play before the crowds come along,
and one said he saw the Fanny go right over the top of the dock on the
crest of the wave, sir, and it sort of settled down on the beach. I had
a look inside, and I’d say she’ll need a month or so in the boat yard,
and the paddle wheels are smashed to blazes, but it’ll be the talk of
the river for years!”

By now an apologetic zookeeper was steering his charge away from Vimes,
allowing him to see a beach covered in damp rubbish and, he was
surprisingly pleased to note, quite a large number of chickens,
scratching busily for worms. One of them, totally oblivious to Vimes,
scratched at some seaweed for a moment, hunkered down with a cross-eyed
expression, gurgled once or twice and then stood up, looking rather
relieved. He saw that it had left an egg on the sand. At least he
supposed it to be an egg. It was square. He picked it up and looked down
at the chickens, and in his half-hallucinating state said, “Well, that
definitely looks complicated to me.”

Out on the surf the two oxen were standing nearly neck deep in the
water, and perhaps it was only his imagination that led Vimes to believe
that the water around them was steaming.

And now more people were running and chickens were running away, and
there was even Ten Gallons, and Mrs. Sillitoe with her daughter, looking
damp, and with blankets around them, but most importantly not looking
dead. Vimes, who had been holding his breath for too long, breathed out.
He breathed out even further when Ten Gallons slapped him on the back,
and Mrs. Sillitoe gave him a kiss. “What about Gastric?” he said, “And
where’s Feeney?”

Mrs. Sillitoe smiled. “They’re fine, Commander Vimes, as far we can
tell. They’re a bit battered, but sleeping it off. No long-term problems
according to the medic. I’m sure they’ll be fine, thanks to you!”

She stood back as a Quirmian officer handed Vimes a mug of coffee. It
had sand in it, but never had sandy coffee tasted better. “All sorted
out very well, you might say, sir. We even made sure those damn goblins
caught their boat!”

Never in the field of coffee-making had so much of the stuff been
sprayed so far and over so many. Vimes stared beyond the surf where, in
the distance, a ship had left the port and was making good sail. He
said, “Fetch me Acting Captain Haddock right now!”

Acting Captain Haddock arrived at a run six minutes later and Vimes
couldn’t help noticing that he had a bit of breakfast around the edge of
his mouth. “Our relationship with Commandant Fournier is cordial at the
moment, is it not?” said Vimes.

Haddock grinned widely. “Commander, when he gets down here you may have
to try hard to stop him kissing you on both cheeks. Mrs. Sillitoe is his
daughter.”

“Was happy to be of assistance,” said Vimes, looking around absently,
“and so would you tell these gentlemen that I want a fast boat, one fast
enough to catch that ship, and a decent squad of men to crew it, and I
want them now, and while I’m waiting I’d like someone to get me a clean
shirt and a bacon sandwich…without avec.”

“They have a pretty swift cutter, commander, for chasing smugglers!”

“Good, and get me a cutlass. I’ve always wanted to try one.” Vimes
thought for a moment and added, “And make that another two bacon
sandwiches. And a lot more coffee. And make that one more bacon
sandwich. And, Haddock, if you can scavenge a bottle of Merkel and
Stingbat’s very famous old brown sauce, I swear I’ll make you a full
sergeant when your term here is up, ’cos any man who can find a proper
down-and-dirty Ankh-Morpork sauce in Quirm, home of five hundred bloody
types of mayonnaise, without getting his eye full of spit deserves to be
a sergeant in anybody’s force!”

And then, as whatever had been holding Sam Vimes up drained away, he
fell gently backward, dreaming of bacon sandwiches and brown sauce.

Even Constable Haddock or, as he was now, Acting Captain Haddock, would
agree that he was not the sharpest knife in the box, but it was amazing,
the things you could open with a blunt instrument. As he hurried away on
this prestigious errand he was stopped by one of the Quirm officers, who
said, “Hareng!* Have you heard of a watchman called Petit Fou Artour?”

“Wee Mad Arthur? Yes, he’s one of our lads!”

“Well, you had better come quickly, my friend, because he is in our
Watch House. Strong little fellow, isn’t he? A few of the other officers
had laughed at him, he said, but I believe that they have learned the
error of their ways—the hard way, as it happened. Apparently he has been
sent to find Commandant Vimes.”

Sam Vimes awoke from a pig’s nightmare to find himself lying on a pile
of sacks in a godown in the docks. He was carefully lifted to his feet
by Acting Constable Haddock and led unsteadily to a crude table behind
which was a chef presiding over the sizzling makings of a bacon
sandwich, or rather several bacon sandwiches. “He screamed a bit,” said
Haddock, “when I insisted on no mayonnaise, but right now you can do no
wrong here, commander. And I have one unopened bottle of Merkel and
Stingbat’s finest, sir, the only one in the city. I’m afraid, however,
that you’ll have to eat on the go, but the chef is packing the
sandwiches in a hamper, with hot charcoal to keep them warm. No time to
hang about, sir. The cutter will leave the dock in ten minutes.”

A notebook was pushed under Vimes’s nose. “What’s this?”

“Your signature to my promotion to full sergeant, commander,” said
Haddock carefully. “I hope you don’t mind, but you did promise.”

“Good man,” said Vimes. “Always write things down.”

Haddock looked proud. “I’ve also arranged to have on board a selection
of cutlasses for your perusal, commander.”

Vimes struggled into his new shirt, and as his head appeared he said, “I
want you to come too, Kipper. You know your way around here better than
me. By the way, what did you do with the prisoner?”

Haddock said, “What prisoner would that be, commander?”

And for a moment Vimes’s blood froze. “You didn’t find a man tied up
anywhere on the Fanny?”

Now Haddock looked worried. “No, sir, no one by the time we got there.
The place was a mess, sir. Sorry, sir, we didn’t know!”

“No reason why you should’ve done. Sorry to shout, but if the Quirm
police think the sun is shining out of my arse then tell them they
should be looking for a youngish-looking individual known as Stratford.
He’s a double murderer, at least…vicious and by now certainly armed.
Tell them they’ll be doing everybody a favor if they keep guard on the
boat, on the walking wounded and all the lads in your infirmary, and
also they should send a clacks to Pseudopolis Yard right now to say that
Commander Vimes requires that two members of the Watch should hasten via
golem horse to Ramkin Hall to keep guard over Lady Sybil and Young Sam.
I don’t want them to hang about: I know those things are bad news to
ride, but Stratford is a nut job—they must hurry!”

“Excuse me, commander,” said one of the Quirm officers, “we all speak
pretty good Morporkian here. Everybody here speaks Morporkian. If you
hear us speaking Quirmian it’s because we want to talk about you behind
your back. We salute you, Commander Vimes, we will send your clacks and
search everywhere for your murderer and take great care of the wounded.
Now, please hurry down to the dock. The Queen of Quirm is pretty
ancient, only one step away from being a hulk. Our cutter should catch
up with it in a few hours. Shall we go?”

Come on, sir,” said Haddock, “and Wee Mad Arthur will brief you on the
way.”

“Wee Mad Arthur!”

“Yes, commander. Apparently he got sent to foreign parts to do with this
goblin business, flew back to Ankh-Morpork and then got sent straight
here to you. He’s got a story to tell you and no mistake.”

“Where is he?” said Vimes.

“They should be releasing him from custody right now, sir. A laughable
misunderstanding, no real harm done, all will be forgiven and all will
probably heal, I’m sure.”

Vimes was wise enough to leave it at that.

Of course, the seasickness didn’t help, but that didn’t begin to cut in
until afterward, when Wee Mad Arthur had finished his breathless
account. “And what did you find in the huts?” said Vimes.

“More goblins, sir, all shapes and sizes, little ones too. Most of them
dead, the rest in a very bad way, in my opinion. I did what I could for
them, such as it was. To tell ye the truth, sir, I think they were
bewildered about everything, the poor wee devils, but there’s grub and
water there of a sort and I don’t reckon those guards are going to move
in a hurry, ye ken.” He made a face and added, “Really weird, those
goblins. I let them out and they just milled around, not knowing what
the hell to do. I mean, crivens, if it were me I’d be out of there like
a shot and give those scunners a right good kicking in the fork while
they was lying down. As for the men, well, I kenned this was urgent and
I could always fly back tomorrow and pour some water on them at least,
but I thought the Watch should know and so made haste back to
Ankh-Morpork and they told me where you’d gone on holiday, and Lady
Sybil said you’d gone down that mucky old river, so all I had to do was
fly down until I got to Quirm and when I found a big awful terrible mess
I kenned that was something to do with you, commander.”

Wee Mad Arthur hesitated. He was never quite sure what Vimes thought of
him, given that the man considered Feegles in general a nuisance. When
Vimes was slow to reply, he asked, “I hope I did what ye would have
done, commander?”

Vimes looked at Wee Mad Arthur as if he was seeing him for the first
time. “No, constable, you did not do what I would have done, which is
fortunate, because if you had, then you would be in front of me on a
charge for using brutally excessive force in the execution of your
duties. However, you will get a medal and an official commendation for
this, constable. Right now we’re chasing another ship that’s taking more
goblins to that wretched place. And although I imagine you must be very
tired, I expect you’d like to come along for the ride? Incidentally, may
I congratulate you personally, constable: for someone raised as a gnome
you really have got the hang of the whole Feegle business, haven’t you?
You beat up a dozen armed men single-handed?”

“Oh aye, sir,” said Wee Mad Arthur slyly, “but it was nae fair, I had
them outnumbered. Och, and by the way in some of them sheds there was
all kinds of like alchemy stuff. Didn’t ken what it was, but ye might
find it o’ interest.”

“Well spotted,” said Vimes. “Why don’t you go down below and get a
rest?”

“Aye, I will sir, but as soon as I can I have to run an errand regarding
Sergeant Colon, who is in a verra bad way indeed.” He looked at Vimes’s
blank expression and continued. “Did ye nae know? He got some goblin
geegaw given tae him and it’s put some kind of fluence on him quite
cruel, and he’s a-screaming and a-shouting and making oot like a goblin
all day long according to Sergeant Littlebottom. She’s moved him into
the sanatorium.”

“Sergeant Colon!”

“Aye, sir. And according to Captain Angua we have to find a goblin cave
to break the fluence, ye ken? Sounds a wee bitty weird to me, but half
the Watch is oot searching the place for goblins and they cannae find
even one o’ the poor wee beings, being as the wee beasties is hardly
going tae advertise these days, if you are getting my meaning.” Once
again Wee Mad Arthur looked at Vimes.

“Sergeant Colon!”

“That’s what I told you, sir.”

The blood came back to Vimes’s face as rational thought came back to his
brain. “Can he travel?” Wee Mad Arthur shrugged. Ahead of them the Queen
of Quirm seemed a little closer. “Then if you please, constable, can you
go back to the clacks at the Quirm Watch House and tell them to put Fred
on a coach to Ramkin Hall as soon as possible, okay?” Vimes added, “Best
if Cheery comes with him, I should think.” And in his head he added,
Fred Colon! He hates anything non-human, on the quiet. And for now he
left it at that, given what lay ahead, but thought, Fred Colon! I wonder
what kind of pots he would make.

Behind him, Wee Mad Arthur whistled a strange note and a seagull
trailing the cutter in the vague hope of a free meal of fish entrails
found a weight on its back and a voice in its ear saying, “Hello,
beastie, my name is Wee Mad Arthur.”

Vimes liked to have his feet on something solid, such as his boots, and
he liked his boots to do likewise. The sail of the Queen of Quirm now
clearly visible, the cutter left the safety of the harbor and hit what
is generally known as a moderate swell. And Commander Vimes, the Duke of
Ankh-Morpork, Sir Samuel Vimes and, not least, Blackboard Monitor Vimes,
was definitely going to eat his bacon sandwiches and not throw up in
front of other watchmen.

And he didn’t, and didn’t know how, although he did at one point think
he detected, high in the rigging, the shape of a small goblin grinning
down at him. He put it down to the bacon sandwiches, which were
valiantly trying to come back up, just as he valiantly kept them down.

Stratford would have got onto that damn hulk, he was sure of it. Damn
sure of it. He would want paying, for one thing, and he wouldn’t want
hanging. Vimes hesitated. How sure of it should Vimes be? How much was
he prepared to gamble on a hunch? It was Stratford after all. He was
smart and nasty, so you covered every angle, even though you knew that a
smart man in a hurry could find a new angle for himself.

And so all the people who made up Sam Vimes walked backward and forward
across the poop deck, or the scuppers or the starboard or whatever the
damn slippery rocking wood he was standing on was called, veering
between hope, nausea, despair, self-doubt, nausea and the thrill of the
chase and nausea, while the cutter seemed to hit the hard bits of every
wave as it plunged onward after the Queen of Quirm and justice.

The lieutenant came up to him and saluted, quite smartly, and said,
“Commander, you have asked us to pursue the ship because it is carrying
goblins, but I know of no law against taking goblins anywhere.”

“There ought to be a law, because there certainly is a crime, do you
understand?” said Vimes. He patted the lieutenant on the shoulder and
continued, “Congratulations! This cutter of yours is actually traveling
faster than the law. Lieutenant, the law will catch up. Goblins can
speak, they have a society and I’ve heard one of them play music that
would make a bronze statue burst into tears. The process of modern
policing is such that I’m certain that these have been taken from their
home, and the ship that we’re following is taking them somewhere where
they don’t want to go. Look, if you’re queasy about it, just help me get
on that ship and I’ll sort things out by myself, okay? And, besides, I
believe our murderer could be on the boat as well. But, it’s up to you,
lieutenant.”

Vimes nodded toward the prow and added, “We’re so close I can see the
faces of their crew. Maybe you should tell me your intentions,
lieutenant?”

Vimes felt a little sorry for the lad, but not too much. He had taken
the job, he had accepted the promotion and the money that went with it,
hadn’t he? Any copper worth his truncheon would at least take a look at
the Queen now they’d come this far, wouldn’t they?

“Very well, commander,” said the lieutenant. “I’m not sure of my
bearings, but we will hail the Queen and ask permission to come aboard.”

“No! You don’t ask! You tell them to stand by to be inspected by the
police! And if you’re not concerned about the goblins, then it is a fact
that I am in pursuit of a murderer,” Vimes added. “The capital crime—one
that we can’t ignore!”

In fact, he could see the Queen was already heaving two.* It was even
hoisting a white flag, much to his surprise.

And her captain was waiting for them as the cutter drew alongside. He
had a look of resignation on his face, and said, “We won’t make any
trouble, officers. I know it was a bloody stupid thing to do. We’ve got
the man you’re looking for, and we’re bringing him up now. It’s not like
we’re pirates, after all. Good morning, Lieutenant Perdix, sorry to put
you to any trouble.”

Vimes turned to the lieutenant. “You know the captain?”

“Oh yes, commander, Captain Murderer is well respected on this coast,”
said the lieutenant as the cutter gently kissed the Queen. “Smuggles, of
course, they all do it. It’s a sort of game.”

“But Captain…Murderer?” said Vimes.

The lieutenant scrambled on to the Queen’s deck with ease and gave Vimes
a hand up, saying, “The Murderers are a highly respected family in these
parts. To tell you the truth, commander, I think they rather like the
name. They’d object more to Smuggler, I suspect.”

“We’re bringing the bloke up right now, lieutenant,” said the captain,
“and he ain’t very happy.”

Vimes looked him up and down and said, “I’m Commander Vimes,
Ankh-Morpork City Watch, currently investigating at least two murders.”

Captain Murderer’s eyes shut, and he put a hand over his mouth for a
moment before saying, in a voice weeping with forlorn hope, “That
wouldn’t be that Commander Vimes, would it?”

“Captain…Murderer…produce for me the man I’m after, then I’m sure you’ll
find me on a friendly footing. Do you get my meaning?”

There was some shouting and thumping down below and several suggestions
that somebody was getting kicked very hard. Eventually a man with a
cloth tied round his face as a blindfold was half pushed and half
dragged up onto the deck. “To tell you the truth, I’ll be glad to see
the back of him,” said the captain, turning away.

Vimes made sure the man was held fast by the sailors, and pulled down
the mask. He looked into bloodshot eyes for a moment and then, very
calmly, said, “Lieutenant, will you please impound the Queen of Quirm
and arrest the captain and first mate on a charge of kidnapping and
possibly abduction of a number of persons, specifically Mr. Jethro
Jefferson, also goblins to the number of fifty or more. There may be
other charges.

“You can’t abduct goblins,” said Captain Murderer. “Goblins is cargo!”

Vimes let this one pass for the moment. Captain Murderer would be
orientated to the world as seen by Commander Vimes at Commander Vimes’s
leisure. For now he said to the lieutenant, “I also suggest that you
lock up the captain and first mate in the brig, if that is what it’s
called, because when Mr. Jefferson here has got his hands free I think
he’s going to try to punch somebody’s lights out. I’m sure this can all
be sorted out, but someone’s going to suffer for this and it’s just a
matter of deciding who it’s going to be.”

He thought for a moment and then countermanded, “No, I think that first
I’ll talk to the captain, in the captain’s quarters. Kipper, I’d like
you to come and take notes. Lots of notes. Good to see you, Mr.
Jefferson. Lieutenant, to the best of my knowledge Mr. Jefferson is
guilty of no crime other than being in possession of a hot temper. But
although he’s a man I’m very glad to find, he’s not the bastard I’m
currently looking for.”

It was, Acting Captain Haddock thought, a good thing that he had a
decent amount of room in his notebook…

“Captain Murderer, let me recap,” said Sam Vimes after a while, idly
swiveling in the captain’s chair; it squeaked. “Some men unknown to you,
but whom you decided to treat with respect because they had the right
password, which is to say the password you used in your dealings with
smugglers, with whom you have developed what I might call an
understanding, delivered to you a man, bound and gagged, and told you to
take said man to Howondaland to, and I quote ‘cool his heels for a
little while’; and you have also told me that these men said to you that
this was okay by the law.”

The swivel chair under Vimes squeaked once or twice as he twisted for
dramatic effect, and he went on, “Captain Murderer, I represent the law
in Ankh-Morpork, and you may be aware that a number of influential
politicians throughout the world trust my judgment, and, Captain
Murderer, I know of no law that makes kidnapping legal, but I’ll ask my
colleague and an expert on Quirmian law whether he knows of any local
edict that makes it legal to tie up somebody who has committed no crime
and drag him onto a boat and send him to a questionable distant location
against his will.”

The swivel chair only had one chance to squeak again before Lieutenant
Perdix said, ponderously, “Commander Vimes, I know of no such change in
the law, and therefore, Captain Murderer, I arrest you,” and here the
lieutenant placed a hand on the stricken captain’s shoulder, “on a
charge of kidnapping, aiding and abetting kidnapping, actual and
possibly grievous bodily harm, and other charges that may arise in the
course of our continued investigations. In the meantime, upon its return
to port, the Queen of Quirm is impounded and will, you may be sure, be
inspected down to its gunwales.”

Vimes swiveled the chair again until his face was not visible to the
downcast captain but could be clearly seen by the lieutenant, then
winked at him and got a little nod in response. He rotated the chair
again and said, “Depriving an innocent man of his liberty even for a
week, captain, is a very serious crime. However, the lieutenant has told
me that you are well thought of on this coast and in general are
considered to be a model citizen. Personally, I don’t like a world in
which small men who act out of fear, or even out of a misguided
deference, get thrown into prison while big men, the instigators if not
the perpetrators of crime, get off totally free. I expect you don’t like
that world either, eh?”

Captain Murderer stared down at his sea boots as if he was expecting
them to explode or perhaps break into song. He managed to mutter,
“You’re right there, commander!”

“Thank you, captain! You’re a man of the world. Right now you need a
friend, and I need names. I need the names of the people who got you
into this mess. Now, Mr. Jefferson the blacksmith has told me that in
all conscience he cannot say that he was particularly badly treated once
he was in your illegal hospitality. Apparently he was reasonably well
fed, given beer and a daily tot of rum and even provided with a number
of back issues of the magazine Girls, Giggles and Garters to while away
his time. He also wants names, Captain Murderer, and it may just be that
if we had those names, all put down legally in an affidavit, he might
just be persuaded to forget his imprisonment in exchange for a certain
sum of money, to be negotiated, and a chance to go hand to hand, fair
and square, no holds barred, with your first mate, who he describes as a
‘bag of shite,’ a nautical term which I don’t pretend to understand.
Apparently said man took pleasure in thumping him when he objected to
his imprisonment, and Mr. Jefferson would like, as it were, to settle
the score.”

Vimes stood up and stretched his arms as if taking the cramp out of
them. “Of course, captain, this is all very irregular, especially since
we have here our lieutenant, a decent, clean and upstanding young
officer, but I suspect that if he brought the Queen into dock and you in
front of the authorities on a smuggling charge he might consider honor
to be satisfied. It would be a bit of a knock for you, but not one half
as bad as being an accessory to kidnapping. Don’t you agree?” Vimes went
on, cheerfully, “The lieutenant here will have got a feather in his
chapeau and may put in a bon mot on your behalf, I suspect, what with
you being an otherwise upstanding and, above all, helpful citizen.”

Vimes winked at Lieutenant Perdix. “I’m teaching this young man bad
habits, captain, and so I suggest that you treat him as a friend,
especially if at any time in the future he asks you any innocent
questions to do with shipping movements and merchandise and other such
concerns. It’s up to you, Captain Murderer. I think you know names, the
names at least of the men you deal with, and also the name of their
employer? You want to tell me anything?”

The boots shuffled. “Look, commander, I don’t want to become enemies
with powerful men, if you know what I mean?”

Vimes nodded, and leaned forward so that he could look the man in the
eyes. “Of course, I quite understand that captain,” he said quietly,
“and that is why you should give me the names. The names, captain. The
names. Because, Captain Murderer, I understand you do not wish to upset
influential men, and right now I have half a mind to have your ship
impounded and destroyed because you were trafficking in living,
breathing, intelligent, creative if somewhat grubby sapient creatures.
Strictly speaking, I would get into trouble for authorizing this, but
who knows? The world can change quite quickly, and it’s changing quickly
for you.” He slapped the captain on the back. “Captain Murderer, here
and now I’d like you to think of me as a friend.”

And Vimes listened and the red balls bounced across the baize, cannoning
off the colored balls, and the law was being broken wholesale for the
purpose of upholding the law. How could you explain that to a layman?
How could you explain it to a lawyer? How could he explain it to
himself? But it was all happening fast and you got on top of it or
perished. So you did your best and faced such music as anyone cared to
play.

The Queen of Quirm docked that day, two and a half months earlier than
expected, to the dismay, distress or possibly even delight of the wives
of the crew. The harbormaster made a note of this, and also was
intrigued by the fact that most of the crew after disembarkation
immediately wandered along past the other ships in port to a quiet area
of beach close to the repair yard where the somewhat battered Wonderful
Fanny was already being pulled up the slipway.

Walking alongside his boat, like a mother hen with one enormous chick,
was Captain Sillitoe, nursing a plaster cast on his arm; he brightened
up when he saw Vimes. “Well, sir, I have to hand it to you, by my
halibut, so I must! You played a man’s job in getting us safely home,
sir! I won’t forget it, and nor will my wife and daughter!”

Vimes looked up at the boat and hoped for the best. “She looks extremely
battered to me, captain—I mean the boat, not your wife, of course.”

But it appeared that the captain was determined on optimism. “We lost
much of the gearing for the paddle wheels, but truth to tell she was
long overdue for refit in any case. But, my dear commander, we rode a
damn slam, with all souls safe! And, moreover—What the seven hells are
they doing?”

Vimes had already heard the shrill notes of a flute, but he had to look
down to see, marching resolutely across the beach, a large number of
goblins. At their head, and for a moment appearing bright blue, was
Stinky, playing an old and empty crab leg. As he passed Vimes he stopped
playing long enough to say, “No seaside rock for goblins! Hooray! Home
again, home again, as fast as they can! And them above as watches, they
applaud! And them what tries to stop, oh yes, Constable Stinky and his
little chums, he find Stinky will be worst nightmare.”

Vimes laughed. “What? What do you mean? A goblin with a badge?” He had
to walk fast as he said that, because Stinky was understandably dead set
on getting the goblins out of there as soon as possible.

“Stinky don’t need no badges, fellow po-leess-maan! Stinky worst
nightmare all by himself! Remember a little boy? Little boy open book?
And he see evil goblin, and I see nasty little boy! Good for us, little
boy, that we were both right!”

Vimes watched them march away, speeding up until they reached the
undergrowth at the edge of the dockyard, where they disappeared, and for
a moment it occurred to Vimes that even if he rushed forward and fished
around for any trace of goblin he would not find one. He was bewildered.
This didn’t matter very much; bewilderment was often a copper’s lot. His
job was to make sense of the world, and there were times when he wished
that the world would meet him halfway.

“Are you feeling all right, commander?”

Vimes turned and looked at the serious face of Lieutenant Perdix. “Well,
I’m not certain when I last slept properly, but at least I can stay
standing up! And I have all the names and descriptions.” Three names,
and one, oh, what a name that was, that is if you trusted the word of
someone happy to be called Captain Murderer. Well, the man was in his
fifties, not a good age to have to run and hide. No, Murderer was not
going to be a problem. Nor was Jefferson, idiot firebrand though he was.
What Jefferson had suspected, Captain Murderer knew. But Vimes, on the
other hand, hadn’t demanded the chance to take a crack at the Queen’s
first mate, admittedly an unpleasant-looking cove with a chin like a
butcher’s boot. He was swaggering toward them now, with the apprehensive
Captain Murderer fussing along behind him.

Vimes strolled up to the blacksmith, who seemed no worse for his
impromptu voyage. “Come on, sir, Murderer will pay you whatever it takes
to keep the lieutenant happy, and keep his own boat. Chalk it up to
experience, eh?”

“There’s still that bloody first mate,” said the blacksmith. “The rest
of the crew were civil enough but he’s a bullying bastard!”

“Well,” said Vimes, “here he is and so are you, it’s man-to-man, and
I’ll stay here to see fair play. It’s an interesting day here. We’re
trying a different kind of law, one that’s quick and doesn’t have to
trouble any lawyers. So go on, he knows what you want, and so do you,
Mr. Jefferson.”

Other crewmen were congregating at this end of the beach. Vimes looked
from face to face, all showing the working man’s intuition that a good
bit of healthy violence might cheerfully be expected, and read the
unspoken language. The first mate did look like a man who made a lot of
use of his fists and his temper, and so, Vimes thought, there would
probably be many among the crew who would like to see him given a little
lesson—or even a great big one. He beckoned both the men toward him.

“Gentlemen, this is a grudge match; you both know the score. If I see a
knife may the gods help him who holds it. There is to be no murder here,
saving you of course, captain, and in front of you all I give my word
that I’ll stop the fight when I deem that one man has definitely had
enough. Gentlemen, over to you.” And with this he stood back smartly.

Neither man moved, but Jefferson said, “Do you know the Marquis of
Fantailer Rules devised for the proper conduct for a bout of
fisticuffs?”

The first mate’s smile was evil. He said, “Yus, I do!”

Vimes didn’t see, not actually see with his own eyes, what happened
next, surely no one could, but it was agreed later that Jefferson had
spun around in a blur and laid the sailor flat. The sound of his heavy
body thumping down on the sand was all that broke the silence.

After one second, Jefferson, massaging some blood back into his fist,
looked down at the fallen giant and said, “I don’t.” He turned and
looked at Vimes. “You know? He deliberately pissed on the goblins in the
hold. Bastard.”

Vimes tensed in case the fallen man had chums without a sense of humor,
but in fact there was laughter. After all, a big man had gone down heavy
right enough, bang to rights, and that was a definite result in
anybody’s money. “Well done, Mr. Jefferson, a fair fight if ever I saw
one. Perhaps these gentlemen will take the first mate back to his ship
for a lie-down.”

Vimes delivered this as an instruction, which was instantly obeyed as
one, but he added, “If that’s all right by you, Captain Murderer? Good.
And now I think that you and I’ll go, in an entirely friendly way, along
with the lieutenant here, to the Quirm Watch headquarters, where there
will be a little matter of affidavits to sign.”

“I expect you will want to be leaving with some haste, commander,” said
the lieutenant as they strolled along the Rue de Wakening.

“Well, yes,” said Vimes. “I’m supposed to be on holiday. I’ll pick up
young Feeney from the infirmary and find some way of getting back to the
Hall.”

The lieutenant looked surprised. “And you don’t want to get back on the
heels of the murderer as soon as possible, sir?”

“Him? I’ll see him soon enough, I have no doubt about that, but, you
see, even he is not exactly the end of things. Do you play snooker down
here?”

“Well, I haven’t learned to play, but I understand the game, if that’s
what you’re asking.”

“Then you’ll know that the ultimate aim of the game is to sink the
black, although you’ll hit all the other colors during the course of a
frame, and you’ll bash the red ones again and again, sometimes making
use of them to further your strategy. Well, I know where to find the
black, and black can’t run. The others? The captain has helpfully given
us names and descriptions. If you wish to arrest them yourselves, for
aiding and abetting the practice of trafficking sapient creatures for
profit, then I leave that honor to the Quirm constabulary.”

Vimes grinned. “As for me, after I have the affidavits I intend to go
straight back to see my wife and little boy, who I have shamefully, no,
desperately neglected over the past few days, and do you know what? Just
as soon as I’ve got there, I’m going to bring them back down here! My
wife will enjoy the fresh air, and Young Sam will just love the
elephants, oh, won’t he just!”

The lieutenant brightened up. “May I suggest, then, that after dinner
you take the overnight boat? It will be the Black-Eyed Susan, quite
speedy, like her namesake, according to popular legend. She’s due to go
upriver in, let me see, three quarters of an hour. She’s very fast,
doesn’t take much in the way of cargo so they gear her up high. You’ll
be home in the morning, how about that? Just time to get yourself
smartened up, and if you like the idea then I will get one of the men to
go and find the Susan’s captain and make certain she doesn’t leave
without you.”

Vimes smiled. “What’s the weather forecast?”

“Clear skies, commander, and Old Treachery is as flat as a mill pond,
scoured of every snag and boulder for the rest of the season. It’s plain
sailing from now on.”

“Good evening, your grace!” The voice was somewhat familiar and Vimes
saw, sauntering down the boulevard, what at first seemed liked a man
wearing a huge cummerbund until further swift forensic inspection showed
that it was the hermit from the Hall. His beard was remarkably clean and
wrapped around his body, as were two young ladies of the giggling
persuasion.

Vimes peered at him. “Stump? What are you doing down here?”

This caused further giggling.

“I’m on holiday, commander! Yes, indeed! Every man should have a
holiday, sir!”

Vimes didn’t know what to say and so patted the man on the shoulder and
said, “Knock yourself out, Mr. Stump, and don’t forget the nourishing
herbs.”

“I think I’m going to need them, commander…”

Say what you like, the food in the Quirm Watch House canteen was pretty
damn good, even if they did use a shade too much avec, thought Vimes;
avec on everything.

Vimes, well fed and cleaned up and with some very important paperwork
stuffed down the inside of his freshly laundered and immaculately ironed
shirt, walked with Chief Constable Upshot down the quayside toward the
Black-Eyed Susan. The lieutenant and two of the guards accompanied him
to his cabin, where the dwarf butler demonstrated to him the cleanliness
of the bed and the crispness of the sheets.

“Honored to have you sleeping in them, commander. You will find that the
Susan gives a very smooth ride, although she can sometimes bounce around
a little, very much like her namesake, but least said, soonest mended.
And, of course, there is a berth next door for officer Feeney. You
gentlemen might like to see the Susan get under way, perhaps?”

They did. The Susan had two oxen, just like the Wonderful Fanny, but
with no heavy cargo and only about ten passengers she was the express of
Old Treachery. Her paddle wheels, highly geared indeed, left a line of
white water all down the valley behind her.

“What happens now, commander?” said Feeney, leaning on the rail as they
watched Quirm disappearing in the wake behind them. “I mean, what are we
going to do next?”

Vimes was smoking a cigar with great pleasure. Somehow this seemed the
time and the place. Snuff was all very well, but a good cigar had time
and wisdom and personality. He would be unhappy to see this one go.

“I don’t need to do anything now,” he said, turning to look at the
sunset. And I don’t often see sunsets these days either, he thought.
Mostly I see midnights; and I don’t need to chase Stratford, either. I
know him like I know myself. He mentally paused, momentarily shocked at
the implication.

Aloud he continued, “You saw those two Quirmian officers get on the
boat, didn’t you? I arranged that. They will, of course, make certain
that we have an undisturbed voyage. The crew have also been told that
there may be some attempt by a murderer to board the boat. According to
the lieutenant, Captain Harbinger can vouch for all of his crew as
having sailed with him loyally for many years. Personally, of course,
I’ll make certain the door to my berth is locked, and I’d suggest you do
the same thing, Feeney.

“Greed is at the center of this, greed and hellish poisons. They’re both
killers and greed is the worst, by a long way. You know, usually when
I’m talking to young officers such as yourself I say that in a certain
type of case, you should always follow the money, you should ask ‘Who
stands to lose? Who stands to gain?’ ” Vimes regretfully tossed the butt
of his cigar into the water. “But sometimes you should follow the
arrogance…You should look for those who can’t believe that the law would
ever catch them, who believe that they act out of a right that the rest
of us do not have. The job of the officer of the law is to let them know
that they are wrong!”

The sun was setting. “I do believe, Commander Vimes, that you have
something in you that would turn the wheels of this boat all by itself
if a man could but harness it!” said Feeney admiringly. “And I remember
reading somewhere that you would arrest the gods for doing it wrong.”

Vimes shook his head. “I’m sure I never said anything of the sort! But
law is order and order is law and it must be the highest thing. The
world runs on it, the heavens run on it and without order, lad, one
second cannot follow another.”

He could feel himself swaying. Lack of sleep can poison the mind, drive
it in strange directions. Vimes felt Feeney’s hand on his shoulder.
“I’ll help you along to your cabin, commander. It’s been a very long
day.”

Vimes didn’t remember getting undressed and into bed, or rather into
bunk, but he clearly had done so and, according to the little bits of
white foam on the cabin’s tiny washbasin, he had cleaned his teeth as
well. He had slept the sleep of the dead except for the bit where bits
fall off and you crumble into dust, and all he could recall was cool
blackness and, rising now to the surface, a certainty, as if a message
had been left in the blackness to await the return of thought. He is
after you, Blackboard Monitor Vimes. You know this because you recognize
what was in his eyes. You know that type. They want to die from the day
they are born, but something twists and so they kill instead. He will
find you, and so will I. I hope the three of us meet in darkness.

As the message drained away Vimes stared at the opposite wall, in which
the door now opened, after a cursory knock, to reveal the steward
bearing that which is guaranteed to frighten away all nightmares, to
wit, a cup of hot tea.*

“No need to get up, commander,” came the cheerful greeting of the
steward, as he carefully placed the cup of tea in a little indentation
that some foresighted person had designed into the tiny cabin so that
said teacup would not slide around. “The captain would like to inform
you that we’ll be docking in about twenty minutes, although of course
you’ll be welcome to stay aboard and finish your breakfast while we
clean the scuppers and take on fresh oxen and, of course, pick up mail
and fodder and a few more passengers. In the galley, I have today…” and
here the steward enthusiastically rattled off a menu of belly-stuffing
proportions, concluding triumphantly with, “a bacon sandwich!”

Vimes cleared his throat and said gloomily, “I don’t suppose you have
any muesli, do you?” After all, Sybil was only twenty minutes away.

The steward looked puzzled. “Well, yes, we would have the ingredients,
of course, but I didn’t peg you as a rabbit food man?”

Vimes thought about Sybil again. “Well, perhaps today my little nose is
twitching.”

Luxurious though the cabin was, roomy it was not. Vimes managed to shave
with a razor donated by the steward, “with the compliments of the
captain, commander,” and a thoughtfully placed basin, soap, flannel and
minute towel, which at least helped him to deal with the form of
ablution his old mother had called “washing the bits that showed.” He
paid attention to them, nevertheless, taking some pains in the knowledge
that this little wooden world would evaporate very soon and he would be
back in the world of Sam Vimes, husband and father. Periodically,
however, as he made himself respectable, he turned back to himself in
the shaving mirror and said, “Fred Colon!”

The luxury cabin had turned out to be wonderful to sleep in, although so
small that in reality it would only be suitable for a fastidious corpse.
But eventually, when every part of Vimes he could reach had been
decently, if erratically, scrubbed and the steward had brought him a
hermit-sized portion of fruits and nuts and grains, he looked around to
see what he might have left behind and saw a face in the shaving mirror.
It was his own, although it must be said the phenomenon is not unusual
in shaving mirrors. The Vimes in the mirror said, You know he doesn’t
just want to kill you. That wouldn’t be good enough for a bastard like
that, not by a long way. He wants to destroy you and will try everything
until he does.

“I know,” said Vimes, and added, “You’re not a demon, are you?”

“Absolutely not,” said his mirror image. “I might be made up of your
subconscious mind and a momentary case of muesli poisoning occasioned by
a fermenting raisin. Watch where you walk, commander. Watch everywhere.”
And then it was gone.

Vimes stepped away from the mirror and turned around slowly. It must
have been my face, he said to himself, otherwise it would have been the
other way round, wouldn’t it?

He walked down the gangway into reality and what turned out to be
Corporal Nobby Nobbs, beyond whom reality does not get much more real.

“Good to see you, Mr. Vimes! My word, you’re looking fit! Your holiday
must be doing you a lot of good. Got any bags?” This was asked in the
absolute certainty that Vimes would have no bags, but a show of willing
is always worth a try.

“Is everything all right?” said Vimes, ignoring this.

Nobby scratched his nose and a bit fell off. Oh yes, thought Vimes, I’m
back, all right!

“Well, the usual stuff that happens is happening, but we’re on top of
it. Could I draw your attention to the hill over there? They were very
careful not to harm the trees, and Lady Sybil herself promised a
lingering death to anyone who upset the goblins.”

Mystified, Vimes scanned the skyline and saw Hangman’s Hill. “Hells
bells! It’s a clacks tower, it’s a bloody clacks tower! Sybil will go
totally librarian about it!”

“As a matter of fact, Mr. Vimes, Lady Sybil was all for it by the time
she’d read all of Captain Carrot’s note. He said this was no time for
you to be out of touch. You know that, sir, very persuasive officer,
which is how come he got the clacks company to rush up here toot sweet
with a temporary tower. Worked all night, so they did, and got it lined
up on the Grand Trunk sweet as a nut!”

This time Nobby picked his nose, briefly inspected the contents for
interest or value, then flicked them away and went on, “Only one thing,
sir, the Ankh-Morpork Times wants to interview you about how you are a
great hero what saved someone’s wonderful fanny—”

There was a pause while they waited for Feeney to stop choking with
laughter and get his breath back and then Vimes said, “Corporal Nobby
Nobbs, this here is Chief Constable Upshot. I call him chief constable
because he’s the only law in these parts, that is until now. This is his
patch, and so you will respect it, okay? Who else came with you from the
Smoke?”

“Sergeant Detritus, Mr. Vimes, but he’s up at the Hall, guarding her
ladyship and Young Sam with delicate surreptition.”

A part of Vimes had unknowingly been holding its breath. Detritus and
Willikins? Together they could face an army. He shook himself. “But not
Fred Colon?”

“No, Mr. Vimes, as I understand it we were on our way when the second
clacks came through, but I reckon that he’ll be here pretty soon.”

“Gentlemen, I’m going home,” said Vimes, “but, Mr. Feeney, how soon will
another boat go down to Quirm?”

Feeney beamed. “You’re in luck, commander. The Roberta E. Biscuit will
be going tomorrow morning! Just the job for what I think you might want.
Big and slow, but you won’t mind that, because there’s gambling and
entertainment. Lots of tourists on it, but don’t you worry, sir, your
name is big on the river already. Trust me! Say the word and the captain
of the Biscuit will make certain that there’s a king-size, I mean,
sorry, commander-size stateroom for you, how about that?”

Vimes opened his mouth to ask, is it expensive? And shut it again with
the embarrassed realization that the Ramkin fortune could almost
certainly buy every vessel on Old Treachery.

Feeney, like the good copper he was becoming, noticed that slight moment
of hesitation and said, “Your money won’t be good on the river,
commander, believe me. The savior of the Fanny won’t have to buy his own
cigars or a stateroom anywhere along Old Treachery!”

Nobby Nobbs was almost bent double with laughter and managed to choke
out, “The Fanny!”

Vimes sighed. “Nobby, her name was Francesca, Fanny for short.
Understand?” It didn’t work with some people; it only just did with
Vimes. “And, Nobby, I want you to wait here, and as soon as Fred’s coach
arrives you’re in charge of getting him up to the goblin cave on the
hill, okay?”

“Yes, Mr. Vimes,” said Nobby, looking at his boots.

“And, Nobby, if you see a goblin who stinks like a latrine and glows
slightly blue, well, that’s a fellow copper and don’t you forget it.”

Sybil was halfway down the lane as Vimes quickly walked up it, and Young
Sam was running ahead and cannoned into his father’s legs, throwing his
arms around them as best he could.

“Dad! I know how to milk a goat, Dad! You have to pull its tits, Dad,
they’re all wiggly!” Vimes’s expression did not change as Young Sam went
on. “And I’m learning to make cheese! And I have some badger poo now,
and some weasel poo, too!”

“My word, you have been busy,” said Vimes. “Who told you the word
‘tits,’ lad?”

Young Sam beamed. “That was Willy the cowherd, Dad.”

Vimes nodded. “I’ll have a little talk to you about that later, Sam, but
first I think I’ll have a word with Willy the cowherd.” He lifted up
Young Sam, ignoring a twinge in his back. “I hope that washing your
hands played a part in these adventures?”

“I take care of that,” said Lady Sybil, catching up. “Honestly, Sam, I
let you out of my sight for hardly any time at all and here you are a
hero, again! Really! Honestly, the whole river is talking about it!
Fights on a riverboat? Maritime chases? Oh dear me, I don’t know where
to put my face, so if you would be so kind as to let our child down
carefully I’ll press said face mightily to yours!”

When Vimes surfaced for breath he growled, “It is a real bloody clacks
tower, isn’t it, yes? And now The Times have got hold of all this
they’ll make out I’m some kind of hero, the damn fools!”

With the suction released, Lady Sybil said, “No, Sam—well maybe a little
of that, but you would be amazed at how fast news travels along the
river. Apparently you were standing on the wheelhouse roof of the
Wonderful Fanny fighting with a murderer, and he shot a crossbow at you
and it bounced off! I’m told there’s going to be a large artist’s
impression in tomorrow’s paper! Once again, I won’t know where to put my
face!” And then Sybil couldn’t contain herself anymore and burst out
laughing. “Frankly, Sam, you may have anything you want for dinner
tonight.”

Vimes leaned over and whispered, causing his wife to slap his hand and
say, “Later, perhaps!”

At this point, somewhat emboldened, Vimes said, “I couldn’t help
noticing that the bridge is severely damaged?”

Sybil nodded. “Oh, yes dear, a terrible storm, wasn’t it? It took away
the entire central arch and all of the three disgraces.* “I remember
them from my childhood. My mother used to put her hand over my eyes when
we crossed the bridge and so I took a keen interest in them, especially
as one was scratching her bottom.” Her smile brightened. “But don’t
worry, Sam, naked ladies are not difficult to come by.”

Vimes took comfort from her smile, and a tiny treacherous suspicion
bubbled up once more. He thought he had stamped it down, but the damn
thing kept coming back. And so he cleared his throat and said, “Sybil,
you did discuss plans for my holiday with Vetinari, didn’t you?”

Sybil looked surprised. “Why yes, dear, of course. After all, he is
technically your superior. Only technically, of course. I had a word
with him on the subject at some charity do or other. I can’t remember
which right now as there’re always so many. But there wasn’t any
difficulty. He said that it was high time you took a decent rest from
your valiant activities!”

Vimes was wise enough not to utter the words that entered his mouth, and
instead said, carefully, “Er, so he didn’t actually suggest that you
came down to the Shires?”

“To be honest, Sam, it was quite some time ago, but we both have your
best interests at heart, as you surely know. We generally discussed the
matter and that’s it, really.”

Vimes left it at that. He would never know for sure. And anyway, the
ball had dropped.

Later, Samuel Vimes, all of him, had a bath in the huge bathroom with
his nose only just above the surface and came out feeling exactly the
same man as before but at least a lot cleaner. The affidavits were in
the strongroom, and when the Ramkins design a strongroom, it’s not a
room that you’ll get into in a hurry: first you needed a combination,
which opened a smaller but nevertheless dangerously efficient safe,
simply to remove a key which then had to be inserted in locks hidden in
three separate clocks in the Hall and each key triggered a clockwork
timing mechanism. Sybil told him that she had fond memories of her
grandfather running split-arse, as the old man called it, down the main
hall to get the key into the last lock before the clock controlling the
first lock had run down and certainly before the guillotines dropped.
What we have we keep, Vimes had thought as he tried it out. Well, they
definitely meant it. Now, he dressed in clothes that didn’t smell of
fish. What next?

It was nice to have a walk with Young Sam again. Dad self-consciously
out for a walk with his lad, yes? That was the picture. Regrettably,
this picture included a distant prospect of Sergeant Detritus, who was
merging with the landscape, a feat that a troll officer can achieve by
simply removing his armor and sticking a geranium behind his ear,
whereupon he becomes, being of a rocky and stony persuasion, pretty much
part of the landscape without even trying. Usually the troll officers
wore super-sized versions of the standard-issue armor, because a lot of
the power of a copper consists in looking like a copper.* Safety
considerations didn’t matter; there were plenty of weapons which, if
handled with skill, could go through steel armor, but all they would do
to a naked troll was make him angry.

Right now Detritus was failing to maintain a low profile. He was a
bodyguard, that was the truth of it, and he was also carrying his
Peacemaker which could, as it were, do what it said on the box. Some
weapons are called a Saturday Night Special; Detritus’s multi-arrow
crossbow would last you all week. And somewhere, where Vimes couldn’t
see him, which meant that nobody else could either, there was Willikins.
There was your picture: Dad taking his lad for a walk in the presence of
enough firepower to kill a platoon. Sybil had insisted, and that was
that. Vimes himself being in danger was one thing, and Sybil had
accepted that right from the start, but Young Sam? Never!

As they strolled up Hangman’s Hill to see the new clacks tower, Vimes
told himself that Stratford would not use a bow. A bow was for
expediency, but a killer…now a killer would want to be up close, where
he could see. Stratford had killed the goblin girl and had gone on
killing her long after she was dead. He was a boy who liked his fun. He
would want Vimes to know who was killing him. Vimes, Vimes realized,
knew killers too well for his own peace of mind.

As they arrived on the hill they were met by a grinning Nobby, who
saluted with a variation on the theme of smartness, but with some
embarrassment, because he was not alone. A young goblin woman was
sitting next to him. Nobby hastily tried to shoo her away and she,
apparently with reluctance, retired to a minimum safe distance, still
looking adoringly at the corporal.

Despite everything, Vimes tried to suppress the urge to smile, and
managed to turn it into a stiff look.

“Fraternizing with the natives, are you, Nobby?”

Young Sam wandered over to the goblin girl and took hold of her hand,
which was something he tended to do to any female that he met for the
first time, a habit which his father considered would quite possibly
open doors for him in later life. The girl tried gently to pull her hand
away, but Young Sam was a ferocious holder.

Nobby looked embarrassed. “I ain’t fraternizing with her, Mr. Vimes, she
wants to fraternize with me! She come out with the straw basket of
little mushrooms and gives them to me, honestly!”

“Are you sure they aren’t poisonous?”

Nobby looked blank. “Don’t know, Mr. Vimes. I ate them anyway, very
nice, very crunchy, slightly nutty you might say, and Fred’s here now,
sir. This young lady”—and to Vimes’s surprise and approval Nobby did not
put inverted commas around the word lady—“walked right up to him, took
this weird shiny pot thing out of his hand, which was amazing because no
one else could get it off of him, and there he was! Just like normal!
Although I think we’re going to have to remind him about washing, and
crapping only in the privy and so on.”

Vimes gave up. It was true that every organization had to have its
backbone, and therefore it stood to reason that there also would have to
be some person who equated to the bits usually destined for dog food.
But Nobby was loyal and lucky, and if there is anything that a policeman
really needs, it’s luck. Maybe Nobby had got lucky.

“What are you doing up here, Nobby?” he said. Nobby looked at Vimes as
if he were mad, and pointed to the wobbling temporary clacks tower.
“Have to check the clacks messages, Mr. Vimes. Actually, young Tony, who
is the only one manning it, he sort of types them, and wraps them around
a stone and they drops down, which is—” There was a rattle on Nobby’s
helmet and he deftly caught a stone wrapped in a strip of paper before
it hit the ground. “Which is why I stand just here, Mr. Vimes.” Nobby
unrolled the paper and announced, “One double stateroom and one single
on the Roberta E. Biscuit, departing at 9 p.m. tomorrow! Lucky you, Mr.
Vimes. Clacks! What would we do without it, eh?”

There was a shout from above: “Stand back, man coming down!” and Vimes
saw the whole structure of the clacks tower tremble as the young man
carefully lowered himself from one spar to another, testing every one
before putting his weight on it. He dropped the last few feet and held
out his hand to Vimes. “Pleased to meet you, Sir Samuel! Sorry it’s
shaky, but we were still working on it last night. A real rush job!
Needs must when Lord Vetinari drives, you might say. We’ll do it
properly later if that’s okay by you? I’ve got it lined up on a Grand
Trunk tower, and they’ll bounce it to anywhere you want, plus a feed
down to a clacks on your house, too. Of course you’ll have to have
somebody manning this one to maintain the link, but from what I see that
won’t be a problem.” The young man saluted Vimes and added, “Best of
luck to you, sir, and now I’m off to have my meal and a wash.”

There was another clang on the helmet of Nobby Nobbs, and a wad of paper
wrapped around a pebble fell at his feet.

The young clacksman picked it up proprietorially and read the message.
“Oh, it’s just an acknowledgment of service closure, confirming that I
am standing down for a break. My assistant typed it. He didn’t really
need to pass it on, but he is a conscientious little bugger and I have
never seen such a quick study. Show him how to do something once and
that’s enough! Reliable little devil as well. And with those big hands
he has no problem with the keyboard.”

As the man strode off whistling down the hill, Vimes jumped to a
conclusion like a grasshopper. “Stinky! Just you come down here, you
little perisher!” he yelled.

“Right here, commander!” The little goblin was already standing almost
between Vimes’s boots.

“You? You! You operating a clacks? Can you read?”

Stinky held out both large hands. “No, but can look, but can remember!
Green man say ‘Stinky, this pointy thing it called A’ and Stinky don’t
need telling twice, and he say ‘This one, look like bum, he called B.’
Good fun!” The cracked voice wheedled, but in a way that seemed to Vimes
to be full of cynical knowingness. “The goblin is useful, goblin is
trustworthy, goblin is helpful? Goblin isn’t dead!”

And it seemed to Vimes that he was the only one hearing these words.
Young Sam had shuffled up to hold Stinky’s hand, but had thought better
of it. Under his breath, Sam Vimes said, “What are you, Stinky?”

“What are you, Sam Vimes?” Stinky grinned. “Hang, Sam Vimes. Hang
together or hang separately. Above all, hang on. Hang, Mr. Vimes.”

Vimes sighed. “I think it’s quite likely that I might, ” he said
gloomily. He looked around to find himself pinned in the gazes of Young
Sam, Nobby Nobbs and the goblin girl who had been looking at Nobby as if
the little corporal was an Adonis. Embarrassed, he shrugged and said,
“Just a passing thought.”

However you put it, Fred Colon was one of Vimes’s oldest friends—and it
was sobering to think that so was Nobby Nobbs. Vimes found the sergeant
halfway down the goblin cave looking strangely pink, bemused, but
nevertheless quite cheerful, possibly because he was eating a roasted
rabbit like there was no tomorrow—which clearly had been the case for
the rabbit. Cheery was watching him with some care from a distance, and
when she saw Vimes gave him a smile and a thumbs-up sign, which was
reassuring.

Fred Colon tried to salute, but had to think about it for a moment.
“Sorry about this, Mr. Vimes, had some kind of nasty turn. All a bit
vague, really, and suddenly here I am among these people.”

Vimes held his breath and Colon continued, “Very nice, very helpful,
very generous, too. They’ve been giving me all kinds of mushrooms,
extremely tasty. Not very well versed in the trouser department, but I
speak as I find. Makes a man think; I ain’t sure what, but it does.” He
looked around with a strange fluorescence in his eyes. “Nice in here,
isn’t it? Nice and calm away from the maddening crowd. Wouldn’t mind
staying here for a bit…Nice.”

Sergeant Colon stopped, flung the rabbit bones over his shoulder and
reached down quickly into the mess of stones beside him. He picked one
up. Was it Vimes’s imagination or did it twinkle for a moment as it once
again turned into just a stone.

“Stay as long as you like, Fred,” said Vimes. “I’ve got to go, but
Nobby’ll be around, and just about everybody else from the Watch or so
it seems. Stay as long as you like”—he glanced at Cheery
Littlebottom—“but perhaps not too long.”

More thoughts passed as Young Sam’s daily stroll progressed back down
the hill and through the village, and when Jiminy appeared at the
doorway of the pub and gave Vimes a little nod that spoke volumes,
Vimes’s passing thought was that an astute publican knows which way the
wind is blowing and adjusts his sails accordingly. No one knew better
than he that no one knows where rumors come from and how they are
spread, but the little convoy, even though it included Nobby Nobbs and
the goblin girl, got smiles and nods where a week ago there would have
been blank stares. Because the dreadful truth is that nobody wants to
support the losing side.

When they reached Ramkin Hall again Vimes found Sybil in the rose
garden, apparently deadheading, something that had to be done because it
was on the list of things you had to do in the country whether you liked
to do it or not. She glanced up at her husband and then got on with what
she was doing, and said quietly, “You’ve been worrying people, haven’t
you, Sam? Lady Rust popped in unexpectedly for a social visit, right
after you left.” Snip! Snip! went the pruning shears, furiously.

“Did you let her in?”

Snip! Snip! “Of course! Of course!”

There was another Snip! Snip! “And I gave her tea and chocolate
macaroons, too. She may be an ignorant whey-faced bitch who gives
herself a title that is not rightfully hers, but there is such a thing
as manners, when all is said and done.” Snip! Snip! Snap! “I only did
that because that one rather spoils the symmetry, honestly. Anyway, I
had a lecture about maintaining standards, and banding together in
defense of our culture, you know the sort of thing, it’s always just a
code.”

Lady Sybil leaned back with her shears poised, and regarded the
rosebushes like a bloody-handed revolutionary looking for his next
aristocrat. “Do you know what the bitch said? She said, ‘My dear, who
cares what happens to a few trolls! Let them take drugs if they want to,
that’s what I say.’ ” Eyes ablaze, Sybil continued, “And so I thought
about Sergeant Detritus and how often he’s saved your life, and then
there was young Brick, that troll lad he adopted. And it made me so
angry that I nearly said something unrepeatable! They think that I’m
like them! I hate that! They just don’t get it! They’ve got on well for
years without ever having to think differently, and now they don’t know
how!” Snip! Snip! Crack!

“You’ve just killed a rosebush, dear,” said Vimes, impressed. It took a
pretty good grip to push those blades through an inch of what looked
like a small tree.

“It was a brier, Sam, wouldn’t ever do any good.”

“You could have given it a chance, perhaps?”

“Sam Vimes, you treasure your ignorance of gardening, so don’t start
weaving a social hypothesis in front of an angry woman holding a blade!
There is a difference between plants and people!”

“Do you think her husband sent her?” Vimes said, standing back a little.
“He is in the frame, you know, and I expect by the end of the day to be
able to link him to smuggling, trafficking in goblins and certainly in
attempting to send Jethro Jefferson abroad to get him out of the way. I
know what happens to the goblins taken to Howondaland and it’s not good
for their health. Jefferson told me that Rust was behind the eviction of
the local goblins three years ago. I’m hoping to get confirmation of
this very shortly. All in all, it’ll wipe the smile off his aristocratic
face, at least.”

The birds were singing and roses were pumping perfume into the air and
Lady Sybil dropped the shears into her apron pocket.

“It will shame old Lord Rust, you know.”

“Don’t think I don’t know that,” said Vimes. “The old boy tried to warn
me off when we first got here, which just about shows his talent as a
tactician. But I’ll say this for the old bastard: he is honorable,
honest and straightforward. It’s a shame that he is also pigheaded,
stupid, and incompetent. But you’re right, it’ll hurt him, although he
must have killed so many soldiers by his own incompetence that shame
should by now be second nature to him, an old friend as it were.” He
sighed. “Sybil, every time I have to arrest some twit who thought he
could get away with swindling or extortion or blackmail, well, I know
that there is probably going to be a family in difficulties, you
understand? I think about it. It preys on my mind. The trouble is, the
idiots commit the crimes! As it is, I’m trying to spare some of the
hangers-on in this case, provided their gratitude results in testimony.
I can stretch the law for the greater good, but that’s the end of it.”

Sybil nodded sadly, and then sniffed and said, “Can you smell smoke?”

Willikins, who had been standing patiently, said, “Corporal Nobbs and
his, ahem, young…lady wandered off into the shrubbery with Young Sam,
your ladyship. Sergeant Detritus accompanied them with what I now
believe to be called…” Willikins savored the word like a toffee,
“surreptition.”

This last fact was testified to by the shrubbery itself, because no
shrubbery, however large, could hide the fact that a troll had just
walked through it.

There was a small, neat fire burning in the shrubbery, watched passively
by Detritus and Young Sam, and nervously by Corporal Nobbs, who was
watching his new young lady cooking something on a spit.

“Oh, she’s cooking snails,” said Sybil, with every sign of approval.
“What a provident young lady.”

“Snails?” said Vimes, shocked.

“Quite traditional in these parts, as a matter of fact,” said Sybil. “My
father and his chums used to cook them up sometimes after a drinking
session. Very wholesome, and full of vitamins and minerals, or so I
understand. Apparently if you feed them on garlic they taste of garlic.”

Vimes shrugged. “I suppose that has to be better than them tasting of
snails.”

Sybil pulled Sam off to one side and said quietly, “I think the goblin
girl is the one that they call Shine of the Rainbow. Felicity says she’s
very smart.”

“Well, I don’t think she’ll get anywhere with Nobby,” said Vimes. “He’s
carrying a torch for Verity Pushpram. You know, the fishmonger?”

Sybil whispered, “She got engaged last month, Sam. To a lad who’s
building up his own fishing fleet.” They stared through the leaves and
tiptoed away.

“But she’s a goblin!” said Vimes, out of his depth.

“And he is Nobby Nobbs, Sam. And she is quite attractive in a goblin
sort of way, don’t you think? And to be honest, I’m not sure that even
Nobby’s old mother knows what species her son is. Frankly, Sam, it’s not
our business.”

“But what if Young Sam eats snails?”

“Sam, given what he’s already eaten in his short life I wouldn’t worry,
if I was you. I expect the girl knows what she’s doing, they generally
do, Sam, believe me. Besides, this is limestone country and there’s
nothing poisonous for the snails to eat. Don’t worry, Sam!”

“Yes, but how will—”

“Don’t worry, Sam!”

“Yes, but I mean—”

“Don’t worry, Sam! There’s a troll and a dwarf in Lobbin Clout that have
set up home together, so I’ve heard. Good for them, I say, it’s their
business and definitely not ours.”

“Yes, but—”

“Sam!”

During the afternoon Sam Vimes worried. He wrote dispatches and walked
up to the new tower to send them. Goblins were sitting around the tower
now, staring at it. He tapped one of them on the shoulder, handed it the
messages and watched it climb the tower as if it were horizontal. A
couple of minutes later it came down with a smudged
confirmation-of-sending slip, which it handed to him along with several
other messages before sitting down to stare at the tower again.

He thought: you have lived your life in and around a cave in a hill and
now here is this magical thing that sends words, right on your doorstep.
That’s got to command respect! Then he opened the two messages that had
arrived for him, carefully folded up the paper and walked back down the
hill, breathing carefully and taking care not to punch the air and
whoop.

When Vimes reached the cottage of the woman who, to Young Sam, would
forever be the poo lady, he stopped to hear the music. It came and went,
there were false starts, and then the world revolved as liquid sound
called out of the window. Only then did he dare to knock at the door.

Half an hour later, walking with the measured gait of the career copper,
he proceeded to the lockup. Jethro Jefferson was sitting on a stool
outside. He was wearing a badge. Feeney was learning fast. The
constabulary of the Waterside owned precisely one badge, made of pot
metal, and so, pinned to the shirt of the blacksmith was a carefully
cut-out cardboard circle with, inscribed in painstaking handwriting, the
words “Constable Jefferson works for me. Be told! Signed: Chief
Constable Upshot.”

There was a second, empty stool by the blacksmith, reflecting the
doubling of the staff. Vimes sat down with a grunt. “How do you like
being a copper, Mr. Jefferson?”

“If you’re looking for Feeney, commander, he’s on his lunch break. And
since you ask, I can’t say coppering sits very well with me, but maybe
it’s the kind of thing that grows on you. Besides, the smithy is a bit
quiet right now, and so’s the crime.” The blacksmith grinned. “No one
wants me chasing them. I hear things are happening, right?”

Vimes nodded. “When you see Feeney, tell him that the Quirm constabulary
has picked up two men who apparently volunteered the information that
they had shanghaied you, amongst other misdemeanors, and it seems they
have a whole lot of other information that they are desperate to tell us
in exchange for a certain amount of clemency.”

Jefferson growled. “Give me five minutes with ’em and I’ll show ’em what
clemency is.”

“You’re a copper now, Jethro, so you don’t have to think like that,”
said Vimes cheerfully. “Besides, the balls are all lining up.”

Jefferson gave a hollow laugh, laden with malice, “I’d line their balls
up for them…and just you see how far apart. I was a kid when the first
lot were taken and that bloody Rust kid was there all right, yes indeed,
urging everybody on and laughing at them poor goblins. And when I ran
out into the road to try and stop it, some of his chums gave me a right
seeing to. That was just after my dad died. I was a bit innocent in
those days, thought that some people were better than me, tipped me hat
to gentry and so on, and then I took over the forge and if that don’t
kill you it makes you strong.”

And he winked, and Vimes thought, you’ll do. You’ll probably do. You’ve
got the fire.

Vimes patted his shirt pocket and heard the reassuring rustle of paper.
He was rather proud of the note at the end of the clacks message, which
was a personal one from the Commandant in Quirm. It read, “When they
heard that you were on the case, Sam, they were so chatty that we used
up two pencils!”

And then Sam Vimes went to the pub just as the men were coming in and
sat in the corner nursing a pint of the beetroot juice with a touch of
chilli, to help down a snack consisting of one pickled egg and one
pickled onion nestling in a packet of crisps. Vimes did not know very
much about gastronomy, but he knew what he liked. And, as he sat there,
he saw people talking to one another and looking at him, and then one of
them walked slowly over, holding his hat in front of him in both hands
as if in penitence. “Name of Hasty, sir, William Hasty. Thatcher by
trade, sir.”

Vimes moved his legs to make room and said, “Pleased to make your
acquaintance, Mr. Hasty. What can I do for you?”

Mr. Hasty looked around at his fellows, and got that mixed assortment of
waves and hoarse whispers that adds up to “Get on with it!” Reluctantly
he turned back to Vimes, cleared his throat, and said, “Well, sir, yes,
of course we knew about the goblins and no one liked it much. I mean
they’re a bloody nuisance if you forget to lock your chicken coop and
suchlike, but we didn’t like what was done, because it wasn’t…I mean,
wasn’t right, not done like that, and some of us said we would suffer
for it, come the finish, because if they could do that to goblins then
what might they think they could do to real people, and some said real
or not, it wasn’t right! We’re just ordinary people, sir, tenants and
similar, not big, not strong, not important, so who would listen to the
likes of us? I mean, what could we have done?”

Heads leaned a little forward, breaths were held, and Vimes chewed the
very last vinegary piece of crisp. Then he said, directing his gaze to
the ceiling, “You’ve all got weapons. Every man jack of you. Huge,
dangerous, deadly weapons. You could have done something. You could have
done anything. You could have done everything. But you didn’t, and I’m
not sure but that in your shoes I might not have done anything, either.
Yes?”

Hasty had held up a hand. “I’m sure we’re sorry, sir, but we don’t have
weapons.”

“Oh, dear me. Look around. One of the things that you could have done
was think. It’s been a long day, gentlemen, it’s been a long week. Just
remember, that’s all. Remember for next time.”

In silence, Vimes walked across to Jiminy at the bar, noticing above the
man a patch on the wall showing gleaming paint on the plaster. For a
moment Vimes’s memory filled that space with a goblin’s head. Another
little triumph.

“Jiminy, these gentlemen are drinking at my expense for the rest of the
evening. See they get home okay even if wheelbarrows have to be
deployed. I’ll send Willikins down to settle with you in the morning.”

Only the sound of his boots broke the silence as he walked to the pub
door and closed it gently behind him. Fifty yards up the road he smiled
when he heard the cheering start.

The Roberta E. Biscuit was, unlike the Wonderful Fanny, a boat that
strutted its stuff. It looked like a Hogswatch decoration, and on one
deck a small band was trying to play as hard as a large band. Waiting on
the quayside, though, was a man wearing a hat that the captain of any
fleet would desire. “Welcome aboard, your grace, and of course your
ladyship. I’m Captain O’Farrell, master of the Roberta.” Then he looked
down at Young Sam and said, “Want to take a turn at the wheel, young
shaver? That shall be arranged! And I bet your daddy would like a turn,
too.” The captain shook Vimes’s hand industriously, saying, “Captain
Sillitoe had nothing but good things to say about you, sir, nothing but
good things indeed! And he hopes to see you again some day. But in the
meantime, it’s my duty, sir, to make you King!”

The thoughts of Sam Vimes collided in their rush to get through first.
Something about the word “king” was getting in the way.

Still smiling, the captain said, “That is to say King of the River, sir,
a little honor that we bestow on those heroes who have taken on Old
Treachery and bested him! Allow me to present you with this gold-ish
medal, sir. It’s a small token, but show it to any captain on the river
and you’ll be carried for free, sir, from the mountains to the sea if
you so desire!”

Whipped to a frenzy by the oration, the crowd burst into loud applause
and the band struck up with the old classic “Surprised, Aren’t You?” and
bouquets of flowers were hurled into the air, and then picked up again
carefully, because waste not, want not. And the band played and the
wheels turned and the water was whisked into a foam as the Vimes family
went down the river for a wonderful holiday.

Young Sam was allowed to stay up to see the dancing girls, although he
didn’t see the point. Vimes, however, did. And there was a conjuror and
all the other entertainment people subject themselves to in the name of
fun, although he did laugh a bit when the conjuror picked his pocket in
order to put in the ace of spades and found himself holding the knife
that Sam had brought along just in case. When you aren’t expecting it,
that’s when you should expect it!

And the conjuror had not expected it and looked goggle-eyed at Vimes
until he said, “Oh my, you’re him, aren’t you? Commander Vimes himself!”
And to Vimes’s horror, he turned to the crowd with, “A big hand, please,
ladies and gentlemen, for the hero of the Wonderful Fanny!”

In the end Vimes had to take a bow, which meant obviously that Young Sam
took a bow next to him, causing much moistening of female eyes
throughout the restaurant. And then the barman, who apparently didn’t
know the score, created on the spot the “Sam Vimes,” which Sam later
pretended to be embarrassed about when it became part of the repertoire
in every drinking establishment on the Plains, apart from, of course,
those where the clientele tended to open their bottles with their
teeth.* In fact, he was so overcome by the honor that he actually drank
one of the cocktails and another afterward as well, on the basis that
Sybil couldn’t really object in the circumstances. Then he sat signing
beer mats and pieces of paper and chatting to people rather more loudly
than he normally chatted until even the barman decided to call it a day
and Sybil towed her tipsy husband to bed.

And on the way to their suite he distinctly overheard one lady say to
another in passing, “Who’s the new barman? Never seen him on this run
before…”

The Roberta E. Biscuit plowed on into the night, the water leaving a
temporary white trail behind her ample stern. One ox had been led into
the stable in the scuppers, leaving the other one to maintain some
sensible headway while the pleasure cruise paddled toward the morning.
Everyone except the pilot and the lookout was sleeping, drunk or
otherwise prone. The barman was nowhere to be seen; barmen come and go,
after all—whoever notices the barman? And in the corridor of staterooms
a figure waited in the shadows, listening. It listened for whispers,
creaks and snores building up.

There was a snore, oh yes! The shadow drifted along the dark corridor,
the occasional betraying creak lost among the symphony of sounds made by
any wooden boat under way. There was a door. There was a lock. There was
a gentle exploration; being the kind that portrays cunning and strength
rather than actually having them. There was a lockpick, a delicate
movement of hinges, and the same movement again as the door was gently
pushed shut from the inside. There was a smile so unpleasant that it
could almost be seen in the dark, especially by the dark-assisted eye,
and so there was a scream, instantly cut short—

“Let me tell you how this is going to be,” said Sam Vimes, as urgent
sounds suddenly filled the corridor. He leaned over the body
spreadeagled on the floor. “You will be humanely handcuffed for the rest
of this voyage, and you will be watched carefully by my valet Willikins,
who, apart from making a really good cocktail, is also not burdened by
being a policeman.” He squeezed a little harder and went on in a
conversational tone, “Every now and again I have to sack a decent copper
for police brutality, and I do sack them, you may be sure of that, for
doing what the average member of the public might do if they were brave
enough and if they had seen the dying child, or the remains of the old
woman. They would do it to restore in their mind the balance of terror.”
Vimes squeezed again. “Often the law treats them gently, if it worries
about them at all, but a copper, now, he’s a lawman—certainly if he
works for me—and that means his job stops at the arrest, Mr. Stratford.
So what’s stopping me from squeezing the life out of a murderer who has
broken into the room he thought would hold my little boy, with, oh dear
me, such a lot of little knives? Why will I squeeze him only to
unconsciousness, while despising myself for every fragment of breath I
begrudge him? I’ll tell you, mister, that what stands between you and
sudden death right now is the law you don’t acknowledge. And now I’m
going to let you go, just in case you die on me, and I couldn’t have
that. However, I suggest you don’t try and make a run for it, because
Willikins is not bound by the same covenant as I am, and he is also
quite merciless and very fond of Young Sam, who’s sleeping with his
mother, I’m glad to say. Understand? You picked the single room, didn’t
you, where the little boy would be. It’s lucky for you that I’m a
bastard, Mr. Stratford, because if you’d broken into the stateroom,
where my wife, although I never dare tell her so, is snoring at least as
loud as any man, you would have found that she has at her command a
considerable amount of weaponry and, knowing the temper of the Ramkins,
she would have quite probably done things to you that would make
Willikins say ‘Whoa, that’s going a bit too far.’ What they have they
keep, Mr. Stratford.”

Vimes momentarily changed his grip. “And you must think I’m a bloody
fool. Some bloke they reckoned was a great thinker once said, ‘Know
yourself.’ Well, I know myself, Mr. Stratford, I’m ashamed to say, right
down to the depths, and because of that I know you, like I know my own
face in the shaving mirror. You’re just a bully who found it easier and
easier and decided that everybody else wasn’t really a real person, not
like you, and when you know that, there’s no crime too big, is there? No
crime you won’t do. You might reflect that, while you’re going to hang,
I’m quite certain that Lord Rust, your boss, will in all probability
walk free. Did you really think he’d protect you?”

The prostrate Stratford mumbled something.

“Sorry, sir, didn’t quite catch that?”

“King’s evidence!” Stratford blurted out.

Vimes shook his head, even if Stratford couldn’t see it. “Mr. Stratford,
you’re going to hang, whatever you say. I’m not going to bargain with
you. You must surely realize that you have nothing to bargain with. It’s
that simple.”

On the floor Stratford growled, “Damn him! I’ll tell you anyway! I hate
the smarmy bugger! What do you want me to say?”

It was a good job that he couldn’t see Vimes’s face, and Vimes merely
said, “However, I’m sure that Lord Vetinari will be very happy to hear
anything that you have to say, sir. He’s of a mercurial nature and I’m
sure there is hanging or hanging.”

Slumped on the floor and wheezing, Stratford said, “Everyone had that
bloody cocktail, I saw them! You had three, and everybody says you’re a
lush!”

There was laughter as the door came open, letting in a little light.
“His grace had what you might call the Virgin Sam Vimes,” said
Willikins, “no offense meant to the commander: ginger and chilli, a dash
of cucumber juice and a lot of coconut milk.”

“And very tasty,” said Vimes. “Take him away, Willikins, will you, and
if he tries anything you know what to do…you were born knowing what to
do.”

For a moment Willikins touched his forelock and then said, “Thank you,
commander, I appreciate the compliment.”

And Sam Vimes finished his holiday.

Of course it couldn’t be entirely fun, not with the clacks, not with
people sending messages like, “I don’t want to bother you, but this will
only take a moment of your time…”

A great many people didn’t want to bother Sam Vimes, but with a great
effort of will they somehow managed to overcome their distaste and do so
nevertheless. One of them, and this message did not contain an apology
of any sort, came from Havelock, Lord Vetinari, and read, “We will talk
about this.”

That morning Vimes hired a small boat with its captain and spent a happy
time with Young Sam picking periwinkles off the rocks on one of the many
small islands off the Quirm coast, and then they gathered driftwood,
made a fire, and boiled them and ate them with the help of a pin, racing
to be the first to get one wiggly morsel out of its shell, and of course
there was brown bread and butter and finally plenty of salt and vinegar,
so that the periwinkles tasted of salt and vinegar rather than of
periwinkles, which would be a disaster.*

With the boys out of the way, Sybil changed the world in her own quiet
way, by sitting at the table in their apartment and writing, in the neat
cursive script that she had been taught as a girl, a large number of
clacks messages. One of them was to the Director of the Royal Opera
House of which her ladyship was a major patron, another was to Lord
Vetinari, and three more went to the secretary of the Low King of the
dwarfs, the secretary of Diamond King of Trolls and the secretary of
Lady Margolotta of Uberwald, ruler of all that country that was above
ground.

But it didn’t stop there. No sooner had the maid come back from carrying
the first batch to the top of the hill than she was sent spinning up
there again with all the rest. Lady Sybil was a ferocious writer of
letters, and if there was any person of substance on the Plains and
beyond who didn’t get a letter from Sybil that day, it was because their
name had fallen out of her beautifully bound and obsessively updated
little black book, which was, in fact, a delicate pink with tiny
embroidered flowers on it, and a small phial of perfume. Nevertheless
the only comparable weapon in the entire history of persuasion was
probably the ballista.

In the afternoon Lady Sybil took tea with some of her girlfriends, all
old girls from the Quirm College for Young Ladies, and had a very
satisfactory time talking about other people’s children while silently,
driven by messages sleeting across the land with a precision and speed
that no wizard would have contemplated, the world began to change its
mind.

Concurrently, Vimes took Young Sam to the zoo, where he met the keepers,
nearly all of whom had known somebody on the Wonderful Fanny and who
opened every door to them, and nearly every cage. The curator himself
came along to witness this cheerful six-year-old who was methodically
weighing giraffe poo on a pair of ancient snuff scales, dissecting it
with a couple of old kitchen knives, and making notes in a notebook with
a picture of a goblin on the front. But for Sam Vimes a highlight was
the elephant’s delivery that Young Sam had been looking forward to—just
as the Vimes party approached, Jumbo obliged and his son was, almost
literally, in a hog heaven. Not even the philatelist finding a rare
reversed-head blue triangle stamp in an unregarded secondhand stamp
collection could have been happier than Young Sam toddling away with his
steaming bucket. Young Sam had seen the elephant.

And so had Sam Vimes. The curator had said that Young Sam was incredibly
gifted, and seemed to have a natural grasp of the disciplines of natural
philosophy, a comment that caused Sam’s father to nod wisely and hope
for the best.

They rounded off the day with a visit to the funfair, where Vimes gave
the man a dollar for the ride on the upsy-daisy machine and was given
change for a quarter-dollar. When he objected the man swore at Vimes,
lashed out and was surprised to be caught in a grip of steel, marched
through a cheering crowd and handed over to the nearest Quirm copper,
who saluted and asked if Vimes could sign his helmet. That was a small
thing, but, as Vimes always said, behind small things you often find big
things. He also won a coconut, a definite result, and Young Sam got a
stick of rock candy with “Quirm” all the way through, which stuck his
teeth together, another memorable occasion.

In the middle of the night Vimes, who had been listening to the pounding
of the surf for some time, said, “Are you awake, dear?” And then,
because this is how these things are done, raised his voice a little
when he got no answer and repeated, “Are you awake, dear?”

“Yes, Sam. I am now.”

Vimes stared at the ceiling. “I wonder if it’s all going to work.”

“Of course it will! People are very enthusiastic about it, you know;
they’re intrigued. And I’ve pulled more strings than an elephant’s
corset. It will work. What about you?”

There was a gecko on the ceiling; you didn’t get them in Ankh-Morpork.
It looked at Vimes with jeweled eyes. He said, “Well, it’ll be more or
less a standard procedure.” He shifted uneasily, and the gecko retreated
to the corner of the room. “I’m a bit worried, though, some things I’ve
done come within the law and one or two others are rather ad hoc, as it
were.”

“You were just opening a way for the law to flow in, Sam. The end
justifies the means.”

“I’m afraid a lot of bad men have used that to justify bad things,
dear.”

Under the covers Sybil’s hand reached out to touch his. “That’s no
reason why one good man shouldn’t use it to justify a good thing. Don’t
worry, Sam!”

Woman’s logic, Sam thought: everything is going to be all right because
it ought to be all right. The trouble is, reality is never as simple as
that and doesn’t allow for paperwork.

Vimes dozed comfortably for a while and then heard Sybil say, in a
whisper, “He’s not going to escape, is he, Sam? You said he’s good with
locks.”

“Well, they have damn good locks on the cells here in Quirm, there’s a
guard watching him at all times and he’s going to be taken up to
Ankh-Morpork on their hurry-up wagon under armed escort. I can’t imagine
the circumstances that would allow him to escape. After all, the Quirm
lads want to do this one by the numbers. I bet they’ll have shined up
their armor until it looks like silver. They’ll want to impress me, you
see? Don’t worry, I’m certain nothing will go wrong.”

They lay there, comfortable, and then Vimes said, “The curator of the
zoo was very complimentary about Young Sam.”

Sleepily, Sybil murmured, “Perhaps he’ll be another Woolsthorpe, but
maybe this time with the missing ingredient of common sense.”

“Well, I don’t know what he’s going to be,” said Sam Vimes, “but I do
know he’ll be good at it.”

“Then he’ll be Sam Vimes,” said Sybil. “Let’s get some sleep.”

Next day the family went home, which is to say that Sybil and Young Sam
went home to Ankh-Morpork on a fast coach, after a small hiatus which
led to Young Sam’s growing collection being removed from inside the
coach and strapped to the roof, while Sam Vimes took the Black-Eyed
Susan back to the Hall, because there was still a matter of business to
be concluded. Since he was a King of the River the pilot let him steer
for part of the way, admittedly staring obsessively over his shoulder,
just in case. And Vimes had fun, an infrequent event. It is a strange
thing to find yourself doing something you have apparently always wanted
to do, when in fact up until that moment you had never known that you
had always wanted to do it, or even what it was, but Sam Vimes, for a
moment upon the world, was a riverboat pilot and was as happy as a cat
full of sixpences.

That night he lay alone in the vastness of Ramkin Hall—except, of
course, for the hundred or so servants—turning the events of the
previous week over and over in his head, and especially his own actions
during them. Time and again he cross-examined himself mercilessly. Had
he cheated? Not exactly. Had he misled? Not exactly. Had he acted as a
policeman should? Well, now, that was the question, wasn’t it?

In the morning two young maids brought him his breakfast and Vimes was
amused to see that they were accompanied by a footman as a chaperone. In
a way he found that rather flattering. Then he went for a walk through
the lovely countryside, listening to the liquid notes of the robin et
cetera (he couldn’t remember the names of the others, but they were
jolly good singers all the same).

And as he walked he was aware of eyes upon him from every cottage and
field. One or two people came up to him, shook him frantically by the
hand and ran away just as quickly, and it seemed to Vimes that the world
was dragging around after him. Nervousness was so saturating the
atmosphere that he felt that any time soon he should shout “BOO!” at the
top of his voice.

But Vimes was merely waiting…Waiting for the evening.

The coaches started to arrive at Ankh-Morpork’s Opera House very early.
This was going to be an important occasion: it was said that not only
the Patrician would be there, but that he would be accompanied by Lady
Margolotta, ruler of all Uberwald, plus the dwarf ambassador, and the
black ruby viceroy of Diamond King of Trolls, who arrived in the city
with almost as many courtiers, secretaries, bodyguards, chefs and
advisors as had been brought by the ambassador from the dwarfs.

In an unsophisticated way, the people of Ankh-Morpork were very
sophisticated and the streets buzzed more busily than usual. Something
like this was important. Great matters of state would be settled over
the canapés. The fate of millions and suchlike would be most likely
decided by a quiet word in a corner somewhere and thereafter the world
would be a slightly different place, you see if it isn’t.

Unless you had a gold-edged invitation to the Opera House that evening
this was no occasion to be fashionably late, in case you were left
fashionably standing fashionable at the back, craning unfashionably to
see over the heads of other people.

Toward sunset Vimes lounged outside the lockup, happy to acknowledge the
fraternal salute of the pilot of a small boat that sailed past. Then he
strolled along the lane until he reached the pub and took a seat on the
bench outside. He took out his snuffbox, looked at it for a moment and
decided that on an occasion like this Sybil would have probably allowed
him a cigar.

Through the smoke of the first luxurious pull he stared at the village
green and most especially at that pillar of what seemed to be broken
wickerwork. Somehow, soundlessly, it was speaking to him, calling to
him, just as it had when he had first seen it. After a few more
thoughtful puffs he wandered toward the pub door. Jiminy beamed at him
from under the freshly painted sign of the Commander’s Arms, where he
was enjoying the pint that the parsimonious publican drinks every day
when cleaning the pipes. It’s old beer, obviously, but what’s beer but
liquid bread, eh? And bread can’t do you no harm.

“You look a bit preoccupied, commander,” said the publican. “A mite
pensive, as it were?”

Vimes nodded toward the tottering spire. “How important is that, my
friend?”

The barman glanced at the stack as if he couldn’t care less. “Well, you
know, it’s just a load of old wicker hurdles, that’s all. They just
stack them there after the annual sheep fair so they don’t get in the
way. A bit of a landmark, you might say, but not that much.”

“Oh,” said Vimes. He stared at the tower. Nothing really, then, but
nevertheless it spoke to him.

Vimes stared at the heap for a while and then followed Jiminy into the
bar.

“How much brandy do you have in here?”

“Not much call for it, but I’d say five or six bottles and a small
barrel.” Jiminy stared intently at Vimes. Vimes knew Jiminy for what he
was: nothing else but a man who knew enough to always be on the winning
side.

Vimes puffed his cigar again. “Put two of them aside for me, will you?
And you’d better make sure you’ve got good beer on tap, because pretty
soon you’re going to have a lot of customers.”

He left the barman bustling as he went back outside and he continued to
stare, his mind elsewhere, and in many places. Of course it’ll work, he
told himself. They’ve all got watches and I know they’ll have
synchronized them, even if they don’t know how to spell synchronize.
It’s a shout like any other, and I’ve trained most of them and I reckon
that they know that if somebody says to them, “Do you know who I am?”
they know enough to say, “Yes, you’re nicked!” and he smiled inwardly
when he thought that among the officers drafted in from the city were
two trolls, two vampires, a werewolf and a dwarf. That’s what they
probably call symbolic, he thought. He pulled out his own watch again,
just as the early seekers of an evening pint began to appear. Right
about…now.

There was a huge jamming of coaches around the Opera House as would-be
patrons, high or low, forsook their carriages and took to their feet,
fighting their way through the throng that was seeking admission. Of
course, it helped if you had a squad of trolls or dwarfs with you.

Ankh-Morpork liked surprises, provided they didn’t involve the revenue.
The curtain was not due to go up for another hour, but that didn’t
matter, because the important thing was to be there and even more
importantly to be seen to be there, especially by the people you wanted
to see. Whatever it was going to be it was going to be an occasion, and
you would have been there and people would have seen you there and it
was important and, therefore, so were you.

It would be a night to remember, even if the mysterious performance was
an act to forget. The really rich often put on these things out of
vanity, but this one looked particularly mysterious and possibly a jolly
good laugh if it fell on its face.

Day was turning into night. The pub was filling up, as were the
drinkers, who had been told by Jiminy that they were drinking courtesy
of Commander Vimes, again. And Jiminy watched him carefully from the
doorway as the shadows lengthened and Vimes stood there, motionless,
occasionally looking at his watch.

At last the lad everybody knew as young Feeney turned up, with his arm
still in its cast but, nevertheless, the old boys agreed amongst
themselves, looking rather more grown-up than they’d ever seen him
before. He was accompanied by Jefferson the blacksmith, whom they
regarded as a ticking bomb at the best of times, and he had a badge,
just like Feeney. People overflowed from the pub as the two of them went
up to Vimes, and there was an unheard conversation. They’d wondered why
the blacksmith was carrying a megaphone, but now they watched him hand
it to Vimes, and Feeney and the blacksmith walked back toward the pub
and people parted like a wave to let them through.

Vimes looked at his watch again. More people were hurrying toward the
green. People with an instinct for the dramatic had run home to say that
something was up and you’d better come and look. And country people
liked a spectacle, or even a serious death, just like city people. They
too liked to say, “I was there,” even if it came out as “I was there,
ooh-arr.”

Vimes put his watch in his pocket for the last time, and raised the
megaphone to his lips.

“LADIES AND GENTLEMEN!” The blacksmith had hammered out a pretty good
loud-hailer and the voice echoed across the green. “I have heard it
said, ladies and gentlemen, that in the end all sins are forgiven.” Out
of the corner of his mouth he said, so that only Feeney and the
blacksmith could hear, “We shall see.” And then he continued. “Bad
things have been done. Bad things have been ordered. Bad orders have
been obeyed. But they never will be again…will they, ladies and
gentlemen? Because there needs to be a law, but before there is a law,
there has to be a crime!”

There was absolute silence in the gloom as he walked over the green to
the tower and broke the two bottles of brandy on its woodwork, stepped
back a little way and threw the glowing end of his cigar after them.

In the Opera House the gossip faded and died as Lady Sybil stepped
through the curtains and onto the stage. She was a woman of, as they
say, ample proportions, although she felt that some of them were more
than ample. However, she could afford the very best dressmakers and did
indeed have the manner and poise that were the symbol of her class, or
at least the class she had been born into, and so she stepped out in
front of the curtain and applause broke out and grew. When she judged
that it had gone on long enough she made a little gesture which
magically silenced the auditorium.

Lady Sybil had exactly the right voice for these occasions. Somehow she
could make everybody think she was talking just to them. She said, “My
Lord Patrician, Lady Margolotta, your grace the viceroy, ambassadors,
ladies and gentlemen, I am so touched you have all decided to come along
to my little twilight soirée, especially since I have been rather
naughty and have been very sparing of information.” Lady Sybil took a
deep breath, which caused several elderly gentlemen near the front of
the audience to very nearly burst into tears.*

“I have been privileged recently to find a musician beyond compare, and
without more ado I will let you into this wonderful secret. Can we have
the house lights down, Jeffrey? Good. Ladies and gentlemen, I am honored
to be able to present to you tonight Tears of the Mushroom playing her
own composition, The Twilight Serenade. I hope you will like it, and, in
fact, I know that you will.”

Lady Sybil stepped back as the curtains dragged themselves aside, and
took a chair next to Tears of the Mushroom, who was seated obediently at
her concert harp.

Beneath the seemingly impregnable composure, Sybil’s heart was bouncing
like a flamenco dancer. A low light—that had been the thing. The girl
shouldn’t be able to see the thousands out there. Sybil had taken her in
hand, fearful that sudden exposure to the massed gaze of Ankh-Morpork,
far from her home, would have some terrible effect, but in fact it
wasn’t working like that. The girl had a curious tranquillity, as if she
hadn’t realized that she should be in awe. She smiled at Sybil in her
strange way and waited, with fingers poised, over the strings. There was
no sound but the susurration of people asking one another what the
intense little figure they were seeing really was. Lady Sybil smiled to
herself. By the time they realized, it would be too late. She looked at
her watch.

The flames were so high over the Ramkin Estate that the blaze could
surely be seen all the way to Ankh-Morpork (bet you a gallon of brandy
and a brace of turbot). There was barely any wind and it stood there
like a beacon.

Vimes announced to the gathered throng, “Ladies and gentlemen, the area
known as the Shires is under the rule of law tonight, and by that I mean
the proper law, the law that is written down for everybody to see, and
even to be changed if enough people agree. Chief Constable Upshot and
Constable Jefferson are currently acting with the backing of their
colleagues in the Ankh-Morpork City Watch, who would like to be assured
that their colleagues receive the respect that is due. At this moment, a
number of people from the Shires are being courteously brought here,
although possibly to their dismay. Some of them will be the people who
call themselves your magistrates and they will be taken away and asked
to explain to a lawyer by what right they have assumed that position. If
any one of you wants to argue with me, please come on and do so. The law
is there for the people, rather than the other way round. When it is the
other way round don’t hesitate to grab your weapons, understand? The bar
is still free, BUT BEFORE YOU STAMPEDE, THERE IS ONE MORE THING!”

Vimes had to put the megaphone back to his mouth because the mention of
“bar” and “free” in one breath has an invigorating effect on people.
“Right now, ladies and gentlemen, the goblins on Hangman’s Hill, and
indeed all other goblins in this area, are under my protection and the
protection of the law. They are also subject to it, and I’ll see to it
that they have their own police force. It appears that they make natural
clacks operators, so if they wish they can derive a revenue from so
doing. I’m paying to have that clacks tower made permanent. You will
benefit from it and so will they! They won’t need to steal your chickens
because they’ll buy them from you, and if they do pinch them, then
that’s a crime and will be treated as such. One law, ladies and
gentlemen…One size fits all!”

There was a cheer at this, as loud as any cheer in the vicinity of the
prospect of a free bar can be. Of course, some of it might have been
cheer at the fact that there was now some justice in the world, but on
the whole it was quite likely that the bar won the day. You didn’t have
to be a cynic, you just had to understand people.

Vimes walked slowly toward the brightly lit pub, although the chances of
getting inside were small. On the other hand, the chances of being given
a hug by Miss Felicity Beedle were exactly one hundred per cent, because
that was what she was doing, while being watched sheepishly by the
blacksmith.

Vimes let go of her hand as she said, “You are a great man, commander,
and I hope they put up a statue to you!”

“Oh dear, I hope not! You only get a statue when you’re dead!”

She laughed, but Vimes said, “Listen, Miss Beedle, right now I don’t
know if I’m facing a statue or the sack. Some of the ways I’ve acted
have been quite lawful, and others have been somewhat…debatable. I have
an officer who can do with numbers what Sergeant Detritus can do with a
hammer and he’s going through the records of the son of one of the most
influential people in Ankh-Morpork. And at the same time experienced
police officers have visited the home of every member on the list of
local magistrates. They are presenting them with a document, under my
seal, informing them that they are no longer members of the self-elected
board of magistrates of the Shires and reiterating that there may be
formal charges to be made. My justification for this ought to work, but
now? It’s probably going to be a case of who has the best lawyers.

“The future, Miss Beedle, is somewhat uncertain, but I have to tell you
that Young Sam, thanks to you, is probably going to be the world expert
on poo. I must tell you that his mother and I are very pleased and only
hope he aspires to higher things.”

There was already the rattle of wagons and coaches in the distance; the
sound of pigeons coming home to roost. “I think I’ll soon have people to
talk to, Miss Beedle, although I suspect that they’d rather not talk to
me.”

“Of course, commander. Can I say that the goblins seem very attached to
your Corporal Nobbs? They treat him as one of their own, in fact, and he
seems to be very fond of Shine of the Rainbow, as she is of him. You may
be interested to know that the goblin name for him is Breaking Wind?”

She did not appear to smile and Vimes said, “Yes, very apt. I’ve always
thought of Nobby as a draft-extruder. In fact, at my wife’s express
suggestion I have breveted him to the rank of sergeant for his stay
here, and I hope that he’ll assist the goblins to understand the
benefits of the law—although, of course, the fusion might simply mean
that people’s chickens will be more expertly stolen from now on.”

“Oh, you are a joker, commander!”

Vimes’s expression had not changed and did not change now. “Yes, aren’t
I?”

He turned to Jefferson. “You know, things would have been a lot easier
if you’d trusted me at the start.”

The blacksmith shrugged. “Why should I have trusted you? You’re a nob.”

“Do you trust me now?”

The blacksmith’s gaze remained steady for longer than Vimes could be
happy with, but at last the man smiled and said, “Yeah, for now.”

There was only one reply that Vimes could conceivably deliver. He smiled
back and said, “A policeman’s answer if ever I heard one.”

As the couple strolled away there was a polite cough behind Vimes. He
turned around and recognized the worried face of the colonel. “Do you
have a minute, commander?”

Oh dear, thought Vimes.

“May I first say, commander, that I firmly agree with what you are doing
and heavens know it needed doing.” The colonel coughed again and said,
“You will not have any disagreement with me on that point.” Vimes waited
and he continued, “My wife is a rather foolish woman who does appear to
worship things like titles and, if I may say so, gives herself airs. Her
father was a fisherman, an extremely good one, but do you know what? I
think she would rather die than have anyone know.”

There was another pause, and in the red light Vimes could see the shine
on the old man’s face. “What is going to happen to her, commander? At
the moment, two polite young ladies in Ankh-Morpork City Watch uniform
are standing guard over her in our house. I don’t know if this helps
very much, but the first thing she did when the arresting officers
arrived was make them tea. There is such a thing as good manners, you
see. Is she going to prison?”

Vimes felt the urge to say, “Would you like her to?” but he choked it
back, because of the tears. “It’s Charles, isn’t it?”

The colonel looked surprised. “As a matter of fact, commander, it’s Chas
to my friends.”

“Am I one of them?” And Vimes went on, “Other people will decide what
has to be done here. I’ve merely made certain that nobody can
inadvertently leave before I’ve had a chance to talk to them all, do you
understand? I’m not the judge and nor would I be allowed to sit on a
jury. Coppers aren’t. And right now I’m not even certain what the
penalty is for being stupid, vain and unthinking, although it does occur
to me that if I was to put in prison every person guilty of these crimes
we’d have to build about five hundred more.

“Speaking for myself,” Vimes continued, “I’d like to see that murderers,
if such I might find, are seen and dealt with as murderers, and the
frightened and unthinking obedient also treated as they deserve. And
right now, sir, I’d just like to not be living in a world of bloody
fools. Personally, I have no particular interest in seeing your wife in
prison, although I have a suspicion that if she was put in the women’s
wing of the Tanty her horizon would be usefully expanded and I expect
she’d be so bossy that she’d be running the place after a couple of
weeks.”

“I do love her, you know,” said the colonel. “We’ve been married for
fifty-five years. I’m very sorry you’ve been troubled and, as I’ve said,
I envy you your job.”

“I think, perhaps, I should envy her her husband,” said Vimes. “You
know, colonel, I’ll be happy just for the truth to come out, preferably
on page one of the Ankh-Morpork Times, if you understand me.”

“Absolutely, commander.”

Vimes looked down at the man, who now looked rather relieved, and added,
“For what it’s worth, I suspect Lord Vetinari will make certain of his
backing and possibly there will be some token punishments. Too many
skeletons, you see, too many cupboards. Too many things around the world
that maybe happened too long ago. What in the world can you do if some
copper is going to go around digging them up? That’s called realpolitik,
sir, and so I suspect that the world will go on and you will not be very
long without the company of your wife, which should, if I’m any judge,
mean that you can have more or less anything for dinner that you want
for the next week.”

The idea seemed to uplift the colonel’s spirits. The old man smiled. “Do
you know, commander, I’m sure that, if treated with respect, potted
shrimps might turn out to be my bosom chums.”

The colonel held out his hand and Vimes took it, shook it and said, “Bon
appétit.”

Afterward, there were several explanations about why the Quirm wagon
containing a very important prisoner overturned in the middle of the
night and rolled down a very steep hill, coming to bits as it did so.
You could blame the dark, you could blame the fog, you could blame its
speed and above all you could blame the express mail coach from
Ankh-Morpork that ran straight into it on the corner.

By the time the wounded were in any state to comprehend what had
happened they were minus one prisoner, who appeared to have picked the
lock of his shackles, and plus one guard whose throat had been cut.

It was dark, it was cold, it was foggy and, hunched together, the
survivors waited until dawn. After all, how could you find a man in
darkness?

Stratford was good at speed. Speed was always useful, and he stayed on
the road that was just visible in the murk. It didn’t really matter
where he went; after all, he knew no one had ever given a description of
him that helped. It was a gift to be indescribable.

After a while, however, he was surprised and delighted to hear a horse
trotting along the road behind him. Some brave traveler, he thought, and
smiled in the fog and waited. To his further surprise, the horse was
reined to a halt a little way from him and the rider slid off. Stratford
could barely make out a shape in the shimmering, water-laden air.

“My word! The famous Mr. Stratford,” said a voice cheerfully, as the
stranger strolled toward him. “And let me tell you right now, if you
make any kind of move you’ll be so dead that the graveyards would have
to run backward.”

“I know you! Vimes sent you, after me?”

“Oh, dear me no, sir,” said Willikins. “The commander doesn’t know I’m
here at all, sir, and nor will he ever. That is a certainty. No, sir,
I’m here, as it might be, out of a matter of professional pride. By the
way, sir, if you’re thinking of killing me and taking my horse I’d be
most grateful if you’d try that right now.”

Stratford hesitated. There was something about the voice that induced
hesitation. It was calm, friendly, and…worrying.

Willikins strolled a little closer and there was a chuckle in his voice.
“My word, sir, I’m a bit of a fighter myself, and when I heard about you
chopping up that girl and that, I thought, goodness me, I thought. And
so the other day, when I had my day off in lieu—very important your day
off in lieu, if you’re a working man—I took a trip up to Overhang and
learned a few things about you, and, my word, did I learn a few things.
You really scare people, eh?”

Stratford still hesitated. This didn’t sound right. The man had a
straightforward and cheerful voice, like a man you didn’t know very well
having a companionable chat in the pub, and Stratford was used to people
being very nervous when they spoke to him.

“Now, me,” said Willikins, “I was raised by the street as a fighter and
I fight dirty, you can depend on that, and I’ll fight anybody, but I
never punched a girl…oh, except Kinky Elsie, who was always game for
that sort of thing and had me by the I’m-not-going-to-mentions at the
time and my hands were tied, in more ways than one, as it were, and so I
had to give her a sharp nudge with my foot. Happy days. But you? You’re
just a killer. Worthless. A bully. I fight because I might get killed
and the other bloke might win, or maybe we’d both end up in the gutter,
too weak to throw another punch, when, quite likely, we’d prop each
other up and go to the pub for a drink and a wash.”

He took another step closer. Stratford took a step back. “And you, Mr.
Stratford, set out to kill Commander Vimes’s little lad, or worse. And
do you know what is even worser? I reckon that if you’d done so, the
commander would have arrested you and dragged you to the nearest police
station. But inside he’d be cutting himself up with razorblades from top
to bottom. And he’d be doing that because the poor bugger is scared that
he could be as bad as you.” Willikins laughed. “Truth is, Mr. Stratford,
from where I sits he’s a choirboy, he really is, but there has to be
some justice in the world, you see, not necessarily law justice, but
justice justice, and that’s why I am going to kill you. Although,
because I’m a fair man I’m going to give you a chance to kill me first.
That means one or other of us will die, so whatever happens the world is
going to be a better place, eh? Call it…cleaning up. I know you have a
weapon because you’d have run if you didn’t, and so I reckon you have a
blade from one of those poor buggers from Quirm and I warrant that in
all the confusion you probably stabbed him with it.”

“I did, too,” said Stratford. “And he was a copper and you’re just a
butler.”

“Very true,” said Willikins, “and much older than you and heavier than
you and slower than you, but still a bit spry. What’ve you got to lose?”

Only the horse, steaming patiently in the mist, saw what happened next,
and being a horse was in no position to articulate its thoughts on the
matter. Had it been able to do so it would have given as its opinion
that one human ran toward another human carrying a huge metal stick
while the other human quite calmly put his hand into his breast pocket.
This was followed by a terrible scream, a gurgling noise and then
silence.

Willikins staggered to the side of the road and sat down on a stone,
panting a little. Stratford certainly had been fast, no doubt about
that. He wiped his forehead with his sleeve, pulled out a packet of
cigarettes and lit one, staring at nothing but the fog. Then he stood
up, looked down at the shadow on the ground and said, “But not fast
enough.” Then, like a good citizen, Willikins went back to see he if he
could help the unlucky gentlemen of the law, who appeared to be in
difficulties. You should always help the gentlemen of the law. Where
would we be without them?

The chief sub-editor of the Ankh-Morpork Times really hated poetry. He
was a plain man and had devoted a large part of his career to keeping it
out of his paper. But they were a cunning bunch, poets, and could sneak
it up on you when your back was turned. And tonight, with the paper
already so late that the lads downstairs were into overtime, he stared
at the report just delivered by hand from Knatchbull Harrington, the
paper’s music critic. A man of whom he was deeply suspicious. He turned
to his deputy and waved the page angrily. “ ‘Whence came it, that
ethereal music?’ See what I mean? What’s wrong with ‘Where did that
music come from’? Bloody stupid introductory sentence in any case. And
what does ethereal mean, anyway?”

The deputy sub hesitated. “I think it means runny. Could be wrong.”

The chief sub-editor stood in misery. “Definitely poetry!”

Somebody had played some music that was very good. Apparently it made
everybody amazed. Why didn’t that twit in his rather feminine purple
silk shirts just write something like that? After all, it said
everything that you needed to know, didn’t it? He took out his red
pencil, and just as he was applying it to the wretched manuscript there
was a sound on the metal staircase and Mr. de Worde, the editor,
staggered into the office, looking as if he had seen a ghost or,
perhaps, a ghost had seen him.

He looked groggily at the two puzzled men and managed to say, “Did
Harrington send in his stuff?”

The chief sub held out the offending stuff in front of him. “Yes, guv, a
load of rubbish in my opinion.”

De Worde grabbed it, read it with his lips moving and thrust it back at
the man. “Don’t you dare change a single word. Front page, Bugsy, and I
hope to hell that Otto got an iconograph.”

“Yessir, but, sir—”

“And don’t bloody argue!” screamed De Worde. “And now, if you’ll excuse
me, I’ll be in my office.”

He clattered on up the stairs while the sub-editor and his deputy stood
gloomily reading Knatchbull Harrington’s copy again. It began:

Whence came it, that ethereal music, from what hidden grot or secret
cell? From what dark cave? From what window into paradise? We watched
the tiny figure under the spotlight and the music poured over us,
sometimes soothing, sometimes blessing, sometimes accusing. Every one of
us confronting ghosts, demons and old memories. The recital by Tears of
the Mushroom, a young lady of the goblin persuasion, took but half an
hour or, perhaps, it took a lifetime, and then it was over, to a silence
which spread and grew and expanded until at last it exploded. Every
single patron standing and clapping their hands raw, tears running down
our faces. We had been taken somewhere and brought back and we were
different people, longing for another journey into paradise, no matter
what hell we had to atone for on the way.

The chief sub and his deputy looked at each other with what Knatchbull
would certainly have called a “wild surmise.” At last, the deputy
sub-editor ventured, “I think he liked it.”

Three days passed. They were busy days for Vimes. He had to get back
into the swing again, although, to tell the truth, it was a case of
getting out of one swing and into another one, while they were both
swinging. So much paperwork to read! So much paperwork to push away! So
much paperwork to delegate! So much paperwork to pretend he hadn’t
received and that might have been eaten by the gargoyles.

But today, in the Oblong Office, Lord Vetinari was close to ranting.
Admittedly you needed to know him very well to realize this. He drummed
his fingers on the table. “Snarkenfaugister? I’m sure she makes these
things up!”

Drumknott carefully put a cup of coffee on his master’s desk. “Alas,
sir, there really is such a word. In Nothingfjord it means a maker of
small but necessary items such as, for example, spills and very small
clothes pegs for indoor use and half-sized cocktail sticks for people
who don’t drink long drinks. The term could be considered of historical
interest, because my research this morning turned up the fact that the
last known snarkenfaugister died twenty-seven years ago in a freak
pencil-sharpener accident. As a matter of fact, I gather that your
crossword adversary herself does actually come from Nothingfjord.”

“Ah! There you have it! All those long winters sitting around the stove!
Such terrible patience! But she runs the pet shop in Pellicool Steps!
Dog collars! Cat biscuits! Mealworms! Such deviousness! Such subterfuge!
Such a vocabulary! Snarkenfaugister!”

“Well, sir, she is now the chief crossword compiler for the Times, and I
suppose those things go with the territory.”

Lord Vetinari calmed down. “One down, one across. She has won and I am
cross. And, as you know, I am very rarely cross, Drumknott. A calm if
cynical detachment is generally my forte. I can change the fate of
nations but am thwarted at every turn by an apparently blameless lady
who compiles crosswords!”

Drumknott nodded. “Indeed, sir, but on that note, if you will permit me
to extend that note a little, may I remind you that Commander Vimes is
waiting in the other room.”

“Indeed? Show him in, by all means.”

Vimes marched in, saluted very nearly smartly, and stood to attention.

“Ah, your grace, it is good to see you back at last. How went your
holidays, apart from lawless actions, ad hoc activities, fights, chases
on both land and sea and indeed freshwater, unauthorized expenditure
and, of course, farting in the halls of the mighty?”

Vimes’s gaze was steady and just above the Patrician’s eye line. “Point
of detail, my lord: didn’t fart, may have picked nose inadvertently.”

“The exigencies of the service, I assume?” said Lord Vetinari wryly.
“Vimes, you have caused a considerable amount of paperwork to cross my
desk in the last few days. In some cases the writers wanted your head on
a plate, others were more circumspect because the writers were in mortal
dread of a prison cell. Can I make one thing perfectly clear, your
grace, the law cannot operate retrospectively. If it did, none of us
would be safe.

“Lord Rust junior may have done, indeed has done many bad things, but
making slaves of goblins under current law cannot be one of them.
However, as I suspect, the recent revelations about his additional
activities have done his reputation a considerable amount of no good.
You might not know this, Vimes, but in society this sort of thing can be
worse than a prison sentence, possibly worse than a death. Young Gravid
is a man with not many friends right now. I hope that will give you some
pleasure.”

Vimes said nothing, but he thought, the ball dropped.

Vetinari glared at him and said, “I have here an eloquent missive from
Lord Rust senior, pleading for the life of, if not the freedom of, his
son, who he fully admits has trodden the family honor into the mud.”
Lord Vetinari held up a hand. “His Lordship is an old man and so, Vimes,
if your next remark was going to be something on the lines of ‘even
further’ then I suggest you deploy a little charity. His lordship is
anxious to avoid a scandal. Apart from that, may I have your views?”

“Yes. The scandal has already taken place, sir, more than once,” said
Vimes coldly. “He trafficked in living, breathing and thinking people.
Many of them died!”

“Once again, Vimes, I have to tell you that laws cannot be made
retrospectively.”

“That may be so,” said Vimes, “but what about the troll kids, who took
that damn rubbish? Are you going to ask the Diamond King if they should
be retrospective?”

“I can assure you, Vimes, that the laws will be upheld, and since you
ask, right now I am having to negotiate with the King who is demanding,
demanding of me—me, Vimes—that young Lord Rust be handed over for
questioning regarding the manufacture and distribution of absolutely
deadly troll narcotics. Of course, under troll law the wretched man
would be put to death, and I am saddened to say that at this moment in
the complex world of human, troll and dwarven politics, I feel that that
might have some long-term repercussions, making it an unfortunate option
for this city. I have to negotiate this problem, and, believe me, it’s
going to take a lot of quid for the pro quo. And it’s only nine thirty
in the morning!”

Vimes’s knuckles reddened. “They are living creatures who can talk and
think and have songs and names, and he treated them like some kind of
disposable tools.”

“Indeed, Vimes, but, as I have indicated, goblins have always been
considered a kind of vermin. However, Ankh-Morpork, the kingdom of the
Low King and also that of the Diamond King, Uberwald, Lancre and all the
independent cities of the plain are passing a law to the effect that
goblins will henceforth be considered as sapient beings, equal to, if
not the same as, trolls and dwarfs and humans and werewolves, et cetera
et cetera, answerable to what we have agreed to call ‘the common law’
and also protected by it. That means killing one would be a capital
crime. You have won, commander, you have won. Because of a song,
commander. Oh, and of course other efforts, but it was your wife who got
most of the ambassadors to her little amusement which, I may say, Vimes,
was eloquence personified. Though frankly, Vimes, I find myself shamed.
One spends one’s life scheming, negotiating, giving and taking and
greasing such wheels as squeak, and in general doing one’s best to stop
this battered old world from exploding into pieces. And now, because of
a piece of music, Vimes, a piece of music, some very powerful states
have agreed to work together to heal the problems of another autonomous
state and, almost as collateral, turn some animals into people at a
stroke. Can you imagine that, Vimes? In what world could that possibly
happen? All because of a song at twilight, Vimes. All because of a song.
It was a thing of strangely tinkling tones and unbelievable cadences
which somehow found its way into our souls, reminding some of us that we
have some. Lady Sybil is worth a dozen diplomats. You are a lucky man,
commander.”

Vimes opened his mouth to speak, but Vetinari interrupted. “And also a
bloody fool, a bloody, headstrong fool. The law must start with a crime?
I understand, but don’t condone.” Vetinari picked the letter off his
desk. “Lord Rust asks that his son be given a moderately short sentence,
subsequent to which he be allowed to emigrate to Fourecks, to start a
new life. Since the man was deeply involved in smuggling the fine will
be harsh.”

He held up a hand. “No, hear me out; after all, I am the tyrant in this
vicinity.” Vetinari slumped into his chair, wiped his brow and said,
“And I have already lost my temper with an otherwise inoffensive sweet
lady who compiles crossword puzzles for the Times. However, Vimes, Lord
Rust refers to you as a man of honor and probity and astonishing
integrity and vigilance. Moreover, he is disinheriting his son, which
means upon his death his title will devolve to his daughter Regina, a
ferocious woman, very difficult and hot-headed. And that, Vimes, creates
another problem for me. His lordship is extremely frail and, frankly, I
was looking forward to dealing with the son, who is an ignorant,
arrogant, pompous idiot, but his sister? She is smart!” and then, almost
to himself, Lord Vetinari added, “But at least she doesn’t compile
crosswords…Now you can speak, commander.”

“There was a murder,” said Vimes sullenly.

Vetinari sighed hugely. “No, Vimes! There was a slaughter! Do you not
understand? At that point goblins were vermin and no, do not shout at
me! At this very moment in palaces and chancelleries all over the world
goblins are becoming as human as you or I, but that was then. I would
like you to be fully aware that the reason that Stratford would have
gone to the tender mercies of Mr. Trooper is that he and his ruffians
boarded the Enormous Fanny— Yes, what is it?”

Vetinari looked around as Drumknott tapped him on the shoulder. There
was a muffled whispering before Vetinari cleared his throat and said,
“Of course, I meant the Wonderful Fanny,” and he did not exactly meet
Vimes’s gaze as he continued. “That was an act of piracy and the good
people of Quirm, where the…boat in question was registered, are all in
favor of the death penalty for that kind of thing. I am aware of his
manifold other crimes but, alas, you can only hang a man once…Although,
as it turned out, apparently Mr. Stratford was mortally wounded in a
collision three nights ago, being thrown some distance from the wreckage
with a surgically cut throat. Convenient, don’t you think?”

“Don’t you dare look at me like that, sir.”

“Heavens, I wouldn’t accuse you, commander, I was just wondering if you
knew of any other person with a grudge against the corpse?”

“Nossir,” said Vimes, pulling himself to attention.

“You know, Vimes, sometimes your expression becomes so wooden that I
think I could make a table out of it. Just tell me this: did you give
any instructions?”

How does he do it? thought Vimes. How? Out loud he said, “I don’t know
what you are talking about, sir, but if what I suspect to be true is so,
then the answer is no. If there was any foul play that night it wasn’t
by my order. I wanted to see Stratford on the gallows. That’s legal.”
And he thought, I am never going to broach the subject with Willikins.

Vetinari’s eyebrows rose as Vimes went on, “But his lordship’s wretched
son is being allowed to go on a long holiday full of sun, sea, surf and
sand and economically priced wines!” He slammed his fist on the desk and
Vetinari looked pointedly at it until Vimes took it away. “Are you going
to leave it at that?”

“It has been known, as people put it, for the leopard to change its
shorts. All of us hope for a little redemption, whether if we deserve it
or not. We will keep an eye on the young fool, you can be certain of
that.”

“Oh, you’re sending the Dark Clerks after him?”

“Vimes, the Dark Clerks are a myth, as everybody knows. To tell you the
truth, some flunkey from our embassy down there will pay attention to
his progress. And now the world is a better place, commander. You have
no understanding, Vimes, no understanding at all of the deals,
stratagems and unseen expedients by which some of us make shift to see
that it remains that way. Do not seek perfection. None exists. All we
can do is strive. Understand this, commander, because from where I sit
you have no alternative. And remember, for this week’s work you will be
remembered. Lord Rust may not like it but news travels fast. The truth
will be known and written down in the history books.” Vetinari gave a
wan smile. “It will, I shall see to it. And, slightly better than
before, the world will continue to turn.”

Vetinari picked up yet another piece of paper, appearing to glance at
it, and said, “You may go, commander, in the knowledge that I, for so
many reasons, envy you. My regards to your good lady.”

Vimes looked at Drumknott. The man’s face so assiduously betrayed
nothing that it betrayed everything.

Vetinari pulled a file toward him and picked up his pen. “Don’t let me
detain you, commander.”

An hour later Lord Vetinari was sitting at his desk with his fingers
steepled, apparently lost in thought, staring at the ceiling, and, to
Drumknott’s surprise, occasionally waving his hand as if conducting some
hidden music. Drumknott knew enough not to disturb him, but at last he
dared to say, “It was a most memorable recital, wasn’t it, sir?”

Vetinari ceased being the invisible conductor and said, brightly, “Yes,
it was, wasn’t it? They say that the eyes of some paintings can follow
you around the room, a fact that I doubt, but I am wondering whether
some music can follow you for ever.” He appeared to pull himself
together and continued, “On the whole, the Rust dynasty, though not
exactly empowered with brains, tends to be an honorable and patriotic
bunch, by and large, am I not right, Drumknott?”

Drumknott meticulously and unnecessarily tidied some paperwork and said,
“It is indeed so. Young Gravid is a regrettable exception.”

“Do you think him beyond redemption?” said Vetinari.

“Quite likely not,” said Drumknott, carefully folding a pen wiper.
“However, Arachne is working in Fourecks at the moment as a filing clerk
in our embassy. She pleaded for the position because she’s particularly
attracted by venomous spiders.”

“Well, I suppose every girl should have a hobby,” said Vetinari. “And
are there a lot of them in Fourecks?”

“The place is positively overwhelmed, I am given to understand, sir, and
apparently Arachne already has a large selection of them.”

Vetinari said nothing, but remained sitting with eyes closed.

Drumknott cleared his throat. “They do say, sir, that in the end all
sins are forgiven?”

Reluctantly, Havelock, Lord Vetinari tore his recollection away from the
wondrous music that he longed to hear again. “Not all, Drumknott, not
all.”

In bed that night in Scoone Avenue, listening to the absence of owls and
nightjars, Vimes said, “You know, dear, I’ll have to go back to the
Shires soon. Feeney is a good lad but they need a proper headquarters
and the right kind of guidance and that doesn’t mean just Nobby Nobbs
and Fred Colon.”

Sybil turned over. “Oh, I don’t know, Sam. Fred and Nobby aren’t as bad
as all that and might be all that’s needed right now. I mean, they’re
coppers, but they amble about extremely slowly and on the whole it’s
good to see them around. Right now you’ve got two young men full of vim
and vigor and if you don’t want to upset things it might just be that,
in this bewildered place, they should be backed up by slow and steady,
don’t you think?”

“You are, as always, right, my dear.”

“Besides, I’ve seen Fred, and having to rethink his world view has
clearly shaken him a little.”

“He’ll get over it,” said Vimes. “Once you get past the stupid Fred
there is, against all expectations, a decent man there.”

Sybil sighed. “Yes, Sam, but that decent man needs a holiday out in the
sunshine away from the smoke and the grime and the terrible spells.”

“But they’re the best bits!” said Vimes, laughing.

“No, he needs a holiday. Everybody needs a holiday, Sam, even you.”

“I’ve just had one, dear, thank you.”

“No, you had a few days interspersed with fighting and floods and
murders and I don’t know what else. Look at your desk, make certain
everybody is on their toes, and then we’ll go down there for another
week, do you hear me, Sam Vimes?”

[20_Compass.ai]

EPILOGUE

And three months later Sam Vimes went on holiday again, and this time he
was allowed to steer the Black-Eyed Susan all the way to Quirm without
hardly hitting anything important, and was so happy that they had to
find another cat full of sixpences for him to be as happy as.

He was amazed at how much fun a holiday could be, but not so amazed as
he was eight months after that when he and Sybil were invited to be
guests at the wedding of Ms. Emily Gordon to the eldest son of Sir
Abuthknott Makewar, owner of the famous Makewar pottery manufactory and
incidentally the inventor of Makewar’s Crispy Nuts, the breakfast cereal
of champions, without whose nourishing roughage the bowels of
Ankh-Morpork would be more congested than was good for them. The wedding
present from Vimes and Sybil was a silver egg coddler, Sybil being of
the view that you can’t go wrong with a coddled egg.

And Vimes was gratified when he noticed at the ceremony that one of the
daughters was wearing a spanking new nurse’s uniform and three of the
others were sporting some quite fabulous and also, according to Sybil
with great glee, quite scandalous bonnets from the new Gordon Bonnets
range.

There was an apology from the ax-wielding Hermione, but according to her
mother she was detained in the woods dealing with a very large and
troublesome Pinus, which caused Vimes’s face to go blank until Sybil
nudged him and pointed out that the pinus strobus was the official name
for the white pine.

But most of all, later that year, Vimes was totally amazed to find that
the bestselling novel taking the Ankh-Morpork literary world by storm
was dedicated to Commander Samuel Vimes.

The title of the book was Pride and Extreme Prejudice.

[20_Compass.ai]

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Terry Pratchett’s novels have sold more than 75 million copies (give or
take a few million) worldwide. He lives in England.

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

The Carpet People

The Dark Side of the Sun

Strata

Good Omens

(WITH NEIL GAIMAN)

For Young Adults

The Bromeliad Trilogy: Truckers · Diggers · Wings

The Johnny Maxwell Trilogy:
Only You Can Save Mankind · Johnny and the Dead · Johnny and the Bomb

The Unadulterated Cat

(ILLUSTRATED BY GRAY JOLLIFE)

Nation

THE DISCWORLD® BOOKS

The Color of Magic

The Light Fantastic

Equal Rites

Mort

Sourcery

Wyrd Sisters

Pyramids

Guards! Guards!

Eric

(WITH JOSH KIRBY)

Moving Pictures

Reaper Man

Witches Abroad

Small Gods

Lords and Ladies

Men at Arms

Soul Music

Feet of Clay

Interesting Times

Maskerade

Hogfather

Jingo

The Last Continent

Carpe Jugulum

The Fifth Elephant

The Truth

Thief of Time

Night Watch

Monstrous Regiment

Going Postal

Thud!

Where’s My Cow?

(ILLUSTRATED BY MELVYN GRANT)

Making Money

Unseen Academicals

The Last Hero

(ILLUSTRATED BY PAUL KIDBY)

The Art of Discworld

(ILLUSTRATED BY PAUL KIDBY)

The Streets of Ankh-Morpork

(WITH STEPHEN BRIGGS)

The Discworld Companion

(WITH STEPHEN BRIGGS)

The Discworld Mapp

(WITH STEPHEN BRIGGS)

The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld

(WITH STEPHEN BRIGGS)

The Discworld Graphic Novels:
The Color of Magic · The Light Fantastic

For Young Adults

The Amazing Maurice and His
Educated Rodents

The Wee Free Men

A Hat Full of Sky

Wintersmith

I Shall Wear Midnight

The Illustrated Wee Free Men

(ILLUSTRATED BY STEPHEN PLAYER)

COPYRIGHT

This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue
are drawn from the author’s imagination and are not to be construed as
real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.

SNUFF. Copyright © 2011 by by Terry and Lyn Pratchet. All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive,
non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.

Terry Pratchett and Discworld are registered trademarks.

EPub Edition October 2011 ISBN: 9780062097866

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au/ebooks

Canada

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com

FOOTNOTES

* The exchange scheme with the Quirm gendarmerie was working very well:
they were getting instruction on policing à la Vimes, while the food in
the Pseudopolis Yard canteen had been improved out of all recognition by
Captain Emile, even though he used far too much avec.

 

* And thenceforth would be glad to get a gentle second place in almost
every domestic decision. Lady Sybil took the view that her darling
husband’s word was law for the City Watch while, in her own case, it was
a polite suggestion to be graciously considered.

 

* Apart, that is, from the line of artistically naked ladies along its
parapets. They were holding urns; urns is art.

 

* It was tricky; to Vimes all men were equal but, well, obviously a
sergeant wasn’t as equal as a captain and a captain wasn’t as equal as a
commander and as for corporal Nobby Nobbs…well, nobody…could be the
equal of corporal Nobby Nobbs.

 

* Metal, in the circumstances, would not be appropriate…or safe.

 

* Not to mention Blackboard Monitor Vimes, a figure of note in dwarfish
society.

 

* Willikins was an excellent butler and/or gentleman’s gentleman when
the occasion required it, but in a long career he had also been an
enthusiastic street fighter, and knew enough never to turn his back on
anybody who could possibly have a weapon on them.

 

* Later on Vimes pondered Willikins’ accurate grasp of the plural noun
in the circumstances, but there you were; if someone hung around in
houses with lots of books in it, some of it rubbed off just as, come to
think of it, it had on Vimes.

 

* More than once watchmen had found handwritten suicide notes which on
careful examination weren’t in the right handwriting.

 

* Saddle pork was invented some time around the Year of the Stoat by
Reverend Joseph “Causality” Robinson, rector of All Saints and Three
Sinners in the parish of Lower Overhang. As far as can be determined
from notes made by his contemporaries, the game may be considered an
amalgam of spillikins, halma and brandy. No known rules exist, if,
indeed, there ever really were any.

 

* Sybil had explained to Vimes that in the country one dresses at least
a decade earlier than in the city, hence the bustle, and, for Vimes, a
pair of breeches: the ancient ones with trap doors front and rear and a
slightly distressing smell all over.

 

* See Dr. Bentley Purchase, The Vicar Is Coming to Tea and One Hundred
and Twenty-seven Other Warnings of Social Embarrassment (Unseen
University Press).

 

* It was all a mystery to Vimes, who was absolutely sure that it was
impossible to tell the difference between a chicken fart and a turkey
fart, but there were those who professed to be able to do so, and he was
glad that such people had chosen this outlet for their puzzling
inclinations rather than, for example, fill their sink with human
skulls, collected in the high street.

 

* Because he wasn’t allowed much time talking.

 

* The fourth Gumption to run the tobacco house and snuff mill felt that
his surname lacked prestige, and for some reason chose the name
“Bewilderforce”—which did indeed become prestigious owing to the success
of his tobacco enterprise, which was extremely well thought of by the
gentry and others. And thereafter there was at least one Bewilderforce
in every generation of the line (although girls were generally named
Bewildred).

 

* A glint is, in fact, a visual tinkle.

 

* This is, of course, absolutely true.

 

* The Colons had survived a long and happy marriage by having as little
to do with the other partner as possible. This was achieved by the
expedient of his working the night shift when she was working days and
vice versa. This was agreed on the basis that anything else would spoil
the romance.

 

* Strictly speaking, the sexuality of any given dwarf remained a secret
between him or, as it might be, her, and his, or, as it might be, her
mother, until they decided to tell someone else about it, although
generally you could work it out by observing dwarfs closely and spotting
the ones that were drinking sherry or light white wine. Regrettably,
this didn’t always work with dwarf policemen, because like all policemen
everywhere they would drink anything strong enough to help them forget
what they’d to deal with that day.

 

* According to dwarf lore the universe was written into being by Tak,
who also wrote its lores. All writing is sacred to the dwarfs.

 

* However that might be rendered in a language that at its best sounded
like a man jumping up and down on a very large packet of crisps.

 

* Regrettably, Constable Upshot was overly hopeful: in Ankh-Morpork the
mice and the cockroaches had decided to forget their differences and
gang up on the humans.

 

* Which were, in fact, a permanency in any case.

 

* Wee Mad Arthur was, as a Feegle, a very economical watchman to have,
given that, size for size, he ate in a year what human watchmen ate in a
week, although it had to be admitted he could drink, size for size, more
alcohol in a week than any human watchman could drink in a year.

 

* The first two being common theft and public indecency.

 

* A race of freshwater mariners found everywhere in and around the Sto
Plains. They are said to be incapable of lying, although this piece of
information has been provided by the Zoons themselves, causing, as it
were, a philosophical conundrum. Certainly it is maintained that they
find the concept of a lie so difficult to understand that the few among
them who have mastered the technique are venerated and given high office
in Zoon society.

 

* Technically, the violent surge of water on Old Treachery was written
down in technical manuals as a Dam Slam, but anyone who has experienced
one learns to swear, hence the subtle change of name.

 

* Constable Haddock’s immediate nickname when he joined the force was
Kipper, because policemen’s minds worked that way.

 

* Or three or four, as far as Vimes the landlubber was concerned.

 

* The sound of the gentle rattle of china cup on china saucer drives
away all demons, a little-known fact.

 

* The Three Disgraces were apparently the daughters of Blind Io (but you
know how people talk); they were Nudicia, Pulchritudia and Voluptia.

 

* That is to say, something bigger than he in fact is, which will turn
very nasty if you think you can give this copper in front of you now a
seeing-to because you are afloat to the tonsils on beer.

 

* Or, perhaps, somebody else’s.

 

* For those unfamiliar with them, periwinkles, like cockles and whelks,
might be considered the snot of the sea.

 

* It had been said by someone years before that to see Sybil Ramkin’s
upholstered bosom rise and fall was to understand the history of
empires.
