Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Dedication

Prologue: A Crown in the Chalk

Chapter 1: Where the Wind Blows

Chapter 2: A Voice in the Darkness

Chapter 3: An Upside-down World

Chapter 4: A Farewell – and a Welcome

Chapter 5: A Changing World

Chapter 6: Around the Houses

Chapter 7: A Force of Nature

Chapter 8: The Baron’s Arms

Chapter 9: Good with Goats

Chapter 10: Treasure

Chapter 11: The Big City

Chapter 12: An Elf among the Feegles

Chapter 13: Mischief . . . and Worse

Chapter 14: A Tale of Two Queens

Chapter 15: The God in the Barrow

Chapter 16: Mr Sideways

Chapter 17: An Argument of Witches

Chapter 18: The Shepherd’s Crown

Chapter 19: Peace

Epilogue: A Whisper on the Chalk

Afterword

Acknowledgements

A Feegle Glossary

Bonus Content: The Witches of Discworld

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Praise for Sir Terry Pratchett

Copyright

About the Book

_A SHIVERING OF WORLDS_

Deep in the Chalk, something is stirring. The owls and the foxes can
sense it, and Tiffany Aching feels it in her boots. An old enemy is
gathering strength.

This is a time of endings and beginnings, old friends and new, a
blurring of edges and a shifting of power. Now Tiffany stands between
the light and the dark, the good and the bad.

As the fairy horde prepares for invasion, Tiffany must summon all the
witches to stand with her. To protect the land. _Her_ land.

There will be a reckoning . . .

_THE FINAL DISCWORLD® NOVEL_



THE SHEPHERD’S
CROWN


Terry Pratchett

A DISCWORLD® NOVEL

[image.missing]

[image.missing]

For Esmerelda Weatherwax
– mind how you go.


[image]
PROLOGUE


A Crown in the Chalk

IT WAS BORN in the darkness of the Circle Sea; at first just a soft
floating thing, washed back and forth by tide after tide. It grew a
shell, but in its rolling, tumbling world there were huge creatures
which could have cracked it open in an instant. Nevertheless, it
survived. Its little life might have gone on like this for ever until
the dangers of the surf and other floating things brought an end, were
it not for the pool.

It was a warm pool, high on a beach, replenished by occasional storms
blown in from the Hub, and there the creature lived on things even
smaller than itself and grew until it became king. It would have got
even bigger if it were not for the hot summer when the water evaporated
under the glare of the sun.

And so the little creature died, but its carapace remained, carrying
within itself the seed of something sharp. On the next stormy tide it
was washed away onto the littoral, where it lodged, rolling back and
forth with the pebbles and other detritus of the storms.

The sea rolled down the ages until it dried and withdrew from the land,
and the spiky shell of the long-dead creature sank beneath layers of the
shells of other small creatures which had not survived. And there it
lay, with the sharp core growing slowly inside, until the day when it
was found by a shepherd minding his flock on the hills that had become
known as the Chalk.

He picked up the strange object which had caught his eye, held it in his
hand and turned it over and over. Lumpy, but not lumpy, and it fitted in
the palm of his hand. Too regular a shape to be a flint, and yet it had
flint in its heart. The surface was grey, like stone, but with a hint of
gold beneath the grey. There were five distinct ridges spaced evenly,
almost like stripes, rising from a flattish base to its top. He had seen
things like this before. But this one seemed different – it had almost
jumped into his hand.

The little piece tumbled as he turned it around and about, and he had a
feeling that it was trying to tell him something. It was silly, he knew,
and he hadn’t had a beer yet, but the strange object seemed to fill his
world. Then he cursed himself as an idiot but nevertheless kept it and
took it to show his mates in the pub.

‘Look,’ he said, ‘it looks like a crown.’

Of course, one of his mates laughed and said, ‘A crown? What would you
want with one of them? You’re no king, Daniel Aching.’

But the shepherd took his find home and placed it carefully on the shelf
in his kitchen where he kept the things he liked.

And there, eventually, it was forgotten and was lost to history.

But not to the Achings, who handed it down, generation to
generation . . .


[image]
CHAPTER 1


Where the Wind Blows

IT WAS ONE of those days that you put away and remember. High on the
downs, above her parents’ farm, Tiffany Aching felt as though she could
see to the end of the world. The air was as clear as crystal, and in the
brisk wind the dead leaves from the autumn swirled around the ash trees
as they rattled their branches to make way for the new spring growth.

She had always wondered why the trees grew there. Granny Aching had told
her there were old tracks up here, made in the days when the valley
below had been a swamp. Granny said that was why the ancient people had
made their homes high up – away from the swamp, and away from other
people who would like to raid their livestock.

Perhaps they had found a sense of refuge near the old circles of stones
they found there. Perhaps they had been the ones who built them? No one
knew for certain where they had come from . . . but even though they
didn’t really believe it, everyone knew that they were the kind of thing
it was probably better to leave alone. Just in case. After all, even if
a circle did hide some old secrets or treasure, well, what use was
_that_ when it came to sheep? And although many of the stones had fallen
down, what if the person buried underneath didn’t want to be dug up?
Being dead didn’t mean you couldn’t get angry, oh no.

But Tiffany herself had once used one particular set of stones to pass
through an arch to Fairyland – a Fairyland most decidedly not like the
one she had read about in _The Goode Childe’s Booke of Faerie Tales_ –
and she knew the dangers were real.

Today, for some reason, she had felt the _need_ to come up to the
stones. Like any sensible witch, she wore strong boots that could march
through anything – good, sensible boots. But they did not stop her
feeling her land, feeling what it told her. It had begun with a tickle,
an itch that crept into her feet and demanded to be heard, urging her to
tramp over the downs, to visit the circle, even while she was sticking
her hand up a sheep’s bottom to try and sort out a nasty case of colic.
Why she had to go to the stones, Tiffany did not know, but no witch
ignored what could be a summons. And the circles stood as protection.
Protection for her land – protection from what could come through . . .

She had headed up there immediately, a slight frown on her face. But
somehow, up there, on top of the Chalk, everything was right. It always
was. Even today.

Or was it? For, to Tiffany’s surprise, she had not been the only one
drawn to the old circle that day. As she spun in the crisp, clean air,
listening to the wind, the leaves dancing across her feet, she
recognized the flash of red hair, a glimpse of tattooed blue skin – and
heard a muttered ‘Crivens’ as a particularly joyful surge of leaves got
caught on the horns of a rabbit’s-skull helmet.

‘The kelda hersel’ sent me here to keep an eye on these stones,’ said
Rob Anybody from his vantage point on a rocky outcrop close by. He was
surveying the landscape as if he were watching for raiders. Wherever
they came from. _Particularly_ if they came through a circle.

‘And if any of them scuggans wants to come back and try again, we’re
always ready for them, ye ken,’ he added hopefully. ‘I’m sure we can
give them oor best Feegle hospitality.’ He drew his wiry blue frame up
to its full six inches and brandished his claymore at an invisible
enemy.

The effect, Tiffany thought, not for the first time, was quite
impressive.

‘Those ancient raiders are all long dead,’ she said before she could
stop herself, even though her Second Thoughts were telling her to listen
properly. If Jeannie – Rob’s wife and the kelda of the Feegle clan – had
seen trouble a-brewing, well, it was likely that trouble was on the way.

‘Dead? Weel, so are we,’ said Rob.fn1

‘Alas,’ Tiffany sighed. ‘In those long-ago days, mortals just died. They
didn’t come back like you seem to do.’

‘They would if they had some of our brose.’

‘What’s that?’ asked Tiffany.

‘Weel, it’s a kind of porridge with everything in it and, if possible,
ye ken, a dram of brandy or some of your old granny’s Sheep Liniment.’

Tiffany laughed, but that uneasiness remained. I need to speak to
Jeannie, she thought. Need to know why she and my boots are both feeling
the same thing.

When they arrived at the large grassy mound nearby that housed the
intricate warren of the Feegle dwelling, Tiffany and Rob made their way
over to the patch of briars which concealed the main entrance and found
Jeannie sitting outside, eating a sandwich.

Mutton, Tiffany thought with just a tinge of annoyance. She was well
aware of the agreement with the Feegles that they could have the
occasional old ewe in exchange for the fun of fightin’ off the corbies
that would otherwise swoop down on the young lambs, who were doing their
best to do what lambs did best: get lost, and get dead. The lost lambs
up on the Chalk had a new trick now – heading at speed across the downs,
sometimes _backwards_, with a Feegle under each tiny foot, as they were
returned to the flock.

A kelda needed a big appetite, for there was only one kelda in a Nac Mac
Feegle clan, and she had a lot of sons, plus the occasional lucky
daughter popping out.fn2 Each time Tiffany saw Jeannie, the little kelda
was a bit wider and a bit rounder. Those hips took _work_, and Jeannie
was certainly working hard at getting them bigger right now as she
tackled what looked like half a sheep’s leg between two bits of bread.
No mean feat for a Feegle only six inches high, and as Jeannie grew to
become a wise old kelda, the word ‘belt’ would no longer signify
something to hold up her kilt but just something to mark her equator.

Young Feegles were herding snails and wrestling. They were bouncing off
each other, off the walls, and sometimes off their own boots. They were
in awe of Tiffany, seeing in her a kind of kelda, and they stopped
brawling and looked at her nervously as she approached.

‘Line up, lads, show oor hag how hard ye ha’ been workin’,’ their mother
said with pride in her voice, wiping a smear of mutton fat off her lips.

Oh no, Tiffany thought. What am I going to see? I hope it doesn’t
involve snails . . .

But Jeannie said, ‘Let yon hag hear your ABC now. Come on, you start,
Slightly-more-wee-than-wee-Jock-Jock.’

The first Feegle in the line scratched at his spog and flicked a small
beetle out. It seems to be a fact of life that a Feegle’s spog will
always be itchy, Tiffany thought, possibly because what is kept in it
might still be alive. Slightly-more-wee-than-wee-Jock-Jock swallowed. ‘A
is for . . . _axe_,’ he bellowed. ‘To cut yer heid off, ye ken,’ he
added with a proud boast.

‘B is for _boot_!’ shouted the next Feegle, wiping something that looked
like snail slime down the front of his kilt. ‘So as to _stamp_ on yer
heid.’

‘An’ C is for _claymore_ . . . and crivens, I’ll gi’e ye sich a guid
kickin’ if’n you stick that sword intae me one muir time,’ shouted the
third, turning and hurling himself at one of his brothers.

A yellowing crescent-shaped object fell to the ground as the brawl spun
off into the brambles, and Rob snatched it up and tried to hide it
behind his back.

Tiffany narrowed her eyes. That had looked suspiciously like . . . yes,
a bit of old toenail!

‘Weel,’ said Rob, shuffling his feet, ‘ye is always cuttin’ these little
chunks off’n them old gentl’men you goes to visit most days. They fly
out o’ the winders, jus’ waitin’ for a body to pick ’em up. An’ they is
hard as nails, ye ken.’

‘Yes, that’s because they _are_ nails—’ Tiffany began, then stopped.
After all, maybe someone like old Mr Nimlet would like to know that
parts of his body were still ready for a scrap. Even if he himself
couldn’t get out of a chair without help these days.

The kelda drew her to one side now, and said, ‘Weel, hen, your name is
in the soil. It talks to you, Tir-far-thóinn, Land Under Wave. Do you
talk to it?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘Only sometimes though. But I do _listen_,
Jeannie.’

‘Not every day?’ said the kelda.

‘No, not every day. So much to do, so much to do.’

‘I ken that,’ said the kelda. ‘Ye know that I watch over you. I watch ye
in my heid, but I also see ye whizzing aboot _over_ me heid. And ye must
remember ye are a long time deid.’

Tiffany sighed, weary to her bones. Going around the houses – that was
what you did if you were a compassionate witch, what she and all the
other witches did to fill in the gaps in the world, doing things that
had to be done: carrying logs in for an old lady or popping on a pot of
stew for a dinner, bringing a herbal remedy for a sore leg or a
troublesome ache, fetching a basket of ‘spare’ eggs or second-hand
clothes for a new baby in a house where money was scarce, and listening,
oh yes, always listening to people’s troubles and worries. And the
toenails . . . those toenails, they seemed to be as hard as flint, and
sometimes an old boy without friends or family would have his toenails
twisting inside his boots.

But the reward for lots of work seemed to be lots more. If you dug the
biggest hole, they just gave you a bigger shovel . . .

‘Today, Jeannie,’ she said slowly, ‘I _did_ listen to the land. It told
me to go to the circle . . .?’ There was a question hanging in the air.

The kelda sighed. ‘I dinnae see it clear yet, but there is . . .
something not right, Tiffan,’ she said. ‘The veil between oor worlds is
thin and can be easily brake, ye ken. The stones stand, so the gateway
is nae open – and the Quin of the Elves will nae be strong after ye sent
her back to Fairyland afore. She will nae be in a hurry to get past ye
agin, but . . . I am still a-feared. I can feel it noo, like a fog
driftin’ oor way.’

Tiffany bit her lip. If the kelda was worried, she knew she should be
too.

‘Dinnae fash yesel’,’ Jeannie said softly, watching Tiffany closely.
‘Whin ye need the Feegles, we will be there. And until that time, we
will keep a watch for ye.’ She took a last bite of her sandwich, and
then gave Tiffany a different sort of look as she changed the subject.
‘Ye ha’ a young man – Preston, I think you call him. Do ye see him
much?’ Her gaze was suddenly as sharp as an axe.

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘he works hard, just like I do. Him in the
hospital and me in the Chalk.’ To her horror, she felt herself begin to
blush, the kind of blush that begins in your toes and works its way up
to your face until you look like a tomato. She couldn’t blush! Not like
a young country girl with a beau. She was a witch! ‘We write to each
other,’ she added in a small voice.

‘And is that enough? Letters?’

Tiffany swallowed. She had once thought – everyone had thought – that
she and Preston might have an Understanding, him being an educated boy,
running the new school at the barn on the Achings’ farm until he had
enough saved to go study in the big city to be a doctor. Now everyone
_still_ thought they had an Understanding, including Tiffany and
Preston. Except . . . did she have to do what everyone expected her to
do? ‘He is very nice and tells wonderful jokes and is great with words,’
she tried to explain. ‘But . . . we like our work, both of us, in fact
you might say we _are_ our work. Preston is working so hard at the Lady
Sybil Free Hospital. And I can’t help thinking about Granny Aching and
how much she liked her life, up on the downs, just her and the sheep and
her two dogs, Thunder and Lightning, and . . .’ She tailed off and
Jeannie laid a small nut-brown hand on her arm.

‘Do ye think this is the way to live, my girl?’

‘Well, I do like what I am doing and it helps people.’

‘But who helps you? That broomstick of yours flies everywhere and I
think sometimes it might burst into flames. Ye look after everybody –
but who looks after ye? If Preston is away, weel, there’s your friend
the Baron and his new wife. Surely they care about their people. Care
enough to help.’

‘They do care,’ said Tiffany, remembering with a shudder how everyone
had once also thought that she and Roland, now the Baron, had an
Understanding. Why were they so keen to try and find her a husband? Were
husbands _that_ difficult to find if she wanted one? ‘Roland is a decent
man, although not yet as good as his father became. And Letitia . . .’

Letitia, she thought. Both she and Letitia knew that Letitia could do
magic but right now was just playing the role of the young Baroness. And
she was good at it – so good that Tiffany wondered if the Being a
Baroness might come to win over Being a Witch in the end. It certainly
involved a lot less mess.

‘Already ye have done such things other folk wouldnae credit,’ Jeannie
continued.

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘there’s too much to be done and not enough people
to do it.’

The smile that the kelda gave her was a strange one. The little woman
said, ‘Do ye let them try? Ye mustn’t be afraid to ask for help. Pride
is a good thing, my girl, but it will kill you in time.’

Tiffany laughed. ‘Jeannie, you are always right. But I am a witch so
pride is in the bones.’ That brought to mind Granny Weatherwax – the
witch all the other witches thought of as the wisest and most senior of
them all. When Granny Weatherwax said things, she never _sounded_ proud
– but she didn’t need to. It was just there, built right into her
essence. In fact, whatever a witch needed in her bones, Granny
Weatherwax had it in great big shovelfuls. Tiffany hoped, one day, that
she might be that strong a witch herself.

‘Weel, that’s guid, so it is,’ said the kelda. ‘Ye’re oor hag o’ the
hills and we need oor hag to ha’ some pride. But we’d also like ye to
have a life of your ain.’ Her solemn little gaze was fixed on Tiffany
now. ‘So off ye gae and follow where the wind blows ye.’

The wind down in the Shires was angry, blowing everywhere as if it was
upset, howling around the chimneys of Lord Swivel’s mansion, which stood
surrounded by acres of parkland and could only be reached by a long
drive – ruling out visits by anyone not in possession of at least a
decent horse.

That put paid to the majority of the ordinary people thereabouts, who
were mostly farmers, and who were too busy to do any such thing anyway.
Any horse they had was generally large and hairy-legged and usually seen
attached to carts. The skinny, half-mad horses that pranced up the drive
or pulled coaches up it were normally conveying a very different class
of man: one who always had land and money, but often very little chin.
And whose wife sometimes resembled his horse.

Lord Swivel’s father had inherited money and the title from his father,
a great master builder, but he had been a drunkard and had wasted almost
all of it.fn3 Nevertheless young Harold Swivel had wheeled and dealed,
and yes, swivelled and swindled, until he had restored the family
fortune, and had added two wings to the family mansion which he filled
with expensively ugly objects.

He had three sons, which pleased him greatly in that his wife had
produced one extra over and above the usual ‘heir and spare’. Lord
Swivel liked to be one up on everyone else, even if the one up was only
in the form of a son he didn’t overly care for.

Harry, the eldest, didn’t go to school much because he was now dealing
with the estate, helping his father and learning who was worth talking
to and who wasn’t.

Number two was Hugh, who had suggested to his father that he would like
to go into the church. His father had said, ‘Only if it’s the Church of
Om, but none of the others. I’m not having no son of mine fooling around
with cultic activities!’fn4 Om was handily silent, thereby enabling his
priests to interpret his wishes how they chose. Amazingly, Om’s wishes
rarely translated into instructions like ‘Feed the poor’ or ‘Help the
elderly’ but more along the lines of ‘You need a splendid residence’ or
‘Why not have seven courses for dinner?’ So Lord Swivel felt that a
clergyman in the family could in fact be useful.

His third son was Geoffrey. And nobody quite knew what to make of
Geoffrey. Not least, Geoffrey himself.

The tutor Lord Swivel employed for his boys was named Mr Wiggall.
Geoffrey’s older brothers called him ‘Wiggler’, sometimes even to his
face. But for Geoffrey Mr Wiggall was a godsend. The tutor had arrived
with a huge crate of his own books, only too aware that some great
houses barely had a single book in them, unless the books were about
battles of the past in which a member of the family had been
spectacularly and stupidly heroic. Mr Wiggall and his wonderful books
taught Geoffrey about the great philosophers Ly Tin Weedle, Orinjcrates,
Xeno and Ibid, and the celebrated inventors Goldeneyes Silverhand
Dactylos and Leonard of Quirm, and Geoffrey started to discover what he
might make of himself.

When they weren’t reading and studying, Mr Wiggall took Geoffrey to dig
up things – old bones and old places – around the Shires, and told him
about the universe, which he previously had not thought about. The more
he learned the more he thirsted for knowledge and longed to know all
about the Great Turtle A’Tuin, and the lands beyond the Shires.

‘Excuse me, sir,’ he said to his tutor one day. ‘How did you become a
teacher?’

Mr Wiggall laughed and said, ‘Someone taught me, that’s how it goes. And
he gave me a book, and after that I would read any book that I could
find. Just like you do, young sir. I see you reading all the time, not
just in lessons.’

Geoffrey knew that his father sneered at the teacher, but his mother had
intervened, saying that Geoffrey had a star in his hand.

His father scoffed at that. ‘All he’s got in his hand is mud, and dead
people, and who cares where Fourecks is? No one ever goes there!’fn5

His mother looked tired, but took his side, saying, ‘He’s very good at
reading and Mr Wiggall has taught him three languages. He can even speak
a bit of Offleran!’

Again his father sneered. ‘Only handy if he wants to be a dentist! Ha,
why waste time on learning languages. After all, everyone speaks
Ankh-Morpork these days.’

But Geoffrey’s mother said to him, ‘You read, my boy. Reading is the way
up. Knowledge is the key to everything.’

Shortly afterwards, the tutor was sent away by Lord Swivel, who said,
‘Too much nonsense around here. It’s not as if the boy will amount to
much. Not like his brothers.’

The walls of the manor could pick up voices a long way away and Geoffrey
had heard that and thought, Well, whatever I do choose to become, I am
_not_ going to be like my father!

With his tutor gone, Geoffrey wandered about the place, learning new
things, hanging around a lot with McTavish, the stable-lad who was as
old as the hills but somehow still was known as a ‘lad’. He knew all the
bird songs in the world and could imitate them too.

And McTavish was there when Geoffrey found Mephistopheles. One of the
old nanny goats had given birth, and while she had two healthy kids,
there was a third kid hidden in the straw, a little runt which its
mother had rejected.

‘I’m going to try and save this little goat,’ Geoffrey declared. And he
spent all night labouring to keep the newborn alive, squeezing milk from
its mother and letting the little kid lick it off his finger until it
slept peacefully beside him in a broken-up bale of hay, which kept them
both warm.

He is such a small thing, Geoffrey thought, looking into the kid’s
letterbox eyes. I must give him a chance.

And the kid responded, and grew into a strong young goat with a devilish
kick. He would follow Geoffrey everywhere, and lower his head and
prepare to charge anyone he thought threatened his young master. Since
this often meant anyone within reach, many a servant or visitor found
themselves skipping rather smartly out of the way when faced with the
goat’s lowered horns.

‘Why did thee call that hell-goat Mephistopheles?’ asked McTavish one
day.

‘I read it in a book.fn6 You can tell it is a very good name for a
goat,’ Geoffrey replied.

Geoffrey grew older, turning from a little boy into a young lad and then
a bigger lad, wisely catching his father’s eye only occasionally.

Then one day McTavish saddled a horse for him and they rode over to the
fields at the edge of Lord Swivel’s estate and crept quietly to a fox’s
earth in the woods. There, as they had done many times before, they
watched the vixen play with her cubs.

‘Nice to see ’un like so,’ whispered McTavish. ‘A fox mun eat and feed
yon cubs. But they has too much of a taste for me chickens for my
liking. They kill things as matter to us, an’ so we kill them. ’Tis the
way of the world.’

‘It shouldn’t be,’ said Geoffrey, sorrow in his voice as his heart went
out to the vixen.

‘But we needs the hens and mun protect ’em. That’s why we hunts foxes,’
said McTavish. ‘I brings you here today, Geoffrey, for the time is
coming when your father will want you to join the hunt. Of yon vixen
mebbe.’

‘I understand,’ Geoffrey said. He knew about the hunt, of course, as he
had been made to watch them ride out every year since he was a baby. ‘We
must protect our hens, and the world can be cruel and merciless. But
making a _game_ of it is not right. That’s terrible! It’s just
execution. Must we kill everything? Kill a mother who is feeding her
cubs? We take so much and we give back nothing.’ He rose to his feet and
went back to his horse. ‘I do not want to hunt, McTavish. My word, I do
not like to hate – I don’t even hate my father – but the hunt I would
like to see put in a dark place.’

McTavish looked worried. ‘I think thee needs to be careful, young
Geoffrey. You knows what your father is like. He’s a bit of a
stick-in-the-mud.’

‘My father is not a stick-in-the-mud; he is the mud!’ Geoffrey said
bitterly.

‘Well then, if you tries talking to him – or your mother – mebbe he
might understand that you are not ready to join the hunt?’

‘No point,’ said Geoffrey. ‘When he has made up his mind, you cannot get
through to him. I hear my mother crying sometimes – she doesn’t like to
be seen crying, but I know she cries.’

Then it was, as he looked up to watch a hawk hovering, that he thought
to himself: There is freedom. Freedom is what I want.

‘I would like to fly, McTavish,’ he said, adding, ‘Like the birds. Like
Langas.’fn7

And almost immediately, he saw a witch flying overhead on a stick,
following the hawk, and he pointed up and said, ‘I want one of those. I
want to be a witch.’

But the old man said, ‘It’s not for thee, boy. Everybody knows men can’t
be witches.’

‘Why not?’ asked Geoffrey.

The old man shrugged and said, ‘Nobody knows.’

And Geoffrey said, ‘I want to know.’

On the day of Geoffrey’s first hunt he trotted out with the rest,
pale-faced but determined, and thought, This is the day I must try to
stand up for myself.

Soon the local gentry were galloping across the countryside, some taking
it to the extreme by careering into ditches, through hedges or over
gates, often minus their mounts, while Geoffrey carefully held his
position well to the back of the throng, until he could slip away
unnoticed. He circled the woods in the opposite direction to the hunt,
his heart aching, especially when the baying of the hounds turned to
joyous yelps as the prey was brought down.

Then it was time to return to the house. There, everyone was at that
happy stage of a hunt where ‘tomorrow’ is a word that still means
something and you have a mug of hot beverage that is liberally laced
with something not too dissimilar to Tiffany’s grandmother’s Special
Sheep Liniment. A reward for the returning heroes! They had survived the
hunt. _Huzzah!_ They swigged and swilled and the drink ran over their
non-existent chins.

But Lord Swivel looked at Geoffrey’s horse – the only animal not to be
lathered in sweat with its legs besplattered in mud – and his wrath was
unquenchable.

Geoffrey’s brothers held him while his mother looked on imploringly, but
to no avail. She averted her face as Lord Swivel smeared vixen’s blood
on Geoffrey’s face.

His lordship was almost incandescent in his rage. ‘Where _were_ you? You
should have _been_ there at the kill!’ he roared. ‘You will do this,
young man – and like it! I had to do it when I was young, and so did my
father before me. And so will you. It is a tradition. Do you understand?
Every male member of our family has been blooded at your age. Who are
you to say it’s wrong? I’m ashamed of you!’

There it came, the swish of the crop, across Geoffrey’s back.

Geoffrey, his face dripping with the vixen’s blood, looked to his
mother. ‘She was a beautiful thing! Why kill her in such a way? For
fun?’

‘Please don’t upset your father,’ his mother pleaded.

‘I see them in the woods, and you just hunt them. Can you eat them? No.
We – the unspeakable – chase and kill what we cannot eat, just for the
blood. For fun.’

_Swish._

It hurt. But Geoffrey was suddenly full of . . . what? All at once he
had the amazing feeling that things could be _made_ right, and he told
himself, I could do it. I know I can. He drew himself up to his full
height and shook himself free of his brothers’ grasp.

‘I must thank you, Father,’ he said with unexpected vigour. ‘I have
learned something important today. But I won’t let you hit me again –
never – and nor will you see me again unless you can change. Do you
understand me?’ His tone was oddly formal now, as if befitting the
occasion.

Harry and Hugh looked at Geoffrey with a kind of awe and waited for the
explosion, while the rest of the hunt, which had given Lord Swivel space
in which to deal with his son, stopped pretending that they weren’t
watching. The world of the hunt was out of kilter, the air frozen but
somehow contriving also to seem to hold its breath.

In the charged silence, Geoffrey led his horse off to the stables,
leaving Lord Swivel standing there like a stone.

He gave the horse some hay, took off its saddle and bridle, and was
rubbing the beast down when McTavish walked up to him and said, ‘Well
done, young Geoffrey.’ Then, surprisingly outspoken, the stable-lad
added under his breath, ‘You stood up for yourself, right enough. Don’t
let that bastard grind thee down.’

‘If you talk like that, McTavish, my father could turn you out,’
Geoffrey warned. ‘And you like it here, don’t you?’

‘Well, lad, you’re right there. I’m too old to be changing my ways now,
I reckon,’ McTavish replied. ‘But you stood your ground and no man could
do better nor that. I expect thee’ll be leaving us now, Master
Geoffrey?’

‘Alas, yes,’ said Geoffrey. ‘But thank you, McTavish. I hope my father
doesn’t take it out on you for talking to me.’

And the oldest stable-lad in the world said, ‘He won’t do that, no,
never, not while I’m still useful like. Anyways, after all these years,
I know him – like one of them volcanee things, he is. Powerful dangerous
explosions for a while, and no care for who gets caught by the red-hot
boulders spewing every which way, but it still blows out in the end.
Smart folks just keep out of sight until it’s over. You’ve been very
pleasant and respectful to me, Master Geoffrey. I reckons you take after
your mother. A lovely lady, always so good to me and so helpful when my
Molly was dying. I remember that. And I’ll remember you too.’

‘Thank you,’ said Geoffrey. ‘And I will remember you.’

McTavish lit up a most enormous pipe and the smoke billowed. ‘I reckon
you’ll be wanting to take away that dratted goat of yourn.’

‘Yes,’ said Geoffrey. ‘But I don’t think I have any say in the matter –
Mephistopheles will make up his own mind. He usually does.’

McTavish gave him a sideways look. ‘Got any food, Master Geoffrey? Got
any money? I reckon you won’t want to go into the house now. I tell you
what, I’ll loan thee a bit o’ cash till you finds out where you wants to
be.’

‘No!’ said Geoffrey. ‘I can’t possibly!’

‘I’m your friend, Master Geoffrey. Like I said, your mother has been
good to me and I owes her a lot. You come back and see her sometime. And
when you do that, just make sure you look up old McTavish.’

Geoffrey went to fetch Mephistopheles and hitched him up to the little
cart McTavish had made for him. He loaded a few things into the cart,
picked up the reins, clicked his tongue and they set off out of the
stable yard.

As the goat’s dainty hooves echoed down the drive, McTavish said to
himself, ‘How does the boy do it? That hell-goat kicks the arse of
everybody who comes here. But not Geoffrey.’

If Geoffrey had looked back, he would have seen his mother’s beseeching
look as she sobbed, while his father still stood there like a statue,
amazed at such defiance. His brothers made as if to follow, but halted
when they saw the rage in their father’s eyes.

And so Geoffrey and his goat went off to find a new life. Now, he
thought, as they rounded the first of the drive’s many bends and he rode
into his future, I’ve got nowhere to go.

But the wind whispered, ‘Lancre.’

In Lancre, it hadn’t been a good day for Granny Weatherwax. A young
lumberjack at work higher up in the Ramtop mountains had nearly severed
his own foot. And on a day when the resident Igor was elsewhere so
unable to patch him up. When Granny arrived at the camp on her rickety
old broomstick she immediately saw that the lad was in an even worse
mess than she had expected. He had been doing his best to look brave in
front of his mates, who were clustered around him trying to cheer him
up, but she could see the pain in his face.

As she examined the damage, he cried out for his mother.

‘You, lad,’ Granny said sharply, turning a piercing look on the nearest
of his mates. ‘You know where this lad’s family live?’ And at the boy’s
scared nod – a witch’s pointy hat often seemed to make young lads
suddenly very scared – she went on, ‘Go then. Run. Tell the lady I’m
bringing her son back and she’ll need hot water on and a clean bed.
_Clean_, mind.’ And as the boy raced off, Granny glared at the others
standing sheepishly around. ‘You others,’ she said sharply, ‘don’t just
stand around. Make a stretcher from some of that there wood lying about
so’s I can take your friend there.’

The lad’s foot was all but hanging off and his boot was full of blood.
Granny gritted her teeth, and set to with everything in her armoury and
all the knowledge accumulated over many years, quietly, gently, taking
his pain away from him, drawing it into herself to hold until she could
release it.

His face came alive and his eyes sparkled and he started chatting to the
witch like an old friend. She cleaned and she stitched, all the while
telling the lad what she was doing in a cheerful and calm voice before
giving him what she called ‘a little tincture’. To the onlookers it
looked like the boy was almost himself again when they brought to her a
rather makeshift stretcher and found the lad dreamily telling Granny how
to get to his home.

The habitations of the lumberjacks up in the mountains were often no
better than sheds and it turned out the boy – a lad by the name of Jack
Abbott – and his mother lived in one of these. It was a rickety little
hut held together more with dirt than with anything else, and when
Granny Weatherwax arrived outside with the stretcher lashed underneath
her broomstick, she frowned, wondering how this lad’s injury could
possibly be kept clean in such surroundings. The mother ran out to her
boy and flapped around as the lad who had run down to her with the news
helped Granny carry the stretcher inside and move the boy onto a pallet
onto which the mother had heaped blankets to create a bed fit for an
invalid.

Granny Weatherwax said quietly to the injured boy, ‘You lie right there
and don’t get up.’ And to the distraught mother, who was wringing her
hands and making noises about paying something, she said, ‘No payment
necessary, mistress – that’s not how we witches work – and I’ll come
back to see him in a few days, and if I can’t make it then send for Mrs
Ogg. I know boys, and your son’ll want to be up and doing as soon as
possible, but mark my words, bed rest is the thing for him now.’

The boy’s mother stared at Granny and said, ‘Thank you so much,
Mrs . . . um . . . well, I ain’t never had need to call on a witch
before, and I’ve heard some folks round here say witches do nasty
things. But I can tell ’em now as I ain’t seen nothing of that sort.’

‘Really?’ said Granny, struggling to keep her temper. ‘Well, I would
like to do some nasty things to the overseer for not keeping an eye on
these lads, and don’t you let that man tell your boy to get up until I
do. If he does, tell him that Granny Weatherwax will be after him for
using these young men who don’t really know how to climb trees. I’m a
good witch, as it happens, but if I find your boy working before that
foot is healed there will be a reckoning.’

As the mother waved Granny away she said, ‘I will pray to Om for you,
Mrs Weatherwax.’

‘Well, do tell me what he says,’ said Granny sharply. ‘And that’s
_Mistress_ Weatherwax, thank you. But if you’ve got some old clothing I
could take back with me when I come again – well, that _would_ help.
I’ll see you in a day or so, along with your boy. And mind you keep that
wound _clean_.’

You, Granny’s white cat, was waiting for her when she arrived back at
her cottage, along with several people wanting potions and poultices.
One or two were looking for advice but generally people were careful not
to ask Granny Weatherwax, as she had a tendency to dish out advice
whether wanted or not, such as the wisdom of not giving little Johnny
hand-made soldiers until he was old enough to know not to stuff them up
his nose.

She bustled around for another hour, dishing out medicaments to person
after person, and it was only much later that she realized that although
she had fed the cat, obviously, she herself had had nothing to eat or
drink since the dawn. So she heated up some pottage – not a great meal,
but it filled her up.

Then she lay on her bed for a while, even though sleeping in the daytime
was something that only very grand ladies did, and so Granny Weatherwax
allowed herself not forty winks but just the one. After all, there were
always more people to see and things to do.

Then she pulled herself up, and despite it being now quite late she went
out and cleaned the privy. And she scrubbed it. She scrubbed it so hard
that she could see her face in it . . .

But somehow, in the shimmering water, her face could also see her, and
she sighed and said, ‘Drat, and tomorrow was going to be a much better
day.’

fn1 The Feegles believed to a man that they had to be dead, as the world
they now lived in was grand, filled as it was with so many opportunities
for stealin’ and fightin’ and boozin’. A land fit for dead heroes.

fn2 Sometimes literally, since a kelda usually gave birth to about seven
Feegle babies at a time. Jeannie herself had produced a daughter in
amongst her first brood.

fn3 Lord Swivel’s father reckoned it was no waste, and that he had
thoroughly enjoyed drinking the family fortune. At least, he thought
this until he drank so much he fell over and met a gentleman with a
decided lack of flesh on his bones and the definitive addition of a
scythe a good few years earlier than he should have done.

fn4 He knew, too, that gods could sometimes make inconvenient requests.
He had an associate who had chosen to follow the crocodile god Offler
and then found he had to keep an aviary of tooth-cleaning birds handy to
fulfil his god’s dental whims.

fn5 Very true, but a lot of people _came from_ Fourecks, as is often the
case with a Place-That-Nobody-Has-Ever-Heard-Of. They just never
bothered to go back again.

fn6 Thus proving that books can teach you much, if only to give you a
good name for a devilish smart goat.

fn7 The legend of Pilotus and his son Langas, who wanted to fly like the
birds, was known by every well-educated boy. They did indeed build
themselves wings by sewing together feathers and thistledown. The boy at
least flew a little way, but his elderly and portly father crashed. The
moral of the story is: understand what you are doing before you do it.


[image]
CHAPTER 2


A Voice in the Darkness

IT WAS A bright sunny day, thought Granny Weatherwax, a perfect day in
fact. She had been up all night and cleaned the hall and kitchen in her
cottage until everything that could shine was shining – the stove
polished, the rag rug shaken and the flagstones scrubbed.

She moved up her corkscrew staircase and concentrated next on the floor
in the bedroom. She had made some very good soap this year,fn1 and the
jug and little wash basin by the bed were gleaming. The spiders in the
corners, who had thought they had tenure unto Doomsday, were carefully
shown the window, webs and all. Even the mattress looked clean and
wholesome. Every so often You, her cat, appeared to see what was going
on, and to lie on the patchwork quilt that was so flat it looked like
someone had trodden on a huge tortoise.

Then Granny cleaned the privy once again, just for good measure. Not an
errand for a fine day, but Esmerelda Weatherwax was meticulous in these
things and the privy yielded to her efforts and, yes, it shone.
Amazingly so.

Watching her, the intensity that showed on her cat’s face was
remarkable. This was a different day, You sensed. A day not yet
experienced. A day that bustled as if there would never be another day,
and with the inside of the cottage up to scratch, You now followed
Granny into the scullery.

A bucket of water, filled from the pump by the well, did the trick
there. Granny smiled. She had always liked the scullery. It smelled of
hard work being done properly. Here there were also spiders, mostly
hiding around the bottles and jars on the shelves, but she thought
scullery spiders didn’t really count. Live and let live.

She went outside next, to the walled paddock at the back of the cottage,
to check on her goats. The itinerary of her thinking was declaring that
once again all things were in their rightful place.

Satisfied, or as satisfied as a witch ever could be, Granny Weatherwax
went to her beehives.

‘You are my bees,’ she said to them. ‘Thank you. You’ve given me all my
honey for years, and please don’t be upset when someone new comes. I
hope that you will give her as much honey as you have given me. And now,
for the last time, I will dance with you.’ But the bees hummed softly
and danced _for_ her instead, gently pushing her mind out of their hive.
And Granny Weatherwax said, ‘I was younger when I last danced with you.
But I am old now. There will be no more dances for me.’

You kept away from the bees, but stalked through the garden, following
Granny as she moved through the herbs, touching a frond or a leaf as she
passed, and the whole garden seemed to answer her, the plants almost
nodding their heads in respect.

You narrowed her eyes and looked sideways at the plants with what might
be called feline disfavour. An onlooker might swear Granny’s herbs were
sapient, as they often moved without the wind blowing. On at least one
occasion, to the cat’s horror, they had actually turned round to watch
her as she sneaked past on a hunting expedition. She preferred plants
that did what they were told, which was mostly to stay dead still so
that she could go back to sleep.

At the far end of the herbs, Granny came to the apple tree old Mr
Parsons had given her only last year, planting it roughly where anyone
else would have a fence around their garden – for no witch’s cottage
ever needed an actual fence or wall. Who would cross a witch? The wicked
old witch in the woods? Sometimes stories can be useful for a witch
without, it must be said, any fence-building skills. Granny eyed the
tiny apples appearing on the bough – they had only just begun to grow
and, well, time was waiting. And so she walked again back to her cottage
door, acknowledging every root, stem and fruit she passed.

She fed the goats, who looked at her askance with their slotted eyes.
Their gaze followed her as she turned to the chickens, who always
squabbled over their feed. Today, however, they didn’t squabble, but
looked at the old witch as if she wasn’t there.

With the animals fed, Granny Weatherwax went into the scullery and came
back with a switch of willows. She got to work, teasing every piece of
resilient willow into the right place. Then, when the thing she had made
was clearly excellent and fit for purpose, Granny Weatherwax left it
near the foot of the stairs where it would be noticed, for those with
eyes to see.

She tidied the remnants of her work back to the scullery and came out
again with a small bag. A white one. And a red ribbon coiled in her
other hand. She looked to the sky. Time was wasting.

She walked briskly into the woods, You trailing behind, curious as only
a cat can be until at least the first eight of its lives have been used
up. Then, her task completed, Granny Weatherwax retraced her steps
towards the little stream which ran through the woods close by. It
gurgled and tinkled.

She knew the woodlands. Every log. Every bough. Every creature that
lived in there. More intimately than anyone not a witch could ever know.
When her nose told her there was no one around apart from You, she
opened the bag, took out a bar of her soap and undressed.

She stepped into the stream, getting as clean as could be. And now,
drying herself off and wrapping just her cloak around her washed body,
she went back to the cottage, where she gave You an extra meal, stroked
her head, and climbed the squeaking staircase to her bedroom, humming an
old dirge as she went.

Then Esmerelda Weatherwax brushed out her long grey hair and repinned it
into its usual bun with an army of pins, and dressed again, this time
choosing her best witch’s dress and least-mended pair of drawers. She
paused to open the little wooden window to the soft evening air and
carefully placed two pennies on the small bedside table, beside her
pointy witch’s hat festooned with unused hatpins.

The last thing she did before she lay down was to pick up a familiar
card she had written on earlier.

And a little later, when the cat jumped up onto the bed, it appeared to
You that something strange was happening. She heard an owl hoot, and a
fox barked in the darkness.

And there was just the cat, You. All alone.

But if cats could smile, this one did.

It was a strange night; the owls hooted almost non-stop, and the wind
outside for some reason made the wicks of the candles inside wobble with
a vengeance and then blow out; but Granny Weatherwax was dressed in her
best and ready for anything.

And now in the deep warm darkness, as dawn began to stealthily steal the
night, her soul had a visitor, an individual with a scythe – a scythe
with a blade so shadow-thin that it could separate a soul from a body.

Then the darkness spoke.

ESMERELDA WEATHERWAX, YOU KNOW WHO COMES, AND MAY I SAY IT’S A PRIVILEGE
TO DEAL WITH YOU.

‘I know it is you, Mister Death. After all, we witches always knows
what’s coming,’ said Granny, looking down at her body on the bed.

Her visitor was no stranger, and the land she knew she was going to was
a land she had helped many others to step through to over the years. For
a witch stands on the very edge of everything, between the light and the
dark, between life and death, making choices, making decisions so that
others may pretend no decisions have even been needed. Sometimes they
need to help some poor soul through the final hours, help them to find
the door, not to get lost in the dark.

And Granny Weatherwax had been a witch for a long, long time.

ESMERELDA WEATHERWAX, WE HAVE MET SO MANY TIMES BEFORE NOW, HAVEN’T WE?

‘Too many to count, Mister Reaper. Well, you’ve finally got me, you old
bugger. I’ve had my season, no doubt about it, and I was never one for
pushing myself forward, or complaining.’

I HAVE WATCHED YOUR PROGRESS WITH INTEREST, ESMERELDA WEATHERWAX, said
the voice in the dark. He was firm, but oh so polite. But now there was
a question in his voice. PRAY TELL ME, WHY WERE YOU CONTENT TO LIVE IN
THIS TINY LITTLE COUNTRY WHEN, AS YOU KNOW, YOU COULD HAVE BEEN ANYTHING
AND ANYBODY IN THE WORLD?

‘I don’t know about the world, not much; but in my part of the world I
could make little miracles for ordinary people,’ Granny replied sharply.
‘And I never wanted the world – just a part of it, a small part which I
could keep safe, which I could keep away from storms. Not the ones of
the sky, you understand: there are other kinds.’

AND WOULD YOU SAY YOUR LIFE BENEFITED THE PEOPLE OF LANCRE AND ENVIRONS?

After a minute the soul of Granny Weatherwax said, ‘Well, not boasting,
your willingness, I think I have done right, for Lancre at least. I’ve
never been to Environs.’

MISTRESS WEATHERWAX, THE WORD ‘ENVIRONS’ MEANS, WELL, THEREABOUTS.

‘All right,’ said Granny. ‘I did get about, to be sure.’

A VERY GOOD LIFE LIVED INDEED, ESMERELDA.

‘Thank you,’ said Granny. ‘I did my best.’

MORE THAN YOUR BEST, said Death. AND I LOOK FORWARD TO WATCHING YOUR
CHOSEN SUCCESSOR. WE HAVE MET BEFORE.

‘She’s a good witch, to be sure,’ said the shade of Granny Weatherwax.
‘I have no doubts whatsoever.’

YOU ARE TAKING THIS VERY WELL, ESME WEATHERWAX.

‘It’s an inconvenience, true enough, and I don’t like it at all, but I
know that you do it for everyone, Mister Death. Is there any other way?’

NO, THERE ISN’T, I’M AFRAID. WE ARE ALL FLOATING IN THE WINDS OF TIME.
BUT YOUR CANDLE, MISTRESS WEATHERWAX, WILL FLICKER FOR SOME TIME BEFORE
IT GOES OUT – A LITTLE REWARD FOR A LIFE WELL LIVED. FOR I CAN SEE THE
BALANCE AND YOU HAVE LEFT THE WORLD MUCH BETTER THAN YOU FOUND IT, AND
IF YOU ASK ME, said Death, NOBODY COULD DO ANY BETTER THAN THAT . . .

There was no light, no point of reference except for the two tiny blue
pinpricks sparkling in the eye sockets of Death himself.

‘Well, the journey was worth taking and I saw many wonderful things on
the way, including you, my reliable friend. Shall we go now?’

MADAM, WE’VE ALREADY GONE.

In the early morning light, in a village pond near Slice, bubbles came
to the surface, followed by Miss Tick, witch-finder. There was no one
there to observe this remarkable occurrence, apart from her mule,
Joseph, grazing steadily on the river bank. Of course, she told herself
sadly as she picked up her towel, they all leave me alone these days.

She sighed. It was such a shame when old customs disappeared. A good
witch-ducking was something she had liked doing in the bad old days –
she had even _trained_ for it. All those swimming lessons, and practice
with knots at the Quirm College for Young Ladies. She had been able to
defeat the mobs under water if necessary. Or at least work at breaking
her own record for untying the simple knots they all thought worked on
the nasty witch.

Now, a bit of pond-dipping had become more like a hobby, and she had a
nasty feeling that others were copying her after she passed through
their villages. She’d even heard talk of a swimming club being started
in one small hamlet over by Ham-on-Rye.fn2

Miss Tick picked up her towel to dry herself off and went back to her
small caravan, gave Joseph his breakfast nosebag and put the kettle on.
She settled down under the trees to have her snap – bread and dripping,
a thank-you the day before from a farmer’s wife for an afternoon’s
knowledge of reading. Miss Tick had smiled as she left because the eyes
of the rather elderly woman had been sparkling – ‘Now,’ she had said, ‘I
can see what’s in those letters Alfred gets, especially the ones that
smell of lavender.’ Miss Tick wondered if it might be a good idea to get
moving soon. Before Alfred got another letter anyway.

Her stomach filled, ready for the day ahead, she sensed an uneasiness in
the air, so there was nothing for it but to make a shamble.

A shamble is a witch’s aid to inner concentration and always has to be
made right there and then, when needed, to catch the moment. It could be
made of pretty much anything, but had to include something alive. An egg
would do, though most witches would prefer to save the egg for dinner,
in case it exploded on them. Miss Tick dug in her pockets. A woodlouse,
a dirty handkerchief, an old sock, an ancient conker, a stone with a
hole in it, and a toadstool which Miss Tick couldn’t quite identify and
so couldn’t risk eating. She expertly strung them all together with a
bit of string and a spare length of knicker elastic.

Then she _pulled_ at the threads. But there _was_ something wrong. With
a _twang_ that reverberated around the clearing, the tangle of objects
threw itself into the air and spun, twisting and turning.

‘Well, that’s going to complicate things,’ Miss Tick groaned.

Just across the woods from Granny Weatherwax’s cottage, Nanny Ogg nearly
dropped a flagon of her best home-made cider on her cat, Greebo. She
kept her flagons of cider in the shady spring by her cottage. The tomcat
considered a growl, but after one look at his mistress he tried to be a
good boy, for the normally cheerful face of Nanny Ogg was like thunder
this morning.

And he heard her mutter, ‘It should have been me.’

In Genua, on a royal visit with her husband Verence, Queen Magrat of
Lancre, former witch, discovered that even though she might think she
had retired from magic, magic had not retired from her. She shuddered as
the shock wave was carried across the world like a tsunami, an
intimation that things were going to be . . . otherwise.

In Boffo’s Novelty and Joke Emporium in Ankh-Morpork, all the whoopee
cushions trumpeted in a doleful harmony; while over in Quirm, Agnes
Nitt, both witch and singer, woke with the sinking feeling known to many
that she might have made a fool of herself at the previous evening’s
first-night party.fn3 It certainly still seemed to be going on behind
her eyeballs. Then she suddenly heard her inner Perdita wail . . .

Over in the great city of Ankh-Morpork, at Unseen University, Ponder
Stibbons had just finished a lengthy breakfast when he entered the
basement of the High Energy Magic Building. He stopped and gaped in
amazement. In front of him, Hex was calculating at a speed that Ponder
had never seen before. And he hadn’t even entered a question yet! Or
pulled the Great Big Lever. The ant tubes that the ants crawled through
to make their calculations were blurred with their motion. Was
that . . . was that an _ant crash_ by the cogwheel?

Ponder tapped a question into Hex: What do you know that I don’t?
Please, Hex.

There was a scuffling in the anthills and the answer spat out:
_Practically everything_.

Ponder rephrased his question more carefully with the requisite number
of IF and BEFORE clauses. It was wordy and complicated, a huge ask for a
wizard with only one meal in him, and no one else would have understood
what Ponder even meant, but after a big hiccough of ants, Hex shot out:
_We are dealing with the death of Granny Weatherwax._

And then Ponder went to see the Archchancellor, Mustrum Ridcully, who
would definitely want to hear this news . . .

In the Oblong Office of the Patrician of Ankh-Morpork, Lord Vetinari
watched amazed as his _Times_ crossword filled itself in . . .

High above the Ramtops, in the monastery of Oi Dong, the Abbot of the
History Monks licked his mystic pencil and made a note of it . . .

The cat called You purred like a kind of feline windmill.

And in the travelling now, Eskarina, a woman who had once been a wizard,
held the hand of her son and knew sorrow . . .

But in a world shimmering just the other side of the Disc, a world where
dreams could become real – where those who lived there liked to creep
through to other worlds and hurt and destroy and steal and poison – an
elf lord by the name of Peaseblossom felt a powerful quiver shoot
through the air, as a spider might feel a prey land on his web.

He rubbed his hands in glee. A barrier has gone, he whispered to
himself. They will be weak . . .

Back on the Chalk the kelda of the Wee Free Men watched her fire flicker
and thought, The witch of witches is away to the fair lands.

‘Mind how ye go, Hag o’ hags. Ye’ll be sore missed.’ She sighed then
called to her husband, the Big Man of the clan. ‘Rob, I’m afeared for
oor big wee hag. She is going to ha’ need of ye. Gae to her, Rob. Take a
few of the lads and get ye awa’ to her.’

Jeannie bustled into her chamber to fetch her cauldron. The edges of oor
world will nae be as strong, she said to herself. I need to ken what may
be comin’ oor way . . .

And far away, in some place unthinkable, a white horse was being
unsaddled by a figure with a scythe with, it must be said, some sorrow.

fn1 Granny’s soap was like her advice: strong and sharp and it stung a
bit at the time, but it worked.

fn2 A popular idea among the young lads, since they felt that everyone –
and ‘everyone’ definitely included the young ladies – should swim
without their clothes.

fn3 Though Agnes does have the very handy excuse that if she behaves
badly, it might not be _Agnes_ doing the Devil-Amongst-the-Pictsies
dance on the table, but her other personality, Perdita, who is much more
outgoing and, incidentally, a lot thinner.


[image]
CHAPTER 3


An Upside-down World

IN A SMALL cottage in a little hamlet on the rolling fields of the
sheep-haunted Chalk, Tiffany Aching had her sleeves rolled up and was
sweating just as much as the mother-to-be – a young girl only a few
years older than she herself was – who was leaning on her. Tiffany had
already helped more than fifty babies into the world, plus lots and lots
of lambs, and was generally held to be an expert midwife.

Unfortunately, Miss Milly Standish’s mother and several other women of
varying ages, who had all claimed to be relatives and asserted their
right to a place in the very small room, thought they were experts
themselves and were generously telling Tiffany what she was doing wrong.

Already one or two of them had given her old-fashioned advice, wrong
advice and possibly dangerous advice, but Tiffany kept her calm, tried
not to shout at anybody and concentrated on dealing with the fact that
Milly was having twins. She hoped that people couldn’t hear her teeth
grinding.

It was always going to be a difficult birth with two boisterous babies
fighting one another to be the first out. But Tiffany was focused on the
new lives, and she would _not_ allow Mr Death a place in this room.
Another sweating push from the young mother, and first one and then
another baby came yelling into the world to be handed to their
grandmother and a neighbour.

‘Two lads! How wonderful!’ said Old Mother Standish with a distinct note
of satisfaction.

Tiffany wiped her hands, mopped her brow and continued to look after the
mother while the crowd cooed over the new arrivals. And then she noticed
something. There was another child in that capacious young woman. Yes, a
third baby was arriving, hardly noticed because of the battling brothers
ahead of it.

Just then, Tiffany looked down and in a slight greenish-yellow haze saw
a cat, pure white and as aloof as a duchess, staring at her. It was
Granny Weatherwax’s cat, You – Tiffany knew the cat well, having given
her to Granny Weatherwax herself only a few years ago. To her horror one
of the older ladies went to shoo You away. Tiffany almost screamed.

‘Ladies, that cat belongs to Granny Weatherwax,’ she said sharply. ‘It
might not be a good idea to make a _very senior_ witch angry.’

Suddenly the gaggle backed away. Even here on the Chalk, the name of
Mistress Weatherwax worked a treat. Her reputation had spread far and
wide, further and wider than Granny Weatherwax had been in the habit of
travelling herself – the dwarfs over in Sto Plains even had a name for
her that translated as ‘Go Around the Other Side of the Mountain’.

But Tiffany, sweating again, wondered why Granny’s cat was _here_.
Usually You would be hanging around Granny Weatherwax’s cottage back in
Lancre, not all the way down here on the Chalk. Witches saw omens
everywhere, of course. So was it some kind of omen? Something to do with
what Jeannie had said? Not for the first time, she wondered how it was
that cats seemed to be able to be in one place one moment, and then
_almost at the same time_, reappear somewhere else.fn1

There was a cry of pain from the young mother and Tiffany gritted her
teeth and turned her attention back to the job in hand. Witches do the
task that is in front of them and what was in front of her right at that
moment was a struggling young mother and another small head.

‘One big push, Milly, please. You’re having triplets.’

Milly groaned.

‘Another one. A small one,’ said Tiffany cheerfully, as a girl child
arrived, unscathed, quite pretty for a newborn and small. She handed the
baby girl to another relative, and then reality was back again.

As Tiffany began clearing up, she noticed – because noticing was the
ground state of her being as a witch – that there was a lot more cooing
over the two boys than there was for their sister. It was always good to
recognize those things and put them away and keep them in mind, so that
a little trouble wouldn’t, one day, become a larger trouble.

The ladies had produced the family groaning chair for Milly, so that she
could sit in state to receive the congratulations of the throng. They
were also busy congratulating each other, nodding sagely about the
advice given which had, clearly, been the _right_ advice since here was
the evidence. Two strapping boys! Oh, and a little girl.

Bottles were opened, and a child was fetched and told to go across the
fields to find Dad, who was working on the barley with _his_ dad. Mum
was beaming, especially since young Milly was very soon to be _Mrs_
Robinson, because Mum had put her foot down very, very hard about that
and made certain that young Mister Robinson was definitely going to do
his duty by her girl. There hadn’t been a problem about this; this was
the country after all, where boy would meet girl, as Milly had met her
beau at Hogswatch, and nature would eventually take its course, right up
until the moment when the girl’s mother would notice the bump. She would
then tell her husband and her husband, over a convivial pint of beer,
would have a word with the boy’s father, who would then talk to the boy.
And usually it worked.

Tiffany went over to the old lady holding the little girl. ‘Can I see
her for just a moment, please, just to see if she’s, you know, if she’s
all right?’

The rather toothless old crone handed over the little girl with
alacrity. After all, she knew that Tiffany, apart from being a midwife,
was a witch, and you never knew what a witch might do if you got on the
wrong side of one. And when the old granny went to get her share of the
drink, Tiffany took the child in her arms and whispered a promise to her
in a voice so low that no one could have heard. This little girl would
clearly need some luck in her life. And with luck, now, she would get
some. She took her back to her mother, who didn’t seem very impressed
with her.

By now, Tiffany noticed, the little boys had names, but the girl didn’t.
Worried about this, Tiffany said, ‘What about your girl? Can’t she have
a name?’

The mother looked over. ‘Name her after yourself. Tiffany is a nice
name.’

Tiffany was flattered, but it didn’t take the worry away about baby
Tiffany. Those big, strapping boys were going to get most of the milk,
she thought. But not if she could do something about it, and so she
decided that this particular family was going to be visited almost every
week for a time.

Then there was nothing for it, but to say, ‘Everything looks fine, you
know where to find me, I’ll pop in and see you next week. And if you’ll
excuse me, ladies, I have other people to see.’

She kept on smiling, right up to the time when she came out of the
cottage, picked up her broomstick and the white cat leaped onto the
handle of it like a figurehead. The world is changing, Tiffany thought –
I can feel it.

Suddenly she caught a flash of the red that showed a Feegle or two
lurking behind a milk churn. Tiffany had, if only for a few days, once
been the kelda of the Nac Mac Feegle, and this created a bond between
them that could never be broken. And they were _always there_ – always,
watching over her, making sure no harm came to their big wee hag.

But there was something different today. This lurking was somehow not
like their usual lurking, and . . .

‘Oh, waily waily,’ came a voice. It was Daft Wullie, a Feegle who had
been somewhere else when the brains of a Feegle – small enough to begin
with – had been handed out. He was shut up suddenly with a ‘whmpf’ as
Rob slapped a hand over his mouth.

‘Shut yer gob, Wullie. This is hag business, ye ken,’ he said, stepping
out to stand in front of Tiffany, shuffling his feet and twiddling his
rabbit-skull helmet in his hands. ‘It’s the big hag,’ he continued.
‘Jeannie tol’ me to come fetch ye . . .’

All the birds of the day, the bats and the owls of the night knew
Tiffany Aching and didn’t fly in her way when she was busy, and the
stick ploughed on through the air to Lancre. The little kingdom was a
long flight from the Chalk and Tiffany found her mind filling up with an
invisible grey mist, and in that thought there was nothing but grief.
She could feel herself trying to push back time, but even the best
witchcraft could not do that. She tried not to think, but it’s hard to
stop your brain working, no matter how much you try. Tiffany was a
witch, and a witch learned to respect her forebodings, even if she hoped
that what she feared was not true.

It was early evening by the time she settled her broomstick down quietly
outside Granny Weatherwax’s cottage, where she saw the unmistakable
rotund shape of Nanny Ogg. The older witch had a pint mug in one hand
and looked grey.

The cat, You, jumped off the broomstick instantly and headed into the
cottage. The Nac Mac Feegles followed, making You scuttle just a little
faster in that way cats scuttle when they want to look like, oh yes, it
was _their_ decision to speed up and, oh no, _nothing_ to do with the
little red-haired figures melting into the shadows of the cottage.

‘Good to see you, Tiff,’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘She’s dead, isn’t she?’ said Tiffany.

‘Yes,’ said Nanny. ‘Esme’s gone. In her sleep, last night, by the looks
of it.’

‘I knew it,’ said Tiffany. ‘Her cat came to tell me. And the kelda sent
Rob . . .’

Nanny Ogg looked Tiffany in the face and said, ‘Glad to see you’re not
cryin’, my dear; that’s for later. You knows how Granny wanted things:
no fuss or shoutin’, and definitely no cryin’. There’s other things as
must be done first. Can you help, Tiff? She’s upstairs and you know what
them stairs is like.’

Tiffany looked and saw the long, thin wicker basket that Granny had
made, waiting by the stairs. It was almost exactly the same size as
Granny. Minus her hat, of course.

Nanny said, ‘That’s Esme for you, that is. Does everything for ’erself.’

Granny Weatherwax’s cottage was largely built of creaks, and you could
play a tune with them if you wanted to. With accompaniment from the
harmonious woodwork, Tiffany followed Nanny Ogg as she huffed and puffed
up the cramped little staircase that wound up and round like a snake –
Nanny always said that you needed a corkscrew to get through it – until
they arrived at the bedroom and the small, sad deathbed.

It could, Tiffany thought, have been the bed of a child, and there, laid
out properly, was Granny Weatherwax herself, looking as if she was just
sleeping. And there too, on the bed by her mistress, was You the cat.

There was a familiar card on Granny’s chest, and a sudden thought struck
Tiffany like a gong.

‘Nanny, you don’t suppose Granny could just be Borrowing, do you? Do you
think that while her body is here, her actual self is . . . elsewhere?’
She looked at the white cat curled upon the bed and added hopefully, ‘In
You?’

Granny Weatherwax had been an expert at Borrowing – moving her mind into
that of another creature, using its body, sharing its experiences.fn2 It
was dangerous witchery, for an inexperienced witch risked losing herself
in the mind of the other and never coming back. And, of course, whilst
away from one’s body, people could get the wrong idea . . .

Nanny silently picked up the card from Granny’s chest. They looked at it
together:

[image]

Nanny Ogg turned it over as Tiffany’s hand crept towards Granny
Weatherwax’s wrist and – even now, even when every atom of her witch
being told her that Granny was no longer there – the young girl part of
her tried to feel for even the slightest beat of life.

On the back of the card, however, there was a scrawled message that
pretty much put the final strand in the willow basket below.

[image]

Quietly Tiffany said, ‘No longer “probably”.’ And then the rest of the
note rocketed into her mind. ‘What? What does she mean by “All of it
goes to Tiffany . . .”?’ Her voice tailed off as she looked at Nanny
Ogg, aghast.

‘Yes,’ said Nanny. ‘That’s Granny’s writing, right enough. Good enough
for me. You gets the cottage and the surroundin’ grounds, the herbs and
the bees an’ everything else in the place. Oh, but she always promised
me the pink jug and basin set.’ She looked at Tiffany and went on, ‘I
hopes you don’t mind?’

_Mind?_ Tiffany thought. Nanny Ogg is asking _me_ if I mind? And then
her mind rattled on to: _Two_ steadings? I mean, I won’t need to live
with my parents . . . But it will be a lot of travel . . . And the main
thought hit her like a thunderbolt. _How can I possibly tread in the
footsteps of Granny Weatherwax? She is . . . was . . . unfollowable!_

Nanny didn’t get to be an old senior witch without learning a thing or
two along the way. ‘Don’t get your knickers in a knot just yet, Tiff,’
she said briskly. ‘It won’t solve anything an’ will just make you walk
odd. There’s plenty of time later to talk about . . . all of that. Right
now, we needs to get on with what must be done . . .’

Tiffany and Nanny had dealt with death many times. Out in the Ramtops,
witches did the things that had to be done to make the departed
presentable for the next world – the slightly messy things that weren’t
talked about, and other little things like opening a window for the soul
to get out. Granny Weatherwax had, in fact, already opened the window,
though her soul, Tiffany thought, could probably get out of anywhere and
go anywhere she chose.

Nanny Ogg held up the two pennies from the bedside table and said, ‘She
left ’em ready for us. Just like Esme, thoughtful to the end like. Shall
we begin?’

Unfortunately Nanny had brought Granny Weatherwax’s bottle of
triple-distilled peach brandy – for medicinal use _only_ – from the
scullery; she said it would help her as she went through the rites for
their sister in the craft, and although they dealt with Granny
Weatherwax as if she were a precious gem, Nanny Ogg’s drinking was not
helping.

‘She looks good, don’t she?’ said Nanny after the nasty bits – and,
thank goodness, Granny had still had all her own teeth – were over and
done with. ‘It’s a shame. Always thought as I’d be the first to go, what
with my drinkin’ and suchlike, especially the suchlike. I’ve done a lot
o’ that.’ In fact, Nanny Ogg had done a great deal of _everything_, and
was commonly held to be so broad-minded that you could pull her mind out
through her ears and tie a hat on with it.

‘Is there going to be a funeral?’ asked Tiffany.

‘Well, you know Esme. She wasn’t one for that kind of thing – never one
to push herself forwardfn3 – and we witches don’t much like funerals.
Granny called them fuss.’

Tiffany thought of the only other witch’s funeral she had been to. The
late Miss Treason, for whom she had worked, had wanted a lot of fuss.
She hadn’t wanted to miss the event herself either, so she had sent out
invitations in advance. It had been . . . memorable.

As they put Granny Weatherwax to bed – as Granny had called it – Nanny
said, ‘Queen Magrat has to be told. She’s away in Genua at the moment
with the King, but I daresay as she’ll be along soon as possible, what
with all these railways and whatnot. Anyone else as needs to know will
probably know already, you mark my words. But first thing tomorrow,
before they get here, we’ll bury Esme the way she wanted, quiet-like an’
no fuss, in that wickerwork basket downstairs. Very cheap, wickerwork
baskets are, and quick to make, Esme always said. An’ you know Esme,
she’s such a frugal person – nothing goes to waste.’

Tiffany spent the night on the truckle bed, a tiny thing which was
usually pushed away when it wasn’t needed. Nanny Ogg had settled for the
rocking chair downstairs, which squeaked and complained every time she
rocked back. But Tiffany didn’t sleep. There were a series of
half-sleeps as the light of the moon filtered into the room, and every
time she looked up there was You, the cat, asleep at the foot of
Granny’s bed, curled up like a little white moon herself.

Tiffany had watched the dead before many times, of course – it was the
custom for a departing soul to have company the night before any funeral
or burial, as if to make a point to anything that might be . . .
lurking: this person _mattered_, there is someone here to make sure
nothing evil creeps in at this time of danger. The night-time creaking
of woodwork filled the room now and Tiffany, fully awake, listened as
Granny Weatherwax began making sounds of her own as her body settled
down. I’ve done this often, she told herself. It’s what we witches do.
We don’t talk about it, but we do it. We watch the dead to see that no
harm comes to them out of the darkness. Although, as Nanny said, maybe
it’s the _living_ you have to watch – for despite what most people
thought, the dead don’t hurt anybody.

What do I do now? she thought in the small hours of the night. What’s
going to happen tomorrow? The world is upside down. I can’t replace
Granny. Never in a hundred years. And then she thought, What did young
Esmerelda say when Nanny Gripes told her that her steading was the whole
world?

She twisted and turned, then opened her eyes and looked up suddenly to
see an owl gazing in at her from the windowsill, its huge eyes hanging
in the darkness like a lantern to another world. Another omen? Granny
had liked owls . . .

Now her Second Thoughts were at work, thinking about what she was
thinking. You can’t say you’re not good enough – no witch would ever say
that, they told her. I mean, you know you are pretty good, yes; the
senior witches know that you once threw the Queen of the Fairies from
our world, and they saw you go through the gate with the hiver. They all
saw you return too.

But is that _enough_? her First Thoughts butted in. After . . . after we
have done what we need to do, I could just put on my number-two drawers
and go home on my broomstick. I have to go anyway, even if I take on the
steading. I have to tell my parents. And I’m going to need help on the
Chalk . . . it’s going to be a nightmare if I have to be in two places
at once. I’m not like a cat . . .

And as she thought that, she looked down, and there was You looking at
her, but not just looking – a penetrating stare of the kind that only
cats can achieve, and it seemed to Tiffany that this meant: Get on with
your job, there is a lot of work to be doing. Don’t think of yourself.
Think for all.

Then tiredness was finally her friend, and Tiffany Aching had a few
hours’ sleep.

The clacks rattled as the news of Granny Weatherwax went down the lines
in the morning, and people who got the message faced it in their various
ways.

In the study of her manor house, Mrs Earwigfn4 got the news while she
was writing her next book on ‘Flower Magick’ and there was a sudden
sense of wrongness, of the world going askew. She put the right
expression of grief on her face and went to tell her husband, an elderly
wizard, trying to keep her joy hidden as she realized what this could
mean: she, Mrs Earwig, was going to be one of the most senior witches in
Lancre. Perhaps she could get her latest girl into that old cottage in
the woods? Her sharp face went even sharper as she thought how
_magickal_ she could make it look with the help of a few curse-nets,
charms, runic symbols, silver stars, black velvet drapes and – oh yes,
the _essential_ crystal ball.

She called to her latest young trainee to fetch her cape and broomstick,
and pulled on her very best pair of black lacy gloves, the ones with the
silver symbols stitched over each fingertip. She would need to Make an
Entrance . . .

In Boffo’s Novelty and Joke Emporium, 4 Tenth Egg Street, Ankh-Morpork –
‘_Everything for the Hag in a Hurry_’ – Mrs Proust said, ‘What a shame,
but the old girl had a good innings.’

Witches don’t have leaders, of course, but everyone knew that Granny
Weatherwax had been the best leader they didn’t have, so now someone
else would need to step forward to generally _steer_ the witches. And to
keep an eye too on anyone prone to a bit of cackling.

Mrs Proust put down an imitation cackle she had taken from her _Compare
the Cackle_ display, and looked towards her son Derek and said, ‘There’s
going to be an argument now, or my name’s not Eunice Proust. But it will
surely be young Tiffany Aching who gets that steading. We all saw what
she can do. My word, we did!’ And in her mind, she said, Go to it,
Tiffany, before somebody else does.

In the palace, Drumknott the clerk hurried with the _Ankh-Morpork Times_
to the Oblong Office where Lord Vetinari, the Patrician of the city, had
been waiting for his daily crossword to arrive.

But Vetinari already knew the news that mattered. ‘There will be some
trouble. Mark my words, I expect squabbling on the distaff side.’ He
sighed. ‘Any ideas, Drumknott? Who will rise to the top of the brew, do
you think?’ He tapped the top of his ebony cane as he considered his own
question.

‘Well, my lord,’ said Drumknott, ‘the rumour on the clacks is that it’s
likely to be Tiffany Aching. Quite young.’

‘Quite young, yes. And any good?’ asked Vetinari.

‘I believe so, sir.’

‘What about this woman called Mrs Earwig?’

Drumknott made a face. ‘All show, my lord, doesn’t get her hands dirty.
Lot of jewellery, black lace, you know the type. Well-connected, but
that’s about all I can say.’

‘Ah yes, now you tell me, I’ve seen her. Pushy and full of herself.
She’s the kind who goes to soirees.’

‘So do you, my lord.’

‘Yes, but I am the tyrant, so it’s the job I have to do, alas. Now, this
Aching young lady – what else do we know about her? Wasn’t there some
bother the last time she was in the city?’

‘My lord, the Nac Mac Feegles are very fond of her and she of them. They
consider themselves an honour guard to her on occasions.’

‘Drumknott.’

‘Yes, my lord?’

‘I’m going to use a word I’ve not used before. Crivens! We don’t want
Feegles around here again. We can’t afford it!’

‘Unlikely, my lord. Mistress Aching has them in hand and she’s unlikely
to want to repeat the events of her last visit, which after all had no
long-lasting damage.’

‘Didn’t the King’s Head become the King’s Neck?’fn5

‘Yes indeed, my lord, but it has in fact proved a welcome change to
many, most of all to the publican, who is still getting wealthy because
of the tourists. It’s in the guide books.’

‘If she has the Nac Mac Feegles on her side, she is a force to be
reckoned with,’ Vetinari mused.

‘The young lady is also known to be thoughtful, helpful and clever.’

‘Without being insufferable? I wish I could say the same of Mrs Earwig.
Hmm,’ said Vetinari, ‘we should keep a careful eye on her . . .’

Mustrum Ridcully, Archchancellor of Unseen University, stared at his
bedroom wall, and cried again, and once he’d pulled himself together he
sent for Ponder Stibbons, his right-hand wizard.

‘The clacks confirms what Hex told you, Mr Stibbons,’ he said sadly.
‘The witch Esme Weatherwax of Lancre, known to many as Granny
Weatherwax, has died.’ The Archchancellor looked slightly embarrassed.
There was a bundle of letters on his lap, which he was turning over and
over. ‘There was a bond, you see, when we were both young, but she
wanted to be the best of all witches and I hoped one day to be
Archchancellor. Alas for us, our dreams came true.’fn6

‘Oh dear, sir. Would you like me to arrange your schedule so that you
can attend the funeral? There will _be_ a funeral, I assume . . .’

‘Mr Stibbons, schedules be damned. I am leaving now. Right now.’

‘With respect, Archchancellor, I must tell you, sir, that you promised
to go to a meeting with the Guild of Accountants and Usurers.’

‘Those penny-pinchers! Tell them that I have got an urgent matter of
international affairs to deal with.’

Ponder hesitated. ‘That is not strictly true, is it, Archchancellor.’

Ridcully riposted with, ‘Oh yes, it is!’ Rules were for other people.
Not for him. Nor, he thought with a pang, had they been for Esme
Weatherwax . . . ‘How long have you been working for the University,
young man?’ he boomed at Stibbons. ‘Dissembling is our stock in trade.
Now I am going to get on my broomstick, Mr Stibbons, and I will leave
the place in your very capable hands.’

And in that . . . other world, that parasite with its evil little hooks
in the gateways of stone, an elf was hatching his plans. Plotting to
seize Fairyland from the control of a Queen who had never fully
recovered her powers after her humiliating defeat at the hands of a
young girl named Tiffany Aching. Plotting to pounce, to spring through a
gateway that – for a time, at least – would be gossamer-thin. For a
powerful hag no longer stood in their way. And those in that world would
be vulnerable.

The Lord Peaseblossom’s eyes gleamed and his mind filled with glorious
images of victims, of the pleasures of cruelty, the splendours of a land
where the elves could toy once more with new playthings.

When the moment was right . . .

fn1 She did not know it, but a keen young philosopher in Ephebe had
pondered exactly that same conundrum, until he was found one morning –
most of him, anyway – surrounded by a number of purring, and very well
fed, cats. No one had seemed keen to continue his experiments after
that.

fn2 And its meals. It’s amazing how a night as an owl, snacking on
voles, can _really_ leave a nasty taste in your mouth.

fn3 She hadn’t ever needed to. Granny Weatherwax was like the prow of a
ship. Seas parted when she turned up.

fn4 Pronounced Ah-wij.

fn5 The only known instance of the Feegles rebuilding a pub they had
drunk dry and demolished. The rebuilt version, however, turned out back
to front. Complete with a big ripe boil on the neck in question.

fn6 Thus proving that dreams that come true are not always the _right_
dreams. Does wearing a glass slipper lead to a comfortable life? If
everything you touch turns into marshmallows, won’t that make things a
bit . . . sticky?


[image]
CHAPTER 4


A Farewell – and a Welcome

GETTING GRANNY WEATHERWAX’S corpse down the winding stair with its tiny
little steps in the tiny little cottage the following morning was not
helped by the big jug of cider which Nanny Ogg was emptying speedily,
but nevertheless they got it done without a bump.

They laid Granny’s body carefully in the wicker casket, and Tiffany went
out to the barn to fetch the wheelbarrow and shovels while Nanny Ogg
caught her breath. Then, together, they gently lifted the basket into
the wheelbarrow, and placed the shovels on either side of her.

Tiffany picked up the handles of the barrow. ‘Ye stay here now, Rob,’
she said to the Feegle as he and his little band appeared from their
varied hiding places and lined up behind her. ‘This is a hag thing, ye
ken. Ye cannot help me.’

Rob Anybody shuffled his feet. ‘But ye are oor hag, and ye ken that
Jeannie—’ he began.

‘Rob Anybody.’ Tiffany’s steely gaze pinned him to the ground. ‘Ye
remember the chief hag? Granny Weatherwax? Do ye want her shade to come
back and . . . _tell ye what tae do for ever and ever?_’ There was a
group moan and Daft Wullie backed away, whimpering. ‘Then _understand
this_: this is something we hags must do by ourselves.’ She turned to
Nanny Ogg, resolute. ‘Where are we going, Nanny?’

‘Esme marked a spot in the woods, Tiff, where she wanted to be planted,’
Nanny replied. ‘Follow me, I know where it is.’

Granny Weatherwax’s garden was cheek by jowl with the woodland beyond,
but the journey felt a long way to Tiffany before they arrived at the
heart of the forest where a stick was pushed into the ground, a red
ribbon tied to the top of it.

Nanny passed Tiffany a shovel and the two of them started digging in the
cool early morning air. It was hard work, but Granny had chosen her
place well and the soil was soft and friable.

The hole finally dug – mostly, it has to be said, by Tiffany – Nanny
Ogg, sweating cobs (according to her), rested on the handle of her
shovel and took a swig from her flagon as Tiffany brought the
wheelbarrow over. They laid the wicker basket gently in the hole and
then stood back for a moment.

Without a word being said, together, solemnly, they bowed to Granny’s
grave. And then they picked up the shovels again and started to fill it
back in. _Ker-thunk! Ker-thunk!_ The earth built up over the wicker
until all that could be seen was soil, and Tiffany watched it flow in
until the last crumb had stopped moving.

As they smoothed the fresh mound of earth, Nanny told Tiffany that
Granny had said she wanted no urns, no shrines and definitely no
gravestone.

‘Surely there should be a stone,’ said Tiffany. ‘You know how badgers
and mice and other creatures can lift the earth. Even though we know the
bones are not her, I for one would want to be sure that nothing is dug
up until . . .’ She hesitated.

‘The ends of time?’ said Nanny. ‘Look, Tiff, Esme tol’ me to say, if you
wants to see Esmerelda Weatherwax, then just you look around. She is
here. Us witches don’t mourn for very long. We are satisfied with happy
memories – they’re there to be cherished.’

The memory of Granny Aching suddenly shone in Tiffany’s mind. Her own
granny had been no witch – though Weatherwax had been very interested in
hearing about her – but when Granny Aching had died, her shepherding hut
had been burned and her bones had gone down into the hills, six feet
deep in the chalk. Then the turf had been put back with the spot marked
only by the iron wheels of the hut. But it was a _sacred_ spot now, a
place for memories. And not only for Tiffany. No shepherd ever passed
without a glance at the skies and a thought for Granny Aching, who had
tramped those hills night after night, her light zigzagging in the
darkness. Her nod of approval had meant the world on the Chalk.

This spot in the woods, Tiffany realized, would be the same. Blessed. It
had been a nice day for it, she thought, if there ever was such a thing
as a good day to die, a good day to be buried.

And now the birds were singing overhead, and there was a soft rustling
in the undergrowth, and all the sounds of the forest which showed that
life was still being lived blended with the souls of the dead in a
woodland requiem.

The whole forest now sang for Granny Weatherwax.

Tiffany saw a fox sidle up, bow and then run away because a wild boar
had arrived, with its family of piglets. Then there was a badger, paying
no heed to those who had come earlier, and it remained, and Tiffany was
astounded when creature after creature settled down near the grave and
sat there as if they were domestic pets.

Where is Granny now? Tiffany wondered. Could a part of her still
be . . . here? She jumped as something touched her on the shoulder; but
it was just a leaf. Then, deep inside, she knew the answer to her
question: _Where is Granny Weatherwax?_

It was: _She is here – and everywhere._

To Tiffany’s surprise, Nanny Ogg was weeping gently. Nanny took another
swig from her flagon and wiped her eyes. ‘Cryin’ helps sometimes,’ she
said. ‘No shame in tears for them as you’ve loved. Sometimes I remember
one of my husbands and shed a tear or two. The memories’re there to be
treasured, and it’s no good to get morbid-like about it.’

‘How many husbands have you actually had, Nanny?’ asked Tiffany.

Nanny appeared to be counting. ‘Three of my own, and let’s just say I’ve
run out of fingers on the rest, as it were.’ But she was smiling now,
perhaps remembering a _very_ treasured husband, and then, bouncing back
from the past, she was suddenly her normal cheerful self again. ‘Come
on, Tiff,’ she said, ‘let’s go back to _your_ cottage. Like I always
says, a decent wake don’t happen by itself.’

As they made their way back to the cottage, Tiffany asked Nanny the
question which had been burning in her mind. ‘What do you think will
happen next?’

Nanny looked at Tiffany. ‘What do you mean?’

‘Well, Granny wasn’t exactly the head witch . . . except that most
people thought she was . . .’

‘There ain’t no such thing as a head witch, Tiff, you know that.’

‘Yes, but . . . if Granny’s not here any more, do you become the
not-head-witch?’

‘Me?’ Nanny Ogg laughed. ‘Oh no, dear, I’ve had a very good life, me,
lots of children, lots of men, lots of fun and, yes, as witches go, I’m
pretty good. But I never thought of steppin’ into Esme’s shoes. Ever.’

‘Well, who is, then? Someone’s got to.’

Nanny Ogg scowled and said, ‘Granny never said as she was better than
others. She just got on with it and showed ’em and people worked it out
for themselves. You mark my words, the senior witches will get together
soon enough to talk about this, but I know who Granny would choose – and
it’s as I would too.’ She stopped and looked serious for a moment. ‘It’s
you, Tiff. Esme’s left you her cottage. But more’n that. You must step
into the shoes of Granny Weatherwax or else’n someone less qualified
will try an’ do it!’

‘But— I can’t! And witches don’t have leaders! You’ve just _said_ that,
Nanny!’

‘Yes,’ said Nanny. ‘And you must be the best damn leader that we don’t
have. Don’t look at me sideways like that, Tiffany Aching. Just think
about it. You didn’t try to earn it, but earn it you has, and if you
don’t believe me, believe Granny Weatherwax. She tol’ me that you was
the only witch who could seriously take her place, she said that on the
night after you run with that hare.’

‘She never said anything to me,’ said Tiffany, feeling suddenly very
young.

‘Well, she wouldn’t say nothing, o’ course she wouldn’t,’ said Nanny.
‘That’s not Esme’s way, you know that. She would have given a grunt, and
maybe said, “Well done, girl.” She just liked people to know their own
strengths – and your strengths are formidable.’

‘But, Nanny, you are older, more experienced, than me – you know lots
more!’

‘And some of it I wants to forget,’ said Nanny.

‘I’m far too young,’ Tiffany wailed. ‘If I wasn’t a witch, I’d still
just be thinking of _boyfriends_.’

Nanny Ogg almost jumped on her. ‘You’re not too young,’ she said. ‘Years
ain’t what’s important here. Granny Weatherwax said to me as you is the
one who’s to deal with the future. An’ bein’ young means you’ve got a
lot of future.’ She sniffed. ‘Lot more’n me, that’s for sure.’

‘But that’s not how it works,’ Tiffany said. ‘It ought to be a senior
witch. It has to be.’ But her Second Thoughts then leaped up in her
head, challenging her. Why? Why not do things differently? Why should we
do things how they have always been done before? And something inside
her suddenly thrilled to the challenge.

‘Huh!’ Nanny retorted. ‘You danced with the hare to save the lives of
your friends, my girl. Do you remember being so . . . angry that you
picked up a lump of flint and let it dribble between your fingers as if
it was water? All the senior witches were there, and they took their
hats off to you. You! Hats!’ She stomped off towards the cottage, with
just one parting shot. ‘And remember, You chose you. That cat there, she
went to _you_ when Esme up and left.’

And there the white cat was, sitting on the stump of an old birch,
preening herself, and Tiffany wondered. Oh yes, she wondered.

Just as they got back to the cottage, a dishevelled but very large
wizard was trying to land his broomstick by the goat shed.

‘It is good of you to come, Mustrum,’ Nanny Ogg shouted across the
garden, as the gentleman smoothed down his robes, trod carefully past
the herbs and doffed his hat to them – Tiffany noticed with glee that he
had tied it onto his head with string. ‘Tiff, this is Mustrum Ridcully,
Archchancellor of Unseen University.’

Tiffany had only met one or two wizards, and they had mostly been of the
type that relied on the robes, pointy hat and staff to make their point,
hoping that they never had to actually _do_ anything magical. On the
face of it, Ridcully looked exactly the same – beard, big staff with a
knob on the top, a pointy hat . . . wait, a pointy hat with a _crossbow_
tucked into the hatband? The witch side of her stepped back and watched
carefully. But Ridcully was not interested in her at all. To her
astonishment, the Archchancellor actually appeared to be _crying_.

‘Is it true, then, Nanny? Has she really gone?’

Nanny gave him a handkerchief and as he blew noisily into it, she
whispered to Tiffany, ‘He and Esme were, well, you know, good friends
when they were younger.’ She winked.

The Archchancellor seemed to be overcome. Nanny handed him her flagon.
‘My famous remedy, your worship. Best to drink it down in one great
gulp. Works a right treat for melancholy, it does. Whenever I’m a bit
unsure of myself I drinks a lot of it. Medicinal use only, o’ course.’

The Archchancellor took the flagon, swigged down a couple of gulps in
one go and then flourished it at Nanny. ‘Here’s to Esmerelda Weatherwax
and lost futures,’ he said in a voice choked with sorrow. ‘May we all go
round again!’ He removed his hat, unscrewed the pointy bit and brought
out a small bottle of brandy and a cup. ‘For you, Mrs Ogg,’ he boomed.
‘And now, may I see her, please?’

‘We have laid her down already, where she wanted to rest,’ said Nanny.
‘You know how it is. She didn’t want no fuss.’ She looked at him, and
continued, ‘I’m very sorry about that, Mustrum, but we’ll take you to
the spot where she is now. Tiffany, why don’t you lead the way?’

And thus the most important wizard in the world respectfully followed
Tiffany and Nanny Ogg through the woods to the last resting place of the
most important witch in the world. The trees surrounding the little
clearing were full of birds, singing their souls out. Nanny and Tiffany
held back to allow the wizard a private moment by the grave. He sighed.
‘Thank you, Mistress Ogg, Mistress Aching.’

Then the Archchancellor turned to Tiffany and looked at her properly.

‘For the sake of Esmerelda Weatherwax, my dear, if you ever need a
friend, you can call on me. Being the most important wizard in the world
must mean _something_.’ He paused. ‘I have heard of you,’ he said, and
at her gasp, he added, ‘No, don’t be surprised. You must know that we
wizards keep an . . . eye on what you witches do. We know when the magic
is disturbed, when something . . . _happens_. And so I heard about the
flint. Was it true?’ His voice was brusque now – a man who did not do
small talk, only big talk, and in a big voice too.

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘All of it.’

‘My word,’ said Ridcully. ‘And now I feel certain that your future is
going to be, let us say, very speckled. I can see the signs in you,
Mistress Tiffany Aching – and I know many people of power, people who
have so much power that they don’t have to wield it. You are hardly into
your prime, yet I see this in you, and so I live in wonder about what
you might do next.’ His face now fell and he continued, ‘Would you
ladies now leave me alone with my feelings. I am sure I can find my way
back to the cottage.’

Later on, the Archchancellor walked back to his broomstick and Tiffany
and Nanny Ogg watched him disappear in the general direction of
Ankh-Morpork. The broomstick itself was wobbling about as he rose over
the woods in a final salute.

Nanny smiled. ‘He is a wizard. He can be sober when he likes, and if he
ain’t, well, he can fly a broomstick well enough with a brandy or two
inside him. After all, there’s not much to bump into up there!’

As the morning progressed, more and more people were coming to pay their
respects at the little cottage. The news had spread, and it seemed like
everybody wanted to leave a gift for Granny Weatherwax. For the witch
who had always been there for them, even if they hadn’t actually _liked_
her. Esme Weatherwax hadn’t done nice. She’d done what was _needed_.
She’d been there for them when they called at the cottage, she’d come
out at whatever time of day or night when asked (and sometimes when
_not_, which hadn’t always been comfortable), and somehow she had made
them feel . . . safer. They brought hams and cheeses, milk and pickles,
jams and beer, bread and fruit . . .

It also seemed that broomsticks were coming through the trees from
everywhere, and there was nothing a witch appreciated more than a bit of
free food – Tiffany caught one elderly witch trying to stuff an entire
chicken up her knickers. And as the witches turned up, the villagers
began to melt away. It didn’t do to be around that many witches. Why
risk it? Nobody wanted to be turned into a frog – after all, who would
bring in the harvest then? They started to make their excuses and sidle
off, with those who had partaken of Nanny Ogg’s famous cocktails sidling
in a rather wobbly fashion.

None of the witches had been invited, but it seemed to Tiffany they had
been drawn there, just like the Archchancellor. Even Mrs Earwig turned
up. She came in a carriage and pair, complete with black plumes, and her
arms jingled with bangles and charms – as if the percussion section of
an orchestra had suddenly fallen off a cliff – while her hat was
festooned in silver stars. Her husband was dragged along beside her.
Tiffany felt sorry for the man.

‘Hail, sisters, and may the runes protect us on this momentous
occasion,’ Mrs Earwig pronounced, _just_ loud enough to be heard by the
remaining villagers – she did like to advertise her witchiness. She gave
Tiffany a long stare, which infuriated Nanny Ogg.

Nanny made the briefest possible bow, then turned and said, ‘Look,
Tiffany, here’s Agnes Nitt. Wotcha, Agnes!’

Agnes – a witch with a waistline that suggested she had a similar
attitude to eating as the Feegles’ kelda – was out of breath, saying,
‘I’ve been touring in Stackpole’s _Much Ado About Everybody_. I was in
Quirm when I heard and I came as fast as I could.’

Tiffany hadn’t met Agnes before, but from one look at her sensible face
and good-natured smile, she thought she would probably get along with
her very well indeed. Then she was overcome with delight as a broomstick
wobbled down to land and she heard the familiar ‘Um’ of her friend
Petulia.

‘Um, Tiffany, I heard you were here. Um, do you want some help with
making any sandwiches?’ Petulia offered, waving a big side of bacon as
she landed. Petulia was married to a pig farmer and was acknowledged to
be Lancre’s best pig-borer.fn1 She was also one of Tiffany’s very best
friends. ‘Dimity is here too, and, um, Lucy Warbeck,’ Petulia continued
– the ‘um’s always got worse when she was in the company of other
witches; amazingly, she never used the word when pig-boring, which had
to say something about Petulia and pigs.

Tiffany and Nanny Ogg’s grandsons had put up some makeshift tables.
After all, everybody knows what a funeral is really for and most people
like eating and drinking whatever the occasion. There was music, and
over it all, Agnes’s heavenly voice. She sang the ‘Columbine Lament’,
and as its soft tune wafted over the roof and into the forest beyond,
Nanny said to Tiffany, ‘That voice could make the trees cry.’

And there was dancing, no doubt helped along by Nanny Ogg’s brews. Nanny
Ogg could get any party singing and dancing. It was a gift, Tiffany
thought. Nanny could jolly up a graveyard if she put her mind to it.

‘No long faces for Granny Weatherwax, please,’ Nanny proclaimed. ‘She’s
had a good death at home, just as anyone might wish for. Witches know
that people die; and if they manages to die after a long time, leavin’
the world better than they went an’ found it, well then, that’s surely a
reason to be happy. All the rest of it is just tidyin’ up. Now, let’s
dance! Dancin’ makes the world go round. And it goes round even faster
with a drop o’ my home liquor inside you.’

Up in the roof of Granny’s cottage, swinging from the boughs of the
little tree that grew out of the thatch, the Nac Mac Feegles – Rob
Anybody, Daft Wullie, Big Yan and the gonnagle, Awf’ly Wee Billy Bigchin
– were in agreement with the latter part of that statement, though they
were keeping the dancing for later, mind. They stayed mostly out of
sight, spotted only by one or two of the more observant witches, but now
they came down to the scullery where Tiffany was starting on what the
elderly, more senior witches always expected the younger girls to do –
clearing up. The senior witches were beginning to gather together
outside; it was time to discuss the appointment of a new incumbent to
Granny Weatherwax’s steading, and Tiffany wanted to keep out of the way
while she thought about what she might say.

As the haunting tones of Awf’ly Wee Billy Bigchin’s mousepipes played a
soft lament for the soul of the hag o’ hags, the other Feegles began
raiding the tables for any leftovers the witches had missed.

‘Alas, poor Granny, I knew her well,’ sighed Big Yan, swigging from a
bottle of Nanny’s home-made hooch.

‘No you didn’t,’ Tiffany snapped. ‘Only Granny Weatherwax really knew
Granny Weatherwax.’ The day was still too raw for her, and the witches
outside were making her nervous.

‘Ha ha,’ laughed Daft Wullie. ‘It weren’t me, this time, Rob. Nae me
what put my foot in it. I sez the hag were upset, Rob, didnae I?’

‘I’ll put my _boot_ inta yer face if ye don’t shut up,’ Big Yan growled.
They’d had the drinkin’ and eatin’, postponed the dancin’, but wasn’t it
time for a wee fight? He clenched his fists, but then had to suddenly
retreat as Tiffany’s friends came into the scullery.

‘I think it’s going to be _you_, Tiffany,’ Dimity hissed, poking her in
the back. ‘Nanny Ogg just stood up and asked for you. You’d better get
out there.’

‘Go on, Tiff,’ Petulia urged. ‘Everyone knows, um, what Granny
Weatherwax thought of you . . .’

And so, pushed and pulled by her friends, Tiffany left the scullery, but
she hovered by the back door of the cottage, unwilling to take that
final step. To make a claim. This was _Granny’s_ cottage, she still
felt. Even though the not-Grannyness was beginning to feel like a huge
hole in the air around her. Tiffany looked down at her feet; You was
twining around her legs, arching her back and rubbing her hard little
head against Tiffany’s boot.

Outside, some of the witches were looking at Nanny Ogg, who was saying,
‘Yes, ladies, Esme did tell us who her successor was to be.’ She turned
and gestured to Tiffany to come nearer. ‘I wish I’d been there,’ she
added, ‘when Esme Weatherwax was made witch by Nanny Gripes. You think
who makes you a witch is the kind of witch you’re goin’ to become, but
we all has to find our own way, as we go along like. Granny Weatherwax
was always her own true witch self – never just another Nanny Gripes.
And though I think we can all talk for ourselves, people like the
Archchancellor, and Lord Vetinari, and indeed someone like the Low Queen
of the dwarfs – well, they want to know sometimes that they can talk to
somebody who can speak, officially like, for all witches. And I’m pretty
certain they looked on Esme as bein’ that voice of witchcraft. So we
needs to listen to her voice too. And she _tol_’ me who her successor
should be. Yes, and wrote it on this here card.’ Nanny brandished in the
air the card Granny Weatherwax had left on her bedside chest.

Someone had clearly raised the idea of Mrs Earwig taking over the
steading – or Mrs Earwig had raised the prospect of her latest trainee
getting the cottage. Nanny glared at her, and there was no trace of the
jolly witch in her now, oh no.

‘Letice Earwig just makes shiny things for her would-be witches!’ she
stated. She ignored the ‘Humph’ from Mrs Earwig as she continued, ‘But
Tiffany Aching – yes, sisters, _Tiffany Aching_ – we’ve all seen what
_she_ can do. It’s not about shiny charms. Not about _books_. It’s about
bein’ a witch to the bone in the darkness, an’ dealing with the
lamentation an’ the tears! It’s about bein’ _real_. Esme Weatherwax knew
this, knew this with every bone in her body. And so does Tiffany Aching,
and this steadin’ is _hers_.’

Tiffany gasped as the other witches turned to look at her. And as the
muttering began, she stepped forward hesitantly.

Then You meowed, the cry cutting through the murmuring in the crowd, and
the white cat came again to Tiffany’s side. Suddenly there was a humming
in the air, and the bees were there too. They flowed out of Granny
Weatherwax’s hive, circling Tiffany like a halo, crowning her, and swarm
and girl stood on the threshold of the cottage and Tiffany reached out
her arms and the bees settled along them, and welcomed her home.

And after that, on that terrible day when a farewell was said to the
witch of witches, there was no more argument as Tiffany Aching became in
all eyes the witch to follow.

fn1 Pig-boring saved a lot of nasty squealing. A pig-borer, like
Petulia, would talk to the pigs until they simply died of boredom.


[image]
CHAPTER 5


A Changing World

THE QUEEN OF the Elves sat in state on a diamond throne in her palace,
surrounded by her courtiers, foundlings and lost boys, and creeping
creatures with no names – all the detritus of the fairy folk.

She had chosen to sparkle today. The everlasting sunlight shining
through the exquisitely carved stone windows had been pitched exactly to
strike the tiny gems on her wings so that delicate rainbows of light
danced around the audience chamber as she moved. The courtiers lounging
about the place in lace-trimmed velvet and feathers were almost, but not
quite, as beautifully dressed.

Her eyes slid sideways, ever alert to the actions of her lords and
ladies. Was that Lord Lankin over there in the corner with Lord
Mustardseed? Whispering . . . And where was Lord Peaseblossom? One day,
she thought, she would have _his_ head on a pole! She didn’t trust him
at all, and his glamour had been strong of late, almost as glorious as
her own. Or, she reminded herself bitterly, as glorious as her own had
been . . . _before_.

Before that young witch – Tiffany Aching – had come into Fairyland and
humiliated _her_.

Lately she had felt shivers between their two worlds, understood that
things were shifting, the edges becoming more blurred. Softer. A few of
the stronger elves had even been slipping through from time to time for
a little mischief. Perhaps soon she could lead the elves on a proper
raiding party . . . fetch another child to play with. Have her revenge
on the Aching witch. The Queen smiled at the thought, licking her lips
in anticipation of the fun ahead.

But for now there was other troubling news to deal with. _Goblins!_ Mere
worms, who should be grateful if an elvish lord or lady even looked
their way, but who were now foolishly refusing to do her bidding. She
would show them all, she thought. Lords Lankin, Mustardseed,
Peaseblossom – they would all see how powerful she was again. They would
see her strike down this goblin filth . . .

But where _was_ Peaseblossom?

The goblin prisoner was brought into the audience chamber under guard.
The whole effect was visually stunning, the goblin thought sourly.
Exactly as a fairy court would look in a human child’s story book. Until
you looked at the faces and realized that there was something not quite
right about the eyes and the expressions of the beautiful creatures in
the scene.

The Queen considered the goblin for a while, resting her fine-boned chin
on the fingers of one exquisitely thin hand. Her alabaster brow
furrowed.

‘You, goblin, you call yourself Of the Dew the Sunlight, I believe. You
and your kind have long enjoyed the protection of this court. Yet I hear
talk of rebellion. A refusal to do my bidding. Before I hand you over to
my guards for their . . . amusement, tell me why this is.’

Her melodious voice was rich with charm as the words were spoken, but
the goblin seemed unmoved. He should have fallen to his knees and begged
for her forgiveness, hypnotized by the power of the Queen’s glamour, but
instead he stood his ground stockily and grinned at her. Grinned at the
Queen!

‘Well, Queenie, it’s like this, you see. Goblins is now treated as
upright citizens in human world. Humans say goblins useful. We likes
being _useful_. We gets paid for being useful and finding out things and
making things.’

The Queen’s beautiful visage slipped and she glared at the cheeky
creature in front of her.

‘That’s impossible,’ she shouted. ‘You goblins are the dregs, everyone
knows that!’

‘Ah ha!’ laughed the goblin. ‘Queenie not so clever as she thinks.
Goblins riding on hog’s back now. Goblins know how to drive the iron
horses.’

There was a shiver in the court as the goblin uttered the word ‘iron’
and the magical glimmer dimmed. The Queen’s dress changed colour from
silver gossamer to blood-red velvet and her blonde ringlets turned into
straight, raven-black locks. Her courtiers followed suit as the pastel
silks and lace made way for leather breeches, scarlet sashes and scraps
of fur over woad-covered torsos. Elven stone knives were drawn and sharp
teeth bared.

The little goblin did not flinch.

‘I don’t believe you,’ said the Queen. ‘After all, you are just a
goblin.’

‘Just a goblin, yess, your queeniness,’ he said quietly. ‘A goblin what
understands iron _and_ steel. Steel as goes round and round and chuffs.
Takes people to faraway places. And a goblin what is a citizen of
Ankh-Morpork, and you know what _that_ means, my lady. The dark one
there gets upset when his citizens get killed.’

‘You are lying,’ said the Queen. ‘The Lord Vetinari would not care what
happens to _you_. You goblins always lie, Of the Dew the Sunlight.’

‘Not my name any more. I am now Of the Lathe the Swarf,’ said the goblin
proudly.

‘Swarf,’ said the Queen. ‘What is that?’

‘Itty bits of iron, they is, Queenie,’ said the goblin, his eyes
hardening. ‘Of the Lathe the Swarf no liar. You talks to me like that
again, your majisteriousness, I opens my pockets. Then we sees what
swarf is!’

The Queen drew back, her eyes fixed on the goblin’s hands hovering near
the pockets of his dark blue jacket, wooden toggles fastening it over
his skinny chest.

‘You dare threaten me?’ she said. ‘Here in my own realm, you worm? When
I could shrivel your heart within you with just a word? Or have you
dropped where you stand?’ She gestured to the guards standing ready with
their crossbows aimed at the goblin.

‘I is no worm for you, Queenie. I have the swarf. Tiny bits of steel
that can float in the air. But I is here to bring news. A warning. Of
the Lathe the Swarf still has fancy for the old days. I likes to see
humans squirm. Likes to see you fairy folk stirring things up, I does.
Some goblins thinks as I does, but not so many now. Some goblins almost
not goblins now. Almost human. I don’t likes it but they says the times
they is a-changing. The money is good, see, Queenie.’

‘Money?’ sneered the Queen. ‘I give you goblins money, you wor—’ She
paused as she saw the goblin’s hand move into his pocket. Could the
horrible little creature really be bringing _iron_ into her world? Iron
– a terrible substance for any of the fairy folk. Painful. Destructive.
It blinded, deafened, made an elf feel more alone than any human could
ever feel. She finished her sentence with gritted teeth. ‘Worthy
creature.’

‘Gold as melts away as sun rises,’ said the goblin. ‘They – we – gets
real money now. I just wants goblins to remain goblins. Goblins with
status. _Respect._ Not pushed around no more by you or anyone else.’ He
glared at Peaseblossom, who had suddenly stepped to the side of the
Queen.

‘I don’t believe you,’ said the Queen.

‘Your funeral, Queenie,’ said the goblin. ‘Don’t believe me. Go to gate.
Not so much trouble now old witch gone. You sees for yourself. World has
changed, Queenie.’

And the Queen thought, Changed, yes. She had felt the tremors, known
something momentous was afoot, but not known exactly what. So the old
witch was gone. With no hag to stop them, why, she realized, we can ride
through in splendour once more. Then her face fell. Except for
this . . . swarf. This _iron_.

‘Bind this maggot’s arms behind him,’ she ordered her guards, pointing
at the goblin. ‘I wish to see if he speaks true. And he will ride with
us . . .’ She smiled. ‘If he speaks false, we will tear out his tongue.’

Next morning, alone in Granny Weatherwax’s cottage – _her_ cottage, now
– Tiffany woke early knowing that her world had changed. You was
watching her like a hawk.

She sighed. It was going to be a busy day. She had been in many houses
where death had recently visited, and always the lady of the house, if
there was one, would be shining anything that shined and cleaning
everything that could be cleaned. And so, with rags and polishing
cloths, Tiffany Aching cleaned everything that was already spick and
span clean: it was a kind of unspoken mantra – the world had gone bad,
but at least the grate had been polished and now had a fire ready to
light in it.

All the time, like a statue, there was You, staring at her. Did cats
know about death? she wondered. What about the cats of witches?
Especially . . . what about _Granny Weatherwax’s cat_?

Tiffany tidied that thought away for now, and started on the kitchen,
burnishing anything that could be burnished, and yes, it shone. She was
cleaning things already clean, but the algebra of mourning required the
effort of getting all the death out of the house; and there was no
shrinking from it: you cleaned everything, regardless.

She’d finished in the kitchen and the scullery, leaving everything so
bright that her eyes watered, and then there was nothing for it but to
go upstairs. On her hands and knees, with bucket and brush and rags and
grease – that is, elbow grease – Tiffany cleaned and cleaned until her
knuckles were red and she was satisfied.

But that wasn’t the end of it: there was Granny’s small wardrobe, with
its few well-worn and serviceable dresses hanging in there, along with a
cloak. All black, of course. Tucked away on a shelf was the Zephyr
Billow Cloak Tiffany herself had given Granny – unworn, as far as she
could see, but kept carefully, like a special possession. She felt her
eyes begin to prickle . . .

Beside the bed were Granny Weatherwax’s boots. Good, serviceable boots,
Tiffany thought. And Granny had hated waste. But . . . to actually wear
them? She was going to find it hard enough to follow in Granny’s
footsteps. She swallowed. She was sure she could find a good home for
the boots. In the meantime, well, she poked forward a toe and pushed
them out of sight, beneath the bed.

Then of course there was the kitchen garden and, above all, the herbs.
Tiffany found a pair of heavy gloves in the scullery – you didn’t go
into Granny’s herbs without heavy gloves until they knew you. Granny had
foraged, bartered and been given herbs from just about everywhere, and
she had Rotating Spinach, and Doubting Plums, Ginny Come Nether,
Twirlabout, Tickle My Fancy Root, Jump in the Basin and
Jack-go-to-bed-and-never-get-up, Daisy-upsy-Daisy and Old Man Root.
There was a clump of Love Lies Oozing by the Jack by Moonlight and a
very active Maiden’s Respite. Tiffany did not know what all of them were
for; she would have to ask Nanny Ogg. Or Magrat Garlick, who – like her
husband Verence, the King of Lancre – was very enthusiastic about
herbs.fn1 Though _un_like her husband, Magrat did actually know her
Troubling Tony from her Multitude Root.

It was never easy being a witch. Oh, the broomstick was great, but to be
a witch you needed to be sensible, so sensible that sometimes it hurt.
You dealt with the reality – not what people wanted. The reality right
now was suddenly You, meowing and banging her head against Tiffany’s
legs, demanding food, which she then ignored completely when Tiffany
went back into the kitchen and placed a dish of it down for her on the
floor.

Tiffany went outdoors again and fed the chickens, let the goats out to
graze, had a word with the bees and then thought, I’ve done my bit. The
place is spotless, the bees are happy, even the lean-to is clean. If
Nanny can come in and feed the animals, keep an eye on You, then I can
go back home for a few days . . .

Reaching the Chalk after a flight that was long and, sadly, very wet,
since the rain was teeming down,fn2 she flew to the house of young Milly
Robinson, the Feegles clinging on behind, under and actually _on_ her in
their usual style.

Milly’s two baby boys looked well fed, but the little girl – baby
Tiffany – didn’t. Unfortunately Witch Tiffany was used to this sort of
thing, especially when the mothers weren’t very clever or had bossy
mothers and thought feeding the boys was the main thing in life. It was
why, just after the baby’s birth, she had whispered that spell into the
baby’s ear. A simple tracking magic, so she would know if any harm
befell the little girl. Just a precaution, she had told herself at the
time.

There was no use getting nasty about all this, so she took the young
woman aside and said, ‘Milly, listen. Yes, your boys have to be straight
and strong when they grow up, but my mother always used to say to me:
_Your son’s your son until he takes a wife, but your daughter is your
daughter all of your life_. And I think that’s right enough. You help
your mother out still, don’t you? And she helps you. So fair shares for
the little girl is the right thing to do. Please.’ Then, because the
carrot – or in this case, the breast milk – sometimes needed to be
accompanied by the stick, she added sternly, the pointy hat making her
seem older and wiser than she would otherwise appear, ‘I shall be
watching after her interests.’ A little bit of menace often did the
trick, she had learned. And, of course, she _would_ watch.

Then there was only one person she wanted to talk to; and the rain was
getting harder still as her stick drifted down towards the Feegle mound
on the hill, Rob and the other Feegles toppling off as she approached.
Daft Wullie made a spectacularly bad landing, head first into the gorse,
and a rabble of young Feegles rushed up joyously to unscrew him.

There were a couple of Rob’s older sons lounging around outside the
entrance. They were scrawny, even by Feegle standards, with barely a
wisp of beard hair between them and impractically low-slung spogs
knocking about their knees, their kilts hung low on their skinny hips.
To Tiffany’s amazement, she could see the top bands of _coloured pants_
riding high above them. _Pants?_ On a Feegle? The times were indeed
changing.

‘Pull yon kilts up, lads!’ Rob muttered as they pushed their way past.

The kelda was in her chamber, surrounded by Feegle babies, all rolling
around on a floor covered with the fleeces of sheep gone to another
land. And the first words she said were, ‘I know . . .’ She sighed and
added, ‘It’s grieving I am, but the wheel takes all in time.’ Her face
crinkled into a huge smile. ‘It’s happy I am to see you as leader of the
witches, Tiffan.’

‘Well, thank you,’ said Tiffany. How did Jeannie know? she wondered for
a moment. But every kelda used the way of the hiddlins to see things
past, present and future . . . and it was a secret known only to the
keldas, passed down one to the other.

She understood too that although Jeannie was very small, she was someone
to whom she could tell every secret, in the assurance that it would
never be passed on to anyone. And now she hesitantly said, ‘Jeannie, I
don’t think I could ever fill her boots.’

‘Really?’ said the kelda sharply. ‘Dinna you think Esmerelda Weatherwax
may nae have kenned the same thing when the position was gi’n to her? Do
ye suppose yon hag then said, Nae me. I’m nae guid enough?’ The wise
little pictsie was looking at Tiffany as if she was some kind of
specimen, a new plant perhaps, and then she lowered her voice and said,
‘I ken well enough that ye will be a guid leader.’

‘Though only the first amongst equals rather than a leader,’ Tiffany
added. ‘At least, I’m sure that’s what the other witches think . . .’
Her voice trailed off, her doubts hanging in the air.

‘Is that so?’ said the kelda. She went quiet for a moment, then said
softly, ‘Ye who kissed the spirit of winter and sent him packing, aye.
Yet I ken that ye have in front of ye something less easy, Tiffan. There
is a change coming in the heavens, and ye will need to be there.’ Her
voice grew even more sombre and her small eyes were fixed on Tiffany
now. ‘Be aware, Tir-far-thóinn; this is a time of transition,’ she said.
‘Mistress Weatherwax is nae longer wi’ us, and her goin’ leaves a . . .
hole that others willnae fail to see. We mus’ watch the gateways, and ye
mus’ tak’ great care. For them ye don’t wish to know might be seeking ye
out.’

It was good to be home, Tiffany thought, when at last she arrived there.
Back at her parents’ farm – it was even _called_ Home Farm – back where
her mother cooked a hot dinner every night. Back where she could sit at
the big wooden kitchen table, which was scarred by generations of
Achings, and become a little girl again.

But she wasn’t a little girl any more. She was a witch. One with two
steadings to look after. And over the next week as she flew back and
forth from the Chalk to Lancre, from Lancre to the Chalk, in weather
that seemed to be enjoying a competition to be the wettest ever for the
time of year, it seemed to her that she was always arriving late, wet
and tired. People were nearly always polite – to her face, anyway, and
certainly to the pointy hat – but she could tell from what they didn’t
say that somehow, indefinably, whatever she did, it wasn’t quite enough.
She got up earlier every day and went to bed later, but it still wasn’t
enough.

She needed to be a good witch. A strong witch. And in between the
carrying and the healing, the helping and the listening, she could feel
sudden prickles of alarm run up and down her body. Jeannie had warned
her that something dreadful might be coming . . . Would she be up to the
job? She didn’t even think she was doing very well with all the usual
stuff.

She couldn’t be Granny Weatherwax for them in Lancre.

And it was getting harder and harder to be Tiffany Aching for the Chalk.

Even at home. Even there. She struggled in wearily one night, longing
for food, peace and her bed, and as her mother pulled a huge pot from
the big black oven and placed it in the centre of the table, a family
row was just starting.

‘I met Sid Pigeon outside the Baron’s Arms today,’ her brother
Wentworth, a strapping lad not _quite_ old enough for the pub yet, but
certainly old enough to hang around outside, was saying.

‘Sid Pigeon?’ Mrs Aching wondered.

‘The younger of the two Pigeon brothers,’ her father said.

_Younger_, thought Tiffany. That counted for a lot in farming country.
It meant the older brother got the farm. Though if she remembered
correctly, the Pigeon farm was a pretty poor place, not very well run.
Wasn’t Mr Pigeon a regular at the Baron’s Arms? She tried to remember
Mrs Pigeon, and failed. But yes, she remembered Sid. She’d seen him only
a few weeks back, up near Twoshirts – a small boy who had seemingly
grown into his name when someone had given him a peaked cap and a
whistle to hang around his neck.

‘He was telling me about them railway jobs,’ Wentworth went on
enthusiastically. ‘He’s earning good money, is Sid. Says they need more
men. It’s the future, Dad. Railways, not sheep!’

‘Don’t get any daft ideas, lad,’ his father warned. ‘Railways is for
them as don’t take on land to farm. Not like us Achings. Not like _you_.
You know what your future holds for you. It’s right here, where it’s
always been for an Aching lad.’

‘But—’ Wentworth wasn’t happy. Tiffany shot him a look. She knew how he
felt. And after all, she herself wasn’t doing what had been expected of
her, was she? If she had, she’d be getting married about now, like her
sisters had, getting ready to produce a few more grandchildren for her
mother to fuss over.

Her mother seemed to be thinking of the same thing. ‘You always seem to
be somewhere else these days,’ she said, changing the subject from
Wentworth to Tiffany, trying hard not to sound like she was complaining.
‘I wish you could be with us more, Tiff,’ she added a bit sadly.

‘Don’t bother the lass. She’s some kind of top witch now, you know. She
can’t be everywhere,’ her father said.

Feeling like a little girl, Tiffany said, ‘I try to be around here as
much as possible but we don’t really have enough witches to do the work
that’s needed.’

Her mother smiled nervously and said, ‘I know you work hard, dear.
There’s lots of people who stop me in the road to say that my girl has
helped their kid or their father. Everybody sees that you are running
about like nobody’s business. And you know what people are saying? They
are saying to me, you are growing up like your granny. After all, she
used to tell the Baron what to do. And you do the same.’

‘Well, Granny Aching wasn’t a witch,’ said Tiffany.

‘That depends,’ said her father, turning away from Wentworth, who
stomped out and slammed the kitchen door behind him. Joe Aching looked
after him for a moment, then sighed and winked at Tiffany. ‘There are
surely different kinds of witches. You remember how your granny wanted
the shepherd’s hut burned down once she was dead? “Burn everything,” she
told me.’ He smiled and said, ‘I almost did what I was told. But there
was a thing she had and it was not for the burning, so I wrapped it up,
and now, seeing you, my girl, here’s a little memento from Granny
Aching.’

To Tiffany’s surprise her father was crying, under his smiles, as he
gave her a little package wrapped up in crinkled paper and tied with a
piece of old wool. She opened it and turned the little ridged object
over in her hand.

‘It’s a shepherd’s crown,’ she said. ‘I’ve seen them before – they are
quite easy to find.’

Joe Aching laughed and said, ‘Not this one. Your granny said it was
special – the crown of crowns. And if the Shepherd of Shepherds picked
it up, it would turn into gold. Look, beneath the grey you can see the
hints of gold.’

Tiffany looked at the little object while she ate her stew, made as only
her mother could make it, and she thought about the days when Granny
Aching would come down to the farm for a meal.

It seemed to some that the old woman had lived on Jolly Sailor tobacco;
and there was no doubt about it – when it came to sheep, Granny Aching
knew everything. But the mind starts running all by itself and Tiffany
thought about all the things Granny had done and the things that Granny
had said. Then the memories came as a cavalcade, whether she wanted them
or not, settling on her like snow.

Tiffany thought of the times she had walked with her granny. Mostly in
silence, sometimes with Thunder and Lightning – Granny Aching’s
sheepdogs – at their heels. She had learned a lot from the old woman.

She taught me so much, she said to herself. She _built_ me as we were
walking around after the sheep, and she told me all those things that I
needed to know, and the first thing was to look after people. Of course,
the other thing had been to look after the sheep.

And all she had ever asked for was her shepherd’s hut and some horrible
tobacco.

Tiffany dropped her spoon. It was all right to sob in this familiar
kitchen like she had when she was a girl.

Immediately, her father was there beside her. ‘You can do a lot, jigget,
but no one could do it all.’

‘Yes,’ said her mother. ‘And we keep your bed ready every day. And we
know you are doing a lot of good and I am proud when I see you flying
around. But you can’t do everything for everybody. Don’t go out again
tonight. Please.’

‘We like seeing our girl, but it’d be nice to see her properly and not
always in a blur,’ her father added, putting his arm around her.

They finished their dinner in silence, a warm silence, and as Tiffany
prepared to go up the stairs to her childhood bedroom, Mrs Aching stood
and pulled out an envelope from where she had tucked it out of the way
on the dresser, amongst the blue and white jars that, surprisingly in a
working farm kitchen, were simply for show. ‘There’s a letter here for
you. From Preston, I expect.’ Her tone was very mother-ish now; she only
had to say ‘Preston’ and there was a question there.

And Tiffany crept up the stairs, feeling the care and love of her
parents flowing around her, and into her room, relishing the familiar
creak of the boards. She placed the shepherd’s crown on the shelf by her
few books – a new treasure – and pulled on her nightdress wearily.
Tonight, she decided, she would try to forget her fears, allow herself
to just be Tiffany Aching for a while. Not Tiffany Aching, the Witch of
the Chalk.

Then, while there was still light to see, she read Preston’s letter, and
the weariness fled for a moment, replaced by a wave of sheer happiness.
Preston’s letter was wonderful! Filled with new language, new words –
today he wrote about taking up a scalpel – ‘such a sharp, strong word’ –
and how he had learned a new way to suture. ‘Suture,’ Tiffany said
quietly to herself. A soft word, so much smoother than ‘scalpel’, almost
healing. And in a way she needed healing. Healing from the loss of
Granny Weatherwax, healing from the strain of too much to do – and
healing from the effort of trying to match the expectations of the other
witches.

She carefully read every word, twice, then folded the letter up and put
it away in a small wooden box in which she kept all his letters, as well
as the beautiful golden hare pendant he had once given her. There was no
point resealing it: she could keep nothing secret from the Feegles and
she preferred not to have the box full of the snail slime they used to
restick anything they had opened.

Then she slept in her childhood bedroom. And beside her there was the
cat, You.

And Tiffany was a child again. A child with parents who loved her very
much.

But also a young girl. A girl with a boy who sends her letters.

And a witch. A witch with a cat that was very . . . special.

While her parents lay in bed, talking about their daughter . . .

‘It’s right proud of our girl I am,’ Joe Aching began.

‘And of course she is a really good midwife,’ Mrs Aching said, adding
rather sadly, ‘But I wonder if she might ever have children of her own.
She doesn’t talk about Preston to me, you know, and I don’t much like to
ask. Not like with her sisters.’ She sighed. ‘But so much is changing.
Even Wentworth, tonight . . .’

‘Oh, don’t worry about him,’ Mr Aching said. ‘’Tis right for a lad to
want to find his own feet, and most likely he’ll bluster for a bit and
shout and argue, but he’ll be here when we’ve gone, looking after the
Aching land, you mark my words. There’s nothing to beat land.’ He
sniffed. ‘Certainly not them railways.’

‘But Tiffany’s different,’ his wife continued. ‘What she’s going to do I
really don’t know, though I do hope, in time, that she and Preston might
settle round here. If he’s a doctor and she’s a witch, that’s no reason
why they can’t be together, is it? Tiffany could have children too then,
like Hannah and Fastidia . . .’ They thought of their other daughters,
of their grandchildren.

Joe sighed. ‘She’s not like our other daughters, love. I believe Tiffany
may even surpass her grandmother,’ he said.

And then he blew out the candles, and they slept, thinking of their
Tiffany, a skylark among the sparrows.

fn1 Basically, if it had something herbal in it, Magrat and Verence
thought it would do you good. With some of the herbs in Granny’s garden,
this might be doubtful. At least in the short term. And it might not be
wise to stray too far from the privy.

fn2 And contrary to popular belief, no witch Tiffany knew had yet
managed to control a broomstick whilst also using an umbrella.


[image]
CHAPTER 6


Around the Houses

WALKING STEADILY ALONG the road to Lancre with Mephistopheles trotting
beside him and his little cart rattling behind, and swallows swooping
overhead, Geoffrey realized that his old home seemed a long way away
now. It had only been a week or so, but as they climbed higher into the
Ramtops he began to understand what ‘geography’ meant in reality, rather
than in the books Mr Wiggall had let him read – Lancre and its
surrounding villages had a _lot_ of geography.

At the end of a day’s long but satisfying walk for both boy and goat,
they arrived outside a village pub which proclaimed its name as The
Star, the sign promising excellent ales and food. Well, let’s see how
excellent it is, Geoffrey thought. He unhitched the cart and went into
the pub with the goat following close behind.

The pub was full of working men, who were now not working but enjoying a
pint or two before dinner. It was rather stuffy inside with the usual
rural tint of agricultural armpit. The regulars were used to people
bringing a working dog in with them but they were amazed to see a dusty
but well-dressed lad bringing a goat into their pub.

The rather skinny barman said, ‘We only allow dogs in here, mister.’

All eyes in the pub were by now focused on Mephistopheles and Geoffrey
said, ‘My goat is cleaner and more knowledgeable than any dog. He can
count to twenty, and when the time comes he’ll go outside to do his
business. In fact, sir, if I can show him your privy now, he will use it
when he needs it.’

One worker appeared to take umbrage at this point. ‘Do you think that
just because we work on the land, we don’t know nothing? I have a pint
here that says that the goat can’t do it.’

Innocently Geoffrey said, ‘You have a knowledgeable pint there, sir.’
And everyone in the pub laughed. Now every eye was on Geoffrey as he
said, ‘Mephistopheles, how many people are in this pub?’

The goat looked down his nose – and it was a nose a dowager would have
been proud of – at the men around the bar and started his count,
delicately hitting the floor with his hoof, the noise suddenly being the
only sound in the place.

He hit the floor eight times. ‘He got it right!’ declared the barman.

‘I saw something like that afore,’ said one of the men. ‘There was a
travelling show. You know, clowns and tightrope walkers and folk with no
arms and travelling doctors.fn1 They called it a carnival. And they had
a horse they said could count. But it was just a trick.’

Geoffrey smiled and said, ‘If a couple of you gentlemen would care to
step out for a moment, I will ask my goat to do it again, and you will
see that there is no trick involved.’

Intrigued now, several of the men stepped out while the others started
to take bets amongst themselves.

‘Gentlemen, my goat will tell you how many people are still in the
room,’ said Geoffrey.

Once again, daintily, Mephistopheles tapped out the correct number.

Hearing the cheers, the men who had gone out came back in again, looking
curious – and Mephistopheles’s hoof registered each one as he entered.
The barman laughed. ‘This trick deserves a meal for you and your
remarkable goat, mister. What does he like?’

‘It’s no trick, I assure you, but thank you. Mephistopheles will eat
almost anything – he’s a goat. Some scraps would be most acceptable. And
for myself, just some bread would be welcome.’

A bowl of kitchen scraps was produced for Mephistopheles and Geoffrey
sat down beside him with his pint and a slab of bread and butter,
chatting to some of the men who were interested in the goat. An interest
which only deepened when Mephistopheles went out in the direction of the
privy and after a while came back again.

‘You actually managed to get him to do that?’ said one of them in
wonder.

‘Yes,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I trained him from when he was very small. He’s
quite docile really. Well, if I’m around.’

‘What do you mean?’

‘It means he does what he’s told, but he has a mind of his own as well.
I wouldn’t lose him for anything.’

Just then, there were raised voices at the other end of the bar as one
drinker, filled with the bluster that ale can give to a man, started a
fight with someone else who had just come in. The more sensible people
moved away as the two began to trade blows, seemingly intent on beating
one another to death, while the barman bellowed about the damage to his
furniture and threatened to wallop them with his grandfather’s
knobkerrie, a souvenir from the Klatchian campaign, if they didn’t stop.

Mephistopheles was suddenly alert at Geoffrey’s side, and every drinker
who was sober understood in his soul that this was no time to be
unpleasant to the lad. They didn’t know _how_ they knew, but there was a
kind of visceral power there waiting to be unleashed.

‘Why are they fighting? What’s wrong?’ Geoffrey asked his neighbour.

‘An old grudge about a young lady,’ said the man, rolling his eyes. ‘A
bad business. Someone’s going to get hurt, you mark my words.’

To everyone’s astonishment Geoffrey strolled across the pub, his goat
watching his every step, dodged the wildly swinging blows and stood
between the two men, saying, ‘There’s no need to fight, you know.’

The barman’s face fell – he knew what happened to people who tried to
get between two idiots smelling blood. And then he could hardly believe
his eyes, for the two men abruptly stopped fighting and were standing
there, looking rather bemused.

‘Why don’t you two just meet the young lady and see what _she_ thinks
before you start beating each other to death?’ Geoffrey said softly.

The men looked at one another and the bigger of the two said: ‘He’s
right, you know.’

And the pub audience laughed as the two looked around at the wreckage,
seemingly amazed that this could have had anything to do with them.

‘There, that was easy, wasn’t it?’ said Geoffrey, returning to the bar.

‘Ah,’ said the landlord, astonished that he wasn’t having to pick a
battered Geoffrey off the floor. ‘You’re not a wizard, are you?’

‘No,’ said Geoffrey. ‘It’s a knack. It happens to me all the time, when
I need it.’ He smiled. ‘Mostly with animals and sometimes with people.’
But alas, he thought to himself, not with my father, never with him.

‘Well, you must be _some_ kind of wizard,’ said the barman. ‘You’ve
broken up a fight between two of the nastiest bruisers we have around
here.’ He glared at the two miscreants. ‘As for you two,’ he said,
‘don’t come back here until you are sober. Look at the mess you’ve
made.’ He grabbed both of them and pushed them out the door.

The rest of the drinkers got back to their pints.

The barman turned back to Geoffrey and looked at him in shrewd
appraisal.

‘You want a job, lad? No pay, but you get your keep.’

‘I can’t take a job, but I’d be happy to stay for a few days,’ said
Geoffrey with alacrity. ‘If you can find some vegetables for me – I eat
no meat. And can there be a place for Mephistopheles as well? He’s not
very smelly.’

‘Probably no worse than the people we have in here,’ said the barman,
laughing. ‘I tell you what. You and your goat can stay in the barn and
I’ll give you your dinner and breakfast, and then after that, we’ll
see.’ The man held out a rather dirty hand. ‘A deal, then?’

‘Oh yes, thank you. My name is Geoffrey.’

The man hesitated. ‘My name’s Darling. Darling Dove.’ He looked at
Geoffrey mournfully and said, ‘Have a laugh about it, will you? Everyone
does. Might as well get it out of the way.’

‘Why?’ said Geoffrey. ‘Darling is a kind word and so is Dove. How can
these be anything to worry about?’

That night, Mr Dove told his wife, ‘I got us a new bar boy. Funny cove
he is too. But he seems, well, harmless. Sort of easy to talk to.’

‘Can we afford it, Darling?’ his wife said.

‘Oh,’ said Darling Dove, ‘he just wants feeding – doesn’t even want meat
– and somewhere to sleep. And he’s got a goat. Quite a smart one,
really. Does tricks and all. Might bring some more customers in.’

‘Well, dear, if you think it’s a good idea. What are his clothes like?’
asked Mrs Dove.

‘Pretty good,’ said Mr Dove. ‘And he talks like a toff. I wonder if he
is running away from something. Best not to ask any questions, I reckon.
I tell you what, though: between him and his goat, we won’t have any
trouble in the bar.’

And indeed Geoffrey stayed at The Star for two days, simply because Mr
Dove liked him hanging around the place. And Mrs Dove said she was sad
when he told her husband that he had to move on. ‘A strange boy, young
Geoffrey. He kind of gives me the idea that everything is all right,
even if I don’t know what it is that _is_ right. A sort of rightness,
floating in the air. I’m really sorry that he’s going,’ she said.

‘Yes, dear,’ said Mr Dove. ‘I asked him to stay, I really did, but he
said he must go to Lancre.’

‘That’s where they have the witches,’ said his wife. She made a face.

‘Well,’ Mr Dove said, ‘that’s where he wants to go.’ He paused, and
added, ‘He said the wind is blowing him there.’

Battling into a bitter headwind on her long journey back to her parents’
farm, Tiffany felt that there was altogether too much wind in and around
Lancre. Still, at least it wasn’t raining, she told herself. Yesterday’s
rain had been awful – the kind of joyous rain where every cloud had
decided to join the party once one cloud had cracked open the first
deluge.

She had felt proud of having the two steadings at first, flying between
Lancre and the Chalk every few days, but broomsticks are not very fast.
Or warm.fn2 It was good that she could go back home to where her mother
did the cooking, but even back home there was no time to rest, and being
away in Lancre for half the week meant she was facing a plethora of
demands from the Chalk. People weren’t getting nasty about it – after
all, she was a witch, and Lancre had more people than the Chalk – but
there were these little strains beginning to develop. A few mutters. And
she had a horrible feeling that some of the muttering was coming from
other witches – witches who were finding queues at their doors, people
who had gone to find Granny Weatherwax and just found an empty cottage.

Some of the problem in both steadings was with the old men left behind
when their wives had died; a lot of them didn’t know how to cook.
Occasionally some of the old ladies would help and you would see them
carrying a pot of stew round for the old man next door. But the witch
part of Tiffany couldn’t help but notice that this happened more often
if the old lady was a widow and the old man had a nice cottage and a bit
of money put by . . .

There was always _something_ that had to be done – and some days it
seemed mostly to be about toenails. There was one old man in Lancre – a
decent old boy – whose toenails were as sharp as a lethal weapon, and
Tiffany had to ask Jason Ogg, a blacksmith, to make her a pair of
secateurs tough enough to break through them. She always closed her eyes
until she heard the patter of his toenails banging off the ceiling, but
the old man called her his lovely lady and tried to give her money. And
at least she now knew that the Feegles had a use for the toenail
clippings.

Witches liked useful things, Tiffany mused, as she tried to take her
mind off the chill wind whipping around her. A witch would never have to
ask for anything – oh no, no one wanted to _owe_ a witch anything – and
a witch didn’t take money either. Instead she accepted things she could
make use of: food, and old clothing, and bits of cloth for bandages, and
spare boots.

Boots. She had tripped over Granny Weatherwax’s boots again that very
day. She had put them in the corner of the room now, and there they sat,
almost staring at her when she was too weary to think. _You’re not good
enough yet to fill these boots_, they seemed to say. Y_ou’ll have to do
a lot more first._

Of course, there always _was_ such a lot to do. So many people never
seemed to think about the consequences of their everyday actions. And
then a witch on her broom would have to set out from her bed in the rain
at the dead of night because of ‘I only’ and its little friends ‘I
didn’t know’ and ‘It’s not my fault’.

_I only wanted to see if the copper was hot . . ._

_I didn’t know a boiling pot was dangerous . . ._

_It’s not my fault – no one told me dogs that bark might also bite._

And, her favourite, _I didn’t know it would go off bang_ – when it said
‘goes bang’ on the box it came in. _That_ had been when little Ted
Cooper had put an explosive bangerfn3 into the carcass of a chicken
after his mum’s birthday party and nearly killed everybody around the
table. Yes, she had bandaged and treated everybody, even the joker, but
she hoped very much his dad had kicked his arse afterwards.

And when the witch wasn’t there, well, what harm was there in trying out
a few things for yourself? Most people knew about using plants to cure
things. They were certain about that. But the thing about plants is that
many of them look like all the others, and so Mistress Holland, wife of
the miller of the Chalk, had treated her husband’s unfortunate skin
condition with Love Lies Oozing rather than with Merryday Root and now
his skin had turned purple.

Tiffany had treated the man, but then it had been time for her to go
back to Lancre, and she was up, up and away again on her stick, hoping
that they had both learned their lesson.

She was very thankful that Nanny Ogg was not too far away from
Granny’s . . . no, _her_ cottage. There were a lot of things that
Tiffany was good at, but cookery wasn’t one of them, and so just as she
relied on her mum and dad for meals in the Chalk, in Lancre she relied
on Nanny. Strictly speaking, this meant she was relying on Nanny’s army
of daughters-in-law, who couldn’t do enough for their old Nanny.fn4

But wherever the pair of them took their meals – either in Tiffany’s
little cottage in the woods, or at Tir Nani Ogg, the overcrowded but
very comfortable home where Nanny Ogg ruled the roost – it seemed that
You was there too. No cat could move as fast as her, but you never _saw_
her move fast, she just _arrived_. It was baffling. What was also
baffling was how Greebo – Nanny’s ancient tomcat who treated a bit of
eyeball scratching as a friendly hello – slunk away when You appeared.

The white cat had clearly made her decision and was a constant presence
in Tiffany’s life in Lancre. Now, when Tiffany got ready for an
afternoon of going round the houses, You would jump on the broomstick
before Tiffany had even looked at it, which made Nanny laugh, saying,
‘She’s got you down pat, my girl. Maybe she could go round the houses by
herself!’

Nanny Ogg was actually rather impressed by Tiffany. But also worried.
‘Really,’ she said to her one day as they shared a quick meal, ‘_you_
know you’re good, Tiff. I know you’re good. _Granny_, wherever she is
now, knew you was good, but you don’t have to keep tryin’ to do it all
on your own, my girl. Let some of them young girls around here – the
apprentices – take some of the strain.’ She paused as she chewed on a
big mouthful of stew, then added, ‘That young lumberjack up in the
mountains what Esme sewed up just the day afore she died? Well, young
Harrieta Bilk’s been goin’ on up there to see to him, _an_’ doin’ a good
job too. Tiff, you have to do it your own way, I know, but you ain’t the
only witch in Lancre. Sometimes you needs to put your feet up and let
the parade go by.’

Tiffany had barely had time to listen before she was back on her stick
and heading down to the Chalk again. No rest for the busy witch with two
steadings! But as the ear-numbing wind whistled by, she considered what
Nanny had said. It was true that there were other witches in Lancre, but
in the Chalk – unless Letitia decided to stop being just a baroness –
Tiffany was the only witch. And if her forebodings were right, if
Jeannie’s words came true, then one witch for the Chalk might not be
anywhere near enough.

She shivered. She was looking forward to getting out of the icy wind and
into the warmth of her mother’s kitchen. But there was one person she
needed to see first . . .

It took Tiffany a long time to find Miss Tick, but eventually she landed
in a little wood just outside Ham-on-Rye where the travelling witch, the
witchfinder, had stopped her caravan for tea. A small mule was tethered
nearby enjoying the contents of its feed bag. It looked at Tiffany as
she approached and neighed.

‘He’s called Joseph,’ said Miss Tick. ‘A real witch’s mule.’

It had started to rain again and Miss Tick quickly waved Tiffany up the
wooden caravan steps. Tiffany was glad to see that there was a kettle
bubbling on a little stove. She perched herself on the edge of a bench
seat fitted just inside the door, facing the stove, and gratefully took
the offered cup of tea.

Inside the caravan, it was just as Tiffany expected. Miss Tick had
everything ship-shape without needing a ship. On the walls were lots of
little racks, neatly filled with many things, and all annotated in Miss
Tick’s careful teacher-y hand. Tiffany looked closer and, _yes_, they
were in alphabetical order. Elsewhere were little pots without labels,
so you would never know what was inside them, and by the side of her bed
there was a chart showing a variety of knots – escapology was a useful
hobby for a witch.

‘I’ll be grateful if you don’t touch my little jars,’ said Miss Tick.
‘Some of those concoctions might not work properly and the results are
often unpredictable. But, you know, one should keep on experimenting.’

That’s what’s in all the pots, thought Tiffany, taking a sip of her tea.
Experiments.

‘Glad to see you,’ Miss Tick continued. ‘I am hearing about you all the
time. You know, almost every girl I meet wants to be you. They see you
whizzing about all over the place on your broomstick and they all want
to be _you_, Mistress Aching. Suddenly it’s become a career choice to be
a witch!’

‘Oh yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘That’s how it starts out, and then you tell
them exactly what they would spend their life doing, and quite a few of
them decide to go to the big city and be a hairdresser or something.’

‘Well, I make no bones about it,’ said Miss Tick firmly. ‘I tell them to
think hard; it’s not all magic and waving wands and all that silly
business. It’s dirt and grime.’

Tiffany sighed. ‘Being a witch is a man’s job: that’s why it needs women
to do it.’

Miss Tick laughed and continued, ‘Well, I remember a little girl who was
unsure of herself and I told her that I would give her lessons that she
would never forget in a hurry.’

Tiffany smiled. ‘I remember. And now I am in a hurry everywhere these
days. But Miss Tick’ – she paused and her voice went a bit quiet – ‘I
have a feeling that some of the older witches are beginning to think I
might not be able to cope . . .’ She swallowed. ‘Up in Lancre, mostly.
But it means I do have to be there a lot.’ She bit her lip – she _hated_
asking for help. Was she saying that she wasn’t really up to the job?
_Letting Granny Weatherwax down_, since Granny had been the one to put
her name up for it. She couldn’t remember Granny ever asking for help.
‘Down here, on the Chalk,’ she said, ‘I think I maybe need to . . .
er . . . train an apprentice. Have some help.’

The heavens didn’t open. There was no gasp of horror from the other
witch at this request. Miss Tick simply crossed her arms sternly. ‘It’s
Letice Earwig, I suppose, who’s put those doubts into people’s heads.
She thinks things always have to be done the same way, so that means she
would take over, I suppose? She’s a senior witch who believes she knows
every blessed thing, but it’s all just tinkly-winkly stuff. The stupid
woman who wrote _My Fairy Friends_ should be ashamed to call herself a
witch, and certainly shouldn’t hope to walk in the footsteps of Granny
Weatherwax. Hah, Letice Earwig certainly couldn’t manage two steadings
at once. She can’t really even cope with _one_.’ She snorted derisively.
‘Do not forget, Tiffany, that I am a _teacher_.fn5 And we teachers can
be really nasty when it comes to it. _Ten Steps to Witchcraft_ and _The
Romance of the Broomstick_ are not what _I_ would call proper books. Oh,
I’ll certainly look out for a girl or two for you – it’s a very good
idea. But you don’t need to worry about what Mrs Earwig might say, oh
no . . .’

fn1 There was the usual man-who-puts-weasels-down-his-trousers in action
too. Hence the need for a doctor.

fn2 It gets awfully cold up there, and no sensible witch ever took to
the skies without several layers of flannelette between her and the
stick.

fn3 Another tiny clue.

fn4 ‘Enough’ wasn’t really a long enough word to describe the numerous
little tasks any young woman marrying into the Ogg family found were
expected of her.

fn5 Said in a way that made anyone listening know this instantly.


[image]
CHAPTER 7


A Force of Nature

LETICE EARWIG WAS not someone who would take being balked lying down. Or
standing up, come to that. In truth, she was a force of nature and she
hated to back down on anything.

It hadn’t taken her long to hear that there had been a queue one day
outside Nanny Ogg’s home. Tiffany Aching, Mrs Earwig decided, was Not
Coping. And it needed a witch of senior stature to Do Something about
it. In Letice Earwig’s opinion – never a small thing – she was in fact
the _only_ witch who had the stature to act, especially as that old
baggage Nanny Ogg wouldn’t do a thing.

Mrs Earwig had married an elderly retired wizard many years before.
‘Wizards ain’t allowed to get married,’ Nanny Ogg had told Tiffany
scornfully. ‘But the silly man got what was comin’ to him. Talk about
hen-pecked, he was _earwig-_pecked. She got through all his money, so
they says!’

Tiffany wisely didn’t rise to that; it was quite probable that ‘they’
were actually Nanny Ogg, who hated Mrs Earwig with an unrelenting
determination.

But that was why she was relieved when Nanny Ogg wasn’t there when Mrs
Earwig arrived at Granny’s cottage one morning a week or so later, for
what she called ‘one of her little chats’. It would have been better, on
reflection, if Mrs Earwig hadn’t found Tiffany out in the garden up to
her elbows in suds in the middle of doing some washing for old Mr Price.

Tiffany’s heart sank when she saw the woman coming,fn1 but she wiped her
hands on a towel and welcomed her visitor into the cottage with as much
politeness as she could muster. Mrs Earwig had a tendency to treat
Tiffany like a child, and also she had bad manners, such as sitting down
without being asked. Mrs Earwig did, indeed, sit down in Granny’s old
rocking chair, and she gave Tiffany a smile of blatant insincerity, then
made it worse by saying, ‘My dear girl!’

‘_Woman_,’ said Tiffany quietly as Mrs Earwig looked her up and down.
She was acutely conscious of the suds still clinging to her apron and
her dishevelled hair.

‘Well, never mind,’ said Mrs Earwig, as if it didn’t matter. ‘Now, I
thought I should come, as a friend and as one of the oldest witches in
this area, to see how things were going and to offer some constructive
advice.’ She looked around the kitchen with a superior air, with a
_particularly_ sharp glare at the dust that was happily playing little
games with itself over the stone flagstones, and Tiffany was suddenly
very aware of the spiders which had remained in residence in the
scullery, with lots of little ones adding to the colony – she hadn’t the
heart to move them.

‘Don’t you think you are overstretched trying to look after two
steadings, my dear?’ Mrs Earwig added with a saccharine smile.

‘Yes, my dear Mrs Earwig,’ Tiffany said back, rather sharply. ‘I _am_
stretched because there is a lot to do in both places and not much
time.’ Which you are taking up, she thought. But two can play at your
game. ‘If you have some advice,’ she added with a smile to match Mrs
Earwig’s, ‘I’ll be glad to hear it.’

Mrs Earwig was never one to ignore an invitation. Not that she had
needed one, anyway, since she immediately launched into a prepared
speech.

‘I’m not saying you are a bad person, my dear. It’s just that you can’t
cope, and people are talking about it.’

‘Perhaps they do,’ said Tiffany. ‘And often they thank me, but I am just
one woman – that is _woman_, not girl – so I can’t do everything at
once. It’s just a shame that there aren’t more elder witches
around . . .’ Her voice trailed off, the memory of Granny Weatherwax
lying in her willow casket still too fresh in her mind.

‘I understand,’ said Mrs Earwig. ‘It isn’t your fault.’ Now her voice
was silky smooth, but just a shade beyond patronizing and moving towards
out and out rudeness. ‘You have indeed been flung into areas you can’t
manage, and you are in fact far too young, dear Tiffany. To take the
right steps on the path of Magick, you surely need the counsel of an
elder witch.’ She sniffed. ‘A _serious_ elder witch with the right . . .
approach. No . . . family ties.’ And it was clear that she did not
consider Nanny Ogg to be a candidate for this task.

Tiffany bridled. If there was one thing she hated more than ‘my dear
girl’, it was ‘dear Tiffany’. And she well remembered the ‘counsel’ Mrs
Earwig had given to her protégée Annagramma Hawkin, who had taken over a
witch’s cottage knowing everything possible about runes and tinkly
spells but nothing at all useful. _She_ had needed _Tiffany’s_ help. As
for implying that Nanny Ogg would not be a good mentor . . .

‘Well, my dear,’ Mrs Earwig continued, ‘as one of the most senior
witches in this area, I therefore feel I should take the place of Granny
Weatherwax. It’s the way it has always been done, and for a good reason
– people need a senior witch to be a person whom they can respect,
someone they can look up to. After all, my dear girl, a witch of high
standing would never be seen doing the washing.’

‘Really?’ said Tiffany, gritting her teeth. A _second_ ‘my dear girl’?
One more and she would want not only to thrust Mrs Earwig into the suds
but also to hold her head under for quite some time. ‘Granny Weatherwax
always said, “You do the good that is in front of you,” and I don’t care
_who_ sees me doing an old man’s washing. There’s lots to do and a lot
of it is _dirty_, Mrs Earwig.’

Mrs Earwig flamed at that and said, ‘_Ah-wij_, my dear girl.’

‘Not my dear girl,’ Tiffany snapped. ‘Mrs _Earwig_’ – not a trace of
_Ah-wij_ – ‘your last book was called _To Ride a Golden Broomstick_. Can
you tell me, Mrs Earwig, how does it fly? Gold is rather heavy. You
might say, in fact, that it is extremely heavy.’

Mrs Earwig growled. Tiffany had never heard her growl before but this
one was a heavy-duty growl. ‘It’s a metaphor,’ she said sharply.

‘Really?’ said Tiffany. Now she was angry. ‘What’s it a metaphor _for_,
Mrs Earwig? I’m on the sharp end of witchcraft, which means doing what
should be done as best you can. It’s all about the people, Mrs Earwig,
not about the books. Have you ever gone round the houses, Mrs Earwig?
Helped a kid with his arse halfway out of his trousers? Do you even
_see_ the little children with no shoes? The cupboards with no food in
them? The wives with a baby every year and a man down the pub? You have
been kind enough to offer some advice. If I may offer you some advice in
return, you will impress me if you too go round the houses – and not
before. I am the acknowledged successor of Granny Weatherwax, who was
brought up as a witch by Nanny Gripes, who learned it from witches going
all the way back to Black Aliss, and that doesn’t change, whatever you
might think.’ She stood up and opened the front door. ‘Thank you for
taking the time to come and see me. Now, as you have pointed out, I have
lots to do. In my own way. And clearly you _haven’t_.’

One thing about Mrs Earwig, Tiffany thought, was that she could flounce.
She flounced so much that it almost hurt. Things jingled a merry
farewell around her, and one charm even made a spirited attempt to stay
by hooking itself around the doorknob as Mrs Earwig turned at the
threshold.

The last thing she said to Tiffany as she untangled the little pendant
was, ‘I tried, I really tried. I invited you to take advantage of all I
know about witchcraft. But no. You flung my good will right in my face.
You know, we could really have been friends, if you weren’t so stubborn.
Farewell, _my dear girl_.’ Having got the last word in, Mrs Earwig
slammed the door behind her as she left.

Tiffany looked at it and said to herself, I do what is needful, Mrs
Earwig, not what I want to do.

But the banging of the door as punctuation caused Tiffany to think and
she thought suddenly, I want to do it my way. Not how the other witches
think it should be done. I can’t be Granny Weatherwax for them. I can
only be me, Tiffany Aching. But she realized something else too. ‘Mrs
Earwig was right about at least one thing,’ she said aloud. ‘I _am_
trying to do too much. And if Jeannie is right and there is something
awful coming’ – she shuddered – ‘which I will have to deal with, well, I
really hope Miss Tick can find me a girl who might be some use. I do
need some help.’

‘Aye, would seem so,’ said the voice of Rob Anybody.

Tiffany almost exploded. ‘Are you always looking after me, Rob Anybody?’

‘Och aye. Remember, there’s a geas upon us tae look after ye day and
nicht and it’s a greet geas.’

A geas. Backed up by tradition and magic, Tiffany knew that a geas was
an obligation no Feegle would ever fail to meet. Except Daft Wullie, of
course, who often mixed up his ‘geas’ with a flock of big burdies. She
understood all this, but it still rankled. ‘You watch me all the time?
Even when I’m bathing?’ she said wearily. It was a familiar argument.
Tiffany – for no reason Rob could understand – seemed to take exception
to the Feegles being around her _everywhere_. They had already come to
an agreement about the privy.fn2

‘Och aye, that we do. Not lookin’, ye ken.’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘could you do me a favour?’

‘Och aye,’ said Rob. ‘Would you like yon Earwig wifie dropped in a pond
or something?’

Tiffany sighed. ‘Alas, no. I’m not that kind of person.’

‘Ah, but we is,’ said Rob Anybody cheerfully. ‘And anyway, ’tis
traditional, ye ken. And we are guid at tradition, bein’ as we are part
of _folklore_ . . .’ He smiled hopefully.

‘A very nice thought,’ said Tiffany. ‘But no, once again, no. Mrs Earwig
is not really a bad soul.’ That is true, she thought. Stupid, sometimes
overbearing, unfeeling, and not really, if you get down to it, a very
good witch. But there is a steel there at the core.

Tiffany knew Nanny Ogg rarely did any washing – what were
daughters-in-law for? – but she realized suddenly that she had never
seen Granny Weatherwax doing any laundry for the old gentlemen either,
and that thought stopped her for a moment. I need time to work this out,
she thought, looking at the Big Man of the Nac Mac Feegles standing in
front of her, ready for anything. This would be a tough task for them,
she knew.

‘I’ve a wee geas tae lay on ye,’ she said.

‘Och aye?’

‘Rob, have you heard of washing clothes?’

‘Och aye, we ken it happens,’ said Rob Anybody. He scratched at his spog
and a mixture of dead insects, half-gnawed chicken’s foot bones and the
like showered out.

‘Well then,’ said Tiffany, ‘I would deem it a favour if you could spend
some time in my scullery whilst I am about my business. You would be
helping an old man, indeed you would. He likes to be clean, and to have
clean clothes.’ She glared down at him. ‘A circumstance, Rob, which
would be well considered by yourself.’

She approached the scullery door in trepidation when she got back from
her visits. Everything was shining clean, and draped among the trees
outside were old Mr Price’s unmentionables, as white as white could be.
Only then did Tiffany draw breath.

‘Excellent,’ she said to Rob Anybody.

He smiled and said, ‘Aye, we kenned this would be a tricky job.’

‘Good job I wuz with ye this time,’ came a voice. It was Wee Mad Arthur,
a Feegle who didn’t mind washing, due to his having been raised by a
bunch of cobblers, and then being a polisman in the big city. Wee Mad
Arthur, Tiffany often thought, had a battle raging inside him between
his Feegle half and the city half, but since every Feegle liked a good
punch-up, well, a fight inside yourself was just an extra treat.

Big Yan pushed Wee Mad Arthur aside and said, ‘We dinnae mind helping
old bigjobs and getting them squeaky clean, but we are the Feegles and
we treasure our dirt. Washing makes a Feegle wither awa’. We cannae
abide the soap, ye ken.’

‘Nae me, Rob. Nae me,’ came a happy voice and Daft Wullie fell off the
wall of the goat paddock. Bubbles floated away on the air as he rolled
across the grass.

‘I’ve told ye about that, Wullie,’ Rob snapped. ‘It just makes bubbles
come out of your ears.’

Tiffany laughed. ‘Well, you could make your own soap, Wullie. Make some
for Jeannie. Take a wee present home to your kelda. It’s easy to make –
you just need some fat and some lye.’

‘Och aye, we’re good liars, we are,’ Rob put in proudly. ‘Famed for it,
ye ken.’

Well, I tried, thought Tiffany. And anyway, their spirits are pure, if
not particularly clean.

Down on the Chalk, at the edge of a dark forest on the top of a hill
overlooking Twoshirts, a small town with growing aspirations of being a
bit more than one store, a coaching inn and a blacksmith’s shop, the
Queen of the Elves smiled in satisfaction.

It was a warm night and the air smelled as it always did, and the sky
looked as it always did. There appeared to be a new road or stream into
the town which glimmered in the moonlight, but otherwise things seemed
just as they had been on her last visit.

She turned to look at her goblin prisoner, who was perched with his
hands bound on the saddle behind one of her guards. She smiled, and it
was not a pleasant smile. She would hand him over to Lord Lankin, she
thought. The elf would enjoy tearing the wretched goblin limb from limb
– after he had had his pleasure playing with his prey, of course.

But first, this goblin filth had led them here – to this hillside. The
Queen and her raiding party looked down at the sleeping valley ahead.
Her warriors wore scraps of fur and leather, feathers tucked into
headbands and dangling around their necks – and they carried bows with
the arrows already nocked.

The gate between the worlds had given them very little trouble in the
end. It had not taken much effort for the stronger elves to push through
– the barrier was, indeed, very weak just now. Before, the old witch
would surely have kept it strong, kept them out. For she had been always
on the watch for the fairy folk.

Animals noticed them too. At the very moment the Queen stepped onto the
Chalk, the hares on the downs had turned and frozen, whilst the owls out
hunting had soared higher, sensing the unwelcome presence of another
predator.

Humans, however, were usually the last to notice anything. Which made
them so much more fun . . .

Apart from a glow above a mound on the hillside and a distant noise of
roistering that the Queen recognized as being the usual sounds of the
Nac Mac Feegle, there had been nothing so far to trouble the first elf
incursion into the Discworld for many years, and the elves had begun to
enjoy themselves. They had caroused through a couple of villages,
letting out cows, upturning carts, turning the milk in the churns sour,
spoiling a cask of ale and generally amusing themselves with such
trifles. But the growing little town below promised all sorts of
entertainment for elves who had been denied the pleasures of a raid for
far too long.

Apart from the delicate tinkling of myriad bells attached to the
harnesses of the raiding party’s black horses, there was silence as the
elves waited for their Queen to give the signal.

She raised her arm.

But before she could do anything, suddenly, screaming through the air,
there came a noise as though someone was killing a gigantic pig.

It was a sound which enveloped the whole of the Chalk. A screaming
whistle which screeched around the hills, setting everyone’s teeth on
edge. Down in the valley, the air now seemed to be full of fire as a
huge iron monster tore along the silvery trail towards the town, clouds
of steam marking its path.

The elves reeled, panic spreading rapidly from elf to elf as they shrank
from the noise. From the sound. From the very _scent_ of iron in the
air.

Nonchalantly Of the Lathe the Swarf jumped down from the saddle, used
his teeth to steal a stone knife from the guard, whose hands were now
covering his pointy ears in an effort to block out the sound, and
swiftly sliced through his bonds.

‘Told you. Iron Horse, that is,’ he said importantly. ‘Last train into
Twoshirts is that. That’s where goblins work. With steel and iron.’

The Queen hadn’t flinched. She knew that. Some of the others had, but
she could deal with them later – no elf should show fear in front of his
queen. But in her mind, she thought: _Train?_ It’s big. It’s iron, and
we don’t know about it. And what we don’t know about it could get us
killed. ‘How can we tame it?’ she demanded. ‘More importantly, can we
make it ours? What grief we could make with something like that!’

Peaseblossom – a calm Peaseblossom, seemingly impervious to the general
sense of terror among the elves – was at her elbow and smiled; a smile
the Queen didn’t like. It cut through the dramatic style of the face he
had chosen to wear, his eyes cold and merciless. He said, ‘We can
torment the goblins until they tell us how to control it. Then they can
do it for us.’

‘They won’t,’ said Of the Lathe the Swarf, giving Peaseblossom a dirty
look. ‘Why should they?’

Peaseblossom reached down to grab the goblin, and Of the Lathe the Swarf
reacted quickly, thrusting his small hands into his pockets and throwing
a shower of silvery scraps over the elf. Peaseblossom screamed in pain
as he fell from his horse.

The goblin laughed as the other elves hastily backed away. ‘Forgot
what’s in my pockets, Mr Pee-pee flower? Told you about swarf, I did.
Part of my name. Hurts, does it? Touch clever goblin these days, nasty
things happens. Especially to elves.’ He pointed down at Peaseblossom,
whose glamour had completely deserted him under the onslaught of the
shower of iron filings.

The elf lay writhing on the grass, a small, weak, pathetic creature,
crying from the pain.

‘Funny, no?’ said the goblin. ‘In this new world, little things like
swarf – and goblins – _do_ matter.’

fn1 And heard her. For Mrs Earwig’s copious amount of jewellery
announced the witch with such a cheerful jangle that it was as if it had
ambitions to move from being a set of charms and amulets to being a full
instrumental fanfare.

fn2 Though a Feegle will cheerfully lie about almost anything, so
Tiffany still went into any privy with her eyes peeled for flashes of
Feegle; she had even once had a nightmare about a Feegle popping up out
of the other hole of her parents’ two-holer.


[image]
CHAPTER 8


The Baron’s Arms

THE BARON’S ARMS was the kind of pub where John Parsley, hereditary
landlord and bartender, was happy for the locals to mind the pumps when
there was a rush or he needed to answer the call of nature. The kind of
pub where men would arrive proudly carrying a huge cucumber or any other
humorously shaped or suggestive vegetable from the garden just to show
it off to all their friends.

Quite often there would be arguments, but arguments for the truth and
not for a fight. Occasionally someone would try to wager money but this
was frowned on by John Parsley. Although smoking was allowed – lots and
lots of smoking – spitting was not tolerated. And, of course, there was
swearing, with language as ripe as the humorous vegetables. After all,
there were no women there except for Mrs Parsley, who turned a blind ear
and would certainly put up with language such as ‘bugger’, it being
considered nothing more than a colourful expression, used plentifully in
this context as ‘How are you, you old bugger?’ and, more carefully,
‘Bugger me!’

The Barons, knowing the value of a thriving pub and not being above
dropping in from time to time, had over the generations added
improvements for the entertainment of their tenants. Soon after his
marriage, for instance, the new young Baron had given the pub everything
needful for playing darts. This hadn’t been a total success – in one
enthusiastic match Shake Gently, widely acknowledged as the best
ploughman on the Chalk, but not known for his intellectual acumen, had
almost lost an eye. The darts were therefore now looked upon as deadly
by all the locals, and the shove ha’penny board had been carefully put
back into favour.

After a long day’s slog in the fields or sheds, the pub was a welcome
refuge to many. Joe Aching, tenant farmer of Home Farm, had been
promising himself a quiet pint throughout a day which had been beset by
obstreperous animals and broken equipment. A pint, he had told himself,
would put him in a better frame of mind for the discussion which he knew
awaited him over supper about his wedding anniversary, which to his dark
dismay he had forgotten. From long experience, he knew that this meant
at least a week of cold dinners and cold shoulders, even the risk of a
cold bed.

It was Saturday, a warm late summer evening, a clear night. The pub was
full, though not as full as John Parsley would like. Joe took a seat at
the long oak table outside the pub with his dog Jester curled around his
ankles.

Coming from a long line of Achings who had farmed on the Chalk, Joe
Aching knew every man who lived in the area and their families; he knew
who worked and who didn’t work much, and he knew who was silly and who
was smart. Joe himself wasn’t smart, but he was clever and a good farmer
and, above all things, every Saturday night, wherever he actually sat,
he held _the_ chair in the pub. Here he was the fount of all knowledge.

At a smaller table just outside the door, he could hear two of the local
men arguing about the difference between the paw prints of the cat and
of the fox. One of them moved his hands in a slow pavane and said,
‘Look, I tell you this again, the cat, she walk like this, you old
bugger, but Reynard, he do walk like this.’ Once again fox and cat were
demonstrated by the other man. I wonder, Joe thought, if we might be one
of the last generations to think of a fox as Reynard.

It had been a long day for all the men, working as they were with
horses, pigs and sheep, not to mention the scores of chores that faced
any countryman. They had a dialect that creaked, and they knew the names
of all the songbirds throughout the valleys, and every snake and every
fox and where it could be found, and all the places where the Baron’s
men generally didn’t go. In short, they knew a large number of things
unknown to scholars in universities. Usually, when one of them spoke, it
was done after some cogitation and very slowly, and in this interlude
they would put the world to rights until a boy was sent to tell the men
their dinners were going cold if they didn’t hurry.

Then Dick Handly – a fat man with a wispy fluff of a beard that should
be ashamed to call itself a beard in this company – quite abruptly said,
‘This ale is as weak as maiden’s water!’

‘What are you calling my beer?’ said John Parsley, clearing the empties
from the table. ‘It’s as clean as anything. I opened the cask only this
morning.’

Dick Handly said, ‘I’m not saying maiden’s water is all that bad.’ That
got a laugh, albeit a small one. For they all remembered the time when
curmudgeonly old Mr Tidder, putting his faith in a traditional cure, had
asked his daughter to save some of her widdle to pour over his sore leg,
and young Maisie – a sweet girl, but somewhat lacking in the brains
department – had misunderstood the request and poured her father out a
drink with a very unusual flavour. Amazingly, his leg had still got
better.

But another pint was pulled, from a new cask, and Dick Handly pronounced
it satisfactory. And John Parsley wondered. But not much. For what was a
pint among friends?

The landlord sat down with his customers now, and said to Joe, ‘How do
you think the young Baron is settling in?’

The relationship between the Baron and Mr Aching, his tenant, was not
that unusual in the countryside. The Baron owned the land. Everyone knew
that. He also owned all the farms in the neighbourhood, and the farmers,
his tenants, farmed the land for him, paying rent every quarter day. He
could, if he chose, take a farm back and throw a farmer and his family
out. In the past, there had been barons who had occasionally indulged in
displays of authority such as burning down cottages and throwing out
whole families, sometimes just on a whim, but mostly as a daft way of
showing who had the real power. They soon learned. Power means nothing
without a decent harvest in the barn, and a flock of Sunday dinners
grazing on the hills.

Roland, the young Baron, had made a bit of a rocky start – made worse,
it has to be said, by his new mother-in-law, a duchess who made sure
that everyone knew it too. But he soon learned. Knowing that he wasn’t
yet experienced at farming the land, he had followed his father’s
general practice of wisely leaving his farmers to run their farms and
their workers as they saw fit. Now everyone was happy.

Also wisely, Roland would from time to time talk to Joe Aching, as had
his father before him, and Joe, a kindly man, would offer to speak about
the things the Baron’s land agent and rent collectors might not see,
such as a widow who had fallen on bad times or a mother struggling to
cope after her husband had been trampled by a bad-tempered young bull.
Joe Aching would point out that a certain amount of charity would be a
good thing and, to give the young Baron his due, he would do what he was
told in a strange sort of way, and the widow would find that somehow she
had managed to pay her rent in advance, so owed nothing for the time
being, and a helpful young lad from the estate who needed to learn
farming might turn up at the young mother’s little holding.

‘I don’t like to judge too soon,’ said Joe, leaning back on the bench
and looking solemn in a way only a man who had the right to _the_ chair
on a Saturday had the right to look. ‘But to tell you the truth, he’s
doing rather well. Picking it up as he goes along, you might say.’

‘That’s good then,’ said Thomas Greengrass. ‘Looks like he’s going to
follow in the footsteps of his old man.’

‘We’ll be lucky then. The old Baron was a good man – tough on the
outside, but he knew what was what.’

Parsley smiled. ‘His young lady, the Baroness, has learned a lot of
lessons without being taught them – have you noticed that? She’s always
around the place talking to people, not putting on airs. The wife likes
her,’ he added with a sage nod. If the wife approved, well, that was
good. It meant peace at home, and every countryman wanted _that_ after a
day’s hard work. ‘I heard tell she’d been round to say well done
whenever a man’s wife was having kids.’

On that subject, Robert Thick said, ‘My Josephine will be having another
one shortly.’

Somebody laughed and said, ‘That’s pints all round, you know.’

‘Be sure to have a word with Joe’s Tiffany then,’ said Thomas
Greengrass. ‘When it comes to birthing a child, I’ve never seen better.’

Over his pint, Thomas added, ‘I saw her whizzing past yesterday. It made
me right proud, it really did, a girl of the Chalk. I’m sure you must be
just as proud, Joe.’

Everyone knew Tiffany Aching, of course; had done ever since she was
very small and played with their own children. They didn’t much like
witches up on the Chalk, but Tiffany was _their_ witch. And a good witch
to boot. Most importantly, she was a girl of the Chalk. She knew the
worth of sheep, and they’d seen her running around in her pants when she
was growing up. So that was all right then.

Tiffany’s father tried to smile as he reached down and gave his dog a
pork scratching. ‘A present for you, Jester.’ He looked up. ‘Of course,
Tiffany’s mother would like to see her here more often, though she’s
made up about our Tiff; can’t stop telling people about what she does,
and neither can I.’ He looked over at the landlord. ‘Another pint for me
when you’ve time please, John.’

‘Of course, Joe,’ said John Parsley, heading into the bar and returning
with the foaming tankard in his hand.

As the pint was passed down to its destination, Joe said, ‘It’s strange,
you know, when I think about how much time our Tiffany spends over in
Lancre these days.’

‘Be a shame if she moved up there,’ Dick Handly commented. And the
thought was there, floating in the air, though nobody said anything
further. Not to Joe Aching, not on a Saturday.

‘Well, she’s always very busy,’ Joe said slowly, tucking Dick’s comment
away in his head to think about later. ‘Lot of babies round here, lads!’
This brought a smile.

‘And it’s not just birthing. She came to my old mother when she was
going,’ said Jim Twister. ‘Was with her all night. And she took the pain
away! She does that, you know?’

‘Yes,’ said Joe. ‘It’s not just for barons, but that’s how the old boy
went, you know – he had a nurse, but it was Tiffany who sorted him out.
Made sure he had no pain.’

There was a sudden silence at the table as the the drinkers reflected on
the many times Tiffany Aching had crossed their paths. Then Noddy
Saunters said, almost breathlessly, ‘Well, Joe, we are all hoping as
your Tiffany stays round here, you know. You have got a good one there
and no mistake. Mind you tell her that when you sees her.’

‘I don’t need telling, Noddy,’ said Joe. ‘Tiffany’s mother would like
her to settle down, o’ course, on the Chalk with her young man – you
know, young Preston, who’s gone off to learn to be a proper doctor in
the big city. But I reckon she won’t, not for a while anyway. As I see
it, there’s lots of Achings around here but our Tiff is following in the
footsteps of her granny, only more modern thinking, if you get me? I
reckon she’s out to change the world, and if not the world, then this
little bit called the Chalk.’

‘She’s a right good witch for us shepherds,’ Thomas Greengrass added,
and there was a murmur of agreement.

‘Do you remember, lads, when shepherds would all turn up here and fight
in the Challenge?’ said Dick Handly after a pause to empty his glass.
‘We didn’t have witches then.’

‘Aye,’ said Joe Aching. ‘Those old shepherds didn’t fight with their
sticks, mind you. They arm-wrestled. And the winner would be named head
shepherd.’

They all laughed at that. And most of them thought of Granny Aching, for
Granny Aching had really been the last head shepherd. A nod from Granny
Aching and a shepherd would walk like a king for the day, Challenge or
no Challenge.

‘Well, we don’t have no head shepherd nowadays. We got a witch instead.
Your Tiffany,’ said Robert Thick after another long silence in which
more beer was drunk and pipes were lit.

‘So if we have a witch instead of a head shepherd . . . do you think any
of you ought to arm-wrestle her?’ asked John Parsley with a big grin –
and a sideways look at Tiffany’s father.

Robert Thick said, ‘A witch? No fear. I would mend my manners.’

Joe chuckled as the others nodded in agreement.

Then they looked up as a shadow passed over them and the girl on her
broomstick shouted down, ‘Evening, Dad! Evening, all. Can’t stop. This
one’s having twins.’

Roland de Chumsfanleigh,fn1 the young Baron on the Chalk, _did_ want to
be like his father in many ways. He knew the old man had been popular –
what was known as an ‘old school baron’, which meant that everyone knew
what to expect and the guards polished up their armour and saluted, and
did what was expected of _them_, while the Baron did what was expected
of him, and pretty much left them alone.

But his father had also been a bit of a bad-tempered bully at times. And
_that_ bit Roland wanted to forget about. He particularly wanted to
sound the right note when he called round to see Tiffany Aching at Home
Farm. For they had once been good friends, and, to Roland’s alarm,
Tiffany was thought of as a good friend by his wife Letitia. Any man
with sense was wise to be fearful of a wife’s best friends. For who knew
what . . . little secrets might be shared. Roland, having been educated
at home and with limited knowledge of the world outside the Chalk,
feared that ‘little’ might be _exactly_ the kind of comment Letitia
might share with Tiffany.

He chose his moment when he saw her broomstick descend early that
Saturday evening, at a time when he knew Joe Aching would be at the pub.

‘Hello, Roland,’ Tiffany said, not even turning round as he rode into
the farmyard and dismounted from his horse.

Roland quivered. He was the Baron. Her father’s farm was his. And as he
thought this, he realized how stupid a thought it was. As Baron, he had
the bits of paper that proved his ownership. But this farm was the
Achings’. It always had been, and it always would be. And he knew that
Tiffany knew exactly what he’d just thought, so he went a bit pink when
she turned round.

‘Er, Tiffany,’ he began, ‘I just wanted to see you and . . . er . . .
well, it’s like this . . .’

‘Oh, come on, Roland,’ she urged. ‘Just get on with what you’ve come to
say; it’s been a busy day and I need to get back to Lancre tonight too.’

It was the opening he needed. ‘Well, that’s what I came about, Tiffany.
There have been . . . _complaints_.’ It wasn’t the right word, and he
knew it.

Tiffany reeled at the word. ‘What?’ she said sharply.

‘Well, you’re never _here_, Tiffany. You’re supposed to be our witch, be
here for _us_. But you’re off to the Ramtops almost every other day.’ He
straightened up, a metaphorical broomstick up his spine. He needed to
sound official, not wheedle. ‘I am your baron,’ he said, ‘and I ask that
you look to your responsibilities, do your duty.’

‘Do my duty?’ Tiffany echoed weakly. What did he _think_ she had been
doing over the past few weeks, bandaging legs and treating sores,
birthing babies and taking pain away from those nearing the end of their
days, and visiting the old folk and keeping an eye on the babies,
and . . . yes, _cutting_ _toenails_! What had _Roland_ been doing?
Hosting dinner parties? Admiring Letitia’s attempts at watercolours? It
would be far better if he could have offered Letitia’s help. For Roland
knew, just as Tiffany did, that Letitia had the natural abilities of a
witch. She could be _useful_ on the Chalk.

And then she thought, that was mean. For she knew that Letitia visited
every new baby. Talked to the women.

But she was angry with Roland.

‘I shall think on what you say,’ she said with an exaggerated politeness
that made him blush even more.

With the imaginary broomstick still rigidly attached to his back, Roland
strode over to his horse, remounted and rode off.

Well, I did try, he told himself. But he couldn’t help but feel that he
had made a bit of a mess of it.

There had been pandemonium when the Queen and her followers got back
through the stone circle.

The glittering Fairyland palace was gone and the council was taking
place in a clearing in the depths of what might have been a magical wood
if the Queen had bothered to put in the requisite details such as
butterflies, daisies and toadstools. Even now, trees were frantically
scribbling in branches and twigs as she passed, and parts of the ground
seemed to be having a little race to create blades of grass on either
side of her.

She was furious. A goblin – a piece of filth – had dared to attack one
of her lords. And he had _fallen_ in front of that goblin, a goblin so
fleet of mucky foot as he had run from her anger. But although it had
been Peaseblossom who had fallen – and secretly the Queen was pleased
that it had been him and not another of her lords – she knew that her
elves blamed _her_ for the shame. The failure. For she had led the
raiding party, taken the goblin with them.

Despite her orders, Peaseblossom was still with them. He’d been pale and
staggering at first, but his glamour was almost back to its normal
strength now the terrible iron had been cleansed from his body. Behind
him were ranked her guards and she could feel defiance flowing from
them.

She glared at Peaseblossom with disdain, and said to one of the guards,
‘Take that weakling away. Get him out of my sight!’

But the guard did not move. Instead, he smiled insolently, and fingered
the crossbow in his hands, casually nocking a feathered arrow and daring
to point it in her direction.

‘My lady,’ Peaseblossom said with thinly veiled scorn, ‘we are getting
lost. Our hold on the human world is weak. Even the _goblins_ are
laughing at us now. Why do we only learn from one of _them_ that the
humans have been encircling their world with iron? Why haven’t you done
anything to stop this? Why haven’t we been out on the hunts? Why have
you not allowed us to be true elves? It’s not like the old times.’

His glamour was nearly powerful enough again to match hers, but his will
was even stronger. How did I not fully see this? the Queen thought,
though her face showed nothing of what she was feeling. Is he daring to
_challenge_ me? I am the Queen. The King may be in another world,
lolling in his barrow, luxuriating in his pleasures, but I am still his
queen. There is always a queen to rule. Never a _lord_. She pulled
herself up to her full height and glared at her treacherous lord,
willing her glamour to its full power.

But there was a chorus of agreement with Peaseblossom from several
elves. It was indeed a rare day when an elf agreed with another elf –
_disagreement_ was a far more normal state of being – but the mass of
warriors seemed to be drawing closer together right now, their cold eyes
examining their queen. Pitiless. Dangerous. _Nasty_.

The Queen looked at each one before turning back to Peaseblossom. ‘You
little squib,’ she hissed. ‘I could put out your eyes in a moment.’

‘Oh yes, madam,’ Peaseblossom continued as the pressure built. ‘And who
lets the Feegles run amok? Now that the old crone is gone, the witches
are weak. As is the gateway between our worlds. But you, despite all
this, you seem still afraid of the Aching girl. She nearly killed you
before by all accounts.’

‘She did not,’ said the Queen.

But the other elves were looking at her now, looking at her like a cat
looks at its prey . . . And he spoke true. Tiffany Aching _had_ defeated
her. The Queen felt her glamour flickering, fading.

‘You are weak, madam,’ said Peaseblossom.

The Queen _felt_ weak. And small, and tired. The trees were closing in.
The light seemed to fade. She looked at the faces around her, then
rallied and summoned up what power she had left. She was still the
Queen. Their queen. They _must_ listen to her.

‘The times are a-changing,’ she said, pulling herself to her full
height. ‘Iron or not, goblins or not, that world is no longer the same.’

‘So we hide away, at your bidding,’ said Peaseblossom, his voice full of
contempt. ‘If the world is changing, it is we who must change it. _We_
who must decide how it will be. That is how it has _always_ been. And
how it _must_ be again.’

The elves around him sparkled their approval, their finery dazzling,
their cold narrow faces surrounded by the glow of their glamour.

The Queen felt lost. ‘You don’t understand,’ she tried. ‘We have that
world there, for our pleasure. But if we try to act as it has always
been, well, we will be rolled over by time. Just . . . fairies. This is
what the iron in that world tells us. There is no future for us there.’

Peaseblossom sneered and said, ‘This is rubbish. This talk of no future?
We make our own futures. We don’t care about humans or goblins. But
_you_ – you seem to be rather soft on them. Could the great Queen be
afraid? You are not certain of yourself, lady. That makes _us_ uncertain
of _you_.’

The allegiance of elves is spider-web thin and the currency of Fairyland
is glamour. The Queen could feel her glamour draining away more and more
as her adversary talked.

And then he struck.

‘You have become _too_ soft, madam,’ he roared. ‘It began with
that . . . girl. And it will end with . . . _me_!’ And now his glamour
was growing in intensity and his eyes were glowing and the power was
building around him, making the other elves wary and obedient.
Peaseblossom pointed at the Queen, watching myriad faces and visages
flicker across her features – golden hair, dark hair, long hair, short
hair, wispy hair . . . balding, baby’s hair. Tall, strong . . . weak,
child-like. Upright, curled over . . . whimpering. ‘The goblins no
longer come at your beck and call these days,’ he hissed. ‘And Fairyland
cannot survive without a strong leader. We elves need somebody to
prevail – over goblins, over humans and everybody else. What we need
now, what our king in the barrow needs, is a _warrior_.’

Peaseblossom was like a snake now, his gaze piercing his victim, even as
she shrivelled further and wept from the loss of her glamour.

‘We can’t be governed by such as _this_,’ he concluded contemptuously.
He turned to the other elves and said, ‘What do you say?’

And in the blankness of their eyes, the Queen saw her future drop away.

‘What should we do with her, Lord Peaseblossom?’ It was Mustardseed,
striding forward to support his new leader.

‘She must quit the throne!’ another elf called out.

Peaseblossom looked down at his former queen with disdain. ‘Take her
away, toy with her as you will – and then _tear off her wings_,’ he
commanded. ‘That will be the penalty for those who fail. Now,’ he
continued, ‘where are my musicians? Let us dance on the shame of her who
was once our queen. Kick her memory, if you will, out of Fairyland with
her, and may she never come back.’

‘Where should she go?’ Mustardseed called, grabbing the Queen by one of
her tiny, stick-like arms.

But Peaseblossom had gone, weaving amongst the throng of courtiers who
now danced in his footsteps.

As the helpless little elf who had once been a queen was dragged from
his sight, Mustardseed heard her whisper a few words in her desperation:
‘Thunder . . . and Lightning . . . may you feel the force of Thunder and
Lightning, Peaseblossom, and then the wrath of Tiffany Aching. It stings
to the bone . . .’

And the rain started and became hail.

fn1 Pronounced ‘Chuffley’ under that strange rule that the more
gentrified a family is, the more peculiar the pronunciation of their
name becomes. Tiffany had once heard a highborn visitor named
Ponsonby-Macklewright (_Pwt_) refer to Roland as _Chf_. She wondered how
they managed at dinner when _Pwt_ introduced _Chf_ to _Wm_ or _Hmpfh_.
Surely it could lead to misunderstandings?


[image]
CHAPTER 9


Good with Goats

THE BOY STANDING in the rain looking at Tiffany at the back door of the
cottage that was now hers – no longer Granny’s – was not like her usual
visitor. He was grubby, yes, but it was the grubbiness of the road
rather than that of poverty, and he had a goat with him, which wasn’t
usual. But he didn’t look _in need_. She looked closer. His clothing had
once been expensive, high-class stuff. _Needy_, though, she thought. A
few years younger than her too.

‘Are you Mistress Aching, the witch?’ he asked nervously as she opened
the door.

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, thinking to herself, Well, at least he has done
_some_ homework and he’s not come knocking asking for Granny Weatherwax,
and he’s knocked at the back door just as he should; and I’ve just made
myself some pottage and it will be going cold. ‘What can I do for you?
I’m sure you need something?’ she continued, because a witch turned
nobody away.

‘No, mistress, by your leave, but I heard people talking about you as I
was walking along the road. They say you are the best witch.’

‘Well, folks can say anything,’ said Tiffany, ‘but it’s what the other
witches think that matters. How can I help you?’

‘I want to be a witch!’ The last word resonated in the air as if it was
alive, but the boy looked serious and unhappy, and he ploughed on
doggedly, saying, ‘Mr Wiggall – my tutor – told me of one witch who
became a wizard, so surely, mistress, the concept must go both ways?
They say what’s good for the goose is good for the gander, don’t they?’

‘Well, yes,’ said Tiffany, uncertain of herself. ‘But many ladies do not
like to deal with an unknown man, as it were, in private circumstances.
A lot of our work involves being midwives, you know, with the accent on
_wives_.’

The boy’s Adam’s apple was shaking, but he managed to say, ‘I know that
in the big city the Lady Sybil Free Hospital helps women and men alike.
There is no doubt about it, mistress, that when it comes to surgery,
there are ladies who are sometimes glad to see the surgeon.’ The boy
seemed to brighten up for a moment and said, ‘I really feel I can be a
witch. I know a lot about country things, and I have very little fingers
which were of great use some while ago on the road, when I had to deal
with a goat in labour, and it was in trouble. I had to roll up my
sleeves and fiddle about with care to get the kid lined up to leave his
mother. It was messy, of course, but the kid was alive, and the old man
who owned the goat was in tears of gratitude.’

‘Really,’ said Tiffany stonily, wondering when ‘good with goats’ had
become a qualification for being a witch. But the boy looked like a lost
soul – so she relented and invited him in for a cup of tea. The goat was
shown an overgrown patch of Creepalong Minnie under the apple tree, out
of the rain, and seemed content to be left outside, although Tiffany
could not help noticing – as any witch would notice – that it gave her
an odd look of a kind not often seen in a goat’s slotted eyes. The type
of look that makes you wary of turning your back, definitely, but
something . . . more than that too.

As she beckoned the boy in, she saw You stroll past the apple tree and
suddenly stop, her back arching and her tail fluffing out to a
remarkable size as she spotted the goat. There was a pregnant pause as
the two eyed each other up – and Tiffany could have sworn she saw a
quick flash of fluorescent light, greenish-yellow-purple – and then all
was suddenly calm, as if there had been an agreement signed and sealed.
The goat returned to its nibbling, and You subsided to her normal size
and strolled past, almost brushing against the goat’s legs. Tiffany was
amazed. She had seen Nanny Ogg’s cat Greebo run from You! What kind of
goat _was_ this? Perhaps, she thought with interest, this boy is also
more than he seems.

As they sat at the little kitchen table, she learned that the boy’s name
was Geoffrey and that he was a long way from home. She noticed that he
didn’t seem to want to talk about his family, so she tried another tack.

‘I am intrigued, Geoffrey,’ she said. ‘Why do you want to be a witch
instead of a wizard, which is something traditionally thought of as a
man’s job?’

‘I’ve never thought of myself as a man, Mistress Tiffany. I don’t think
I’m anything. I’m just me,’ he said quietly.

Good answer! Tiffany said to herself. Then she wondered, not for the
first time, about the differences between wizards and witches. The main
difference, she thought, was that wizards used books and staffs to
create spells, _big_ spells about big stuff, and they were men. While
witches – always women – dealt with everyday stuff. _Big_ stuff too, she
reminded herself firmly. What could be bigger than births and deaths?
But why shouldn’t this boy want to be a witch? She had chosen to be a
witch, so why couldn’t he make the same choice? With a start, she
realized it was her choice that counted here too. If she was going to be
a sort of head witch, she should be able to decide this. She didn’t have
to ask any other witches. It could be her decision. Her responsibility.
Perhaps a first step towards doing things differently?

She looked at Geoffrey. There’s something about this lad and I don’t
know what it is, she decided. But he seems harmless and looks quite
down-trodden, so I will decide, and I choose to give him a try. As for
the goat . . .

‘Well,’ she said, ‘I can give you some bedding in the lean-to, and some
food and drink for today. Your goat is your responsibility. But it’s
getting late now, so we will talk again tomorrow.’

Next morning, whilst waiting for Nanny to drop by, Tiffany went to the
lean-to with some food. The boy was asleep. She coughed carefully and
the boy jumped at the sound.

‘Very well, Geoffrey, now tell me the truth. Are you running away from
somebody? Parents, perhaps?’

‘No, I’m not,’ said Geoffrey, taking a mouthful of the bread Tiffany had
brought but pushing the slice of ham to one side.

You little fibber, thought Tiffany, like any witch good at spotting a
lie.fn1 She sighed. ‘Are you just running away from home then?’

‘Well, you could say that, mistress, but I am sixteen and I just wanted
to leave.’

‘Don’t get on with your father, do you?’ said Tiffany, and she saw the
boy metaphorically jump, as if she’d hit a nerve.

‘How could you see that, mistress!’

Tiffany sighed. ‘It does say _witch_ on the door, doesn’t it? I might
not be much older than you, but you aren’t the first runaway I’ve dealt
with, and I’m absolutely certain there will be many more. Although,’ she
added, ‘never one as highborn as you are, Mister Geoffrey. Good coat,
you see. Well now, of what use can you be to me and my steading,
Geoffrey?’

‘Oh, quite a lot, mistress,’ he said, trying to sound definite but just
seeming hopeful.

And at that moment Nanny Ogg came round the corner of the cottage, not
there one minute and then suddenly there, which was, Tiffany knew,
Nanny’s way. She looked at Geoffrey, made an instant judgement, then
winked at Tiffany and said, ‘Anythin’ going on, Tiff?’ Tiffany saw a
suggestive grin on Nanny’s wrinkled face, as if an apple was suddenly
leering at her. Geoffrey looked as if he was going to flee.

‘It’s all right, Nanny. Meet Geoffrey here,’ Tiffany said sharply. ‘He
wants to be a witch.’

‘Really?’ Nanny chortled. ‘You mean he wants to do magic. Send ’im to
the wizards!’

Now Geoffrey looked like a little fawn about to dash away. Nanny Ogg
could affect people like that.

‘No, he wants to be a _witch_, Nanny. Do you understand?’

Tiffany saw a naughty little gleam in Nanny’s eyes as she said, ‘So, he
wants to be a witch, does he? Perhaps he should learn what us witches
has to put up with before he decides proper like. I mean, he might still
want to give them wizards a go if he’s got any magic in ’im. I know,
make him a back-house boy.’ A backhouse boy was like a male scullery
maid, doing all the odd, and usually dirty, jobs around the homestead.
Things like killing chickens and stringing pheasants, cleaning shoes,
peeling potatoes and any other task that was messy, and occasionally
dangerous. There was usually one on Home Farm, gradually learning what
farming was all about. ‘I tells you what,’ Nanny continued, looking at
the trembling boy, ‘let’s try him out with Mr Nimlet. You knows what his
toenails is like.’

Yes, like all old men’s toenails, Tiffany thought. She looked at the boy
who was so terribly anxious to be helpful and took pity on him and said,
‘There’s more to being a witch than you think, Geoffrey, but if you’d
like to be my back-house boy, we’ll see how you go. And first of all,
I’d like you to do something about an old man’s horrible toenails.’

‘You may need a shield,’ said Nanny Ogg.

The boy looked at Tiffany questioningly.

‘Oh dear,’ said Tiffany. ‘Mr Nimlet’s toenails tend to be thick and
strong and very, very difficult to deal with. You need really sharp
secateurs, and even then the blessed things go pinging off around the
room. You have to be careful about your eyes too.’ She studied the boy’s
face; he looked determined to meet any obstacle, even flyaway toenails.
Nanny was grinning, so Tiffany said, ‘I’ve got a birth to see to. Nanny,
would you be kind enough to take Geoffrey to Mr Nimlet and see how he
does. Oh, and tell him to remember to collect the clippings – Rob
Anybody has a use for them, so he does.’

‘Can I take Mephistopheles with me?’ Geoffrey asked.

Nanny spun on her heels. ‘Mephis_what_?’ she said slowly.

‘My goat,’ Geoffrey said, pointing towards the paddock where
Mephistopheles was investigating the remains of the dandelion patch. ‘Or
rather, he is his _own_ goat, but we travel together. He is a very
clever companion.’

Nanny snorted.

‘See,’ Geoffrey added proudly as they watched Mephistopheles daintily
cross the paddock and nose open the door of the little shed by the beech
tree. ‘He has even learned to use the privy.’

And Nanny – for once in her life – was speechless.

fn1 Spotting the _truth_ was much harder.


[image]
CHAPTER 10


Treasure

DEEP IN THE heart of Fairyland, the triumphant Peaseblossom surveyed his
court.

Lord Lankin – tall, elegant, a tunic of moss and gorse slung casually
over his darkened skin – lounged by his side, toying with a bronze
dagger.

‘I am your king now,’ Peaseblossom declared.

There was silence in the great hall as the elves considered this
development and their chances. And one bold elf said, ‘What about the
King himself? Down in the barrow? What do you think he will say?’

‘Something like _this_,’ said Peaseblossom, hurling a feathered arrow at
the elf, striking him down. Injured, but not dead. Good, Peaseblossom
thought. More fun for me later. He gestured to his warriors and the
stricken elf was dragged away. ‘To hell with the King!’ he said, and
this time there was no argument.

Every elf knew that Peaseblossom wanted a showdown with the world of
humans, of dwarfs and goblins and all the other peoples, wanted elves to
run free and fierce through that world once again.

‘We have been elves since the dawn of time,’ Peaseblossom thundered.
‘Too long have humans had the upper hand. Upstart goblins will feel our
wrath! The hootings of mechanical rubbish will be swept away! We will
take back the world we have been denied!’ He smiled, and added softly,
‘Those who are not with us will suffer.’

In the world of the train and the swarf, iron could kill elves. But no
elf wanted to be the one to feel the dreadful temper of Peaseblossom by
gainsaying him. And they were very aware that he knew _exactly_ how to
make a short word like ‘suffer’ turn into a very long experience.

And as their new king’s glamour built and he stood tall and strong above
them, they felt a sense of their world waking up once more.

‘What fools these mortals be!’ Peaseblossom roared. ‘They think they can
stop us? They _need_ us. They _call_ to us. And we will come. We will
make them want what they can’t have and we will give them nothing but
our laughter. We will take everything!’

And the elves cheered.

Becky Pardon and Nancy Upright, dressed in their best, stood in
trepidation in front of Miss Tick, who said, ‘It’s not all spells and
broomsticks. It’s heavy work, sometimes. Sometimes quite nasty. Yes,
Becky?’

‘I was there as my granddad died,’ said Becky, ‘and I watched all the
things that had to be done. My dad said I shouldn’t, but my mother said,
“Let the girl see. She’ll find out sooner or later how things are in the
world.”’

‘What I want to know, girls, is that you can deal with magic. Both of
you ought to have some basic magic, like blowing out a candle just by
thought. What do you think we do with magic?’

Becky said, ‘You can cure warts. I know that one. My granny could do
that. Magic can make you _beautiful_.’ Her tone was wistful, and Miss
Tick looked a little more closely at her. Oh, a rather nasty birthmark
on one cheek.

‘You can magic someone to be your best friend,’ Nancy added. ‘Or’ – with
a bit of a blush – ‘make a boy like you.’

Miss Tick laughed. ‘Girls, I can tell you this, magic won’t make you
beautiful if you are not. And it certainly won’t make you popular. It is
not a toy.’

Her face even redder, Nancy said, ‘But about boys . . .’

Miss Tick’s face did not move a muscle, and then she said, ‘What about
them?’ Nancy’s blush was now impressive – if she went any redder, Miss
Tick thought, she would look like a lobster. Miss Tick continued, ‘You
don’t have to use spells to get boys, Nancy, and if you wish to know
more about that, I daresay Mistress Tiffany will point you towards Nanny
Ogg, or possibly your grandmother.’

‘Do you have a beau, mistress?’ asked Nancy.

‘No,’ said Miss Tick. ‘They get in the way. Now, let’s see if you can
make a shamble. If you can’t do that you are very unlikely to be a
witch. A shamble will give you _focus_.’ She flung her hand into the air
and something was there. The very air seemed to be boiling. Dancing,
fluttering . . . alive. And Miss Tick said, ‘See how the air moves, how
it waits – it’s the place where my shamble could be. Where it could
advise me.’ Suddenly, she had produced an egg in her hand, with some
thread, twigs, a small nut. ‘These items I had about me could make that
shamble,’ she said. She looked at the serious little faces, sighed and
said, ‘But now it’s time for each of you to make _your_ shamble, and it
must have something living in it. Look, just shut your eyes and make a
shamble out of anything you have with you.’

She watched them, their faces as solemn as a dirge as they pulled things
out of their pockets. Miss Tick knew her witches, knew these girls had
the innate magical talent, but to decide to train to be a witch was the
kind of decision that took more than just a bit of talent. Hard work
would have to come into it too. A lot of hard work. Even then it would
not be easy, she knew. Apart from anything else, they had to have
parents who would support their choice. A girl might be useful at home,
helping with the younger children or working in a family business, for
instance. That was _before_ the question of grandchildren cropped up.
And it always did, oh yes, always.

Miss Tick knew too that you can find out a lot about somebody from
what’s in their pockets, and sometimes a lot about them from what they
_don’t_ have. She herself generally had a small cheese in one of her
pockets – you couldn’t do good magic without a snack. Out loud, she
said, ‘Even a worm is alive, so keeping one in a little box with some
wet leaves will help.’

Nancy pulled off one of her boots, saying, ‘I’ve got a caterpillar in
there.’

‘Well done,’ said Miss Tick. ‘You have been lucky, but being lucky is
only part of being a witch.’

Becky looked rather glum. ‘I’ve got a hairpin – am I allowed to use
that?’

Miss Tick sighed. ‘In your shamble? Of course, but you must still have
something living. Butterflies or ants or things like that, but remember
– you shouldn’t kill them. Let them fly free.’

‘Oh, all right,’ said Becky. She rummaged around in the bushes behind
them for a moment, then held up a large green hairy caterpillar.

‘Copycat!’ said Nancy.

Miss Tick laughed. ‘Part of being a witch is being clever. Using your
eyes and learning from what you see. Well done, Becky.’ For Becky now
had the caterpillar neatly trussed in a bit of old string, which also
seemed to be knotted somehow around one of her fingers. Her other
fingers were struggling to push the hairpin into the shamble.

Nancy pouted and held up _her_ caterpillar, which appeared to be trying
to burrow into a tuft of sheep’s wool.

There was a rumble of thunder and a strike of lightning and both girls
said, ‘That was me, with my little shamble.’

Miss Tick smiled again. Why were people so keen to look at a sunrise, a
rainbow, a flash of lightning or a dark cloud and feel _responsible_ for
it? She knew that if either girl really believed they could control a
storm in the skies, they would be running home, screaming in terror –
and their mothers would probably have to wash out the girls’
underclothing. Still, a bit of self-belief in a witch was a good start.

‘Miss, miss!’ said Becky and pointed. There was a hairpin now floating
in the air alongside her caterpillar.

‘Well done,’ said Miss Tick. ‘Very well done indeed.’

‘Well, what about this, then?’ said Nancy, as her own shamble collapsed
and the sheep’s wool floated to the ground, the little caterpillar
perched on top like a witch on a broomstick. She raised her finger, and
fire appeared to come out of the tip.

‘Excellent,’ said Miss Tick. ‘Both of you have got the hang of it. After
that, it’s just a matter of learning, learning every day,’ she said
sternly.

But what she thought was, Well, Mistress Tiffany will want to see you
two and no mistake.

The music was playing in Fairyland – a harmonious melody, notes
spiralling into the empty air, where a lazing elf perched on a slender
branch near the top of a blossoming tree allowed himself the pleasure of
turning each note into a colour, so that they danced above their heads,
delighting the court. It doesn’t take much to delight an elf. Hurting
something is usually top of their list, but music comes a close second.

The musician was a human, lured into the woods by the glamour of an
elf’s harp, then snatched through to play, play, play for the Lord
Peaseblossom. Elves were skilled at keeping their playthings alive,
sometimes for weeks, and the man with the flute was a delightful new
toy. Peaseblossom wondered idly how long the man would last.

But he was pleased. His warriors were making little sorties into the
human world, bringing him back presents such as this. And he knew that
with each successful incursion their confidence was growing. Soon they
would be ready to make their move . . .

He frowned. He had to speak to Mustardseed. He needed to know that the
elf had indeed thrown the wretched remains of the Queen out of
Fairyland. He wanted no . . . complications.

Just as he loved to watch wildlife, so Geoffrey observed people. He
found them fascinating, and he watched closely all the time, learning
more and more from what he saw.

One thing he saw was that the old men seemed somehow _in the way_ in
their homes. It was so different from Geoffrey’s own home, where his
father had decidedly ruled the roost. Here, where there were women in
the old men’s lives, the women held all the power indoors – as they had
for the years their men had been out working – and they had no intention
of giving any of it away.

This thought was in his mind when he went to tidy up the nostril hairs
of Sailor Makepeace, an errand which even Nanny Ogg disliked. Now Mrs
Sally Makepeace – too shortsighted to be trusted with a pair of scissors
near her husband’s nose, as an earlier attempt had proved – appeared to
be a good woman, but Geoffrey had noticed that she treated her husband
almost as part of the furniture, and that made Geoffrey sad – sad that a
seafaring man who had seen so many interesting things now spent much of
his time in the pub because his wife was always washing, cleaning,
polishing and, when no alternative was around, dusting. She only _just_
managed to avoid washing, cleaning and dusting her husband if he sat
still for long enough.

Gradually it dawned on Geoffrey that the pub was both an entertainment
and a refuge for the old boys. He joined them there one day and bought
them all a pint, which got their attention. Then he had Mephistopheles
do his counting trick. By the second pint the old boys had become quite
avuncular and Geoffrey broached a subject which had been on his mind for
a few days.

‘So, may I ask what you do, gentlemen?’

As it happened, he got laughter, and Reservoir Slump – a man whose grin,
unlike his name, never slipped – said, ‘Bless you, sir, you could call
us gentlemen of leisure.’

‘We are as kings,’ said Laughing Boy Sideways.

‘Though without the castles,’ Reservoir Slump added. ‘’Less’n I had one
once and lost it somewhere.’

‘And do you like your leisure, gentlemen?’ said Geoffrey.

‘Not really,’ said Smack Tremble. ‘In fact, I hate it. Ever since my
Judy died. We never had kids, neither.’ There was a tear in his eye and
a break in his voice, which he covered up by taking another swig from
his tankard.

‘She had a tortoise though, didn’t she?’ Wrinkled Joe, who had been
built to a size big enough to pick up cows, put in.

‘Right enough,’ Smack said. ‘She said she liked it because it walked no
faster ’n her. Still got the tortoise, but it ain’t the same. Not much
good at conversation. My Judy would rattle on all day about this ’n’
that. The tortoise listens well enough, mind you, which is more’n I
could say for Judy sometimes.’ This got a laugh.

‘It’s a petticoat government, when you get old,’ said Stinky Jim Jones.

Geoffrey, now pleased to have got the ball rolling, said, ‘What do you
mean by that?’

And then there was a kind of grumble from every man.

‘It’s like this, backhouse boy,’ said Wrinkled Joe. ‘My Betsy tells me
what I am to eat and when and where, and if we are together, she fusses
around me like an old hen. It’s like being a kid.’

‘Oh, I know,’ said Captain Makepeace. ‘My Sally is wonderful and I knows
I would be lost without her but, well, put it like this: I was a man
once in charge of many other men, and when the weather was fearsomely
bad, I would be up there making sure that we didn’t founder because it
was my job and I was the captain.’ He looked around, seeing nods from
the others, and then said directly to Geoffrey, ‘And best of all, young
man, I was a _man_. And now? My job is to lift my feet while she sweeps
around me. It’s our home and I love her, but somehow I’m always in the
way.’

‘I know what you mean,’ said Stinky Jim. ‘You know me, I’m still a good
carpenter, well known in the Guild, but my Milly frets about me handling
all the tools and so on; and I tell you, when she’s got her eyes on me,
my hands shake.’

‘Would you like them to stop shaking?’ asked Geoffrey, though he had in
fact seen Stinky Jim lift a tankard to his lips with a hand as steady as
a rock. ‘Because you gentlemen have given me an idea.’ He paused, hoping
they would listen. ‘My maternal uncle came from Uberwald and his name
was Heimlich Sheddenhausen – he was the first man known to have a
“shed”.’

Stinky Jim said, ‘I’ve got a shed.’

‘No offence, you may _think_ you have,’ said Geoffrey, ‘but what is in
it? There are goat sheds and chicken sheds and cow sheds, but these
sheds I’m proposing are for _men_. I reckon what we need around here is
sheds for men. A _man_ shed.’

And now he did have their attention. Especially when he hailed the
landlord with a ‘Let’s drink to that, gentlemen! Another pint all round,
please!’

The ladies in the villages had taken Geoffrey to their hearts, too. It
was astonishing. There was something about his willingness to stop and
talk, his gentle smile and pleasant manner, that made them immediately
warm to him.

‘Mister Geoffrey is so calm, all the time. He never gets in a tizz, oh
no, and he speaks wonderful! A real educated man,’ old Betsy Hopper said
to Tiffany one day.

‘And that goat of his!’ Mrs Whistler added, folding her impressive arms
under her even more impressive chest. ‘Looks a testy animal to me, but
that Geoffrey has him trotting along all peaceful like.’

‘Wish he could do the same to my Joe!’ Betsy cackled, and she and Mrs
Whistler chortled together as they headed off down the street.

Tiffany watched them go, and began thinking about her backhouse boy,
wondering how he made things settle down so well, and she thought, I’ve
seen those people before – the ones who seem to know everybody. They
hold the ring, stop the fighting. I think I shall let him go round the
houses with me now, and see what he does.

And so Geoffrey went out the next day with Tiffany, hanging on behind
her on the broomstick, his face lighting up with sheer joy as Tiffany
awkwardly steered the much heavier stick into the mountains; and the
houses lit up as soon as he came in, so cheerfully alive. He could be
funny, he could sing songs, and somehow he made everything . . . a bit
better. Crying babies began to gurgle instead of howl, grown-ups stopped
arguing, and the mothers became more peaceful and took his advice.

He was good with animals too. A young heifer would stand for him, rather
than skitter off in fright at a stranger, while cats would stroll in and
immediately decide that Geoffrey’s lap was the place to be. Tiffany once
saw him leaning up against a woodland cottage wall with a family of
rabbits resting at his feet – _at the same time as_ the farm dog was by
his side.

Nanny Ogg, after seeing Geoffrey with Tiffany one day, said, ‘His
heart’s in the right place, I c’n smell it. I knows men, you know.’ She
laughed. ‘I’ve seen a great many in my time in all kinds of
circumstances, believe you me. I won’t say as he’s rich material right
now, and some of the other witches might not like a boy comin’ into the
business, but, Tiff, never let no one tell you as Granny Weatherwax
wouldn’t like it. Remember, she chose you to be her successor, not none
of them. An’ you got to do it your way too. Not hers. So if’n you wants
to train up this lad, well, you go ’n’ do it.’

Tiffany herself was becoming fascinated by Geoffrey’s goat.
Mephistopheles came and went, but unless she and Geoffrey were off on
the broomstick he would usually be somewhere near Geoffrey and it seemed
to Tiffany that the goat watched over the boy. They had a code. It was
as if the goat could talk just by tapping a hoof, and occasionally there
would be a staccato of complicated hoof taps. If Mephistopheles had been
a dog, he would have been a pointer, she thought. His master was his
friend, and woe betide anyone who took advantage of Geoffrey’s good
nature – the hooves of Mephistopheles were exceedingly sharp.

When Geoffrey was away, the goat often took himself off. He had soon got
the goats at Granny’s cottage doing his bidding, and Nanny Ogg said once
that she had seen what she called ‘that devil goat’ sitting in the
middle of a circle of feral goats up in the hills. She named him ‘The
Mince of Darkness’ because of his small and twinkling hooves, and added,
‘Not that I don’t like him, stinky as he is. I’ve always been one for
the horns, as you might say. Goats is clever. Sheep ain’t. No offence,
my dear.’

The triumph of Mephistopheles – proving Nanny right on both counts –
happened at the edge of the woods surrounding the cottage, near the
foothills of the nearest mountain, when Geoffrey had taken the cart over
to look at a small boy who needed medicine.

On this homestead, on this particular day, the mother was watching
Geoffrey. In the flurry of worry about her son she had left the gate to
the sheep pen open. And the sheep, like all sheep, got hysterical and
were getting out and running away before she looked out of the window
and noticed.

‘My husband isn’t going to like this. It takes ages to get them settled
down,’ the young mother wailed. ‘Look at them, running everywhere!’

Geoffrey put his head out of the window and made a clicking sound to
Mephistopheles, whom he had unhitched from the cart and allowed to
graze. The goat stopped eating the herbage – and then what happened next
went all round Lancre. To hear it, the goat Mephistopheles rounded up
those sheep like the best of shepherds. The sheep outnumbered him, of
course, but carefully – one after the other – he herded them neatly back
through the gate.

When the mother told her husband later that the goat had not only got
the sheep into the pen but had also _shut the gate_ after them, he
thought that was a bit far-fetched, but it still made a good story down
the pub, and the legend of Mephistopheles spread rapidly.

Geoffrey and Nanny Ogg told Tiffany the tale. Along with Geoffrey’s work
for the little boy, that made it a day well done. But Tiffany couldn’t
help looking at the slot-eyed Mephistopheles. She knew goats. But this
goat had a purpose, she was sure. And it was watching her, she noticed,
and watching You, who was watching the goat whilst, of course,
pretending to look anywhere else. Everybody was watching everybody else,
it seemed. She smiled.

And made a decision.

The following morning she took Geoffrey to one side, and told him that
she had something special to say to him.

‘There’s something else,’ she said. ‘Some . . . little friends I want to
introduce you to.’ She paused. ‘Rob,’ she called. ‘I know ye is there,
and I ask ye to come out now.’ She paused. ‘There’s a wee drop o’
scumble here for ye.’ She placed a cup with a few drops of the liquor in
it on the floor.

There was a movement in the air, a flash of red hair, and Rob Anybody
was there, a shiny claymore in his hand.

‘Rob, I want you to meet . . . Geoffrey,’ Tiffany said slowly,
carefully, turning to see how Geoffrey was taking the sight of his first
Feegle, but Rob took her by surprise.

‘Ach, the wee laddie, we kens him already,’ he announced.

Geoffrey coloured up. ‘Well, I have been sleeping in the old lean-to,’
he said. ‘These gentlemen were kind enough to allow me to share their
sleeping space.’

Tiffany was astounded. Geoffrey had met the Feegles already! How had she
not known! She was the witch. She should have _known_.

‘But—’ she began, as other Feegles began to appear, one swinging down on
string from the ceiling beams, another sidling out from behind a handy
bucket, a group edging over to form a semicircle around the scumble on
the floor.

‘Nae trouble,’ said Rob, waving a hand in the air. ‘We has had the most
interrresting discussions, ye ken, when ye are in your nightie and
asleep.’

‘But we still watch over ye— _mmpfh_, _mmpfh_.’ Rob had his hand clamped
over Daft Wullie’s mouth.

‘In my _nightie_?’ Tiffany began, but then gave up. Oh, what was the
use. The Feegles would always be watching over her, and if she had to
choose between having Feegles or no Feegles in her life, well, it was an
easy decision.

‘Ye don’t mind, mistress?’ Rob added, shuffling his feet as he always
did when he found himself having to do the Explainin’. ‘Jeannie sez as
ye ha’ this yon laddie here, and he is a treasure. And ye knows how we
Feegles are with treasure – we just ha’ to pick it up.’

As one, the Nac Mac Feegles sighed in happiness.

And Tiffany pushed the cup towards them, saying, ‘Well, you aren’t goin’
to steal _this_ treasure. But I ken – I _think_ – it may be time for me
to take Geoffrey along to meet the kelda.’

It was raining hard and they dried off sitting in front of the great
fire in the mound. Geoffrey was elated after the trip, and seemed
completely unfazed by having to squeeze through the bushes and wriggle
down into the Feegle mound.

Involuntarily he squirmed a little,fn1 for every Feegle eye was upon
him. Especially that of Maggie, Jeannie’s eldest daughter, who had just
bravely squeezed in to see the big wee hag and her friend. She ran her
hands through her fiery hair now, and put on her best pout.

Jeannie sighed. It would soon be time for her daughter to leave. There
could only be one kelda.

Just as she thought this, Rob held out his arms and Maggie scrambled
across the chamber to sit by his side. ‘My daughter, Maggie,’ Rob said
proudly to Geoffrey. ‘Soon to be off to her ain clan, ye ken, now she is
a big grown-up lassie.’

Maggie bridled. ‘But can’t I stay here?’ she wheedled, putting on her
best little-lassie voice for her father. ‘I like it here, ye ken, and I
dinnae want to ha’ a husband’ – she said the word like it was an
abomination to her – ‘and babbies. I want to be a _warrior_.’

Rob laughed. ‘But ye is a lassie, Maggie,’ he said, with a worried look
at Jeannie. Had she not taught the hiddlins to Maggie? Taught her what
she needed to know to be kelda herself in her own clan?

‘But I kens how to fight,’ Maggie said sulkily. ‘Ask Wee Duggie Bignose
– I gave him such a kickin’ when we las’ had a wee brawl, ye ken.’

Wee Duggie Bignose – one of Rob’s scrawnier teenage sons – scuffled his
feet awkwardly in the corner and hung his head so that only his nose was
visible as the beads in his plaits smacked him on the chin.

‘An’ I talked to the Toad,’fn2 Maggie went on. ‘_He_ said I dinna ha’ to
follow tradition, ye ken. He says it’s my Yuman Rites.’

‘Well, ye ain’t a human,’ Jeannie snapped. ‘An’ we’ll ha’ nae more o’
that nonsense. Gae and fetch oor guest a nice bit of mutton now, with
some of oor special relish.’

Tiffany knew of the Feegles’ relish. Snail was one of the key
ingredients.

‘Snails,’ she murmured to Geoffrey under her breath as Maggie flounced
off. To Tiffany’s amazement, the young Feegle lassie flounced in
_exactly_ the same way Mrs Earwig flounced. Except, of course, for the
obvious fact that Maggie was only five inches tall, whilst Mrs Earwig
was as tall as Tiffany’s father.

Jeannie had sharp ears for a little woman. ‘Aye, it’s amazin’ what my
boys can do with snails, ye ken,’ she said. ‘They can even make snail
whisky.’

Geoffrey smiled politely. ‘I thank you kindly, Kelda,’ he said softly,
‘but I do not eat anything that has been running, swimming or crawling
around. And that includes snails. I prefer to let them live.’

‘Actually the Feegles cultivate snails,’ said Tiffany. ‘Everyone has to
have a living, Geoffrey, there’s no getting away from that.’

‘Indeed,’ said Geoffrey. ‘But not at the expense of others.’

Jeannie leaned forward, her eyes bright, and laid a small nut-brown hand
on his arm. The air stilled, and now Geoffrey and Jeannie were looking
into each other’s eyes.

‘There were many like you once,’ Jeannie said quietly at last. ‘I was
right. I sees ye in my cauldron and I sees that ye are one of those who
can stop a fight, bring peace . . .’ She turned to Tiffany. ‘Treasure
him, Tir-far-thóinn.’

As they left to head back to the farm for tea, Tiffany pondered on the
kelda’s words. _Stop a fight. Bring peace._ She might have need of just
those very skills. And as she thought this, a shiver ran down her spine,
one of those nasty little shivers that are like a message that something
dreadful might be about to happen, hard to ignore. On the other hand,
she thought, perhaps it was just her body telling her that if it was all
right by her, next time perhaps she should say no to the snail
relish . . . She did her best to shake the unsettling feeling off,
focusing instead on Geoffrey. _Treasure him._ Jeannie is right about
him, she decided. There might just be some things that a boy like this
can do best.

And right there and then, she made a decision. She would go to
Ankh-Morpork – and take Geoffrey with her. It was time anyway, as a sort
of head witch, to make a trip to the city. What if all the city witches
had heard of her and were talking about her like she was some little
upstart? She ought to _know_. And, a little voice whispered in her head,
I can maybe see Preston too. She tried to push the thought away. This
trip was not about her. It was about being a witch, about doing what she
ought to do, and _that_ was what she would inform Nanny Ogg when she
told her she’d be away for a few days. But the thought of seeing Preston
again still crept back into her mind and made her feel a bit . . .
tingly.

Geoffrey had got some way ahead down the path, but when Tiffany called
him, he came back with a question in his eyes.

‘Geoffrey,’ she said, ‘tomorrow we will go to get you your first
broomstick.’

fn1 It was a brave man indeed who could look upon a clan of Feegles and
not want to tie the bottoms of his trousers tight around his ankles.

fn2 The Toad was the Feegles’ lawyer, his toad body the result of a
misunderstanding with a fairy godmother.


[image]
CHAPTER 11


The Big City

IT WAS A long journey to Ankh-Morpork. Tiffany and Geoffrey had to stay
over on the way, one night at a local witch’s cottage and the other in a
barn where the farmer had been delighted at Geoffrey’s ability to help
him with a troublesome goat. But now they were there – at the great city
– and Tiffany watched Geoffrey’s mouth drop open as they flew carefully
along the route of the river Ankh and into the heart of the capital.
Well, she thought to herself, Geoffrey had said he wanted to see the
world. Ankh-Morpork would be a very good start.

But she herself was amazed too when she went to the site of the old
broomstick workshop, and they were directed to a new site. The railway
was still in its infancy – and already there were these arches.

There’s a kind of magic in the cavernous spaces under railway arches and
a mystery known only to those who work there. There are always puddles,
even if it hasn’t rained for weeks, and the puddles are glossy and
slimy, the air above filled with the taint of oil and working man’s
armpit.

It is easy to recognize a habitué of the railway arch. He (it is rarely
a woman) is the kind of man who keeps useful nails in old jam jars, and
he might spend a considerable time talking about the merits of different
kinds of grease or sprocket, and occasionally an onlooker might hear a
proprietor saying quietly, ‘I can get them for you next week.’ Sometimes
accompanied with a knowing look and a finger tap to the side of his
nose.

If anyone comes and asks for something, well, there will always be
someone, often a dwarf, who knows where everything is, and almost always
it’s _right at the back_ of the arch in a darkness of stygian
proportions. And when the right piece is found and brought out, well,
some people would call it a piece of junk, but in the arch the junk has
somehow metamorphosed into _exactly_ the item that the buyer really,
really wants – no one knows why. It is as if that piece had just been
waiting for the right person to wander in.

The dwarfs Shrucker and Dave had relocated their established broomstick
business to the second arch in the row, just after an arch where a
passer-by’s ears were assaulted by the weird noises of musical
instruments, and before one where the tang of a harness-maker’s fresh
leather made its own happy raid on the nose.

It was Dave who rushed towards Tiffany when she came in with Geoffrey in
tow. He recognized her immediately – he had had a bad moment when she’d
called in a year or two back and let slip she knew the Feegles.fn1 Once
a dwarf workshop gets the Feegles, well, they might as well just pack up
and go back to the mountains. Taking a big axe with them.

Tiffany noticed how Dave’s eyes were everywhere. ‘Don’t worry, I haven’t
got any Nac Mac Feegles with me,’ she said, though she knew that this
might not be quite accurate, for although she had told Rob Anybody that
this was hag’s business and he and the Feegles had a geas to stay
behind, there was no knowing if one hadn’t crept into the bristles of
her stick somehow and would suddenly pop up waving a big stick and
shouting ‘Crivens!’ But when she said they weren’t with her, she heard a
sigh, and the dwarf almost grinned. Tiffany dodged a drip that fell
merrily from the top of the arch, and added, ‘This is Geoffrey, and
we’ve come to get him a stick.’ She looked along the row of arches.
‘Took a bit of finding you, actually. Your new workshop.’

Dave was eyeing Geoffrey up and down. ‘Good for us here,’ he said. ‘We
gets our supplies quicker. And it’s easier to go see my old mum. Long
journey though.’ A belch of smoke from a train steaming over the arches
almost enveloped both the dwarf and Geoffrey, and when Tiffany could see
them again, Dave – who now had bits of smut sticking to his face – had
decided _exactly_ what the lad would need. ‘A number three, I think,’ he
said. ‘Reckon we’ve got just the one in stock. Top-of-the-range, you
know. Wood all the way from the Ramtops. Special _wizard_ wood.’ He
stroked his beard, flicked the cinders off his nose, and walked around
Geoffrey. ‘Training to be a wizard then, lad?’

Geoffrey didn’t quite know what to say. He looked over at Tiffany.
Should he tell these men that he wanted to be a witch?

‘No,’ said Tiffany, the witch in her making her answer for Geoffrey. ‘My
friend here is a calm-weaver.’

The dwarf scratched his iron helmet, stared at Geoffrey and said, ‘Oh,
and what do _they_ do, miss?’

Tiffany thought, then said, ‘At the moment, Geoffrey just helps me. And
for that, gentlemen, he needs a broomstick.’ She had been holding two
broomsticks, her own and one other, and now she held out the spare. ‘But
we don’t want a new stick,’ she said. ‘You know how we witches hand our
sticks down one to the other. Well, I’ve got this one, and I think it
would do my friend very well with a bit of repair work on it.’

At the word ‘repair’ Shrucker loomed out of the workshop. He looked
almost affronted. ‘_Repair?_’ he groaned, as though anyone choosing to
reject the new sticks on offer was missing out on the opportunity of a
lifetime. ‘You want the lad to begin his career on a used broomstick?’
And then he saw the stick, and reeled back on his heels, grimacing and
clutching at his back. ‘That’s . . . Granny Weatherwax’s stick,’ he
said. ‘That’s famous, that is.’

‘A challenge, then,’ said Tiffany smartly. ‘Or aren’t you gentlemen up
to the task? I expect I can find someone else . . .’

‘Oh, there’s no need to be hasty,’ said Shrucker, taking off his helmet
and wiping his forehead with a woolly cloth. He lit his pipe, giving
himself time to think, and examined the stick in front of him.

‘I would be much obliged,’ said Tiffany.

Shrucker made the usual sucking noise through his teeth. ‘Well,’ he said
slowly at last, ‘I could take the shell off. Perhaps a new staff?’

‘One of our gentlemen’s staffs,’ Dave added. He tapped his nose. ‘You
know, with the . . . special indentation for the . . . delicate parts. A
much smoother ride for the lad.’

‘Always wanted to get my hands on this stick,’ Shrucker said. ‘Do some
proper work on it. But the dwarfs up there in the mountains said as
Mistress Weatherwax always wanted, well . . .’

‘A _bodge_,’ Dave put in, his forehead creasing as if the word caused
him actual pain.

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘I am not that witch, but it’s always useful to be
friends with any witch.’ She smiled sweetly and added, ‘I’m feeling
friendly at the moment . . . but I might not later.’

This fell into a very handy pause as an almighty roar announced another
train shooting overhead, smoke and smut billowing in the air.

‘Mistress Weatherwax was a powerful lady indeed,’ Shrucker said
carefully once the noise had died down.

‘And I heard that she never paid her bills,’ Dave added grumpily.

‘I’ve got the money,’ said Geoffrey. He had been silent so far, allowing
Tiffany to speak up for him, but after all, it was going to be his
broomstick.

Tiffany saw the dwarfs look up with a smile, Shrucker only just managing
to stop himself rubbing his hands together.

‘_Some_ money,’ she said sharply, ‘but I don’t want my friend to have to
use it – I promised him I would arrange this for him. Now, I will tell
you what I will do. I will pay in obs.’ Obs were the unspoken currency
of the dwarfs. Why waste gold? Humans would call it favours, and the
currency was negotiable. The obligation of a witch was particularly
valuable, and Tiffany knew that. ‘Look,’ she added, ‘the stick isn’t
_that_ bad.’

Shrucker sat down heavily on a chest brimming with bristles.fn2 ‘It’s
funny you should suggest obs,’ he said slowly. ‘My lumbago is giving me
gyp. Comes with the job, you know. Can you do something about that?’

‘All right, then,’ said Tiffany. ‘Just stay there.’ And she walked
behind him. He shifted around a bit, then sat up straight with a look of
amazement on his face.

‘Oh my, how did you do that?’

‘I’ve taken away your pain,’ Tiffany explained. ‘So now it’s my pain.
And I have to congratulate you for dealing with it, for it is, I must
say, very bad. And now I’ve got it hovering in the air, like a dog on a
leash.’ The dwarfs automatically looked over her head, just in case
there was some kind of big bubble up there marked ‘pain’, but all that
happened was that a big drop of some oily substance fell right into
Dave’s beard.

‘Is there a stonemason in these arches?’ Tiffany asked, watching the
dwarf whip off his helmet and rummage through the beard. ‘If he needs
some rocks split, I can use this pain to break them up!’ She looked
appreciatively at the helmet. ‘But that would do,’ she added, and as
Dave put it down on the ground, she shot the pain into the iron, which
to the dwarf’s horror actually buckled, steam shooting up to mingle with
the steam from the railways above.

The obs were paid. So, his pain gone, Shrucker – a new, upright, lively
Shrucker – was now whipping out his measures. He eyed up both Geoffrey
and the old stick as he worked his own form of magic.

‘How do you dress, sir?’ he asked at one point.

Geoffrey was puzzled. ‘I usually dress looking out of the window,’ he
said.

There was a little hiatus as the dwarfs told Geoffrey what ‘dressing’
meant in the circumstances.

‘Ah yes,’ he said. ‘I never thought about it before.’

Shrucker laughed and said, ‘Well, that’s about it. All down to me now,
but I daresay that if you come back sometime tomorrow, I will have it
working a treat.’

They left the dwarfs and Tiffany told Geoffrey they would now be
visiting Mrs Proust, a witch who loved living in the city. She headed
for the elderly witch’s shop, Boffo’s Novelty and Joke Emporium on Tenth
Egg Street. It would be an education for Geoffrey anyway, Tiffany
thought. If he decided to follow the witching path, well, he might also
need Boffo’s at some point – a lot of the younger witches liked Mrs
Proust’s artificial skulls, cauldrons and warts to give them the right
_image_ for the job. To someone in need, someone punched so far down
that it might seem there was no getting up again, well, a witch with the
right look could make all the difference. It helped them to _believe_.

Mrs Proust – a witch who had no need to add nasty witch accessories to
her everyday look, given that she had been naturally blessed with the
right kind of hooked nose, messy hair and blackened teeth – heard the
novelty graveyard groan of the door opening and came over to greet them.

Tiffany laughed. ‘That’s a new one,’ she said.

‘Oh yes,’ said Mrs Proust. ‘Can’t keep them on the shelves. Nice to see
you, Mistress Aching, and who’s this young man, may I ask?’

‘This is Geoffrey, Mrs Proust, and we’re in the city to fit him up for a
witch’s broomstick.’

‘Are you indeed? A boy? A witch? On a broomstick?’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘the Archchancellor uses a broomstick sometimes.’

‘I know,’ said Mrs Proust, ‘but there might be trouble.’

‘Well, if there is,’ said Tiffany, ‘the trouble will come to me. I am
the chosen successor to Granny Weatherwax, and I think it could be time
for a few little changes.’

‘Well done,’ said Mrs Proust. ‘That’s the spirit!’ She looked at
Geoffrey, who was engrossed in the display of naughty doggy-dos. And
then and there she loomed close to him, put a clawed hand on his
shoulder, and said to him, ‘So you want to be a witch, do you?’

Geoffrey stood his ground well, and Tiffany was impressed. So was Mrs
Proust.

‘Well, mistress,’ he said, ‘I think I can help witches anyway.’

‘Do you?’ said Mrs Proust with a glint in her eye. ‘We shall see, young
man, won’t we?’ She turned back to Tiffany. ‘I am sure there will be
some witches who will hate the idea,’ she said, ‘but it is your way,
Tiffany, your time. And Esme Weatherwax was no fool. She could see the
future coming.’

‘We’re staying in Ankh-Morpork until the dwarfs have finished with
Geoffrey’s stick,’ Tiffany said. ‘Can we stop here? We might need to
stay overnight.’

Mrs Proust grinned. ‘Well, there is plenty of space in my spare room,
and it would be good to have a chinwag while you are here.’ She looked
at Geoffrey. ‘Have you been to the city before, young man?’

‘No, Mrs Proust,’ he replied quietly. ‘We lived in the Shires, and my
father was the only one to travel.’

‘Well then, my son Derek will show you around,’ Mrs Proust said,
sounding satisfied. She followed this up with a shout for the lad, and
Derek – the sort of lad you wouldn’t notice in a crowd of two, meaning
that he shared very little in common with his mother’s looks – came
stumbling up the stairs from the workshop below.

Ankh-Morpork, Tiffany thought, would _definitely_ be an education.

As the two lads left, Mrs Proust said, ‘So how are things going with
your young man then, Tiffany?’

Tiffany sighed. Why were elderly witches so _nosy_? But then she
thought: Actually, _all_ witches are nosy. It’s part of what being a
witch _is_. And she relaxed. At least Mrs Proust wasn’t trying to push
her Derek at her again.

‘Well,’ she said, ‘I do like Preston and he likes me – he’s my best
friend – but I’m not sure either of us are ready for, well . . .
anything _more_. You see, he does a lot of wonderful work at the
hospital and we write to each other and even meet up sometimes.’ She
paused. ‘I think we are married to our jobs.’ She swallowed, a lump
suddenly appearing in her throat. ‘It’s not that we don’t want to be
together . . . I mean, I . . . but . . .’ The words trailed off and
Tiffany just looked totally miserable now.

Mrs Proust did her best to look sympathetic. ‘You’re not the first witch
to have that problem, my dear,’ she said. ‘Nor will you be the last.’

Tiffany could feel the tears beginning. She said, ‘But why do I feel
like this? I know a part of me does want to be with Preston – and it
would make my family so happy! – but I also want to be a witch. And I’m
_good_ at it – I know it’s a terrible thing to say, but I measure myself
against the other witches and I know I’m better than most of them when
it comes to witchcraft. I can’t _not_ do it.’ A tear threatened to
trickle down her cheek. ‘Just like Preston can’t not be a doctor,’ she
finished sadly.

‘Oh, I understand all that,’ Mrs Proust said. ‘But this is today. It’s
soon going to be tomorrow and things can change. Things are changing,
especially for you young people, when you both want to do different
things. Just do the work you find in front of you and enjoy yourself.
After all, you are both still young, so you still have options for the
future. Just like my Derek.’

‘But that’s the difficulty,’ said Tiffany. ‘I don’t really _want_
options. I know what I want to do. I enjoy my work, I really do.’ This
last word came out as a squeal. ‘I just wish Preston could be with me,’
she added quietly. ‘Not here in the city.’

‘But you tell me he is training to be a doctor,’ said Mrs Proust. ‘And
he loves his work. You wouldn’t want him to give that up for you, now
would you? So don’t worry so much. Think yourself lucky and don’t run
ahead of the world. There is a saying, Don’t push the river. Although,
of course, in _Ankh-Morpork_ you can push very hard,’ she added with a
cackle.fn3 More encouragingly, she continued, ‘Maybe in a year or two
your young man can be a doctor in the same place where you are a witch.
I had my Mr Proust. You can have your Preston. Just not yet.’

‘When I go around the houses,’ Tiffany said quietly, ‘I also see how
some of the marriages, well, they’re not really . . .’ That hung in the
air.

‘There _are_ happy marriages,’ Mrs Proust said. ‘Think of your parents,
maybe? Isn’t that a happy marriage? Now, let your Auntie Eunice give you
some help. Go and see your boy and have a chat to him.’ She paused and
added shrewdly, ‘He’s not interested in anyone _else_, is he?’

‘Oh no,’ said Tiffany. ‘He’s working with the Igorsfn4 and he said that
he didn’t fancy the Igor girls because he likes a girl who stays the
same shape every day. The Igorinas like to experiment.’

Geoffrey came back late with Derek, singing a song worthy of Nanny Ogg,
but Tiffany got a good night’s sleep – a rare treat! – and then a
breakfast of ham and eggs courtesy of Mrs Proust. While Geoffrey and
Derek still slept, Tiffany decided to go and visit Preston. Mrs Proust’s
words had got her thinking.

She headed for the Lady Sybil Hospital over in Goose Gate, but paused at
the door, strangely uncertain. She hadn’t told Preston she would be in
the city. Would her visit be a good one, or . . .?

It was a free hospital, so there was a queue of people waiting, all
hoping for the happy result of seeing a doctor _before_ old Boney turned
up with his scythe. It looked like nobody would be moving for some time,
so Tiffany did something she knew she shouldn’t.

She stepped outside her body, leaving it standing demurely by the gates.
It was an easy trick for a witch, but still dangerous, and she had no
real reason to take the risk. Except . . . the Igor girls? They were
beautiful . . . once you looked past the discreet stitches, anyway.

She slid silently through the crowd, doing her best to ignore her First
Thoughts, Second Thoughts and even her Third Thoughts, and drifted into
the hospital itself, floating along the corridors until she found
Preston.

He was in his element, his gaze focused on a patient with a rather
unsettling hole in the stomach – and when Preston looked at anything, it
_knew_ it was being looked at and was liable to stand up and salute.
This was especially true of some of the spare parts the Igors used – a
most unsettling experience – and Preston was indeed surrounded by Igors.
And yes, that included girls. But, happy sight, he was paying them _no
attention_.

Tiffany sighed with relief, and then – allowing herself to listen to her
Second Thoughts, which were telling her off in a style uncomfortably
like the voice of Granny Weatherwax – whisked herself back into her
body, which wobbled slightly as she took control again.

The queue had moved a few inches. But the pointy hat took her to its
head and the porter let her through immediately. She waved away his
offer of directions and marched confidently off down the corridor,
leaving the porter to mutter, ‘I didn’t even need to tell her where he
was. That’s a proper witch, that is.’ For at the hospital it was all too
easy to set off confidently for one place but find yourself in the
basement – which these days was home to goblins, who maintained the huge
boilers and had set up a workshop manufacturing the very finest surgical
instruments. Still, most people eventually made it out of the hospital
and the record seemed to be improving.

Preston was very glad to see Tiffany, saying, ‘I heard about Granny
Weatherwax. Well done for being the top witch, it couldn’t happen to a
better person; are you allowed to tell all the other witches what to do
now?’

‘What!’ Tiffany laughed. ‘It’s like herding goblins. No! Goblins are
easier. Anyway, it works like this: I don’t tell them what to do, and
they allow me to work hard – just as I like it.’

‘Just like me and the Igors,’ said Preston. ‘But I’ve got good news too.
Doctor Lawn is getting on now and he has promoted me to be a surgeon;
usually only Igors can be surgeons, so that’s a real feather in my hat.’

Tiffany kissed him, and said, ‘That is good news; I am so proud of you!
But I do wish he would give you more time off – and you could come and
see me. Letters can only say so much . . .’ Her voice faltered. ‘Though
I do so love the way you write.’

‘And I like your letters too,’ Preston said, ‘and I wish I could visit
home more. But I do enjoy the work here, Tiffany. And people need me.
Every day. I’ve got a talent and it would be criminal not to use it.’

‘Yes, I know,’ said Tiffany. ‘That’s the story of my life as well. Our
skills, you will find, could be our gaolers.’ And it struck her that
just as Preston was looking into people in one way – he knew the names
of all the bones now, and could even say hello to a few of them – she
was learning to look into people another way: into their heads, their
minds. ‘But I couldn’t do anything else,’ she finished, a touch
wistfully.

Preston said, ‘No. Me neither.’

Then the time for talking was over, and it was just Tiffany and Preston,
together, snatching the moment and saying more with their eyes than any
words could convey.

And it was magic; a different kind of magic.

Mrs Proust went with them to pick up Geoffrey’s broomstick – Granny
Weatherwax’s stick had been a _legend_, and she was curious to see if
the dwarfs had managed to make it work.

Dave greeted them and said, ‘Well, here it is. It’s a good stick, it
really is. I reckon Mistress Weatherwax never took any care of it at
all, no matter what we dwarfs did to fix it up.’

‘All she did was curse it,’ Shrucker put in a bit sourly. It was clear
that, to him, a broomstick was almost like a living creature.

The stick gleamed. It shone. It looked almost alive, and the bristles
were sleek. It was _almost_ Granny Weatherwax’s old stick, if you
discounted the new shell for the staff and new bristles.fn5 Tiffany and
Geoffrey stared at it in amazement while the two dwarfs looked on,
smiling.

‘It’s the best we ever made – I mean, mended,’ Shrucker added. ‘But
please, use it gently and keep it oiled. Nothing but the best for
Mistress Aching.’ He straightened up proudly, a dwarf who could stand
tall to his full four foot once again.

Mrs Proust ran her fingers against the stick and nodded. ‘This is an
excellent stick,’ she said. ‘Look, it’s even got a little cup to hold
your drink.’

Shrucker gave her a funny look. ‘And special today, for our good
customers,’ he said instead, ‘those who _don’t_ bring . . . trouble’ –
with a sideways glance at Tiffany – ‘we have a bonus little gift.’ He
proudly presented Geoffrey with two furry white cubes covered in
assorted spots. ‘You can tie them on the strap,’ he said. ‘Very popular
with the lads for their carriages, these. Some lads also keep birds in a
little cage to sing as they go along. They call it in-carriage
entertainment.’

Geoffrey shuddered at the thought. A bird, in a cage? His heart felt
sorrow for them. But the broomstick, well, he could barely wait to have
a go on it.

Dave sniffed and said, ‘There you go, young man. So, do you want to give
it a test drive then?’ He handed him the stick, and said, ‘Go on. Go to
the end of the arches and give it a whirl.’

Tiffany was about to speak, but already Geoffrey was sparkling with
excitement. She looked at his glowing eyes and said, ‘Well, all right,
Geoffrey. You’ve been on my stick with me, and watched the broomsticks
going past overhead. Go up slowly, just a bit at a time.’

She might as well have talked to the wall. Geoffrey straddled his
broomstick, ran past the neighbouring arch, jumped – and went skywards
very fast. A series of nightmares flashed through Tiffany’s mind. There
was a distant _boom!_ Then a little dot in the sky got bigger, and there
was Geoffrey, coming back down, grinning from ear to ear.

Tiffany almost squealed. ‘Look, Mrs Proust. He’s picked it up already.
It took me _ages_ to learn how to fly.’

‘But of course,’ said Mrs Proust. ‘That’s this here technology.’

And Shrucker said, ‘Wow! He’s a natural. Not even the goblins can do
that.’ For Geoffrey had just looped the loop, then got off his stick,
leaving it hovering a few feet above the cobbles.

‘How did you do _that_?’ asked Tiffany, genuinely impressed.

‘I don’t know,’ said Geoffrey. ‘Just a knack, I suppose.’

And Tiffany thought: When Geoffrey’s not anxious, he radiates calmness,
which probably means he sees more things and finds more things than
other people do. It makes him open to new things too. Yes, it’s a knack
all right.

Waving a goodbye to the dwarfs and Mrs Proust, Tiffany and Geoffrey took
off together and floated back towards Lancre and the distant mountains,
Geoffrey getting the feel of his stick immediately and disappearing into
the sky ahead of Tiffany.

She caught him up just outside the outskirts of Ankh-Morpork – he was
soaring and swooping at a ferocious speed. ‘You do know your trousers
are smouldering, don’t you?’ she said with a laugh.

Geoffrey patted the smoke away with a sudden anxiety that made the stick
wobble, saying, ‘Please don’t tell Nanny about this when we get back!
She’ll laugh at me!’

But after they had travelled back to Lancre – quite a bit faster than on
the outward journey – and before she set off back to the Chalk, Tiffany
did of course tell Nanny Ogg. And the older witch did indeed laugh.

‘It was amazing, though,’ Tiffany said. ‘Flying seemed so natural to
him.’

‘Ha!’ said Nanny. ‘Every man has a broomstick in the house, but they
just don’t often know how to use ’em!’

fn1 The Feegles had, in fact, accidentally set fire to Tiffany’s
broomstick, creating a need for new bristles.

fn2 There are _some_ advantages to wearing layers needing double figures
to count. Dwarfs like lots of layers of chainmail, jackets and – of
course – the traditional woolly vest which actually makes the chainmail
unnecessary.

fn3 ‘River’ as a term doesn’t quite describe the sludge of the river
Ankh in its course through the city, though it is of course a decent
torrent up in Lancre.

fn4 Uberwald servants, usually working as doctors, or assistants to mad
scientists, who believe a stitch in time saves a lot of bother later.
They like to swap body parts from an early age, often within the same
family, such that an Igor saying ‘He’s got his uncle’s nose’ really
_means_ something.

fn5 So a new stick, really. As new as the famous nine-hundred-year-old
family mining axe owned by the King of the Dwarfs was anyway.


[image]
CHAPTER 12


An Elf among the Feegles

THERE WAS THUNDER and there was lightning. It was raining and there was
water everywhere, running down the chalk hills.

The Queen screamed as she was thrown out of Fairyland, her wings torn
from her body, her blood staining her shoulders. A scream with a life of
its own, which ended in a dew pond on the Chalk, surprising a stoat on
the prowl.

And Tiffany Aching woke up.

Her heart was thumping, a sudden chill making her shiver in the dark of
the night. She looked over at the window. What had made her wake? Where
was she needed?

She sat up and reached wearily for her clothes . . .

Up on the downs, the Feegle mound was still its usual hive of activity
and song, a Feegle mound being very like a beehive but without the
honey, and to be sure a Feegle could sting much worse than a bee. But
when something was being celebrated – and they didn’t need much to pick
a reason for a celebration – the Nac Mac Feegles always made sure that
it went on happily for a long time.

A short time past midnight, however, the revels that night were
interrupted by Big Yan, the Feegle nightwatchman, as he ran in from the
storm raging outside.fn1

He kicked the helmet of his chief, the Big Man of the clan, and shouted,
‘There’s elves here! I can smell it, ye ken!’

And from every hole in turn, the clan of the Nac Mac Feegle poured out
in their hundreds to deal with the ancient enemy, waving claymores and
swords, yodelling their war cries:

‘Ach, stickit yer trakkans!’

‘Nac Mac Feegle wha hae!’

‘Gae awa’ wi’ ye, yer bogle!’

‘Gi’e you sich a guid kickin’!’

‘Nae king! Nae quin! We willnae be fooled agin!’

There is a concept known as a hustle and bustle, and the Feegles were
very good at it, cheerfully getting in one another’s way in the drive to
be the first into battle, and it seemed as if each small warrior had a
battle cry of his own – and he was very ready to fight anyone who tried
to take it away from him.

‘How many elves?’ asked Rob Anybody, trying to adjust his spog.

There was a pause.

‘One,’ said Big Yan sheepishly.

‘Are ye sure?’ said Rob Anybody, as his sons and brothers flowed around
him and hurried past to the mouth of the mound. Ach, the embarrassment.
The whole Feegle colony bristling with weaponry, full of alcohol and
bravado and apparently nothing to do with it. Of course, they were
always itching for a fight but most Feegles itched all the time,
especially in the spog.

They rushed about on the sodden hilltop looking for the enemy, while Big
Yan led Rob to the dew pond on the top of the hill. The storm had passed
and the water gleamed under the stars. There, half in, half out of the
pond, the battered body of an elf lay groaning.

And indeed it was, apparently, a solitary elf. You could almost hear the
Feegles thinking: One elf? Feegles loved a spat with the elves,
but . . . just one? How did that happen?

‘Ach crivens, it’s a long time since we had a reely good fight.’ Rob
sighed, and for a moment he was, for a Feegle, quite sombre.

‘Aye, but where there’s the one, there’s sure to be a plague o’ them,’
Big Yan muttered.

Rob sniffed at the air. The elf just lay there and it was doing nothing.
‘There are nae ither elves aboot. We’d smell them if they were,’ he
pronounced. He reached a decision. ‘Big Yan, ye and Wee Dangerous Spike,
grab a-hold of that scunner. Ye know what to dae if it gets feisty.
Awf’ly Wee Billy Bigchin’ – he looked for the clan gonnagle, who was the
least likely to mangle the facts – ‘hie ye awa’ tae the kelda and tell
her what’s abroad. What we are bringin’ back to the mound.’ Then he
shouted so that the rest of the clan could hear him, ‘This elf is oor
prisoner. A hostage, ye ken. That means ye are nae tae kill it until ye
are told.’ He ignored the grumbles from the clan. ‘As tae the rest o’
ye, tak guard around yon stones. And if they come in force show them
what the Feegles can dae!’

Daft Wullie said, ‘I can play the harmonica.’

Rob Anybody sighed, ‘Aye, weel, I suppose that puts the willies up me,
so wud likely keep them awa’.’

Back at the mound – _outside_, mind, for no elf would find itself a
place for long inside a Nac Mac Feegle mound – the kelda looked at the
stricken elf and then back at Rob Anybody.

‘Just one?’ she asked. ‘Weel, one elf alone is nae challenge tae a young
Feegle even. And this elf has been beaten, aye, its wings torn from its
back. Did oor boys dae that?’

‘No’ us, Jeannie,’ said Rob. ‘Big Yan said it drappit oot o’ the sky
intae the auld dew pond up by the stones, ye ken. It were battered like
that afore it got there.’ He looked anxiously at his wife, who had a
frown on her face. ‘We be warriors, no’ butchers, Jeannie. The lads are
raring tae gae, o’ course, and if yon elf was facin’ me in a fight, my
claymore would ring aloud, but whin it looks like a wee slunkit mowpie
there’s nae honour in killin’ it.’

‘Brawly spoken, Rob,’ said the kelda as she considered the unconscious
creature. ‘But why just one? Are ye sure?’

There was a groan from the elf and it stirred. Rob’s claymore leaped
into his hand but the kelda gently held him back. The bedraggled elf
groaned again and whispered something, its voice weak and faltering. The
kelda pricked up her ears and listened carefully before turning to her
husband with some surprise.

‘It said, “Thunder and Lightning”!’ she said.

The elf whispered again and this time Rob could hear the words too:
‘_Thunder and Lightning_.’

Everyone on the Chalk knew about Granny Aching’s famous dogs, Thunder
and Lightning, long gone but, as all the local farmers believed, still
roaming the hills in spirit. Several years before, young Tiffany Aching
had summoned them to help rid the Chalk of the Queen of Fairyland. Now
here was an elf, at the very entrance to a Feegle mound, invoking their
names.

‘There’s somethin’ I dinnae like aboot this,’ said the kelda. ‘But I
cannae decide what it means withoot oor hag. Can ye send for her, Rob?’

‘Aye, Hamish can gae. I mun get back to the stones and the clan.’ He
looked at his wife anxiously. ‘Will ye be all richt here wi’ that
scunner?’

‘Aye, I’ll take it inside, ye ken, to dry by the fire. It’s too weak tae
dae anything tae me. And the boys kin look after me.’ Jeannie nodded
over at a happy bundle of young Feegles, who were tumbling out of the
mound, waving their crescent-shaped clubs in the air.

‘Aye, it will be good practice for them,’ Rob said, looking at them
proudly. And then ducked as one of the Feegles let loose his club and it
shot through the air and nearly smacked him on the ear.

To his amazement, the weapon swung round in the air and shot back to the
young Feegle who had hurled it, giving him a bang on the head, saving
Rob the trouble.

‘Ach, boys,’ Rob shouted. ‘It fights ye back! Now that’s a weapon fit
for any Feegle. Double the fun, ye ken.’

Tiffany had just begun to dress when there was a whistling sound
outside, followed by the thump of something falling past, merrily
breaking branches, and then a tapping on the window.

She opened the window and she could see a tangle of cotton and cloth
down below, which after a good kickin’ fell away to reveal Hamish, the
Feegle aviator.fn2

With the window open, it was suddenly very cold in the bedroom, and
Tiffany sighed and said, ‘Yes, Hamish, now tell me what you need me
for.’

Hamish, adjusting his goggles, jumped up onto the sill and into the
room. ‘Oor kelda hae sent for ye, hag o’ the hills. I mun get ye tae the
mound as soon as ye can.’

It had been a long day, but Tiffany knew that if the kelda wanted her,
even after midnight, then that was where she needed to be. So she put on
her heavy-duty travelling pants, left a saucer of milk on the hearth and
cranked up the broomstick.

And once again You was staring at her, the white cat who seemed now to
be everywhere.

The fire inside the mound was like a furnace.

The young Feegles who had been left to guard their kelda were all
scowling at the hated adversary. When Rob Anybody returned, each Feegle
wanted to look like he had been the one to keep the scunner from causing
any trouble. Especially now she was _inside_ the mound.

But the elf appeared to have been crying.

The kelda shifted her bulk and said softly, ‘So now, elf, you come to
me. For what purpose? Why do we nae kill ye right noo?’

This caused a susurration of expectation among the Feegles, each of whom
was hoping to kill an elf before too long, and trepidation on the part
of the elf.

The kelda turned away, then said softly, ‘I ha’ the secrets of the
hiddlins, and what I see is that everything we do today was ordained
afore the seas were made. There is nae turning back. But there is a mist
in what is afore me. I cannae see for sure beyond this day, ye ken.’

There was a shiver from the elf.

‘Haed yer tongue richt noo, elf,’ Jeannie mused. ‘For I wonder what my
position were tae be if things were otherwise. Yoor people are sae . . .
inventive.’

That caused the young Feegles to brandish their weapons playfully, and
the kelda turned back to the elf and went on, ‘Ye are sent tae me by the
calling of Thunder and Lightning. I ken those twa spirit dogs, aye, and
also their owner, will be with us soon enough. Right now, shivering elf,
tell me what is the geas you are under? Why are ye here? Who are ye?
What is your name? And dinnae lie tae me, elf. Because I ha’ a way of
kenning.’ The kelda looked at the elf – tiny, shrivelled, rags and
drying blood – something that could have been kicked about for days
before being left to end its life in a dew pond.

‘I can’t ask for anything, Kelda. I am empty to your pleasure or your
wrath.’ The Queen’s voice was very small. ‘But I was – until just now –
the Queen of the Elves.’

The young Feegles stopped rattling their weapons and began to crowd
nearer. Could this wee little mowpie be the fearsome Quin they had heard
about from the Big Man? Wee Duggie Bignose leaned over and bravely poked
the elf with his finger, the effect slightly spoiled by his rabbit-skull
helmet falling over his eyes and making him reel forwards as it stuck on
his nose.

‘Get awa’ wi’ ye, lads,’ the kelda said sharply, rapping Duggie’s helmet
with her fist and spinning him away from the elf. She turned back to the
Queen. Drily she said, ‘Then it appears ye ha’ had a misfortune, your
majesty. And I’ve a mind to mention that there appear to be many queens
of the elves. I ask myself, which one do we have here? What I want is
your _name_, madam. Be careful: if ye should gi’ me a name which is nae
yours, your majesty will find me somewhat acerbic.’

The elf said, ‘My name, Kelda, is _Nightshade_.’

The kelda sent a sideways look to Rob Anybody that said, What have we
here? The real Quin? For she knew that although there were many leaders
among the elves of Fairyland, there had always been only the one King
and Queen. The King, of course, had gone away some years ago, creating a
separate world just for himself and his pleasures, leaving the Queen
behind. And although it was rarely used, the Queen did have a name of
her own. A name known to the Feegles from their time in Fairyland. A
name now to be passed from each kelda to her successor. The name of
_Nightshade_.

Quietly she said, ‘We are the Nac Mac Feegle, and we dinnae bow down to
queens.’

Rob Anybody was silent, but the sound of him whetting his claymore
against the stone was a song, an invitation to death. Then he looked up
and his gaze was fearsome. ‘We are the Nac Mac Feegle! The Wee Free Men!
Nae king! Nae quin! Nae laird! Nae master! _We willna’ be fooled
again!_’ he thundered. ‘Your life, elf, is on the edge o’ my blade.’

There was a scuffling noise behind them and Tiffany crawled in, followed
by Hamish, with more Feegles pushing around after them.

‘It’s happy I am tae see ye, hag o’ the hills,’ Jeannie said. ‘We have
ourselves . . . an _elf_. Tell us, what shall we dae with it?’ And at
that word ‘elf’ every weapon sang.

Tiffany looked at the elf. It was in terrible shape and she said, ‘We
aren’t the kind of people who kill those who are unarmed.’

Rob Anybody put up his hand. ‘Excuse me, mistress, but some of us do, or
are.’

Nonplussed, Tiffany thought, Well, I’m their big wee hag, and the kelda
has asked for my help. And then, despite its bedraggled state, she
recognized the Feegles’ captive. After all, how could she have
forgotten?

‘I know you, elf, and I told you never to come here again,’ she said.
She frowned. ‘You remember? You were a great elvish queen and I was a
little girl. I drove you away with Thunder and Lightning.’

She watched the elf’s face when she said that. It had gone white.

‘Yes,’ said the elf faintly. ‘We came raiding into your world, but this
was before the time of . . . iron.’

Her face twisted with fear and Tiffany sensed a change in the world, a
feeling that she stood between two courses of action, and what she did
next would _matter_. This, she realized, was what she had suspected was
coming her way, what Jeannie had warned her about. A witch is always on
the edge, between the light and the dark, good and bad, making choices
every day, judging all the time. It was what made her human. But what
was it that made an elf? she wondered.

‘I hear that the goblins believe that the railway engines have a soul,
elf,’ she said softly. ‘Tell me, what kind of soul have you? Do you run
along your own elvish rails? With no time or place for turning?’ She
looked at the kelda and said, ‘Granny Aching told me to feed them that
was starving and clothe them as is naked and help the pitiful. Well,
this elf has come to my turf – starving, naked, pitiful – do you see?’

The kelda’s eyebrows rose. ‘Yon creature is an elf! It has nae care for
ye! It has nae care for anyone – it disnae even care for other elves!’

‘You think then there is no such animal as a good elf?’

‘Ye think there _is_ such a thing as a guid elf?’

‘No, but I am suggesting that there is a possibility that there _might_
be one.’ Tiffany turned to the cowering elf. ‘You are no queen now. Do
you have a name?’

‘Nightshade, my lady.’

‘Aye,’ said the kelda. ‘A poison.’

‘A word,’ said Tiffany sharply.

‘Well, yon _word_ has been kicked out as if life was nae more than a
game o’ chess; and now it turns to the lassie she tried to destroy years
ago,’ the kelda said. ‘She ha’ been beaten verra severely, but here she
comes, to your steading, asking ye for sanctuary.’ There was a gleam in
her eye as she said, ‘What now, Tiffan? It’s up to ye. Only ye can
decide. This elf nearly killed ye afore, and yet ye want to help
her . . .’ The kelda’s face looked grave. ‘Fairies are nae to be
trusted, we Nac Mac Feegle ken that! But ye are the girl who made the
Wintersmith mind his manners. Don’t fret for the Quin, but through her
footsteps there may be a war . . .’

Tiffany bent down to the shrunken, quivering elf. Face to face with her
she quietly said, ‘Last time we met, Nightshade, I was a small girl,
hardly capable of any magic whatsoever.’ She pushed her face closer.
‘How much better at magic am I now! I am the successor of Granny
Weatherwax, aye, and you elves were right to fear _her_ name. And now
you might say that the life of elves is hanging on you. And if you let
me down, I’ll send you back to the Feegles. They have no love for
elves.’ The kelda caught her eye and Tiffany said, ‘Does that sit well
with you, Kelda?’

‘Och, weel,’ said the kelda, ‘somebody had to taste the first snail.’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘And goblins were treated as nobodies until
somebody gave a thought to them. Give the Lady Nightshade no reason to
hate you, but if she breaks the rules then I promise you – and, ye ken
well, a promise from the hag o’ the hills is a serious business indeed –
that will be the end of it.’

Feegle eyes were still watching Nightshade with unabashed loathing. It
seemed to Tiffany that the air between them and the elf was humming with
hatred, in both directions.

Rob Anybody said, ‘You, elf, ye know that your kind will nae trick us
agin. And so it is for the sake o’ Mistress Aching that we are lettin’
ye live. But be told. The hag o’ the hills gets a bit restive when she
sees us killin’ people, and if she wasnae here, ye would be bleeding
again.’

There was a chorus of threats from the Feegles – it was clear that if
they had their preference, Nightshade would be a damp little piece of
flesh on the floor by now.

Rob Anybody smashed his claymore against the ground. ‘Listen to the big
wee hag, ye scunners. Aye, ye, Wee Clonker and Wee Slogum, Wee Fungus
and Wee Gimmie Jimmie. She’s made a truce with the auld Quin, believin’
yon schemie might have a wee passel o’ goodness in her.’

Big Yan coughed and said, ‘I dinnae want to gainsay the hag but the only
guid elf is a deid elf.’

‘I suggest ye dinnae tak that road, brother. As a gonnagle, I say to
leave a space for goodness tae get in, as it was in the Lay of Barking
Johnnie,’ said the gonnagle, Awf’ly Wee Billy Bigchin, an _educated_
Feegle.

‘Is that the mannie who balanced a thimble on his neb for a week and
afterwards had a wonderful singing voice?’ asked Daft Wullie.

‘Nae, ye daftie.’

‘Why are you getting all het up about this? Dinnae fash yersel’. The
first time yon elf touches a body, it will be a _deid_ elf, an’ that’s
the way to find out,’ said Wee Dangerous Spike.

‘Weel now,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘this is what the hag wants and I tell ye,
that’s the end of it.’

‘And I tell you one more thing, Rob Anybody,’ Tiffany said. ‘I will take
this elf away with me. I know that you will come with me, but I will
need a Feegle or two to bide by her side and watch her for me. Wee Mad
Arthur? You were in the Watch – I pick you for one.’ She looked around.
‘And ye, Big Yan. Don’t let this little elf get the better of _ye_. I
want to say to you both, this elf is a _captive_. And captives have to
be looked after. As a constable, you – Wee Mad Arthur – know that people
don’t fall down wells unless they’ve been pushed. I suggest you think
about this. And generally speaking, they don’t often fall downstairs
either unless they’ve been pushed. There are to be no little things
like, “Ach, weel, we let her out for a walk and she ran away and was
knocked over by a rampaging stoat,” or, “She died resisting arrest by
fifteen Feegles.” No great swarm of bees to sting her a lot. No great
big bird dropping her in a pond. No great big wind which comes out of
nowhere and blows everything away. No “She fell down a rabbit hole and
no one ever saw her again.”’ She looked around sternly. ‘I am the hag o’
the hills and I will _know_ how it happened. And then there would be
a . . . reckoning. _Do you understand me?_’

‘Oh, waily, waily, there’s to be a reckoning,’ Daft Wullie moaned, and
there was an embarrassed shuffling of feet as the Feegles reconsidered
their plans. Big Yan absentmindedly poked his finger up his nose and
closely examined what he found there before stuffing it into his spog
for later inspection.

‘Right, well, that’s settled then,’ said Tiffany. ‘But I will not abide
troublesome elves coming onto my turf, gentlemen.’

fn1 The Baron had given the Feegles their own land and the promise that
no sharp metal beyond a knife would go near them, but the Feegles lied
all the time themselves, so liked to be ready with boot and heid and
fist should any other liar come calling.

fn2 Hamish’s trained buzzard Morag did the actual flying, of course.
Mastering the art of flying wasn’t a problem for Hamish. Landings were
another matter.


[image]
CHAPTER 13


Mischief . . . and Worse

THE ELVES LIKED being troublesome. When elves come, they hunt with
stealth. There are little changes in the world, at first just mischief.

As in the cellar in the Baron’s Arms, where something had happened to
the beer. No matter how often or how thoroughly John Parsley cleaned and
changed spigots and barrels, the beer was suddenly full of floaties,
barrel gushies, skunkies and the like, and the publican was tearing out
his hair – of which he had little enough to start with.

And then, in the bar, someone said, ‘It’s the elves again. It’s their
sort of joke.’

‘Well, it doesn’t make _me_ laugh,’ said Thomas Greengrass, while John
Parsley was almost crying. And as happens in a pub, everyone else joined
in, and there was talk of elves, but no one believed it – though later,
at home, more than one new horseshoe was suddenly nailed up on the
doorframe.

People laughed and said, ‘Anyway, we’ve got our own witch here.’

‘Well,’ said Jack Tumble, ‘no offence, but she’s never here these days.
It seems she’s spending more of her time over in Lancre.’

‘Oh, come on,’ said Joe. ‘My Tiffany is doing a man’s work every day.’
He thought for a moment (especially since he knew that what he said
might easily get back to his wife via Mrs Parsley). ‘Better than that,
she’s doing a woman’s work,’ he added.

‘Well, how do you explain the beer?’

‘Bad management?’ said Jack Tumble. ‘No offence meant, John. It’s
difficult stuff, beer.’

‘What? My pipes are as clean as the rain and I wash my hands when I
change a barrel.’

‘What is it, then?’

Someone had to say it again, voice their conclusion, and it was said:
‘Then it _can_ only be the fairies.’

‘Oh, come on,’ said Joe. ‘My Tiffany would have dealt with _them_ in a
brace of shakes.’

But the beer was still sour . . .

While over in Lancre, high up in the forests of the Ramtop mountains,
Martin Snack and Frank Sawyer were anxious. They had trudged for days
from the last town, Hot Dang, to get this far and had left the main cart
track hours before. Their empty stomachs and the late afternoon shadows
were hurrying them up but it was hard going along the faint tracks on
the steep hillside. If they didn’t find the logging camp soon, this was
likely to be their second night without shelter. They had heard wolves
howling in the distance the night before. And now, as the temperature
dropped, it began to snow.

‘I reckon as we are lost, Frank,’ said Martin anxiously.

But Frank was listening carefully, and now he heard a roaring sound in
the distance. ‘This way,’ he said confidently.

And indeed, within no more than another five minutes they were close
enough to hear the sound of people talking, and soon after, the aroma of
something cooking, which seemed a good sign. Then, in a break between
trees, they could see the camp. There were a number of large hairy men
moving about, while others sat on tree stumps and one was stirring
something bubbling over on an almost red-hot portable stove.

As the boys emerged from the trees, the men looked up. One or two laid a
hand on their large and serviceable axes which were never far from their
sides, and then relaxed when they saw how young the boys were. An
elderly lumberjack in a big checked jacket with a fur-lined hood – the
kind of man that you wouldn’t talk to unless you heard him talk first –
walked over to meet them.

‘What are you lads doing here? What do you want?’ He eyed them up –
Frank, small and wiry but strong-looking, and Martin, more muscular but
shuffling his feet awkwardly behind his friend, as is often the way of a
lad with muscles but not much else who might feel uncomfortable when
asked something more demanding than his name.

Frank said, ‘We need a job, sir. I’m Frank, and this is Martin, and we
want to work on the flumes.’

The old boy gave them an assessing look, then held out an enormous
calloused hand. ‘My name’s Slack – Mr Slack to you two. So, the flumes,
is it? What do you know about flume-herding then?’

‘Not a lot,’ said Frank, ‘but my grandfather was on the flumes and he
said it was a good life.’ He paused. ‘We hear there’s good money to be
had,’ he added optimistically.

The problem for lumberjacks working this high up in the mountains was
the distance from the remote camps to the main cart track. It was just
not practical to have the huge, heavy logs dragged out of the forest by
horse, and the solution was to send the logs down the mountain on a
fast-running flume of water to the depot on the downs below. From there
the logs could be transported to the towns and cities by mule cart.

It was a wonderful idea, and once the first flume got going, the idea
spread. The men who became flume-herders lived in little sheds perched
precariously on ledges dangerously close to turning points in the
flumes, and they needed strength to be able to deal with blockages as
several tons of wood came hurtling down the surging water towards them.
There was no shortage of young men who would head to the mountains,
determined to ride the flumes, if only to say they had done it! Some, of
course, never got the chance to say anything to anyone ever again after
an early mistake on the logs, but every camp had an Igor, so some parts
of them might very well get a second chance. And occasionally you might
meet a really old flume-herder who had been doing it for a long time,
and might indeed be sporting a young man’s arms on his wiry old body.

‘The flumes don’t like babies,’ Mr Slack said. ‘It’s a man’s job and no
mistake. I see you’ve got muscles, both of you, but I don’t care about
that. There are lots of boys like you with muscles. What we need is boys
with muscles in their heads. You never know what the flumes will do to
you on a renegade turn.’ He frowned at them. ‘Do you know young Jack
Abbott? Young lumberjack who lives down the mountain with his good
mother and young sister? Near as anything chopped his own foot off just
a week or so ago. Only just getting better, and _that_ thanks to some
lass with a squint who the witches sent on up to help. Think on _that_,
lads, if you think you can take risks up here. Flume-herding is a lot
more dangerous than lumberjacking.’

The boys looked downcast.

‘And it’s magic wood, some of this up here,’ Slack continued. ‘For the
wizards. That’s why they need us, lads – can’t take it on trains, even
once it’s down in the depot. You all right with that? Magic can do funny
stuff to some of the men up here.’ He pointed at the snowy trees
surrounding them and said, ‘These aren’t your ordinary pines, these are
Predictive Pines. They know the future. Although dang me if I know why
or how. What good is knowing the future for a pine tree? It can predict
_when_ it is going to be cut down – but you still _do_ cut them down.
Not like it can get away now, ha! But if you touch one, and it likes
you, you’ll see what is about to happen. So, lads, you still
interested?’

Martin wasn’t the kind to talk too much, but he said very simply, ‘I
just need the money, boss. And the grub, of course.’

‘Oh, it’s good money. And you can buy all sorts and get it sent up
here,’ said Mr Slack. He dug into a pocket of his checked jacket and
pulled out a well-thumbed book. ‘Biggerwoods catalogue. We all swear by
it. You can get anything you want.’

Frank peered at the catalogue, at its cover. ‘Says ’ere you can get a
_bride_,’ he said in wonder. ‘Comes by _train_.’

‘Well, there ain’t no train gets up here – no iron near _this_ wood.
Nearest railhead’s down at Hot Dang. Near enough. And that there brides
is a new offer. Just in time for you lads. It says that you can get a
young lady – lots of fancy girls looking for men. Find yourself one, and
on what you can make up here she can have a proper indoor privy and no
messing and all the clothes she wants. _That’s_ how good the money is.’
He paused and stuffed the catalogue back into his pocket, then added,
‘Women’s clothes are wonderful, don’t you think? Only the other day I
met a man who said he travelled in ladies’ lingerie . . .’

‘Are you sure he was all right?’ Martin asked Mr Slack a bit dubiously.
He had heard talk of one very remote camp where the tough, strong
lumberjacks apparently chose to dress in women’s clothing as they sang
songs about their big choppers, but he hadn’t believed it. Until now,
anyway.

The lumberjack ignored his question. ‘Well, Martin, you are a fine boy,
aren’t you?’ he said, then turned to Frank. ‘You, lad, why do you want
to take your chances up here?’

‘Well, Mr Slack, I was going out with this girl, but there was this
other lad, you know . . .’ He hesitated.

Mr Slack held a hand in front of his face. ‘Don’t tell me anything more,
kid. These hills are full of people who really wanted to be somewhere
else, and it sounds like you might fancy taking a look at Biggerwoods
then, once you’ve got some money in your pocket. Well, you two seem
strong enough. Just sign up and we’ll say no more. You can start in the
morning, and then we’ll see. If you ain’t stupid, you’ll come away with
good wages. And if you go messing about around the flumes, I’ll give
your dear old mothers your wages, so she’ll have enough to bury you
with.’

He spat on his thumb, and man and boys made the thumb bargain so common
amongst men of the world.

‘And I’ll tell you what’s going to happen to you in the next thirty
minutes,’ Mr Slack said with a wide grin. ‘You’ll be over where the logs
go into the flumes, watching and learning. And I don’t need no
Predictive Pine to tell me that!’ He laughed, and patted the nearest
pine.

But as his fingers touched the bark, his jaw dropped open and his hood
fell back from a face frozen with fear.

‘Lads,’ he stammered – and that in itself was terrifying, that a man so
grizzled should have such a thing as a stammer in his voice – ‘get out
of here. _Now!_ Get down the mountain. We’ve got a fight coming our way
– in about five minutes! – and I need only men who know what to do with
an axe up here.’ And he turned and ran into the camp, shouting to the
lumberjacks.

Martin and Frank looked at each other, shocked, and then Frank reached
out tentatively and poked a finger onto the tree. A sudden flash of
images shot into his mind – gloriously colourful creatures in velvet and
feathers, their bodies painted with woad, came tumbling down out of the
trees. But there was nothing glorious about the pain and death they were
bringing with them. Then he saw a fur-lined hood bobbing in the waters
of a flume, a hood that framed the head of Mr Slack. A Mr Slack who
seemed to have somehow been slack enough to lose his body . . .

The two boys stumbled through the lumberjacks, heading for the trees,
for the snowy ground that offered a chance of escape.

Not quickly enough. For with a sudden whistle, a storm of elves came
dancing from the trees – large, nasty elves, the feathers and velvets of
their tunics making them seem like predatory birds swooping from the
shadowy heights. The two boys shrank back, frozen to the spot.

And for a few minutes it was lumberjack versus elf, helped by the camp
Igor, who said, ‘Keep touching the pineth, it troubleth them and they
won’t know what day it is. And while they are finding out, you can give
them a real rollocking.’

The lumberjacks were not men who would run away from a fight, and the
terrible metal of their axes destroyed more than one elf. But more and
more elves were pouring into the camp, tipping over the little sheds,
kicking at the logs so that they tumbled into the flumes any which way,
the elves swinging into the heights of the trees and laughing down at
the camp. And there was something enchanting about them . . . something
that crept behind the hard exteriors of the lumberjacks and made them
fall to their knees, sobbing for their mothers, dropping their axes,
easy prey for the victorious fairy folk . . .

‘I told you. Get yourselves _away_, get to the flumes, boys,’ Mr Slack
shouted, chopping with his axe at an elf creeping up behind him. ‘Them
flumes are faster than elves. I’ll be OK.’

Martin took him at his word – though Frank had seen the future and knew
that ‘OK’ wasn’t really going to happen for Mr Slack – and leaped into
the first bucket, Frank close on his heels, and Mr Slack pushed a lever
– and the bucket was off! Down the flume snaking its way down the steep
mountainside, round corners so terrible that they had to lean from one
side to the other to avoid falling. Soaked to the skin, a jumble of logs
in front of them, behind them, alongside them, they tore along deep
gorges, dodging arrows from arriving elves who were heading up the
mountain like a deadly swarm of insects.

It was wild, it was exhilarating, it was _almost_ getting killed – and
the _almost_ bit is what made it something they would feel able to talk
about later, though clearly getting killed would shut up most people.

It was also terrifying – the most terrifying thing that had ever
happened to either boy. Even over the roar of the water, they could hear
the screams of the lumberjacks from behind them. And there were . . .
things coming down with them in the water that no one would want to look
at too closely.

The journey ended in a pile of logs. And the depot had many men, big
strong men with metal in their hands, angry at the damage to the timber,
and as they gathered to march up the mountain, there were laughs and
shrieks from above – and then silence. The elves had gone.

The miller of Stankfn1 was a pious man, and the mill itself was
complicated, with wheels turning all the time in various directions; his
nightmare, which he hoped never to see, would be a day when the mill
broke down and all those complicated wheels spun off everywhere. But
while they kept on turning, well, the miller was a happy man, for after
all everybody needed bread.

Then one night the elves came, and oh, they started to interfere with
his flour, making holes in the sacks and dropping an anthill into the
grain, laughing at him.

But they had made a big mistake.

The miller prayed to Om, but as he got no answer – or, rather, he got
the answer in his head that he wanted Om to give him – he let the elves
have it, and as the complicated wheels roared into action, they were
surrounded by metal – wonderful metal, cold metal, all turning like
clockwork.

And the miller locked all the doors so they couldn’t get out. He could
hear the screams all night, and when his friends then asked him how he
could have done that, he just said, ‘Well, the mills of Stank grind
slow, yet they grind ’em exceeding small.’

Down in the village of Slippery Hollow, Old Mother Griggs woke up with
her hair in a terrible tangle – and a bed full of thistles, tearing into
her aged skin . . . while an elf laughed in glee as its mount – a young
heifer – collapsed to her knees, exhausted from the night-time
revels . . .

And an old, crabbed trader in Slice pushed his cart – his only means of
survival – into the market square, singing, ‘A cabbage a day keeps the
goblins away. And an onion a day makes the elv— Aargh!’

And at the foot of the Ramtops, a young maiden by the name of Elsie was
tickled under the chin by a flower, and suddenly loosed the hand of her
little sister, letting the little girl wander into the river, while
Elsie gazed lovingly into the eyes of her father’s donkey . . . as an
unwary traveller skipped deeper and deeper into the woods, dancing to
elven music that would never stop, the elves gambolling along beside
him, laughing at his distress . . .

And Herne the Hunted – god of the small and furry, those destined to be
eaten – crawled under a bush and hid as three elves discovered the gory
fun they could have with a family of young rabbits . . .

fn1 You might think that a name like Stank would put people off. But in
fact the mountain village of Stank had once been a very popular place
for tourists. They liked to send messages home saying, ‘We’re stinking
in Stank.’ And go home with presents for their loved ones like tunics
with ‘I’ve been to Stank and all I’ve brought home is this stinking
tunic’ written on them. Alas for them, with the coming of the railways –
or in the case of Stank, the _not_ coming of the railways – tourists
began to go elsewhere, and Stank was now gradually disappearing into the
mud, surviving mostly by taking in washing.


[image]
CHAPTER 14


A Tale of Two Queens

TIFFANY TOOK NIGHTSHADE – a very small, pathetic creature right now –
back to her father’s farm with her, tucking her under her cloak for the
journey, and then settling her and the Feegles into one of the
old-fashioned hay barns.

‘It’s clean and warm here,’ she said, ‘with no metal. And I will bring
you some food.’ She looked sternly at the Feegles. They had a hungry
look to them. There was an elf, all by itself. What could they do with
it? ‘Rob, Wee Mad Arthur, Big Yan,’ she said, ‘I’m just going to get a
lotion for Nightshade, to help heal her wounds, and I do not want you to
touch her while I am gone. _Is that clear?_’

‘Oh aye, mistress,’ said Rob cheerfully. ‘Get yeself offski and leave
yon scunner wi’ us.’ He glared at Nightshade. ‘If yon elf gi’ us any
trouble, ye ken, we have oor weapons.’ He shook his claymore in a
fashion that clearly showed that he was itching to take it out to play.

Tiffany turned back to Nightshade. ‘I am the hag o’ the hills,’ she
said, ‘and these Feegles will do my bidding. But they do not like you
and your kind, so I suggest you mend your manners, madam, and play the
game. Or there will be a reckoning.’

And then, indeed, she was offski. But it was a very rapid offski, as she
trusted the elf very little and the Feegles even less.

When Tiffany got back, Nightshade took the healing ointment, and it
seemed as if with each smooth stroke the little elf blossomed, becoming
more and more beautiful. There was a sparkle about her and it was like a
syrup that covered everything. It shouted, ‘Am I not beautiful? Am I not
clever? I am the Queen of Queens!’

Then it seemed to Tiffany that her sense of self was being changed; but
she had been waiting for it, and she thought, I’m not having that, my
friend. She said, ‘You will not try your elvish wiles on _me_, madam!’

But still she felt the elf’s magic reaching out for her, like the creep
of a sunrise . . .

She screamed, ‘You will _not_ put your glamour on _me_, elf!’ And the
words of the shepherd’s count that Granny Aching had used were in her
mind. ‘_Yan tan tethera_,’ she chanted, over and over, the singing of
the words helping her mind become her own again.

It worked. Nightshade began to tone herself down, and now she looked
like a farm girl, a dairymaid. She had conjured up a dairymaid’s dress
for herself, though one that no real dairymaid would ever wear, given
that it was adorned with little ribbons and bows, a dainty little
slipper-clad foot peeking out from beneath the hem. As a pretty straw
bonnet took shape, Tiffany recoiled – the elf had summoned up an echo of
the costume she knew very well, one worn by a china shepherdess she had
once given to her granny. And as she remembered Granny Aching she became
incredibly angry. How _dare_ this elf try this on her, here, on her very
turf!

‘I demand—’ Nightshade tried, and then she saw Tiffany’s expression. ‘I
would hope . . .’

A country girl! The elvish has begun to leave the building, Tiffany
thought with delight. But she still folded her arms and glared at the
elf. ‘I’ve helped you,’ she said, ‘but I am also busy helping other
people – people who would have a better life if you weren’t here.’ She
narrowed her eyes. ‘Especially if your people cause mischief, do things
like spoiling our beer. Yes, I know about that, and I know you, elf, and
I know what you want. You want your kingdom back, don’t you,
Nightshade?’

There was a growl from the assembled Feegles, and Big Yan said
hopefully, ‘Can we nae throw it back there, mistress?’

‘Aye,’ said Rob. ‘Be rid o’ yon pest.’

‘Well, Rob,’ said Tiffany, ‘I am sorry to tell ye, there are some folks
who think _Feegles_ are a pest.’

Big Yan went silent, then said slowly, ‘Weel, we may be pests, ye ken,
but a puir bairn has nae reason tae dread Feegles.’ He rose to his full
height of seven inches – Big Yan was very tall for a Feegle, with the
scars on his forehead typical of the taller-than-average, who can find
doorways somewhat challenging – and loomed over the elf from the
rafters.

Tiffany ignored him, turning back to Nightshade. ‘Am I right?’ she
demanded. ‘You want to return to Fairyland? What do you say?’

Cunning flickered across Nightshade’s sharp little face. ‘We are like
bees,’ she said at last. ‘The Queen has all the power . . . until she
gets older, and then a new queen kills her to take the hive.’ A wave of
anger was suddenly visible. ‘Peaseblossom,’ she hissed. ‘He does not
believe that the world has changed. It was _he_ who threw me from my
people.’ A contemptuous sneer crossed her lips. ‘He, who is so powerful
he can spoil _beer_. When we could once destroy _worlds_ . . .’

‘I could give you some help with your little friend Peaseblossom,’
Tiffany said slowly. ‘I would settle for you as Queen of the Elves again
if you could make all the elves go back once more to their own land and
stay there. But if you and your race should come here for the purpose of
making humans your slaves, well, you may think you have seen me angry,
but _then_ you will know the real meaning of the word rage.’

As she said that everything about her flickered in fire. And she
remembered facing the Queen before. Land under wave. Knowing where she
had come from, where she was going. And that she could no longer be
fooled. Knowing that no matter how many people dreamed, invited the
elves to come into the world, _she_ would be there, awake, holding firm.

‘If you break your vow, the last things you will see are Thunder and
Lightning,’ she threatened. ‘Thunder and Lightning in your head and you
will die of the thunder. That is a _promise_, elf.’

From the look of terror that flickered across Nightshade’s face, Tiffany
knew that the elf understood.

She brought Nightshade some porridge in the morning.

The elf looked up at Tiffany as she took the bowl, and said, ‘You could
have killed me yesterday . . . _I’d_ have killed me. Why didn’t you? You
know I am an elf, and _we_ are merciless.’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, ‘but we are human, and we do know mercy. I also
know I’m a witch, and I’m doing my job.’

‘You are clever, Tiffany Aching, the little girl I almost killed on the
hill when the thunder and lightning became solid and hurtful, all teeth
and bite.’ Nightshade was puzzled. ‘What am I now but a ragged pauper?
Friendless, but you, one girl, you took me in when you had no reason
to.’

‘I did have a reason,’ said Tiffany. ‘I’m a witch, and I thought it
possible.’ She sat down on a milk churn, and said, ‘You must understand
that elves are seen as vindictive, callous, spiteful, untrustworthy,
self-centred, undeserving, unwelcome nuisances – and that’s being
_nice_. I’ve heard much worse language used about them, especially from
people whose children have been taken away, I can tell you. But nothing
stays the same – our world, our _iron_, your court, your glamour. Did
you know, Nightshade, that in Ankh-Morpork goblins have jobs, and are
considered to be useful members of the community?’

‘What?’ said the Queen. ‘Goblins? But you humans hate goblins – and
their stink! I thought the one we captured was lying!’

‘Well, maybe they do stink a bit, but so do their masters, because for
some of them a stink is money,’ said Tiffany, ‘and a goblin who can
repair a locomotive can stink as much as he likes. What do you elves
have to offer us? You are just . . . folklore now. You’ve missed the
train, in fact, and you have only mischief left, and silly tricks.’

‘I could kill you with a thought,’ said Nightshade with a sly look.

‘Oh dear,’ said Tiffany, holding up a hand to halt the Feegles, each of
whom wanted to be the one to get the first fist in. ‘I hope you don’t do
so. It would be your last.’ She looked at the elf, whose sharp little
face was quivering with upset as she found herself surrounded by those
she did not understand. ‘Oh, please don’t cry. An elf who has been a
queen – an elf who wants to be a queen again – surely shouldn’t cry.’

‘A queen shouldn’t, but I am a remnant of a queen, lost in the
wilderness.’

‘No, you are in a hay barn. Do you understand the meaning of manual
labour, lady?’

Nightshade looked puzzled. ‘No. What does it mean?’

‘It means earning a living by working. How are you with a shovel?’

‘I don’t know. What is a shovel?’

‘Oh dear,’ said Tiffany again. ‘Look, you can stay here until you are
better, but you must work hard at something. You could try.’

A boot bounced off the ground beside her, one of her father’s, a hole at
the toe, and another trying out of sympathy to join in at the heel. ‘I
cannae abide boots on my feet, ye ken,’ said Wee Mad Arthur, ‘but if ye
recall I wuz raised by shoemakers, and they tol’ me a tale o’ the elves.
Yon scunner ye ha’ there might ha’ a talent for it, ye ken.’

Nightshade turned the boot gingerly over in her hands. ‘What is this?’
she said.

‘A boot,’ said Tiffany.

‘An’ ye’ll get one reet noo up yer backside if I ha’ anythin’ tae dae
wi’ it,’ Big Yan growled.

Tiffany took the boot from the elf and put it down. ‘We’ll talk later,
Nightshade,’ she said. ‘Thank you for your suggestion, Wee Mad Arthur,
and yes, I do know the storyfn1 but I think it is just that, a story.’

‘Weel, I tol’ ye, Wee Mad Arthur, you shouldnae have listened to that
load o’ old cobblers,’ said Rob.

It was a day of old sheets and old boots and ‘make do and mend’. And oh
dear, Tiffany thought, she had to check on baby Tiffany, and drop in on
Becky Pardon and Nancy Upright – Miss Tick felt that both girls might be
of use if she wanted to take on a trainee in the Chalk. But she couldn’t
ask the girls to move in while she had Nightshade at the farm, not
unless she gave them each a horseshoe necklace so they would be
protected by the iron. It would have to wait . . .

She was back and forth to the farm all day, in between visits. Her last
call of the afternoon was to Mr Holland the miller. There were only a
few purple blotches on his skin now, and she left Mistress Holland with
a second pot of the Merryday Root lotion, biting her tongue at the good
lady’s clear message of ‘If only you had been here, I wouldn’t have used
the wrong herb.’

When she got back, she found Nightshade perched in the corner of the
barn, her merciless eyes pinned on You, who had stalked in and was
arching her back and hissing at the elf. The Feegles were egging You on,
with cries of ‘Ach, see you, pussycat, gi’ the scunner a wee giftie for
the Nac Mac Feegle’, interrupted by a sudden, ‘Crivens, lads, the big
wee hag is back!’

Tiffany stood in the doorway tapping her foot, and Rob shrank back.

‘Ach no,’ he wailed. ‘Nae the Tappin’ of the Feets, mistress.’

Tiffany folded her arms.

‘Ach, mistress, ’tis a heavy thing to be under a geas,’ Rob moaned.

And Tiffany laughed.

But Nightshade had questions for her. She had seen people coming to the
farm during the day, coming for medicines, for advice, for an ear to
listen and, sadly, sometimes for an eye to see the bruises.

‘Why do you help these strangers?’ she asked Tiffany now. ‘They are not
of your clan. You owe them nothing.’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘although they are strangers, I simply think of
them as people. All of them. And you help other people – that’s how we
do it.’

‘Does every person do it?’ said Nightshade.

‘No,’ said Tiffany. ‘Sadly, that is true. But many people will help
other people, just because, well, because they _are_ other people.
That’s how it goes. Do you elves not understand this?’

‘Shall we say that I am trying to learn?’ said Nightshade.

‘And what do you find?’ said Tiffany, smiling.

‘You become a kind of servant.’ Nightshade sniffed, her delicate nose
wrinkling.

‘Well, yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘But it doesn’t matter, because one day I
might need that person, and then they will very probably help me. It
works for us; it always has.’

‘But you have battles,’ said Nightshade. ‘I know that.’

‘Yes, but not always. And we are getting better at the _not_.’

‘You are powerful, though. _You_ could rule the world,’ said Nightshade.

‘Really?’ said Tiffany. ‘Why should I want to do that? I am a witch, I
like being a witch, and I like people too. For every nasty person,
there’s a nice one, mostly. There is a saying, “What goes around comes
around,” and it means that sooner or later you will find yourself on
top, at least for a while. And another time, the wheel turns and you
will _not_ be on top but you have to put up with it.’

She tried to look into Nightshade’s eyes, see what the elf was thinking,
but she might as well have looked at a wall. The elf’s eyes were
emotionless.

‘And I remember the darkness and the rain and the thunder and
lightning,’ she added, ‘and what good has it done you? You, elf, found
in a ditch?’

For once Nightshade seemed at a loss and looked carefully at Tiffany
before saying, ‘Your way . . . would not work for elves. Every other elf
is a challenge. We kill our queens – every other queen is a rival, and
we fight over the hive.’ She paused as a new thought struck her. ‘Yet
you have your queens of wisdom – and thus there was Granny Aching, and
Granny Weatherwax, and yes indeed, Tiffany Aching. You grow older,
wisdom flourishes and is passed on.’

‘And you never prosper, you live in a cycle of decay,’ Tiffany said
softly. ‘And you are not bees. They are productive but they die young
and never, ever have a thought . . .’

There was a strange look on the elf’s face. She was having to think.
Really think. Tiffany could see it. Nightshade had the face of someone
who had already begun to think about a world that had changed, a world
with iron that was less welcoming for the fairy folk, a world that liked
them well enough in _stories_ but had no real _belief_ in them, gave
them no way in; now she was looking closer and she was finding a new
world she had never thought about before, and she was trying to
reconcile it with everything else she knew.

And Tiffany could see the battle in her face.

Over in Lancre, Queen Magrat had heard about the trouble up in the
Ramtops – the attack on the lumberjacks, the deaths and the lost timber.

Elves, she thought. They’d seen them off last time, but it hadn’t been
easy, and it had been a long time since she’d posted guards – well,
Shawn Ogg, anyway – up by the circle of stones known as the Dancers, or
made sure the castle had plenty of horseshoes to hand.

She knew how the memory plays tricks, and the old stories had power, and
everyone forgot how ‘terrific’ really meant ‘brings terror’. Her people
would only remember that the elves sang beautifully. They would have
forgotten what their song was about.

Magrat was not only a queen, but also a witch, of course. And although
she was mostly a queen these days, the witch part of her knew that the
balance was off, that Granny Weatherwax had left a void behind her, and
no matter how hard Tiffany Aching was working to fill it – and that nice
backhouse boy she now had – Granny Weatherwax was a hard act to follow;
she had held the barrier, held it firm.

And if the barrier was no longer strong . . . Magrat shivered. Anyone
who had ever met elvenkind knew that ‘terror’ was absolutely the right
response – the _only_ response. For the elves were a _plague_ that could
spread rapidly, destroying and harming and hurting and poisoning all
they touched. She wanted no elves in Lancre.

That evening, Queen Magrat went to her garderobe and took out her
beloved broomstick, sat on it and very carefully tried a lift and,
slightly against her expectations, it took off gently, rising slowly
over the castle. She flew around happily for some minutes and told
herself, It’s true – once a witch, always a witch.

Being a dutiful wife, when she wanted to be, she mentioned her
intentions to her husband late that evening, and to her surprise King
Verence said, ‘Back on the old broomstick, my love? Very glad to hear
it. I’ve seen your face when a witch flies by, and no man can keep a
bird in chains.’

Magrat smiled and said, ‘I don’t feel like a bird in a cage, my dear,
but now we don’t have Granny, I feel I must help.’

‘Well done,’ said Verence. ‘We are all coming to terms with what’s
happened, but I am sure Mistress Aching will follow in Granny’s
footsteps.’

‘It isn’t like that,’ said Queen Magrat. ‘I think she is walking in her
own footsteps.’ She sighed. ‘But there are elves afoot,’ she said. ‘And
I believe Tiffany will be at Granny’s cottage – no, _her_ cottage –
later today, so I must go and see her, offer my support.’ Her husband
shivered at the mention of elves. ‘Of course,’ Magrat continued firmly,
‘I also intend to be a good role model for our children. Young Esme is
growing up fast and I want her to see that there’s more to being a queen
than waving hellos – we don’t want her to start kissing frogs, now, do
we? We all know how _that_ can turn out!’fn2 She turned at the door, and
tossed her husband a baby sling. ‘I am _quite_ sure,’ she said sweetly,
‘that you can look after our children very well indeed on your own for a
little while.’

Verence smiled weakly.

Magrat made a face that only a witch would see. He holds them upside
down sometimes, she thought to herself. He is a very clever man, but
give him a baby and he doesn’t really know what to do. She smiled. He
could learn. And when she asked him to change a nappy, when Millie was
off helping in the kitchen, he pulled a face but he did try anyway.

‘I want to help,’ Magrat said firmly to Tiffany, landing her broomstick
outside what they both still thought of as Granny’s cottage, less than
an hour after Tiffany had arrived herself, the news quickly flashing up
to the castle since Magrat had made it known she wanted to be informed.
‘I am the Queen, but I am also a pretty good witch.’

Tiffany looked into Magrat’s eyes and saw her longing to be a witch once
more, just for a little while, and then Magrat said, ‘We have had elves
here, Tiffany. _Elves!_’ And Tiffany remembered Granny Weatherwax
telling her how Magrat had fought the elves before – shot one right
through the eye with a crossbow indeed!

‘I have _experience_, Tiffany,’ Magrat continued. ‘And you are going to
need everyone you can get if the elves start coming through.’ She paused
to think. ‘Even novices. Have you spoken to Miss Tick?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘She says she has found one or two likely girls,
but not everyone can be a witch, even if they want to be. And at the
moment it’s not . . . possible to take a girl on in my steading on the
Chalk.’

‘Why not? And what about your friend Petulia, her with the piggery?’

‘Well, she has the skills,’ said Tiffany, ignoring the first of Magrat’s
questions. ‘But Petulia helps her husband to run the farm – says she
spends all her time among creatures who go “grunt”, and that sometimes
includes the old pig farmers! And you have to admit that pig-boring is
good for everybody, even the pigs. It’s terrible to hear the squealing
if she’s not there.’

‘Well, we may still need her up here, pigs or not. And heavy waterproof
boots can take an arrow,’ said Magrat. ‘So, any sign of elves down on
the Chalk?’

Tiffany coloured, uncertain how Magrat would take her news about
Nightshade, but thinking a little guiltily that at least it would save
her having to tell Nanny Ogg herself. She told her about the beer first,
then about Nightshade. How the elf was staying at her parents’ farm,
watched over by Feegles. Making it impossible to take on any other help.

Magrat knew the Feegles would keep the elf from causing any trouble, but
she was surprised by what Tiffany told her. ‘Are you telling me you
think you can _trust_ an elf?’ she said. Her face had paled. ‘No elf is
trustworthy,’ she added. ‘They wouldn’t even know the _meaning_ of the
word. Yet you trust this elf? Why?’

‘No,’ said Tiffany. ‘I don’t trust her. But I think this elf wants to
live. Nightshade has already seen for herself that our world is
changing. The iron, you know. And now she has encountered ideas unknown
to her. We might just be making some progress, and I think it’s worth a
try. Perhaps she might then go back to Fairyland and . . . persuade
other elves to think like her? To leave us alone.’ She paused. ‘The
kelda of the Feegles warned me, Magrat. She said that Granny’s going
would leave a . . . hole. That we needed to take great care. It’s the
elves! It has to be. So if this elf can help, well, I must try . . .’

‘Hmm, but if those others do start coming, you’re going to need help,
Tiffany,’ said Magrat. She thought for a moment. ‘I understand the Baron
on the Chalk has a wife who is a witch . . .?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘Letitia Keepsake. But she’s not trained and her
husband is a bit – how should I say it? – snobby.’

Magrat said, ‘Well, my dear, if you want, I’ll fly down there and drop
in for tea one day. And hint, in a subtle way, that the idea of being a
witch for the people at large might be a good idea. My Verence, you
know, likes to be thought of as a king of the people, and in fact, I
feel sure he thinks I am being a good example to the population by
working as a witch now. He talks like that, sometimes, but I love him
nevertheless. The idea of this Letitia being friends with a queen might
stop her husband interfering.’

Tiffany said, ‘I am amazed. Just like that?’

‘Trust me,’ said Queen Magrat. ‘Crowns are important, you know.’

Tiffany flew back to the Chalk feeling a bit happier. Magrat would be a
useful ally, and perhaps Letitia would be able to help too. But we are
still short of witches, so we must take pains to get more, she thought.
_Furious_ pains. That means pulling in every witch and likely witch to
learn at least some of the craft and how to deal with the glamour of
elves.

Elves! Nastiness for the sake of being nasty. As Granny Aching had told
her, they would take away the stick of a man with no legs. Nasty,
unpleasant, stupid, annoying – trouble and discord just for the pleasure
of it. Worse. They brought actual horror, and terror, and _pain_ . . .
And they laughed, which was bad enough because their laughter was
actually musical and you could wonder why such wonderful music could
come from such unpleasant creatures. They cared for nobody except
themselves and possibly not even that.

But Nightshade . . . Perhaps there _was_ one elf for whom the wheel was
turning. Especially the _iron_ wheels . . .

fn1 It had been in _The Goode Childe’s Booke of Faerie Tales_ and told
how two little elves secretly helped a poor shoemaker, but sadly
experience had taught Tiffany that a lot of what was in that book bore
no relation whatsoever to the real Fairyland.

fn2 Most princesses never tried to kiss toads, however, which had been a
source of sadness to the Feegles’ toad lawyer for many years.


[image]
CHAPTER 15


The God in the Barrow

IN THE DARK of the night, down in the Chalk, the wheel was definitely
stuck in the old ways – just the way three elves dancing through the
gloom of the woods liked it. This world was here for their pleasure, to
entertain them, delight them. And the creatures within it were no more
than toys; toys that sometimes squealed and ran and shrieked as the
elves laughed and sang.

Now they spotted a small home, a poor-looking dwelling with a window
slightly ajar. From within came the sound of babies, gurgling happily in
their sleep, their bellies full of their mother’s milk, their limbs
curled beneath the covers of their cots.

The elves grinned at each other and licked their lips in anticipation.
_Babies!_

Faces now at the window. Predatory faces, with the eyes of hunters.

Then a hand reached in and tickled the nearest infant under the chin,
the little girl waking and gazing in delight at the glorious creature
leaning over her, his glamour shining radiantly in the dark room. Her
little fingers stretched to touch a beautiful feather . . .

Tiffany’s happiness lasted until just after she had gone to bed, when
there was a sudden tickling in her head, and in her inner eye she saw
young Tiffany Robinson – the baby she had not had time to see yet this
week, the little girl on whom she had placed a tracking spell.

But this was not just neglect by baby Tiffany’s mum and dad.

The _elves_ had taken her!

Tiffany’s broomstick could not go fast enough. In a piece of woodland
she found a group of three elves toying with the little girl, and what
was inside her was not anger. It was something more forensic than that,
and as the stick went onwards, Tiffany let her feelings flame up . . .
and _release_.

The elves were laughing, but as Tiffany swooped down, she sent fire
blazing from her fingertips and into them and watched them burn. She was
shuddering with her fury, a fury so intense it was threatening to
overcome her. If she met any more elves that night, they too would be
dead.

And she had to stop herself there, suddenly appalled at what she had
done. _Only a witch gone to the dark would kill_, she screamed at
herself inside her head.

And another voice said, _But they were just_ elves. _And they were
hurting the baby._

The first voice came sneakily back with, _But Nightshade is also_ just
_an elf_ . . .

And Tiffany knew that if a witch started thinking of anyone as ‘_just_’
anything, that would be the first step on a well-worn path that could
lead to, oh, to poisoned apples, spinning wheels and a too-small
stove . . . and to pain, and terror, and horror and the darkness.

But it was done. And a witch had to be practical, so Tiffany wrapped her
shawl around the baby and slowly flew to the Robinsons’ house – ‘shack’
being, in fact, a better word for the little dwelling. Young Mister
Robinson opened the door to her knocking. He looked surprised,
especially when Tiffany showed him his baby daughter, swaddled in her
witch’s shawl.

She walked past him and confronted his wife, thinking, They are young,
yes, but that doesn’t mean you have to be stupid. Leaving the windows
open at this time of year? Surely everybody knows about elves . . .

_My mother said I never should . . ._

_Play with the fairies in the wood . . ._

‘Well,’ said Milly, ‘I checked the boys. They seemed to be all right.’
She blushed as Tiffany handed her the baby, and Tiffany caught it.

‘Let me tell you something, Milly. Your girl has a great future before
her. I’m a witch, so I know it. Because you’ve let me name her, I will
see to it that my namesake has what she needs – and mind, it is your
_girl_ I am talking about. In some way, she’s partly mine. Those great
big boys of yours will look after themselves. Now don’t leave your
windows open on nights like this! There are always watchers. You know
it! Let no harm attend her.’

Tiffany almost shouted the last bit. This family needed a little prod
every so often, and she would see to it. Oh yes, she would. And if they
neglected their duty, well, there would be a reckoning. Maybe just a
little reckoning, to make them understand.

But right now, as she headed home, she knew she needed to talk to
another witch.

She grabbed a warm cloak from her bedroom, then saw the gleam of the
shepherd’s crown on the shelf and, on a sudden impulse, tucked it into
her pocket. Her fingers curled around the odd-shaped little stone,
tracing its five ridges, and somehow she felt a strength flow into her,
the hardness of the flint at its heart reminding her who she was. I need
to keep a piece of the Chalk with me, she realized. My land gives me
strength, supports me. It reminds me who I am. I am not a killer. I am
Tiffany Aching, witch of the Chalk. And I need my land with me.

She sped through the night sky, back to Lancre, the cool of the air
rushing past, the eyes of the owls watching her in the moonlight.

It was almost dawn when she arrived at Nanny Ogg’s home. Nanny was
already up, or rather she hadn’t yet got down, since she had spent the
night at a deathbed. She opened her door and blanched a little when she
saw Tiffany’s face.

‘Elves?’ she asked grimly. ‘Magrat told me, you know. You got trouble
over in the Chalk?’

Tiffany nodded, any calm deserting her as tears suddenly choked her
voice. And over the requisite cup of tea in Nanny’s warm kitchen, she
told her what had happened.

Then she came to the bit of the story which she struggled to get out.
All she could say was, ‘The elves. With little Tiffany. They were going
to . . .’ She choked a little, then, ‘I killed all three of them,’ she
wailed. She looked despairingly at Nanny.

‘Good,’ said Nanny. ‘Well done. Don’t trouble yourself, Tiff. If they
was hurtin’ that baby, well, what else could you do? You didn’t . . .
_enjoy_ it?’ she asked carefully, eyes shrewd in her wrinkled face.

‘Of course not!’ Tiffany cried. ‘But, Nanny, I just . . . I did it
almost without _thinking_.’

‘Well, you might have to do it again soon if the elves keeps on comin’,’
Nanny said briskly. ‘We’re witches, Tiffany. We has the power for a
reason. We just ’as to make sure as it’s the right reason, and if
there’s an elf comin’ through and hurtin’ a baby, take it from me, that
_is_ the right reason.’ She paused. ‘If’n people do wrong things, well,
why would they be surprised if bad things then happen to them. Most of
’em knows this, you know. I remember Esme tellin’ me once, she was in
some hamlet or other – Spickle, Spackle, somewhere like that – and
people was tryin’ to string up this man for killin’ two children and she
said as he knew he deserved it; ’pparently ’e said, “I did it in liquor
and it ended in ’emp”.’ She sat wearily down, allowing Greebo to clamber
onto her ample lap. ‘Reality, Tiff,’ she added. ‘Life _an_’ death. You
knows it.’ She scratched the tomcat behind what _might_ be described as
an ear by someone with _very_ poor eyesight. ‘Is the child all right?’

‘Yes, I took her back to her parents but they . . . can’t . . .
won’t . . . look after her properly.’

‘Some folk just don’t want to see the truth, even when you points it out
to ’em. That’s the trouble with elves, they will keep comin’ back.’
Nanny sighed heavily. ‘People tell stories about ’em, Tiff,’ she said.
‘They make ’em sound fun – it’s as if their glamour hangs around after
they’ve gone and stays in people’s heads, tellin’ ’em that elves is no
problem. Just a bit of mischief.’ Nanny sank further into her chair,
knocking a small family knick-knack off the table beside her. ‘Feegles,’
she said. ‘They’re mischief. But elves? Elves is different. You remember
how the Cunning Man crept into people’s heads, Tiff? How he made people
_do_ things – _awful_ things?’

Tiffany nodded, her mind replaying horrible images while her eyes still
focused on the knick-knack on the floor. A present from Quirm from one
of her daughters-in-law, and Nanny _hadn’t even noticed she had knocked
it over_. Nanny. Who treasured every small object her family gave her.
Who would never _ever_ fail to notice if something was damaged.

‘Well, that’s _nothin_’ to what them elves might do, Tiff,’ Nanny
continued. ‘There is nothin’ they likes more than watchin’ pain and
terror, nothin’ that makes ’em laugh more. And they loves stealin’
babbies. You did well to stop them this time. They will come again,
though.’

‘Well, then they will have to die again,’ said Tiffany flatly.

‘If you are there . . .’ Nanny said carefully.

Tiffany slumped. ‘But what else can we do? We can’t be everywhere.’

‘Well,’ said Nanny, ‘we’ve seen ’em off before. It was hard, for sure,
but we can do it again. Can’t that elf of yorn help?’

‘Nightshade?’ Tiffany said. ‘They won’t listen to her the way things are
right now! They threw her out.’

Nanny pondered a bit, then appeared to come to a decision. ‘There _is_
someone they might listen to . . . or at least they _used_ to listen to
’im. If he can be persuaded to take an interest.’ She looked at Tiffany
appraisingly. ‘He don’t like to be disturbed. Though I have visited him
before, once, with a friend’ – her eyes grew misty at the memoryfn1 –
‘and I think Granny and he may have had words in the past. He likes
ladies, though. A pretty young thing like you might be just his cup of
tea.’

Tiffany bristled. ‘Nanny, you can’t be suggesting—’

‘Lordy, no! Nothin’ like that. Just a bit of . . . persuadin’. You are
good at persuadin’ folks, ain’t you, Tiff?’

‘I can do persuading,’ Tiffany said, relaxing a bit. ‘Who do you mean
and where do I go?’

The Long Man. Tiffany had heard a lot about the Long Man, the barrow
that led to the home of the King of the Elves – mostly from Nanny Ogg,
who had gone into the barrow and met the King once before, when the
elves had been getting unruly.

The professors would have said that the King lived in a long barrow from
ancient times, when people didn’t wear clothing and there weren’t so
many gods, and in a way the King himself was a kind of god – a god of
life and death and, it seemed to Tiffany, of dirt and ragged clothing.
And men still sometimes came to dance around by the barrow, horns on
their heads and – usually – a strong drink in their hands.
Unsurprisingly, they found it hard to persuade young women to go up
there with them.

There were three mounds to the barrow, three very _suggestive_ mounds
that no country lass who had watched sheep and cows in action could fail
to recognize – there was always a lot of giggling from the girls
training to be witches when they first flew over it and saw it from the
air.

Tiffany headed up the overgrown path, pushing her way through thorns and
trees, untangling her witch’s hat from a particularly insistent bush at
one point, and stopped by the cave-like entrance. She was strangely
reluctant to duck under the lintel, past the scratched drawing of the
man with horns and down the steps she knew she would find once she had
pushed aside the stone at the entrance.

I cannot face him just by myself, she thought with terror. I need
someone who can at least tell people how I died.

And a wee voice said, ‘Crivens!’

‘Rob Anybody?’

‘Oh aye. We follow ye all the time, ye ken. Ye are the hag o’ the hills
and the Long Man is a big hill.’

But, ‘Wait by the gate please, Rob, I must do this by myself,’ she said,
suddenly filled with sureness that this was the right choice. She had
killed the three elves; now she would face their king. ‘This is hag
business, ye ken.’

‘But we knows the King,’ said Rob. ‘If’n we gae along wi’ ye, we can
fight yon scunner in his ain world.’

‘Oh aye,’ added Wee Dangerous Spike. ‘A big laddie, ye ken, but I’ll gi’
the bogle a face full of Feegle he’ll nae forget.’ He experimentally
nutted one of the entrance stones, bouncing his head off the rock with a
satisfying _clunk_.

Tiffany sighed. ‘That’s what I’m afeared – I mean, afraid of,’ she said.
‘I want to ask the King for his help. Not anger him. And I know the
Feegles have history with him . . .’

‘Aye, that’s us,’ said Rob proudly. ‘We is _history_.’

‘Nae king, nae quin, nae laird!’ roared the assembled Feegles.

‘Nae _Feegles_,’ said Tiffany firmly. A sudden burst of inspiration hit
her. ‘I need you _just here_, Rob Anybody,’ she told him. ‘I have to do
my hag business with the King without anyone disturbing me.’ She paused.
‘And there are elves afoot. So if any should come seekin’ their king, I
want _you_ – Rob Anybody, Wee Dangerous Spike, all of ye – to stop them
coming down after me. I need you to do this for me. It’s _important_. Is
that _understood_?’

There was a bit of grumbling, but Rob had brightened up. ‘So we can gi’
them scunners a guid kickin’ if they shows up here?’ he asked.

‘Yes,’ Tiffany said wearily.

This was met by a cheer. ‘Nac Mac Feegle, wha hae!’

She left them there, squabbling over who should guard which part of the
Long Man, Wee Dangerous Spike bashing his head enthusiastically against
the entrance stones again as a sort of warmup for what he hoped was
coming, and she walked into the stinky darkness, clutching the small
crowbar she had brought with her, along with a horseshoe. She put one
hand into her pocket and held tight on to the shepherd’s crown – her
ground, her turf. Let’s see if I am truly the hag of the hills, she
thought, and she gripped the big stone blocking the entrance.

It rose up gently, no crowbar necessary, the stone crackling as she
raised it higher and higher, revealing the steps beyond. The path inside
led her deeper and darker, spiralling round and round, taking her into
the heart of the barrow.

Into a pathway between the worlds.

Into the world of the elven King, where he floated between time and
space in his land of pleasure. It was stifling, though there was no fire
– the heat seemed to be coming out of the earth.

And it stank. It reeked of masculinity and unwashed clothing, of feet
and sweat. There were bottles everywhere, and at the end of the hall,
naked men were wrestling, grunting and groaning as they twined and
twisted with their opponents, their bodies greased as if from a bucket
of lard. There were no women to be seen – this was a land where men
indulged themselves with no thought for the other sex. But when they saw
Tiffany, they stopped and put their hands over their essentials – as
Nanny Ogg would have said – and Tiffany thought: Ha, you big strong men,
your meat and two veg hanging out, you are frightened, aren’t you? I am
the maiden – and I am also the hag.

She could see the King of the Elven Races. He was just as Nanny Ogg had
described, still stinking of course, but somehow hugely attractive. She
kept her eyes on the horns on his head, trying not to look at _his_ meat
and veg, which were _huge_.

The King sighed, stretching out his legs and tapping his hooves against
the wall, an animal scent like that of a badger in heat rising from him
and curling towards her. ‘You, young woman,’ he said lazily, his voice
an invitation to romance, to wickedness, to pleasures you had not known
you wanted until that moment. ‘You come into my world. Into my
entertainments. You are a witch, are you not?’

‘Indeed I am,’ said Tiffany, ‘and I am here to ask the King of the Elves
to be a proper king.’

He moved closer and Tiffany tried not to blanch as the stench of him
thickened. He smiled lasciviously, causing her to think, I know who you
are and what you are, and I think Nanny Ogg must have liked you . . .

‘Who are you?’ he queried. ‘By your garb, you seem indeed to be a witch,
but witches are old and somewhat wrinkled. You, girl . . .’

Sometimes, Tiffany thought, I am so _fed up_ with being young.fn2 My
youth has got his attention, but what I need is his _respect_.

‘I may be young, my lord,’ she said firmly, ‘but as you see, I _am_ a
ha— a witch. And I come to tell you that I have killed three of your
people.’

That should do it, she thought, but the King merely laughed. ‘You
interest me, my girl,’ he said, stretching languorously. ‘I do no harm,’
he added lazily. ‘I simply dream, but my people, oh dear, what can I do?
I must allow them their delights, as I do myself.’

‘But their delights are not to _our_ taste,’ said Tiffany. ‘Not in _my_
world.’

‘_My_ world?’ chuckled the King. ‘Oh, you have pride, little girl.
Perhaps you would like to be one of my ladies. A queen needs
pride . . .’

‘The Lady Nightshade is your queen,’ said Tiffany firmly, her legs
shaking at the invitation in the King’s words. _To stay here? With him?_
her mind shrieked. She gripped the shepherd’s crown more firmly. _I am
Tiffany Aching, of the Chalk_, she said to herself, _and I have flint in
my soul_. ‘Nightshade is my . . . guest,’ she added. ‘Perhaps you did
not know, my lord, that your queen has been thrown from Fairyland by the
Lord Peaseblossom?’

A lazy smile spread across the King’s face. ‘Nightshade . . .’ he mused.
‘Well, I hope you enjoy her company.’ He spread his legs, making Tiffany
gulp, and leaned forward. ‘You begin to tire me now, girl. What do you
_want_ from me?’

‘Get your elves to see sense,’ said Tiffany. ‘Or there will be a
reckoning.’ Her voice almost wobbled on the last bit of this, but it had
to be said, oh yes.

There was a huge sigh, and the King yawned as he lay back again. ‘You
come to my abode and you _threaten_ me?’ his voice caressed. ‘Tell me,
mistress, what care should I have for those elves who play in your
lands? Even the Lady Nightshade? There are other worlds. There are
_always_ other worlds.’

‘Well, _mine_ never was a place for elves,’ Tiffany said. ‘It was
_never_ yours. You just latched on to it – a _parasite_ – and took what
you could. But once again I have to tell you these are the days of iron
– not just horseshoes, but iron and steel forged together in great lines
across the land. It’s called a _railway_, my lord, and it is spreading
across the Disc. People are interested in mechanical things, because
mechanical things _work_, while old wives’ tales mostly just don’t kill
them. And so people laugh at the fairies, and as they laugh, so you will
dwindle. You see, nobody cares about you any more. They have the clacks,
the railways, and it’s a new world. You – and your kind – have no future
here now other than in _stories_.’ She said the last word
contemptuously.

‘Stories?’ the King mused. ‘A way into the minds of your peoples,
mistress. And I can wait . . . the stories will survive when this
“railway” you speak of is long gone.’

‘But we will not stand by to see small children taken as playthings for
elves any more,’ Tiffany said. ‘I and others will burn those who take
them. This is a warning – I would like it to be friendly but, alas, it
seems this is not possible. You are living in railway time and _you
should leave us be_.’

The King sighed again. ‘Perhaps . . . perhaps,’ he said. ‘New lands to
discover could be entertaining. But I have told you, I have no desire to
visit your land in this time of iron. After all, I have all the time I
wish for . . .’

‘What about the elves who have already come through?’

‘Oh, just kill them if you wish.’ The King smiled again. ‘I may remain
here until the end of time, and I don’t think that you would want to be
there. But I have always liked the ladies, and so I will say that if
elves are stupid, they deserve my censure and your wrath. My dear
Mistress Aching – _and yes, I do know who you are_ – you clasp good
intentions to you like a mother clutches her young. Now, should I even
let you leave? When I am looking for . . . entertainment.’ He sighed. ‘I
do so desire new amusements sometimes – perhaps to tinker with
something, to discover new interests. And one new interest could be you.
Do you think that I will let you leave my home?’ His heavy-lidded eyes
caressed her.

Tiffany swallowed. ‘Yes, your majesty. You will let me leave.’

‘You are so sure?’

‘Yes.’ Tiffany wrapped her hand around the shepherd’s crown once again,
and felt the flint at its centre give her strength, draw her back to her
own land, to her land above the wave. She stepped backwards slowly.

And nearly tripped over something on the floor behind her.

The King was staring too. It was a white cat and she heard the King’s
voice, surprised for the first time: ‘You!’

And then there was an end to it, and Tiffany and You spiralled back the
way they had come, and the Feegles were outside, patrolling up and down
and enjoying the happy opportunity of fighting a tree or two, since no
elves had turned up, but these trees were still right scunners, stickin’
their barbs as they did into Feegle heads and beards. They _deserved_ a
guid kickin’.

‘Well, I’m not sure that did any good,’ Tiffany said to Rob as she
emerged from the tunnel.

‘Weel,’ said Rob Anybody, ‘let them come. Ye will always have your
Feegles. We Feegles are everlasting.’

‘Everlasting if there is enough to drink!’ Wee Dangerous Spike added.

‘Rob,’ said Tiffany firmly. ‘Right now, not one of you needs a drink. We
need a _plan_.’ She thought for a moment. ‘The King will not help – yet.
But he is looking for new entertainments. Perhaps if we offer him
something of that ilk, then he will think more kindly upon us and at
least leave us alone?’ Leave us to kill his elves, she thought to
herself. He did say he wouldn’t mind. Would he change his mind?

‘Ach, nae problem,’ said Rob proudly, confident of his ability to find a
PLN. ‘That King of the Elves, he needs some-thin’ tae do, ye say.’

‘Like the men of Lancre!’ Tiffany said suddenly. ‘Rob, you know how
Geoffrey has them all building sheds . . . Well, you built a _pub_ once.
How difficult would a shed be?’

‘Nae trouble at all, right, lads?’ said Rob, happy now. For he had his
PLN. ‘Let’s offski.’ He looked down at You. ‘How come your pussycat
follows you around, mistress?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Tiffany. ‘She’s a cat. They can go anywhere. And
after all, she was Granny Weatherwax’s cat and that means quite a lot.’

But Rob wasn’t listening. Not now. He was thinking of his PLN. And the
following day, at the mouth of the Long Man there was a shed replete
with everything a gentleman could require, including fishing line and
every tool you can think of, all made of wood or stone. Tiffany thought
that might make the King of the Elves happy. But she did not feel it
would get his help . . .

Lord Peaseblossom lounged on a velvet-covered couch in Fairyland, idly
fingering the ruff of feathers around his neck, swigging from a goblet
of rich wine.

Lord Lankin had just entered the chamber. He bowed before his new king,
a glorious red broom of a tail slung casually round his neck, a memento
of a recent raid. ‘I believe, my lord,’ he said lazily, silkily, ‘that
our warriors will soon wish for . . . greater enjoyments in the human
world. The barriers seem weak, and those of us who slip through to hunt
are finding no real opposition.’

Peaseblossom smiled. He knew that his elves had been testing the gates,
some skipping through the red stones of Lancre whilst others had
gambolled near the villages of the Chalk, wary only of the little
red-haired men who liked nothing more than a fight with an elf. The
elves were like the Feegles in one respect – if there was nobody to
fight, they would fight amongst themselves. And squabbling was _de
rigueur_ in Fairyland – not even cats were as bad.fn3

And elves could take umbrage. They loved umbrage, and as for sulking,
that was a top entertainment. But everywhere they had been, they had
stirred up little pockets of trouble, being nuisances, causing damage
for damage’s sake. Stealing sheep, cows, even the occasional dog. Only
yesterday Mustardseed had gleefully snatched a ram from its flock on the
hills and then loosed it in a small china shop, laughing as it had
lowered its horns and – yes – _rammed_ the shelves.

But there was no rhyme nor reason to it. They needed to show what they
could _really_ do. Perhaps, Peaseblossom mused, the time was afoot to
lead his elves on a raid that all elves would sing about for a long time
to come.

A smile flickered across his thin, sharp face, and he waved a hand in
the air, changing his tunic instantly to one of leather and fur, a
crossbow tucked into his belt.

‘We will put a girdle of glamour around their world,’ he laughed. ‘Go,
my elves, go make your mischief. But when this still-bent moon swells to
her full glory, we will go together in force. That land will be ours
once more!’

In her father’s barn, Tiffany was watching Nightshade wake up. She had
mixed up a new tonic for her yesterday: a good strong dose of reciprocal
greensfn4 which had made the elf sleep deeply for a whole day, giving
her body a chance to regain its strength.

And, incidentally, giving Tiffany a chance to go round the houses
without worrying about what the Feegles might do in her absence. I might
even have time to fly to Lancre and check on Geoffrey if I do it once
more, she thought. She knew the Feegles would never hurt a sleeping elf,
but one awake? Well, their instincts might just take over if Nightshade
should put a single dainty finger wrong. And, of course, she didn’t
trust the elf either . . .

‘Time for a walk,’ she said as Nightshade stretched her limbs and looked
around her as she woke. ‘I think it is time you saw a few more humans.’
For how else could she teach Nightshade about how this world worked if
Nightshade mostly only saw the inside of the barn and a few
ready-to-boil-over Feegles?

So she took Nightshade down into the village, past the pub where the men
were sitting looking glumly at their beer, fishing the occasional barrel
gushie out of it, past the small shops, picking her way carefully over
the debris outside Mrs Tumble’s Plates for All Seasons, down the road
and back up into the downs. Tiffany had asked her dad to let people know
she was trying out a girl to help mix her medicines, so nobody really
looked _directly_ at her, but Tiffany had no doubt that they would all
have taken in every single detail as she passed. It was why she had
insisted on Nightshade’s dairymaid’s dress being toned down, so there
were now no bows, no ribbons, no buckles, and a decent pair of boots
rather than dainty slippers.

‘I have been watching humans,’ said Nightshade as they were clumping
back up the road. ‘And I can’t understand them. I saw a woman giving an
old tramp a couple of pennies. He was nothing to do with her, so why
would she do that? How does it help her? I don’t understand.’

‘It’s what we do,’ said Tiffany. ‘The wizards call it empathy. That
means putting yourself in the place of the other person and seeing the
world from their point of view. I suppose it’s because in the very olden
days, when humans had to fight for themselves every day, they needed to
find people who would fight with them too, and together we lived – yes,
and prospered. Humans need other humans – it’s as simple as that.’

‘Yes, but what good would the old lady get from giving away her money?’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘she will probably feel what we call _a little
glow_, because she has helped someone who needed help. It will mean that
she is glad that she is not in his circumstances. You could say that she
can see what his world is like, and – what can I say? – she comes away
feeling hopeful.’

‘But the tramp looked as if he could do a job of some sort, to earn his
own pennies, but nevertheless she gave him hers.’ Nightshade was still
struggling to understand the human concept of money – the elves, of
course, could simply make it appear whenever they willed.fn5

‘Well, yes,’ said Tiffany, ‘that sort of thing does happen, but not
always, and the old lady will still feel she has done the right thing.
He may be a bit of a scamp but she tells herself that she is a good
person.’

‘I saw a king in your land before – Verence – and I watched him and he
didn’t tell people what they should do,’ Nightshade continued.

‘Well, he has a wife to tell him what to do,’ laughed Tiffany. ‘That’s
what humans are. Right up to our kings and queens, our barons and lords.
Our rulers rule by consent, which means that we like having them as
rulers, if they do what we want them to do. There were a lot of battles
long ago, but there again everyone finally realized that it was better
to work peacefully with everyone else. For one person alone cannot
survive. We humans definitely need other people to keep us human.’

‘I notice that you don’t use magic very much either,’ Nightshade added.
‘Yet you are a witch. You are powerful.’

‘Well, what we witches have found is that power is best left at home.
Magic is tricky anyway, and it can turn and twist and get things wrong.
But if you surround yourself with other humans you will have what we
call _friends_ – people who like you, and people you like.’

‘Friends.’ Nightshade rolled the word, and the idea, around in her head
and then asked, ‘Am I your friend?’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany. ‘You could be.’ She looked at the people passing by
and said to Nightshade, ‘Look, try this. There’s an old woman trying to
carry a very heavy basket up the hill. Go and help her, will you, and
see what happens.’

The elf looked horrified. ‘What do I say to her?’

‘You say, “Can I help you, mistress?”’

Nightshade gulped, but she crossed the road and spoke to the old woman,
and Tiffany listened and heard the old woman saying, ‘What a kind girl
you are, thank you very much. Bless you for helping an old lady.’

To Tiffany’s surprise, Nightshade carried the basket not only over the
hill but also along the next stretch of the road, and she heard her ask,
‘How do you live, lady?’

The old lady sighed. ‘Little by little. My husband died years ago, but I
am good with the needle and so I make things. I don’t need charity. I
get along and I have still got my home. As we say, worse things happen
at sea . . .’

As Nightshade watched the woman go away, she said to Tiffany, ‘Can you
give me some money, please?’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘witches seldom have money about their person – we
don’t live in that kind of world.’

Nightshade brightened up. ‘I can help then,’ she said. ‘I’m an elf and I
am sure I could get into a place where the money is.’

‘Please do not try that,’ said Tiffany. ‘There would be a lot of
trouble.’

She ignored a grumble from the side of the road, ‘Nae if you don’t get
caught.’

‘We is guid at gettin’ intae places, ye ken,’ another Feegle
muttered.fn6

Nightshade paid the Feegles no heed. She was still puzzling. ‘That old
woman had absolutely nothing, but she was still cheerful. What did she
have to be cheerful about?’

‘Being alive,’ said Tiffany. ‘What you are seeing, Nightshade, is
someone making the best of things, which is something else humans do.
And sometimes the best of it is good.’ She paused. ‘How did it make you
feel?’ she asked. ‘Carrying that basket.’

Nightshade looked puzzled. ‘I’m not sure,’ she said slowly. ‘But I’m not
sure I felt like an elf should . . . is that a good thing?’

‘Look,’ Tiffany said, ‘the wizards tell us that in the very, very olden
days, humans were more like monkeys, and being a monkey was a very
clever thing to be as monkeys like to see into everything. And then the
monkeys realized that if one monkey tried to kill a large wolf, he would
soon be a _dead_ monkey, but if two monkeys could get together they
would be very happy monkeys, and happy monkeys create more happy monkeys
so they would have lots of monkeys, which chatter and gibber and talk
all the time until, in the end, they became _us_. So too could an elf
change.’

‘When I get my kingdom back . . .’ Nightshade began.

‘Stop there,’ said Tiffany. ‘Why do you want your kingdom back? What
good has it done you? Think about it, for I am the human who has looked
after you, the only person you might call a friend.’ She looked
seriously at the elf. ‘I have told you that I – we – would be happy if
you were to be Queen of the Elves again, but only if you can truly learn
from your time here. Be prepared to live in peace, teach your elves that
the world has changed and that there is no space for them here.’

There was hope in her voice now, a hope that human and elf might be able
to _change_ the stories of humans and elves.

A princess doesn’t have to be blonde and blue-eyed and have a shoe size
smaller than her age, she thought.

People _can_ trust witches, and not fear the old woman in the woods, the
poor old woman whose only crime was to have no teeth and to talk to
herself.

And perhaps an elf could learn to know mercy, to discover humanity . . .

‘If you learn things,’ she finished softly, ‘you might find yourself
building a different kind of kingdom.’

fn1 Nanny’s friend on that occasion had been Count Casanunda the
lowwayman – a highwayman who carried a stepladder on his horse, on
account of his being a dwarf, and was most gallant towards the ladies he
encountered.

fn2 A thought that she would most certainly grow out of, assuming she
survived long enough.

fn3 It has in fact been said that elves are _like_ cats; but cats will
work together – for instance, when sharing a kill – while elves squabble
and fight so that a third party may go home with the food.

fn4 It looked a rather poisonous green before it was heated up, but in
most cases the end certainly justified the greens.

fn5 It disappeared pretty quickly too, as anyone given fairy gold soon
discovered. Usually by the morning, which often meant a lively evening
in the pub. And an even livelier evening the following night if visiting
the same establishment.

fn6 Very true, though getting out again was sometimes trickier,
especially if there was strong drink about.


[image]
CHAPTER 16


Mr Sideways

THE OLD BOYS in the villages around Granny Weatherwax’s cottage had
swiftly taken a liking to Geoffrey. They respected Nanny Ogg and
Tiffany, of course, but they really _liked_ Geoffrey.

They would taunt him sometimes; after all, he was in a woman’s business,
but when he got on his broomstick – sometimes even with his goat perched
behind him rather than harnessed to its little cart – and whizzed away
to the horizon, they were speechless.

Even when he was really busy, he always had time to stop and chat and
there was always a brew on in any shed when he came by, and a broken
biscuit for Mephistopheles. The old boys were fascinated by the goat,
but wary nonetheless after the day when someone gave it a drink of ale
just to see what would happen and, to their astonishment, Mephistopheles
danced like a ballerina and then kicked a young tree so hard that its
trunk split in two.

‘It’s like those folk who do mushi,’ said Stinky Jim.

‘I don’t think that’s the right word,’ said Smack Tremble. ‘Ain’t mushi
something you eat? Out in . . . foreign parts.’

‘_You_ mean One-man-he-go-up, he-go-down,’ Captain Makepeace said. ‘A
way of fighting.’

‘That’s it!’ said Stinky Jim. ‘There was a fellow at the market in Slice
who could do that.’

‘There’s a _lot_ of people in Slice who can do that kind of thing,’
Smack Tremble added with a shiver. ‘Odd place, Slice.’fn1

They sat and thought about Slice for a moment. You could find anything
at Slice market if you looked hard enough. Famously a man once sold his
wife there, where the phrase ‘bring and buy’ was taken literally, and he
went home with a second-hand wheelbarrow and felt he had the best of the
bargain. Then they looked at the remains of the sapling and agreed that
Mephistopheles was indeed a remarkable goat, but perhaps it would be
best to leave his diet alone.

The remarkable goat himself stoically chewed his way through the long
grass by the pub fence as though nothing untoward had happened and then
trotted off to find Geoffrey.

On this particular fine morning, Geoffrey was at Laughing Boy Sideways’s
house. Tiffany had been treating a particularly troublesome bunion of
his which had resisted her ministrations for weeks. She had been
considering breaking her rule and using magic on the thing, just to be
done with it, when Geoffrey decided to pop in to see Mr Sideways on a
day when Tiffany was away at the Chalk. He found the old man by the back
door of his cottage, just about to hobble down the path to the old barn.
Instead of heading back into the cottage as he would have done if
Tiffany had called, Mr Sideways beckoned to Geoffrey to follow him down
the path towards the rickety barn. And it was as Geoffrey watched the
old boy struggling painfully along in his old army boots that he noticed
something very wrong.

‘Well, dang me!’ Mr Sideways said when Geoffrey prised the offending
hobnail from his left boot. ‘If I’d known that was what the trouble was,
I’d have dealt with the bugger meself!’ He looked at Geoffrey with
bright eyes. ‘Thank ’ee, lad.’

Old Mr Sideways lived on his own and had done so for as long as anyone
could remember. He was meticulously dressed and in the city might have
been described as ‘dapper’. Apart from his work overalls, which were
washed regularly but were streaked with paint and oil, he was always
spick and span. So was his little cottage. The living room, which he
kept immaculately tidy, had paintings of people in old-fashioned dress
on the wall – Geoffrey assumed these were portraits of Mr Sideways’s
parents, although he never spoke of them. Everything the man did he did
carefully. Geoffrey liked him, and even though he was a very private
man, he had taken to Geoffrey.

The shed Mr Sideways had constructed adjacent to the old barn was also
immaculate. Every shelf was neatly stacked with carefully labelled old
tobacco tins and jars. His tools were hung against the walls, neatly
ranked by size. They were clean and sharp too. Tiffany had never been
allowed beyond Mr Sideways’s living room, but Geoffrey had soon been
welcomed to share a mug of tea and a biscuit in the shed by the barn.

Each one of the sheds Geoffrey visited on his rounds of the old boys was
different, expressing the personality of the occupant, unfettered by
female intervention. Some were chaotic, with piles of scrap and
half-made objects scattered about; others were tidier – like Captain
Makepeace’s shed, which was full of paints, brushes and canvases, but
still had a clear sense of order.

But no one was as tidy as Mr Sideways. And then Geoffrey noticed
something missing. All the other sheds had at least one work in progress
visible, whether it was a half-made bird table, or a stripped-down
wheelbarrow with a new shaft, but there was nothing like that to be seen
in Mr Sideways’s shed. And he evaded the question when Geoffrey asked
what he was working on.

‘What are you up to, Mr Sideways?’ Geoffrey asked. ‘You look like a man
who has been thinking, and I know you are a canny man at that.’

Mr Sideways cleared his throat. ‘Well, you see, lad, I am building a
machine. I’ve no interest in bird tables or mug trees and the like. But
machines now . . .’ He paused, then looked carefully at Geoffrey. ‘I’ve
been thinking that it might be useful, what with the troubles folks are
having.’

Geoffrey sat calmly, waiting for the old boy to finish his tea and reach
a conclusion. Eventually Mr Sideways put down his mug and stood up,
brushing the crumbs off his lap. He swept them up with a small pan and
brush he clearly kept just for that purpose, washed out the mugs, dried
and stacked them neatly on a shelf, then opened the door.

‘Would you like to see, lad?’

While Geoffrey drank his mug of tea with Mr Sideways in Lancre, over in
the Chalk Letitia, the Baroness, was sipping tea daintily with Magrat,
the Queen of Lancre, who had arrived unexpectedly on her broomstick – a
broomstick flying the pennant of Lancre, the two bears on black and
gold, just to make sure that nobody could be in any doubt that this was
a royal visit. She had arrived bearing a bunch of roses from the castle,
throwing Letitia and her staff all in a tiswas and Letitia flapping
about the cobwebs, some of which she had even managed to get tangled in
her hair.

Magrat had smiled at the rather shaky-looking Letitia, and said, ‘I’m
not here as a queen, love. I am here as a witch. I always have been one
and always will be. So don’t worry about all the pomp – you know how it
is, it’s just expected. A bit of dust here and there is nothing. Some
parts of my castle are full of dust, I am sorry to say. You know how
that is too.’

Letitia had nodded. She did indeed know what it was like. And as for the
plumbing . . . well, she did not want to even _think_ about how
old-fashioned the castle was. The ancient privies had a habit of
gurgling at the wrong time, and Roland said that if he had the time, he
could create an orchestra from the bangs, gurgles and clankings that
sometimes followed his morning visits.

She had rallied the troops, though, and now the two ladies sat side by
side in the castle hall, breathing in the peaty fumes from the fireplace
– it was always, always cold there, even in the summer, which was why
the fireplaces were so big and ate several small trees at a time. The
kitchen staff had brought out a hasty tray with tea and little snacks –
and yes, the sandwiches _did_ have the crusts cut off to make them
appropriately dainty for the two noble ladies. Magrat sighed – she
really hoped Letitia at least asked for the crusts to be given to the
birds.

There was also a plate of rather wobbly cupcakes.fn2 ‘_I_ made those,’
Letitia said proudly. ‘Yesterday. From a recipe in Nanny Ogg’s new
cookbook – you know, _A Lot of What_ _You Fancy Makes You Fat_.’ She
coloured a little, and her hand crept self-consciously up to her bodice,
where it was clear that when curves were being handed out, Letitia had
been at the end of the line.

Magrat took a cake by its little case rather carefully. Some of Nanny
Ogg’s recipes could include . . . unusual ingredients, and she already
_had_ three children. She nibbled at the little cake, and the two ladies
exchanged the usual pleasantries, with Magrat admiring a watercolour
Letitia had painted of the chalk giant up on the downlands. It was
surprisingly detailed, especially in the No Trousers area. Nanny Ogg
would definitely have approved, Magrat thought.

Then she got down to business. ‘Well,’ she said, ‘I’m sure I don’t need
to tell you, Letitia, but up in Lancre we’ve had enough of the elves.
Something must be done.’

‘Oh dear, I’m sorry to say that Roland is about to write to Mistress
Aching about the wave of elf raids and ask her what she’s proposing to
do about them. There have been an awful lot of complaints, you know, and
he’s out inspecting the damage.’ Letitia sighed. She understood that her
husband looking at the damage comprised more than just inspecting the
aftermath and saying, ‘Tsk, tsk,’ and ‘How long has this been going on?’
– it needed to include other things to make his tenants feel that
someone was doing something about it. And Roland’s wife had impressed on
him that this was not just a matter of being seen, but that rolling up
his sleeves and getting stuck in alongside his men was good for morale.
Even better if he bought a round in the pub when the day’s work was done
and became not just the boss but almost a friend. ‘We’ve got men enough
here, no doubt about that,’ she added, ‘but most of the time they are
working on the farms. It would be appreciated if other witches could
help.’

‘And unfortunately, that means us,’ Magrat said smartly, with the
emphasis on the _us_ part.

Letitia looked embarrassed. ‘I’m not a proper witch, you know.’

Magrat looked at the Baroness. There was something terribly _soggy_
about Letitia, as if you could pick her up and wring her out. But
witches came in all shapes and sizes. Both Nanny Ogg and Agnes Nitt, for
instance, were decidedly plumpfn3 while Long Tall Short Fat Sally went
up and down according to the tides – and there was no doubt that water
could be powerful. ‘My dear, you are selling yourself short,’ she said.
‘And I know what it is. I believe, my dear, that you are frightened that
you wouldn’t make the grade as a witch. We all went through that – girls
normally do. Tiffany has told me all about you, you know. As for me, I
don’t know what I would be like in a house with a screaming skeleton.
Were you not the girl who gave a headless ghost a pumpkin to carry
around? And handed a teddy bear to a screaming skeleton for comfort? You
don’t think you are a witch, but every part of my soul says you are. I
wish I’d had your opportunities when I was a girl.’

‘But I am the Baroness. I am a lady. I can’t be a witch.’

Magrat made a sound like ‘hurrumpf’, and said, ‘Well, I am a queen. That
doesn’t stop me being a witch when needs must. This is the time, my
dear, when we stop thinking about ourselves and who we are and get down
and dirty. Tiffany cannot fight the elves on her own, and this is a war
– and it will keep on going unless everyone pitches in.’

Her words flowed in and filled Letitia. ‘You are right, of course,’ the
young Baroness said. ‘Naturally Roland will agree with me, as he always
does. Count me in.’

‘Good,’ said Magrat. ‘I have got some chainmail which I think is your
size. And now, how soon can you leave for Lancre? I believe we are
meeting to discuss the situation. Can you ride a broomstick or do you
need a lift?’

Tiffany straddled her broomstick. She had heard in the village that old
Mrs Pigeon was near her time, and a wave of guilt had flooded through
her. Yes, she had two steadings. Yes, she had to work out what to do
with Nightshade. Yes, she had no time to rest. But she hadn’t seen the
old lady for over a week, and in a week an old lady could fall through
the cracks of life.

Nightshade was perched behind her, her sharp eyes noting everything.
Noting how the Pigeon family had only the smallest plot of land, with
soil so poor it was a wonder they got a crop out of it at all, their
fortunes depending mostly on the little flock of sheep they had in their
field by the stream.

Sid Pigeon, the youngest son, was there, looking much smaller somehow
without his shiny railway uniform. To Tiffany’s surprise, he had brought
a new work friend home with him.

Nightshade recoiled. ‘A _goblin_! In their house. Stinking . . .’ she
said with distaste.

Tiffany felt like kicking her. ‘A very _respectable_ goblin,’ she said
smartly, though it was true that she could smell the goblin as soon as
she went into the house, even over the layers of other smells happily
living in that very dirty home. She nodded to the goblin, who was
sitting with his feet up on the table, eating what looked like a chicken
leg that others – possibly the cats – had had a go at before him. ‘Sid’s
_friend_.’

‘Of Piston the Steam, mistresss,’ the goblin said cheerfully. ‘Works
with the iron and steel, I doess—’

‘Tiffany,’ Sid said urgently, ‘have you come to see Granny? She’s in bed
upstairs.’

Old Mrs Pigeon was indeed in her bed, and it didn’t look to Tiffany as
if she was likely to be getting out of it ever again. The old lady was
little more than a wrinkled set of bones, her twiglike fingers clutching
at the edges of a faded patchwork quilt. Tiffany reached out and held
one of her hands and . . . did what she could for the old lady, calling
the pain out of the shrunken body—

And all hell broke loose downstairs.

‘Sid! Them pesky fairies or whatever – they’ve only gone and fouled the
stream. It’s all yeller! And there’s dead fish floatin’ in it! We’ve got
to move the sheep – now!’ Mr Pigeon sounded desperate as he called to
his son.

As a thunder of boots left the house, Tiffany held her concentration,
drew more pain from old Mrs Pigeon. And then Nightshade was at her side.

‘I don’t understand,’ she said. ‘That . . . goblin went with the
humans.’

‘It’s called _helping_,’ Tiffany said smartly, still trying to hold on
to the pain she had taken from old Mrs Pigeon. ‘Remember?’

‘But goblins and humans don’t like each other,’ Nightshade continued,
puzzled.

‘I told you, Of Piston the Steam is Sid’s _friend_. But this isn’t about
_liking_,’ Tiffany said. ‘It’s about helping each other out. If the
goblin camp was on fire or something, the humans would help _them_.’ She
looked down at Mrs Pigeon; the old lady was falling into a sleep now.
‘Look, I need to go outside for a minute,’ she said. ‘Stay with Mrs
Pigeon, would you? Let me know if she wakes again.’

Nightshade was horrified. ‘But I can’t – I’m an elf! I’ve already
carried that basket. I can’t . . . help _another_ human.’

‘Why not?’ said Tiffany sharply. ‘Of Piston the Steam just did. Are
elves less than goblins?’ But she had no time to waste, so she headed
downstairs and threw the pain out into a pile of stones laid ready for
building into a wall.

It made a rather unfortunate loud bang – there had been quite a _lot_ of
pain – which is probably why, when she got back upstairs, Mrs Pigeon had
woken up. Woken up and asked for a cup of water.

The old granny was staring up at Nightshade, a smile on her gummy face
as she reached out for the cup. ‘You’re a good girl, you are,’ she was
saying weakly. ‘A good girl . . .’

A good girl? A good _elf_?

Nightshade put her hands to her stomach. ‘I think it is beginning . . .’
she said softly, looking up at Tiffany. ‘I feel a sort of warm spot.
Here, in my stomach. A little _glow_.’

Tiffany smiled, laid a gentling hand on Mrs Pigeon, and then took
Nightshade by the arm. ‘I need your help,’ she said. ‘Elves have put
this glamour on the stream and it runs past several farms . . . can you
put it right?’ She paused. ‘As your _friend_, Nightshade, I am asking
for your help. The Feegles can help with the sheep, but to remove the
glamour? This is something only one of your kind can do.’

Nightshade stood up. ‘A glamour from Peaseblossom?’ she said. ‘This will
be no trouble to remove. That elf is _weak_. And yes, I will help you,
Tiffany. You are my . . . friend.’ The word sounded odd in her voice,
but there was no doubt that she meant it.

So she went down into the fields with Tiffany, past the skittish sheep
in the yard – some of whom, courtesy of the ever-present Feegles, had
just broken the county record for stream-to-yard time, one young lamb
actually doing so _on one leg_ – and down to the boiling water.

Where she did indeed put it right.

And the tiny little glow inside began to smoulder . . .

The old barn behind Mr Sideways’s shed was full of miscellaneous
weaponry, souvenirs from many conflicts, lovingly oiled and meticulously
labelled.

‘I’ve been collecting them,’ Mr Sideways said proudly. ‘Every campaign I
bin in and more besides. You should always keep your weapons handy. I
mean, I don’t say anything bad about the trolls and the dwarfs, but we
fought them more’n once and so I say, you always have to make sure.
Somebody says something and before you know it, we’re knee-deep in
dwarfs. They give you the up and under. You can’t trust ’em with the up
and under.’

Geoffrey looked around the walls of the barn in astonishment. The
machinery of death was everywhere, if you looked at it properly. And
there he was, this smiling old man with whom he’d just been sharing a
cup of tea, eyes sparkling, ready to face the foe, especially if it
wasn’t human. And he was known as _Laughing Boy_? What would he have
been like if he had been known as _Scowling Boy_?

‘I can turn a lathe as good as anybody,’ Mr Sideways said.

‘A lathe,’ said Geoffrey. ‘You get swarf, don’t you?’

‘Oh yes, terrible stuff if it gets in your eye.’ He smiled. ‘And it
could be useful for something.’ There was a moment when he almost led
Geoffrey back out again, but then he could not hold it in any longer –
he _had_ to show the boy what he had been working on. ‘Come, lad,’ he
said. ‘Have a look at this. It was going to be a secret until it was
finished, but of course I can tell _you_.’

At the back of the barn there was a huge shape covered with a tarpaulin.
Mr Sideways led Geoffrey over to it, reached up and gave the tarpaulin a
tug, and as it fell away Geoffrey gasped.

The machine looked like a great metal grasshopper, with a counterweight
at one end, and an enormous leather sling at the other. As he gazed at
the machine in astonishment, Geoffrey realized that he had seen
something similar in the books Mr Wiggall had shown him at home. He
said, ‘This looks dangerous.’

‘I hope so,’ said Mr Sideways. ‘I’ve always wanted one of these, ever
since I saw them in action. The dwarfs had ones a bit like this which
could throw a troll flat on his back. Those dwarfs know a thing or two,
I must say, and I’m very big on gnome defence.’ He coughed. ‘Got the
idea to build one after I’d been watching the lads down the pub do the
Stick and Bucket dance.’fn4

‘So I see,’ said Geoffrey.

‘Captain Makepeace is very impressed,’ Mr Sideways added. ‘So me and the
boys are going to try it out tomorrow, but nowhere anyone can see us.’

These old gentlemen have certain qualities, Geoffrey thought. Just
because they are old doesn’t mean they can’t be powerful.

fn1 Quite correct. As the common joke says, most inhabitants of Slice
are more than one slice short of a loaf.

fn2 It appears to be a fact of life that if two or more well-born ladies
should gather together, cupcakes are _essential_. Otherwise the ceiling
might fall on them.

fn3 A very _kind_ term for Agnes, used only by her friends.

fn4 A dance that should only be performed when no women are nearby. If
you saw it, you would know why.


[image]
CHAPTER 17


An Argument of Witches

_THROUGH THE UNBARRED door, Lord Lankin creeps into a crumbling old
manor house. Up the creaky stairs, snuffing out the candles in the
sconces as he passes, he opens an unbolted door and prowls into a
nursery, where a young nursemaid rocking a cradle looks up, gazes into
his eyes, and then pulls a sharp pin from her basket . . ._

Sitting in the Great Hall at Lancre Castle with their allies and
friends, Tiffany and the witches of Lancre contemplated the construction
of a battle plan.

It had taken some effort to get everyone there and settled down.
Geoffrey had done a marvellous job rounding up reinforcements from all
over, flying hours in every direction with Tiffany’s message, to every
witch she could name.

Even blind Mrs Happenstance and Long Tall Short Fat Sally had turned up,
with Mrs Proust from Ankh-Morpork. And there was a group of younger
witches too: Annagramma Hawkin, Petulia Gristle, Dimity Hubbub, Harrieta
Bilk and others. Under Queen Magrat’s watchful eye, Letitia ticked them
off Tiffany’s list as they arrived.

Having a queen backing you up was a good thing, Tiffany thought, as Mrs
Earwig came in and started bossing everyone around – Magrat swiftly put
a stop to _that_, for even Mrs Earwig found that she couldn’t argue with
royalty. But dealing with witches all together was like carrying a tray
full of marbles. Witches were very good at rubbing one another up the
wrong way, and little feuds turned up and went away and disappeared and
started again. It was silly and everybody knew it, but they couldn’t
help themselves.

Geoffrey came into his own on occasions like this. Whenever bickering
broke out, he was there with the perfect word or a sympathetic smile.
Seeing his calm-weaving doing its subtle work was a joy, Tiffany
thought. You could almost see the calm coming out of his ears.

‘Ladies,’ Tiffany said, calling the meeting to order. ‘Here’s the
problem. The elves are back again, this time in force. And if we don’t
stop them soon, things will get very bad indeed. I know some of you have
encountered elves before’ – she looked at Nanny Ogg and Magrat – ‘but
many of you have not. They are a formidable foe.’

Nightshade was standing at the side of the hall, almost too demure in
her dairymaid’s dress. She didn’t _seem_ very formidable, but a few of
the older witches were eyeing her as though they had just encountered a
bad smell.

Mrs Earwig tutted and looked as though she was about to say something,
but Petulia got there first. ‘Tiff, are you sure that it’s wise to have
an elf here listening to this?’ she asked.

‘Don’t you worry, my girl,’ Nanny Ogg said. ‘If our little friend tries
anything, there will be fireworks and no mistake. Certainly no more
elf!’

‘The last time this happened, didn’t the King of the Elves intervene?’
Annagramma Hawkin asked, looking at Nanny Ogg.

‘He did indeed, but he almost didn’t. Tiffany’s been to see him already,
and it seems Old Horny ain’t interested,’ Nanny answered. ‘Can’t rely on
him in any case.’

‘Time moves differently in his realm,’ Tiffany explained. ‘Even if he
did decide to do something, it might be now, or next month or next
year.’

‘What about the wizards?’ asked another witch. ‘Why aren’t _they_ here?’

Nanny snorted. ‘Ha! _That_ lot. By the time they got a spell ready, the
elves would be over the Ramtops and far away.’ She adjusted her position
and sniffed. ‘No, this is _witches_’ business. Them wizards have all got
their bums on chairs and their noses stuck in _books_.’ She said this
last word with a sideways glance at Mrs Earwig who was, of course, known
for her love of writing.fn1

Magrat cut in quickly. ‘We also have all the support of Lancre that
Verence and I can muster.’

‘Well, that’s my Shawn,’ said Nanny with satisfaction. Shawn Ogg _was_
the army of Lancre, as well as its bottle-washer, butler, gardener,
trumpeter and – a role Shawn would have liked to lose – the man who
checked the garderobes and removed all the night waste. ‘And I reckons
our Jason can provide us with a few horseshoes. Being as he’s the
blacksmith,’ Nanny added for those who might not know.

Geoffrey coughed. ‘I’ve been working on a few ideas with some of the
older gentlemen,’ he said softly. ‘We have . . . something I think might
be useful.’

‘And there’s Hodgesaargh,’ said Magrat. Hodgesaargh – the royal falconer
– was a surprising asset, since elven glamour didn’t seem to work on
him, probably because he spent so much time with his beloved birds that
a part of his brain _was_ a falcon by now, and hence unprepared to share
space with any other predator. It was generally believed that this was
also what stopped the birds from pecking out his eyeballs.

Mrs Earwig laughed confidently. ‘So what is the problem, may I ask?
There are plenty of us here. Surely more than enough for a few elves.’
She looked scornfully at Nightshade.

Nanny Ogg exploded. ‘No, there’s _not_ enough of us! How many witches
have we here?’ She looked around the room. ‘Ten, twelve mebbe – more if
you includes Geoffrey and Letitia, and the young girls still training –
but only half of us bein’ senior witches what has much real experience.
The elves are sneaky. They’ll have the glamour on you afore you knows
it. They come quietly – like a silent but deadly fart – and they get you
before you can pinch your nose. Even Esme Weatherwax could barely
withstand the power. She fought hard, and you all remember what _she_
was like. They didn’t get past her – but it was a close thing. Ladies,
these ’ere elves are _horrible_. We’re right to be fearful. They
do . . . things to you. Get at you.’

‘It happened to me too,’ said Magrat. ‘The glamour makes you feel small
and worthless. Those of us who have faced it before can’t warn the rest
of you enough.’

‘I fear you are exaggerating. There’s nothing glamorous about _that_,’
Mrs Earwig said scornfully, pointing at Nightshade.

‘Well, _you’ve_ certainly never met no fairy. If’n you had, you would
have _scars_,’ Nanny spat. She had turned an interesting colour and
Tiffany intervened quickly before sparks really began to fly.

‘Ladies, ladies, I think it would be useful to have a little
demonstration of the power of an elf. Nightshade, would you be prepared
to give us a taste of your glamour?’

There was a collective intake of breath as the assembled witches
realized what Tiffany was suggesting.

‘Be careful, Nightshade. Very careful. Those of us who have met the
glamour before will keep an eye on you. I sincerely hope that we won’t
have a problem.’

And Nightshade smiled – not a particularly pleasant smile, Tiffany
noticed.

‘Ladies,’ said Magrat to the others, trying to prepare them. ‘To be a
witch is to be full of yourself – and in charge of yourself as well. It
would be a good idea to watch one another when the glamour starts to
take hold.’

‘Tish and pish!’ said Mrs Earwig. ‘I am my own woman, and always will
be. I am a witch, whatever you might think, and I don’t deal in fairy
tales.’

In a syrupy voice, Nanny Ogg said, ‘You just _write_ them, Mrs Earwig.’

‘But not as reality,’ said Mrs Earwig. ‘That’s allowed.’

Nanny Ogg looked at her face and thought: We will see.

‘Ladies,’ asked Tiffany, ‘are you all ready?’ There were some nods and
yeses, so she said, ‘Nightshade, please show us your glamour.’ And she
grasped the shepherd’s crown in her pocket – this was a moment when she
knew she would need to keep a strong hold on her sense of her self. _Yan
tan tethera_, she chanted softly to herself. _Yan tan tethera_.

Nightshade began slowly, her foxy little dairymaid’s face filling with a
shining light, with beauty, with _style_, and then she was suddenly the
most wonderful thing in the hall.

Fantastic.

Marvellous.

Enchanting.

_Terrific_.

The air was thick with glamour and Tiffany could almost hear the witches
fighting it. The inexperienced ones – Annagramma, Petulia and Letitia,
Dimity and Harrieta – suddenly seemed flaccid, their faces like dolls.

Petulia – like many of the other witches – felt a beguiling feeling that
the world was all hers, all of it, with everything that was in it. And
then, her dream – as did theirs – unravelled. _Who did she think she
was? No one liked her, no one wanted her. She wasn’t worthy of anything.
No one wanted her. Everyone knew she didn’t have any skills. It would be
so much better if she was dead. Maybe it would be better if she simply
let the pigs stamp her down into the mire, and even that wouldn’t be bad
enough._ She screamed.

Tiffany moved towards Nightshade, and almost like a bubble bursting, the
elf let go, and her glamour was all gone. But everyone in the hall
looked shaken. Except, Tiffany noticed, Mrs Earwig.

‘So, what happened?’ the older witch snapped bossily. ‘What are you all
doing?’

‘Mrs Earwig, did you not feel as though you were small, nasty and a
waste of space? Totally without redemption?’

Letice Earwig’s face held nothing but puzzlement.

Nightshade looked at her, and back to Tiffany. ‘It was like hitting a
rock,’ she said. ‘This one has something interesting . . . something
missing.’ She turned to stare again at Mrs Earwig. ‘Are you sure you are
not an elf?’ she queried.

‘How dare you! I am just Letice Earwig. No one can stop me being me!’

‘Perish the thought,’ said Tiffany. ‘But everyone else was affected. And
that, ladies, was just one elf. Imagine what it will be like when we are
facing a horde of them.’

‘It was like seeing my father,’ said Geoffrey. ‘I heard a voice telling
me that I was no good and I never would be. A mouse, a maggot, no one
worth crying for. He was never satisfied about anything.’

His words sang into the room, and the witches’ faces showed that each
knew exactly what he was talking about.

With the demonstration finished and Nightshade back in her unassuming
dairymaid guise, the bickering was almost over.

‘Well, fellow witches, there we have it,’ Tiffany said. ‘We know who we
are after and what we have to do, which is to keep the elves away from
this world. It’s very unlikely that we could kill them all.’ She
hesitated. ‘What we have to do is make them see that dealing with us
will not be easy, and it might be a very good idea to go back to where
they came from.’

‘So,’ Queen Magrat said, ‘how long do we have to get ready?’

Tiffany sighed. ‘We don’t know,’ she said. ‘But they will come soon, I
feel.’ She looked at Nightshade, who moved now into the centre of the
room.

‘The _when_,’ said the elf, ‘will surely be at the full moon. A time
of . . . endings.’

‘_Tonight_, then . . .’ Magrat whispered.

‘And if I know Peaseblossom,’ continued the elf, ‘the _where_ will be on
every front where the barriers may be weak.’

‘What do you think, Tiff?’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘They’ve been coming into the
Chalk already, right? And they’ve been up here in Lancre – through the
Dancers.’

Nightshade nodded. ‘They will come through both those gates,’ she said.
‘And afterwards fan out.’ She shivered.

Tiffany was taking charge now. ‘Well, we’re going to need to face them
on two fronts then. Here in Lancre, and over in the Chalk.’ She looked
around the room. ‘We’ll have to split our forces.’

‘Well,’ said Nanny Ogg, ‘you can count on me. I’ve always been a
fighter. You has to be a fighter to be a witch. We don’t have to worry –
_they_ does. If you can get an elf down and kick it about a bit, it’s
not goin’ to be so glamorous as it was. Take it from me, even elves has
soft parts which don’t like no boot in ’em.’

Tiffany glanced at Nanny’s boots. They looked as though they had been
built by a blacksmith, and in Nanny’s case they probably had been. A
kick from one of those and it would be ‘So long, elf!’ It might not kill
them, but you could certainly say that all the glamour would have been
kicked out.

‘They know where the stone circles are,’ she said, ‘but by Thunder and
Lightning they had better keep away. After all, we know where the stones
are as well, and we humans are clever, and we can sometimes be very
nasty to boot. When we need to, I suspect.’ She turned to Nightshade,
who had been watching everyone carefully. ‘What do you make of it,
Nightshade?’

The elf smiled and said, ‘You humans are a strange people. Sometimes
soft and stupid, but also surprisingly dangerous. There are very few of
you, and very many of the elves ranged against you. Yet I believe that
traitor Peaseblossom has no idea what he will be facing. And I’m glad of
that.’

Tiffany nodded. Magrat, Nanny Ogg, the surprisingly strong Mrs Earwig –
there was more to Letice Earwig, she realized, than the occult jewellery
and fancy outfits suggested – the other witches of Lancre, Mrs Proust,
Geoffrey and Mephistopheles. It would have to do.

‘I think Lancre will be well served by you all,’ she said, looking
around. ‘But I must go back to the Chalk. It’s my land.’

‘Who will you have to help you in the Chalk, may I ask?’ said Mrs
Earwig.

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘there’s Miss Tick – a formidable lady, as I am
sure you will all agree, who sends her apologies for her absence today.’
Or would, she thought to herself, if I could have _found_ her again.
‘Also Letitia.’ She looked at the young Baroness, who was trying to look
brave. ‘And there’s the land itself, of course. But remember, I have
some other admirable allies. We are not on our own.’ She had been
keeping an eye on the pile of broomsticks by the door, and even though
they hadn’t been invited she could see the face of Rob Anybody, and by
the look of it a significant number of his clan. She laughed; they must
have come up with Magrat and Letitia, she thought. ‘Ladies,’ she
announced, ‘please allow me to introduce . . . the Nac Mac Feegles!’

There was a susurration amongst the witches as the room started to fill
with a sea of blue skin and tartan – not all the witches had met the
Feegles before. Tiffany heard Nanny Ogg whisper not quite quietly enough
to Queen Magrat, ‘Put anythin’ drinkable in the cellar.’

‘Ach, ye are a cruel hag, so ye are, or my name isnae Rob Anybody,’ Rob
moaned.

Magrat laughed. ‘Rob Anybody, you are a war all by yourself, man!
Welcome to the palace but please don’t drink everything. At least, not
until we have won the war.’

‘Now ye are talking, lassie – I mean, your queenship. Where there’s a
war there’s a Nac Mac Feegle.’

There was a barrage of cries of ‘Crivens’ from the clan and Rob Anybody
shouted, ‘Aye, get ’em doon, and the kickin’ starts.’ There was another
cheer then and Big Yan jumped up and shouted, ‘Ye will need to tak’
note, ye weans. We dinnae say yes tae Mister Finesse, but we jes’ kick
’em.’

Hamish added, ‘Whan Morag swoops doon on top o’ ’em, her beak ’n’
talons’ll tak’ their breath awa’. And she’s a heavy girl.’

‘Be happy that they are on our side,’ Tiffany said. She looked
reprovingly at Mrs Earwig, who had a snooty look on her face. ‘It’s true
that they are rough diamonds, but no better warriors can be found
anywhere on the Disc.’ And she hoped that Mrs Earwig didn’t hear the
mumbling:

Daft Wullie. ‘What’s this? Did we stole any diamonds?’

‘It’s a manner of speaking, ye daftie.’ Rob Anybody.

‘But we _got_ no manners. We treasure the fact, ye ken.’ Wullie, again.

‘It’s an idiom.’

‘Who’re you calling an idiom?’

Tiffany laughed to herself. It appeared that the kelda had been seeing
to the clan’s range of expressions.

Rob waved his claymore in the air, making one or two witches retreat a
step or two, and then he leaped up onto a table and glared down the
hall. ‘Weel, I see the Lady Nightshade is with us the noo,’ he said.
‘Ach, the big wee hag and the kelda seem tae think that we shouldnae do
anything aboot this elf – we are tae leave her alone. Although,’ he
continued, looking at Nightshade, ‘we’ll be watching her carefully,
verra carefully indeed. Oor kelda is soft, oor kelda, as soft as
_stone_, ye ken – she is nae one to let a body break their troth and get
away wi’ it!’

‘Dear sir, Mister Feegle,’ said Mrs Earwig. ‘This is a council of war,
so we should be discussing strategies and tactics.’

‘Ah weel, ye can if ye wish, but we are Feegles and we dinnae mess about
wi’ things like that. It’s all aboot usin’ yon claymore to best offence.
And if ye dinnae get that right, your last resort is to nut ’em.’

Tiffany took in Mrs Earwig’s face and said cheerfully, ‘Could you do
that, Mrs Earwig?’

She was given a Look, and Mrs Earwig said, ‘I will nut as I see fit.’
And to Tiffany’s surprise, the other witches applauded, and for once Mrs
Earwig was wreathed in smiles.

‘I tell ye, I would nae cross yon carlin,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘Nae me,’ said Big Yan. ‘She’s as sharp as a she-wolf.’

‘So wheer’s yon battle, then, hag o’ the hills?’ Rob demanded.

There was another roar from the assembled Feegles, and a forest of
little swords and clubs were thrust into the air.

‘Nac Mac Feegle, wha hae!’

‘A guid kickin’ for the wee scunners!’

‘Nae king! Nae quin! We willnae be fooled again!’

Tiffany smiled. ‘If Nightshade is right, the elves will ride through
this coming night – when the full moon shines in the skies. Ladies – and
Geoffrey,’ she addressed the assembled witches. ‘Go and get some rest. I
must fly back to my steading now, but goodnight and good luck.’

‘Let the runes of fortune guide and protect us all,’ Mrs Earwig added
portentously, always determined to get the last word in.

Tiffany loved the little room she’d had since she was a child. Her
parents hadn’t changed anything, and unless it was raining or blowing a
gale, she slept with the window open.

Now, weary from the broomstick ride back, tense with the expectation of
what the night might bring but hoping to get a few hours’ rest, she
savoured the atmosphere of the little room, finding strength from its
familiarity.

A strength that came from feeling that she was _exactly_ where she
should be. An Aching.

‘I get up Aching, and I go to bed Aching,’ she whispered to herself,
smiling. One of her father’s jokes, and she had rolled her eyes when
hearing it again and again as a child, but now its warmth curled over
her body.

And there was the china shepherdess on the shelf.

Granny Aching.

And next to it she had placed the shepherd’s crown.

Aching to Aching, down the generations.

Land under wave, she mused. That was what the name Tiffany meant in the
speech of the Feegles. Tir-far-thóinn, ‘Tiffan’, the kelda would call
her. The sound of her name was magic, real magic from the beginning of
time.

It was a soft night. She told herself that she really ought to get some
sleep – she’d be no good without some rest – but she lay there, the cat
You snuggled up against her warmth, listening to the owls. Hootings were
coming from everywhere, as if they were warning her.

Outside her window, the moon was rising, a gloriously full silver orb to
light the skies, to lead the elves in . . .

Tiffany’s eyes closed.

And a part of her, the soul of her, was in a chalk pit, the shepherd’s
crown in her hand, its five ridges catching the light of the full moon,
and it was glowing, like an aquarium out of time.

Now she could hear the roar of the ancient sea beneath her, its voice
trapped in the millions of tiny shells that made up the Chalk.

And she was swimming . . .

Great strange fish were coming towards her, big and heavy-looking with
teeth.

At that point, Dr Bustlefn2 floated into her mind and took his cue.
‘_Dunkleosteus_,’ he said as a creature the size of a house floated by.
‘_Megalodon_’ was huge and carnivorous – more teeth than Tiffany had
ever seen in one go. Then there were sea scorpions – armour-plated,
clawed horrors. But none of them paid any attention to her. It was as if
she had a right to be there.

And then there was a smaller creature, an explosion of blue spines that
did notice Tiffany.

‘_Echinoid_,’ whispered Sensibility Bustle.

‘That is correct,’ said the creature. ‘And I am the shepherd’s crown.
Deep in my heart is the flint. And I have many uses. Some call me the
sea urchin, others the thunderstone, but here, now, in this place, call
me the shepherd’s crown. I seek a true shepherd. Where can a true
shepherd be found?’

‘We shall see,’ Tiffany heard herself saying. ‘I am Tiffany Aching and
my father is a king among shepherds.’

‘We know him. He is a good shepherd, but not the best. You must find the
king of shepherds.’

‘Well,’ said Tiffany, ‘I’m just a witch, but I will help you if I can. I
work hard, mostly for other people.’

‘Yes,’ said the echinoid. ‘We know.’

I’m talking to a creature from under the sea, thought Tiffany. Is that
right? First Thoughts, not Second Thoughts, her mind reminded her.

‘It is strange,’ said the voice of Dr Bustle in her head. ‘But not so
strange as falling down a rabbit hole with a pack of cards.’

Let me think about it, her Second and Third Thoughts said. If talking
creatures from the sea turned up everywhere, we’d all know about it, so
this must be something just for me.

The voice came from nowhere, as though it was part of that ocean from
Time: ‘_Tiffany Aching is the first among shepherds, for she puts others
before herself_ . . .’

And the shepherd’s crown was warm in her hand, a golden light glowing
from within its depths. An heirloom handed down from generation to
generation of Achings – down to Granny Aching, on to Joe Aching, and now
to Tiffany herself . . .

Then the sea had gone and she was back in the pit, but the magic was
still there, for slowly, oh so slowly, she could see bones pulling
themselves free of the chalk, rising to draw together . . . to make two
figures . . .

Thunder and Lightning! Granny Aching’s sheepdogs. The best dogs any
shepherd could ever have. Dogs for the first among shepherds.

Now they were at her feet, their ears pricked, and Tiffany felt as if
she could almost reach out to touch them. _Almost_. But not quite. For
if she should touch them, be part of them, would she too be drawn into
the chalk, to be bones like them . . .?

‘Come by, Thunder. Away to me, Lightning,’ she whispered, the familiar
commands filling her with courage.

Then she was suddenly awake, back in her room, You draped across her
feet and an owl’s huge eyes hanging in the dark of the trees outside.

And someone was tapping on the window.

_While the moon shone gloriously full over the stone circles, lighting a
path for her wayward children, who rode through in their
splendour . . ._

fn1 Most everyday working witches believed the best use for a book was
on a nail in the privy.

fn2 Part of him anyway, his memories being relocated to Tiffany’s mind
following an episode early in her witching life. The rather pedantic
wizard’s knowledge, especially of ancient languages, came in very handy
sometimes, like when she wanted to read a peculiar menu in Ankh-Morpork.


[image]
CHAPTER 18


The Shepherd’s Crown

THERE WAS THE face of Rob Anybody, and he said, ‘The scunners are
breaking through, Mistress Tiffany. It’s stairted!’

‘So cry “Crivens” and let loose the clan Mac Feegle!’ Tiffany commanded
as a small group of Feegles scrambled out from under the bed, from where
they had been watching over her. One of them appeared to have been
hiding in her boots . . . he was now punching at the laces with a cry of
‘Tak’ tha’, yer nasty wrigglin’ little bogles!’

Boots, Tiffany thought. I wish I had brought Granny Weatherwax’s boots
to wear for this fight. They would have given me strength. And then she
stopped this thought. No. This is _my_ land. _My_ turf. _My_ feet. _My_
boots. _My way . . ._

But she still scolded herself as she struggled into her dress and
thought that she should have slept with her day clothes on: What kind of
leader are you?

As she stumbled to pull on her boots she felt a weight in the deep
pocket of her fine black dress . . . and she pulled out the shepherd’s
crown, which she thought she had put on the shelf. Had she put it there
herself earlier that night? Ready for this moment?

And to the moon she said, ‘What is the shepherd’s crown? Whom does the
shepherd’s crown serve?’

And the answer dropped into her head. ‘Tiffany Aching, Land under Wave.’

She twisted a thong of leather rapidly around the flint and hung it
around her neck. She would go into battle with its power at her heart,
she thought. The power of generations of Achings. Of Granny Aching. Of
the shepherds of all time.

Then she ran down the darkened stairs and out of the door, locking it
behind her, and was not surprised to see You the cat perched on the
front of her broomstick, purring and looking smug, while Nightshade was
stumbling from the barn, Wee Mad Arthur at her side.

Then she was flying through the silvery night, the elf Nightshade
clutching at her waist, Feegles hanging on to the bristles, and the owls
following behind her, a squadron of feathered allies . . .

Over in Lancre, Nanny Ogg was sleeping and her snores could have cut
timber. Suddenly there was a mild explosion which might be called a
_grumph!_ and the cat, Greebo, woke up and sniffed the air.

Nanny _had_ been sleeping in her day clothes. After all, she thought,
who knew for sure when the elves would come.

She shouted, ‘Greebo, ring the castle bell.’

The cat was suddenly not there, but there was a blur of cat travelling
at speed up to the castle, Greebo’s unmistakable smell lingering in the
air behind him, and when the guard saw him coming towards him he ran
after him into the bell tower.

And as the great castle bell tolled, light blossomed throughout the
castle as candles were lit in every window, followed very shortly by the
rest of Lancre Town. The bell! What danger was this?

In the royal bedchamber, Queen Magrat nudged her husband, who was still
rubbing his eyes, and said, ‘Verence, help me buckle my escutcheon, will
you, my dear?’

The King sighed. ‘Look, why can’t I go with you? It’s going to be
dangerous.’

Magrat smiled. The smile that you gave loving but occasionally annoying
husbands. This was old ground. ‘Well, someone has to be left at home,’
she said. ‘It’s like chess, you know. The Queen saves the King.’

‘Yes, dear,’ said the King and opened the cupboard that contained the
armour of Queen Ynci. Ynci had been the most fearsome warrior queen
Lancre had ever seen. Well, so the stories said, as she hadn’t
_actually_ existed. But the people of Lancre hadn’t let a tiny thing
like that stop them adding her to their history, and so a set of armour
had been made to go along with a portrait. Magrat had worn the armour
the last time she faced the elves, and it seemed only right to wear it
again.

As the door opened, Magrat thought she heard a subtle little sound of a
call to arms. Queen Ynci’s armour had a life of its own and it always
shone, even in the dark. Verence helped her buckle on the mail armour –
which she secretly thought of as _fe_-mail – then she slipped her feet
into the heavy-soled spiked sandals, and topped it all off with the
winged helmet. The last piece to go on was the leather baldric.

Verence wanted to embrace her, but he thought, I won’t. There were too
many spikes, in any case. But he loved his wife to distraction, so he
tried again to volunteer himself to be somewhere in the coming fray.

‘Magrat, my love,’ he murmured, ‘it seems so shaming if the King can’t
fight.’

‘You are a very good king, Verence,’ his wife said firmly, ‘but this is
witches’ work. And someone has to look after the people and our
children.’ The Queen – Magrat, as was – staggered under the weight of
the armour, and under her breath she whispered a little magic. ‘Queen
Ynci, Queen of Queens, make your armour light.’ And suddenly she felt
strong, stronger than she had ever been before.

She picked up a crossbow in one hand, her broomstick in the other, and
almost flew down the stairs to the Great Hall where the other witches,
who were for the most part en déshabille, stared at her with wild
surmise. Wild surmises take on many shapes and every witch, some still
in their underwear, stared at the Queen and the surmise each gave her
hung there in the rafters.

In the voice of Queen Ynci, Magrat shouted, ‘Up, girls, and at ’em. It’s
started, ladies, so get your heavy-duty knickers on and your sticks
ready!’ She glared at the only witch to be fully dressed, spick and span
in three minutes, to the surprise of all. ‘That means you too, Mrs
Earwig.’

There was a little commotion at the back of the hall, then a sudden
_crash_ and a group of witches ground to a halt.

‘What’s happening?’ Magrat cried, still in the voice of Queen Ynci.

‘It’s only Long Tall Short Fat Sally: she’s got two feet down one
knicker!’ said Mrs Proust. Surrounded by witches, Long Tall Short Fat
Sally – small and squat right then, like a low-lying thunderstorm – was
swiftly put back on her feet.

Mrs Earwig looked rather smug and said, ‘I’ve been looking at my charts.
The omens are good.’

‘Well, omens are ten a penny,’ said Mrs Proust. ‘I’ve got lots of them.
After all, we are all witches.’

And the ghost of Queen Ynci filled Magrat, who said, ‘Let us fly.’

In Mr Sideways’s old barn, Mephistopheles laid a hoof gently on
Geoffrey’s sleeping form. Geoffrey jumped out of the straw and
discovered that the old boys who had readied themselves for the coming
battle by bivouacking in the barn with him were already up and about,
creaking a bit, and making their toilet in a bucket.

Geoffrey looked at the old men. They had spent most of the evening
carousing and telling stories of the days when they were all young and
handsome and healthy and didn’t have to pass water far too often.

They had managed to make their wives give them a ticket of leave, and
said wives had been given to believe that their husbands were just in
the barn for a few drinks and reminiscences. The wives, as wives do, had
festooned their menfolk with big scarves, mittens on strings and woolly
hats with, alas, pompoms on the top.

Captain Makepeace – the old boys’ acknowledged military leader – said,
‘It’s time to go and get out Laughing Boy’s confounded contraption.’

Geoffrey looked at the captain’s warriors and sighed internally. Could
they do it? They were old men. And then he thought, Yes, they are old
men. They have been old men for a long time, which means they have
learned many things. Like lying, and being crafty and, most importantly,
dissembling.

‘We shall fight them on the mountains. We shall fight them on the rocks.
We shall fight them over the hills and down in the valleys.fn1 We shall
never surrender!’ Captain Makepeace roared, and there was an answering
cheer.

‘They will not like it up and over ’em!’ Smack Tremble called out,
waving what looked like a rusty bayonet in the air and, worryingly,
living up to his name. ‘They will not like it, oh no they won’t!’

Mephistopheles grunted as Geoffrey hitched him to his little cart, which
the old boys had filled with mysterious bags before drinking the night
away, and the two of them followed the old men out of the barn.

Captain Makepeace didn’t need to tell his men to be stealthy. They
already were. It was running fast that would be a problem. And
stealthily they made their way into the wood and further on to where
they had hidden Mr Sideways’s contraption, camouflaging it with
branches.

Geoffrey watched them pull Mr Sideways’s project out into the clearing.
It stood there looking ominous. Surrounded by the bushes. Waiting its
moment. Like a huge insect.

One with a nasty sting . . .

Up by the circle of stones called the Dancers, Lord Lankin was exulting.
His elves were dancing around the stones, flitting in and out and
metaphorically tweaking the noses of the Piper, the Drummer, the Leaper
– the best-known stones. The power of the gate was weak, and the glamour
of the elves was . . . _fearsome_.

‘They are not even here, waiting for us!’ Lord Lankin gloated. ‘Stupid
humans. If we go down through those woods, we could be out into the
centre of Lancre in one great charge. And the moon is full and on our
side.’

And in the silver moonlight, the elves, some on horseback, bells
jingling and harness tinkling, made their way down the hill towards the
woods.

But as they neared the edge of the trees, Lankin saw a young human boy
step out onto the path with an animal by his side. It was a goat.

‘Who are you, boy?’ he demanded. ‘Move aside. I am a prince of the elves
and you are in my way. Move lest I show you my displeasure.’

‘Well,’ said Geoffrey, ‘I don’t see why I should. My advice to you is to
turn round, sir, and go the other way or else it will be all the worse
for you.’

Lord Lankin laughed out loud. ‘We will take you away, boy, and the
things we will use on you when we get you back home will be incredibly
nasty. Your torment, for naysaying a prince of the elves.’

‘But why, sir? I mean no harm to you. I have no weapons. Can we be calm
about this? It would appear that I have made you unhappy, and for this I
am sorry.’ Geoffrey paused – he was trying to weave a peace between
them, but it was like trying to get a rock to agree with a hard place.
‘Surely both of us are civilized people,’ he finished.

Lord Lankin screeched, ‘Now, young man, you have trodden on the tail of
the snake.’

Geoffrey calmly said, ‘I believe this is not the case. I know you,
mister. I know what kind of thing you are. You are a bully. I know about
bullies, oh yes I do! I have known them all my life. And believe me, you
aren’t the worst.’

‘You are nothing, boy. We’ll kill you anyway. And why a goat, may I ask?
They are stupid creatures.’

Geoffrey found his calmness floating away. He was worthless. A maggot. A
ne’er-do-well. He felt powerless, a baby again . . . And as the elf
spoke, in Geoffrey’s mind an echo came. _Even if I let you live, you
will amount to nothing_. This time it was the voice of his father, and
he stood there, frozen.

The elf prince said silkily, ‘Are you crying, you little baby?’

‘No,’ said Geoffrey, ‘but you might be.’ For now his eyes had caught the
flash of red fox fur swinging on its leather thong across the lord’s
chest, and he felt a rage beginning to build. ‘We are not here for
your . . . _sport_,’ he stated, throwing the glamour from his mind with
a huge effort of will.

He clicked his teeth and Mephistopheles was on the elf.

It was a ballet with speed. The Mince of Darkness pirouetted to
dangerous effect. He used his teeth first, then kicked hard with his
legs, and ended by using his horns. Lord Lankin was spinning, kicked and
tossed into the air from all directions, and the other elves drew back
to keep out of the range of the maelstrom.

And Geoffrey said to the battered prince, ‘You are just a trickster. And
I have found your trick.’ He shouted, ‘He’s down, gentlemen. Time to put
him _out_.’

The branches parted and there was a _twang_ as Mr Sideways yelled, ‘Keep
your hats on, boys, cover your eyes,’ and the contraption sang, swinging
up into the air, filling it with a twinkle of swarf and terrible death
that came from nowhere to shower over the elves.

Smack Tremble cheered. ‘They don’t like it up and over ’em! Oh no, they
don’t!’

‘Swarf,’ said Nanny Ogg approvingly, from one side of the woods, where
she and some of the other witches were waiting – prepared for what
Captain Makepeace had called a _pincer_ movement, with Mrs Earwig and
more witches on the other side. ‘Pieces of iron,’ Nanny told the witches
with her. ‘Very small. Very clever. Throw it down on elves, and they’re
in a world of hurt. Tiny bits of iron ev’rywhere. And, I stress,
ev’rywhere.’

The Lancre Stick and Bucket machine sang again. And again. And each
_twang_ was followed by the war cries of ancient battles, rivalling
those of the Feegles. On this day of days, the old boys were younger
than they thought.

And the elves were, indeed, down and out, screaming from the pain of the
terrible metal that stripped their glamour away from them, leaving them
writhing. Many dragged themselves away back up the hill towards the
Dancers, while any who had escaped the rain of swarf now found
themselves sandwiched by the witches.

From one side, Magrat piled in to make life unlivable for those
remaining, her armour shielding her from their glamour while her
crossbow shot deadly arrows at them, and fire flew from her fingertips,
forcing those who had ridden into battle on yarrow stalks to fall from
the sky as flame destroyed the stems.

From the other side, the elves were assaulted by Mrs Earwig. And they
really didn’t know how to deal with her. She was shouting at them like
some horrible headmistress – and they couldn’t get through to her; she
was impervious to their glamour. She also had an umbrella which she had
opened, and it was amazing how much of a problem it was for the elves,
its metal spokes poking at them, hitting tender spots.

‘This lady is _not_ for turning,’ Mrs Earwig boomed. She rose among them
like a whirlwind, and as they were floored, Long Tall Short Fat Sally
became very fat and heavy and sat on them, bouncing up and down. While
Mrs Proust hurled her novelties – novelties that now worked as
advertised – over the elves, trapping them in curls of spells that
seized their glamour and took it for their own.

The younger witches were in and out of the mêlée, diving from the skies
on their broomsticks, throwing spells at every elf they saw: fire
burning them where they stood, wind blowing dust into the horses’ faces,
madness into their minds, such that the horses reared, throwing their
elvish riders to the ground. Then there was the crunching as Nanny Ogg
came to the fore with her big, big boots. The ones with nails
everywhere.

Petulia was face to face with an elf – and a different kind of battle
was going on, as the elf threw its glamour towards her, sparkling shards
of glamour shining in the air between them, and Petulia fought back with
her soft voice and strong will, her words hypnotic, irresistible, boring
the elf as she bored her beloved pigs, lulling it until it dropped
dramatically at her feet.

‘Hah! Easier than pigs!’ was Petulia’s response. ‘Less intelligent.’ And
she turned to the next opponent . . .

And in a lull, there was Hodgesaargh, with his favourite gyrfalcon on
his wrist – the Lady Elizabeth, a descendant of the famous Lady Jane. He
slipped the hood off, and the bird joyfully hurled herself into the
fray, hitting the nearest elf between the eyes with her sharp talons.
Then her beak got to work . . .

When it came to it, the battle for Lancre was over quite swiftly. Queen
Magrat had all the surviving elves brought before her. ‘Even the goblins
are smarter than you – they work _with_ us these days,’ she told them,
standing tall and strong in her spiked armour, the wings on her helmet
silvered in the moonlight. ‘We have had enough of this. You could have
had it all. Now, go away to your forlorn spaces. Come back as good
neighbours – or not at all.’

The elves cringed. But Lord Lankin, his warrior garb now only rags and
his body bloodied by the terrible swarf, hissed in defiance at them as
he crawled away. ‘You may have won this battle,’ he snarled, ‘but not
the war. For our Lord Peaseblossom will yet make this world bow down to
us.’

And then they were gone.

Nanny Ogg said seriously, ‘It seems to me, girls, that it goes like
this. We fight the elves at every turn, and they is always comin’ back.
Perhaps it might be a good thing? To keep us on our toes, to stop us
from gettin’ lazy. To put us on the anvil, so that we remembers how to
fight. And at the end of time, living _is_ about fightin’ against
everything.’

She laughed, however, when she heard the old gentlemen coming up the
hill, singing, ‘There was a young lady from Quirm, whose thighs were
exceedingly firm . . .’ And the rest of the song helpfully disappeared
as the captain remembered just in time how that verse ended.

Captain Makepeace leaned over to Nanny Ogg and said, ‘They came through
the Dancers, right? Let’s put a ring of swarf all around the stones.
That would be the end of their fun. They would be locked out for ever.’

‘Well, I reckons it would be a good start,’ said Nanny.

But Lord Lankin had one thing right. The elves might have lost the
battle in Lancre, but the war was not yet over. For, many miles
rimwards, Lord Peaseblossom had indeed ridden through the stone circle
on the Chalk, with a band of elite warriors at his back.

The Feegle mound was one big scuttle as the Nac Mac Feegles turned out
of every nook and cranny to fight. Everywhere was heat and noise. You
could call it something like an overgrown termite mound – not in front
of the Feegles, unless you liked picking your teeth up from the ground –
but there was the same bustling. It could even be said that the vanguard
was steaming along, but these being Feegles, there were squabbles in the
ranks which, as everyone knew, was just the way of the clan.

When Tiffany arrived at the mound with Nightshade, the throng spread out
in the direction of the stones.

The gateway had fallen to the elves.

Who were now heading towards them, a glorious band of lords and ladies,
resplendent in the moonlight. The air was thick with their glamour.

Miss Tick was waiting. A Miss Tick with a board propped up on a few
sticks she had handily knotted together to create a trestle. And on the
board was written PLN. With a teacher’s determination not to let
anything interrupt her in the midst of any kind of lesson, her insistent
voice was demanding the younger Feegles’ attention as she tied a strange
net, a tangle of intricate, carefully woven knots and loops, to her
broomstick.

‘Remember, I want you to keep it _in one piece_,’ she was saying
sternly.

Then, within minutes, it was a mêlée. In fact, a mêlée of mêlées. There
was a sting in the air and Tiffany recognized the surge of static
electricity. How could the elves be so stupid, she thought, as to attack
in the midst of a storm? Did they not remember how she had used thunder
and lightning to defeat them before? The sky was crackling. The hairs on
her head tingled. She could see signs of a coming downpour happening
everywhere, could recognize the build-up to an enormous storm.

As Awf’ly Wee Billy Bigchin’s mousepipes screeched out a battle hymn,
pitched perfectly to assault the elven ears, there was a distant scream
from a train at Twoshirts. A roar of iron and steel, a bellow that
shouted: This is no world for elves!

Feegles and elves were fighting now, with no quarter given on either
side. Tiffany could see that the Feegles were dealing with things in
their own special way – which included getting into the elves’ clothing
and fighting them from within. If there was something that an elf really
hated, it was to have their clothing torn, and a black eye didn’t do
much for the image either. You can’t be suave with a black eye, Tiffany
thought.

She suddenly burst out laughing. It had been a long time since she had
set eyes on Horace the Cheese,fn2 but now she saw him rolling heavily
over every fallen elf, and when they were flattened the younger Feegles
got to work as well, mostly with their heavy boots, but also with their
double-the-fun clubs that curled in the air, clonking elves on the head
and then coming joyfully back for another go. And yes, there was Maggie
in their midst – a Feegle daughter fighting alongside her brothers! And
indeed fighting even more furiously than her brothers. Tiffany thought,
She’s like a small Ynci. The Feegle maid had been waiting for something
like this to prove herself, so woe betide any elf who got in her way. It
was one small step for a Feegle lassie – but a giant step for all Feegle
womenfolk!

Miss Tick was flying overhead now, the strange rope-net hanging beneath
her broomstick filled with young Feegles. As she pulled at one knot
after another, the Wee Free Men were tumbling out to fall smack on the
heads of the elves below. _Crash! Whack! Crump!_ Followed by _Aargh!_
from the elves.

And the witch had small bottles with her too – concoctions mixed in her
caravan that she was now gleefully emptying over the heads of the elves’
horses as she swooped above them. There was a moment’s pause as each
horse absorbed the mixture, then its eyes crossed, followed rapidly by
its hooves, and it toppled to the ground, losing its footing, hurling
its rider onto the earth to be quickly covered by Feegles.

Letitia had arrived now, summoned by Hamish, and was tumbling from her
horse, determination in her face, borrowed chainmail over her dress. She
somehow _flowed_ through the elves – there was a certain magic to it as
if she were some goddess of water, streaming everywhere: no thought to
it, but no stopping it either. Suddenly the elvish horses still standing
were bogged down in a quagmire, and the Feegles were there on hand to
keep them in the mire.

Nevertheless, it looked as if the Feegles, Miss Tick and Letitia were
really not getting the better of the elves. Despite the Wee Free Men’s
pouring into elvish underwear and tearing it up, Tiffany realized that
the Nac Mac Feegles were actually in danger of losing.

Nightshade pointed out Peaseblossom sitting on a black charger, and
Tiffany flew down to confront the leader of the elves. His minions
scattered as she arrived – they had seen the expression on Tiffany’s
face.

Peaseblossom was laughing. ‘Ah, the little country girl. How pleased I
am to see you!’

She felt the tug of his glamour but rage was a useful tool, and she
hated that grinning face. It was so self-centred. It loved itself beyond
any other thing.

‘Peaseblossom is a very stupid name for an elf of your size,’ she said
rather childishly.

And then, suddenly, the elf had sprung from his horse to stand before
her, a sabre in his hands, and his laughter was gone, only evil in his
eyes.

A voice said, ‘Don’t touch her, Peaseblossom.’

And Nightshade was stepping forward, her glamour fully restored and
shining gloriously, her hair streaked silver with the moonlight, her new
wings resplendent. She held herself like a queen again, her gaze slowly
moving over the warriors behind her treacherous lord, and such was the
power of her presence that even the Feegles paused in the frozen
silence.

‘Why do you follow this . . . perfidious elf?’ the Queen demanded of the
elves. ‘_I_ am your rightful queen, and I say that you do not have to do
this. There are . . . other ways.’ She spun on the spot, her velvet
robes spiralling around her slim body. ‘I have learned this. And this
girl’ – she pointed at Tiffany – ‘is my _friend_.’

Tiffany couldn’t stop what happened next.

‘Friend?’ Peaseblossom spat. ‘There are no _friends_ for elves.’

He raised his arm and his sabre tore through Nightshade with a terrible
swishing sound. The elf Queen fell, crumpling to the ground at Tiffany’s
feet, where she writhed for a moment that seemed to last a lifetime,
myriad faces and shapes appearing and disappearing, flickering in and
out of substance, before finally lying still, a forlorn heap. Tiffany
reeled back in shock. _Peaseblossom had killed the Queen of the
Fairies!_

Worse, he had killed her _friend_.

Peaseblossom, revelling, turned to Tiffany, his face sharp and
merciless. ‘You have no friend now!’

Suddenly the air was full of ice. ‘You killed one of your own to get to
me, you cursed elf,’ Tiffany said, her voice cold, red-hot anger boiling
inside her. ‘She wanted to explore a new way, an alliance of humans and
elves, and now you have killed her.’

‘You stupid little girl!’ Peaseblossom taunted. ‘You think you can stand
against me? What a fool you are! We elves knew well of the witch who
once walked the edges of this world . . . but you, you are just a
_child_, filled with pride because you were once lucky against a failing
queen’ – he glanced contemptuously down at the little heap that had once
been the Queen of Fairyland – ‘and now I will see you dead, alongside
your _friend_.’ He spat out the last word, and his glamour snaked
towards her, creeping into her head, into her thoughts.

Tiffany recoiled, a memory of Nanny Ogg’s voice suddenly saying to her:
_Granny Weatherwax said to me as you is the one who’s to deal with the
future. An’ bein’ young means you’ve got a lot of future_. Well, it
looked like Granny Weatherwax might have been wrong. She _didn’t_ have
much future to come.

She had failed everyone.

She had tried to be the witch for two steadings. And let everyone
down . . .

She had gone to see the King of the Elves. He had turned her away . . .

She had made a friend of Nightshade. Now the elf Queen was dead . . .

She was facing a powerful elf lord who would kill her . . .

She deserved to die . . .

She was alone . . .

Then it came to her. She did _not_ deserve to die. And she was _not_
alone. She never would be. Not while her land was beneath her boots.
_Her_ land. The land of the Achings.

She was Tiffany Aching. Not Granny Weatherwax, but a witch in her own
right. A witch who knew exactly who she was and how she wanted to do
things. Her way. And she had not failed, because she had barely
begun . . .

She stood tall. Frosty. Furious. ‘You called me a country girl,’ she
said, ‘and I will see to it that the _country_ will see you dead.’

The land was speaking to her now, filling her up, throwing the glamour
of the elf lord aside as though it were nothing, and the air crackled
like lightning. Yes, she thought. Thunder and Lightning. The two dogs
were long gone, buried in the hills alongside Granny Aching, but their
strength was with her.

And she was standing firm, her feet on the turf, the murmur of the
ancient ocean below swelling through her soles. Earth. Water.

She raised her arms. ‘Thunder and Lightning, I command you.’ Fire and
Air. As she drew on the power of the two sheepdogs, there in the air was
a flash of lightning, a rumble of thunder. The shepherd’s crown glowed
golden on her breast – at the heart of it all, the soul and centre of
her being – the golden light rising from the apex to surround her,
protect her, add its energy to her own.

And the sky broke in half.

Never had there been such a storm. It was full of vengeance and the
elves were running, or rather trying to run because the Feegles were in
their way and the Wee Free Men had no liking for the elves. In the
carnage and the shouting, it seemed to Tiffany that she wasn’t in charge
any more. She was just a conduit for the wrath of the Chalk.

The land under her feet was trembling, shaking like a wounded animal on
a leash, yearning to be free. And the shepherd’s crown was shining like
a living thing in front of her.

A shepherd’s crown, not a royal one.

A crown for someone who knew where she had come from.

A crown for the lone light zigzagging through the night sky, hunting for
a single lost lamb.

A crown for the shepherd who was there to herd away the predators.

A crown for the shepherd who could work with the best sheepdogs any
shepherd could possibly have.

A _shepherd’s_ crown.

And she heard again that voice: _Tiffany Aching is the first among
shepherds, for she puts others before herself . . ._

A king of shepherds.

No . . . a _queen_.

She felt she needed to apologize to the crown, apologize for letting
these elves come through and threaten this land, and so she said in a
whisper, ‘I am Tiffany Aching and my bones are in the Chalk. Let the
Chalk be cleansed!’

And the world changed.

In the city of Ankh-Morpork, Hex spat out a calculation for Ponder
Stibbons – and he saw that an answer was underlined . . .

A prayer wheel spun in the monastery of Oi Dong, and the monks bowed
down in gratitude . . .

While a little boy took his mother’s hand in the travelling now, and
said, ‘Mummy, big nasties all gone . . .’ He had a wooden train in his
other hand, and a little backpack of tools over one shoulder. Perhaps he
will be an engineer in this new world when he grows up, his mother
thought.

And in Fairyland, there was a sudden _twang_, as if a strand connecting
the two worlds had suddenly snapped . . .

There was fighting still going on – it was hard to stop the Feegles once
they got going – and Tiffany walked through it as if in a dream. The
elves were trying to get away now, but the ground seemed to hold them
down and she whispered, ‘I ask the Chalk, deliver to me the King of the
Elves!’

The heavy dance of the land now had a different tempo.

Dust flew out, and there came suddenly the King of the Elves – the stink
and his long hair and antlers were unmistakable. Oh, that stink! It had
a life of its own. But in a way, Tiffany thought, it was a male stink of
life.

The huge body loomed over her. ‘How now, Mistress Tiffany. I can’t say,
“Well met again,”’ said the King. ‘But I must confess to . . . surprise.
You surprised me before,’ he mused, ‘with the gift you left me. A . . .
shed. What do you humans _do_ with this place you call a shed?’ He
sounded intrigued.

‘It is a place for . . . interests. Where the future can be founded,’
Tiffany said. ‘And a place where those who have lived many years may
remember.’

‘I have many memories,’ said the King. ‘But I did not know that you had
the power to offer me new entertainments, to draw me to new pleasures.
Very few in this world or others are able to do so.’

And now, Tiffany thought, the King of the Elves did see her as more than
a young girl. At this meeting she had respect. But he deserved respect
too, so she bowed her head towards him, just a little.

‘May I apologize for the hotheads in my kingdom,’ he continued lazily,
his voice smooth and delicious. ‘I find them a large annoyance. Quite
possibly as you do.’ He glared at the quivering Peaseblossom, and then
at the corpse of Nightshade. ‘You, elf, you killed my queen, my lady
Nightshade, just for spite,’ he growled. And the King of the Elves
brought himself upright and smacked Peaseblossom with a hand that
killed, leaving the carcass just lying there, his careless and casual
use of violence shocking Tiffany, despite all she knew of elves. ‘I’m
sorry I had to do that,’ he said, ‘but they don’t understand anything
else. The universe turns, alas; it turns and we have to accommodate
change or move on. This is a good world we had here, mistress,’ the King
said now. He shrugged. ‘It’s a shame about the iron. But perhaps as the
universe turns, Mistress Tiffany, we might meet again, on a different
turn and in more happy circumstances.’

‘Yes,’ said Tiffany, ‘we might. Now, begone from my land.’ Her voice was
hard. And in the air there was the piercing sound of a whistle, with an
answering screech as the early-morning train left Twoshirts station.
‘Listen, your majesty. That is the song of the five twenty-five for
Lancre, and that is your future, my lord. A lifetime of metal if you
stay.’

‘These mechanisms are interesting. There are tools in my shed, and I
wonder if such “trains” could perhaps be made . . . _without_ iron,’
said the King, adding wistfully, ‘I am a man of magic, so I should be
able to have anything I want.’

‘But you can’t,’ said Tiffany. ‘The railways are not for you.’

And it seemed to her, as he left, that the King of the Elves was looking
thoughtful.

As the final elves slipped away to limp back to their land, she turned
to Rob Anybody. ‘Rob, let us bury the Lady Nightshade here, where she
fell,’ she said quietly. ‘I will mark the spot with a cairn of stones.
We will remember this day. We will remember her.’ Then she added softly,
almost to herself: ‘We _need_ to remember.’

fn1 There was plenty of all these to pick from in Lancre, so he had a
good choice of battlegrounds. As long as they were all up and down.

fn2 Horace was a cannibal cheese, an adopted member of the Feegle clan.


[image]
CHAPTER 19


Peace

AS THE MORNING flowed into the day, the Feegles were settling down to a
feast of drinking, eating and more drinking and telling tales, some of
which were bigger than the Feegles themselves.

Rob Anybody looked at Tiffany and said, ‘Weel noo, mistress, the field
is oor ain! Come on doon intae the mound. Jeannie would love tae see
your sonsie face.’

And Tiffany slid into the mound, which seemed bigger than when she had
seen it last. The great hall was full of leaping figures and flying
kilts as the Feegles danced their reels – Feegles loved a reel at any
time; the slap of boot on earth was like a challenge to the universe.
Then, of course, every Feegle wanted every other Feegle to know how well
they had conducted themselves against the elves.

Every single one of the younger Feegles was wanting Tiffany – their hag
o’ the hills – to know how brave he had been. As they gathered around,
she said, ‘What are your names, boys?’

Wee Callum, a little bit tongue-tied, said, ‘I’m Callum, mistress.’

‘Pleased to meet you,’ said Tiffany.

‘Aye, mistress, and this is my brother, Callum.’

‘Two of you?’ she said. ‘Isn’t that difficult?’

‘Och no, I know who I am and he knows who he is and so does our other
brother Callum.’

‘And how did you like the fighting?’

‘Och aye, we smited them weel enough. The Big Man is a hard task master,
ye ken. He sees to it that we can handle the mace and the spear and the
axe. And, of course, the feets. And when the three of us got one of they
scunners doon on the ground, that’s what oor boots was for.’

The old boys were marching down the lane.

And they had a new song now, one that began: ‘Ar-sol, ar-sol, a
soldier’s life for me!’ And with each verse, and each step, they were
standing straighter and stronger.

_‘Ar-sol, ar-sol, a soldier’s life for me!_

_For King, for King, for King and Constabulary,_

_We wee, we wee, we weaken the enemies,_

_For they don’t want it up ’em, don’t want it up ’em, don’t want it up
and_ over_!’_

And those who had wives kissed them – the wives hadn’t seen their
husbands so frisky for years – and then they set off down to the pub to
tell their mates all about it.

With a pint resting happily in his hand, Captain Makepeace sat on a
milestone outside the pub and declaimed, ‘People of Lancre. We happy
few, we extremely elderly few, have scorned the horrible elves. They say
that old men forget, but we won’t. Not by a long chalk. We thought we
were old – but today we found we were still young.’

And then it was time for another round of drinks. And another, with
everyone wanting to stand the old boys a round, until standing was no
longer an option. And still the shout went up: Was there time for
another flagon?

As the moon rose to herald the hours of darkness the following day there
was Geoffrey on his broomstick, which was once again hovering in the
air. Tiffany shouted over at him, ‘I still don’t know how you can do
that!’

‘No idea, Tiffany – can’t everyone?’ he replied. ‘Let’s ask, for here
comes everyone.’

And indeed, now the other witches were arriving, led by Nanny Ogg and
Magrat. It was time to look to the future once again – a future not now
filled with elves. But the present, well, the present was filled with
the chattering and gossiping of witches as the tales of the two battles
were shared.

Rob Anybody had set fire to a beacon and Tiffany watched the last
witches circling until there was space, then coming in to land one after
the other. Not one left her stick hovering, though – it seemed as if
Geoffrey was the only one who could make his broomstick do that.

‘I wonder if they’re goin’ to sneak back,’ said Nanny Ogg after a while.
‘You can’t trust Old Hairy. He was tryin’ to charm you, Tiff, by what
you say.’

‘I know, but I am not charmed,’ said Tiffany. ‘Not since the one elf who
tried to be a good elf is now dead. We marked the spot where we buried
her, Nanny, you know. And if they do try to come back, we will be ready
for them. We can put iron on the stones here on the Chalk, like you’ve
laid swarf all around the Dancers in Lancre.’ Her voice hardened. ‘There
is iron in my soul now. And iron in dealing with them should they dare
ever to return.’

‘Well,’ said Magrat the Queen, ‘we’ve knocked them down so often now
that I think he means what he said. I think it’s unlikely they will come
back.’

‘I’ll drink to them not coming back then,’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘Ladies, while we are gathered,’ said Tiffany, ‘I want to talk to you
about Geoffrey. He has been a great strength to us – and I know you all
saw how he made the old men of Lancre into a fighting force. He is
clever and cunning and careful. He knows how to listen. And he has a
kind of magic.’

‘That’s true,’ said Nanny. ‘Everybody likes Geoffrey. Somehow he seems
to understand everybody. Believe me, even some of them old girls would
be quite happy to have him deal with their aches and pains and worse. He
calms people. You all know that. He is calm itself, and the calm stays
even when he has left. He doesn’t just jolly people up. After he is
gone, they are somehow much better – as if life was still worth havin’.
People like that, like Geoffrey, well, they makes the world, well,
better.’

‘I totally agree with you,’ said Mrs Earwig.

‘_You_ agrees with _me_?’ said Nanny Ogg, almost speechless.

‘Yes, my dear, I do.’

And Tiffany thought, At last, we will have peace. ‘Thank you, Geoffrey,’
she said under her breath. ‘Now we are all here,’ she said aloud, ‘I
must tell you that I can’t manage Granny’s steading. I’m not going to
sleep in Granny’s bed any more. Because I’m not her.’

Nanny grinned. ‘I wondered if’n you would do that, Tiff. You has to be
your own woman after all.’

‘My roots are in the Chalk and the Chalk is my strength,’ Tiffany
continued. ‘My bones will be part of these hills just like those of my
Granny Aching.’

There was a murmur from the witches. They had all heard of Granny Aching
by now.

‘And I have some very good boots too. Just as I cannot sleep in Granny
Weatherwax’s bed, I cannot wear her boots either.’

Nanny chuckled. ‘I’ll collect ’em when I’m next up at the cottage, Tiff.
I knows Esme’s boots, knows a young witch they’ll do very nicely for.’

‘Talking of young witches,’ Tiffany added, ‘Miss Tick has found me some
girls with potential. May I send them up to the mountains to begin their
training? I will have need of help in the Chalk in the future.’

The witches were nodding. Of course. For it was the way it was done: the
young girls – Nancy Upright and Becky Pardon – would spend time with the
senior witches and learn the beginning of their trade.

Tiffany took a deep breath. ‘And what I suggest is that Geoffrey be
allowed to look after Granny Weatherwax’s cottage and steading for me,’
she said, looking at Nanny Ogg as she said that and getting a wink in
return.

She glanced at Mrs Earwig and was surprised to see her nod and say,
‘He’s a very nice decent young man, and we have seen him at work, and
now we live in the time of the railways so perhaps we should change our
ways. Yes, I believe Mister Geoffrey should take care of Granny’s –
_Tiffany’s_ – steading in Lancre. He’s no witch, but he’s certainly much
more than the _usual_ sort of backhouse boy.’ And Tiffany could see Mrs
Earwig’s mind working, and she felt certain that the next time she saw
the witch, she would have a lad somewhere around her establishment.

Out loud, Nanny said, ‘What did you call him, Tiff? A calm-weaver? Shall
we leave it at that for now?’

But Magrat wanted her say too. ‘Verence heard of what he did for the old
men,’ she said. ‘He believes he should have a reward. And I think I know
exactly what would suit . . .’

And thus, a few weeks later, Lord Swivel was most surprised to see his
third son riding proudly up his long, long drive, a herald at his
sidefn1 and a pennant with the royal insignia of Lancre fluttering in
the breeze. The same insignia was also on a velvet coat over the flanks
of Mephistopheles.

‘May I announce His Royal Ambassadorship Geoffrey Swivel,’ proclaimed
the herald, breaking into a few notes on the trumpet he held.

Geoffrey’s mother sobbed with delight, while his father – a man on whom
no calm-weaving would _ever_ work – boiled inside with fury as he had to
bow to the son he had treated as a nobody. But no one argued with the
power of a crown.

There was a purpose to this visit, though. After the usual bowing,
scraping and general knee-bending any royal emissary took as his due,
Geoffrey grinned around at the assembled company and said, ‘Father, I
have exciting news! Those of us in the country may oft feel neglected by
those in the big city but let me assure you, this is not the case. There
have, in fact, been important developments just recently in the field
of . . . _chicken runs_. Some young people in Ankh-Morpork . . . young
people whose parents have the power to indulge their wishes’ – and he
tapped his nose with a finger to show that he expected his father to
know these important parents – ‘feel that it may no longer be necessary
to hunt sly old Mister Reynard to protect our chickens.’ He beamed.
‘They have come up with a new chicken run which is _totally impervious_
to foxes. And you, Father, are the lucky, lucky landowner who has been
chosen to test this new design.’

As his father spluttered, and his brother Hugh shouted ‘Hurrah!’ for no
particular reason except that it felt like someone should, Geoffrey
looked around. He could see his mother’s face. Normally she looked like
someone the world had trodden on so many times that it was almost an
invitation to tread on her yourself, but now she stood tall, her chin
high.

‘Harold. Our son has worked wonders, and here is a king honouring him
and treating him as a friend,’ she said proudly. ‘Don’t you look at me
like that, Harold, for today I have spoken. And the Queen of Lancre has
invited me to come and visit her,’ she added with satisfaction.

There was a bleat from Mephistopheles, and as Geoffrey’s father turned
to stamp away, the goat turned its back and aimed a square set of
devilish hooves right onto Lord Swivel’s rump. Followed by a raucous
fart that almost – but not _quite_ – covered up the noise of the man
falling flat on his face.

‘A most usefully offensive goat,’ Geoffrey murmured to McTavish, who had
come to stand by his side.

The old stable-lad looked around. ‘_And_ one your father cannot touch,’
he said with a wink. ‘Not with that fancy coat on its back.’ He sniffed.
‘My word, though, Mephistopheles isn’t easy on the nose – he whiffs even
worse than I remember.’

‘Yes,’ said Geoffrey, ‘but he can climb trees. _And_ use a privy. Even
count. He’s a strange creature; he can turn a dark day into a clear one.
Look into his eyes sometime.’

And McTavish looked, and then hastily looked away.

fn1 Shawn Ogg, in another of his royal duties.


[image]
EPILOGUE


A Whisper on the Chalk

TWO DAYS AFTER the battle, Tiffany led one of the farm horses up to the
hills above the farm. It was a perfect early autumn’s day. There was a
wonderful cerulean sky, buzzards screaming overhead and a clear view
towards the distant mountains of Lancre, their tops still covered in
snow even at this time of year.

There were always a handful of sheep up in this part of the downs,
whatever the weather. At this time of year there were half-grown lambs
kicking their heels and chasing about while the ewes grazed nearby. Here
was a well-known landmark for those who knew. A special place for sheep
and farmers alike. The place where Granny Aching now lay beneath the
turf.

Only the iron wheels of her hut and the old pot-bellied stove with its
chimney were still visible, but the ground, the ground was holy: Tiffany
came to look at it every time she felt the world grinding her down, and
here, where the wind never stopped blowing, she felt that she could deal
with anything.

With the help of the horse and a strong rope, Tiffany hauled the rusty
wheels out of the turf where they had been embedded, and painstakingly
greased and coaxed them back together. Rob Anybody had watched her for a
while after she had rebuffed his offer to help, then departed with a
puzzled look on his face, muttering about geases, and what he’d like to
do to them.

The following day, Tiffany went to visit old Mr Block, the local
carpenter. He had once made her a doll’s house when she was a little
girl; now she had a bigger home in mind.

He was pleased to see her but was startled when he discovered what she
wanted from him.

‘Mr Block, I would like you to teach me to be a carpenter. I am going to
build myself a hut – a shepherding hut.’

The carpenter was a kindly man and offered to help. ‘You are a witch,’
he said. ‘I’m a carpenter. A little hut like that wouldn’t take me long.
Your granny was very good to our family and you helped my sister
Margaret. I’d be happy to do it for you.’

But Tiffany was very definite. ‘That’s nice of you,’ she said, ‘but all
the work on this hut must be done by me. It will be mine, from top to
bottom, and I will pull it to where the larks rise. And I’ll still be a
witch when anyone should call. But there I will live.’ On my own, she
thought to herself. For now, anyway, for who knew what the future might
bring . . . And her hand crept to her pocket, where she had Preston’s
latest letter to savour.

And so Tiffany learned carpentry every evening after her day’s work was
done. It took her some weeks to finish it, but eventually there was a
new shepherd’s hut stationed close to Granny Aching’s grave.

There were three steps up to its wooden door, a horseshoe and a tuft of
sheep’s wool – the sign of a shepherd – already nailed in place there,
and the roof arched over a small living space into which she had built a
bed, a little cupboard, a few shelves and a space for a wash basin. From
the bed, she could see out of a small window – see clear across the
downs, right to the horizon. And she could see the sun rise, and set,
and the moon dance through its guises – the magic of everyday that was
no less magic for that.

She loaded up the old farm horse again with the bedding from her little
room in the farmhouse and her few possessions, said goodbye to her
parents and headed up the hill in the late afternoon sun.

‘Are you sure, jigget, that this is what you really want?’ said her
father.

‘Yes, it is,’ Tiffany replied.

Her mother cried and handed her a new quilt and a freshly baked loaf of
bread to go with the cheese Tiffany had made that morning.

Halfway up the hill, Tiffany turned to look down at the farm and saw her
parents still arm in arm. She waved and carried on climbing without
looking back again. It had been a long day. They were always long days.

Later that evening, once she had made her little bed in the hut, she
went out to collect some kindling. The white cat, You, followed close
behind.

The little tracks of the Chalk were very familiar to Tiffany. She had
walked along them with Granny Aching years ago. And as she reached the
wood at the top of the rise, Tiffany thought she saw somebody walking
through the dusky shadows under the trees.

Not just one person alone. There seemed to be two figures, both
strangely familiar. Beside them, alert to every gesture, every nod,
every whistle, trotted two sheepdogs.

Granny Weatherwax, Tiffany thought. Side by side with Granny Aching,
Thunder and Lightning at their heels. And the little words in her head
came unbidden: _You are the shepherd’s crown, jigget. You are the
shepherd’s crown_.

One of the figures looked over and gave her a brief nod, whilst the
other paused and bowed her head. Tiffany bowed back, solemnly,
respectfully.

And then the figures were gone.

On the way back to the hut, Tiffany looked down at the cat and, on a
sudden impulse, spoke to it.

‘Where is Granny Weatherwax, You?’

There was a pause, and the cat made a long _meow_, which appeared to
end, ‘_Meow . . . vrywhere_.’ And then purred, just like any other cat,
and rubbed her hard little head against Tiffany’s leg.

Tiffany thought of the little spot in the woods where Granny Weatherwax
lay. Remembered.

And knew that You had been right. Granny Weatherwax was indeed here. And
there. She was, in fact, and always would be, everywhere.

There was a long stream of visitors to the shepherding hut once it
became known that Tiffany was back on the Chalk for good.

Joe Aching came up to deliver some messages – and a new letter, from
Preston! – and bring Tiffany some things her mother had decided she
needed. He looked around the neat little hut with approval. Tiffany had
made the space very comfortable. He looked at the books on the shelf and
smiled. Tiffany had left Granny Aching’s _Diseases of the Sheep_ at the
farm, but both _Flowers of the Chalk_ and _The Goode Childe’s Booke of
Faerie Tales_ had their place by the little shepherd’s crown he had
given her. On the back of the door was a wooden peg on which hung her
witch’s hat.

‘I reckon ye’ll find some use for this too,’ her father said as he took
a bottle of Special Sheep’s Liniment (made according to Granny Aching’s
recipe) out of his pocket and placed it on the shelf.

Tiffany laughed and hoped her father hadn’t heard the cry of ‘Crivens!’
from the roof of the hut.

He looked up as some dust fell down from where Big Yan sat on Daft
Wullie to silence him. ‘I hope ye haven’t got woodworm already, Tiff.’

She laughed again as she gave him a hug to say goodbye.

Mr Block was an early visitor too. He puffed his way up the hill and
found her settled in with You the cat sitting on her lap while she
sorted rags.

Tiffany watched nervously as the old carpenter looked around and under
the hut with a professional eye. When he had finished, she gave him a
cup of tea and asked him what he thought.

‘You’ve done well, lass. Very well. I have never seen a boy apprentice
take to carpentry as quickly as this, and you are a girl.’

‘Not a girl,’ Tiffany said. ‘I’m a witch.’ And she looked down to the
little cat beside her and said, ‘That’s so, isn’t it, You?’

Mr Block looked at her suspiciously for a moment. ‘So did you use magic
to make the hut, miss?’

‘I didn’t have to,’ said Tiffany. ‘The magic was already here.’

The End.

 

[image]


[image]
_1948–2015_


AFTERWORD

_The Shepherd’s Crown_ is Terry Pratchett’s final novel. It was written
in his last year before he finally succumbed in early 2015 to the
‘embuggerance’ of posterior cortical atrophy. Terry had been diagnosed
back in 2007, the year that he wrote _Nation_. At that time, Terry
thought he might have less than two years to live and that brought a new
urgency to his writing. He had never been a slouch in this respect but
now things were measured by the cost in writing time. If demands for his
presence took him away from writing, it had to be really worthwhile,
such as feeding the chickens or attending to his tortoises. He had so
many more books he wanted to write.

It says a lot for Terry’s resilience and determination not to go down
without a fight that he wrote five more full-length bestselling novels
between _Nation_ and _The Shepherd’s Crown_ (as well as collaborating
with Stephen Baxter on five _Long Earth_ novels). And Terry was still
developing new ideas for books right up to his final few months.fn1

Terry usually had more than one book on the go at a time and he
discovered what each was about as he went along. He would start
somewhere, telling himself the story as he wrote it, writing the bits he
could see clearly and assembling it all into a whole – like a giant
literary jigsaw – when he was done. Once it was shaped, he would keep
writing it too, adding to it, fixing bits, constantly polishing and
adding linking sequences, tossing in just one more footnote or event.
His publishers often had to prise the manuscript away from him, as there
was always more he felt he could do, even though by then he would be
well into the next story which was tugging at his elbow. Eventually the
book was sent to the printer, and reluctantly Terry would let it go.

Terry had been thinking about the key elements in Tiffany Aching and
Granny Weatherwax’s last story for a few years. He wrote the pivotal
scenes while he was still writing _Raising Steam_ and then re-wrote them
several times as he shaped the rest of _The Shepherd’s Crown_ around
them.

_The Shepherd’s Crown_ has a beginning, a middle and an end, and all the
bits in between. Terry wrote all of those. But even so, it was, still,
not quite as finished as he would have liked when he died.

If Terry had lived longer, he would almost certainly have written more
of this book. There are things we all wish we knew more about. But what
we have is a remarkable book, Terry’s final book, and anything you wish
to know more about in here, you are welcome to imagine yourself.

_Rob Wilkins_
May 2015
Salisbury, UK

 

fn1 We will now not know how the old folk of _Twilight Canyons_ solve
the mystery of a missing treasure and defeat the rise of a Dark Lord
despite their failing memories, nor the secret of the crystal cave and
the carnivorous plants in _The Dark Incontinent_, nor how Constable
Feeney solves a whodunnit amongst the congenitally decent and honest
goblins, nor how the second book about the redoubtable Maurice as a
ship’s cat might have turned out. And these are just a few of the ideas
his office and family know about.


[image]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Despite the effects of his Alzheimer’s disease, Terry wanted to keep
writing as long as possible and was able to do so not least through the
assistance of his fine editorial team. Lyn, Rhianna and Rob would most
especially like to thank Philippa Dickinson and Sue Cook for their
tireless help and encouragement that kept the words flowing.


[image]
A Feegle Glossary

ADJUSTED FOR THOSE OF A DELICATE DISPOSITION
_(A Work In Progress By Miss Perspicacia Tick, witch)_

_Bigjobs_: human beings

_Big Man_: chief of the clan (usually the husband of the kelda)

_Blethers_: rubbish, nonsense

_Bogle_: see _Schemie_

_Boggin_: to be desperate, as in ‘I’m boggin for a cup of tea’

_Brose_: porridge with a drop of strong drink added – or more than a
drop. Be warned: it will put hairs on your chest

_Bunty_: a weak person

_Carlin_: old woman

_Cludgie_: the privy

_Corbies_: big, black burdies known by most people as crows

_Crivens!_: a general exclamation that can mean anything from ‘My
goodness!’ to ‘I’ve just lost my temper and there is going to be
trouble’

_Dree your/my/his/her weird_: facing the fate that is in store for
you/me/him/her

_Een_: eyes

_Eldritch_: weird, strange; sometimes means oblong too, for some reason

_Fash_: worry, upset

_Geas_: a very important obligation, backed up by tradition and magic.
Not a bird

_Gonnagle_: the bard of the clan, skilled in music and stories

_Hag_: a witch, of any age

_Hag o’ hags_: a very important witch

_Hagging/Haggling_: anything a witch does

_Hiddlins_: secrets

_Kelda_: the female head of the clan, and eventually the mother of most
of it. Feegle babies are very small, and a kelda will have hundreds in
her lifetime

_Lang syne_: long ago

_Last World_: the Feegles believe that they are dead. This world is so
filled with all they like, they argue, that they must have been really
good in a past life and then died and ended up here. Appearing to die
here means merely going back to the Last World, which they believe is
rather dull

_Mowpie_: furry animals with white tufts as tails, making them easy to
spot. Sometimes called rabbits. Good to eat, especially with a dab of
snail relish on the side

_Mudlin_: useless person

_Pished_: I am assured that this means ‘tired’

_Schemie_: an unpleasant person

_Scuggan_: a really unpleasant person

_Scunner_: a generally unpleasant person

_Ships_: woolly things that eat grass and go baa. Easily confused with
the other kind

_Spavie_: see _Mudlin_

_Special Sheep Liniment_: probably moonshine whisky, I am very sorry to
say. A favourite of the Feegles. Do not try to make this at home

_Spog_: a small leather bag at the front of a Feegle’s kilt, which
covers whatever he presumably thinks needs to be hidden, and generally
holds things like something he is halfway through eating, something he’d
found that now therefore belongs to him, and whatever he was using as a
handkerchief, which might not necessarily be dead

_Steamie_: only found in the big Feegle mounds in the mountains, where
there’s enough water to allow regular bathing; it’s a kind of sauna.
Feegles on the Chalk tend to rely on the fact that you can only get so
much dirt on you before it starts to fall off of its own accord

_Waily_: a general cry of despair

THE WITCHES OF DISCWORLD

by Jacqueline Simpson
(co-author of _The Folklore of Discworld_)

The witches of Discworld spend rather less time than one might suppose
on actually doing magic. Mostly, they are called in to cope with other
people’s problems. It is to them that the village turns when a child or
a cow falls desperately sick, when a woman is having a difficult labour,
when those who are dying cannot actually die. It is then that witches
have to bring help – and take responsibility. There is nothing romantic
about this work, nothing dramatic, no magic potions to cure the sick in
an instant. Witchcraft is mostly about helping people by doing quite
ordinary things.

However, cures and advice are more likely to be accepted if they _sound_
magical. On one occasion a rather rational witch had been carefully
telling one family that their well was much too close to their privy, so
the water was full of tiny, tiny creatures which were making the
children sick. They listened politely, but did nothing. Then Granny
Weatherwax visited them and told them the illness was caused by goblins
who were attracted to the smell of the privy, and that very day the man
of the house and his friends began digging a new well at the other end
of the garden. A story gets things done.

Witches also often adjudicate in neighbourly disputes; they see to it
that where there has been injustice there will be a reckoning. It is a
life of hard work, and rather lonely, for though a witch gains respect,
she is always slightly feared.

It is also a witch’s duty to defend her homeland against the insidious
incursions of malevolent beings from other dimensions, such as elves.
She must keep watch, she must guard the borders and the gateways, even
if in doing so she puts herself in danger too.

How does a girl become a witch? First, she must have some natural inborn
talent, even if she does not yet realize it. Here, heredity can help,
and in Tiffany’s case it does: the Achings, like the Weatherwaxes, have
witching in their blood. But she needs training too, so when she is
about eleven she must leave home and become part servant, part
apprentice to an old witch, from whom she will learn about herbs and
medicines and magical techniques, and whose area she will normally take
over when the old one dies.

These techniques, unlike those of wizards, are not showy. True, there
are a few witches who go in for grimoires and occult silver jewellery,
but they are either conceited or inexperienced. The best witches use the
simplest means – no need for a crystal ball for scrying when a few drops
of ink in an old saucer of rainwater are quite as good; no carved wand
when any stick will do. Their main tool is the ‘shambles’, a powerful
magic-detector and -projector which looks a bit like a particularly
complicated cat’s cradle, a bit like a broken set of puppet-strings, and
a bit like a very untidy dream-catcher. But even this is formed from the
simplest things. You have to make your own, fresh every time, out of
whatever happens to be in your pockets. In the centre you put something
alive – an egg, say, or a beetle or small worm – and pull the strings,
and as the objects twirl past or even through one another, the device
works. In the presence of really powerful magic, it may explode.

One of the minor benefits of being a witch is that you know, months or
even years in advance, exactly when you are going to die, so you can
stage-manage the event to perfection. Having done all the obvious things
(cleaned the cottage, made a will, destroyed any embarrassing old
letters or spells still lying around), had a nice grave dug ready for
you, some witches choose to throw a really good ‘going-away party’. This
is like a wake, but with yourself as guest of honour, still taking a
keen interest, and distributing pleasant keepsakes to your friends. But
there are also some who go in privacy to meet their old acquaintance,
the Reaper.

About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT was the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld® series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. _The Shepherd’s Crown_ is his forty-first Discworld
novel. His books have been widely adapted for stage and screen, and he
was the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie Medal, as well
as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature. He died in
March 2015.

For more information about Terry Pratchett and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

BOOKS BY TERRY PRATCHETT

[image] THE DISCWORLD® SERIES [image]

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC
(illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS
(for young adults)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN
(for young adults)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY
(for young adults)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD!

35. WINTERSMITH
(for young adults)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT
(for young adults)

39. SNUFF

40. RAISING STEAM

[image] OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD [image]

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III: DARWIN’S WATCH

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD IV: JUDGEMENT DAY
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

TURTLE RECALL: THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION . . . SO FAR
(with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK
(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO
(with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK
(with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK
(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW?
(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD
(with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD
(compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD
(with Jacqueline Simpson)

THE WORLD OF POO
(with the Discworld Emporium)

THE COMPLEAT ANKH-MORPORK
(with the Discworld Emporium)

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE – A DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN
(with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

[image] SHORTER WRITINGS [image]

ONCE MORE* WITH FOOTNOTES

A BLINK OF THE SCREEN

A SLIP OF THE KEYBOARD

[image] NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS [image]

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT
(illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS
(with Neil Gaiman)

THE LONG EARTH
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG WAR
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG MARS
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG UTOPIA
(with Stephen Baxter)

[image] NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS FOR YOUNG ADULTS [image]

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

DODGER’S GUIDE TO LONDON

DRAGONS AT CRUMBLING CASTLE

Praise for Sir Terry Pratchett

‘Terry was one of our greatest fantasists, and beyond a doubt the
funniest’

– George R. R. Martin

‘A Terry Pratchett book is a small miracle’

– Neil Gaiman

‘Discworld is one of the very most fabulous creations in all of
literature’

– Patrick Ness

‘No writer in my lifetime has given me as much pleasure and happiness’

– A. S. Byatt

‘A writer of monumental talent’

– Rick Riordan

‘His fantasies sit alongside – and are the equals of – those of
Rabelais, Voltaire, Swift, Kurt Vonnegut and Douglas Adams . . . But
whereas all these are neatly arranged on the bookshelves, my Pratchetts
are strewn under the beds, in the bathrooms, the glove compartments.
They have shopping lists, takeaway orders and Scrabble scores scribbled
on the fly leaves. They were part of life’

– Frank Cottrell Boyce

[image]

THE SHEPHERD’S CROWN
AN RHCP DIGITAL EBOOK 978 1 448 19714 9

Published in Great Britain by RHCP Digital,
an imprint of Random House Children’s Publishers UK
A Penguin Random House Company

[image]

This ebook edition published 2015

Text copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, 2015
Illustrations copyright © Paul Kidby, 2015
Terry Pratchett®, Discworld®, Wee Free Men® and Unseen University® are
registered trademarks.

First Published in Great Britain

‘The Witches of Discworld’ bonus content copyright © Jacqueline Simpson,
2015

Doubleday Childrens 9780857534811 2015

The right of Terry Pratchett to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

RANDOM HOUSE CHILDREN’S PUBLISHERS UK
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA

www.RANDOMHOUSECHILDRENS.co.uk
www.TOTALLYRANDOMBOOKS.co.uk
www.RANDOMHOUSE.co.uk

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group Limited can be
found at: www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm

THE RANDOM HOUSE GROUP Limited Reg. No. 954009

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.


