Critical Explorations in Science Fiction and Fantasy
(a series edited by Donald E. Palumbo and C.W. Sullivan III)

1 _Worlds Apart? Dualism and Transgression in Contemporary Female
Dystopias_ (Dunja M. Mohr, 2005)

2 _Tolkien and Shakespeare: Essays on Shared Themes and Language_ (ed.
Janet Brennan Croft, 2007)

3 _Culture, Identities and Technology in the_ Star Wars _Films: Essays
on the Two Trilogies_ (ed. Carl Silvio, Tony M. Vinci, 2007)

4 _The Influence of_ Star Trek _on Television, Film and Culture_ (ed.
Lincoln Geraghty, 2008)

5 _Hugo Gernsback and the Century of Science Fiction_ (Gary Westfahl,
2007)

6 _One Earth, One People: The Mythopoeic Fantasy Series of Ursula K. Le
Guin, Lloyd Alexander, Madeleine L’Engle and Orson Scott Card_ (Marek
Oziewicz, 2008)

7 _The Evolution of Tolkien’s Mythology: A Study of the History of
Middle-earth_ (Elizabeth A. Whittingham, 2008)

8 _H. Beam Piper: A Biography_ (John F. Carr, 2008)

9 _Dreams and Nightmares: Science and Technology in Myth and Fiction_
(Mordecai Roshwald, 2008)

10 Lilith _in a New Light: Essays on the George MacDonald Fantasy Novel_
(ed. Lucas H. Harriman, 2008)

11 _Feminist Narrative and the Supernatural: The Function of Fantastic
Devices in Seven Recent Novels_ (Katherine J. Weese, 2008)

12 _The Science of Fiction and the Fiction of Science: Collected Essays
on SF Storytelling and the Gnostic Imagination_ (Frank McConnell, ed.
Gary Westfahl, 2009)

13 _Kim Stanley Robinson Maps the Unimaginable: Critical Essays_ (ed.
William J. Burling, 2009)

14 _The Inter-Galactic Playground: A Critical Study of Children’s and
Teens’ Science Fiction_ (Farah Mendlesohn, 2009)

15 _Science Fiction from Québec: A Postcolonial Study_ (Amy J. Ransom,
2009)

16 _Science Fiction and the Two Cultures: Essays on Bridging the Gap
Between the Sciences and the Humanities_ (ed. Gary Westfahl, George
Slusser, 2009)

17 _Stephen R. Donaldson and the Modern Epic Vision: A Critical Study of
the “Chronicles of Thomas Covenant” Novels_ (Christine Barkley, 2009)

18 _Ursula K. Le Guin’s Journey to Post-Feminism_ (Amy M. Clarke, 2010)

19 _Portals of Power: Magical Agency and Transformation in Literary
Fantasy_ (Lori M. Campbell, 2010)

20 _The Animal Fable in Science Fiction and Fantasy_ (Bruce Shaw, 2010)

21 _Illuminating_ Torchwood_: Essays on Narrative, Character and
Sexuality in the BBC Series_ (ed. Andrew Ireland, 2010)

22 _Comics as a Nexus of Cultures: Essays on the Interplay of Media,
Disciplines and International Perspectives_ (ed. Mark Berninger, Jochen
Ecke, Gideon Haberkorn, 2010)

23 _The Anatomy of Utopia: Narration, Estrangement and Ambiguity in
More, Wells, Huxley and Clarke_ (Károly Pintér, 2010)

24 _The Anticipation Novelists of 1950s French Science Fiction:
Stepchildren of Voltaire_ (Bradford Lyau, 2010)

25 _The_ Twilight _Mystique: Critical Essays on the Novels and Films_
(ed. Amy M. Clarke, Marijane Osborn, 2010)

26 _The Mythic Fantasy of Robert Holdstock: Critical Essays on the
Fiction_ (ed. Donald E. Morse, Kálmán Matolcsy, 2011) 

27 _Science Fiction and the Prediction of the Future: Essays on
Foresight and Fallacy_ (ed. Gary Westfahl, Wong Kin Yuen, Amy Kit-sze
Chan, 2011)

28 _Apocalypse in Australian Fiction and Film: A Critical Study_ (Roslyn
Weaver, 2011)

29 _British Science Fiction Film and Television: Critical Essays_ (ed.
Tobias Hochscherf, James Leggott, 2011)

30 _Cult Telefantasy Series: A Critical Analysis of_ The Prisoner_,_
Twin Peaks_,_ The X-Files_,_ Buffy the Vampire Slayer_,_ Lost_,_
Heroes_,_ Doctor Who _and_ Star Trek (Sue Short, 2011)

31 _The Postnational Fantasy: Essays on Postcolonialism, Cosmopolitics
and Science Fiction_ (ed. Masood Ashraf Raja, Jason W. Ellis, Swaralipi
Nandi, 2011)

32 _Heinlein’s Juvenile Novels: A Cultural Dictionary_ (C.W. Sullivan
III, 2011)

33 _Welsh Mythology and Folklore in Popular Culture: Essays on
Adaptations in Literature, Film, Television and Digital Media_ (ed.
Audrey L. Becker, Kristin Noone, 2011)

34 _I See You: The Shifting Paradigms of James Cameron’s _Avatar (Ellen
Grabiner, 2012)

35 _Of Bread, Blood and_ The Hunger Games_: Critical Essays on the
Suzanne Collins Trilogy_ (ed. Mary F. Pharr, Leisa A. Clark, 2012)

36 _The Sex Is Out of This World: Essays on the Carnal Side of Science
Fiction_ (ed. Sherry Ginn, Michael G. Cornelius, 2012)

37 _Lois McMaster Bujold: Essays on a Modern Master of Science Fiction
and Fantasy_ (ed. Janet Brennan Croft, 2013)

38 _Girls Transforming: Invisibility and Age-Shifting in Children’s
Fantasy Fiction Since the 1970s_ (Sanna Lehtonen, 2013)

39 Doctor Who _in Time and Space: Essays on Themes, Characters, History
and Fandom, 1963–2012_ (ed. Gillian I. Leitch, 2013)

40 _The Worlds of_ Farscape_: Essays on the Groundbreaking Television
Series_ (ed. Sherry Ginn, 2013)

41 _Orbiting Ray Bradbury’s Mars: Biographical, Anthropological,
Literary, Scientific and Other Perspectives_ (ed. Gloria McMillan, 2013)

42 _The Heritage of Heinlein: A Critical Reading of the Fiction
Television Series_ (Thomas D. Clareson and Joe Sanders, 2014)

43 _The Past That Might Have Been, the Future That May Come: Women
Writing Fantastic Fiction, 1960s to the Present_ (Lauren J. Lacey, 2014)

44 _Environments in Science Fiction: Essays on Alternative Spaces _(ed.
Susan M. Bernardo, 2014)

45 _Discworld and the Disciplines: Critical Approaches to the Terry
Pratchett Works_ (ed. Anne Hiebert Alton, William C. Spruiell, 2014)

46 _Nature and the Numinous in Mythopoeic Fantasy
Literature _(Christopher Straw Brawley, forthcoming [2014])



DISCWORLD AND THE DISCIPLINES


Critical Approaches to the Terry Pratchett Works

_Edited by_ Anne Hiebert Alton _and_ William C. Spruiell

Critical Explorations in Science Fiction and Fantasy, 45
_Series Editors_ Donald E. Palumbo _and_ C.W. Sullivan III

[logo]

McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
_Jefferson, North Carolina_

“Terry Pratchett®” and “Discworld®” are registered trademarks and used
by permission. Stephen Briggs_, A View in the Shades_ and _Armoured
Raven_ from _Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_ by Terry
Pratchett and Stephen Briggs—The Orion Publishing Group, London;
Illustrations copyright © Stephen Briggs 1994. Discworld Emporium,
_Twilight Canyons_ from _The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_—Reproduced by
permission of the Discworld Emporium. Paul Kidby, _Granny Weatherwax
Standing_, _Granny Weatherwax with Bees, Rincewind in XXXX_, _Cohen the
Barbarian_, _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook—_Artwork copyright © 2013 by Paul
Kidby, www.paulkidby.net. Josh Kirby, _Hogfather_ (1996) and _Reaper
Man_ (1991) reproduced by permission of Colin Smythe on behalf of the
Josh Kirby Estate. Stephen Player, _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_ detail
and _Feegles_—Reproduced by permission of Stephen Player,
playergallery.com. David Wyatt, _No Rat Shall Kill Another Rat_ from
_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_; Illustration copyright ©
2001 by David Wyatt; used by permission of HarperCollins Publishers

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUING DATA ARE AVAILABLE

BRITISH LIBRARY CATALOGUING DATA ARE AVAILABLE

E-ISBN: 978-1-4766-1601-8

© 2014 Anne Hiebert Alton and William C. Spruiell. All rights reserved

_No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying or
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher._

Cover images © 2014 Thinkstock

_McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Box 611, Jefferson, North Carolina 28640
www.mcfarlandpub.com_


Table of Contents

_Acknowledgments_

_Introduction_

_A Note on the Text_

_The Wee Free Men_: Politics and the Art of Noise
   Roderick McGillis

Coloring in Octarine: Visual Semiotics and Discworld
   Anne Hiebert Alton

Tell It Slant: Of Gods, Philosophy and Politics in Terry Pratchett’s
Discworld
   Gray Kochhar-Lindgren

The Watchman and the Hippopotamus: Art, Play and Otherness in _Thud!_
   Caroline Webb

Counting Dangerous Beans: Pratchett, Style and the Utility of
Premodified Bits
   William C. Spruiell

Debugging the Mind: The Rhetoric of Humor and the Poetics of Fantasy
   Gideon Haberkorn

_Primary Bibliography of Terry Pratchett’s Works Published in English_

_Annotated Critical Bibliography_

_About the Contributors_

_List of Names and Terms_


Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Sir Terry Pratchett, for obvious reasons, and his
agent Colin Smythe for his assistance and his patience in fielding
incessant e-mail queries. In addition, we would like to thank series
editor Donald Palumbo for his comments and suggestions.

We would also like to thank the following artists, publishers, and
representatives for their permission to reprint the illustrations in the
essay “Coloring in Octarine”:

  • Colin Smythe, on behalf of the Josh Kirby Estate, for _Hogfather_
  and _Reaper Man._

  • Paul Kidby, for _Granny Weatherwax Standing, Granny Weatherwax with
  Bees, Rincewind in XXXX, Cohen the Barbarian,_ and the cover image
  from _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook._

  • Stephen Briggs, _Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_ by
  Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs, and The Orion Publishing Group
  London for _A View in the Shades_ and _Armoured Raven._

  • David Wyatt and HarperCollins Publishers for _No Rat Shall Kill
  Another Rat_ from _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents._

  • Stephen Player for a selection from _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_
  and _Feegles._

  • The Discworld Emporium for _Twilight Canyons_ from _The Compleat
  Ankh-Morpork._

The librarians at the Clarke Historical Library and the Park Library,
Central Michigan University, and especially those at the Documents on
Demand office, were very helpful in obtaining numerous hard-to-find
copies of articles and books we needed for our chapters and for the
Annotated Critical Bibliography—and we strongly appreciate all of their
efforts.

Finally, we hereby impose personal thanks upon the following, be the
recipients willing or not:

  • Trey Jones for his feedback on the probability section; all
  remaining issues are, of course, one hundred percent Bill’s fault.

  • The students in Anne’s English 460: Interdisciplinarity and Terry
  Pratchett class (Fall 2012) for their enthusiasm and commentary during
  the research process.

  • Administrative secretaries Jamie Fockler and Denise Abbey for their
  technical expertise and assistance throughout this project.

  • Anne’s family, Colin and Matthew, who not only put up with a lot of
  single-topic conversations (and/or monologues) during the duration of
  our work on this book but also, in Matthew’s case, joyfully embraced
  the chance to explain game rules to slightly befuddled adults.


Introduction

Anne Hiebert Alton _and_ William C. Spruiell

  Terry is now read in thirty-eight languages, with sales now in the
  region of 70 million books worldwide: put side by side, they’d stretch
  from London to Rome—over a thousand miles.—Colin Smythe, “Terry and
  Discworld”

Terry Pratchett is one of the most prolific and successful fantasy
novelists of the last several decades: knighted in 2008 for his
contributions to literature, he has been referred to in reviews as “the
Dickens of the twentieth century” (Hunt 91), though, since a number of
his influential works have appeared after the turn of the millennium,
that moniker may need to be adjusted. He has won numerous awards for his
writing, including the prestigious Carnegie Medal for _The Amazing
Maurice and His Educated Rodents_ (2001), the Margaret A. Edwards award
(2011), LOCUS awards for best fantasy novel (2008) and best young adult
novel (2004, 2005, 2007), and the British Book Award in the Fantasy and
Science Fiction category (1994), among others. His Discworld series,
which has forty volumes to date (not counting the various companions,
maps, and other satellite works),¹ has captivated readers of all ages,
backgrounds, and nationalities. In 2002, one percent of all books sold
in Britain were written by him, and it has been joked that “no British
railway train is allowed to depart unless at least one passenger is
reading a Pratchett novel” (Hunt 91). Few other contemporary popular
authors find their work referred to by people working in as wide a range
of fields as robotics, business management, elementary education,
philosophy, and medicine, to name but a few.²

The sheer number of adaptations and complementary works that his work
has motivated is also significant. In addition to audio books (abridged
and unabridged) and plays, several novels have been adapted in different
modes: animated or live-action films, graphic novels, or illustrated
screenplays. Three books have also been lavishly illustrated—_Faust_
_Eric_ (illustrated by Josh Kirby), _The Last Hero_ (illustrated by Paul
Kidby), and _The Illustrated Wee Free Men_ (illustrated by Stephen
Player). Pratchett has also collaborated with other writers and artists
to create satellite works³ that provide more detailed information about
the Discworld and its inhabitants, such as _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_, which
contains, among other things, recipes for a number of delicacies
including Nanny’s (in)famous Carrot and Oyster pie. Other collaborations
include several maps of the Discworld, _The Unseen University Cut-Out
Book_ (in collaboration with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson), and two
picture books set within the Discworld. Pratchett’s created context has
also been enthusiastically adopted by gamers, who have shaped text- and
action-based games around it. Most traditional are trivia quiz books
like David Langford’s _The Unseen University Challenge_ and _The Wyrdest
Link_, complemented by the on-line Discworld University Challenge,⁴
which provides a daily quiz of ten questions and posts a new tournament
each month. Interested players can make use of companions like Pratchett
& Stephen Briggs’ _Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_ and
Andrew Butler’s _An Unofficial Companion to the Novels of Terry
Pratchett_. In addition, conventional board games like _Thud!_, _The
Discworld Board Game_, and _Guards! Guards!_ sit alongside role-playing
games, computer games, and other online games.⁵ While some of the
earliest retailing may have begun with the now-defunct Clarecraft
Discworld figurines,⁶ a large variety of Discworld merchandise is now
available including stamp covers, greeting cards, jewelry, sweatshirts,
miniatures, aprons, mouse pads, stickers, tote bags, mugs, and magnets,
among other ephemera. Collectors can also purchase calendars, desk
diaries, and a variety of prints as well as original artwork. Several
volumes devoted to the art of Discworld have also been published.

For dedicated fans, there are a number of conventions devoted entirely
to Discworld, and these are attended by fans from all over the globe.
The premier event is the Discworld Convention, started in England in
1995 and now a biannual four-day event that includes talks and panels,
theater, a charity auction, musical performances, and a myriad of other
events. Moreover, as Colin Smythe notes,

  Eric and Arthur Wall have produced a number of alcoholic beverages to
  entertain fans—“Nanny Ogg’s Scumble,” “Ridcully’s Revenge,” supplied
  with a bag of hops, and a drinking horn designed and produced by “the
  Cunning Artificer,” and “Black Hogswatch” (which came with a Cunning
  Artificer mug portraying the Hogfather and a bag containing nuts and
  chocolate coins). And while I am on the subject of alcohol, the
  Australian company marketing the Discworld II computer game produced
  bottles of white wine which they called the “Fountain of Youth,” 1996
  vintage [Smythe “1996–1998”].

Other conventions include those held in Australia (Nullus Anxietas),
Ireland (Irish Discworld Convention), Germany (Scheibenwelt Convention),
and North America (NADWCon). In addition, Wadfest is a fan-organized,
family-friendly camping weekend with the intention of providing
attendees with the opportunity to dress up as their favorite characters
and participate in a masquerade, purchase limited edition merchandise,
listen to stories and a variety of other performances, and meet people
with similar fantasy- and specifically Discworld-related interests.

This proliferation of Discworldiana not only encourages us to redefine
our notions of what exactly constitutes a “text”—which, in keeping with
the traditions of a variety of literary theoretical frameworks,⁷ for our
purposes will include not only works of literature but also films and
other adaptations, games, and memorabilia associated with the
Discworld—but also suggests that Pratchett’s work holds an immense as
well as diverse cultural significance. Given that millions of people are
willing to trek, either in person or virtually via the internet, to the
ends of the earth (quite literally, in some cases) to attend a
conference or play a game or find a T-shirt or watch a play, or to do
any of a number of other Discworld-related activities, clearly something
in Pratchett’s creation of Discworld has appealed enough to them to
galvanize them into pursing action of some sort, beyond their initial
reading of the novel(s). While one hesitates to label any single author
as “universal,” Pratchett’s particular and individual flavor of writing
appears to cut a narrow swath across a very broad band of readers:
though his books by no means appeal to everyone in a single cultural
group, they do have a broad appeal across cultural barriers and
divisions, and speak to—at least in our world—humans of a similar
mind-set.⁸

In other words, this is exactly the sort of thing that people who like
that sort of thing like—a statement also true of happiness, and oxygen.

_Pratchett and Interdisciplinarity_

In her 2002 article, “Is There Hope for the Humanities in the 21st
Century?,” Susan Bassnett notes that she would like to see “Terry
Pratchett on every degree program in English Studies” (109) as an
example of a writer whose work encompasses the most important elements
of interdisciplinarity. A decade later, Pratchett’s work—and here we
refer specifically to his Discworld books—has become even broader (if
possible) in terms of the fields it invokes: in addition to such staples
as literary (and non-literary) genre-play, socio-political satire, and
commentary on such apparently diverse areas as economics, mythology,
geography, and folklore, his _oeuvre_ now also includes treatments of
sports, racism, picture books, and science—to name but a few very broad
categories that Pratchett has absconded with and made his own through
the witty and at times acerbic use of humor embedded throughout his
fantastic narratives.

Pratchett’s Discworld books are inherently multidisciplinary. He merrily
deploys innumerable genres and literary conventions (often within the
same book), only to overturn them and transform them into self-critiques
as well as often highly targeted social satire. One of the best examples
appears in _Night Watch_, perhaps Pratchett’s most complex novel, which
utilizes elements of criminal justice, history, philosophy, economics,
geography, politics, and even a nod to physics in terms of the time
travel conceit to present a scathing critique of society’s penchant for
reinterpreting history from the perspective of the winners.

Inasmuch as an awareness of disciplinary conventions, including those
involving language use, is a prerequisite for interdisciplinarity,
encouraging readers to practice metalinguistic and metageneric
discourses prepares them to encounter disciplinary discourses at an
analytic level. Pratchett often does this by making readers aware of the
ways in which language catalyzes meaning. While wordplay is not
typically perceived as part of the formal critical toolkit for making
reader perceptions of the text even more complex, its
effects—encouraging consciousness of multiple readings, manipulating the
poetic dimensions of text, shifting language from background to
foreground—arguably develop the same faculties as are required for
critical analysis. Indeed, the major differences between humor and
criticism may lie less in what the participant is doing than for whom
s/he is doing it. When readers encounter a line such as “‘A night
watchman in crappy armor is about your métier,’ said Colon, who looked
around proudly to see if anyone had noticed the slanty thing over the e”
(_Arms_ 238), they probably do not directly perceive it as a scholarly
comment on the intersection of orthography, pronunciation, and the
marking of social class—but their resultant shift in worldview can be
exactly the sort professors devote a good bit of energy to encouraging.

His tendency to invoke multiple disciplines surfaces frequently
throughout his novels, both in terms of their foci—ranging from rock
music to religion to economics to sports to geography to mythology to
politics, to name but a few—and in the way Pratchett uses humorous
paratextual devices such as footnotes to achieve a number of ends. They
often contain comments on language: not only grammatical commentary, but
also comments on specific words—like _Wyrd Sisters_’ “Quaffing is like
drinking, but you spill more” (15)—as well as translations of dwarfish.
They include background information about different kinds of groups,
like wizards and witches and dwarfs and Igors, and individuals like
Archchancellor Ridcully and Bergholt Stuttley (Bloody Stupid) Johnson;
on urban as well as Unseen University politics; on food, like Dibbler’s
sausages and Troll beer and what kind of vegetable the Big Wahooni is
(_Truth_ 55); on geography, like the miasmic river Ankh in the city of
Ankh-Morpork or the lethal waterfalls of the Edge; and on Discworld
folklore, like the Yeti of the Ramtops (_Thief_) or Anoia, “a minor
goddess of Things That Stick in Drawers” (_Postal_ 334). The footnotes
also often contain jokes and humorous asides—one-liners or more complex
witticisms like the notion of Rogers the bull thinking that there must
be two of him because his eyes face in opposite directions (_Clay_)—as
well as pithy insights about life and human nature, like the observation
that “deafness doesn’t prevent composers hearing the music. It prevents
them hearing the distractions” (_Music_ 146).⁹

At times these apparently tangential bits work their way into other
texts that Pratchett writes. A brief mention of the Death of Rats in
_Reaper Man_ foreshadows the development of this small personage into a
minor character in a number of later novels, including _Soul Music,
Hogfather, Thief of Time,_ and _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated
Rodents,_ among others. A lengthy footnote about the Hogfather in _Soul
Music_ eventually morphs into a whole novel that focuses on this
folkloric manifestation, and Pratchett’s practical attitude towards
folklore—“I think of folklore in much the same way a carpenter thinks
about trees” (Pratchett and Simpson x)—eventually led him to collaborate
with English folklorist Jacqueline Simpson on _The Folklore of
Discworld_. Other tangential information of a quasi-scientific nature
found outlets in Pratchett’s four _Science of Discworld_ books, which
Pratchett co-wrote with science writers Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen.
Pratchett appears to view disciplinary discourses in much the same way
Feegles view sheep: coming at them from ground level does not appear to
be as much an impediment as an opportunity for surprise. By his
appropriation and reconstruction of discourse types, he provides readers
with models for gaining a measure of conscious and playful control over
what can otherwise be an impenetrable hegemonic maze.

_Overview of the Book_

Over the last decade, increasing awareness of the need for and benefits
of interdisciplinary communication has resulted in an increasing number
of publications exploring the intersections between literature and
philosophy, ecology, political science, mathematics, psychology, music,
science, religion, and art. Many of these have considered popular
literature as well as canonical works, with such titles as _Harry Potter
and International Relations_ (2006), _The Unimaginable Mathematics of
Borges’ Library of Babel_ (2008), _The Physics of Star Trek_ (2007),
_Sensation and Sublimation in Charles Dickens_ (2011), and “Flavor
Pairing in Medieval European Cuisine: A Study in Cooking with Dirty
Data” (2013), the last of which considers the long-overlooked area of
intersection between corpus linguistics, biochemistry, and history of
cuisine. Our collection presents a multidisciplinary selection of essays
that provides a variety of scholarly approaches to Terry Pratchett’s
_Discworld_ series, which, over the last two decades, has begun to
garner serious critical attention. Numerous individual essays and
shorter critical pieces on Pratchett have appeared, along with an
increasing number of scholarly articles and book chapters discussing
topics including allegory, witches, heroes and the heroic tradition,
myth and folklore, and genres such as _Bildungsroman_ and parody.
Pratchett’s work also has begun to appear on K-12 school reading lists
and in university classrooms, and several master’s theses have been
written on Pratchett, applying such approaches as feminism and stylistic
analysis to explore topics including humor, allusion, and
intertextuality. Despite this increasing critical interest, the marked
dearth of book-length scholarly/critical works leaves an enormous gap in
terms of providing scholarly analysis and commentary. This collection
aims to help fill that gap. In response to the growing trend in
scholarship and academe for interdisciplinary studies, it offers
readings that approach Pratchett’s _Discworld_ series from such diverse
perspectives as language and linguistics, literary criticism, visual and
performance art, and popular culture studies. Though all of the essays
in the collection are written in English by scholars who participate in
humanities and social science research, and also serve as one form or
another of literary criticism, they nevertheless represent and reflect
some of the diverse perspectives that Pratchett’s Discworld invites.

The first essay, Roderick McGillis’s “_The Wee Free Men_: Politics and
the Art of Noise,” provides an investigation of the Tiffany Aching
books, exploring the ways in which Pratchett’s treatment of noise and
silence comment on constructions of childhood in both its ethical and
political senses, and on relations between individuality and community.
McGillis uses Italian Futurist painter and composer Luigi Russolo’s
theory of the “Art of Noises” and the idea that noise “is, in short,
art—revolutionary art” as a springboard into his exploration of
Pratchett’s treatment of noise and his notion that books for younger
readers tend to have a narrative perspective that “is more attuned to
sound” than those for older readers.

Anne Hiebert Alton’s “Coloring in Octarine: Visual Semiotics and
Discworld” considers the various images that complement the Discworld
books and traces the trajectories of meanings that arise from a visual
analysis of Discworld. While artists Paul Kidby and the late Josh Kirby
have produced the lion’s share of Discworld art, others including
Stephen Player, David Wyatt, Melvyn Grant, Stephen Briggs, and Bernard
Pearson and the Discworld Emporium have also contributed to the vast
array of images, including but not limited to cover art, the decorative
art of frontispieces, chapter headings and ornaments, and tailpieces,
illustrated books, and hypotrochoidal texts such as picture books and
maps. When considered together, all of these images not only amplify
Pratchett’s already vividly described world but combine with it in a
kind of creative synergy that creates a larger imaginative whole.

Gray Kochhar-Lindgren’s “Tell It Slant: Of Gods, Philosophy and Politics
in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld” focuses on relations among fantasy,
religion, and philosophy in the Discworld novels. It examines the ways
in which Pratchett remixes religious traditions and how the act of
writing in the genre of fantasy repositions traditional philosophical
discourses of truth that depend, to a large extent, on some version of
correspondence matching language with “real” objects in the world.
Kochhar-Lindgren presents the act of making fantasy worlds as creating a
narrative site—one full of puns, wordplay, and linguistic invention—that
gives Pratchett an opportunity to critique and then to reclaim religious
and philosophical traditions for an emancipatory purpose.

Caroline Webb’s “The Watchman and the Hippopotamus: Art, Play and
Otherness in _Thud!_” considers Pratchett’s study of the nature of
racial conflict and how the use of art (story, painting, game) empowers
people to examine not only notions of the Other but also the tensions
within the individual, as well as between groups, “that obscure the
commonality of the human.” She argues that _Thud!_ illustrates how
readers can learn significant lessons about the power of empathy or the
importance of diversity, among other things, from a variety of art
forms—paintings, games, children’s picture books—and thus “engage with
our own potential for civilization” in addition to forming a more
tolerant and culturally sensitive identity.

William C. Spruiell’s “Counting Dangerous Beans: Pratchett, Style and
the Utility of Premodified Bits” demonstrates the application of basic
techniques from linguistic stylistic analysis and corpus linguistics to
Pratchett’s prose, illustrating several ways in which quantitative
observations can be brought to bear on discussions of readers’
perceptions of stylistic features—for example, the extent to which
readers’ native language-variety might influence their sense of how
marked a particular expression is in Pratchett’s novels.

The final essay, Gideon Haberkorn’s “Debugging the Mind: The Rhetoric of
Humor and the Poetics of Fantasy,” considers the place of Pratchett’s
novels in relation to their generic concerns with both humor and fantasy
and argues that the Discworld series displays a fusion of aspects
typical to both. Grounding his argument in the theories of both poetics
(of fantasy) and rhetoric (of humor), Haberkorn contends that
Pratchett’s novels explore the ways we spin meaningful patterns, or
stories, out of our sensory perceptions while concurrently encouraging
us to think about how we create these patterns “to explore the role of
the words in our heads, and how they control us.”

Our collection concludes with a Primary Bibliography of Terry
Pratchett’s Works Published in English plus an Annotated Critical
Bibliography comprising entries for known published criticism on
Pratchett’s Discworld novels, including monographs, critical articles,
book chapters, and biographies; in addition, it includes a list of
interviews, dissertations, and theses. Not surprisingly, these pieces
have employed a variety of approaches, with feminist, genre-based, and
stylistic analyses predominant, and have addressed a multitude of
topics, including allegory, witches, heroes and the heroic tradition,
myth and folklore, as well as Pratchett’s use of humor, allusion, and
intertextuality.

Pratchett marries entertaining prose with a kind of edgy humorous
insight into the human condition that, in an arena other than fantasy,
would be regarded as high art—indeed, in many ways he could be regarded
as the Chaucer of our time. However, Pratchett’s prose is of the sort
that very large numbers of people, unfortunately, _voluntarily_ read,
thus making it not very well suited as an intellectual in-group marker
and hence not as attractive for literary critics as it might be
otherwise; one can only hope that at some point he learns to talk about
bricolage instead of merely doing it masterfully. Borrowing from one of
his own comments on fantasy as being “the proper diet for the growing
soul” and adapting it more generally to his own work, we might say that
“all human life is there: a moral code, a sense of order and, sometimes,
great big green things with teeth” (Pratchett 205).

Notes

1. See bibliography for a full list.

2. See, for example, works by Michael Allen; Liam Farrell; Paul
Fitzpatrick; Alison Rostron; and Karl Sprachken.

3. Although this term will be examined more closely in Alton’s essay in
this volume.

4. As of August 2012 its web address is
http://www.funtrivia.com/private/main.cfm?tid=22299.

5. One of the earliest role-playing games was _GURPS Discworld_ (1998),
reissued in 2002 as _Discworld Roleplaying Game_. GURPS is the acronym
for Generic Universal RolePlaying System.

6. Clarecraft “produced handmade Discworld figurines” that became very
popular with not only collectors but also Pratchett himself (L-Space
Librarians). The company, founded by Bernard and Isobel Pearson in 1980,
“acquired Discworld rights in 1990” but shortly thereafter they sold the
company to Bob and Trish Baker and it eventually stopped trading in 2005
(McCrea).

7. For example, structuralism, poststructuralism, and semiotics present
different interpretations of what exactly constitutes a “text.” As
Bernard Radloff suggests, “In narrower usages ‘text’ is restricted to
linguistic unities, in wider usages any group of phenomena, and even
being itself, may be understood as ‘text’” (639).

8. One example of his broad appeal appears in Francis Lyall’s law book
entitled _International Communications: The International
Telecommunication Union and the Universal Postal Union_, which includes
five references (four in footnotes and one in his Preface) to Discworld
novels—_Going Postal, Thief of Time, Men at Arms,_ and _The Fifth
Elephant—_because “Terry’s insights were so relevant” (Lyall “Letter”).

9. While many of these comments are strewn throughout the Discworld
books, another striking one appears when Ridcully wants to pry open a
door that has been nailed shut and labeled with the words “Do not, under
any circumstances, open this door” because he wants “To see why they
wanted it shut, of course”; his comment is accompanied by the footnote,
“This exchange contains almost all you need to know about human
civilization. At least, those bits of it that are now under the sea,
fenced off or still smoking” (_Hogfather_ 13).

Works Cited

_Note: This list excludes Discworld novels, which appear in the Primary
Bibliography_.

Allen, Michael. _Misconceptions in Primary Science_. Berkshire, England:
Open University Press, 2010. 178. _MyLibrary_. 23 July 2012.

Bassnett, Susan. “Is There Hope for the Humanities in the 21st Century?”
_Arts & Humanities in Higher Education_ 1:1 (2002): 101–110.

Farrell, Liam. “Don’t Look Now.” Soundings. _British Medical Journal_
312: 7025 (27 Jan. 1996): 255. JSTOR. 7 Aug. 2013.

Fitzpatrick, Paul Michael. “From First Contact to Close Encounters: A
Developmentally Deep Perceptual System for a Humanoid Robot.” Diss. MIT,
2003. _CiteSeer_. 7 Aug. 2013.

Hunt, Peter. “Terry Pratchett.” _Alternative Worlds in Fantasy Fiction_.
Ed. Peter Hunt and Millicent Lenz. London: Continuum, 2001.

Langford, David. _The Unseen University Challenge: Terry Pratchett’s
Discworld Quizbook_. London: Gollancz, 1996.

L-Space Librarians. “Clarecraft Figures.” Merchandise. _The L-Space
Web_. N.d. 7 Aug. 2012.

Lyall, Francis. _International Communications: The International
Telecommunication Union and the Universal Postal Union_. Burlington, VT:
Ashgate, 2011.

_____. “Letter to the Editor.” _Discworld Monthly_ 182 (June 2012): n.
pag. 23 July 2012.

McCrea, Erik. “Links to Micro-National and Fantasy Coins.”
_GeoCities.ws.archive_. 7 Aug. 2013.

Moran, Joe. _Interdisciplinarity_. 2002. 2d ed. New York: Routledge,
2010.

Pratchett, Terry. “Let There Be Dragons.” _Science Fiction Chronicle_
15:1 (1993): 5, 28–29.

Radloff, Bernard. “Text.” _Encyclopedia of Contemporary Literary Theory:
Approaches, Scholars, Terms_. Ed. Irena R. Makaryk. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1993. 639–41.

Rostron, Alison. “Building from the Middle: How Middle Managers
Construct Their Identities Both as Leaders and Followers.” M.A. thesis.
University of Chester, 2009. University of Chester. 7 Aug. 2013.

Smythe, Colin. “1996–1998: From Convention to Convention: Two Years on
the Discworld.” _Terry Pratchett_. Colin Smythe Limited. N.d. 23 July
2012.

_____. “Terry and Discworld—2008–2010.” _Terry Pratchett_. Colin Smythe
Limited. N.d. 23 July 2012.

Spracklen, Karl. _The Meaning and Purpose of Leisure: Habermas and
Leisure at the End of Modernity_. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.

“Story of Wadfest.” _Wadfest_. N.d. Web. 23 July 2012.


A Note on the Text

In the essays we will be adopting American spelling, except in those
cases where British is required for quotations or editions published
only in Britain. Russian names will be transliterated using the U.S.
Board on Geographic Names system, except where otherwise required in
article titles. As Pratchett is a popular and contemporary writer, there
is not yet a “standard” edition for his works, and so authors have used
different editions according to availability.

_Abbreviations_

Parenthetical references throughout the essays and notes will use the
following abbreviations:

  _Abroad — Witches Abroad_ (1991)

  _Academicals — Unseen Academicals_ (2009)

  _Almanak — The Discworld Almanak_ (2004)

  _Arms — Men at Arms_ (1993)

  _Art — The Art of Discworld_ (2004)

  _Blink — A Blink of the Screen: Collected Short Fiction_ (2012)

  _Clay — Feet of Clay_ (1996)

  _Colour — The Colour of Magic_ (1983)

  _Companion — The Discworld Companion_ (1994)

  _Compleat — The Compleat Ankh-Morpork City Guide_ (2012)

  _Continent — The Last Continent_ (1998)

  _Cookbook — Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_ (1999)

  _Cow — Where’s My Cow? A Discworld Picture Book_ (2005)

  _DeathMapp — Death’s Domain: A Discworld Mapp_ (1999)

  _DiscworldMapp — The Discworld Mapp: Being the Onlie True & Mostlie_
  _Accurate Mappe of the Fantastyk Magical Dyscworld_ (1995)

  _Elephant — The Fifth Elephant_ (1999)

  _Eric — Faust Eric_ (1990)

  _Folklore — The Folklore of Discworld_ (2008)

  _Footnotes — Once More, with Footnotes_ (2004)

  _Free — The Wee Free Men_ (2003)

  _Gods — Small Gods_ (1992)

  _Guards — Guards! Guards!_ (1989)

  _Hat — A Hat Full of Sky_ (2004)

  _Hero — The Last Hero_ (2001)

  _Hogfather — Hogfather_ (1996)

  _Jingo — Jingo_ (1997)

  _Jugulum — Carpe Jugulum_ (1998)

  _LancreMapp — A Tourist Guide to Lancre: A Discworld Mapp_ (1998)

  _Light — The Light Fantastic_ (1986)

  _Lords&Ladies — Lords and Ladies_ (1992)

  _Maskerade — Maskerade_ (1995)

  _Maurice — The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_ (2001)

  _Midnight — I Shall Wear Midnight_ (2010)

  _Money — Making Money_ (2007)

  _Mort — Mort_ (1987)

  _Music — Soul Music_ (1994)

  _NightWatch — Night Watch_ (2002)

  _Pictures — Moving Pictures_ (1990)

  _Poo — The World of Poo_ (2012)

  _Portfolio — The Pratchett Portfolio_ (1996)

  _Postal — Going Postal_ (2004)

  _Poster — The Josh Kirby Poster Book_ (1989)

  _Pyramids — Pyramids (The Book of Going Forth)_ (1989)

  _Reaper — Reaper Man_ (1991)

  _Recall — Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_ (2012)

  _Regiment — Monstrous Regiment_ (2003)

  _Rites — Equal Rites_ (1987)

  _ScienceI — The Science of Discworld_ (1999)

  _ScienceII — The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_ (2005)

  _ScienceIII — The Science of Discworld III: Darwin’s Watch_ (2005)

  _ScienceIV — The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day_ (2013)

  _Snuff — Snuff_ (2011)

  _Sourcery — Sourcery_ (1988)

  _StreetsMapp — The Streets of Ankh-Morpork Being a concise and
  possibly even_ _accurate Mapp of the Great City of the Discworld_
  (1993)

  _Thief — Thief of Time_ (2001)

  _Thud — Thud!_ (2005)

  _Times — Interesting Times_ (1994)

  _Truth — The Truth_ (2000)

  _Wintersmith — Wintersmith_ (2006)

  _Wyrd — Wyrd Sisters_ (1988)


_The Wee Free Men_

_Politics and the Art of Noise_

Roderick McGillis

  “Why was it, Tiffany Aching wondered, that people liked noise so much?
  Why was noise so important?”—_I Shall Wear Midnight_ [1]

My epigraph asks the question I hope to answer. At the beginning of _I
Shall Wear Midnight_, Tiffany Aching is attending a fair where the air
sounds like a “great cauldron of noise” (1). The various noises “made by
people trying to make noise louder than other people making noise” were
the sounds of people “_having fun_” (1–2; my italics). Noise, then, is a
testament to fun. We might see and hear the truth of this in schoolyards
at recess or in dimly lit nightspots or on crowded beaches or at sports
events. But like everything else, noise is not one-dimensional.
Pratchett notes that fairs are “deceptively cheerful” (3). He does not
go on to examine the deception, but he does let us know that along with
the noise of the fair, the fair also has its silences, the silences of
pickpockets and thieves. Elsewhere in his work, Pratchett complicates
the noise/silence binary when he notes that silence itself may be loud.
Some silences speak louder than any sound can manage. The quiet voice
can seem like a scream: “Eskarina did not shout; she spoke very quietly
and in a way that seemed to make more noise than a scream would have
done” (_Midnight_ 337). Without intending to diminish the complexity of
this rich invocation of noise in Pratchett’s work, I will concentrate on
his Tiffany Aching books in order to associate noise with childhood, but
childhood in an ethical sense and even a political sense.

The noise of these books’ children, the Nac Mac Feegle or the Wee Free
Men, is the exuberance of childhood coupled with the acceptance of
responsibility. The delirium of these small pictsies is the expression
of fun and high spirits, but also of their dedication to freedom and
independence. The noise that we hear from the Nac Mac Feegle is the
noise of the future in the sense that it prompts us to accept humanity
in all its confusion and discord to go forward with a sense of life’s
loudness, the loudness of togetherness and community. Pratchett’s work
is nothing if not dedicated to equality and community, and to be
dedicated to equality and community is to be forward-looking—in a word,
futurist. I do not argue that Terry Pratchett is a Futurist. No one is a
Futurist today, although many live in the future. And sometimes the
future is the past or at least a version of the past (I think of
Steampunk). In any case, I do argue that the Futurist painter Luigi
Russolo’s letter to Francesco Balilla Pratella in 1913 offers a useful
entrance to Pratchett’s Discworld, especially to his creation of the Nac
Mac Feegle. Listening to the atonal music of the composer Balilla
Pratella, Russolo came up with what he termed the “Art of Noises,” a
combination of “the most complex succession of dissonant chords” (5).
Noise, he argued, is the sound of industrial civilization, civilization
removed from the silence of nature (4). Noise is a characteristic of
modern life. Russolo put the case succinctly: “Today noise reigns
supreme over human sensibility” (4). Noise, white or otherwise, is a
constant feature of contemporary life and it is easy to conclude that
noise functions as a _negative_ feature of contemporary life. Noise
infiltrates our peace of mind, distracting us from focusing on important
aspects of daily life. Noise makes it difficult for us to relax and find
a space outside the stresses of modernity, especially urban modernity.
Conversely, noise might soothe and quiet our nerves; it may prove
reassuring. Noise reminds us of certain spaces, and it may stretch time.
Russolo thinks that noise has its beneficial uses, and that “our ears
far from being satisfied [with the sounds we hear], keep asking for
bigger acoustic sensations” (6). Noise is not simply irritating static,
the sound of brouhaha, or the unquiet condition of contemporary and
future life. For Russolo noise is provocative, creative, and
stimulating. To envisage a time and place without noise is to envisage a
post-apocalyptic future emptied of life’s bustle and life’s fullness.
For a Futurist like Russolo, noise is youthful and challenging to the
status quo. Noise keeps us forever young. Noise is, in short,
art—revolutionary art.

Noise is a feature of urban living, and perhaps it is no accident that
Pratchett has described his novel, _I Shall Wear Midnight_, as an “urban
fantasy” (Mullan). This is the book in which Pratchett asks the question
quoted above in the epigraph to this essay: “Why was noise so
important?” (1). The book delivers more than one answer to this
question, but in a nutshell we can say that the answer is (as always in
Pratchett’s world view) because noise makes us human, keeps us human,
and brings us together. It is in its own way leveling, just as the fair
that opens the book is leveling. Like the fair, noise is a feature of
the carnivalesque; it reflects the body in all its excesses. Noise
describes the sound of protest as well as the sound of victory. Noise
expresses joy as well as pain. Noise assures us that the future will
hear about what matters. Noise carries the sound of humanity in all its
roughness and charm.

On the subject of noise, Russolo is thinking specifically about
orchestral music. He concocts six categories of noises for the orchestra
he would like to hear. I will not list all the sounds in these six
categories, but a brief survey gives us (1) roaring and bellowing, (2)
whistles and snorts, (3) whispers, rustlings, mutterings, and grumbles,
(4) cracks, shuffles, and buzzings, (5) wood or rocks knocked together,
and (6) voices moaning or shouting or screaming (10). This list reminds
me of the various sounds we might associate with the Nac Mac Feegle in
Pratchett’s Tiffany Aching Books (and in their first appearance in
another Discworld book, _Carpe Jugulum_). The Nac Mac Feegle are nothing
if not loud. They are loud much of the time, but they can rustle and
they can be silent when hiding from the Big Jobs (you and me). But even
their silence has a certain loudness: Tiffany tells Miss Tick, in _A
Hatful of Sky,_ that she knows the Feegles are watching her when she
can’t hear anything: “It’s always a bit quieter if they’re watching me”
(27). The Nac Mac Feegle are pictsies (not pixies), small people with
red hair, blue tattoos, kilts and swords. They are clannish and rural.
Some of them live in a burial mound, reminding us just how
life-affirming they are; they do not quake in the presence of death (or
Death, for that matter. See _Wintersmith_ 295). They have a seemingly
endless supply of gold coins that they do not value highly. They inhabit
a world removed from Russolo’s urban cities with their constant
cacophony of sound. But they are noisy and they like nothing more than
finding a busy pub or tavern in which to carouse. What might the Nac Mac
Feegle and their noise have to do with Pratchett’s sense of value?

The Nac Mac Feegle first appeared in the “adult” fantasy, _Carpe
Jugulum_. I place “adult” in quotation marks because Pratchett’s work
can and does appeal to readers of pretty much all ages from the young
adult years to old codgers like me. Having said this, I make note that
Pratchett’s work, at least in the marketing of that work, falls into
adult and children’s books. Interestingly, the Nac Mac Feegle first
appear in an adult book, but thereafter appear as a group only in the
series of four children’s books featuring the young witch, Tiffany
Aching. In an interview with Ann Giles, Pratchett remarks that “it’s
probably true to say there is not a massive difference between my
children’s books and my adult books…. The books go out there and I’ve
always been aware that fantasy is uni-age and the kids who read, read
anything” (Giles). The line between adult and children’s fiction may be
unclear, but publishers and writers do acknowledge such a line. In
various interviews Pratchett points out that he is able to address
larger issues in children’s books and that the language of a children’s
book must be somewhat clearer (simpler) than the language of an adult
book. The simpler language of a children’s book accounts for the
readability of the Nac Mac Feegle’s speech in the Tiffany Aching books.
In _Carpe Jugulum_, their speech is impenetrable. So far, so good.
Fantasy appeals across the age spectrum; books for children do differ
from books for adults.

In _The Hidden Adult_, Perry Nodelman lists forty-five qualities that
distinguish children’s books (76–81). Might we add to this list that
books for younger readers are noisier than books for adults? Noise
appeals more to youth than to age, as anyone above, say, forty-five, who
has tried to have a conversation in a well-populated bar or even in many
restaurants will recognize. At least noise impinges on one’s
consciousness less the younger one is. The young take noise for granted.
I think we might argue that narrative perspective in books for the young
is more attuned to sound than in books for adults. Often we have a
narrative voice that mimics orality. Perhaps the most spectacular
example is Tolkien’s _The Hobbit_, a fantasy whose narrator provides
sound effects and speaks directly to readers. Noise has been a feature
of children’s books for a long time. _Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland_
is a loud book. At one point, Alice engages in a shouting match with the
Queen of Hearts, and we have splashing water, a barking dog, and much
cavorting and mirth. The Disney version of this book is also suitably
loud, most emphatically so in the zany Mad Tea Party scene. In _A Hat
Full of Sky_, Granny Weatherwax prods Tiffany until she is shouting,
screaming, and full of fury. Granny maneuvers Tiffany until she is so
angry that she becomes noisy and this noise is a feature of an anger
that keeps Tiffany free of fear and able to confront the hiver, this
book’s villain (252–255). Noise serves the function of catching readers’
attention. It also reflects the energy of youth. Noise has something of
the exuberance (and possibly the anger) of childhood. It is also a
challenge to routine and to the complacency of a settled and composed
life. It shakes things up. It keeps us awake and perhaps even alert.
Noise cuts through complexity. A strain of English comedy stretching
from the _Goon Show_ on BBC radio from 1951 to 1960, to _Monty Python’s
Flying Circus_ (1969–1974), to _Black Adder_ (1983–1989), to Pratchett’s
Discworld books (1983–ongoing) joys in noise, the noise that will make
ye free. Laughter itself is a form of noise, and laughter is, or can be,
an expression of the carnivalesque. Laughter is a stay against
confusion; it brings people together. The noise of laughter is a feature
of childhood at its best.

In other words, noise has its place in the world of children’s books if
we accept that these books not only socialize young readers, but also
set out to alert young readers to the possibilities of transgression.
Transgression need not be anti-social or ruthlessly disruptive of
community. It can be educative, healthy, and necessary for the free
individual. We might remember that the Nac Mac Feegle are the Wee _Free_
Men. Noise is often transgressive, but at the same time it can form
community as we see in many children’s games in which shouting and
cacophony are the rule. Just as Russolo was eager to hear sounds that
expand sensibility, sounds that will turn “every factory … into an
intoxicating orchestra of noises” (12), sounds that take us into the
future, so the noises perpetrated by the Nac Mac Feegle expand our
sensibilities and allow us to appreciate the almost anarchic fun these
characters represent. In _Wintersmith_, the Feegles are relieved to hear
that Rob Anybody has a plan: “They always felt happier when Rob had a
Plan, especially since most plans of his boiled down to screaming and
rushing at something” (170). Their oft-repeated cry of “crivens,”
delivered in an oval-shaped, twenty-point font near the end of _I Shall
Wear Midnight_, is as good an example as any. Crivens is the Nac Mac
Feegles’ most familiar cry; it serves as war cry, expression of joy,
expletive, and general signal of presence and identity. It is rude, but
also a hearty expression of high spirits. It may be a shortened form of
“Christ Defend Us,” or “Christ in his Heavens,” or simply a way of
saying expletively, “Christ!” (see Velten) with an emphatic exclamation
mark. In effect, “crivens” is lightly disguised profanity in the manner
of W. C. Fields’s “Godfrey Daniel.” It is a word uttered loudly. It is
the signature of the Nac Mac Feegle. In a children’s book, “crivens” is
a reminder of language that ought not be spoken in polite company. It is
transgressive.

The Nac Mac Feegle are transgressive; they lie and steal and drink to
excess. The Nac Mac Feegle may be loud, they may be inebriate, and they
may be aggressive to the point of violence, but they are also loyal,
persistent, and joyous. These small pictsies with their blue tattoos
teach us that to be human is to err, but they also teach us to engage in
life whole-heartedly. Their boisterous antics are reminiscent of the
antics of children. They are even known to dress up, as when they make
themselves into a Big Job and enter a tavern in Ankh-Morpork in _I Shall
Wear Midnight_. Like children, the Feegles run about, gambol, take what
they want, and generally live a life of boisterous fun. As far as they
are concerned, they live in heaven where anything is permitted. Living
the way they do means they steal and carouse. Their life style might
indicate that they are criminal and selfish, but if they are, then they
are the way the fabled Robin Hood is criminal and selfish. As their
leader Rob Anybody (and his name is a nearly accurate descriptor) points
out, “we never steal from them as has nae money, we has hearts of gold,
although maybe—OK, mostly—somebody else’s gold, and we did invent the
deep-fried stoat” (_Midnight_ 172). Tiffany explains to Petulia, in _A
Hat Full of Sky_, that the Nac Mac Feegle are fairies, but “not the
sweet kind.” She goes on to say that they are “good … well, more or less
… but they’re not entirely nice” (281). The Feegles are attractive
precisely because they are good but not nice. Their goodness manifests
itself in their willingness to help those in need, and their not
niceness manifests itself in their fierce individuality and
independence.

Perhaps the good-not-niceness of the Feegles is most evident in their
penchant for lying. The Feegles rarely tell the truth. They seem to have
a pathological aversion to the truth. Their lies, however, are not
malicious; the Feegles think lies are necessary for their survival. And
they lie so often that lying becomes, strangely, a method of telling the
truth. In their lying, they are akin to Discworld’s most complex and
admirable character, Granny Weatherwax. In _A Hat Full of Sky_, Tiffany
reflects on Granny: “She lied all the—she _didn’t tell the truth_ all
the time” (257; original italics). Granny’s lies serve a purpose, and
more often than not that purpose is the betterment of humanity. As
Granny notes in the same book: “the start and finish, is helpin’ people
when life is on the edge. Even people you don’t like” (251). She
cautions Tiffany when she advises her to “tell people a story they can
understand” (258). Telling stories is another way of saying “tell lies.”
What matters in the end, as Granny again asserts, is helping people.
Tiffany asks Granny why she and Miss Tick sent Tiffany to learn
witchcraft from the ditsy Miss Level, and Granny replies that they did
so because Miss Level cares for and about people:

  She cares about ’em. Even the stupid, mean, dribbling ones, the
  mothers with the runny babies and no sense, the feckless and the silly
  and the fools who treat her like some kind of a servant. Now _that’s_
  what I call magic—seein’ all that, dealin’ with all that, and still
  goin’ on. It’s sittin’ up all night with some poor old man who’s
  leavin’ the world, takin’ away such pain as you can, comfortin’ their
  terror, seein’ ’em safely on their way … and then cleanin’ ’em up,
  layin’ ’em out [250; original italics].

The sentence goes on for another nine lines, presenting the ethics of
humanity. Granny’s speech pattern itself is important. She is a common
person, educated in the ways of humanity but with little in the way of
“higher education.” Characters like Granny, Tiffany, and even the
Feegles have their flaws—they are human, even when they are pictsies—but
when you get right down to it, what defines them is their humanity,
their willingness to help others without prejudice.

Another connection between Granny, Tiffany, and the Feegles is their
status as outsiders. Granny and Tiffany are witches and witches are by
definition “other” than the rest of the members of a community. Witches
stick out by virtue of their pointy hats (and for the most part their
black clothes), but also by what other members of the community perceive
to be their magical ability. As Pratchett and Granny Weatherwax make
clear throughout the Discworld series, magic is as much perception as it
is fact. Or magic is a fact by virtue of people accepting it as fact
rather than it being a matter of spells, charms, or potions. “Headology”
is a word Granny uses for magic. In any case, witches are othered. As
for the Feegles, they are “other” because they are fairies, because they
are small, and because they come from away. They are foreign among the
likes of Big Jobs. That othered characters like Granny or the Feegles
sacrifice themselves for the good of those who other them is testament
to their goodness. The ethics of the other in Discworld are tolerance
and assistance without prejudice. Pratchett’s world may have its
hierarchies, but ultimately what matters is the human instinct for
cooperation and care. Ministering to others is the lot of the witch in
Discworld, and the Feegles who live on the Chalk take as their lot the
protection of the big wee hag, Tiffany Aching. When Pratchett says that
he can tackle more difficult themes in his children’s books than in his
other books, he refers, in part at least, to this theme of communal
responsibility and collective assistance. The Feegles are willing to put
themselves in danger to help the wee big hag because they admire and
respect her for what she is, a Big Job who helps others and who puts
herself out for others.

These small pictsies fit the ingredients of a children’s book precisely
because they are children, or at least they are like children. Not only
do they run about and make loud noises, but they also are on the verge
of literacy. Much is made in the books of their respect for literacy;
the new kelda (their matriarch) has decided that literacy is something
her people should master. They know that Tiffany is a reader, and they
look up to those who have the ability to read. With Rob Anybody, we have
a character who is, somewhat reluctantly, learning to read. In _A Hat
Full of Sky_, the Feegles go inside Tiffany’s mind in order to discover
how to save her from the dreaded hiver that threatens to infiltrate her
thinking. They have the ability to travel between worlds, even when the
world is inside a person’s head. In Tiffany’s mind, they come across her
grandmother’s old shearing hut, but Tiffany is nowhere about. As they
scout the place, words begin to appear on the door. Awf’ly Wee Billy
begins to read, but he is abruptly cut off by Rob who snaps, “I ken weel
what they say! … I ha’ the knowin’ of the readin’” (218). What follows
is a painfully funny attempt by Rob to read the words that keep
appearing. For each letter Rob “reads” as if he were looking at a
pictograph: “that’s the snake, an’ that’s kinda like a gate letter, an’
the comb on its side. Two o’ that, an’ the fat man standin’ still, an’
the snake again…” (218). In case you missed it, the word Rob has just
read is “SHEEPS.” He goes through another four words in the same
fashion, and then proudly announces, “There! Is that readin’ I just did,
or wus it no?” (218).

The exclamation mark after Rob’s “There” deserves notice. The Feegles
more often than not speak in exclamation marks; that is, they speak
loudly, in an exclamatory manner. Noise is their element. When Rob
announces that the meaning of the words he so descriptively reads is
that the Feegles “are gonna go _stealin_’!” they reply with a resounding
cheer (219; original italics). The Feegles, like children, live life in
exclamation marks. The exclamation mark, as we see in _I Shall Wear
Midnight_, constitutes one aspect of Pratchett’s art of noise. As part
of his noise exposition in this book, Pratchett differentiates between
the noise churned out by the Cunning Man, this book’s villain, and the
noise raised to thwart fear or the noise raised to indicate the Feegles’
zest for life. Tiffany and Laetitia go shopping and while they are
looking at various articles of apparel, the Cunning Man attempts to
invade Tiffany’s mind with a view to taking it over. The Cunning Man
represents hate and paranoia and when he gets into your head, the world
turns dark before your eyes. Tiffany hears the voice of the Cunning Man
croaking in her head: “_I will take you and your confederacy of
evil!!!!!_” She thinks that “she could actually see the exclamation
marks. They shouted for him, even when he spoke softly” (324; original
italics). Here is loud writing, the volume indicated by the combination
of italics, exclamation marks, and of course the word “shouted.” The
noise of the Cunning Man is unpleasant and counter to the enjoyment of
life. This is the sound of the death principle as opposed to the noise
of the Feegles that is the sound of eros, of life lived to the fullest.
The Feegles have experienced easeful death, or so they think. They have
passed through the magic casements and live with unabated energy. The
Cunning Man, on the other hand, is jaded. He is the cruelty and
intolerance and superstition of the world. He is the unpleasant adult to
the Feegles’ buoyant children. A witch hunter, the Cunning Man
represents the dour and decidedly dark deliverer of gloom. He renders
the world devoid of charm.

The Feegles are not, literally, children; they are, however, childlike.
The childlike, in the words of George MacDonald, “is the divine.” For
MacDonald, the child is the type of essential humanity, willing to serve
others and to look up to and obey authority. The childlike knows no age.
The Nac Mac Feegle are adamant that they are not pixies, not cute small
humanoids with pointy hats. Rather they are a warrior-like race, “the
most feared of the fairy races” (_Folklore_ 103). In _The Folklore of
Discworld_, Pratchett and Simpson refer to them as “out-and-out rebels
against any authority whatsoever” (104), and in _The Wee Free Men_, the
lawyer toad says they are rebels against anyone and everything (77).
This is not exactly the case, as they do follow what their kelda directs
them to do, but they follow direction in an independent, and usually
wild and wooly way. They live by their own rules, which is to say they
live without the benefit of rules.

If heaven lies about us in our infancy, then the Nac Mac Feegle have
died and gone to heaven, or at least this is what they believe. _A Hat
Full of Sky_ opens with an excerpt from _Fairies and How to Avoid Them_
by Miss Perspicacia Tick; this excerpt includes a section on the history
and religion of the Nac Mac Feegle. Here we learn that these little
pictsies used to live in Fairyland, but they were exiled for some
reason. In exile, they found themselves in “our world [i.e., the
Discworld, a world intriguingly like the world of readers], with its
sunshine and mountains and blue skies and things to fight” (10). How
could such a wonderful place, they reason, not be “a heaven or
Valhalla?” Therefore, they must be dead. If, in the heat of battle in
this world, they die, then they fret that they will go to a boring place
where nothing much happens and they will have no one to fight.

When they appear in _Carpe Jugulum_, the Nac Mac Feegle speak a language
well nigh impenetrable. Here is a brief example of their speech: “Yings,
yow graley yin! Suz ae rikt dheu” (209). Whatever this may mean, it most
likely sounds better when uttered loudly. The “Yings” and the
exclamation mark seem to signal the need for loudness. We should not
assume that noise exists only in the three-dimensional world of matter,
that noise is something only for the ears. Eyes too can hear. Noise, as
we have seen, may be an aspect of silence. The loud silence that our
eyes can see lies at the origin of Pratchett’s Nac Mac Feegle. They are,
we remember, pictsies, members of the fairy crew, and Pratchett finds
his fairies in nineteenth-century art and literature. In _The Wee Free
Men_, Tiffany goes to the land of the fairies to rescue the Baron’s son
Roland from the Fairy Queen. The chapter in which she does this has the
title, “Master Stroke.” When Tiffany approaches the place of the
fairies, she hears “a loud _crack_!” Then she pushes her way through the
tall grass and observes the following scene: “On a flat rock, a man was
cracking nuts half as big as he was, with a two-handed hammer. He was
being watched by a crowd of people” (220; original italics). In the
Author’s Note at the end of _The Wee Free Men_ and also in Pratchett and
Simpson’s _The Folklore of Discworld_, Pratchett gives the origin of
these fairies and this scene: the famous painting by the Victorian
artist Richard Dadd called _The Fairy Feller’s Master-Stroke_ (1855–64).
The painting depicts the cracking of a nut, and it is the cracking of
this nut, or at least the blow that tries to crack the nut, that Tiffany
hears. As she passes by the fairy feller, she remarks: “Best of luck
with the nut-cracking” (221).

The passing joke here is that the nut-cracking is akin to cracking a
joke. The “crack” is both the sound of the master-stroke and a witty
remark—a joke. It is also a colloquialism for something that makes you
burst out laughing, something that cracks you up. Crack is a loud sound
as well as a small space; in other words, a crack is something that we
can both see and hear. The crack of dawn, for example, is the sliver of
light on the horizon as the sun begins to rise and the sharp sound of
the alarm clock as it jangles in the morning. Crack contains the noise
that we can see reverberating through Discworld, the noise that gives
life. The allusion to the Dadd painting is nice because it combines
noise and silence, ears and eyes and allows them to share sense
impressions. The painting is, in effect, something of a synesthetic
moment. Synesthesia is evident later in the book when Tiffany smells
snow; she thinks that “snow had a smell like the taste of tin” (249).
Synesthesia reminds us of the Romantic aesthetic at the heart of these
books. And by looking back at a Victorian moment, as he does when he
invokes the Richard Dadd painting, Pratchett catches the craziness at
the heart of Discworld. This craziness is what Lewis Carroll refers to
in _Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland_ as madness: “We’re all mad here.
I’m mad. You’re mad” (58). The madness Carroll alludes to and that
pervades the Discworld is not the madness of Richard Dadd incarcerated
in a psychiatric hospital, but rather that fine madness that allows one
to create. The poet, the madman, the lover, and the Feegle have much in
common.

One thing these four people have in common is their hope for the future.
The mind that loves, creates, and carouses joys in the things of the
world. The world is not too much with the poet, the madman, the lover,
or the Feegle. But the future is a delicate sound. Tzvetan Todorov has
recently outlined the Futurist manifesto of the early twentieth century,
connecting its aesthetics to its political desire for revolution. He
assures us that we are politically savvy in these days of the early
twenty-first century: “We now spurn peddlers of political
dreams—utopians who promise us that happiness is just around the
corner—because we have learned that promises such as these served in the
past to hide the sinister designs of Lenin, Mussolini and Hitler” (89).
Todorov cautions us that “Romantic images, in their artistic perfection”
participate in the drive to a totalitarian organization of community.
The Futurists were complicit with dictatorship.

I began by connecting Pratchett with Luigi Russolo and the Futurists.
Like the Futurists and members of other movements in the arts in the
early to mid-twentieth century, Pratchett works in the Romantic
tradition. However, we need not see this tradition in the elitist or
politically sinister way that Todorov outlines. The privileging of art
that we see in Romantic ideology, a privileging that can have as its
political manifestation the championing of heroic figures, is not simply
a projection of the artist as great person speaking from his or her
particular Olympus. The vision of the artist in Romantic thinking is
more often than not egalitarian. Everyone is an artist. In Pratchett’s
world this view of the arts manifests itself in the power of story. We
see just how powerful story is in the myth of Wintersmith and his love
for the Lady Summer. As Granny Weatherwax says in _A Hatful of Sky_: “A
story gets things done” (258). Witches are, after all, just
storytellers. The Wee Free Men inhabit the world of story. What
Pratchett calls “the narrative imperative” (_Folklore_ 22) organizes the
world, and all of us are participants in story. Like the past, the
future consists of stories and more stories. Generations may pass, but
story remains forever young. Story is perhaps just a shout-out to the
human race. Terry Pratchett’s books for young readers offer stories of a
world fraught with a complexity compromised by the simple act of
shouting.

Works Cited

_Alice in Wonderland_. Dir. Clyde Geronimi, Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton
Luske. Disney, 1951.

_Black Adder_. BBC1. 1983–89.

Carroll, Lewis. _Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland_. 1865. Ed. Roger
Lancelyn Green. Illus. John Tenniel. New York: Oxford University Press,
1982.

Giles, Ann. “Terry Pratchett—‘I know the books have their heart in the
right place.’” Interview with Terry Pratchett. _Bookwitch_. 24 Apr.
2012. Web. 29 Mar. 2012.

_The Goon Show_. BBC Home Service. 1951–60.

MacDonald, George. “The Child in the Midst.” _Unspoken Sermons_. First
Series. London: Alexander Strahan, 1867. _Project Gutenberg_. 8 Aug.
2013.

_Monty Python’s Flying Circus_. BBC. 1969–74.

Mullan, John. “Terry Pratchett talks to the Guardian Book Club.”
Interview with Terry Pratchett. Guardian Book Club. 18 Dec. 2009.
_Guardian_. Web. 20 Mar. 2012.

Nodelman, Perry. _The Hidden Adult: Defining Children’s Literature_.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2008.

Pratchett, Terry. _Carpe Jugulum_. 1998. London: Corgi, 1999.

_____. _A Hat Full of Sky_. 2004. London: Corgi, 2005.

_____. _I Shall Wear Midnight_. 2010. London: Corgi, 2011.

_____. _The Wee Free Men_. London: Doubleday, 2003.

_____. _Wintersmith_. New York: HarperTempest, 2006.

Pratchett, Terry, and Jacqueline Simpson. _The Folklore of Discworld_.
2008. London: Corgi, 2009.

Russolo, Luigi. “The Art of Noise.” 1913. Trans. Robert Filliou. N.p.:
Ubuclassics, 2004. 1 Apr. 2012.

Todorov, Tzvetan. _The Limits of Art: Two Essays_. London: Seagull,
2010.

Tolkien, J. R. R. _The Hobbit._ 1937. 2d ed. 1951. London: Allen and
Unwin, 1979.

Velten, Alexandra. “English Dialects in Modern British Fiction: ‘Ach
Crivens’: The Language of the Wee Free Men.” 2008. _L-Space_. 6 Apr.
2012.


Coloring in Octarine

_Visual Semiotics and Discworld_

Anne Hiebert Alton

  “No poet, no artist, of any art, has his complete meaning alone.”—T.
  S. Eliot, “Tradition and the Individual Talent” [55]

T. S. Eliot’s comment seems a perfect place to begin an exploration of
the relevance of illustration in relation to the hermeneutics of Terry
Pratchett’s Discworld series. The enormous range of visual material
created for and about the Discworld and its inhabitants serves to
amplify Pratchett’s vibrant prose by providing additional depth, flavor,
and shading, giving it supplementary meanings that fluctuate and shift
depending on the artist being read or remembered at any moment of
reading. These multiple images, when taken together, can color our
imaginations and steer them so that we imagine Discworld and its people
and places along certain lines. We have wiggle room, of course, and for
most readers Pratchett’s prose likely plays the most significant part in
influencing their imaginations: after forty-plus novels, the lines have
fallen into certain patterns, and the fantasy Pratchett created some
thirty years ago has taken on a certain _gravitas_ or resonance—a
critical mass of suspended disbelief, perhaps—which means that
experienced readers of Pratchett may not veer too far away from the
imagery that they have created in their minds’ eyes. That said, while
readers have shaped these images largely based on the words that they
have read on the page, they have also—in some cases inadvertently, in
others deliberately—had these images informed by the amazing variety of
illustrations that exists to accompany the books; book covers, media
adaptations, companion works, and other images have (perhaps
unconsciously) helped to solidify the ways that Discworld and its
inhabitants appear in our imaginations in terms of their general shape
and/or specific details.¹ The artists who create these images
participate in what I think of as coloring in octarine, or
Discworld-meaning-creation. Discworld readers know that octarine is
Pratchett’s color of magic, but for my purposes it is also the resulting
meaning that we, as Discworld readers, construct when we read the books
in conjunction with their images.

To explore these artists of octarine in a way that is possible within
this essay, I have necessarily defined some parameters and exclusions,
since it was impossible to consider all of the visual interpretations of
Discworld (had we but world enough and time…). Thus, even though they
are part of a larger discussion of visual semiotics and phenomenology,
this essay does not discuss adaptations of Pratchett’s works,
Discworld-inspired and related games, and Discworld ephemera such as
jigsaw puzzles, wine labels, Clarecraft figurines, jewelry, tea towels,
and many other objects created over the years as collectible items for
Pratchett fans.² In the case of both adaptations and games, my grounds
for exclusion rest on the lack of a direct line of connection between
the original text and the illustrations: in most of these cases the
illustrations are based on something that is not directly a Pratchett
text, even though the text on which it is based may be. For instance,
the illustrated animated screenplays for _Wyrd Sisters_ and _Soul Music_
correspond with the animations of these works, which in turn are
adaptations of Pratchett’s titular novels; thus, their artwork is at
least one step removed from Pratchett’s original text. Similarly, the
artwork that appears in the graphic novels of _The Color of Magic_ and
_The Light Fantastic_ and the “big comic books” of _Mort_ and _Guards!
Guards!_ is based on adaptations rather than the original novels.³ The
illustrated screenplays for the live-action films of _Hogfather_ and
_The Colour of Magic_ are likewise one step removed from the originals:
their screenplay text, illustrated with film stills, was written by
Vadim Jean (albeit “mucked about with” by Pratchett) before being
performed by actors, after which the films were edited by a group of
producers and cinematographers, and as a result have a series of
interpreters separating them from the originals. In none of these cases
am I suggesting that these adaptations are not works worthy of further
study; instead, they fall so clearly into the larger fields of film and
media studies that they warrant a far more detailed discussion than can
be achieved here. The same argument holds for the case of artwork for
the games, which encompasses not only covers and graphics for a variety
of computer, role-playing, and board games⁴ but also game-cards and
instruction booklets. Finally, in relation to the delightful abundance
(or plethora, depending on one’s perspective) of Discworld ephemera, for
the most part it has been left out due to the sheer volume of
merchandise that exists, available through internet shops and dealers,
among other places.

This essay thus focuses mainly on the art of two-dimensional
illustration as it has been created in response to particular Discworld
texts and to Pratchett’s concept of the Discworld as a whole. This
artwork includes the cover art of Paul Kidby and the late Josh Kirby,
which moves from the realm of decoration and representation into that of
homage and parody. It also includes the decorative art of frontispieces,
chapter headings, and tailpieces that appears in several Discworld
books, including _The Josh Kirby Discworld Portfolio, The Art of
Discworld, The Pratchett Portfolio, Night Watch, Monstrous Regiment,_
the four Tiffany Aching books, _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated
Rodents_, _The Folklore of Discworld_, and the _Discworld Companions_
and Diaries. In addition, this essay considers the illustrated books
written by Pratchett: Josh Kirby’s _Faust_ _Eric_, Paul Kidby’s _The
Last Hero_, and Stephen Player’s _The Illustrated Wee Free Men_, where
the illustrations not only decorate Pratchett’s text but also interpret,
supplement, and at times extend it. It concludes with a discussion of
the artwork that appears in what I refer to as the hypotrochoidal texts,
works generated from within the Discworld novels—_Where’s My Cow?_, _The
World of Poo_, _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_, _The Discworld Almanak_, and the
maps—that have concurrent implications outside Pratchett’s multiverse.
Despite the many variations and potencies of images that appear
throughout the Discworld books, they come together in a substantial body
“to illuminate text, to throw light on words” (Shulevitz 120), which is
one of the main purposes of illustration. In doing so, all of the images
necessarily interpret the written text into other, more visual, formats,
and consequently they contain an implicit element of translation of
medium as they move from the written word to the visual image.⁵
Moreover, many of these images go a step—or several—further and
supplement the text of Discworld to extend it, often with Pratchett’s
blessing. Taken together, all of the illustrations establish some of the
shades and hues of the color of octarine. This essay considers the key
visual contributions to Discworld and explores their visual semiotics in
order to trace the trajectories of meanings that arise from a visual
analysis of Discworld.

*****

Ursula Le Guin once commented, “I write in the ‘despised’ genres:
children’s literature, science fiction, women’s literature, fantasy” (Le
Guin). Certainly fantasy has taken longer than some other genres to
claim its respectability in the areas of literary study well established
within the so-called literary canon. Fantasy illustration similarly
embodies Le Guin’s notion and magnifies it.⁶ Illustration is an art form
that also exists on the margins, the poor cousin at the table; it
occupies a similarly side-lined place in relation to fine art as fantasy
does to mainstream literature. As Steven Heller notes, “All painters
know that the word ‘illustration’ is the kiss of death” because of the
old notion of pure art necessarily being separate from commercial art,
as commercial art—read: illustration—is considered as “the beginning of
selling out” (3). Some of the reasons for this may be traced to audience
as well as genre expectations. Our western culture, at least,
traditionally has regarded pictures in most literature as being elements
that, while occasionally decorative, are either unnecessary or
appropriate only for immature readers—echoes of Le Guin’s “despised”
genres—and thus something that readers need to grow up and out of.⁷
Take, for example, literature for children. We often assume that
contemporary books published expressly for children must include
illustrations, and it is virtually impossible to find a book today
marketed for younger readers that does not contain pictures of some
sort, be they cute decorations that ornament books of instruction like
alphabet books or early word books, or the double-page spreads that
dominate picture books. Even chapter books and juvenile novels tend to
regularly include full-page images. However, the art of reading pictures
is not something that is either taught or emphasized as part of a
regular curriculum; Gunther Kress notes the way that school children are
encouraged to illustrate their writing, yet their assignments are
corrected for grammar and style and content while the art is not (16).
Kress also notes that illustrations start to disappear from children’s
own work after about the second grade, and I would add that pictures
progressively disappear from the books that they read as they get older.
By the time children reach high school, their books tend to eschew
illustrations, except (as Kress notes) in their textbooks that have
specialized or functional images in the forms of maps or diagrams or
photographs for particular purposes. Once readers have moved to
so-called adult books, their fictional reading material is often devoid
of illustrations—except in the case of certain genres, such as, for
example, fantasy and science fiction, which often contain inside
illustrations in the form of maps, and cover art with eye-catching
otherworldly creatures or wizarding folk cavorting with magical beasts.
Books with these sorts of covers, however, are often dismissed as
“genre” by critics, with the implication that something that is “genre”
is necessarily not “literature.”⁸ This sort of attitude perfectly sums
up the implicit criticism of both audience and genre, that if one is
silly enough to enjoy fantasy, or books with pictures, clearly one is
not mature enough to be able to appreciate “real” literature and art.

Unfortunately, this blinkered attitude ignores not only the enormous
delight and illumination to be gained from reading texts with their
accompanying images, but also the aesthetic pleasure created from
thinking and reading in a multidisciplinary way. W. J. T. Mitchell notes
“that the interaction of pictures and texts is constitutive of
representation as such: all media are mixed media, and all
representations are heterogeneous; there are no ‘purely’ visual or
verbal arts” (5), and Richard Howells adds that texts that include
images “combine the visual with the verbal in order to get multilayered
messages across” (5). This multi-layered effect is more complex than
that achieved by stories told through a single medium. While a number of
critics have written about the theory of visual semiotics,⁹ one whose
work is particularly useful for my purposes is picture book theorist
Lawrence Sipe, who notes the necessity of invoking interdisciplinary
approaches in considering visual literacy and draws on a combination of
reader response theory, aesthetic criticism, linguistics and semiotics,
and literacy theories to explicate what he sees as the way text and
illustrations combine to create “synergy”—the combined effect of two or
more agents that is greater than sum of separate efforts.¹⁰ Sipe argues
that when we read pictures and text, we use a kind of
filling-in-the-gaps process, where the pictures fill in gaps left by the
words and the words fill in gaps left by the pictures, creating fuller
meaning than if either existed in an isolated state. He also uses Roman
Jakobson’s semiotic theory in relation to the distinctions between the
text of written language and the image of visual art, where Jakobson
distinguishes between the two, noting that the predominant nature of
written language is sequential, while the predominant nature of visual
art is simultaneous. Sipe clarifies this with his observation that the
art of visual literacy for reading illustrated books, such as picture
books, is both linear and temporal, and thus in order to “construct an
integrated meaning” one must concurrently perceive the work both
sequentially and simultaneously (101).¹¹

These kernels of Sipe’s theory, combined with a few other elements of
reading pictures, serve as a springboard into my discussion of the
phenomenology of Discworld illustrations and text. By breaking down the
basic functions of illustrations in literature into five
aspects—representation, decoration, clarification, elaboration, and
extension—and applying these aspects to the various sorts of artwork
that illustrates Discworld, we can participate in Sipe’s process of
filling in the gaps by reading the pictures to interpret the text and
vice versa. Once we have completed that process, by considering all of
the image-reading as a whole we can create a kind of synergistic
interpretation that informs us about Discworld on a deeper level than a
one-layered meaning might. In viewing the ways in which the text and
illustrations work concurrently, in both sequential and simultaneous
fashions, we can see that the fantasy art of Discworld, far from having
the kind of parasitic nature that Perry Nodelman attributes to
illustration,¹² instead reveals the artist’s function as a kind of
partner to the author “in shaping the reader’s mental image and
understanding of the text” (Shulevitz 129).

_Cover Art_

One of the first places readers might notice fantasy art is on the book
jacket, where the first glimpses of some of the crucial elements of a
story appear. For the Discworld series, the two most significant artists
are Paul Kidby and the late Josh Kirby; their respective cover artwork
has also appeared on numerous translations of the Discworld novels. As
the series has grown in popularity, other artists’ cover art has been
used, occasionally in England as well as abroad, and the work of French
artist Marc Simonetti has adorned the covers of several editions, but
Kirby’s and Kidby’s names are still the most synonymous with Discworld
covers.¹³ Cover art, and especially fantasy cover art, plays an
important role in marketing, being considered “the second most important
marketing tool next to the author’s name” (Frank 48); after all, covers
are the first point of entry, and thus function as a kind of hook to
grab the reader’s attention and encourage her to pick the book up off
the shelf and open it. Essentially, cover art is regarded by publishers
as “a poster to sell the book” (Cherry). David Langford suggests that
the function of book jacket is to tell readers what sort of book it is,
invoke other books like it, and thus provide an indication as to whether
it is the sort of thing a reader might enjoy (_Josh_), and certainly
covers can do all of these things. At times, however, this effect can
backfire: for instance, A. S. Byatt noted that her initial reaction to
the Discworld novels was somewhat negative, since “Josh Kirby’s covers
with pink and bosomy cartoon women as well as energetic dragons did not
seem to be my kind of thing” (11). Later, however, she came to
appreciate Kirby’s illustrations, noting that his “gleeful wild energy
and intricacy—both brash and sophisticated—… is exactly right for these
tales” (12). Her comment addresses an additional function for cover art:
in addition to providing certain kinds of anticipatory indications for
readers, cover art can also function as a kind of shorthand to enhance
the sense of character, place, and overall impression of the world they
are reading.

For many readers, and for many years, the Discworld covers by Josh Kirby
were readers’ first point of entry into Pratchett’s world. Kirby
illustrated over 400 published book covers between 1954 and 1999,
twenty-eight of which were covers for Discworld and Discworld-related
works.¹⁴ His covers for _The Colour of Magic_ and _The Light Fantastic_
established him in the 1980s and 1990s “as _the_ illustrator for
Discworld” and Langford goes so far as to suggest that Kirby was as
“inseparable” from the Discworld books as Sir John Tenniel was for
_Alice in Wonderland_ or Ernest Shepard was for Pooh (_Josh_ 11). While
some might argue with this claim, as Kirby was but one of several
artists who contributed to Discworld’s visual aspect, his work certainly
is a major piece that creates the octarine shades of Discworld
illustration. His cover for the Corgi paperback edition of _The Colour
of Magic_, his first Discworld commission, was his only watercolor
cover; his preferred medium was oil paint, and Langford has described
him as “a cartoonist in oils” (_Josh_ 6). Certainly his illustrations
have a certain cartoonish and often carnivalesque style, containing
exaggerated proportions like those appearing on _The Colour of Magic_
cover, with rats the size of terriers and a toad bigger than one of
them.¹⁵ His covers always show plenty of action and color, and embody a
kind of exuberant style which takes a central image and then surrounds
it with anything (and everything) else from the story that takes his
fancy. Kirby once described the Discworld books as “‘Bruegel in literary
form’” (“Out of”),¹⁶ and Bruegel’s influence is evident throughout
Kirby’s Discworld covers, particularly in the way they capture the
flavor of an “abundance of bustling, imperfect humanity” (Langford
_Josh_ 6). Kirby also cited the artistic influences of the work of
Titian and Rubens, as well as William Hogarth, Hieronymus Bosch, and
Frank Brangwyn.¹⁷ His delight in painting the human, and particularly
female, form echoes the work of Rubens and Titian, while he shares
Bosch’s sense of colorful complexity, Hogarth’s elements of visual
storytelling and detail, and Brangwyn’s grandeur of scale and design.

One of the main aspects of any of Kirby’s illustrations is the sense of
hectic activity: there is always so much going on it is difficult to
know where to look first. For example, his cover for _Wyrd Sisters_
depicts Nanny Ogg (_sans_ red boots) in the stocks looking up at the
ghost of King Verence; Duke Felmet and the Duchess are looking
appropriately startled, while Granny Weatherwax, the Fool, and Magrat
crash into the frame from above. Our attention alternates between the
main characters and setting to Death and his lifetimers on the far left
(on the back cover of the paperback), back to the image of the Fool and
Granny Weatherwax at the top center, where our attention is arrested by
her hugely exaggerated chin and nose. Similarly, Kirby’s cover for the
omnibus edition of _The Colour of Magic_ and _The Light Fantastic_
highlights Rincewind and Twoflower¹⁸ racing through the air atop the
Luggage, attended by Hrun the Barbarian and Liessa Wyrmbidder, the
dragon maiden, giving Kirby ample opportunity to draw his trademark
scantily-clad shapely heroine, complete with flowing long tresses and
brandishing a sword. His cover here parodies typical pulp fantasy covers
of the Hildebrandt brothers’ variety and adds comic elements through not
only the absurdity of the Luggage’s appearance but also his pastel color
choices of light blues, whites, and pinks. There is plenty of detail,
including four apocalyptic figures in pursuit—Death appears second from
the right, riding Binky—and numerous fantastic creatures glaring at them
from the ground, including a small dragon and a large troll.

Kirby’s covers also often combine several scenes, particularly when, as
he observed, “‘I can’t find a single incident that represents the whole
book’” (Langford _Josh_ 13). Good examples of this tendency appear on
the covers for _Witches Abroad, Hogfather,_ and _The Truth_, all of
which include numerous characters from different parts of the action
brought together in a montage. The cover of _Hogfather_, for example,
foregrounds Death and Albert riding on a sled being towed through the
sky by the four Hogswatch Night hogs; the sled also carries Susan,
Banjo, and Mr. Sideney, the wizard student (see Image 1). The lower
right corner shows the assassin Teatime, apparently preparing to climb
down a chimney, and in the bottom center the King and his footmen appear
in the snow. Other details include the Death of Rats, snow-covered
turrets, and bats flying in the night sky. The color palette is
relatively restrained—for Kirby—with blues, whites, and yellows/oranges
dominating. His cover for _The Truth_, in contrast, is more typical,
with its cheerful jumble of characters piled together around the
printing press in a scene that does not occur in the book, but that
nevertheless invites close speculation as to the identities of each of
the multitude of characters. While it is relatively easy to pick out the
dwarf Gunilla Goodmountain, Gaspode the wonder dog, the “nuns” (one of
them looking remarkably like a potato), and Sacharissa Crisplock, Lord
Vetinari looks more like a wicked priest than the
former-assassin-turned-city-dictator, with his pronounced hunchback and
pointed boots, neither of which is mentioned in any of the novels.

[]

1. _HOGFATHER_, BY JOSH KIRBY (BY PERMISSION OF COLIN SMYTHE ON BEHALF
OF THE JOSH KIRBY ESTATE).

Two of Kirby’s covers are especially interesting for more than just
their eye-catching energy or representative aspects. His cover for
_Reaper Man_ has been referred to as “one of his most memorable
Discworld paintings” since it shows the influence of Dutch seventeenth
century “memento mori paintings” (“Out of”), paintings that were
intended to be symbolic reminders of death’s inevitability and that
conveyed their messages through images conventionally associated with
death, such as skulls or bones (see Image 2). Kirby’s _Reaper Man_
succeeds brilliantly here, combining images from the book—the field
workers stopping for lunch, the threshing machine, the child Sal playing
with Death’s own small golden lifetimer, Death’s overalls—with others
that typically refer to mortality, such as the skeletal figure of Death
holding his scythe and a setting crescent moon, along with imagery
specifically associated with death in the Discworld, including the tree
festooned with lifetimers and the Death of Rats. Kirby also invokes Van
Gogh: echoes of _Starry Night_ appear in not only in his use of color,
with the midnight blue sky and bright yellow moon, but also in the
pattern of stars leading to the crescent moon, though Kirby’s moon is
reversed and lower in the sky than Van Gogh’s; similarly, Van Gogh’s
paintings of harvests and threshers, particularly _Harvest in Provence_
and _Wheatfield with Crows_, are referenced in Kirby’s composition,
style, and color. The harvest background creates a pastoral scene, and
the gentleness with which Death’s hand sits on the small girl’s hair is
comforting, despite the surrounding iconography. Kirby’s cover for _Soul
Music_ is similarly intertextual, but this time in relation to a record
album cover. Fittingly, given its subject matter as a satire on rock
music and musicians in general, Kirby’s cover alludes to the iconic
image from Meat Loaf’s 1977 album, _Bat Out of Hell_.¹⁹ While the album
cover features a motorcycle erupting out of a graveyard, Kirby’s cover
shows Death doing a wheelie on a motorcycle; though the two images are
facing opposite ways, the motorcycles themselves and the angles at which
they are presented are nearly identical. Kirby was unhappy with the
original hardcover version, feeling that its white background was too
toned down for the effect he hoped to create, and so he completely redid
the cover for Corgi’s paperback, adding the flourishes so paramount in
most of his paintings with extra stylization on the motorcycle, more
stars in the sky, and the crowded landscape of Ankh-Morpork’s many
bridges and buildings below.

Kirby began illustrating Discworld covers for the Corgi paperback
edition of _The Colour of Magic_, and he subsequently was asked to
create the hardcover image for _The_ _Light Fantastic_. When Pratchett
changed publishers to Gollancz for the hardcovers, he asked that Kirby
continue to do the cover illustrations, and at this point they started
discussing the cover designs over the phone. However, according to
Suckling, it was a “loose collaboration” and Kirby was “left pretty much
to his own interpretations” (Suckling 92).²⁰ Usually his illustrations
for the hardcover and paperback books are, if not exactly the same, very
similar, with the same design but slightly different colors or more
details, as for the _Soul Music_ cover discussed earlier. Occasionally,
however, Kirby would create a new painting for the paperback, as
happened with _Lords and Ladies_ “after a bad time with requested
revisions to the hardback version” (Langford _Josh_ 17). This is
understandable, as the hardcover illustration includes figures not
transparently related to the characters in the book. His revised cover
for the paperback is much easier to follow, showing an easily
recognizable Nanny Ogg, wearing her trademark red boots, along with the
dwarf Casanunda as they confront the King in his lair.

[]

2. _REAPER MAN_, BY JOSH KIRBY (BY PERMISSION OF COLIN SMYTHE ON BEHALF
OF THE JOSH KIRBY ESTATE).

Kirby’s policy was “‘not to do a Discworld cover that does not have a
frameable painting at the end of it’” (Langford _Josh_ 99),²¹ which
resulted also in two publications featuring the complete paintings: _The
Josh Kirby Poster Book_ and _The Josh Kirby Discworld Portfolio_. Though
Pratchett did not agree with all of Kirby’s interpretations of the
Discworld, he did famously comment, “I … only invented the Discworld.
Josh created it,” and continued, “Many writers are unhappy about their
jacket design, others like them. I’m one of the very few who wait
anxiously to see what new delights the book cover will bring” (_Poster_
n. pag_._). That said, Pratchett has noted that sometimes Kirby gets it
wrong, as with the witches: “Whatever the book says, he likes witches to
look like crones ‘otherwise how will anyone know they’re witches?’”
(_Poster_ n. pag_._). This of course misses the point: while Pratchett’s
witches might, at times, dress like witches and act like witches, they
are first and foremost people, with complex personality traits and
distinctive personalities—no one who has encountered Nanny Ogg in print
is likely to forget her immoderate love of alcohol, her many husbands,
or the Hedgehog Song. Indeed, Pratchett’s creation of Nanny Ogg and
Granny Weatherwax has undermined, or at the very least expanded, the
archetype of what witches can be. Though Kirby attempted to justify his
decision, noting that “‘witches and wizards have their place in far more
ancient folklore and I follow that convention—a sort of communal
consciousness’” (Langford _Josh_ 92), his disregard of specific textual
descriptions in favor of archetypes can at times be annoying. His
default presentation of female non-witches is also noteworthy: Pratchett
has observed that even “if I take pains to dress young heroines from
neck to ankle in Mother Hubbards, then Josh strips them down to their
underwear because that’s a fantasy convention hallowed by time”
(_Poster_ n. pag_._). This tendency appears on Kirby’s Discworld covers
from the beginning: although the scene he paints from _The Colour of
Magic_ does not appear to include any female characters, a closer
examination reveals a miniature bare-breasted woman posing on top of the
toad—a minor detail that can easily go unnoticed except under the
closest scrutiny.

It is in just these details, though, that the strength of Kirby’s
illustrations rests. Every time one returns to his covers, more details
surface and impel the imaginative eye to curiosity and speculation, just
as Pratchett’s prose nudges one to suspend disbelief and become immersed
in the Discworld and the lives of its inhabitants. Despite the
interpretive differences between author and artist, Kirby’s covers
succeed in reflecting the frenetic energy of life on the Discworld: they
communicate the incredible variation of both people and ideas that
populate the books, and they also reflect the layers of meaning one
finds throughout Pratchett’s prose. Kirby’s gallimaufry of colors and
places and actions reflects the jumble of activity readers encounter in
the books’ pages, and the complexity of his cover illustrations allows
readers to return to them with a better sense of understanding after
having finished the book. In the end, Kirby’s covers definitely succeed
in catching attention, but they then take readers several steps further
and continue to spark their imagination along their visual journey.²²

The other artist whose Discworld covers succeed at catching readers’
attention and enticing them into Pratchett’s world is Paul Kidby,
Pratchett’s “illustrator of choice” (_Art_).²³ When he read _The Color
of Magic_ a number of years ago, Kidby felt “compelled to draw” its
images, and after showing his sketches to Pratchett—who was immediately
interested in them—at a book-signing, Kidby began working on
illustrating the Discworld, drawing maps, postcards, chapter art, and
other images (“Entrevista”). He began working exclusively with Pratchett
in 1995, and upon the sudden death of Josh Kirby in 2001 he was asked to
create the cover artwork for _Night Watch_ (Lee). Kidby has commented
that he and Josh Kirby knew each other, and that Kirby felt that their
interpretations of Discworld “were so different that there was room
enough for us both to explore and visually ‘mine’ its rich seams with
our sketchbooks” (Lee). Kidby has proven himself an adept and, indeed,
gifted miner: in addition to the covers for thirteen Discworld novels,
the four _Science of Discworld_ books, _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_, _The New
Discworld Companion_, and _The Folklore of Discworld_, he has produced
cover designs and images for Discworld diaries, games, calendars, two
full-length art books featuring his Discworld art, and _The Last Hero_,
a profusely illustrated novella on which he collaborated with
Pratchett.²⁴ Kidby views his role as artist as someone who strives “to
represent all the characters and try to capture [their] essence to marry
Terry’s words. It’s a very exciting challenge for me and I love my job”
(“Entrevista”).

In creating the Discworld book covers, Kidby works closely with
Pratchett and the marketing team. At the start of the process, he
receives a specific brief whose details are agreed upon by the
marketing, editorial and art teams at the publishers, in addition to
having been approved by Pratchett. He then works with a designer for the
duration of project, first doing preliminary sketches and sending those
in for approval, and then submitting second drawings showing any
changes, before starting to paint (Harvey). His vision and Pratchett’s
generally mesh, as Pratchett has noted:

  Paul sees things my way about seventy-five per cent of the time, which
  suggests either mind-reading is happening or that my vision of my
  characters is really rather vague until I see his drawings. And he
  remembers the history of the characters in a way that’s almost
  frightening, so that a simple illustration will contain little details
  mentioned in half a dozen books [_Art_ n. pag].

In the few instances where Kidby’s interpretations have not corresponded
with Pratchett’s, Kidby has “changed the illustration to allow images to
be what [Pratchett’s] imagination has created” since he feels that they
are, ultimately, Pratchett’s characters and that his job as illustrator
is “to give them life” (Vladimirova). It is perhaps this flexibility or
at least willingness to submit his own artistry to that of the author’s
vision that has allowed Kidby to capture the essence of Pratchett’s
world and characters, and create images that make Pratchett’s fantasy
world seem even more accessible.

Kidby’s covers are far less frenzied than Kirby’s, although he still
packs in plenty of information and detail. He tends to work “in a muted
earth colour palette and tr[ies] to capture a historical feel whilst
Josh used a bright palette and filled his page with a myriad of
fantastical figures in his own unique and distinctive fantasy genre”
(Lee). This historical style appears most prominently in Kidby’s covers
for Night Watch and _Monstrous Regiment_.²⁵ Both images are parodies of
famous works, but are set in Discworld and contain a number of easily
recognizable characters. _Night Watch_ mirrors Rembrandt’s famous
painting commonly known as _De Nachtwacht (The Night Watch_),²⁶ with the
original appearing on the back cover. Kidby utilizes the technique of
chiaroscuro—the play of light and shadow—in a more restrained manner
than Rembrandt, but it still appears in the way the light highlights
young Vimes’ face and the two other most important characters, the
original Sam Vimes (impersonating John Keel) and the sweeper/history
monk Lu-Tze, along with the cobblestones they stand on, against the arch
of darkness behind them and the shadows around the picture’s edges, most
noticeably on the right in young Vetinari’s black assassin’s garb. A
sense of edginess, both literal and metaphoric, is created by the way
the light draws attention to the edges of the various spears and
pikestaffs, while the generally muted colors not only create a kind of
historical mood but also add a layer of realism. In the place of the
small girl carrying the militia’s goblet in Rembrandt’s original, Nobby
appears carrying the spoon given to him by Sergeant Keel, and there are
lilac sprigs at the sweeper’s feet, representing the participants in the
People’s Republic of Treacle Mine Road revolution. At the back, barely
noticeable, is a smallish man standing beside Reg Shoe and peering over
the shoulder of Waddy; this is the spot where Rembrandt painted himself
in the original, but where Kidby painted Josh Kirby as a tribute to
him.²⁷

The cover for _Monstrous Regiment_, rather than being straightforward
parody, is more of an homage to a contemporary source, that of Joe
Rosenthal’s iconic photograph “Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima.” Taken on
February 23, 1945, during World War II’s Battle of Iwo Jima, this
photograph shows five U.S. Marines and a U.S. Navy corpsman raising the
American flag on the top of Mount Suribachi. The photograph was
reprinted in thousands of publications, and was the only photograph to
win the Pulitzer Prize for Photography in the same year as its
publication; it “remains one of the abiding images of World War Two”
(Howells 3–4). In contrast to the black-and-white image of 1945, Kidby’s
illustration is in color, but the angle of the flag is the same, the
cloud cover has a similar pattern, and the overall composition of the
illustration echoes Rosenthal’s photograph. However, instead of carrying
the national flag of Borogravia, the five figures in Kidby’s
image—Polly, Maladict, Jade, Shufti, and Tonker (Wazzer having collapsed
from the effort of channeling the Duchess)—are carrying a white flag
(which upon close inspection appears to be made of bloomers), a
traditional indicator of surrender that in this case signifies the truce
between Borogravia and Ankh-Morpork. Kidby’s image portrays the soldiers
looking directly at the audience, rather than at the ground, suggesting
an element of illustrative metanarrative: in addition to playing with
the raising-the-flag subtextual (and sometimes super-textual) narrative
parody of Pratchett’s novel, Kidby’s characters demonstrate their
awareness of their action’s significance in the sense of being conscious
of the audience’s attention and, perhaps, the audience’s recognition of
the iconic original’s significance.

This element of audience awareness occurs throughout Kidby’s covers, and
it is one of the many aspects that distinguish his covers from Josh
Kirby’s. Kirby’s covers portray their characters thoroughly caught up in
the action, intently focusing on whatever scenario they are embroiled
in. In contrast, Kidby’s covers initially appear to be more static—a
moment caught in time—often featuring a group shot or a single instant
caught for posterity. _Unseen Academicals_, for example, presents a
group portrait of the Ankh-Morpork football team, with the Librarian
looking predictably fierce and Vetinari (also predictably) unmoved by
the young cheerleader standing next to him; all of the characters wear
team portrait expressions and gaze directly at the audience. Similarly,
the cover of _The Wee Free Men_ features the somewhat daunting prospect
of a large group of Feegles, weapons in hand, clustered together in
various threatening stances and glowering at the audience, while the
portrait of Commander Vimes on the cover of _Snuff_ shows him standing
at the tiller of the _Wonderful Fanny_, the goblin Stinky at his
shoulder, glaring directly at the reader and ignoring the chaos of
squawking chickens and tempestuous waters surrounding him. The cover
image of _Thud!_, on the other hand, one of Kidby’s most successful book
jackets to date (Harvey), features Vimes standing in the centre of a
Thud board flanked by troll pieces, holding a torch and looking up at
someone out of the reader’s view, with a dwarf piece bleeding from its
head lying at Vimes’ feet. This illustration is especially effective
both in terms of design and color use: the black and white squares of
the board, along with the stone and granite tones of the troll and dwarf
pieces, work to draw our attention to the reds and golds and browns of
Vimes in the center, and though the image appears to be in a freeze
frame, Vimes’ stance makes him look ready to run or spring at someone.

Kidby’s illustrations possess a kind of realistic overlay that makes
Pratchett’s characters, who already seem fairly real due to their vivid
textual depictions, become flesh-and-blood people, albeit of all
different species, in a way that Kirby’s illustrations never do. This is
not to say that Kirby’s illustrations and covers do not serve an
important function; on the contrary, they do, but theirs is a function
more connected with reinforcing the generic aspect of Pratchett’s books
as comic fantasies than with introducing readers to the characters or
the locations of Discworld. In contrast, Kidby’s illustrations have the
effect of reminding readers about various aspects of what they already,
perhaps subconsciously, know in relation to human nature, and then
providing a platform for readers to plug that knowledge into their
expectations about certain aspects of characters and places throughout
the Discworld and apply it, so to speak, as they read. In a sense, then,
Kidby’s illustrations can provide a kind of recognition for readers,
which allows them to suspend their disbelief in Pratchett’s world
perhaps a little more easily, and thus concentrate on aspects of the
story that particularly grab them without having to reach after an image
that might be elusive. Much of this effect has to do with Kidby’s
drawing style, which utilizes clean lines, generally accurate
proportions and perspective, and that “truthfulness to life” that
Maurice Sendak notes is the basis of all great art (“Caldecott” 149). In
some ways, perhaps it is better that Kidby has been creating the later
cover illustrations, as Pratchett’s writing over the years has been
acquiring a deeper level of sophistication, which has also contributed
to our being able to see the people and spaces of the Discworld more
clearly. Kidby’s illustrations thus have the effect of allowing readers
to imagine the Discworld as being somehow more real, which blurs the
boundaries between reality and fantasy in pleasant ways.

_Decorative Art_

This blurring of boundaries has likely been exacerbated by the
decorative art that abounds throughout many of the novels. This art
appears not only in the form of chapter art and frontispieces, but also
in desk diaries and calendars, greeting cards, posters, and essentially
on anything that might be able to sport a visual image (mouse pads, tote
bags, and a myriad of other items).²⁸ Books featuring the artwork of
Discworld have also appeared, notably Paul Kidby’s _The Pratchett
Portfolio_ and _The Art of Discworld_. Indeed, the vast majority of
these images have been drawn by Kidby, although in a few of the books
other artists fill in for particular purposes. Unlike a film, which,
despite leaving a bit of room for interpretation, generally directs the
viewer’s imagination in particular ways (how an actor moves, for
instance, or what the sounds of the night are), an illustration arguably
leaves a bit more up to the imagination: it is a still shot, which
allows the imagination to be nudged rather than specifically directed to
flesh out the world it represents. Smaller illustrations often do this
even better than the full scale scenes that appear on covers, since they
provide a close-up of the larger whole that exists in the text of the
books and on the canvas of readers’ imaginations. Taken together, these
images help to solidify those already there, and fill in some of the
spaces that have not already been imagined, thus acting as a kind of
springboard to encourage even more active visualization.

[]

3. _GRANNY WEATHERWAX STANDING_, BY PAUL KIDBY (ARTWORK COPYRIGHT © 2013
BY PAUL KIDBY, WWW.PAULKIDBY.NET)_._

Paul Kidby’s _The Pratchett Portfolio_ and _The Art of Discworld_
showcase a number of his Discworld character images alongside
Pratchett’s commentary. In his introduction to _The Pratchett
Portfolio_, Pratchett comments on Kidby’s realistic vision, noting “the
feeling that he’d just strolled into the books with a sketchpad” (n.
pag). More importantly, though, Pratchett comments on his sense that he
does not provide a lot of physical description in the novels, because
“character does not lie in two pages of dense depiction, but in modes of
speech, the things people say and do not say. Character is the shape
they leave in the world” (_Portfolio_ n. pag.). Kidby renders this shape
exceptionally well, especially (and in contrast to Kirby) with the
witches. His Granny Weatherwax, “the witch with a personality like
granite and a whim of chromium steel” (Langford “Pratchett” 487),
appears to be the quintessential image of a stern and imposing lady
whose power is conveyed in the pictures through her body language—ramrod
posture, chin up, arms crossed—and steady gaze (see Image 3). One of his
best images for capturing her essence appears in the small headshot of
Granny with the bees converging on her head; here, lacking her customary
scowl, she looks perhaps the closest we imagine to being happy or, at
least, satisfied (see Image 4). Pratchett also likes Kidby’s Rincewind,
commenting, “He’s one of the characters that Paul gets spot-on;
Rincewind in Fourecks is exactly right” (_Art_). This image shows
Rincewind running, sporting a sheep over one shoulder and a disgruntled
expression, with the Luggage, its little feet wearing red high heels in
a nod to the “girls” Rincewind meets who take a liking to “Trunkie,”
trailing behind him (see Image 5). This image exemplifies Roland
Penrose’s notion that “art has the unique quality of being able to halt
the march of time while still giving the illusion of movement” (Nodelman
159)—something that would surely appeal to Rincewind.

[]

4. _GRANNY WEATHERWAX WITH BEES_, BY PAUL KIDBY (ARTWORK COPYRIGHT ©
2013 BY PAUL KIDBY, WWW.PAULKIDBY.NET)_._

Other characters that Pratchett feels Kidby captures well include
Captain Carrot, Tiffany Aching, Death and his granddaughter Susan, Cohen
the Barbarian, and the Feegles. Carrot and Cohen feature heavily in _The
Last Hero_, discussed below, as does the Librarian, the Wizards at
Unseen University, and the dragons. Tiffany and the Feegles appear in
the frontispiece to _The Wee Free Men_—depicting Tiffany in a pose very
similar to that of Granny Weatherwax, complete with the ramrod posture
and the glare, with Rob Anybody at her feet, brandishing a sword—and in
many of the chapter headings of the four Tiffany Aching books. The
Feegles, who appear in color images with electric blue skin and bright
red hair, also show up in the page number decorations throughout _The
Wee Free Men_ and _A Hat Full of Sky_ in Rackham-like silhouette images
of Feegles rushing to battle and assuming fighting stances. Kidby’s
version of Death is also compelling: like Pratchett’s prose creation,
Kidby’s artistic rendition of Death takes a figure that elicits fear in
a number of cultures and translates it to a humanized individual who,
despite his preternaturally sharp scythe, appears somewhat friendly,
albeit not cuddly. He appears in such very human poses as riding a
motorbike (wearing the Dean’s “Born to Rune” black leather jacket over
his robe), playing an electric guitar, stroking a kitten, and dressed up
in a Hogfather costume. In all of the color images, Kidby shows Death
with glowing blue eyes and outlined in a thin line of fluorescent blue,
reflecting his otherworldly nature as well as Pratchett’s descriptions
of his scythe with its transparent blade’s “edge glittering blue as air
molecules were sliced into their component atoms” (_Maskerade_ 349).
This same glow is suggested in the non-color images through Kirby’s use
of chiaroscuro. One of his most intriguing paintings featuring Death is
“Check Mort,” painted for the cover of the French _Fun2Fantasy_ “Homage
to Sir Terry,” showing Pratchett playing chess with Death in a parody of
the scene from Ingmar Bergman’s film, _The Seventh Seal_ (_Discworld and
Beyond_).

[55-Alton]

5. _RINCEWIND IN XXXX_, BY PAUL KIDBY (ARTWORK COPYRIGHT © 2013 BY PAUL
KIDBY, WWW.PAULKIDBY.NET)_._

Kidby uses paper, pencil, and board along with oils or acrylics to
create his pictures and “favours a subdued colour palette,” a somewhat
contentious choice in the fantasy industry since fantasy editors tend to
prefer bold colors that are bright and eye-catching, but he nevertheless
aims for a balance that works for both himself and publishers
(_Discworld and Beyond_). This inclination can be seen especially well
in Kidby’s images of the Shamble as well as his version of Igor and
Scraps (_Art_). Both are rendered in shades of dark blues and grays and
whites, which works well to call attention to the fine detail in both
pictures. With Igor and Scraps, we are immediately drawn to Igor’s face
with its many stitches running across his forehead, down both eyebrows,
and around his nose and mouth—indicating places he has been “repaired”
or stitched—and to his fingers, which are numerous and appear to include
multiple thumbs. Scraps, on the other hand, has eyes of two different
colors and an unusually long tongue and large nose for a dog his size;
this is perhaps explained by the more subtle stitching around his face
(his two tails are sadly not in evidence). Similarly, the subdued color
palette of the Shamble allows readers to focus on its contents, which
include not only a doorknob and feathers and a pencil but also buttons,
a tuft of sheep’s wool, a fossil, beads, Tiffany’s necklace, and a bee.
Kidby has commented that the Discworld characters “were so fully
realised in Terry’s writing that I felt drawing them was merely
translating word to line … I strive to achieve a realism that
complements the text” (_Art_ n. pag). This realism shows up particularly
well in the images he created for _The Folklore of Discworld_. Each of
its chapters includes a pencil illustration as a chapter frontispiece
and feature most of the mythical, or at least folkloric, creatures of
the Discworld, including dwarfs, elves, trolls, werewolves and vampires,
Igors, golems and zombies, fantastic beasts, and Death, in addition to
various landscapes including the Chalk and Lancre. Kidby portrays all of
them convincingly enough that they seem not only believable but
instantly recognizable. Even in his smallest illustrations, such as
those that appear in the various Diaries, Kidby’s illustrations project
a kind of veracity that helps solidify the Discworld in a way that makes
reading the stories even more enjoyable.

Other illustrations also appear in the Discworld books, including the
frontispieces of _Night Watch_ and _Monstrous Regiment_ as well as the
chapter illustrations for _Going Postal_ and _Making Money_. The _Night
Watch_ frontispiece is a small cutaway drawn by Stephen Briggs²⁹ for
_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_ map in 1993 (discussed below). The
selected area focuses on where the main action of the rebellion, “The
Glorious People’s Republic of Treacle Mine Road,” occurs. _Night Watch_
is the first Discworld novel to include a frontispiece, and the novel
suggests the shift in tone of the series from this book onwards, where
Pratchett’s writing style and focus seem to have more serious overtones
than they had previously.³⁰ The map lends a sense of veracity to the
novel, and by extension the series, in the sense of providing the
illusion of reality while at the same time invoking the fantasy
convention of having a map,³¹ and thus works in much the same way as
Pratchett’s prose works, by making a joke about something, undercutting
it to demonstrate its satiric point, and then overturning that satire to
highlight the joke. Its detail reinforces the meandering nature and
sheer disorder of the city’s roads and districts that the characters
navigate during the revolution. Similarly, the frontispiece for
_Monstrous Regiment_, drawn by Paul Kidby, also evokes the sense of
realism, this time though a cartoon satirizing the political situation
between Borogravia and Ankh-Morpork and intended to convey the feisty
nature of Borogravia as it stands up to the bigger bully of
Ankh-Morpork. As the fictional journalist William de Worde points out in
the novel, “In politics … pictures like this are powerful” and asks
Polly’s unit to make a plea “for a little common sense” in an attempt to
bring the war to an end (178). The cartoon does here just what political
cartoons do in real life, namely to make something, usually a political
leader or situation, appear ridiculous in order to call for some sort of
reform. Although we obviously cannot call for real change to the
political situation between Borogravia and Ankh-Morpork, the cartoon
nevertheless has the effect of adding humor as well as the momentary
illusion of realism. Curiously, the cartoon is unattributed on the
copyright page, and it is simply signed “Fizz”—a nod to cartoonist
Hablot Knight Browne (1815–1882), who used the pseudonym “Phiz” and drew
illustrations (reproduced as copperplate engravings) for a number of
Victorian works, including the novels of Charles Dickens.³²

A number of illustrations in the form of headings, tailpieces, and
occasional small insets enhance the pages of _Going Postal, Making
Money,_ and _Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_. The first
two contain drawings designed by Pratchett and Bernard Pearson,³³ which
in _Going Postal_ are cancelled stamps showing minute images of the
Ankh-Morpork Post Office, the cabbages of the Sto Plains, Lord Vetinari,
Morporkia, and the Ankh-Morpork coat-of-arms, which consists of four
hippos, two bags of money, and the motto “_Quanti Canicula Ille in
Fenestra_.”³⁴ A particularly nice touch is Vetinari’s face adorning the
one penny stamp, perhaps on the grounds that this is the most commonly
used stamp and so people are reminded of his presence constantly. The
drawings in _Making Money_ show coins featuring the Royal Bank of
Ankh-Morpork (complete with its motto, “Integrity, Probity, Trust”),
Morporkia, the coat-of-arms, the seal of the bank, a ship, a dog’s paw
print, and once again Lord Vetinari’s head, this time on the one penny
coin. _Turtle Recall_, the latest encyclopedic companion to the
Discworld,³⁵ also includes numerous black-and-white illustrations, drawn
by Stephen Briggs. In addition to decorated letters at the beginning of
each section—for example, the entries under “L” are prefaced by a line
drawing of the Librarian’s teeth—there are full-page illustrations of
places such as a street in the Shades (see Image 6), a view across the
Ankh River, and a map of the Circle Sea area; detailed illustrations of
a variety of coats-of-arms; small pictures of creatures such as the
Quantum Weather Butterfly, an armored raven (see Image 7), and a
hedgehog (not surprisingly with the entry for Nanny Ogg); illustrations
of buildings, including the Assassins’ Guild, Sybil Vimes’ house, and
the Hubward Gate; and depictions of items like Death’s lifetimers, a
Dried Frog Pills tin, Unseen University’s pipe organ, and Granny
Weatherwax’s hat with its sign “I Aten’t Dead.” All of these images
serve to reinforce the sense of Ankh-Morpork, and by extension the
Discworld, as a quasi-real (albeit imaginary) place. This sense of
quasi-reality is further supported by the rousing real-world trade that
has sprung up in relation to the stamps: from the Discworld Emporium,
philatelists can now purchase stamps and cover sheets of Discworld
stamps, including minisheets of the 2p Guild of Archaeologists or Guild
of Armourers, 4p special issue stamps featuring Bloodaxe and Ironhammer,
and Glorious twenty-fifth of May Lilac Patrician sheets, among others.³⁶

_Illustrated Novels_

At times, illustrations in the novels are an important and even integral
part of the story. In _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_, in
addition to illustrated chapter headings with excerpts from _Mr. Bunnsy
Has an Adventure_ (the rats’ metaphorical book of life), pictograms
drawn by David Wyatt appear that show the rats’ development of a written
language.³⁷ Their iconography is explicated by Peaches, the creator of
the writing system, who must explain it to the other rats since using
written language is a new concept for them. For “No Rat Shall Kill
Another Rat” (see Image 8), the thick line means “no” while the trap is
the sign for death, to which “she’d added the dead rat to make it all
more _serious_” (_Maurice_ 46; original italics). After reading Peaches’
explanation the picture makes sense; however, without the image we would
be left with an insufficiently-constrained mass of options, most (if not
all) of them anthropocentric. By including the image as (supposedly)
drawn by a rat, the otherness of the rats is reinforced in a way that
stresses one of the main themes of the book: that of coming to terms
with a culture that is truly different from our own.

[]

6. _A VIEW IN THE SHADES_, BY STEPHEN BRIGGS (© STEPHEN BRIGGS 1994.
FROM _TURTLE RECALL: THE DISCWORLD COMPANION … SO FAR_ BY TERRY
PRATCHETT AND STEPHEN BRIGGS, ILLUSTRATIONS BY STEPHEN BRIGGS, PUBLISHED
BY THE ORION PUBLISHING GROUP, LONDON).

[87-Alton]

7. _ARMOURED RAVEN_, BY STEPHEN BRIGGS (© STEPHEN BRIGGS 1994. FROM
_TURTLE RECALL: THE DISCWORLD COMPANION … SO FAR_ BY TERRY PRATCHETT AND
STEPHEN BRIGGS, ILLUSTRATIONS BY STEPHEN BRIGGS, PUBLISHED BY THE ORION
PUBLISHING GROUP, LONDON).

Nodelman has suggested that placing words and pictures in conjunction
with each other “inevitably changes the meaning of both, so that good
picture books as a whole are a richer experience than just the simple
sum of their parts” (199). This is certainly true for the three fully
illustrated Discworld novels: _Faust_ _Eric, The Last Hero,_ and _The
Illustrated Wee Free Men_. All three contain significantly more
illustrations than typical fantasy novels, and although Pratchett wrote
the texts before Josh Kirby, Paul Kidby, and Steven Player
(respectively) illustrated them, their images add another layer to
reading a Discworld story. For Josh Kirby’s illustrations for _Eric_,
David Langford claims that Pratchett wrote a storyline “that
deliberately whizzed wildly around in time and space, providing Kirby
with opportunities for lavish illustration” (_Josh_ 93). Kirby painted
sixteen double-page color illustrations for the book, fourteen of which
are interspersed with the text and the other two of which appear on the
title page and the cover. These illustrations maintain his exuberant
style, though at times they seem more streamlined than his Discworld
covers, perhaps because rather than incorporating a number of different
moments they are able to focus on a single scene. For example, the
illustration of Death in his study contains plenty of detail, such as
the giant scythe and lifetimers stretching up the wall behind him, but
the lines are cleaner and the overall feeling of the scene is not as
busy as a typical Kirby cover. Another excellent illustration, and one
which perfectly demonstrates Kirby’s cartoon-like style, depicts the
Universe coming into being. The placement for this illustration is
ideal, for it appears on a double-page spread free of any text,
immediately following the sentence, “Seen from close by, though, it had
a certain gaudy attraction” (89). The image shows Death whirling about
in the center, well above the Great A’Tuin and the Discworld perched on
top of the elephants, with Rincewind flying off, feet first, towards the
bottom left of the page while Eric and, upwards to the right, Astfgl,
look as though they have somehow exploded out of nothingness into
existence. The colors are dominated by purples, yellows, reds, and blues
and are surrounded by a clean white page, adding to the effect of
something having just appeared out of nothing. Although this
illustration, like the others throughout the book, provides more of a
sense of representation than an extension of the text, it nevertheless
adds much to the imagination, particularly in terms of reinforcing the
chaotic element of the Discworld that so often appears in stories
involving Rincewind.

[78-Alton]

8. _NO RAT SHALL KILL ANOTHER RAT_ FROM _THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS
EDUCATED RODENTS_, BY DAVID WYATT (ILLUSTRATION COPYRIGHT © 2001 BY
DAVID WYATT; USED BY PERMISSION OF HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS).

Stephen Player’s _The Illustrated Wee Free Men_ also does an excellent
job of representation, but moves a step further and adds a fair bit of
clarification to the text as well.³⁸ For instance, his illustration of
the shamble (1), while much simpler than the one Kidby imagines,
nevertheless shows the important bits of it, like the egg, the stone,
the twigs, and the pencil mentioned in the text. In addition to a number
of watercolor decorations, often taking up a small space on a page
otherwise filled with text, the book includes images that extend the
story, such as a poster advertisement for the witches’ school (named
“Hovering Grange”), complete with a list of lessons Tiffany imagines
(40). Other kinds of textual complements show images of what Tiffany
might find in some of her books, from the small inset image of the
stages of the moon (43) to the full-page color illustration of a
cacophony of faerie creatures, complete with a Feegle in the lower left
corner making “a gesture with his hand … a rude one” (45). Some of the
literally in-text sketches illustrate things like a small Feegle
standing on one word of the text and climbing up a couple of lines—the
letters being stepped on and grabbed are misaligned (107)—or traces of
water droplets or footprints with the text super-imposed over them
(50–51). Occasionally, significant words appear beneath the printed text
in the same sort of way—susurrus, mutter, patronizing, incursion,
guzunder, for example—looking like watermarks. While these all have
amusing as well as decorative functions, other illustrations more
pointedly clarify the action, as in the fold-out pages that illustrate
precisely how the landscape changes when Tiffany steps through the
standing stone arch and moves from summer to winter (131). Another image
shows the virtual witch’s hat that Granny Weatherwax places on Tiffany’s
head, and though this is a simple line drawing it still conjures the
sense of exactly what Granny has drawn in the air. Overall, the sheer
variety of illustrations and illustration types engages readers’
imaginations and extends the text in very satisfying ways.

Of the illustrated books, however, it is Paul Kidby’s _The Last Hero_
that most fully realizes the functions of not only representation and
clarification but, more significantly, extension and occasional
elaboration of Pratchett’s text. As Pratchett noted, the book “was
_planned_ as an illustrated story right from the start,” and he regarded
the illustrations as a kind of shorthand: “if you have maybe 40,000
words to play with it’s not a great idea to waste a hundred of them
telling the reader what a character looks like when, hey, here’s a
picture of him, right here on the next page. Describing the colors of a
rainbow is a fool’s job if the man he’s working with has a palette in
his hand” (Pratchett “A Note”; original italics). In many places Kidby’s
illustrations do just what Tolkien intended his own illustrations to do
for _The Hobbit_: they save the author time providing background
information and characterization, and allow him to get on with his main
job of telling the story. Cohen the Barbarian’s heroic language—“stop
talking like that and _follow me_!” (_Hero_ 76; original italics) and
“Behold!” (134)—is perfectly reflected in the images of his heroic
charges and stances (see pages 48 and 136, among others). Ponder
Stibbons, the wizard who serves as a nice parody of a research
scientist, has a glum expression and shirt with the slogan “Actually I
Am a Rocket Wizard” (123) that perfectly expresses his fussy brand of
self-conscious intellectualism, which Pratchett hints at through
Ponder’s conversation. Kidby also does an excellent job with places,
providing a double-page spread of Ankh-Morpork in sepia tones, with mist
swirling around the wizards’ Tower of Art and the streets crowded with
buildings; the color choice allows readers not only to perceive the
city’s sense of history but also smell some of its fog. In contrast, his
images of Dunmanifestin, the mountain where the Discworld gods reside,
are often rendered in whites and blues, and have sharp lines and edges
that convey its height, its remoteness, and its danger. Kidby has an
equally good eye for minute details, many of which appear in his
meticulous diagrams of Leonard of Quirm’s inventions. These include the
frying pan for use in gravity-free environments, with burrs on the
bottom to keep it in place (Discworld’s equivalent of Velcro), as well
as blueprints of the Kite, the dragon-powered airship modeled (according
to Leonard’s notes) on an eagle clutching a salmon in its talons. The
sketches here include a view of the bridge, complete with carefully
labeled parts such as “Dragon Pod Separation,” the “Device for Looking
Behind You,” and “Prince Haran’s Tiller” (the autopilot). While these
titles are pure Leonard, Kidby’s intertextual leanings creep in, with
the “No handball playing allowed” note mirroring the sign that John
Glenn allegedly attached to the instrument panel of the Mercury flight
saying “No Handball Playing in this Area,” a reference that also appears
in the 1983 film _The Right Stuff_.

Representations of heroic masculinity appear brilliantly with Kidby’s
versions of Carrot and Cohen, though in somewhat different ways. While
his visual portrayal closely reflects Pratchett’s verbal description,
Kidby’s images arguably work even better than words to emphasize Carrot
as the type of “virile, spectacular masculinity” (Adams 10) that was one
of the main components of early science fiction illustration. His stance
throughout the book, seen perfectly when he is shown saluting and
placing the flag of Ankh-Morpork on the moon (_Hero_ 128) and again when
he faces Cohen and the Horde to arrest them (159), is one of
stereotypical heroic masculinity, which meshes with his character in
this and the other books in which he appears. His “godlike proportions”
(_Thud_ 90) are accentuated by his strong jaw, direct gaze, and sincere
demeanor very fitting for the supposedly rightful yet undeclared heir to
Ankh-Morpork’s throne. Cohen, in a satiric way, also reinforces this
fantasy hero model. As Adams suggests, “When we peruse the contours of a
spectacularly muscled warrior on a fantasy novel, in many ways we are
encouraged to number him among the ranks of other pseudo-classical
heroes to whom he is kin” (27). This is exactly Cohen’s stance, both
physically and mentally (see Image 9): from his perspective, at least,
he belongs at the top of their ranks because he exists in the “bold
unequivocal milieus … where moral absolutes give way to ‘higher’ truths:
namely, a kind of manifest destiny where one can and does continually
iterate the superiority of one’s being and cause simply by being
victorious” (Adams 168). While in a number of ways we are invited to
view Cohen as being a parody of the hero, this gets undercut by the
story, since he continues to be victorious even at the end. However,
even the undercutting gets undercut—in true Pratchettian fashion—as
parody (re-)enters the picture through Kidby’s illustrations of Cohen
and his Horde as wiry old geezers with false teeth, thinning (or absent)
hair, wizened and wrinkled faces, and needing canes or wheelchairs for
balance as they wield their swords. Despite their geriatric status,
Cohen and the Silver Horde are still dangerous, precisely because they
are successful at being “very old _heroes_ … they’ve had a lot of
_experience_ in doing what they want to do” (_Hero_ 19; original
italics). As Pratchett has commented about the Horde, “somehow they
always win because they’re so _good_ at it!” (“Discworld & Beyond” 75;
original italics).

[]

9. _COHEN THE BARBARIAN_, BY PAUL KIDBY (ARTWORK COPYRIGHT © 2013 BY
PAUL KIDBY, WWW.PAULKIDBY.NET).

Kidby’s artwork also reflects Pratchett’s intertextual style, and both
include elements of pastiche in the way that they draw on different
genres and sources. A variety of “sketches & notes in the style of
Leonardo” appear through out _The Last Hero_ (_The Illustrator_),
including Rincewind as the Vitruvian Man and Leonard’s drawing of a
perfect circle.³⁹ The tapestry on the title page and at the end of the
story is modeled after the Bayeux Tapestry, which depicts the story of
the Battle of Hastings; here it illustrates many of Cohen’s and the
Silver Horde’s adventures, beginning with their departure from the
Agatean Empire through fighting sea monsters, slaying warriors,
travelling to Cor Celesti with the bomb, being greeted by the Valkyrie
warriors at the end, and then riding off into the sky. Pairing these
images with those on the Bayeux Tapestry suggests that the kinds of
adventures that Cohen and his Horde have experienced hold a similar
historical stature to those of William the Conqueror, which contradicts
Nodelman’s argument that pictures do not require as much prior knowledge
as words to understand the information being conveyed. For Kidby’s art,
at least, recognizing the layers of historical and artistic riffs adds
an additional dimension of understanding and meaning to the story.
Cohen’s finger gesture to Blind Io in the parody of Michelangelo’s
_Creation of Adam_ (painted on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, from
about 1509–1512) and Rincewind’s posture emulating that in Edvard
Munch’s painting _The Scream_ are much funnier when one is familiar with
the originals, and no one who has read _Hamlet_ can miss the connections
between the image of the minstrel and the skull at the end with the
grave-digger in _Hamlet_ and his “Alas, poor Yorick!” speech (_Hamlet_
V:1). The way that Kidby’s illustrations provide a kind of historical
counterpoint to Pratchett’s fantasy adds not only a layer of humor but
also elements of social commentary and satire that make _The Last Hero_
resonant on multiple levels of meaning.

_Hypotrochoidal Texts_

According to the _OED_, a hypotrochoid is “the curve described by a
point rigidly connected with the centre of a circle which rolls on the
inside of another circle” (see Figure 1 below). I have borrowed this
concept to serve as a metaphor for the types of works discussed in this
final section, publications that have been generated from and appear
within the Discworld multiverse and have a kind of simultaneous
resonance. These are items to which characters make specific references,
as in the cases of _Where’s My Cow?_, _The World of Poo_, _Nanny Ogg’s
Cookbook_, and _The Discworld Almanak_, as well as works that characters
are either shown consulting or could conceivably consult, as in the case
of the maps and _The Compleat Ankh-Morpork City Guide_. These
publications are also items that Discworld fans might (and, from all
evidence, do) enjoy as supplemental materials to the novels. The term
seems especially appropriate: the curve (labeled A in the diagram) is
traced with a line pinned to the centre of the small circle (labeled B
in the diagram) that extends outside of both circles to a point; the
small circle moves counterclockwise around the inside of the large
circle (labeled C in the diagram) while the trace moves clockwise to
create the curve, which intersects and overlaps with both circles as
well as itself. If the large circle represents the Discworld multiverse,
the small circle represents the Discworld novels, and the trace
represents the other texts generated from within the novels, their
trajectory diagrammatically represents the concurrent incarnations of
those texts within the Discworld novels, the Discworld multiverse, and
in our mundane world—for example, the recipes in _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_
are (for the most part) palatable in all worlds involved.⁴⁰

[]

FIGURE 1. THE CURVE [A] IS A HYPOTROCHOID DRAWN AS THE SMALLER CIRCLE
[B] ROLLS AROUND INSIDE THE LARGER CIRCLE [C].

To date, several works have been published in the real world that
originated from within the Discworld novels, two of which are ostensibly
for children and are read by or to young Sam. Like all good children’s
literature, the first—Pratchett’s picture book⁴¹ _Where’s My Cow?_,
illustrated by Melvyn Grant⁴²—has depths of meaning and significance
beyond its apparently simple storyline and pictures. Mentioned in
_Thud!_ as the reason that Vimes rushes home at precisely 6:00 p.m.
every evening to read to young Sam, _Where’s My Cow?_ is a book with
“rounded and soft [pages] where Young Sam had chewed them” (_Thud_ 120)
and follows the very basic events of the narrator seeing and hearing a
number of typical (sheep, horses, pigs) and a few not-so-typical
(hippopotamus) animals as s/he searches for a lost cow. In the end, not
surprisingly, the cow is found—“Hooray, hooray, it’s a wonderful day,
for I have found my cow!’” (_Thud_ 336)—and everyone lives (presumably)
happily ever after. Snippets of the text, along with descriptions of
both the pictures and young Sam’s and Vimes’ reaction to them, appear
throughout _Thud!_, and the way these are delivered appears to gently
mock not only the kinds of drivel that many adults seem to think small
children must like to hear, but also the kinds of repetitive narrative
and storyline that many parents have read to their children through the
ages as comforting bedtime stories. However, like all of Pratchett’s
works, larger points are being made here, both with the book’s
significance within _Thud!_ and with the picture book itself. Near the
end of the novel, Vimes terrifies the deep-down dwarfs with his
insanity-tinged recitation of parts of the book while trapped in the
Koom Valley caves, the words of the story “boom[ing] under Koom Valley,
shaking the rock of ages and making the stalactites hum in sympathy”
(341). Miraculously, as Vimes bellows the words, young Sam sits up in
his nursery miles away, “happy but puzzled” (334), and responds. This
incident exemplifies Vimes’ love for his son, but more significantly
allows readers to witness the utter inseparability of Vimes’ identity
from his rigid dedication to the law and his notion of what is right: to
uphold the light in the face of the gathering (or Summoning) dark.

_Where’s My Cow?_ has far more multiple layers than a cursory reading
might suggest, and most of these are indicated through the pictures
rather than the words. The words are assembled from the bits in _Thud!_,
with a few additions, and every page has illustrations that appear in
conjunction with the words. The book opens with images of young Sam,
Vimes, Lady Sybil, and some dwarfs in their “real” world, and the second
page spread shows Vimes taking the _Where’s My Cow?_ story book off the
shelf while young Sam clamors to have it read to him. Over the next
several pages, the illustrations have a kind of dual layering: in
addition to showing Sam and his father reading and acting out various
parts of the story, they also show images from the story book itself.
The separation between the two layers is clearly demarcated, with young
Sam’s and Vimes’ reality being portrayed with realistic colors and
proportions—even the pet dragon is believably real within their
world—while the story book’s pictures have soft pastel illustrations,
wide lines and unrealistic proportions. When Vimes’ awareness of the
absurdity of the narrative becomes too much for him, the illustrations
suddenly become unbalanced and disproportional, with various objects in
the room flying about and fantastic images invading this primary layer
of illustration. When Vimes shifts to a more realistic kind of story—one
that begins, “Where’s my daddy? Where’s my daddy? It goes, ‘Bugrit!
Millennium Hand and Shrimp!’ It is Foul Ole Ron! That’s not my daddy!”
(_Cow_ n. pag)—the majority of the picture returns to darker and more
realistic hues, and Foul Ole Ron appears as a more credible character
than the pig and goose from the story. This technique continues as
Vimes’ revised narrative progresses, and the story book images shrink in
size as well. By the end of the picture book, which concludes, “Sam
Vimes leaned over the cot and whispered, ‘Where’s my daddy? Is that my
daddy? It goes: ‘I arrest you in the name of the Law!’ _That’s_ my
daddy!’” (_Cow_ n. pag; original italics), the pastel colors have
largely disappeared, the room’s proportions and angles are nearly back
to normal, and the image of Vimes arresting someone morphs into the
final picture of him smiling down at his sleeping son, with a framed
portrait of Pratchett on the wall in the shadows adding a nod to their
creator. The unrealistic illustrations of the story book layer have the
effect of reinforcing the authority of the picture book layer, which in
turn adds to the sense of realism of the story as a whole.

The other work that young Sam becomes fascinated with is _The World of
Poo_, a juvenile novel written by fictional author Miss Felicity Beedle
intended to instruct young readers about everything there is to know
about dung. It is first mentioned in _Snuff_, where Vimes notes that in
addition to its humor, “interspersed with the scatology was actually
quite interesting stuff about septic tanks and dunnakin divers and
gongfermors and how dog muck helped make the very best leather, and
other things that you never thought you would need to know, but once
heard somehow lodged in your mind” (_Snuff_ 60). The text is embellished
with illustrations by Peter Dennis⁴³ in the form of chapter headings as
well as quarter-, half- and full-page pen-and-ink drawings reminiscent
of Gordon Browne’s illustrations for E. Nesbit’s children’s books (this
is at least in part due to the somewhat Edwardian flavor and setting of
the story). Each of the chapter headings has a picture of a jar with a
specimen in it, and the number of jars correspond to the chapter number
(three jars for the third chapter, six jars for the sixth chapter, and
so on). The rest of the illustrations generally have either
representative or decorative functions, as when they show images of
Geoffrey’s grand-mama greeting him, the toy-filled nursery, or the fancy
table setting at the luncheon he attends at the Guild of Plumbers and
Dunnakin Divers. In a few places they provide humorous spoilers by
showing readers what is happening before the text tells them. For
example, after Geoffrey’s visit to the Sunshine Sanctuary for Sick
Dragons, he takes away with him “a small glowing ember” that was
deposited on his glove while he was holding a baby dragon and that he
surreptitiously transfers to his jacket pocket (_Poo_ 47); the image
shows him walking away with his pocket leaking smoke. It is not until
two pages later that his grand-mama notes the smoking jacket pocket and
“extracted the charred ember with the sugar tongs and transferred the
hot little nodule to an empty snuff tin” (49). Overall, the
illustrations do here what they do in juvenile novels of this ilk, which
is to provide interesting images that complement what is happening in
the text.

Similarly, the illustrations in _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_ (see Image 10)
serve both representative and decorative functions, while those in _The
Discworld Almanak_ are primarily decorative. Nanny Ogg appears in a
number of Paul Kidby’s smaller illustrations in his Discworld art books,
but the _Cookbook_ showcases the tone of her wicked sense of humor,
often delivered through the sort of innuendo that appears in recipe
titles like “Nanny Ogg’s Perfectly Innocent Porridge with completely
Inoffensive Honey Mixture Which Shouldn’t Make Anyone’s Wife Laugh,”
which is followed by Nanny’s commentary: “… ’cos they made me take out a
couple of what you might call the more active ingredients” (70). “They”
refers to Nanny’s publishers, Mr. Goatberger and Mr. Cropper, whose
fascinated reaction to and subsequent publication of the _Cookbook_ in
_Maskerade_ provides the excuse for Nanny’s and Granny Weatherwax’s trip
to Ankh-Morpork. Kidby’s portrayal of Nanny perfectly indicates her big
grin and raucous laugh, her ample proportions indicating her love of
life’s many pleasures (many, though not all, of them involving food),
her face “like a small dried raisin” (_Wyrd_ 43), and his images convey
in her twinkling eyes the sense of her as a woman who has had many
husbands, three of them her own.⁴⁴ Throughout the book Kidby also
presents numerous portraits of other Discworld inhabitants, including
especially good ones of Leonard of Quirm and the dwarf Casanunda. The
book parodies not only Mrs. Isabella Beeton’s famous _Beeton’s Book of
Household Management_ (1861) but also modern cookbooks, with their
occasionally unusual dishes and experimental cooking techniques, and
includes images of some of the more interesting ingredients for the
recipes, such as for Deep-Sea Blowfish (lethal unless you discard the
blowfish). _The Discworld Almanak_, illustrated by Kidby, Bernard
Pearson, and Sheila Watkins, is also mentioned in passing in
_Maskerade_: “‘Everyone I knows buys the Almanack,’ said Granny. ‘I
reckon everyone in Lancre buys your Almanack. Everyone in the whole
Ramtops buys the Almanack, even the dwarfs…. Your Almanack will last a
household all winter, with care…. Providing no one’s ill and the paper’s
nice and thin’” (187). Its numerous and varied ornaments include
advertisements, pithy sayings, notes on astrology, and other useful and
not-so-useful information, such as “Interesting Cabbage Fact No 324”
(87).⁴⁵

[]

10. _NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK_, BY PAUL KIDBY (ARTWORK COPYRIGHT © 2013 BY
PAUL KIDBY, WWW.PAULKIDBY.NET).

These were not Pratchett’s initial ventures into the area of
hypotrochoidal works; instead, this distinction belongs to the Discworld
maps. Pratchett’s novels since their first inception have included
numerous references to maps in both literal and metaphoric senses, and
the dedication line to _Sourcery_ includes Pratchett’s invitation: “This
book does not contain a map. Please feel free to draw your own.” The
most frequent references to physical maps occur for maps of the
Discworld as a whole (in twelve novels) and to the city of Ankh-Morpork
(in six novels). Other places that are either mentioned as having maps
or shown via characters consulting their maps include the Ramtops and
the village of Bad Ass, Überwald, Bonk, Klatch, Borogravia, Fourecks
(XXXX or EcksEcksEcksEcks), and the Counterweight Continent. Pratchett’s
visual sense of the Discworld’s fictional geography first appears in
_The Color of Magic_ with a gaming board made of “a carefully carved map
of the Discworld, overprinted with squares” (65). In _Sourcery_,
Carding, Spelter, and Coin get a aerial view of first Ankh-Morpork and
then the greater world:

  Ankh-Morpork spread out like a map, the river a trapped snake, the
  plains a misty blur…. The Discworld appeared below them, and from up
  here you could see that it was indeed a disc, pinned to the sky by the
  central mountain of Cori Celesti, where the gods lived. There was the
  Circle Sea … there was the vast continent of Klatch, squashed by
  perspective. The Rimfall around the edge of the world was a sparkling
  curve [108–109].

Despite Pratchett’s now much-quoted comment that “the Discworld is not a
coherent fantasy world. Its geography is fuzzy, its chronology
unreliable…. There are no maps. You can’t map a sense of humor”
(Pratchett “Foreword”),⁴⁶ he has collaborated in the creation of four
maps of Discworld and its environs, along with a city guide and map of
Ankh-Morpork, in the form of an old-fashioned gazetteer, and the
Discworld map electronic application. The first three maps—_The Streets
of Ankh-Morpork_, _The Discworld Mapp,_ and _A Tourist Guide to
Lancre_—were created in conjunction with Stephen Briggs, with artwork by
Stephen Player (for the first two) and Paul Kidby (for the third), while
the fourth—_Death’s Domain_—was created in conjunction with Paul Kidby,
who also did the artwork. In addition to consulting with Briggs, Player,
and Kidby as to details and locations, Pratchett wrote most of the
material for the booklets that accompany the earlier maps, and added
details and other material to the Ankh-Morpork gazetteer and the
electronic version. This written material might suggest that the maps
have a kind of weight that many other fantasy maps do not, and in some
ways that might be true; however, as Pratchett notes in his introduction
to _The Discworld Mapp_, “I said there would never be a map of the
Discworld. This is it…. This map possibly isn’t the way things are. But
it is one of the ways they could be” (Pratchett “I Needed”).⁴⁷ Their
function as hypotrochoidal texts appears in the way that they have been
engendered by the details of the novels and yet have also influenced the
novels in turn: in addition to being shaped by the diegetic outline of
the landscape and geography of Discworld, they have in turn shaped
Pratchett’s creation of it.

When Stephen Briggs first approached Pratchett about creating a map for
Ankh-Morpork, Pratchett’s reaction was somewhat negative, commenting
that he considered it “unmappable because I’d made it up as I went
along,” and he noted that he preferred to leave it vague (Pratchett “The
Streets”). However, after giving the matter some thought, he soon
realized that “most ancient cities got made up as people went along” and
that, furthermore, certain things have to stay in the shape that he has
already described them throughout the novels in order to reinforce the
sense that readers have of the city’s geographic validity (“The
Streets”). To create the map, Briggs went through the books and made
notes on paper and file cards, and then began to plan it, consulting
with Pratchett throughout this drafting process, and he comments that
Pratchett took “a _lot_ of constructive interest in the map. This is a
polite way of saying that before long the master copy had so much
Tipp-ex on it that it was hard to lift” (Briggs “Mapping”; original
italics). At times the details Pratchett mentioned referred to novels
that were not yet published, and a kind of fantasy architectural history
started to emerge. The map’s full title—_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork
Being a concise and possibly even accurate Mapp of the Great City of the
Discworld_—suggests a sense of history, which is reinforced by its sepia
color and Stephen Player’s fantastic ancillary decorations with
gargoyle-adorned plinths, a turtle compass marking the Hubwards
direction, and coats-of-arms for various families and guilds (including
the Vetinari and Ramkin families, and the guilds for Fools and
Joculators, Alchemists, and Assassins, among others). The map’s details
include a rabbit’s warren of streets and areas, showing such locations
as Sator Square and Unseen University, the Shades, Treacle Mine Road,
and the cemetery in Small Gods, along with the walls around the city and
the eight city gates. The booklet accompanying the map contains small
pen-and-ink drawings of various places and Tudor-style buildings in the
city, as well as map grids and the map key. The map itself is a thing of
beauty: single-sided, it folds out to about 28 inches by 29 inches (the
same size as the other three maps) and is printed in sepia tones with
shades of aqua, ultramarine, rose, and moss. As a work of art, it is
something that map lovers of all sorts might enjoy hanging on a wall; as
a map, Discworld characters could consult it to determine possible
routes of travel within the city, while both characters and readers can
study it to help solidify their sense of spatial relationships within
the city as well as get a sense of the city’s vast and complex layout
(see Image 11).

[]

11. _THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK_ (DETAIL), BY STEPHEN PLAYER
(REPRODUCED BY PERMISSION OF STEPHEN PLAYER, PLAYERGALLERY.COM).

The other maps function in similar ways, as a kind of inside/outside
view of the Discworld’s places. Briggs used references from all of the
books up to _Interesting Times_ to create _The Discworld Mapp: Being the
Onlie True & Mostlie Accurate Mappe of the Fantastyk Magical
Dyscworlde_, and also did some reading in geography, at Pratchett’s
suggestion, thus avoiding such potential errors as placing the Great Nef
Desert where a swamp would be (Briggs “Many Miles”); a sense of history
is reinforced by not only the map’s subtitle, but also its archaic
spelling conventions. The introductory material, in addition to brief
notes by Pratchett and Briggs, includes character sketches of some of
Discworld’s most famous explorers, garnished by a map showing the first
three “epic voyages” of General Sir Roderick Purdeigh around the
Widdershins Ocean, “on which he proved conclusively that the
Counterweight Continent and the continent of XXXX could not possibly
exist” (Pratchett “Here Be Dragons”). It concludes with a section on the
history of the Discworld, providing its dimensions—20,000 miles across
and thirty miles thick at the Rim, though considerably thicker towards
the Hub—and an interesting note about the way it changes its direction
of spin every 100,000 years. As with his artwork for _The Streets of
Ankh-Morpork_, Steven Player uses muted colors, this time in mostly
blues and greens, and the decorations around the map have a winged motif
that echo the Great A’Tuin’s stately flight though space: an owl carries
the map’s scale, flying eyeballs (with tails) as well as a
grouchy-looking aged male angel ornament the perimeter, and two winged
hippos bear the title as well as the acknowledgement: “the Result of
intents Research by Our Skilled Teem of Surveyors, Skillfully Drawn with
Greate Skill by Skilled Dwarf Craftsmen.” The layout, rather than being
a road map, instead has topographical overtones and thus does not
indicate the boundaries between the various nations. Like _The Streets
of Ankh-Morpork_, it is aesthetically pleasing, and is the kind of map
that people (both in and outside of the Discworld) could believably hang
on their walls, or, in the case of Discworld characters, use to gain a
broad sense of the shape of their world, not to mention reinforcing the
belief that their Disc sits atop a gigantic chelonian. However, it is
not the sort of “workman’s map” like the one Vetinari consults in _The
Truth_ (30), but instead an artistic rendering of the Disc.

Like the first two Discworld maps, _A Tourist Guide to Lancre: A
Discworld Mapp_ includes prefatory material written by Pratchett and
Briggs, along with short essays serving as introductions to the area by
the fictional champion walker, Eric Wheelbrace, and Gytha Ogg, as well
as a lengthier extract from Wheelbrace’s _A Pictorial Guide to the
Lancre Fells_ and a concluding note by Nanny Ogg on Folk Lore of Lancre.
Their essays are decorated with a few small illustrations of items such
as a compass and a set of wire-cutters—indicating Wheelbrace’s habits
and attitudes towards the thorny issue of right-of-way in the
countryside—as well as a stone footbridge, a well, and a view (subtly
presented from the side) of the Long Man. The map is designed with
numbers corresponding to such locations as Granny Weatherwax’s cottage,
the town of Lancre, the Castle, some of the mountain peaks, and the
village of Bad Ass which, despite being described in _Equal Rites_ as a
village that “wouldn’t have shown up on a map of the mountains. It
barely showed up on a map of the village” (11), nevertheless shows up
here. It also includes detailed inset maps of both Lancre Town and
Lancre Castle, along with a portrait of Granny Weatherwax and Nanny Ogg
as well as ones of the Queen of the Elves and the King of the Elves.
Kidby’s border includes more natural elements than Player’s, which works
for a map of a rural area, and the entire view is framed by intertwined
branches of trees, roots, and leaves. The Lancre map provides an
excellent sense of the sheer verticality of the Kingdom, as well as
presenting a better awareness than the novels do of the distance between
Granny’s cottage and Nanny’s house in town. Like the other maps, by
indicating a sense of geographic proportions it reinforces the idea of
the geographic space of the Discworld, however imaginary.

_Death’s Domain: A Discworld Mapp_ depicts a setting outside of the
Discworld and indeed outside any level of reality, even that contained
within an imaginative place. Described as “a landscape, hanging in
space” (_Music_ 68), Death’s home appears “on no map, [and] existed only
in those far reaches of the multiplexed cosmos known to the few
astrophysicists who have taken really bad acid” (_Mort_ 32). The
prefatory material is more extensive than for the other maps, and much
of it corresponds more directly to places on the map. Pratchett’s
description of Albert’s attempts to grow pineapples “in a deep warm
pineapple pit” corresponds with map location 21 showing the site of the
pit, while Death’s hobby of golf is reflected not only on the map, where
there appears a small golf course containing both a miniature windmill
and a sand trap complete with a skeleton (location 28), but also in the
booklet with an illustration of Death assuming a golfer’s stance with a
driver in his grasp, the Death of Rats on his shoulder, and Albert as
his caddy balancing a golf cart that holds other golf clubs along with
Death’s scythe. Moreover, the text notes that though the colors of
Death’s domain “tend towards the black” this still has its own spectrum,
and Kidby’s illustrations mirror that spectrum with shades of deep
purples and gently marbled grays, providing a sense of dreaminess that
obviates the potentially fearsome notion of this being Death’s abode.
The map’s border is created with sculpted and intertwining bones that
frame images of Albert, Susan, and the Death of Rats as well as scenes
from the house, such as the front entrance with its double stairway,
Death’s wall of lifetimers, flowers in both black and white, and Death
himself. The edges of the map are traced with the thin line of electric
blue that Kidby characteristically uses to outline Death throughout his
illustrations. His attention to the very smallest details appears
throughout as well, perhaps most strikingly in the peacock that
ornaments the border, whose tail-feather pattern is made up of tiny
skulls. All of these details add elements to Death that help flesh out
(so to speak) his character, just as the illustrations throughout the
novels help expand our imaginative concepts of the Discworld and its
inhabitants.

The most recent additions to Discworld maps appear with _The Compleat
Ankh-Morpork_ City Guide and map, and the corresponding _Ankh-Morpork
Map for iPad_, both of which were created by Pratchett with the
assistance of the Discworld Emporium—Bernard Pearson, Reb Voyce, Isobel
Pearson, and Ian Mitchell—and with additional illustrations by Peter
Dennis.⁴⁸ The City Guide comes with an oversize, double-sided pull-out
map, measuring 38.5 inches by 35 inches, with an extremely detailed
street map on one side and an aerial view of the city on the other. The
street map looks like many other street maps, with every street having a
name and the Legend distinguishing between major thoroughfares, minor
roads and lanes, and waterways, and the map points out significant
places of interest including principal buildings and landmarks such as
the Patrician’s Palace, the Dysk, Small Gods cemetery, and numerous
other spots. Its borders are intricately decorated with stylized flowers
and toadstools, and its sepia tones support the illusion of this being
an aged map of an even older city. The map is divided into grids
corresponding to entries in the City Guide’s street directory, which
also includes enlarged maps for The Shades and the Cattle Market
Districts. The other side of the map provides a more realistic
representation of the city, as if painted by someone looking down on it.
This view gives an excellent sense of the circular sprawl of the city
and the way the buildings are clustered together along with sections of
green parkland, bridges, fields, the great brown river Ankh that bisects
the city, and the wizard’s Tower of Art looming near the Hubwards end
(or, for those of us outside the Discworld’s multiverse, the north end).
The detail here is remarkable, with sails and even oars being visible on
the boats, people of various shapes and sizes going about their daily
business, and the occasional seagull (or perhaps pointless albatross)
flying below. The City Guide reads like a typical travel guide, with
information about what to do during accidents or emergencies, details
for walking tours, and innumerable advertisements in the style of those
that appeared in Victorian serial publications such as _David_
_Copperfield_. These list just about anything readers could imagine,
along with many things they might not—mousetraps, spirits and wine
importers, tattoo parlors, “Verdant Spring—Cosmetics for the Troll of
Today,” Jolly Sailor tobacco, Wee Mad Arthur’s service, humorous
vegetables—and provide plenty of reading as well as decoding in relation
to the habits and culture of Ankh-Morpork. The City Guide is heavily
illustrated, not only with the decorations for advertisements but also
with illustrations for various places, such as the one for Twilight
Canyons, “A residential home…. Famed for the care of elderly trolls and
dwarfs, united against young people,” which includes a half-page image
of an aging dwarf sitting next to an aging troll, the latter of whom is
wearing bunny slippers (see Image 12).

The electronic _Discworld: The Ankh-Morpork Map for iPad_ mirrors the
paper copy in that it provides both the street directory and the aerial
view; however, the electronic version has the additional benefit of
being interactive. Readers can zoom in on any detail and tap an icon on
the map to get more information.⁴⁹ For example, the City Watch
Headquarters has two pop-up icons, one for the Headquarters itself,
which provides more information about the Watch, and another with
information about the City’s legal system. The aerial view, referred to
as a “Living Map,” contains a three-dimensional city landscape and the
same informational pop-up boxes along with the added dimensions of sound
and movement. When opened, the bird’s-eye view of the city is married
with birdsong and by the muted sounds of a city. As readers zoom closer,
the sounds focus on those of the areas being viewed, such as the squeaks
and creaks of the Clacks Tower, the river’s slow burbling and bubbling,
sizzles of fuses being lit and their subsequent small explosions outside
the Guild of Alchemists, the noises of animals squealing and clucking,
and near the Opera House the notes of a musical rehearsal, complete with
fragments of songs and the stage director’s voice in the background.
Movements appear in smoking chimneys and a huge number of people of all
species purposefully wandering about the city. Many of these are
familiar Discworld characters who, when tapped, say something and have
pop-up information cards that can be read. Commander Vimes, for
instance, is accompanied by the whistle sounds of the watch, and the
voice-over, “We’re a bit short-staffed, so if I give you a cigarette
would you mind kicking yourself in the teeth?” Granny Weatherwax’s
comment is similarly typical: “Now you be quiet, Gytha Ogg, and don’t
you criticize nobody unless you can walk a mile in her shoes!” Pratchett
himself makes a couple of unattributed appearances, first in a character
named Silas T. Firefly, who looks remarkably like Pratchett, and also in
the voice of C.M.O.T. Dibbler, whose “Sausage inna bun. Sausage inna
bun. Both ends meet—don’t ask me which _kind_ of meat, both ends meet”
(my transcription) sounds remarkably like Pratchett’s voice.

[]

12. _TWILIGHT CANYONS_ FROM _THE COMPLEAT ANKH-MORPORK_, BY DISCWORLD
EMPORIUM (REPRODUCED BY PERMISSION OF THE DISCWORLD EMPORIUM).

The maps and the illustrations in the City Guide all have a sepia wash
with yellow and green overtones, and the artwork is done in acrylic inks
on illustrators board; this conveys the mood of the maps perfectly,
providing just enough detail to be interesting while still conveying a
slightly older look that suits Discworld’s time period. From the
perspective of a character within Discworld, all of the maps could be
useful for finding one’s way around the city, and the electronic version
would have the added bonus of working by magic. They also provide a
sense of proportional relationships—how far away one street is from
another, for instance—as well as information about where various places
are located. This could be interesting for Discworld readers, who might
be curious as to these locations, as well as potentially useful for
Discworld inhabitants, although here at least one Discworld character
might disagree: Granny Weatherwax, who “didn’t like maps. She felt
instinctively that they sold the landscape short” (_Abroad_ 28). Her
comment is accurate, as this is certainly what maps do if one assumes
they are expected to provide a literal representation of the landscape.
However, most maps are not intended to be an exact replica, albeit in
miniature, or even scale models of a place, but instead tend to serve as
merely sketches or indications, beginning thoughts to help form one’s
sense of a place. The existence of a map, of either a real or a fantasy
place, can reinforce a sense of the landscape being structured, or
organized, in much the same way as other real places that the readers’
experience has structured. Nicholas Tam addresses the negative aspects
of this effect specifically in relation to the Discworld maps:

  There is something completely bounded about maps. We all know that the
  data they present is highly selective, as is also true for prose, with
  strategic omissions and gaps left for future exploration. Yet the
  boundedness of maps commits to an illusion of having reached a roughly
  finished state, as if everything inside has already been fixed and
  everything outside is still untouched and malleable [25].

Tam goes further, suggesting that “from the perspective of someone
involved in creating a world, particularly in a series that continues to
emerge over time, a map intended to serve as an aid may also be a
suffocating constraint” (26). He raises some sound points here,
particularly since we tend to give maps of real places a certain
authority, perhaps because they give us the illusion that we are in
control of where we are and where we are going. It is important to
remember, though, that this authority is an illusion: maps cannot
actually directly give control, but instead can be used as one of many
tools that provide information and, at times, suggest possible journeys
or potential routings for excursions. In the end, we must take charge of
our travel. By using them as a jumping-off point, or suggestion of
something that might influence the imaginative conception of a place but
not necessarily lock it into being, the Discworld maps are useful as a
springboard. Maps of imaginary places are fun to look at for that very
reason: they pique our curiosity and excite in us a sense of wonder.
Pratchett, not surprisingly, addressed this point as well in relation to
_The Discworld Mapp_, noting, “It’s not _completely_ accurate. It can’t
be. The only accurate map is the one inside my head, and yours” (“I
Needed”; original bold-face).

*****

The nature of fantasy arguably lends itself more to visual
interpretation than many other genres—novels of manners, for instance—in
part because of its strangeness. In fantasy, authors often create places
that no one has ever seen and that do not exist, and must do so in a
tangible enough way that readers can suspend their disbelief and enter
the story without being unceremoniously bumped back into reality when
the first three-headed dragon or talking rock appears. As Maurice Sendak
has noted, “fantasy makes sense only if it’s rooted ten feet deep in
reality” (Hautala), and this comment is particularly apt in relation to
illustration. Fantasy illustration is most effective when it portrays
its fantastic scene in a way that makes it seem both real and
recognizable. One of the ways in which fantasy artists create this
verisimilitude is by relying on “the pictorial conventions associated
with realism: gesture and human expression, spatial depth and natural
light, the inclusion of detail, logical scale relationships, and so on”
(Hackford 172). We see this sort of realism demonstrated in both Paul
Kidby’s and Stephen Player’s illustrations, with their realistically
proportioned characters whose facial expressions make them look like
real people, and with their incredible attention to even the very
smallest details (see Image 13). Similarly, Stephen Briggs’ sketches of
Ankh-Morpork buildings and scenery, as well as such minute items as the
Bursar’s Dried Frog Pills tin, and Bernard Pearson’s designs for coins
and stamps have the effect of creating a sense of authenticity, while
the Discworld Emporium’s use of scale in their maps and the realistic
details of the City Guide provide representations that encumber doubt.
In addition to this sense of realism, though, George Landow argues that
artists of fantasy also need to emphasize “the element of whimsy” (109)
to evoke in the reader a sense of wonder. Certainly the art of Josh
Kirby induces this sense of wonder, his illustrations jam-packed with
fantastic creatures of all sizes and shapes accentuating more elements
of whimsy—in its original meaning of a feeling of dizziness, giddiness,
or vertigo—per square inch than any other fantasy artist may have
achieved. Kidby’s and Player’s art, in contrast, tends to contain more
whimsical overtones than actual whimsy; in other words, their art tends
to be fanciful rather than whimsical, particularly in the ways in which
they include creatures such as dragons, trolls, or the Feegles alongside
their more realistic human counterparts, rendering them in ways that
make them seem believable and, indeed, realistic. As Hackford observes,
“it is this fusion of the familiar and the magical … that animates the
best fantasy art” (172), and certainly when fantastic creatures look the
way they are supposed to, or the way we expect them to, it adds to our
pleasure in the texts.

[]

13. _FEEGLES_, BY STEPHEN PLAYER (REPRODUCED BY PERMISSION OF STEPHEN
PLAYER, PLAYERGALLERY.COM).

Ultimately, good fantasy illustration enlightens readers by bringing
images to life in an instantly familiar way, which allows us to see
something for the first time but with a strong sense of recognition. The
art of Discworld, in all of its incarnations, has exactly this effect,
especially when the various artists’ images are considered together. One
excellent place to view these images is in the Discworld Calendars,
particularly those that are compilations of various artists’ Discworld
illustrations.⁵⁰ These calendars indicate that Pratchett’s Discworld has
now evolved to a point where it can appear in illustrations without the
accompanying texts: there are enough people cognizant of the Discworld
to enjoy the images not just for their own sake, but because they
recognize the place and people they evoke. The wide variety of visual
types reinforce this point: the cover art, the decorations, the lavishly
illustrated novels, the hypotrochoidal texts such as picture books and
maps all provide different kinds of images which, when viewed with
Pratchett’s words on the page in mind, combine into a synergy that
creates a greater whole. Naturally when we first start reading and
looking, there are gaps in our imaginative visions and we inevitably
interpolate among the texts we read and the pictures we see and the
images we create in our minds to approximate a coherent representation,
but as we progress further into the Discworld multiverse we have an
ever-expanding body of mental images, both imagined and remembered, that
we might consciously or unconsciously summon to produce a kind of higher
synergistic experience. In this way, while each of the artist’s images
add something different to our own vision of Discworld, when taken
collectively the art they have produced creates in our imaginations the
color of octarine.

Notes

1. This, incidentally, is one of the concerns every time a film version
(to choose one of the most typical types of adaptation for any popular
work) is created: so many millions of people all over the world have
such a strong sense of how they envision the Discworld, and who the
people are who inhabit it, that re-envisioning it in any way is a risky
business at best.

2. Including _The Unseen University Cut-Out Book_, an amazingly detailed
cardboard model needing assembly, along the lines of the well-known
paper model of the Globe Theatre.

3. The illustrations for _The Colour of Magic_ and _The Light Fantastic_
graphic novels illustrate Scott Rockwell’s adaptation of Pratchett’s
prose, just as Graham Higgins’ illustrations for _Guards! Guards! A
Discworld Big Comic_ illustrate Stephen Briggs’ adaptation. While _Mort:
A Discworld Big Comic_ was adapted by Pratchett himself, Higgins’
illustrations were still created for the adaptation rather than for the
original novel.

4. Josh Kirby provided some of the artwork for computer games including
_Discworld I_ (TWG/Perfect 10 Production, Psygnosis Games, 1995);
_Missing Presumed…_ (Perfect Entertainment/Psygnosis, 1997); and
_Discworld Noir_ (Perfect/TWG, 1999). Paul Kidby produced the art and
illustrations for the GURPS _Discworld Roleplaying Game_ (Steve Jackson
Games, 2002). Paul Kidby, Bernard Pearson, Peter Dennis, and Ian
Mitchell provided cover artwork and game card images for the _Discworld:
Ankh-Morpork_ board game (Treefrog Games, 2011).

5. This ignores the question of whether all reading is, at some level, a
visual semiotic process.

6. It is worth noting that while fantasy art has its roots in the
illuminated manuscripts of the Middle Ages, it did not really take off
again until the _beaux-arts_ movement in mid- to late–Victorian Britain
with the art of the Pre-Raphaelites, along with William Morris and the
English Arts and Crafts Movement, when the connections between images
and the texts they illuminated had a resurgence in the popular
imagination. Though early twentieth century fantasy artists “were
primarily employed creating science fiction illustrations for pulps”
(Layne 65), today the field has broadened to encompass fantasy art
“involving dungeons, dragons, star warriors, and alien worlds of every
imaginable ilk” (Layne 65). The 1970s was a “critical decade” in the
history of fantasy art, with films like _2001: A Space Odyssey_ (1968)
and _Star Wars_ (1977) having an influence not only on the genres of
science fiction and fantasy as a whole but also on its illustration and
how we thought about it (Frank). Moreover, the 1970s were important
because that was when artists started becoming more recognized: they
began receiving contracts for work, getting their art back from the
publishers, and signing their works in ways that made it harder to crop
out their signatures (Frank). The Hugo Award for Best Artist was
established in 1953, and other awards followed, including the World
Fantasy Award for Art in 1975, awards for art from the British Science
Fiction Association and the British Fantasy Society in the 1970s, and
the Chesley Award in 1985, named for science fiction artist Chesley
Bonestell and given in several categories, including Best Cover
Illustration awards for hardcover and paperback books as well as
magazines, Best Gaming Related Work, Best Three Dimensional Work, Best
Interior Art, and others.

7. This particular attitude towards the genres of both fantasy and
children’s literature, while common enough in not only everyday
conversation but also the circles of literary criticism, is perhaps best
expressed in Jonathan Myerson’s short piece, “Harry Potter and the Sad
Grownups,” which appeared in _The Independent_ in 2001. Myerson
maintains that, as an adult, he reads novels for the moral,
psychological, political, or sexual truths that he can gain from reading
them and that he “cannot hope to come closer to any of these truths
through a children’s novel, where nice clean white lines are painted
between the good guys and the evil ones, where magic exists, and where
there are adults on hand to delineate rules” and that, furthermore,
adult readers need to “get real, please, there is so much good fiction
out there, written specifically for your adult age group, written with
you in mind. Please, next time, choose that. Don’t keep running away
from life” (Myerson).

8. It is worth noting that cover artists earn a one-time fee for a
cover, while authors get royalties for each book sold; thus, the more
copies sold, the more profit an author makes, but the artist’s profits
remain static. This lack of financial recognition also implies the kind
of second-rate status, or devaluation, that at least certain forms of
artwork suffer in relation to the text.

9. The list of names in the field is quite lengthy, depending on the
field in which the theorists locate themselves (semiotics, children’s
literature, narratology, and visual media, to name but a few). That
said, the theorists’ works I have found the most useful in influencing
my thinking for this essay include Perry Nodelman’s _The Pleasures of
the Text_, W. J. T. Mitchell’s _Picture Theory_, Maria Nikolajeva and
Carole Scott’s _How Picturebooks Work_, Uri Shulevitz’s _Writing with
Pictures_, and Maurice Sendak’s _Caldecott & Co.: Notes on Books &
Pictures_.

10. According to Sipe, Philip Pullman uses the musical term
“counterpoint” to explore the process of reading and interpreting text
and illustrations, while Allan Ahlberg uses “antiphonal” effect to mean
music that is sung alternately in a kind of call-and-response pattern.
Other theorists invoke terms from science: Miller uses “interference”
(from wave theory) to refer to the way two different wave patterns may
combine to form a complex new pattern, while Moebius draws a parallel to
“plate tectonics.” Semioticians like Lewis call it “polysystemy,” which
means piecing together text from different kinds of signifying systems,
“relaying” (Barthes), “irony” (Nodelman), and “congruency [and]
deviation” (Schwarcz), the latter of which considers the way pictures
can present images that either are harmonious and complementary or that
veer away from the text to oppose it, or telling a different story in
the two media (Sipe 98–101).

11. He also references other theorists who expand on Jakobson’s ideas,
suggesting that both Perry Nodelman and German Romantic philosopher G.
E. Lessing distinguish between arts that are perceived simultaneously
(such as painting and sculpture) and thus experienced concurrently, and
those perceived successively (such as music and literature) and thus
experienced linearly.

12. Nodelman’s exact phrase is “Illustrators are subsidiary artists,
their work a parasite on work that already exists” (79).

13. This essay focuses on the book covers for the first editions of
hardcovers and paperbacks published in England. Although some of the
earlier American covers were done by other artists, these are more
difficult to trace and not only less interesting but also, I would
argue, less influential, than the covers by Kirby and Kidby. Covers for
the audio books tend to vary, depending on whether they are published in
England or the United States and whether they are abridged or
unabridged. Older audio CDs tended to include images from either Kirby’s
or (for books published after 2001) Kidby’s covers, while some of the
most recent ones have updated covers by a variety of artists.

14. Kirby (1928–2001) studied at the Liverpool City School of Art before
moving to London and working in advertising; early in his career he also
created images for jigsaw puzzles, before moving on to illustrating
covers for pulp fiction and science fiction novels and anthologies,
including cover images for works by Ray Bradbury and Ron Goulart (“Out
of”). In addition to the Discworld illustrations, he created a series of
paintings entitled _Voyage of the Ayeguy_, regarded as his _tour de
force_, which tackled the challenges and emotions experienced by a
spaceman protagonist during his mission across a strange planet (“Out
of”). Kirby won the British Fantasy Award for Professional Artist in
1996.

15. _Carnival_ is a term usually associated with the work of Russian
scholar Mikhail Bakhtin and his theory of laughter; his seminal work on
the topic, _Rabelais and His World_, focused on the medieval carnival,
which was marked by a kind of chaotic excess in terms of the way one
experiences the world, and embodied the drive towards liberation and
subversion. Linda Hutcheon notes that Bakhtin reveals the paradox of
carnival in its “authorized transgression of norms” (Lacombe 517), and
other critics have commented on its patriarchal attitudes, especially in
the ways the female body and voice are represented. Modern carnival
employs ritual language and gesture, and often focuses on the grotesque;
it consciously celebrates the resistance of “order, closure and the
sacrosanct” (517). Visual carnival examples appear throughout the works
of Hieronymus Bosch, Pieter Bruegel and Marc Chagall—all artists whose
influence over Kirby was profound.

16. Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s (1525–1569) paintings of the Tower of
Babel perhaps best illustrate this sense of bustling human life.

17. The Italian painter Tiziano Vecelli, known as Titian (?1488–1576)
and the Flemish Baroque painter Paul Rubens (1577–1640) were both
recognized during their lifetimes for their portrait painting, and both
were especially highly regarded for their use of color. The English
painter William Hogarth (1697–1764) also painted portraits, and was
considered tremendously influential on satirical political illustration
due to his rendering of contemporary moral subjects. Hieronymus Bosch
(1450–1516) was known for his complex and dense paintings that used
fantastic imagery and portrayed complicated inventions; his triptych
entitled _The Garden of Earthly Delights_ (probably dating to about
1504, though it could have been painted any time between 1490 and 1510)
was one of his masterpieces. The Anglo-Welsh artist and illustrator
Frank Brangwyn (1867–1956) was also a muralist, designer, and engraver.

18. For both _The Colour of Magic_ and _The Light Fantastic_, Kirby
shows Twoflower having literally four eyes, which was apparently a
misinterpretation of Pratchett’s reference to spectacles. When Twoflower
first appears, the beggar Blind Hugh “found himself looking up into a
face with four eyes in it” (_Color_ 10)—one wonders, of course, how
Blind Hugh can see this in any case—and Twoflower is shortly thereafter
referred to as “the four-eyed man” (_Color_ 11); later, in _Interesting
Times_, Rincewind refers to Twoflower as “you four-eyed little git!”
(108). By the time he painted the cover for _Interesting Times_, Kirby
had started reading the novels (rather than relying on a short digest of
them), and corrected his image of Twoflower to appear wearing glasses,
as he does on the covers of _Interesting Times_ as well as the omnibus
edition of _The Colour of Magic &_ _The Light Fantastic_.

19. The album is also mirrored in Pratchett’s text, initially in a
reference to “one out of three ain’t bad” (2)—a nod to the song on the
album “Two Out of Three Ain’t Bad”—and later with “The flower-bed
erupted. Modo had a brief vision of flames and something arcing into the
sky before his vision was blotted out by a rain of beads, feathers, and
soft black petals” (344), corresponding to much of the cover image of
Meat Loaf’s album.

20. When Kirby created the cover for _Equal Rites_ he had not yet met
Pratchett personally and did not realize they had a completely different
perception of witches until after the painting was finished; however,
“[a]lthough they debated the point, no changes were called for”
(Suckling 102).

21. The sizes of paintings for the covers were usually four times the
width and height of the paperback cover. The process took Kirby about
eight weeks from start to finish, including the time to read (or scan)
the novel and create the design; typically it took him four weeks to
complete the illustration itself.

22. Kirby also painted three paintings to be used for Dave Greenslade’s
musical interpretation, _From the Discworld_. Containing fourteen tracks
of music, inspired by passages, characters, and settings, the CD’s cover
image is Kirby’s _Eric IV: Discworld I_, from _Eric_, which shows
Rincewind and Eric riding on the Luggage far above the Disc, while the
back cover features an image from Kirby’s _Unseen University_. A
painting titled _When Will We Three Meet Again?_ appears in the booklet,
showing the opening scene from _Wyrd Sisters_ with Nanny Ogg, Granny
Weatherwax, and Magrat. A third painting, titled _Ankh-Morpork_, was
commissioned for the CD but not used, and appears in _A Blink of the
Screen_.

23. Kidby is self-taught and always focused on his goal of becoming a
self-employed artist. After graduating from high school, he worked
making false teeth, painting blinds in a factory, and designing greeting
cards and packaging before moving on to magazine covers and then to
illustrating for Pratchett. His artistic influences are wide-ranging,
though he specifically notes Arthur Rackham, the Pre-Raphaelites,
Alphonse Mucha, Norman Rockwell, Gustave Doré, Albrecht Dürer, and
Maxfield Parrish as inspirations (Kidby “RE: Enquiry”). In addition to
his Discworld art, he also paints faerie art (much of which can be seen
in his _Le Royaume Enchanté_), and creates sculptures of fantastic
creatures such as dragons, winged horses, griffins, and mermaids, among
others.

24. Kidby also created the cover and chapter headings for Pratchett’s
_Dodger_, a non–Discworld novel set in the same world as _Nation_.

25. Though _Night Watch_ is often referred to as Kidby’s first Discworld
cover, he actually painted a number of Discworld-related covers before
2002, including those for _The Science of Discworld_, _Nanny Ogg’s
Cookbook_, and _The Last Hero_. In addition, his covers for many of the
diaries, maps, and _The Pratchett Portfolio_ appeared well before _Night
Watch_.

26. The painting’s full title is “The Company of Captain Frans Banning
Cocq and Lieutenant Willem van Ruytenburch Preparing to March Out”;
painted in 1642 by Rembrandt van Rijn, it is displayed in the
Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam.

27. The painting for the _Night Watch_ cover exemplifies Howells’
comment that “art as history and art as commodity appear … to be
inextricably linked” (Howells 75). During Rembrandt’s time, it was not
uncommon for wealthy patrons to pay to have themselves included in his
paintings, and this happened for his painting of _The Night Watch._
Kidby was aware of this tradition, and when it transpired that “there
had been a charity auction at a Discworld event whilst the book was
being written and three fans had paid to be written into the ‘Night
Watch’ story…. It therefore seemed creatively fitting that the Discworld
auction winners should also have their portraits painted into the cover.
The original artwork is now owned by one of those featured on the cover”
(Lee).

28. In 1998, Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs released _Discworld’s
Unseen University Diary 1998_ with illustrations by Paul Kidby; this was
followed by several more diaries in the same format, with illustrated
front and back covers pertaining to their topic. For instance, _Lu-Tze’s
Yearbook_ has a picture of Lu-Tze and his broom on the front, with an
image of two monks being chased by Mrs. Cosmopilite on the back, while
_Discworld’s Ankh-Morpork City Watch Diary 1999_ has front images of
Carrot, framed by a badge shape, and a back image of the badge sporting
the letters AMCW and the motto, “Fabricati Diem, Pvnc.” Other diaries
include _Discworld Assassins’ Guild Yearbook and Diary 2000, Discworld
Fools’ Guild Yearbook Diary 2001, Discworld Thieves’ Guild Yearbook &
Diary 2002, Discworld (Reformed) Vampyre’s Diary 2003_, and the
_Ankh-Morpork Post Office Handbook Discworld Diary 2007_. In addition to
being handy marketing tools that increase Discworld visibility (and
revenue), these are also fun for readers who enjoy suspending belief in
the Discworld in a way that exceeds merely reading the books.

29. Stephen Briggs is a British thespian and civil servant, and has
recorded a number of Pratchett’s Discworld novels for audio book
editions. He is the author/updater of the _Discworld Companion_, and
also created a number of Discworld merchandise items, such as the Unseen
University scarf (Smythe “Terry Pratchett”).

30. While in some ways the series had been building towards heavier
overtones of social and political criticism for awhile, and hit a kind
of stride in _The Fifth Elephant_ as well as _The Amazing Maurice_, I
would still argue that _Night Watch_ is the novel where that tone was
sustained throughout the entire book.

31. See Ekman’s _Here Be Dragons: Exploring Fantasy Maps and Settings_
for an extensive discussion of this convention.

32. Paul Kidby and Colin Smythe have both confirmed that Kidby was the
artist here (Kidby “RE: Enquiry” and Smythe “Re: Query”). In some ways,
the lack of attribution adds to the verisimilitude of the ubiquitous
presence of Victorian political cartoonists.

33. Bernard and Isobel Pearson, the founders of the Discworld Emporium,
have worked with Pratchett for nearly thirty years, “creating numerous
Discworld artefacts, sculptures and games as well as collaborating with
Terry on books such as _The Unseen University Cut Out Book_, _The
Discworld Almanack_, _The World of Poo_ and _The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_”
(Mitchell “RE: Discworld Emporium”).

34. This translates roughly as “How much is that dog in the window?”

35. Two other versions of Discworld Companions were published before
_Turtle Recall_, both written by Pratchett and Briggs and illustrated by
Briggs: these were _The Discworld Companion_ and _The New Discworld
Companion_. This third version includes all of the text and
illustrations from the second, and was expanded to include some of the
material from the first that had been deleted from the second for
reasons of space.

36. The Discworld Emporium also publishes _A History of Discworld
Stamps,_ “an illustrated history of how the stamps began on an A3
double-sided poster presented in a near-facsimile copy of the very first
cover created for Waterstone’s Booksellers in conjunction with
Transworld publishers for the launch of _Going Postal_. The cover bears
some of the very first stamps, as described in _Going Postal_ and seen
in the Sky1 film adaptation. This item is a fabulous introduction to the
world of Discworld Stamps and contains never before seen material for
the hardened collector” (Discworld Emporium “Description”).

37. In the American edition, these chapter headings are simply printed
in a different font; in the British edition, the _Mr. Bunnsy_ text is
inset into a scrap of parchment with decorations such as butterflies,
flowers, brambles, or mushrooms. Artist David Wyatt attended art college
in Reading, and is an acclaimed children’s book illustrator and cover
artist. He has created illustrations for a number of fantasy works
including books by Alan Garner, Diana Wynne Jones, J. R. R. Tolkien,
Brian Jacques, Megan Whalen Turner, and Ursula Le Guin.

38. Stephen Player has created illustrations for a number of science
fiction and fantasy works, including covers for the dramatic adaptations
of _Wyrd Sisters, Mort,_ and _Guards! Guards!_, among others. While
studying illustration at the Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts in
London he met horror writer Clive Barker, and after graduating began
publishing artwork for science fiction, fantasy, horror, and children’s
literature. He has also illustrated graphic novels and video game
covers, and has created artwork for film, television, and electronic
games. He has won a number of awards for his artwork, including the
British Science Fiction and Fantasy Association award in 1994 for _The
Streets of Ankh-Morpork_.

39. Leonard’s perfect circle is connected with the story of Leonardo da
Vinci being asked by the Pope to “submit some of his work for a
competition for a new commission. Leonardo kept putting him off, saying
he was too busy, as the requests grew more and more insistent. In the
end, to avoid the Pope having him arrested, he drew, freehand, at arms
length, a perfect circle on a sheet of paper and sent it to the Pope,
who promptly gave him the commission. The reason for this is that to
draw a perfect circle, freehand and unsupported is one of the hardest
things possible to draw, achieved by few artists, usually only after
much practice and was for a long time considered to be the pinnacle of
artistic achievement” (Breebaart).

40. The metaphor seems doubly apt when one sees the image in motion,
with the curves being created from start to finish in a repeating loop.
The involuntary “It does move!” elicited from this sight echoes Om’s
faithful followers in _Small Gods_ and their watch-phrase “The turtle
moves!” (31). Moreover, the shape serendipitously approximates an aerial
view of the Great A’Tuin with the Discworld perched on top of its back.
The closest theory I am aware of that relates to this idea appears in
Gérard Genette’s _Paratexts_, where the term _paratexts_ refers to
liminal texts that serve as a kind of a threshold “between the inside
and the outside” or on the fringes of other texts (2). In contrast, the
term _hypotrochoidal texts_ refers to texts that are generated from
within another text but that exist both inside and outside it, for
characters and readers concurrently. I am indebted to Bill Spruiell for
listening to my convoluted thoughts about this concept and then finding
the perfect image with which to express it.

41. I will refer to Pratchett’s _Where’s My Cow?_ as a picture book,
which is a book whose story relies on both words and pictures to tell
the story, and the same-titled book that young Sam and Vimes read as a
story book, a book that contains both words and pictures but whose
pictures serve to decorate rather than extend the text and thus do not
serve the same sort of interdependent function as those in a true
picture book.

42. Grant began studying at the Brassey Institute of Fine Arts in
Hastings, Sussex at the early age of twelve, and describes himself as “a
nonconformist with a Bohemian attitude” (“Grant” 245). While his
approach is rooted in traditional fine art, he favors fantasy and horror
genres, and his illustrations have also appeared in children’s books and
posters, romance, historical literature, and general fiction.

43. The title page also credits Bernard and Isobel Pearson for
assistance, but much of the turn of phrase seems very Pratchettian.
Artist Peter Dennis studied illustration at Liverpool Art College and
has worked as an illustrator for over forty years. In addition to
creating the illustrations for _The World of Poo,_ he contributed
illustrations for the _Discworld: Ankh-Morpork_ board game and has
worked with the Discworld Emporium on _The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_
(Mitchell “RE: Discworld Emporium”).

44. “Nanny had nothing against witches being married. It wasn’t as if
there were rules. She herself had had many husbands, and had even been
married to three of them” (Pratchett, “The Sea and Little Fishes” 224).

45. This consists of an anecdote about a group of Pseudopolitan soldiers
who hid beneath cabbage leaves in a trench and ended up being planted by
the Sto Militia (_Almanak_ 87). The alternate spelling of the word
_Almanack_ mirrors the variable spelling of the Discworld population in
general.

46. Pratchett continues, “Anyway, what is a fantasy but a space beyond
which There Be Dragons? On the Discworld we know that There Be Dragons
Everywhere. They might not all have scales and forked tongues, but they
Be Here all right, grinning and jostling and trying to sell you
souvenirs” (“Foreword” n. pag).

47. The area of fictional cartography is relatively new in relation to
literary theory as a whole, having really only emerged in the last
twenty or so years as a burgeoning area of study. That said, as a field
it is far too vast to do justice to here, and so my attention is focused
primarily on the illustrative, or aesthetic, aspect of the Discworld
maps. For an extensive and detailed introduction to the fictional
cartography of fantasy, see Stefan Ekman’s _Here Be Dragons: Exploring
Fantasy Maps and Settings_; for a shorter but excellent overview, see
Nicholas Tam’s essay “Here Be Cartographers: Reading the Fantasy Map.”

48. “Ian Mitchell & Reb Voyce joined the Discworld Emporium in 2006
after training at the Falmouth College of Arts. They have been lucky
enough to collaborate with Terry on the _Compleat Ankh-Morpork_ and are
currently working on _The Compleat Discworld_ as well as _A Compleat
Discworld Bestiary_” (Mitchell “RE: Discworld Emporium”). See earlier
notes for biographical information on Bernard Pearson, Isobel Pearson,
and Peter Dennis.

49. Readers can also take guided tours of the city, zooming in on
various places and tapping the screen to get a pop-up information card
and sometimes a picture, in addition to collecting points for their
various achievements.

50. There have been annual Discworld calendars since at least 1999. Some
have featured the artwork of a single artist—Josh Kirby (1999, 2002,
2011), Paul Kidby (2003 and 2012), and Marc Simonetti (2013); others
have featured a selection of artists, and have included artwork by
Stephen Player, Angelo Rinaldi, Chris Riddell, David Frankland, David
Wyatt, Dominic Harman, Edward Miller, Gino D’Achille, Graham Higgins,
Jackie Morris, James Mayhew, Jon Sullivan, Les Edwards, Mark Edwards,
Melvyn Grant, Paul Kidby, Sandy Nightingale, and Stuart Williams.

Works Cited

Adams, Tamla Ebony. “Icon: Masculine Myths and the Visual Culture of
Fantastic Art Illustration.” Diss. University of Minnesota, 2006.
_ProQuest_. 29 June 2012.

Beeton, Mrs. [Isabella Mary]. _The Book of Household Management_.
London: S.O. Beeton, 1861.

Breebaart, Leo, ed. “The Last Hero.” _The Annotated Pratchett File,
v.9.0_. L-Space. 2 Feb. 2008. Web. 20 Oct. 2012.

Briggs, Stephen. _Armoured Raven_. Ink drawing. 1994. _Turtle Recall:
The Discworld Companion … So Far_. By Terry Pratchett and Stephen
Briggs. London: Gollancz, 2012. 137.

_____. “Many Miles Across Tortuous Terrain….” _The Discworld Mapp_. By
Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player. London:
Corgi, 1995. N. pag.

_____. “Mapping the City.” _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. By Terry
Pratchett and Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player. London: Corgi,
1993. N. pag.

_____. _A View in the Shades_. Ink drawing. 1994. _Turtle Recall: The
Discworld Companion … So Far_. By Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs.
London: Gollancz, 2012. 100.

Byatt, A. S. “Foreword.” _A Blink of the Screen: Collected Shorter
Fiction_. By Terry Pratchett. London: Doubleday, 2012. 11–15.

Cherry, David A. “An Appreciation of Michael Whelan.” _Bucconeer: The
56th World Science Fiction Convention_. Baltimore. Aug. 1998. Address.
Web. 21 June 2012.

The Discworld Emporium. “Description of _A History of Discworld
Stamps_.” Discworld Emporium. N.d. Web. 15 June 2013.

_____. “Twilight Canyons.” Ink drawing on board. _The Compleat
Ankh-Morpork_. By Terry Pratchett and The Discworld Emporium. London:
Doubleday, 2012. 19.

Ekman, Stefan. _Here Be Dragons: Exploring Fantasy Maps and Settings_.
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2013.

Eliot, T.S. “Tradition and the Individual Talent.” _The Egoist_ 4:6
(Sept. 1919): 54–55.

“Entrevista a Paul Kibdy [sic], magia con las manos y mucho cuteness
‘Interview with Paul Kibdy [sic], magic hands and much cuteness.’” _Be
Literature_. 4 Mar. 2013. Web. 15 Apr. 2013.

Frank, Jane. “Historical Overview, from the 1970s to 2000.” _Science
Fiction and Fantasy Artists of the Twentieth Century_. Ed. Jane Frank.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009. 35–68. _MyLibrary._ 21 June 2012.

Genette, Gérard. _Paratexts_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1997.

Grant, Melvyn, illus. _Where’s My Cow?_ By Terry Pratchett. New York:
HarperCollins, 2005.

“Grant, Melvin.” _Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists of the Twentieth
Century_. Ed. Jane Frank. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009. 245–46.
_MyLibrary._ 21 June 2012.

Hackford, Terry Reece. “Fantastic Visions: Illustration of the _Arabian
Nights_.” _The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and Art_. Ed. Roger C.
Schlobin. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982. 143–75.

Harvey, Lloyd. “Paul Kidby Interview.” _Inside the Artist’s Studio_.
http://artistinsight.blogspot.com/2010/01/paul-kidby-inrerview.html 4
Mar. 2010. Web. 30 May 2012.

Hautala, Laura. “CJM’s Sendak On Sendak: Where the Child Things Are
Rather Grown Up.” _The San Francisco Appeal_. 9 Sept. 2009. Web. 29 July
2013.

Heller, Steven, and Marshall Arisman, eds. _The Education of an
Illustrator_. New York: Allsworth, 2000.

Howells, Richard, and Joaquim Negreiros. _Visual Culture_. 2003. 2d ed.
Cambridge: Polity, 2012.

“Hypotrochoid.” Def. _The Oxford English Dictionary_. 15 Apr. 2013.

_The Illustrator Who Makes Terry Pratchett’s Characters Come Alive!—Paul
Kidby and His Magical Creations_. By Ms. Z. _The Genius Salon_. 27 Nov.
2012. Web. 30 Nov. 2012.

Jean, Vadim, and Terry Pratchett. _Terry Pratchett’s_ The Colour of
Magic_: The Illustrated Screenplay_. London: Gollancz, 2008.

Jean, Vadim, Terry Pratchett, Bill Kaye and Stephen Player. _Terry
Pratchett’s_ Hogfather_: The Illustrated Screenplay_. London: Gollancz,
2006.

Kidby, Paul. _The Art of Discworld_. By Terry Pratchett and Paul Kidby.
New York: HarperCollins, 2004. N. pag.

_____. _Cohen the Barbarian_. Oil on board. Private collection.
_Discworld and Beyond: A Retrospective_. Hampshire, UK: St. Barbe Museum
& Art Gallery, 2012. 10.

_____. _Discworld and Beyond: A Retrospective_. Hampshire, UK: St. Barbe
Museum and Art Gallery, 2012. 10.

_____. _Granny Weatherwax Standing_. Pencil drawing. Private collection.
_Discworld and Beyond: A Retrospective_. Hampshire, UK: St. Barbe Museum
and Art Gallery, 2012. 36.

_____. _Granny Weatherwax with Bees._ Pencil drawing. Private
collection. _The Pratchett Portfolio_. By Terry Pratchett and Paul
Kidby. London: Gollancz, 1996. N. pag.

_____. _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_. Cover image. Pencil drawing. Private
collection.

_____. _The Pratchett Portfolio_. By Terry Pratchett and Paul Kidby.
London: Gollancz, 1996.

_____. “RE: Enquiry.” E-mail to the author. 13 July 2013.

_____. _Rincewind in XXXX_. Oil on board. Private collection. _The Art
of Discworld_. By Terry Pratchett and Paul Kidby. New York:
HarperCollins, 2004. N. pag.

_____, illus. _The Folklore of Discworld._ By Terry Pratchett and
Jacqueline Simpson. London: Corgi, 2009.

_____, illus. _A Hat Full of Sky._ By Terry Pratchett. 2004. London:
Corgi, 2005.

_____, illus. _The Last Hero_. By Terry Pratchett. 2001. New York:
HarperCollins, 2002.

_____, illus. _Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_. By Terry Pratchett and Stephen
Briggs. London: Transworld, 1999.

_____, illus. _A Tourist Guide to Lancre_. By Terry Pratchett and
Stephen Briggs. London: Corgi, 1998.

_____, illus. _The Wee Free Men._ By Terry Pratchett. London: Corgi,
2003.

Kidby, Paul, and Vanessa Kidby. _Le Royaume Enchanté_. Paris: Daniel
Maghen, 2009.

Kirby, Josh. _Hogfather_. 1996. Oil painting. Private collection.

_____. _The Josh Kirby Discworld Portfolio_. 1993. Intro. Nigel
Suckling. London: Paper Tiger, 2001.

_____. _Josh Kirby Poster Book_. Intro. Terry Pratchett. London: Corgi,
1989.

_____. _Reaper Man_. 1991. Oil painting. Private collection.

_____, illus. _From the Discworld_. By Dave Greenslade. London: Virgin,
1994. CD.

Kress, Gunther, and Theo van Leeuwen. _Reading Images: The Grammar of
Visual Design_. 1996. 2d ed. New York: Routledge, 2006.

Lacombe, Michéle. “Carnival.” _Encyclopedia of Contemporary Literary
Theory: Approaches, Scholars, Terms_. Ed. Irena R. Makaryk. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1993. 516–18.

Landow, George P. “And the World Became Strange: Realms of Literary
Fantasy.” _The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and Art_. Ed. Roger C.
Schlobin. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982. 105–42.

Langford, David. _Josh Kirby: A Cosmic Cornucopia_. Illus. Josh Kirby.
Foreword by Tom Holt. London: Paper Tiger, 1999.

_____. “Pratchett, Terry (David John). _St. James Guide to Fantasy
Writers_. Ed. David Pringle. New York: St. James, 1996. 486–88.

Layne, Gwendolyn. “Mum’s the Word: Sexuality in Victorian Fantasy
Illustration (and Beyond).” _Eros in the Mind’s Eye: Sexuality and the
Fantastic in Art and Film_. Ed. Donald Palumbo. New York: Greenwood,
1986. 59–74.

Lee. “Fantastic Fantasy Artwork #2: Night Watch (Discworld: Book 29) by
Paul Kidby.” _Fantasy Book Review_. 11 Oct. 2011. Web. 27 Oct. 2011.

Le Guin, Ursula K. “The Despised Genres: Women Writers and the Canon.”
University of Calgary. 24 Sept. 1996. Lecture.

Meat Loaf. _Bat Out of Hell_. Sony, 1977. LP.

Mitchell, Ian. “RE: Discworld Emporium.” E-mail to the author. 18 July
2013.

Mitchell, W. J. T. _Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
Representation_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Myerson, Jonathan. “Harry Potter and the Sad Grown-Ups.” _Independent_
14 Nov. 2001: N. pag. 2 Mar. 2007.

Nikolajeva, Maria, and Carole Scott. _How Picturebooks Work_. New York:
Routledge, 2001.

Nodelman, Perry. _Words about Pictures: The Narrative Art of Children’s
Picture Books_. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1988.

“Out of This World: The Art of Josh Kirby.” 15 June–30 Sept. 2007.
_Walker Art Gallery Exhibition_ 2007. Liverpool, UK. 10 Oct. 2012.

Player, Stephen. _Feegles_. Watercolor painting. Private collection.
_Terry Pratchett’s Discworld Collectors’ Edition Calendar 2008_. London:
Gollancz, 2007. N. pag.

_____. _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. Watercolor painting. Cover image.
_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. By Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs.
London: Corgi, 1993.

_____, illus. _The Discworld Mapp_. By Terry Pratchett and Stephen
Briggs. London: Corgi, 1995.

_____, illus. _The Illustrated Wee Free Men_. By Terry Pratchett.
London: Doubleday, 2008.

_____, illus. _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. By Terry Pratchett and
Stephen Briggs. London: Corgi, 1993.

Pratchett, Terry. _The Colour of Magic_. 1983. Illus. Josh Kirby.
London: Corgi, 1985.

_____. “Discworld & Beyond.” _Locus_ (Dec. 1999): 4, 73–76.

_____. _Equal Rites_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1987.

_____. _Faust_ _Eric_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1990.

_____. _The First Discworld Novels: The Colour of Magic & The Light
Fantastic_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Colin Smythe, 1999.

_____. “Foreword.” 1999. _The Colour of Magic_. 1983. Illus. Josh Kirby.
London: Corgi, 2012.

_____. _Going Postal_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2004.

_____. “Here Be Dragons … and Here … and Here….” _The Discworld Mapp._
By Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player. London:
Corgi, 1995. N. pag.

_____. _Hogfather_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1996.

_____. “I Needed a Map.” _The Discworld Mapp_. By Terry Pratchett and
Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player. London: Corgi, 1995. N. pag.

_____. _Interesting Times_. 1994. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi,
1995.

_____. _Making Money_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2007.

_____. _Maskerade_. 1995. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1996.

_____. _Monstrous Regiment_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2003.

_____. _Mort_. 1987. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1988.

_____. _Night Watch_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2002.

_____. “A Note to Readers of This Text-Only Version of THE LAST HERO.”
E-mail from Colin Smythe. 19 July 2012.

_____. _Reaper Man_. 1991. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. “The Sea and Little Fishes.” 1998. _A Blink of the Screen:
Collected Shorter Fiction_. London: Doubleday, 2012. 218–67.

_____. _Small Gods_. 1992. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1993.

_____. _Snuff_. Illus. Paul Kidby. New York: HarperCollins, 2011.

_____. _Soul Music_. 1994. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1995.

_____. _Sourcery._ 1988. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1989.

_____. “The Streets of Ankh-Morpork.” _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. By
Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player. London:
Corgi, 1993. N. pag.

_____. _Thud!_ Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2005.

_____. _The Truth._ 2000. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 2001.

_____. _Unseen Academicals_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2009.

_____. _Witches Abroad_. 1991. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. _The World of Poo_. By Miss Felicity Beedle. Assisted by Bernard
and Isobel Pearson. Illus. Peter Dennis. London: Transworld, 2012.

_____. _Wyrd Sisters_. 1988. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Corgi, 1989.

Pratchett, Terry, and Stephen Briggs. _The Discworld Companion._ London:
Gollancz, 1994.

_____. _The Discworld Mapp_. Illus. Stephen Player. London: Corgi, 1995.

_____. _The New Discworld Companion_. London: Gollancz, 2004.

_____. _The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. Illus. Stephen Player. London:
Corgi, 1993.

_____. _A Tourist Guide to Lancre_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Corgi,
1998.

_____. _Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_. London:
Gollancz, 2012.

Pratchett, Terry, and The Discworld Emporium. _The Complete
Ankh-Morpork_. London: Doubleday, 2012.

_____. _Discworld: The Ankh-Morpork Map_. London: Transworld, 2013. App.

Pratchett, Terry, and Paul Kidby. _The Art of Discworld_. New York:
HarperCollins, 2004.

Pratchett, Terry, and Bernard Pearson. _The Discworld Almanak_. Illus.
Paul Kidby, Bernard Pearson, and Sheila Watkins. London: Transworld,
2004.

_____. _Death’s Domain: A Discworld Mapp_. London: Corgi, 1999.

_The Right Stuff_. Dir. Philip Kaufman. Warner Bros., 1983.

Rosenthal, Joe. “Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima.” 23 Feb. 1945. _Wikimedia
Commons_. Creative Commons. 23 Feb. 1945. 3 Nov. 2012.

Sendak, Maurice. “Caldecott Medal Acceptance.” 1964. _Caldecott & Co.:
Notes on Books & Pictures_. 1988. New York: Noonday Press, 1990. 145–55.

Shakespeare, William. _Hamlet_. 1600. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003.

Shulevitz, Uri. _Writing with Pictures: How to Write and Illustrate
Children’s Books_. New York: Watson-Guptill, 1985.

Sipe, Lawrence R. “How Picture Books Work: A Semiotically Framed Theory
of Text-Picture Relationships.” _Children’s Literature in Education_
29:2 (1998): 97–108.

Smythe, Colin. “Re: Query Regarding On-Line Pratchett Bibliography.”
E-mail to the author. 1 July 2013.

_____. “Terry Pratchett: The 2012 Convention—the Past Two Years.” _Terry
Pratchett_. Colin Smythe Limited. N.d. 18 July 2013.

Suckling, Nigel. _In the Garden of Unearthly Delights: The Paintings of
Josh Kirby_. 1991. London: Paper Tiger, 1995.

Tam, Nicholas. “Here Be Cartographers: Reading the Fantasy Map.” _Nick’s
Café Canadien_. 18 Apr. 2011. Web. 30 May 2013.

Van Gogh, Vincent. _Harvest in Provence_. 1888. Oil on canvas. Israel
Museum, Jerusalem, Israel. _Vincent: The Vincent Van Gogh Gallery_. 5
Aug. 2013.

_____. _The Starry Night_. 1890. Oil on canvas. Museum of Modern Art,
New York, USA. _Wiki paintings._ 5 Aug. 2013.

_____. _Wheatfield with Crows_. 1890. Oil on canvas. Van Gogh Museum,
Amsterdam. _Van Gogh Museum_. 5 Aug. 2013.

Vladimirova, Asia. “Как се рисува светът на Тери Пратчет ‘How to Paint
the World of Terry Pratchett.’” _Dneven Trud ‘Labour.’_ Culture section.
2 Feb. 2013. Web. 15 May 2013.

Wyatt, David. _No Rat Shall Kill Another Rat_. Ink drawing. _The Amazing
Maurice and His Educated Rodents_. By Terry Pratchett. 2001. New York:
HarperCollins, 2001.

_____, illus. _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_. By Terry
Pratchett. 2001. London: Corgi, 2011.


Tell It Slant

_Of Gods, Philosophy and Politics in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld_

Gray Kochhar-Lindgren

  Trickery with words is where _humans_ live.—Terry Pratchett

Terry Pratchett is a first-class comic, a wit _par excellence_, and, as
such, his writing is both profound and whimsical. Its very lightness—of
touch, of style—enables all apparently weighty matters such as
philosophy, religion, and politics to leave the ground and float in the
airy medium of writing. His Discworld novels act to snip off the
ideological roots of old gods, patriarchies, and worn-out narratives and
then to re-graft them so that they take on a new form, an occurrence
that liberates the reader from her static set-up and opens, in a
dialectic of the fantastic, a different positionality. This is the
miracle concocted by reading.

Pratchett’s fantasy world is supersaturated in religion and philosophy,
with their necessary connections to politics, but it requires not
adherence to an ideology—a stale habit of perception—but, rather, a
quirky kind of faith, a belief, we might say, in the possibility of
belief by one, at least, in the magic of language. His writing
demonstrates the power of fictionalizing, an enterprise that,
emphatically, is _not_ opposed to the real. Without fictionalizing, in
fact, there would be no real. The truth can be told but it must, as
Emily Dickinson has reminded us, be told “slant” if we are to know the
“Truth’s superb surprise” (507). Pratchett, a master punster, enacts
these qualities at the level of the word, the sentence, the theme, and
the genre of the fantasy novel. These terms are both a giver of
possibilities and a limit, since everything has a limit. But, since
every limit has a limit—how could it not?—then every limit is opened up
within itself to that which undoes the limit, leaving it limitless. It
looks as if Discworld is a coherent world-unto-itself, self-contained,
but, instead, it constantly opens to other worlds of history, myth,
religion, anthropology, philosophy, literature, the contingencies of
each idiosyncratic reader, and to the unpredictable future. Is
Pratchett, then, a fantasist or a philosopher? What is the difference?
Who cares?

_Hogfather_ opens itself with that most profound of questions, that of
origins. “Everything starts somewhere,” the narrator says, “although
many physicists disagree. / But people have always been dimly aware of
the problem with the start of things … there is the constant desire to
find some point in which the twisting, knotting, raveling nets of
space-time on which a metaphorical finger can be put to indicate that
here, _here_, is the point where it all began…” (1; original italics).
There is, really, no need to read another passage from Pratchett’s
_oeuvre_: it’s all here. Everything is a knotted net. The “here,”
however, is not quite as here as we might expect, so we might as well
continue reading.

Giving the finger the task of pointing at the _here_ is an essential
gesture of understanding, indicating as it does a function of indexical
referentiality as the word replaces, or augments, the silent
expressivity of the finger. “Here it is! The beginning! Look, right
here! Over there! There it is right in front of you!” This action is
called, by the wags at Unseen University, no doubt, as well as by the
linguists at various Seen Universities, _deixis_, a term that refers to
the simple act of pointing, of referring to a “this” or a “that” in
sentences in which the context is required to understand the meaning of
a word (such as pronouns). And, as Pratchett indicates, the finger is
always “metaphorical,” a figure that is always moving the pieces of the
cosmic and novelistic text-puzzle around and that can never, as much as
we might wish it, be “direct.” Metaphors are playfully whimsical
creatures and tend to create a slight sense of epistemological dizziness
in the pit of the stomach. It’s like riding a whirligig.

This metaphoricity, this literariness, is another name for the
“twisting, knotting, raveling nets of space-time” (1), a series of
images of rhizomatic networks whose origin can never be identified,
since everything implicates everything else. (The Buddhists have a
leg-up on this discussion of dependent co-origination, but the quantum
physicists and the philosophers of difference are making progress.) This
is also, precisely, the image of textuality that has dominated the
discussion of literature and its theories since at least the 1960s. As
Roland Barthes, representing a complex ensemble of writers, has famously
said: “_Text_ means _Tissue_: but whereas we have always taken this
tissue as a product, a ready-made veil, behind which lies, more or less
hidden, meaning (truth), we are now emphasizing, in the tissue, the
generative idea that the text is made, is worked out in a perpetual
interweaving” (62). We all actively weave the fabric of the tissue of
stories that we call “life.”

The idea of “here”—and, again, we are simply tracing the opening pages
of _Hogfather_ and its question of origins, as we head toward the
primordial past of the Ur-Turtle—is undone, rewoven, by the groundless
metaphoricity of textuality, but there is another avenue into the
question of the “here” that takes us back to the “Sense-Certainty”
section of G. W. F. Hegel’s _Phenomenology of Spirit_ (1807). In this
section, Hegel is considering the fact that we all naturally take
sense-certainty as assured self-evidence—“Look! Here!”—but that, in
fact, it is always a complex of “mediated simplicities” (61), his
provisional definition of the “universal.” Here we are now, we say to
ourselves. This is the sunlight of morning falling across my desk. But,
Hegel avows, the very fact that we _say_ this to ourselves _means_ that
what we thought we were trying to capture—the slant of sunlight on the
desk—has vanished and a new perception has taken its place. What looks
to be the simplest of all things—the perception of the
here-and-now—turns out to be an exceedingly complex structure.

Language, in other words, radically intervenes in sense-certainty: “we
do not strictly say what in this sense-certainty we _mean_ to say,”
Hegel argues, for “in [language] we ourselves directly refute what we
_mean_ to say, and since the universal is the true [content] of
sense-certainty and language expresses this true [content] alone, _it is
just not possible for us ever to say, or express in words, a sensuous
being that we_ mean” (60; my italics). We can never say what we mean and
we cannot, strictly speaking, mean what we say. Therefore, there is a
need for fantasy novels, which incorporate this (un)truth into their
very structure of composition. The Hogfather may not be real—I’ll say
just for the sake of argument—but he expresses truth. But not straight
on, not face-to-face.

Hegel continues this line of thinking with an example of the piece of
paper upon which he writes, or was writing upon several centuries ago:
“If they actually wanted to say ‘this’ bit of paper which they mean, if
they wanted to _say_ it, then this is impossible, because the sensuous
This that is meant _cannot be reached by language_, which belongs to
consciousness, i.e., to that which is inherently universal” (66;
original italics). And, finally, having already passed through the
examples of the “open Mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus” (65)—and these
mythical allusions to divinities that have supposedly died, passed on,
have everything to do with Pratchett’s recuperative fantasies—Hegel
concludes the section by remarking that “if I want to help out
language—which has the divine nature of directly reversing the meaning
of what is said, of making it into something else, and thus not letting
what is meant _get into words at all_—by _pointing out_ this bit of
paper, experience teaches me what the truth of sense-certainty in fact
is: I point it out as a ‘Here,’ which is a Here of other Heres, or is in
its own self a ‘simple togetherness of many Heres,’ i.e., it is a
universal” (66). (It’s all quite bracing, isn’t it?)

Object, consciousness, and language are “twisting, raveling, knotting
nets” (1) that are all in constant motion, and, therefore, there can be
no adequate answer to the question of origins. Following a long detour
through Kant, Hegel, Husserl, and Heidegger that cannot be recapitulated
here, Jacques Derrida, that deconstructive punster, can eventually argue
that

  traces thus produce the space of their inscription only by acceding to
  the period of their erasure. From the beginning, in the “present” of
  their first impression, they are constituted by the double force of
  repetition and erasure, legibility and illegibility … [and]
  “perception,” the first relation of life with its other, the origin of
  life, had always already prepared representation [“Freud” 226].

_Hogfather_, then, gets it right. There is no _here_ of the origin of
origin that can be pointed to, origins arise only in their inscriptions,
and there are therefore, and of necessity, stories, _fabula_ of the
fabulous.

Hegel’s phenomenology as the key to the philosophical dimensions not
only of _Hogfather_, but of Pratchett’s Discworld cosmos as a whole?
Please. (_Puh-leaze_, if you please). It is nonetheless indubitable,
however, that, referring to the soul of the tube worm, the narrator of
the novel remarks, “It had never bothered itself with questions like
‘Why am I here?’ because it had no concept at all of ‘here’ or, for that
matter, of ‘I’” (37). Clearly Pratchett, or perhaps the tube worm, is
offering a critique of German philosophy between Kant, Hegel, Fichte,
and the Romantics. In any case, between the introduction of the Guild of
Assassins and Mister Teatime (_Teh-ah-tim-eh_, if you please) and the
introduction of the Senior Wizards of Unseen University—the dialectic is
already taking shape—Pratchett takes us back past the forgetting of the
blood that seeps through all the old stories, through the sticky-string
webs of space-time, and, finally, into the dark corners of primordial
caves. Back to the womb of all hominization, perhaps? “Or, possibly not,
of course. The philosopher Didactylos, Two-Fingers, has summed up an
alternative hypothesis as ‘Things just happen. What the hell’” (2). It
is a statement, not a question.

There are, in _Hogfather_, assassins, wizards, universities,
possibilities and unpossibilities, worldviews galore, the metaphorical
compression of history, the belief of at least one as the minimal
requirement for a god, and that curious philosopher, Didactylos, to whom
we shall return. History has always already begun, even when we ask
ourselves, as we all do, the question of origins, which is
simultaneously a question about both ourselves and about the cosmos.
Consciousness and world. Two, always two. At least two, but then more,
many more. (The third always intervenes and who knows where the
numbering stops?) Perhaps the Auditors know, for they “did not believe
in anything, except possibly immortality. And the way to be immortal,
they knew, was to avoid living. Most of all they did not believe in
personality. To be a personality was to be a creature with a beginning
and an end” (46). Discworld, in other words, offers a philosophy of
finitude to stand against the desire for everlastingness. Words come,
then they go, erasing traces that constitute “life” and the world.
Sometimes, but not always, they come back around, but they are then
different. Words are tricky little buggers.

The plot of _Hogfather_ is a simple tale about the death of a god—or at
least a rotund demigod of sparkling trees, ho-ho-hos, and gift-wrapped
presents who has difficulty climbing in and out of chimneys on a certain
day of the year—and about how Death, along with his granddaughter,
Susan, and sundry other characters intervene for the good. It is quite a
bit funnier than _Thus Spake Zarathustra_ or _Die fröhliche
Wissenschaft_, but laughter, after all, is the point of both philosophy
and fantasy novels. It is not the “real” world and it is not the
“not-real” world, but it is a “SPECIAL CONGRUENT REALITY CREATED FOR THE
HOGFATHER. NORMAL RULES HAVE TO BE SUSPENDED” (79). This is the essence
of the literary, which can—like any self-respecting thought-experiment
in physics or in philosophy of that odd analytic sort—create whatever
words can imagine. Pigs _can_ fly. Or, for example, this might be a
world in which some of the “characters [of books] hovered above the
pages or moved in complicated little patterns as they read you while you
read them” (90). This all makes perfectly good sense since we are all
objects of each other’s interpretive phantasmagorias.

_Hogfather_, then, accomplishes philosophical tasks, but in Pratchett’s
inimitable style. It addresses questions of origins, identity, symbolic
representation, death, immortality, and ethics: how shall we then live?
And, as with any good philosophy, it is self-reflective. Ponder
Stibbons, a Reader in Invisible Writings, has constructed Hex, an
oracular writing machine, in the Unseen University, a “magical
university where the border between the real and the ‘not real’ was
stretched so thin you could almost see through it” (171); and, as Death
insists, “THE HOGFATHER CAN TEACH PEOPLE THE _UNREAL_ MEANING OF
HOGSWATCH” (181). Fiction questions the status of that dull division
between the real and un-real, for these are not opposites but
con-sanguinities, flowing in the same blood.

*****

Pratchett, in the Discworld novels, addresses philosophical and
religious questions and responds to these through the concoction of an
alternative world full of characters that are contextualized by
traditional narratives, but reinvented for different purposes. This is
also seen within the realm of a more overt politics of gender,
exemplified by his novel _Monstrous Regiment_. The basic plot is
straightforward as a group of young Borogravian recruits—as well as
established officers—who initially disguise themselves as men come out,
over the course of the novel, as a group of accomplished and courageous
women. And the title itself is a remix, already accomplishing the
ethical work of fiction, which is to re-imagine the real.

In his “The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of
Women” (1558), John Knox, the famous Protestant Reformer, gets right to
the point of his diatribe against the dominion of women, in general,
and, more specifically, against the monarchy of Mary Tudor in England
(just before she is deposed by Elizabeth):

  Wonder it is that amongst so many pregnant wits as the isle of Great
  Britain hath produced, so many godly and zealous preachers as England
  did sometime nourish, and amongst so many learned and men of grave
  judgment as this day by Jezebel are exiled, none is found so stout of
  courage, so faithful to God, nor loving to their native country, that
  they dare admonish the inhabitants of that isle how abominable before
  God is the empire or rule of a wicked woman, yea, of a traitoress and
  bastard [37].

Wit, apparently, can be “pregnant,” but those who can literally become
“pregnant” with political power are “abominable.” Writing from Dieppe in
1557–58, Knox places himself in the symbolic position of courageous
prophet—Ezekiel is the primary model—who is willing to address the
abuses of the power of women in positions of governmental authority, who
are cast, by analogy, as Jezebel. (Yawn.) The rhetorical structure of
the “First Blast” is thoroughly predictable, since “prophet” and
“Jezebel” are pre-established types within the biblical narrative and,
as such, offer forms of address that can be (re)filled with whatever
content is the most contentious at any given moment of history. In 1558,
with the Reformation and the complexity of the political environment
bearing down on him and on the green isle of Britain, Knox fulminates
that it is this “monstriferous empire of women (which amongst all
enormities that this day do abound upon the face of the whole earth is
most detestable and damnable) be openly revealed and plainly declared to
the world to the end that some may repent and be saved” (40). The _most_
detestable and damnable.

Repetition is one of the typical strategies of rhetorical (and
prophetic) force, so Knox keeps repeating that “to promote a woman to
bear rule, superiority, dominion, or empire above any realm, nation, or
city is repugnant to nature, contumely to God, a thing most contrarious
to his revealed will and approved ordinance, and, finally, it is the
subversion of good order, of all equity and justice” (42). This “good
order” is what he will mean by “regiment” and any order imposed by the
sovereign will of a woman will be “monstrous.” It is important to
underline this opposition between “order” and “monstrosity,” both
because it is an extraordinarily powerful and lasting
philosophical-social trope and because it is precisely at this point
that Pratchett’s novel drives an explosive device into the bedrock of
traditional religious and political narrative organized around gender.

Knox’s argumentative strategies take on a familiar shape. Using an
erudite list of the greats, including not only a host of biblical
writers but also Aristotle, Tertullian, Origen, Augustine, St. Ambrose,
Basilius Magnus, and others, Knox “establishes” that the entire
Judeo-Christian tradition speaks with one blaring voice: women, and
especially women rulers, are monstrous. They do not fit into their own
proper shape; they exceed the regulative law of nature. Chrysostom, in
the _Homilies on St. John_, gives Knox a particularly pertinent summary:
“But woman can never be the best governor by reason that she, being
_spoiled of the spirit of regiment_, can never attain to that degree to
be called or judged a good governor; because in the nature of all woman
lurketh such vices as in good governors are not tolerable” (54; my
italics). The footnote tells us this is a reference to prostitutes,
something not mentioned by Knox, but, given his general logic of gender
and power, this is in any case irrelevant. All women are monstriferous,
which is clearly proven by God’s word, the indisputable law of nature,
and a litany of erudite philosophers and righteous prophets.

  That God hath subjected womankind to man by the order of his creation
  and by the curse that he hath pronounced against her is before
  declared. Besides these, he hath set before our eyes two other mirrors
  and glasses, in which he will that we should behold the order which he
  hath appointed and established in nature. The one is the natural body
  of man; the other is the politic or civil body of that commonwealth in
  which God by his own word hath appointed an order [55].

Order, given by God, is established by the “natural body” of
man—phallogocentrism at its most compressed—but also in the civil order
of politics. Women disrupt this natural order and offer a kind of
surrealist, or Cubist, body in place of the ordered one: “For who would
not judge that body to be a monster where there was no head eminent
above the rest, but that the eyes were in the hands, the tongue and
mouth beneath the belly, and the ears in the feet?” (56).

The doubled and doubling mirror, for Knox, shows us the true order of
the good, the just, and the real, while the body of woman is, as it
were, reflected only in the broken shards of a perverse mirror of the
representation of reality. In its most general form, this argument is
based on a conviction of the givenness by God of both nature and of the
polity, as well as on the assurance that John Knox and other prophets
can clearly read and reproduce this divine revelation. “As a prophet,
Knox believed himself adept at reading the times: the past leading up to
the present. He interpreted history exactly as he interpreted a book
like the Bible, identifying simple narrative patterns such as the
success of a faithful covenanted people and the demise of a people
unfaithful to their covenant” (Schrock 89). England, and their damnable
queen(s), could never fulfill the covenant of a people with their God.

Pratchett, in contradistinction to Knox, delightedly _invents_ his world
(though not, of course, _ex nihilo_) and thus, by the very act of
writing fantasy disrupts the cosmos of putatively given “good order” for
the sake of a more just order. _Justice depends, finally, not on law but
on inventiveness._ He takes the world as mirrored by Knox’s text (itself
attempting to mirror a certain interpretation of Judeo-Christian
tradition), folds it into a reflective origami (and of course in the
Unseen University there is a Professor of Recondite Architecture and
Origami Map Folding), and thereby opens space for a different political
philosophy of gender. Derrida has clarified one of the essential
functions of the monstrous:

  But the notion of the monster is rather difficult to deal with, to get
  a hold on, to stabilize. A monster may be obviously a composite figure
  of heterogeneous organisms that are grafted onto each other. This
  graft, this hybridization, this composition that puts heterogeneous
  bodies together may be called a monster. This in fact happens in
  certain kinds of writing. At that moment, monstrosity may reveal or
  make one aware of what normality is. Faced with a monster, one may
  become aware of what the norm is and when this norm has a
  history—which is the case with discursive norms, philosophical norms,
  socio-cultural norms, they have a history—any appearance of
  monstrosity in this domain allows an analysis of the history of the
  norms. But to do that, one must conduct not only a theoretical
  analysis; one must produce what in fact looks like a discursive
  monster so that the analysis will be a _practical_ effect, so that
  people will be forced to become aware of the history of normality
  [_Points_ 386; original italics].

This is precisely the function of Pratchett’s narrative strategy in
_Monstrous Regiment_. He re-regiments the “regiment” by re-ordering the
word and the narrative. Fantasy has the power to reorder the order of
ideology as women, disguised as men (complete with socks awkwardly
bulging in their pants), move through a series of masques and costumes
to take on their own names and their own power. The monstrous is a
strategy of revelation as well as a transformation of the sedimented and
rigidified social order.

*****

In a very complicated argument illuminating Martin Heidegger’s concept
of time as it relates to Aristotle’s commentary in _Physics IV_, Derrida
asks a pointed question: “Have not meaning, reason, and ‘good sense’
been produced within this right [of the present, of the now]?”
(“_Ousia_” 38). _Good sense_ is the naturalist attitude that the world,
including thought and the now of presence, is apparently simply given by
nature, which is the foundation of ideology and the good regiment of the
social order (as we have seen with Knox’s text). Derrida, in that
micro-hermeneutic methodology from which we have learned such a great
deal, focuses on _hama_, a single throw-away word in Aristotle’s text.
Aristotle himself makes nothing of it, never thematizes it, but Derrida
shows that precisely because it “_goes_ without saying, making discourse
play itself out in its articulation” that it will, indeed, act as the
“pivot of metaphysics” (56; original italics). _Hama_ is what happens
“at the same time” and it says the “complicity, the common origin of
time and space, appearing together [_com-paraître_] as the condition for
all appearing of Being. In a certain way, it says the dyad as the
minimum” (56).

Didactylos of _Small Gods_ knows the secret of thought: it takes two to
tango. Two is the minimum; no word stands alone and a story takes at
least a now-now and a here-here. These non-ones always multiply, for “We
must be several,” Derrida reminds us, “in order to write, and even to
‘perceive’” (“Freud” 226). As the Discworld & Terry Pratchett Wiki, a
source that members of the Seen University are often quite wary of,
tells us:

  Didactylos’ name literally mean “two fingers.” He resembles various
  Roundworld philosophers, notably Diogenes, who also lived in a barrel
  and carried an oil-less lantern in his fruitless search for an honest
  man. [Pratchett] also alludes to aspects of the characters of, the
  philosophical ideas of, or events from the lives of Plato, Archimedes
  and Aristotle in his description of Didactylos.

Two-fingers, then, is a multiplier, and another example of Pratchett’s
ability to embody many figures from history into a newly invented, newly
named figure who simultaneously (_hama_) does the assembling work of
remembering, inventing, and projecting new possibilities. “All would be
simple if the _physis_ and each one of its others were one or two. As we
have suspected for a long time, it is nothing of the sort, yet we are
forever forgetting this. There is always more than one—and more or less
than two” (Derrida “Archive” 9). Didactylos is many, and as Gilles
Deleuze reminds us, “there is no true beginning in philosophy, or the
true philosophical beginning, difference, is in-itself already
repetition” (129). Didactylos; Dialectic; Didactic. Fantasy creates a
delightful dizziness.

Any talk of fingers in philosophy brings to mind Socrates’s disquisition
in the _Republic_ (VII 523–525) on fingers, perception, and
understanding; on the one and the many; and on relative and absolute
understanding (not bad for some fingers and a couple of pages). How does
the unifying force of a definition of “finger” relate to the perceptual
and conceptual plurality of finger_s_? How does the long and the short,
the thick and the thin relate to that which numbers and calculates the
real? The one cannot be thought; the two gives rise to distinctions and
thus the possibilities of comparison: thinking can now begin, since the
possibility of a question is based on the minimality of the two. In a
lovely term, Plato says that such perceptual questions _summon_ us to
attempt to understand the perplexity.

Deleuze argues that there is a fundamental “image of thought” that has
governed philosophy for as long, almost, as philosophy has been
philosophy. He calls this image, much like Derrida, “Good Sense” or
“Common Sense” and it is that which everyone, apparently, can agree
upon.

  According to this image, thought has an affinity with the true; it
  formally possesses the true and materially wants the true. It is in
  terms of this image that everybody knows and is presumed to know what
  it means to think. Thereafter it matters little whether philosophy
  begins with the object or the subject, with Being or with beings, as
  long as thought remains subject to this Image which already prejudges
  everything… [131].

As we have seen, this is Pratchett’s strategy as well. By _not_ acceding
to the given (of perception, tradition, or ideology), he enables us to
experience the world anew by asking questions, even if not formally
thematized ones, about the apparently _given_. He writes freshness. He
writes against the Auditors of Discworld and the Auditors of Roundworld.

The Auditors, those who are disdainful of individuality and personality,
“SEE TO IT THAT GRAVITY WORKS AND THE ATOMS SPIN, OR WHATEVER IT IS
ATOMS DO. AND THEY HATE LIFE … IT IS … IRREGULAR. IT WAS NEVER SUPPOSED
TO HAPPEN. THEY LIKE STONES, MOVING IN CURVES. AND THEY HATE HUMANS MOST
OF ALL. Death sighed. IN MANY WAYS, THEY LACK A SENSE OF HUMOR”
(_Hogfather_ 289). The Auditors are the Spirits of Gravity, nihilists
stuck in their ways. They are reductionists who despise the fuzzy fizz
of life, its unpredictability and exposure to contingency. They believe,
they think in naked facts, and if the Hogfather had vanished, “THE SUN
WOULD NOT HAVE RISEN…. A MERE BALL OF FLAMING GAS WOULD HAVE ILLUMINATED
THE WORLD … TRICKERY WITH WORDS IS WHERE _HUMANS_ LIVE” (_Hogfather_
335). Given our discussion of Hegel, it’s not even the case that there
could be a “mere ball” without significance, since perception itself,
for us, always brings significance along with it since it is “stated” in
language. Words are tricky, but that is precisely, and only, where we
exist, within this space of the trick, the game, the throw of the dice.
Terry Pratchett revels, with great lucidity, in this irreality and,
through his stories, he is able to tell the truth, knowing he must “tell
it slant” (Dickinson 506).

Works Cited

Barthes, Roland. _The Pleasure of the Text_. Trans. Richard Miller. New
York: Hill and Wang, 1975.

Deleuze, Gilles. _Difference & Repetition_. Trans. Paul Patton. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1994.

Derrida, Jacques. “Freud and the Scene of Writing.” _Writing and
Difference_. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1978.

_____. “_Ousia_ and _Grammē_: Note on a Note from _Being and Time._”
_Margins of Philosophy_. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1982.

_____. _Points…: Interviews, 1974–1994_. Trans. Peggy Kamuf, et al.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995.

_____, and Eric Prenowitz. “Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression.”
_Diacritics_ 25:2 (Summer 1995): 9–63.

Dickinson, Emily. _The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson_. Ed. Thomas H.
Johnson. Boston: Little, Brown, 1960.

_Discworld and Terry Pratchett Wiki_. 2012. Web. October 2013.

Hegel, G. W. F. _Phenomenology of Spirit_. Trans. A. V. Miller. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1977.

Knox, John. _The Political Writings of John Knox. The First Blast of the
Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women and Other Selected
Works_. Ed. Marvin A. Breslow. Washington, DC: Folger, 1985.

Levinson, Stephen C. “Deixis.” _International Encyclopedia of
Linguistics_. Ed. William J. Frawley. Oxford University Press, 2005.
Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. University of
Washington. 6 September 2012.

Plato. _The Republic_. Trans. G. M. A. Grube; rev. C. D. C. Reeve.
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1992.

Pratchett, Terry. _Hogfather_. New York: HarperTorch, 1996.

_____. _Monstrous Regiment_. New York: HarperCollins, 2003.

_____. _Small Gods._ New York: HarperTorch, 1992.

Schrock, Chad. “The Pragmatics of Prophecy in John Knox’s _The First
Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women._”
_Renaissance and Reformation_ 30:2 (Spring 2006): 83–99.


The Watchman and the Hippopotamus

_Art, Play and Otherness in_ Thud!

Caroline Webb

Comic novelist Terry Pratchett’s concern with attitudes to race and
human perceptions of the Other has been foregrounded especially in his
Watch sequence of Discworld novels. In _Men at Arms_, for example, the
Watchmen have to deal with hereditary prejudice as members of different
species begin to enter the Ankh-Morpork City Watch, while in _Jingo_ the
notion of national identity and its apparently automatic correlation
with rejection of the foreign is critiqued and ridiculed. In _The Fifth
Elephant_, Pratchett’s hero Commander Vimes becomes both a suspect in a
crime in the dwarfs’ kingdom and the prey in a ritualized hunt by
atavistic werewolves, forcing him to confront his own understanding of
cultural relativism. While Pratchett’s ethical and humanist approach to
the concept of race has always been clear, his fictions are significant
in their insistence on engagement with the reality of interracial
suspicion. If racism based on skin color has rarely been a problem in
the Discworld, Pratchett makes clear that this is only because “black
and white [have] lived together in perfect harmony and ganged up on
green” (_Abroad_ 167).

Meanwhile, Pratchett’s Discworld writing is, arguably, preoccupied with
its status as literary text. Though intertextual references abound, the
Witches sequence of novels highlights particularly its own relationship
to earlier literature, whether to Shakespeare in _Wyrd Sisters_ or
_Lords and Ladies_ or to fairy tale in _Witches Abroad_, while Nickianne
Moody has remarked that “it is narrative causality which structures the
plots of the Death sequence,” pointing to the literary
self-consciousness visible in those novels (155). Andy Sawyer has
discussed how _The Science of Discworld_, co-written by Pratchett and
the scientists Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart, parodies the scientific
method in its fictional passages while deploying story to explain
science. As Sawyer argues, _The Science of Discworld_ provides insight
into “the roles both science and fiction have in making us human”
(Sawyer 78). The Watch sequence itself is studded with references to
detective stories, especially the “hardboiled American cop tradition,”
as Edward James puts it (197), noting how Pratchett in this sequence
comments on “the conventions of popular entertainment in the late
twentieth century: particularly those of heroic fantasy” (199).

Nevertheless, I would suggest that the prominence of explicit reference
to, and discussion of, art both in general and in various forms
(including the literary) in _Thud!_ (2005) is striking even within the
context of Pratchett’s _oeuvre_. A list of the visual art-forms alone
present or referred to in _Thud!_ includes the following: landscape
painting; portrait painting; representations of the nude; symbolic
painting, as for example a picture of a goddess; abstract sculpture;
pantograph; iconograph, i.e., photograph; picture book; wallpaper
decoration; images on a child’s clock and blanket; and graffiti, in the
form of the mystic mine signs of the dwarfs. Further, the picture book,
_Where’s My Cow?_, is also a story, one in fact told within _Thud!_
three times, and Death appears to Vimes reading a novel and pondering
“the strangeness of written narrative” (_Thud!_ 388), extending the
novel’s reflection on art to fiction itself.

In case the reader misses all this, long-familiar characters Sergeant
Colon and Corporal Nobbs are early found musing at some length over what
art is when they investigate the theft of a painting from the art
museum:

  [Colon] knew in his heart that spinning around a pole wearing a
  costume you could floss with definitely was not Art, and being painted
  lying on a bed wearing nothing but a smile and a small bunch of grapes
  was good solid Art, but putting your finger on why this was the case
  was a little tricky.

  “No urns,” he said at last…. “Nude women are only Art if there’s an
  urn in it.” This sounded a bit weak even to him, so he added, “or a
  plinth. Both is best, o’ course” [_Thud!_ 55].

In this essay I shall examine not only Pratchett’s study in _Thud!_ of
the nature of racial conflict but his exploration of the power of art of
all kinds—including, most particularly, games—in both perpetuating and
resolving that conflict. Art—as story, as painting, as game—is depicted
within the text as a potential means of engagement with the human, and
offered as a site through which people, both individually and as racial
groups, can confront and critique the notion of the Other and the
tensions (within the individual, as well as between groups) that obscure
the commonality of the human.

_Race, Identity and Conflict_

Before turning to the question of art I wish to review Pratchett’s
attitude to conflict, especially racial conflict, across his writing.
Pratchett has always demonstrated a resistance to violence highly
unusual among writers of heroic fantasy. It is at once a characteristic
joke against generic convention and a marker of the values expressed in
his fiction that the protagonist of the first and several subsequent
Discworld novels, the failed wizard Rincewind, is a committed coward who
specializes in running away from danger. In the children’s book _Only
You Can Save Mankind_ (1992), set in our own world, the protagonist
Johnny Maxwell learns to take seriously the suffering inflicted in
warfare when the enemies he is happily destroying in a shoot-’em-up
computer game identified as descended from Space Invaders attempt to
surrender and he is forced to recognize them as entities with their own
lives, fears, and desires, rather than simply as targets. It is clear
that Pratchett recognizes the drive to conflict as originating in the
definition of self against Other described by Andrew M. Butler (“We Has
Found”).

In the Watch series, Pratchett acknowledges the reality of prejudice and
hatred. Even in the first of the series, _Guards! Guards!_ (1989), the
power-seeking villain is able to muster the petty resentments, mostly
class-based, of his Mystical Brethren to summon the destructive energies
of a dragon. But Pratchett depicts his central figures as endeavoring,
not always successfully, to overcome such hatred. In the comparatively
early _Men at Arms_ (1993) this is not always too difficult: the dwarf
Cuddy and the troll Detritus become buddies in the time-honored cop
story way, by going on the beat together and assisting each other. But
things are not always so simple. As James observes, “even [Pratchett’s]
most moral characters have problems in adhering to a tolerant attitude”
(212). Thus in _Men at Arms_ the dwarf-raised human Carrot acknowledges
that he can respect humans as well as dwarfs and even trolls, but has
trouble with the undead (100), of which there are many kinds on the
Discworld. Vimes can cope with most of the undead as well as with the
living, but in _Thud!_ still wants to draw the line at vampires—and is
never too happy about aristocrats of his own species either.

While it is the aristocrats who, in _Jingo,_ manipulate the chance
discovery of a newly risen island into a _casus belli_ for conflict
between Ankh-Morpork and the neighboring nation of Klatch, the ordinary
populace of the city is revealed to be equally ready with unthinking
prejudice against even those Klatchians who have lived and worked among
them for years. As Farah Mendlesohn observes, “Pratchett’s emphasis on
the ability of the ordinary person … to commit unimaginable acts of
atrocity denies us the chance to separate the characters into the simply
good and the simply bad or mad. It refuses us the binary shelter of the
‘us’ versus ‘them’” (255). In _Jingo_, Vimes and the Patrician Lord
Vetinari, ruler of the city, resort to unorthodox tactics to avoid
violence. Vimes uses his rights as a knight to enlist citizens in an
expanded Watch, works in an informal alliance with the dangerous
Klatchian 71-hour Ahmed, who turns out to be a fellow policeman, and
ends up arresting both armies for “behaviour likely to cause a breach of
the peace” (_Jingo_ 368). While the armies are waiting, Carrot, the
Watch Captain, gets them playing a vast game of football (soccer); I
shall return later to the implications of this.

The novel’s identifiable villains are found on both sides: the Klatchian
Caliph who turns out to be behind an assassination attempt on his own
brother that is intended to provoke a war that will enable him to expand
his empire, and the Ankh-Morporkian general Lord Rust, whose perception
of war as a game of honor with rigid rules that involve sacrificing
human lives—and even neglecting the ostensible goal of victory—is
condemned as fatally destructive. Lord Vetinari’s decision to surrender
and give up the island seems unthinkably dishonorable to Rust, who
threatens him with prosecution for treason; however, Vetinari’s
submarine study of the island has assured him that it will soon sink
again, and the despicable ratification of the surrender he is due to
perform there cannot therefore take place, voiding his concessions to
Klatch. Vetinari’s attention to detail—in this case the specific
physical attributes of the island—rather than to the abstractions of the
chivalric code thus enables political victory both over the enemy ruler,
who loses face and therefore his post, and over Lord Rust, ensuring the
continuity of the _Pax Morporkia_. As Mendlesohn remarks, “Vetinari’s
conclusion to the war emphasizes both the game like nature of the
proceedings and its brutal reality” (254). In place of the values
underlying Lord Rust’s attitude to war, we are invited to admire instead
Vetinari’s superior intelligence and political gamesmanship. Thus
Pratchett evokes an idea of patriotism dependent neither on hatred of
the Other nor on death-or-glory zeal, but on the shared will to protect
the people of the city that in different ways motivates both Vimes and
Vetinari.

In _Thud!_ the issue of race and how to engage with the Other,
especially where that Other has been declared an enemy, governs the
text, as the inter-species conflict between dwarfs and trolls is traced
to its historical crisis point, the Battle of Koom Valley. As is
characteristic in Pratchett’s Watch sequence, the novel’s structure
begins with the detective story, recording the Watch’s investigation of
a crime. In this case the murder of the dwarf Hamcrusher, blamed by the
dwarfs on the trolls, becomes the catalyst both for violence and for
Vimes’s investigation into the origins of the mutual hatred between the
species. Pratchett makes plain, primarily through the dwarfs, how hatred
is used to fuel pride in one’s own identity: the city dwarfs, previously
tolerant, are being incited to hatred by the “deep-downers,” who
represent their idea of what dwarfs should be.

  They were “grags.” Vimes had just enough dwarfish to know that grag
  meant “renowned master of dwarfish lore.” Hamcrusher, however, had
  mastered it in his own special way. He preached the superiority of
  dwarf over troll, and that the duty of every dwarf was to follow in
  the footsteps of their forefathers and remove trollkind from the face
  of the world…. Young dwarfs listened to him, because he talked about
  history and destiny and all the other words that always got trotted
  out to put a gloss on slaughter [_Thud!_ 37].

In addition to Hamcrusher’s use of heady rhetoric, his message resonates
because the dwarfs’ sense of identity is currently unstable:

  [S]omewhere in the head of every city dwarf there was a little voice
  that said: you should live in a mine, you should be in the mountains,
  you shouldn’t walk under open skies, you should be a _real_ dwarf. In
  other words you shouldn’t really be working in your uncle’s pigment
  and dye factory…. However, since you _are_, you could at least try to
  _think_ like a proper dwarf. And part of that meant being guided by
  the deep-downers…. Somewhere down there in the dark was true
  dwarfishness. They had the knowing of it [_Thud!_ 84; original
  italics].

Identification of self is simplest, and easiest, when it can be defined
against the Other, as Hamcrusher offers the city dwarfs a way to do. The
enmity that was readily overcome by Cuddy and Detritus in _Men at Arms_
leads in _Thud!_ to many dwarf and troll members of the now expanded
Watch resigning in order to go home to protect their own families. And
humans, nervous of both, are vulnerable too. Mr. Shine, the diamond
troll born to be king, explains to Vimes that the dwarfs have exploited
human ignorance of trolls: “You really know very little about us, Mister
Vimes. You see us down on the plains, shambling around _talkin’ like
dis…._ You see the hunched troll, dragging his club. That’s what the
dwarfs did for us, long ago. They turned us, in your minds, into sad,
brainless monsters” (_Thud!_ 257; original italics). The parallels with
European images of Africans, and the images’ effects across the globe
well into the twentieth century, are not far to seek.

Unsurprisingly, perhaps, given Pratchett’s earlier fiction, it emerges
that the murderer of Hamcrusher was not a troll but a dwarf (which one
we never discover). Hamcrusher was attempting to destroy words, a
serious crime to the deep-downers, who despise “Blackboard Monitor
Vimes” (_Thud!_ 94). But the murder is blamed on trolls by deep-downers
who, like Hamcrusher, are desperate to conceal the words (which are
recorded on an ancient Device), if not destroy them. The truth of the
first Battle of Koom Valley, Vimes discovers, is that the dwarf and
troll kings were seeking to make peace before erroneous cries of ambush
went up (as in Malory’s account of Arthur’s final battle), as revealed
by the recording made by the kings who fought there: “They fell to
fighting and would not hear our commands. So troll fought troll, and
dwarf fought dwarf, and fools made fools of all of us as we fought to
stop a war, until the disgusted sky washed us away” (_Thud!_ 419).
Species hatred—which in this novel looks just like race hatred—is
identified as a folly that resonates for centuries, but a folly that
need not exist or persist. The current Low King of the dwarfs and
Diamond King of the trolls are already, it emerges, secretly seeking to
negotiate, and the discovery at the end of _Thud!_ of the dead kings
facing each other over a game board in the caverns below Koom Valley
produces some prospect of a durable peace.

_The Power of Games_

Countering the forces of violence and hatred in _Thud!_ are those who
provide alternative ways to define identity. A key incident occurs when
Angua, a member of the Watch known to be a werewolf, is looking for
clues in the slimy mud of the dwarfs’ exploratory tunnels below the city
with the vampire Sally. As a werewolf, Angua is instinctively and
ancestrally hostile to Sally, who radiates the confidence and stylish
elegance of the vampire, and the situation is not improved by Angua’s
recognition that Sally is attracted to Captain Carrot, Angua’s heroic
human boyfriend. As Angua’s fury rises, Sally stops her:

  “Hold it! … We’re both wearing nothing, we’re standing in what, you
  may have noticed, is increasingly turning to mud, and we’re squaring
  up to fight. Okay. But there’s something missing, yes?”

  “And that is?”

  “A paying audience? We could make a _fortune!_” Sally winked. “Or we
  could do the job we came here to do?” [_Thud!_ 207; original italics].

While Sally’s appeal to Angua’s sense of duty is certainly important, it
is also significant that her comment on the potential spectacle of their
situation is transformative. What has been another instance of the
age-old conflict between vampire and werewolf, or of two females over
the possession of a male, becomes a sport—and, crucially, one in which
women are on one side of a barrier, watched by men on the other. In
mud-wrestling, despite the ostensible conflict, the women are working
together, defined by the spectator males. In any case Sally’s
observation shifts the reader’s interpretation of the event, removing it
to the level of spectacle or entertainment rather than the grim
confrontation that Angua, and with her the reader, has been
experiencing. Sally’s image of the game of mud-wrestling defuses
violence and enables Angua to dissociate herself at least temporarily
from her identification of herself as werewolf and Sally as vampire and
focus instead on their joint concerns as members of the Watch. Later,
Angua, Sally, the dwarf Cheery—who in _Feet of Clay_ (1996) expressed
strong prejudice against werewolves (127) before discovering that Angua
was one—and the human Tawneee, a pole-dancer, go out drinking together;
their shared identity as females, and particularly females in need of a
drink, is of far greater importance than their species status, and does
lead, despite Angua’s protestations, to bonding.

While mud-wrestling may not be defined by all of us as an artform, it
can be seen as one of many play-based activities that Pratchett deploys
in opposition to the valuing of conflict. Sergeant Colon is not in fact
so far off the mark in his recognition that the presence of urns (or
plinths) in a painting of a nude distinguishes it from pole-dancing as
Art. Although art has been defined in terms of aesthetics and creative
expression, one of its key features, as demonstrated in
twentieth-century practice following Marcel Duchamp’s controversial 1917
artwork _Fountain_ (a urinal submitted to the Society of Independent
Artists exhibition, but rejected), is that it is framed as an object to
be considered in terms other than the functional. In _Thud!_ Corporal
Nobbs scrutinizes the artist Daniella Pouterina’s highly valued artwork
_Don’t Talk to Me About Mondays_ and is informed that it has been
transformed from what he first sees as “a load of stinking ol’ rubbish”
(_Thud!_ 51) by its framing in the museum context. He then suggests that
the museum curator deal with the embarrassing problem of the theft of
Rascal’s vast painting of the Battle of Koom Valley by renaming the
space: “‘Tell you what, then, sir,’ said Nobby helpfully. ‘Why don’t you
leave the ol’ big frame where it is and give it a new name, like _Art
Theft_?’” (_Thud!_ 52). Although the curator rejects the suggestion as
foolish, Nobby has recognized an important element in the contemporary
understanding of art. In this sense art has close affinities with play,
of which Huizinga has said,

  [W]e might call it a free activity standing quite consciously outside
  “ordinary” life as being “not serious,” but at the same time absorbing
  the player intensely and utterly. It is an activity connected with no
  material interest, and no profit can be gained by it. It proceeds
  within its own proper boundaries of time and space according to fixed
  rules and in an orderly manner [32].

Like art, play can be imaginative and is frequently mimetic, imitating
images and social practices while abstracting them from their real-world
contexts and function.

This process of abstraction, or framing, is crucial to the
transformative possibilities Pratchett identifies in both art and game
within _Thud!_ This is a different kind of abstraction from that
exemplified by Lord Rust in _Jingo_. Instead of reducing real human
beings to game pieces expendable in the name of honor, both games and
(most) artworks substitute play for suffering: Pouterina’s _Freedom_ in
effect “frames” the stake to which she had been nailed by her ear, an
initially involuntary experience she plans to duplicate (_Thud!_ 52). If
the danger in _Only You Can Save Mankind_ is that such elimination of
suffering in shoot-’em-up games may risk blindness to real suffering
produced by the bright streaks of bombers in the 1991 Gulf War,¹ in
_Thud!_ Pratchett suggests the obverse, that the abstraction of play
represented both in games and in artworks may provide ways to see beyond
the “us versus them” mentality of race/species hatred.

On the face of it, then, the game of Thud itself operates most
strikingly in this novel to defuse conflict, although as I shall show
other forms of art/play here may be read as similarly powerful in
formation of a positively defined identity. According to the novel, Thud
is a board game with affinities to the old game of Fox and Geese. One
side consists of eight pieces designated as trolls, having the troll
characteristics of near-immobility but great force, while the other
consists of thirty-two pieces designated as dwarfs, able to move great
distances in any direction but with little striking power (_Thud!_ 259).
As a strategy game it appears, as Vimes observes, to favor the dwarf
side, though the troll king Mr. Shine assures Vimes that “among the best
players the bias is slightly in favour of the trolls” (_Thud!_ 259).
Where it differs from similar strategy games, however, is that a
complete game consists of two battles; players must switch sides after
the first. As Mr. Shine notes, “to _win_ you must play both sides. You
must, in fact, be able to think like your ancient enemy…. When you’re
under his skin you start to see the world through his eyes” (_Thud!_
260; original italics). The ingenuity of Thud is that it formalizes the
species differences by which dwarfs and trolls define themselves against
the Other: dwarfs are small and fast, trolls slow-moving and ponderous.
In this way it at once emphasizes and reduces to play what elsewhere
have been archetypes generating deadly conflict—as human warfare is
tamed to and by football in _Jingo_, as female possessiveness is reduced
in mud-wrestling, or as traditional feudal warfare is formalized in
chess, a game Vimes despises because of its aristocratic conservatism:
“If only the pawns united, maybe talked the rooks round, the whole board
could’ve been a republic in a dozen moves” (_Thud!_ 86).

At the same time, however, the game of Thud compels empathy: every
player of Thud must learn to think in terms of the abilities and
strategies appropriate to at least one species other than his or her
own. In particular, the hereditary enemies troll and dwarf must learn
the ways of the Other. Not only does the game, as game, remove them to a
different space from direct violence, as with Sally’s joke about
mud-wrestling, but this game promotes a deep understanding that refuses
the simple rejection enabled by defining identity through difference. It
is no surprise then that at the novel’s resolution the long-dead dwarf
and troll kings discovered beneath the floor of Koom Valley having
attempted to make peace are found facing each other over a makeshift
Thud board.

The educational value of Thud, which as Vimes can see in Mr. Shine’s
games room is being played by young people of various species including
dwarfs and trolls (_Thud!_ 254–55), may provide an indication of how
Pratchett views the potential value of games. In _Only You Can Save
Mankind_ the reduction of warfare to streaks of light was seen as
dangerous. Johnny, the more bloodthirsty Kirsty, and indeed the
contemporary West have been conditioned by the computer games to see
warfare as just another game, especially through the film footage of the
attacks on Baghdad in the 1991 Gulf War, which Johnny watches on
television (and critiques as film) early in the novel. However, in
_Thud!_ the power to transform war to game can be seen as potentially
constructive. Whereas Johnny was disturbed by the conceptual reduction
of warfare—“We turn it into games and it’s not games” (_Only You Can
Save Mankind_ 161)—Pratchett suggests through Thud that there can be
games that (to be speciesist) humanize rather than dehumanize. In Space
Invaders and its myriad descendants the player’s enemies are fictional
and faceless: we have not met the enemy and therefore he is not us, to
misquote Pogo. Like Lord Rust in _Jingo_, the computer game-players see
an abstraction in which the enemy is simplified to a set of missiles. In
the game of Thud, by contrast, the whole point of the double game is to
see and even become the enemy. Thud allows the hereditary enemies dwarfs
and trolls to sublimate enmity within the game and use their will to win
to expand empathy instead of violence.

Carrot’s use of the football games in _Jingo_ is similar: warring street
gangs and national enemies can both be persuaded to transform violent
conflict into game-playing in which all are collaborators in the
activity, bound by the same rules. Although it is not clear that any of
them have actually learned the values that Carrot insists they always
already share, what they do in fact share is the reluctant recognition
of how both sides have in fact been dominated by Carrot’s own
charismatic personality. Carrot thus creates a new kind of commonality
in which both sides are on the same side in relation to the rest of the
world—they are players in the game, and subject to Carrot’s
arbitration—similar to Sally’s location of her battle with Angua as the
spectacle of mud-wrestling. As Vimes suggests, this is “sport as a
substitute for war” (_Jingo_ 382)—and as Carrot points out, it works.

_Art, Story and Identity_

In both _Thud!_ and _Jingo_, then, games may be seen as alternatives to
species-based conflict, enabling collaboration in the activity of
playing even as they reduce conflict itself to play. But I would argue
that _Thud!_ extends Pratchett’s commentary on the power of abstract
play to forms more generally recognized as art. A clue to this may be
found in the stolen painting of the original Battle of Koom Valley; seen
by many as a map concealing a clue to treasure, _Da Vinci Code–_style,
the painting turns out indeed to be a map to the truth when framed in a
new way. When it is displayed in the round, instead of flat on the wall,
it pinpoints the location at which its painter, the mad Methodia Rascal,
picked up the Device later found by the deep-downers that carries the
words of the famous dwarf king B’hrian Bloodaxe and the then Diamond
King of the trolls after they were trapped by a flood during the battle.
Both the deep-downers and Vimes can use the painting to seek out the
truth, holding it (or a pantograph of it) around themselves and matching
the mountains on its circular horizon to what they see. Perspective is
thus crucial to the interpretation of the painting, and truth, as is to
be expected in Pratchett, is not two-dimensional.

Perspective is an important element within narrative, as well, and
Pratchett’s deployment of narrative techniques highlights his concern
with art in this novel. It is noteworthy that, unusually in Pratchett’s
writing, several episodes within _Thud!_ have been presented in
flashback, drawing the reader’s attention to narrative process. For
instance, when the dwarf Ardent leads Vimes through the labyrinthine
tunnels of the dwarf workings underground, he responds to Vimes’s
increasing impatience by saying “We are nearly there, commander…. Nearly
there!’” (_Thud!_ 101). But instead of proceeding to the expected
encounter with the deep-down dwarfs, Pratchett interrupts the story with
an apparent digression to the wandering of a troll called Brick, whose
thoughts are represented in near stream-of-consciousness style: “Dat
mine wi’ dem dwarfs, was _dat_ real? You go an’ find a place to lie down
and watch der pretty pitchers, suddenly you’re in dis dwarf hole? That
couldn’a bin real!” (_Thud!_ 102; original italics). And this passage is
followed by the statement “When Vimes stepped out into the brilliant
daylight the first thing he did was draw a deep breath” (_Thud!_ 103).
The shock of this vision of sudden emergence from darkness is notable;
there is also a suggestive evocation of the novel’s prefatory passage,
“The first thing Tak did, he wrote himself…. The first Brother walked
towards the light, and stood under the open sky. Thus he became too
tall. He was the first Man. He found no Laws, and he was enlightened”
(_Thud!_ np). Vimes may have been enlightened (not, to the dwarfs, a
compliment), but the reader remains in the dark as to what he has
learned underground: the passage about the previously unknown Brick
substitutes for Vimes’s meeting with the dwarfs, offering the reader,
but not yet Vimes, an alternative line of investigation into the murder
of Hamcrusher. The substitution of troll for dwarfs, of light for
darkness, in the reader’s expectations highlights the importance of
narrative art in shaping our understanding. It demonstrates how in the
act of reading we engage continually with substitution, especially
through metaphor, as well as how we depend on expectations based on the
past to form a meaningful future. Substitution is the stuff not only of
games like Thud but also of art.

This is made explicit in perhaps the most important of the artworks
mentioned in _Thud!_: the picture book _Where’s My Cow?_ According to
the novel,² this picture book, read every evening by Sam Vimes to his
infant son, Young Sam, follows the quest of the unnamed narrator to find
his or her cow through investigation of alternative candidates for the
role, such as a sheep, a horse, and a hippopotamus. As noted above, the
story of the picture book is not merely mentioned or mentioned as being
read but is actually told, at least in part, on three occasions within
_Thud!_, to different effect in each case. It is made very clear that
this book is crucial not only in Vimes’s understanding of the mystery he
confronts as a detective (itself interestingly symbolized by Vimes as a
jigsaw puzzle on a number of occasions) but even in his construction of
his identity.

The first reading of _Where’s My Cow?_ amusingly takes place after the
Ankh-Morpork equivalent of a car chase. We are shown Sam Vimes running
desperately across the city, hijacking coaches, running across boats,
and even taking advantage of major streets especially closed for the
purpose by Carrot, in order, as it turns out, to reach home by six
o’clock and read to his young son. “It was important that no one else
was here. This moment in time was just for the Sams…. There was The
Reading of the Picture Book to be undertaken. That was the _meaning_ of
six o’clock” (_Thud!_ 149; original italics). Vimes’s desperate,
city-stopping run makes clear the importance of the six o’clock reading:
this is Vimes’s very newly self-imposed personal limit to concessions to
the demands of his job. Both in _Thud!_ and earlier, Vimes has had on
many occasions to apologize to his wife, Sybil, for abandoning her in
order to deal with some actual or imminent crime; the overruling
authority of six o’clock therefore marks a powerful change in Vimes’s
apprehension of himself. Potentially, he has become something other or
at least more than the Watchman; however, as Pratchett demonstrates, his
identity as Watchman is never more important to events than in _Thud!_.
Yet the resolution of this apparent conflict itself significantly
depends on the role of the picture book in Vimes’s sense of identity.

On its first reading in the text, Pratchett quotes the early part of the
story and provides what is presumably Vimes’s own commentary on its
absurdity. The first observation has overtones of the police report:
“The unidentified complainant had lost their cow” (_Thud!_ 150). But
this brief summary of the story’s situation is followed by a critical
review not yet of the story but of the creative process:

  Then the author began to get to grips with their material:

  Where’s my cow?

  Is that my cow?

  It goes, “Neigh!”

  It is a horse!

  That’s not my cow!

  At this point the author had reached an agony of creation and was
  writing from the racked depths of their soul [_Thud!_ 150].

As in game and art, the narrative comment here again shifts us to the
level of abstraction. Rather than engage with the story, the narrator
provides what seems an empathetic response to the inferred travails of
the artist as Romantic creator. The comic disjunction between this
emotional and emotive description and the banal repetition of the
picture book extracts invites readers to question their conception of
art and literature: must the production of art involve the “agony of
creation?”

But the repetition also highlights the minimal variation within the
picture book—only the name of the animal and the noise it makes changes
from section to section—and thus demonstrates its emphasis on similarity
and substitution. The horse is not a cow, not because of its appearance,
but because it goes “Neigh!” _Thud!_’s narrator observes that

  some suspense was lent by the fact that all other animals were
  presented in some way that could have confused a kitten, who perhaps
  had been raised in a darkened room. The horse was standing in front of
  a hat-stand, as they so often did, and the hippo was eating at a
  trough against which was an upturned pitch-fork. Seen from the wrong
  direction, the tableau might look for just one second like a cow …
  [_Thud!_ 150–51; original ellipsis].

Like other picture books for very young audiences, this one shapes
learning into discovery and quest, teaching not just about animals and
the noises they make but about similarity and difference, self and
other.

It is the quest element that dominates the second reading, in which the
quotations from the story are interpolated with Vimes’s thoughts not,
this time, about the story itself, but about his case. Following hints
provided by Mr. Shine, he is able to put together clues to the dwarfs’
behavior:

  Where did I see one of those Thud boards recently?

  It goes, “Neigh!”

  Oh, yes, Helmclever. He was very worried, wasn’t he? … That was a
  dwarf under pressure if ever I saw one; he looked as if he were dying
  to tell me something…

  Where’s my cow?

  That look in his eyes…

  Is that my cow?

  I was so _angry_. Don’t tell the Watch? What did they expect? You’d
  have thought he would have known…

  It goes, “Hruuugh!”

  He _knew_ I’d go spare!

  It is a hippopotamus!

  He wanted me to be angry! [_Thud!_ 267–68; original ellipses and
  italics].

As the process of the quest for the cow requires interrogation of
suspicious resemblances, so Vimes’s assessment of Helmclever’s behavior
changes once he focuses on the dwarf’s expression and considers him as a
person desiring to communicate rather than simply as an enemy.
Helmclever is not merely the agent of the deep-downers; he has his own
agenda that is at odds with theirs. Vimes’s recognition of Helmclever’s
motivation reclassifies him, in effect, as a hippopotamus rather than as
a recalcitrant cow, and his dealing with Helmclever can shift to that of
an ally helping Helmclever (appropriately, through a game of Thud) to
articulate his concerns with the actions of the deep-downers he serves.
This second reading of _Where’s My Cow?_ thus underscores the process of
connection and differentiation essential to Vimes’s unraveling of the
mystery.

However, although the picture-book’s story ends, inevitably in Vimes’s
view, with the discovery of the cow—“It was that much of a page turner”
(_Thud!_ 150)—the point for the nascent reader after the first reading
is not mystery, but the process of repetition and confirmation of what
he already knows. A horse, even if standing behind a hat stand, goes
“Neigh!”; only a cow goes “Moo!” Every reading after the first one is a
game. The two readings provided thus far, which are both already for
Vimes and Young Sam re-readings, dramatize the pleasure of play
formalized in Thud: individuality is simplified to stereotype, a
structure is established, rules are followed, and the reader achieves
narrative satisfaction.

The picture book is read by characters within the novel on a further
occasion, in a communal reading, not quoted in the text, in which
Vimes’s most trusted members of the Watch assist with the production of
the animal noises, underlining the reading as collaborative play. But
the final “reading” of _Where’s My Cow?_ provided within the text is
quite different from any of these. It is Vimes’s recital of the story
when, at six o’clock, far from sitting in his child’s bedroom, he is
charging through the caverns under Koom Valley possessed by the
Summoning Dark (a murderous entity known to the dwarfs that has been
evoked by a dying curse). The dwarfs are horrified by the sight of the
berserk figure approaching them:

  Vimes crouched and whirled the sword around in a circle. A little lamb
  rocked in front of his eyes…. He had found what he was seeking.

  “Is that my cow? It goes ‘Mooooo!’”

  Picking up another fallen axe, Vimes started to run.

  “Yes! That’s my cow!”

  The grags were behind a ring of guards in a frantic huddle, but
  Vimes’s eyes were on fire and there were flames streaming from his
  helmet. A dwarf holding a flame-thrower threw it down and fled.

  “Hooray, hooray, it’s a wonderful day, for I have found my cow!”
  [_Thud!_ 395].

The Summoning Dark has attempted to harness Vimes’s fury at the
deep-downers’ attack on his family in its pursuit of the cursed grags,
and the images from Young Sam’s bedroom (including the rocking lamb from
his clock) support his vengeful rage against the Other. “And then the
screaming started. His son, screaming. It filled his mind. _They will
burn_” (_Thud!_ 392; original italics). However, at this crucial moment
when Vimes’s own sanity as well as his ethical code is at stake, the
quest for the criminals—by now revealed as the deep-downers
themselves—and Vimes’s own moral conscience are alike sustained by the
picture book around which he has shaped his life since the birth of
Young Sam. His identification of the grags as the criminal/cow he has
been seeking does not after all lead to his slaughtering them. Instead
he is revealed to be guarded from within:

  _“They would have killed his family!” The darkness lunged, and met
  resistance. “Think of the deaths they would have caused! Who are you
  to stop me?”_

  _He created me._ Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? _Who watches the
  watchman? Me. I watch him. Always. You will not force him to murder
  for you”_ [_Thud!_ 397; original italics].

As a cow may be cursorily if misleadingly represented as an animal with
horns (and an identifying moo), Vimes has symbolized himself as the
Watchman, a game figure who guards the streets of his own mind. This
identity, with the identification of himself as the civilized father who
reads to his child so successfully that Young Sam coos along with the
story though twenty miles away, overcomes the power of the Summoning
Dark.

Not only the process of learning, the play with formula and
substitution, and the narrative quest found in the picture book have
assisted Vimes across this novel. Rather, his response to ultimate
stress is founded on his new identification of himself as the father
whose “day [goes] soft and pink” at six o’clock (_Thud!_ 265), and whose
job is always to protect the vulnerable. As the young Thud-playing grag
Bashfulsson explains, “You wouldn’t strike the helpless, you see. You
resisted [the Summoning Dark]…. I was frightened that the struggle
inside would rip the tendons from your bones” (_Thud!_ 404). The
deep-downers are arrested, the secret of the dead kings revealed, and
the dwarfs and trolls prepare to make peace. As demonstrated through
Vimes’s reading of the picture book, art as well as games can be
identified as a means through which the respondents can define their
values and produce a positive identity based on these rather than, as
Hamcrusher has advocated to the dwarfs, simply on rejection of the
Other.

It is therefore no accident that when Death appears to Vimes near the
climax of _Thud!_ he is reading a detective story, and invites the
half-crazed Vimes to contemplate the strangeness of doing so given that
“ALL ONE NEEDS TO DO IS TURN TO THE LAST PAGE AND THE ANSWER IS THERE.
WHAT, THEREFORE, IS THE POINT OF DELIBERATELY NOT KNOWING?” (_Thud!_
388). This postmodern moment removes the reader from the action just as
it appears at last to have become heroic adventure in Vimes’s rush
through the cavern after the deep-downers, instead focusing our
attention on the fact that Pratchett’s _Thud!_ is itself an artwork. We
are invited to see how even “genre writing”—heroic fantasy, police
procedural, detective story, thriller—can be deployed, and is here being
deployed, not (or not only) to assist in our escape from the
difficulties of our lives, nor to promote the easy acceptance of
stereotype that can be fostered by fantasies (and games) that
reductively assign immutable sets of characteristics to groups, but to
enlighten—or, as the dwarfs would say, to endarken. Death’s question
goes to the heart of our humanity: we are, as Huizinga suggests, the
species that plays, that makes art, and that revels in the experience
not merely of reading but, as for Young Sam, even of re-reading. We
engage in the activity of play for its own sake rather than functionally
to resolve a mystery or conquer an enemy. Like other human activities,
this one can have powerful effects, which may not always be positive, as
Johnny observed in _Only You Can Save Mankind_. In _Thud!_, however,
Pratchett focuses on the positive value of play. He demonstrates how we
may learn from art, even picture books like _Where’s My Cow?_, about the
importance of similarity and difference, or from games like Thud about
the power of empathy. Encouraged by our reading of _Thud!_, we can
engage with our own potential for civilization and, like Vimes, create
our own internal Watchman to guard an identity constructed in terms of
tolerance and cultural openness rather than by definition through
hatred.

Notes

1. As Cherith Baldry observes, “The influence [of the shoot-’em-up game]
may be practical and direct…. Or it may be more insidious, in creating a
society which believes that war is acceptable and that those who wage it
enjoy what they do” (47).

2. Pratchett simultaneously published a picture book entitled _Where’s
My Cow?_ (2005) that frames the narrative described in _Thud!_ with an
account of Vimes’s reading and re-writing of it, in a _mise en abyme_.

Works Cited

Baldry, Cherith. “The Children’s Books.” Butler, James, and Mendlesohn
41–65.

Butler, Andrew M. “‘We Has Found the Enemy and They Is Us’: Virtual War
and Empathy in Four Children’s Science Fiction Novels.” _The Lion and
the Unicorn_ 28 (2004): 171–86.

Butler, Andrew M., Edward James, and Farah Mendlesohn, eds. _Terry
Pratchett: Guilty of Literature_. 2d ed. Baltimore: Old Earth, 2004.

Huizinga, Johan. _Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture_.
1949. London: Granada, 1970.

James, Edward. “The City Watch.” Butler, James, and Mendlesohn 193–216.

Mendlesohn, Farah. “Faith and Ethics.” Butler, James, and Mendlesohn
239–60.

Moody, Nickianne. “Death and Work.” Butler, James, and Mendlesohn
153–70.

Pratchett, Terry. _Feet of Clay_. 1996. London: Corgi, 1997.

_____. _The Fifth Elephant_. 1999. London: Corgi, 2000.

_____. _Guards! Guards!_ 1989. London: Corgi, 1990.

_____. _Jingo_. 1997. London: Corgi, 1998.

_____. _Lords and Ladies_. 1991. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. _Men at Arms_. 1993. London: Corgi, 1994.

_____. _Only You Can Save Mankind_. 1992. London: Corgi, 2004.

_____. _Thud!_ 2005. London: Corgi, 2006.

_____. _Where’s My Cow?_ Illus. Melvyn Grant. New York: HarperCollins,
2005.

_____. _Witches Abroad_. 1991. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. _Wyrd Sisters_. 1988. London: Corgi, 1989.

Pratchett, Terry, Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen. _The Science of
Discworld_. London: Ebury, 1999.

Sawyer, Andy. “Narrativium and Lies-to-Children: Palatable Science in
_The Science of Discworld_.” _Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts_ 13.1
(2002): 62–81.


Counting Dangerous Beans

_Pratchett, Style and the Utility of Premodified Bits_

William C. Spruiell

  “A poet removes all signs from their places. An artist always incites
  insurrections among things.”—Viktor Borisovitch Shklovsky, trans.
  Robinson [127–8]

  “Devices that attract attention to words, sounds, or other
  embellishments instead of to ideas are inappropriate in scientific
  writing.”—_American Psychological Association_ _Style Manual_, 6th ed.
  Sec. 3.10 [70]

A colossal number of people have read Terry Pratchett’s _Discworld_
novels, and it would likely be difficult to find many of them who do not
think Pratchett has a distinctive writing style. They may find it
difficult to describe what they feel its characteristics to be (past the
requisite immediate mention of frequent word-play), but if explicit
description were a prerequisite for any assumption of existence we would
not have much of a world to interact with. One has to be wary of
monolithic constructions like “style,” but even were Pratchett’s writing
style to be entirely a product of the _belief_ of individual readers, it
would still be an interesting object of study (or series of objects of
study)—after all, as Pratchett himself points out, just because
something is a story does not mean that it is not important. We are, in
any event, in little danger of being forced to describe Pratchett’s
writing as styleless: in contemporary stylistic analyses, style is
frequently treated as involving systematic correlations between _any_
textual features and _any_ contextual factors relevant to the text.¹
Thus, it is almost impossible for anyone who has written more than a few
lines to be “styleless,” particularly as correlations do not require
causation at all (though readers can be counted on to supply it) and
authorship, even if it is only a matter of belief, can still easily be
perceived as a conditioning factor until and unless contradictory
evidence is encountered. Readers are humans, humans are good at
perceiving patterns even in random noise (apophenia)—and an
apophenogenic style is still a style.

Still, most of us would prefer epiphany to apopheny, even if we
responsibly worry that the difference may turn out to be a matter mainly
of ideology and marketing. If we are to venture a statement about what
Pratchett’s writing style is, how might we go about finding out, or at
least convincingly cobbling together, what that might be? At some level
the answer has to include some version of “examine Pratchett’s texts and
identify what is distinctive about them that can be attributed to
authorship,” although every part of that discussion is problematic. As
Fish has pointed out in his critiques of New Critical approaches to
literary analysis, anything one might want to say about a text in its
meaningful sense (e.g., not “_Ulysses_ is fairly heavy; I think we can
break the window with it”²) is derived from interpretation at some
level. None of the basic elements of lexicographic or grammatical
analysis are universally accepted. A positivist stance toward text and
style is simply one that is in denial; whatever comparisons we engage in
are acts of interpretation, not of discovery in its unexamined sense.
And we cannot expect “style” to be some unitary structural essence.
David Lodge’s image of the linguist homing in on the one essential
linchpin of an author’s style in _Changing Places_ is memorable
(especially to linguists, who are not accustomed to being represented in
fiction that does not involve aliens, pyramids, or alien pyramids) but
blessedly unrealistic.

Rather than attempting to provide an overall characterization of
Pratchett’s style, this paper will provide materials for
characterizations, while demonstrating some very basic techniques of
analysis drawn from the field of corpus linguistics. Much of it will
entail word-counts, which can be more interesting than they sound. What
I will arrive at will very much be open to the criticism of being a
hunter-gatherer’s collection of observations—it is completely
_EXPLORATORY_, and no attempt will be made at exhaustiveness. As there
are currently few analyses of Pratchett’s style, such exploration may be
useful nonetheless. One subsection will be focused on counting instances
of discrete items—sequences with type-nouns (_the kind of / some sort
of_), verbs indicating amplitude modulation (_sighed, yelled_) or type
of utterance (_stated, demanded, asked_), combinations of verbs of
vision with directional prepositions (_looked up, peered down_), and
expressions using _bits_ and _a bit_. These were all chosen as tests of
hypotheses, in that use of “hypothesis” that banks on it sounding more
scientific than “hunch”: I had some impressions of Pratchett’s style
that I wanted to test, and they were of the sort amenable to useful
destruction by data. A second subsection will examine some Pratchettian
names—such as _Dangerous Beans_—in relation to the different ways in
which they violate likely reader expectations. Both of these approaches
position authorial style as a matter of shifts in potentials, allowing
connection of specific observations about Pratchett’s prose to wider
discussions of the relation between humor and surprise.

However, since the discussion will involve some of the most loaded terms
in the humanities and social sciences (_text_, _characteristic,
author_), and since definitional differences among what deceptively
appear to be the same words are one of the standard pitfalls in
cross-disciplinary endeavors, I must first attempt to sketch out the
space of discussion enough that readers can at least locate
disagreement.

_Text, Deviation, Foregrounding, Ostranenie, and Squance_

The first issue is basic vocabulary. “Text” can refer to a physical
artifact (or set of artifacts; in this case, volumes with pages that
have black spots and non-black spots), it can refer to a basic
grammatical construct of some sort (a string of words that is taken to
also instantiate a set of grammatical categories, perhaps grouping into
hierarchical formations that may include sentences as units), it can
refer to a set of movements in an intersubjective
discourse-community-constructed choice-space, and it can refer to
whatever it is that the reader _experiences_ interacting with (we have
to assume this happens and admit that whatever it is may not be in every
particular determined by community interaction).³ The discussion to
follow will primarily adopt the “temporal pattern in social
choice-space” interpretation of text, in which the occurrence of any
item is interpreted as signifying choices among a set of potential
alternatives, with the choices each tied to different (potentially
immense) sets of distinctions potentially relevant to the interaction in
any way.⁴ While the description is profoundly oversimplified, it should
serve as an umbrella characterization of a wide range of contemporary
programs of textual analysis, for example Systemic Functional
Linguistics and Rhetorical Structure Theory to name but two.⁵ Its
foundations, as with most of modern linguistics, partly lie in
Saussure’s structuralist view that meaning is a function of distinction,
although most contemporary versions do not adopt strict versions of
Saussure’s _langue/parole_ distinction (nor Chomsky’s derivative of it,
_competence/performance_), and some also reject the
_synchrony/diachrony_ distinction and full binarism.

The analysis has to incorporate some way of constructing difference
usefully.⁶ Twentieth- and twenty-first century stylistic analysis has
typically analyzed differences in texts using a notion of _DEVIATION_,
starting with the seminal works of the Russian Formalists such as Boris
Shklovsky and Roman Jakobson, and Czech Structuralists such as Jan
Mukařovský.⁷ For the Formalists, literariness was tied to violations of
expectations—disruptions that, by encumbering a too-automatic process of
semiosis that reduces experience to schemas, encouraged
de-familiarization, or _ostranenie_; in its optimal state, a
re-connection with experience.⁸ The notion of de-familiarization was not
a new one (Erlich _Russian Formalism_ 179; Rossbacher), but the
Formalists made it central to their practice. De-automatization
presupposes automatization; there must be an established practice that
has enabled comprehension to be problematically easy in the first place.
There must be a normal, and it cannot be the case that any deviation
from it produces ostranenie; otherwise, any slip of the tongue (to say
nothing of making a pun) would trigger a revelatory episode. Likewise
there must be deviation; a completely unsurprising text is a completely
uninformative one. The Formalists were thus heavily concerned with
describing just what the conventional patterns of text were that could
be violated, and in what ways authors violated them (one of which, of
course, was to engage in egregious consistency where variety was
expected; parallel structures are unnaturally predictable).

Mukařovský developed a useful taxonomy of deviation by positioning it on
a global-to-local scale: primary deviation involved violating the rules
of the language, secondary deviation involved violating the rules of
genres / recognized text types, and tertiary deviation involved
violating whatever expectations the author had created thus far in the
text itself. This general approach, along with Mukařovský’s notion of
_foregrounding_—the patterning of elements so as to draw attention to
them to produce literary effects, akin to ostranenie (as I am using it
here) but more pervasive—has remained influential, particularly as both
deviation and foregrounding are highly amenable to interpretation within
modern cognitive science paradigms.⁹ When foregrounding is
operationalized as involving measurable changes in the reader’s
reactions, regardless of the reader’s consciousness of them, it becomes
an intersection between stylistic and psycholinguistic research.¹⁰ The
notion of deviation, of course, also invites a juxtaposition between
literary-critical and statistical modes of interpretation, even if only
through polysemy.

The global-to-local taxonomy, particularly if we do not take the number
of levels in it too seriously, is readily, if not unproblematically,
applicable to Pratchett. Science fiction and fantasy literature, along
with poetry and children’s literature, are some of the few literary
forms in which authors can be perceived as having an automatic _license_
for blatant positive primary deviation; sequences that no
English-speaker has any reason to expect have a much higher chance of
occurring. While fully fleshed-out examples are relatively rare, fantasy
and science-fiction authors _have_ made up entirely new languages to
write sections of text in, in some cases with spelling conventions that
(allowing for the vagaries of English sound-to-spelling correspondences)
are easily interpreted as prohibiting pronunciation by humans.¹¹ From a
traditional structural standpoint, Pratchett does engage in this type of
wholesale obvious primary deviation at points (sentences in dwarfish,
for example), but it would seem difficult to argue that it is one of his
more defining characteristics. He does not make the created languages
centerpieces, although he sometimes focuses on specific terms from them.

He does, of course, frequently compose or juxtapose English words in
unexpected ways—_Mightily Oats (Jugulum)_, an object of discussion in a
later section, appears balanced neatly on the edge of violating a rule
against modifying a noun with an adverb and being immune to it by the
exemption granted proper names, and it is worthwhile to try to pin down
in exactly which ways it is straining at the bounds of English. More
often, however, Pratchett is putting to good use the derivational
apparatus that English provides its speakers. The adjective _seagully_
(_Continent_), for example, violates no rules of English morphology at
all. Neither do what to an absolutely literal (especially
binary-processor-based) reader would be “foreign” words such as _thtop_,
once they are placed in context (Igor, in this case). They are patterned
variations _on_ English—arguably, secondary deviation—and therefore
recognizable as English; they raise a number of interesting questions,
but they are not doing the same thing as dropping an _ash nazg gimbatul_
into a text designed for people who will not have encountered it.¹²
Writers of humor frequently violate _pragmatic_ rules of English (Chiaro
43–7; Dżereń-Głowacka), which, if we adopt a now-traditional Gricean
view based on the Cooperative Principle, are the same as the pragmatic
rules used by speakers of any language—give the amount of information
needed, but not too much, and the like—but by virtue of their not being
anchored to English directly, it is difficult to view their violation as
primary deviation. Perhaps “ur-deviation” is needed.

Secondary deviation—departures from the norms of genre / text type—is a
different matter. Pratchett plays with genre conventions frequently, and
some of this play manifests as structures that even an analyst wanting
to maintain belief in a strict separation of “diction” and “content”
would have no problem classifying as lexical. Ponder Stibbons’ technical
vocabulary, for example (“If there is a suitably high flux level, the
inter-continuum pressure can probably overcome quite a high base reality
quotient”—_Lords&Ladies_ 36), a strong element of _Star Trek_ physics to
it (or of any of a number of other science-fiction presentations of
technology), and although thaumotech in fantasy certainly existed before
Pratchett (Poul Anderson’s “Operation Afreet” in 1956, for example), it
was in conflict, certainly, with stereotypes of fantasy literature.

Pratchett’s footnotes are a clearer example of genre-bending. They are a
scholarly graphotextual device and thus again a seemingly foreign
import, although because the noted science-fiction and fantasy author
Jack Vance was known for using them, they might be interpreted as
primarily a Vance allusion and only secondarily a genre-skew (but to
admit the existence of readers again, only for those with experience of
Vance). In any event, the grammar of Pratchett’s footnotes is different
from Vance’s.¹³ Vance typically maintained strict verisimilitude to
scholarly style; his footnotes are frequently noun phrases standing in
apposition to a word they are defining in the text—a convention familiar
to any user of dictionaries—or are full sentences. Pratchett adopts the
visual form of the scholarly convention (in that they are quite
recognizably footnotes, in the printed editions), but the footnotes are
in some cases adverbial _which_-clauses—a colloquial feature actively
prohibited by some formal style guides.¹⁴

Secondary deviation is frequently a matter of quantity, of a statistical
difference (the word-counting in the next section will, in fact, be
entirely an attempt to locate examples of secondary deviation). Cooper,
in _Mysterious Music_, for example, has argued that one of the qualities
that allows readers of free verse to _recognize_ it as such is the
greater-than-usual frequency with which syllables bearing primary stress
are positioned immediately adjacent to each other in poetry using the
form. The fact of Pratchett’s frequent word-play, against the backdrop
of the absence of such in most fantasy novels, thus may be counted as
secondary deviation as well, although Pratchett may have been so
successful at establishing his own subgenre that fewer readers now think
of “fantasy” and “humor” as rarely intersecting categories. This does,
of course, raise the thorny question of how much deviation is needed
before there is _real_ deviation, a question I will return to below.

Tertiary deviation occurs text-internally, so in application to
Pratchett it would involve any of the devices Pratchett uses within his
text to shift tone, to establish structure, to create or destroy
parallelism. It is the primary locus of argument for close stylistic
analysis (or any close reading, for that matter), and crucially depends
on interlocking and hierarchical patterns of sequencing in the text. As
this paper focuses primarily on elements at a fairly basic level (the
longest sequence considered in the next section is four words) it is
beyond the scope of most of the discussion here.

As an interpretive framework allowing texts to be viewed as existing in
relation to networks of norms, the idea of deviation does useful work.
Just what the norms are remain an issue, naturally, and we have to guard
against slipping into any pretense that they somehow exist as some sort
of Platonic true form, whose shadow we are attempting to delineate.¹⁵
Corpus linguists establish them by recourse to collections of texts that
act as reference sets but are always positioned _as_ reference sets;
they are simply what is possible for deviation to be measured in
relation to, and the choice of what to include in them is never a
neutral or theory-free matter. For trying to establish the extent to
which an author’s usage deviates from “overall” English, comparison
against broad reference sets representing multiple registers is a
logical choice (especially if the author is a humorist, and may be using
anomalous register mixing as a technique; see Venour, Ritchie, and
Mellish); if focusing on relations between the authors’ usage and that
of a set of similar authors, a much narrower set is warranted.

Deviation, however, might be seen as a set of potentials which _could_
act upon a reader. It exists “in” the text that our model of text
constructs, but it is necessarily divorced from even idealized readers.
Terms like “distinctiveness,” on the other hand, connote that something
has acted on at least some _actual_ readers. “It is distinctive” is much
more difficult to disguise as objective than is “It deviates from the
norm”; the damage historically wrought by the latter is directly tied to
its sneakiness. Leech positions foregrounding as requiring psychological
prominence; both produce measurable effects, but he defines
foregrounding as aesthetically active—so neither requires conscious
notice, but only the former affects aesthetic judgments (163). In
principle, it would be possible for deviation to be “there” without
having any behavioral or aesthetic effects at all (except on the analyst
who finds it in the numbers; publication counts as an observable
behavior, even in linguistics).

It is possible, of course, that all shifts in frequency do always affect
readers at some level, and that all effects impinge on aesthetic
impressions, thus rendering deviation, prominence, and foregrounding the
same thing for an idealized reader. Absent the “always,” the linkage
between deviation and prominence, and between deviation and
foregrounding, in actual readers can be a matter of empirical
investigation. In linguistics, the role that input plays in shaping
language is a perennial matter of contention, and the past several
decades, with the explosive growth of technologies allowing statistical
analysis of increasingly gigantic amounts of text, have seen the rise of
usage-based theories of language. Thus, there is a robust and
robustly-contested psycholinguistic literature attempting to measure
such effects. Snyder’s study serves as a possible boundary case; his
study found that as few as five exposures to a particular type of
ungrammatical sentence affect observers’ judgment of grammaticality (but
see Sprouse’s arguments that Snyder’s results were a side-effect of the
experiment design).¹⁶ Even if we adopt the “all deviation equals
foregrounding” position, however, it remains the case that deviation is
adduced from relations between reference sets and texts, and readers
will never have identical reference sets, and (perceptual processes
being what they are) will never encounter precisely the same text. If
our view of foregrounding is one that involves alterations of reader
behavior, they need to be actual readers (although one advantage of
ideal readers constructed for thought experiments is that they are
uncommonly cooperative).

It is also not the case that patterns of correlation that do affect the
reader will be directly tied to an impression of distinctiveness (which
need not be the same thing as an impression of literary quality), nor,
conversely, that a pattern that a reader does feel to be distinctive be
supported by a careful examination of the text. The possibility that all
of the effects that, in other areas of human perception and reasoning,
intervene between what is there and what people notice or react
to—stereotyping, the illusion of frequency (“You notice what you look
for”), and the like—would _not_ apply to style is, I think, remote. Mark
Liberman, for example, has noted pundits’ ability to detect elevated use
of the first-person singular pronoun despite the absence of any
supporting evidence. Likewise implausible is the possibility that what
might be considered emotional reactions _to_ deviation or foregrounding
would not affect perceptions of style, or more precisely,
style-as-experienced. There is a very real sense in which attributions
of difference require that something _feel_ different from an
experienced norm.¹⁷

In a perhaps-abusive exercise of an academic’s deriving license, I will
term “the felt difference between the felt expectations a reader has
(derived in part from that reader’s specific experience with previous
texts), and what the text is perceived to be doing” _squance_.¹⁸ To
compound coinage with metaphor, we could adopt an image from Mukařovský
(50) positioning norms as energy, as forces attracting speakers’ usage,
and view squance as a reaction to the torque produced by the reader’s
network of expectations (Hoey’s “primings”) interacting with the text.
Torque will exist regardless; it can, however, be perceived as one or
more of a multitude of things, e.g., a welcome diversion, a
re-connection with object-as-event (ostranenie), a marker of regional or
social difference, or, as with many older speakers encountering the
changed usage of the young, an excuse for their inner Buckleys to stand
athwart history yelling “Stop!” The perception that an author has a
distinctive style requires that the reader link the text’s squance to
the author, rather than to a genre or some other conditioning factor.
When readers of a text engage in tasks that are consciously, explicitly
author-_focused_, their reactions are a function of squance, not
directly of foregrounding or deviation.

Take, for example, the phenomenon of non–Terry-Pratchett writers
consciously writing “in the style of Terry Pratchett,” as in this
description of the death of J. K. Rowling’s Dumbledore from the 15 July
2005 online edition of _The Guardian_¹⁹:

  The hole was positioned immediately above a Dumbledore-shaped pile of
  robes currently resting on several cubic feet of stone and masonry,
  and, for some reason, a traffic cone.

  I LIKE WHAT YOU’VE DONE WITH THE PLACE.

  “Thank you,” said a dozen portraits in unison.

  VERY KITSCH. YOU DON’T SEE MUCH KITSCH THESE DAYS.

  “Oh dear,” said a muffled voice from somewhere within the robes.

  The Dumbledore-shaped pile got up, leaving behind another identical
  pile that looked distinctly less capable of upright posture. The ghost
  of Albus Dumbledore was wearing a traffic cone on his head.

  IS THAT A NEW LOOK? I HAVE SUCH A HARD TIME KEEPING UP WITH FASHION.

Such attempts presuppose that the writer thinks Terry Pratchett has a
style that can be emulated and they are implicit verifications of the
writer’s attribution of distinctiveness to Pratchett’s prose. They make
sense in a way that writing a piece “in the style of books that are at
45-degree angles to someone’s desk” would not. Their authors are drawing
on their felt perceptions of Pratchett’s writing, regardless of whether
the writer succeeds (however we would measure that); at the same time,
no one would be particularly surprised to discover that the piece’s
author had not come to the task with a meticulously articulated list of
Pratchettic features to encode. Style emulation is more akin to
attempting to mirror a movement. Trying to name the muscles involved
during the process does not help in the slightest. While some of the
features of the imitative text match those from Pratchett’s writing in a
way that is so obvious as to be probably uninteresting (having a Death
figure speak in all caps might be regarded as a similarity of content
rather than style, although that distinction is a vexed one), other
sections suggest possibilities to investigate. “Dumbledore-shaped pile”
uses a personal name as part of a compound modifier formed with the
participle “shaped,” and this certainly strikes me, at least, as
distinctive. Does Pratchett use personal names like this, and if so,
does he do so more than English-speakers do in general? (Spoiler: Yes.)

Similarly, given a set of sentences such as those below, at least some
Pratchett-readers will be able to assign rankings based on how much each
sentence sounds like an attempt at Pratchesimilitude. The issue here,
again, is not whether the sentences _are_ Pratchett-like, it is the
degree to which they can be felt to be such:

  1. A vista of tall cliffs, facing a sere wasteland, loomed before
  them, blocking any direct progress to the north.

  2. “Not to be intrusive or anything, but is that your newspaper?”
  asked Harald.

  3. It was the sort of side-alley that your average cormorant would
  never invite to _anything_.

  4. Several of the crates were stacked against the far wall, skewed
  slightly ajar as if someone had moved them hastily into place.

  5. She was far more concerned with where the chair wasn’t.

  6. Not being involved in the situation at all seemed like the absolute
  best state to be in, all things considered.

  7. His hand slipped under the table and came up holding a meat cleaver
  honed to paper thinness.

  8. It had been described as an odd shade of blue, particularly by
  people who keep their color terms down to what can be counted on one
  hand.

Traditional forms of stylistic analysis represent the results of
style-description tasks, if only ones imposed by the analyst on herself
in an attempt to articulate an impression; they exist only to the degree
that they are explicit, and thus may seem different in kind to
style-emulation and to the kind of style-categorization implicit in this
list (to which I will return later). But all three originate in what
those engaged in the task feel to be the author’s style, whether the
results converge or (perhaps more interestingly) do not.

If one’s goal is to define authorial style as a stable set of
correlations between author and text features relative to an abstract
reader, as most stylistic analyses must, these squantic intuitions
represent starting points, and some readers’ intuitions will constitute
better starting points than others.’ A “sensitive and observant reader
attuned to the use of the language,” as Leech puts it (163), is
presumably someone whose expectations approximate an intersubjective
mean more closely than those of most randomly-chosen readers, and whose
reactions to deviations from those expectations are perhaps more
pronounced (“Only those who _feel_ ideosomatic regulation can sense or
feel the creative movement of ‘blasphemy’; of deviation from the canon”;
Robinson 125). Deviation data derived from text-mining, and statistical
evaluation of those data, also represent starting
points—“empirically-derived ‘good bets’ to follow up on in undertaking a
subsequent stylistic analysis in terms of foregrounding” (Leech 164).

If, instead or in addition, one’s goal is to use reader behavior as a
way to investigate “style-as-experienced,” or the relations holding
between actual readers and texts-as-experienced, or even relations
holding between different _kinds_ of readers and texts-as-experienced,
deviation data and squantic intuitions remain relevant because of the
disjunction between the two; it is a matter of no little theoretic
interest—and to no few fields—that a pundit can feel a politician’s
speech to have a marked excess of first-person pronouns that it does not
in fact evince, or that adult readers are confident in judging Theodore
Geisel’s prose to be quite simple. At a more general level, readers’
native language varieties (e.g., British or American dialects) can
certainly affect their perceptions of authorial style (Francom and
Ussishkin), a point that is particularly relevant to the discussion of
writers read as widely as is Pratchett.

_Counting Instances_

In this section, I will examine the general frequency with which
Pratchett uses several sets of specific items, including single words
and sequences of two to three words. The term “sequence” is being used
because some of the two-word combinations (bigrams) and three-word
combinations (trigrams) may or may not act more as single units than as
series of “slots” with items substitutable within them in a manner fully
predictable from knowledge of English grammar and the denotations of the
specific words.²⁰ The strategy adopted here will be simply to dodge the
issue, although at some points in the discussion of results it will be
worthwhile to return to the fact that it _is_ an issue. Item frequencies
from Pratchett will be compared to ones derived from two different
sources:

  (a) A pair of large, balanced corpora of English—BYU-BNC (Davies)
  henceforth BNC for purposes of brevity, based on the British National
  Corpus, comprising roughly 100 million words of British English, and
  the Corpus of Contemporary American English, henceforth COCA (Davies)
  comprising roughly 450 million words of American English. Both allow
  classification of texts by major register: spoken (usually via
  transcripts of live television interviews), fiction, magazines, news,
  academic writing, and in the case of the BNC, additional
  “non-academic” and “miscellaneous” categories. Of these, only the
  spoken, fiction, news, and academic subcorpora were used. Pratchett’s
  writing is fiction, of course, so BNC-F and COCA-F are the closest
  comparators; spoken and academic are useful as extreme positions along
  a number of scales (formality, etc.) and Pratchett’s background as a
  journalist made comparing against the news category logical. Both
  corpora are accessible via web-based GUIs that allow the user to
  search for orthographic words, lemmas (abstracting away from “cat” vs.
  “cats,” for example), and lexical categories (“parts of speech”).
  Results can be viewed in terms of total frequency and in terms of
  “words per million” (henceforth WPM), a procedure that
  proportionalizes against the size of each subcorpus. If there are
  fewer words in the spoken–English sample than in the fiction sample,
  for example, then a lower total frequency in the former might still
  indicate a higher proportion than the same number in the latter; the
  WPM display compensates for this.²¹

  (b) A set of single-author text collections (discussed in more detail
  below). These were chosen simply as samples of other authors’ writing,
  and not structured in any way other than being incorporated as
  separate files within the composite whole for each author, so they are
  not formally corpora. However, they can be useful, particularly as a
  source of negative evidence (“Pratchett does X more than does typical
  British fiction, but definitely not more than Wodehouse”). These were
  downloaded as plain-text files from Project Gutenberg, and the
  Gutenberg-specific language at the beginning and end of each file was
  removed for processing. Tabulation of word counts and subsequent
  calculation of dispersion and correlation measures (also discussed
  below) were done using the R statistics / programming language (R Core
  Team), along with a graphical front-end interface and a set of
  extensions (“packages” in R).²²

As with much traditional stylistic analysis, the choice of items to
examine was partly driven by intuition and simple curiosity—I had the
impression, for example, that Pratchett uses expressions such as _the
sort of_ and _a sort of_ unusually frequently, and wanted to know if the
impression was accurate to any degree. Similarly, I had noticed cases in
which Pratchett had used an adjective to modify words like _bit_ (e.g.,
“the important bit”), and, as I associated this type of usage with
British comedy (particularly _Monty Python_ with its “naughty bits”), I
also examined instances of _bits_ and _a bit_.

In addition, however, the choices were strongly shaped by limitations
imposed by the method of access to the texts themselves. The _Discworld_
texts may be purchased in electronic format, but the license agreement
under which they are sold in the U.S. prohibits their conversion into a
format amenable to very large-scale analysis; investigating the rate at
which Pratchett introduces new vocabulary as a text proceeds, for
example, rapidly becomes prohibitively labor-intensive if done by hand.
The programs with which the texts may be read (Kindle, in this case) do,
however, allow searching with an upper “hit” limit of 100.²³ Thus, it is
possible to investigate orthographic sequences that (a) occur fewer than
100 times per text and (b) do not require part-of-speech tagging or
syntactic analysis to locate. While the situation is far from ideal, the
fact that there is comparatively little stylistic analysis of
Pratchett’s prose will, I hope, justify the profoundly approximate
nature of the approach (quantitative linguists at this point may be
wondering if the next step involves chipping flint). The texts and the
reader program were sufficient to allow filling out “number of instances
per text” charts (given time and patience), and these charts can then be
used as the input for a limited range of analyses.

The additional author-based text collections were added because COCA and
the BNC, while providing information about the frequency of items in
different sub-corpora, do not provide measures of how “bunched up” or
“dispersed” items are across the corpus.²⁴ One of the many ways
linguistic elements depart from being normally distributed is that they
are _bursty_; whatever factors lead an author to include an
otherwise-unusual word in a text may be operant across a large section
of that text, leading to multiple uses in that text but no others (and
the first use of the word can constitute its own conditioning factor for
subsequent use). Few people have any reason to make reference to the
Despotate of Epirus, for example, but Byzantine histories do, and the
ones that do have reason to mention it multiple times. Burstiness is the
focus of a very large and growing body of research at the intersection
of information theory and linguistics (see Altmann, Pierrehumbert, and
Motter as an example), but if we are interested in the degree to which
an author’s use of an item may be a reliable indicator of authorship, or
of the author’s style, then logically items that are used consistently
throughout the author’s work should count more than those that appear
frequently but in only one or two of the author’s texts.²⁵ Imagining a
corpus of all English text, we would want items that are author-bursty
but not novel-bursty.

Comparisons of Pratchett to COCA and BNC subcorpora thus allow
discussion of what the quantitative relationship is between Pratchett’s
total usage of an item and the total usage of the item across a very
large set of texts in specific registers, but they do not allow any
direct discussion of how much usage of the item is _characteristic_ of
Pratchett’s texts in general, or how much the total frequency reported
by BNC/COCA may represent a small number of texts’ having a very large
number of uses. To pick a trivial example, Pratchett uses the personal
name “Polly” a sizeable number of times—but four instances are from
_Eric_ (a parrot), four are references to a kitchen-girl in _Soul
Music_, and one hits the 100 limit fairly early on in _Monstrous
Regiment,_ of which Polly is the protagonist. Pratchett is hardly
characterizable as an author who frequently goes around naming
characters Polly; he named one major character that, and the character
has dialog.

The measure used here to represent dispersion is Gries’s DP score, which
represents the difference between the proportional frequencies of an
item per text and what would be _expected_ if the item were evenly
distributed across the texts based on the texts’ relative “size” in the
corpus. For example, if there are 100 instances of item X in the corpus,
and one of the texts represents 20 percent of the total number of words
in the corpus, one would expect 20 percent of the 100 to occur in that
text. If 90 percent of the 100 appear in it instead, the items are
clearly concentrated in that text. The DP score is lower the more evenly
distributed the items are; in a set of measures of the “BNC Baby” subset
of the BNC provided by Gries,²⁶ the most evenly-distributed word is “a”
with a score of just over .1; very unevenly distributed items may have
scores of .98. Since the goal in this discussion is to assign _more_
weight to items that occur more consistently for that author, the
dispersion-adjusted scores used in the charts below and the “by Author”
tables in Appendix B were obtained by multiplying the frequency of the
item, expressed in WPM, by (1-DP).

The selection of authors for comparison was shaped by pragmatic
limitations similar to those affecting the choice of items to examine.
Basic word-tabulations (for example, counting the instances of each
(orthographically-defined) word in each text in a set of texts) can be
done quite rapidly given “plain text” electronic versions of written
works, but few recent humor, fantasy or science-fiction texts—the
natural choices for initial comparison—are available in the public
domain (and the “ebook-reader-count” method, while usable, is not an
attractive choice for multiple corpora). Cory Doctorow, a contemporary
author whose works interweave fantasy, science-fiction elements, and
magic realism, has (thankfully!) made novels available to Project
Gutenberg, and thus these were included. The other texts used were also
drawn from Project Gutenberg, although the authors are obviously not
contemporaries of Pratchett. Weird Fiction author H. P. Lovecraft (via
Gutenberg Australia), British science-fiction author H. G. Wells, and
American Golden-Age space-opera author E. E. Smith were included for
comparison as speculative fiction samples, and texts by P. G. Wodehouse
were added for comparison because of his status as a British humor
writer. Because it is useful to have a sample that might serve as a
boundary case, texts by Edward Bulwer-Lytton were used as well. Table 1,
below, lists number of texts and total number of words per author while
full lists of texts per author are in Appendix A. For the Pratchett
texts, figures from the L-Space “Statistics” page and extrapolations
from the ebook editions were used; the calculations used later in this
section are based on a total word count approximating 3,510K.

[]

TABLE 1: NUMBER OF TEXTS IN, AND SIZE OF, AUTHOR TEXT COLLECTIONS.

Several of the Lovecraft texts and one of the E. E. Smith texts were
co-written; for purposes of this paper, I am assuming that whatever
stylistic differences their coauthors introduced are small enough to
permit the texts’ inclusion. Any detailed analysis of relations between
stylistic features in particular texts of Pratchett’s and particular
texts of Lovecraft’s or Smith’s, however, would render the assumption
highly problematic.

In addition to raw and proportionalized counts, Pearson correlation
scores were computed between series of subcorpus counts to determine the
extent to which author (or corpus in the case of BNC vs. COCA vs.
Pratchett) appeared to affect frequency of occurrence. While the
correlations provide no real information about differences between
_items_ in the series, they do provide a way of gauging how much one
subcorpus is using the items similarly to another. For example, consider
the following subset:

[]

All three subcorpora use forms of _looked_ more than forms of _glanced_,
etc. Whatever is going on here, much of it has to do with
population-wide differences in usage between forms like _looked up_ and
_peered down_—there are overall differences in how those combinations
are used. Those differences are interesting in their own right (of
course) but for current purposes, it is primarily useful to know how
much each _column_ “tracks” another _column_ in terms of values in the
one increasing when values in the other do, or decreasing in one when
the values increase in the other; in other words, how much information
one column provides about the other. If Doctorow, for example, always
used each of these constructions exactly half as often as COCA-F does,
those two columns would have a high correlation score—the only thing
about Doctorow’s usage that the COCA-F column _could not_ provide would
be the fact of the .5 frequency multiplier. Conversely, if the
relationship between pairs of items in the columns were completely
random, knowing the COCA-F distribution would tell us nothing about
Doctorow’s.

It is vital to point out some of the limitations of the analysis here:

  • LACK OF PART-OF-SPEECH TAGGING MEANS EXTRA AMBIGUITY. The verb forms
  that will be discussed are regular verbs with -ed suffixes, and are
  thus indeterminate out of context between past tense and past
  participle forms. From some angles, this is not necessarily a problem
  (a muttered word still involves muttering), but it does mean that the
  analysis does not take into account what the word is doing in the
  sentence. Also, the use of -ed forms ignores the use of _present_
  tense verbs, and authors are perfectly capable of adopting present
  tense as the primary tense of narration—so an author’s having a low
  rate of usage of “muttered” might be ignoring a very high rate of
  “mutters.” The novels used in the author collection are primarily
  past-tense narratives, but of course authors can shift to present
  tense for portions even so (it is one of the classic tertiary
  deviation moves, and my impression is that Doctorow uses it quite
  frequently). The investigation here is only intended to suggest
  avenues for further study.

  • CONSISTENTLY LOW NUMBERS ARE LESS INFORMATIVE. Linguistic
  expressions do not conform to normal distributions in the statistical
  sense; they instead follow what information theorists term a Zipf
  curve, a category of what elsewhere are called power-law distributions
  or Pareto distributions. Essentially, a few items occur extremely
  frequently (e.g., “the”), and a very large number of items occur very
  infrequently (e.g., “vug”); single-occurrence items are familiar to
  philologists as hapax legomena. Because of this distribution, the
  larger the corpus, the more likely the total frequency of a given item
  is to jump from “zero” to “one” (and if the corpus is under a million
  words, that “one” can show up as something like “2.92”). Thus, the
  presence of low but non-zero scores can simply be a function of corpus
  size. COCA is over four times as large as BNC, and the BNC dwarfs any
  of the single-author collections used here. Thus, comparisons between
  items that occur only at very low frequency are much less likely to be
  telling us anything. Since the correlation scores used are calculated
  between columns that typically have a few low frequency values in
  them, I will be taking care to use the scores heuristically—e.g.,
  using “these results suggest” rather than “these results indicate.”
  Any shifts in frequency connected to the status of particular texts as
  co-written, as discussed above, can also be expected to manifest more
  strongly for items that do not occur as often (with a boundary case
  being items that only the co-author uses).

  • THERE IS DOUBTLESS AN ERROR RATE. For a sequence like “looked up” to
  count _as_ a sequence, there should be no sentence-final punctuation
  intervening (“I walked over and looked. Up on the hill, there were…”).
  Such cases are fairly rare for the sequences being investigated here,
  and I have attempted to eliminate any. However, I will avoid any
  arguments based on small differences in frequencies (e.g., 34.57 vs.
  34.64 or even 36), since if there _is_ an error, it could easily be
  the cause of the difference. This is particularly an issue with low
  frequency values, compounding the problem discussed above.

TYPE NOUN SEQUENCES

The nouns _kind_, _sort_, and _type_ are the only three words that can
occur in the frame “the ___ of thing,” and the sequences _kind of_ and
_sort of_ are interestingly indeterminate—“a sort of green bird,” for
example, may be a variety of bird that is green, or it may be a bird
that is somewhat green, or a greenish shade the speaker does not want to
commit to pinning down too much (there is frequently less structural
ambiguity in spoken English, where the difference between “sort of” and
“sorta” provides extra information). _Type of_ is less common, and
occurs proportionally more often in academic English; _type_ was still
being used at the end of the nineteenth century in some cases
equivalently to _exemplar_ or _eidolon_, while the general “subclass”
uses of _kind_ and _sort_ are much older (see Denison; Brems and
Davidse).

A growing body of literature has examined the ways these are used in
modern English (see De Smedt, et al. for a detailed and careful review
of the literature on different uses of type noun constructions). In
their study of the constructions’ use in two very different corpora (one
based on samples from _The Times_, the other COLT, a corpus of teenage
London spoken English), De Smedt et al. found striking dissimilarities
in the use of different subtypes. In particular, adverbial qualifier
uses of _sort of_ and _kind of_ (among the “sorta” types) were markedly
(if perhaps not surprisingly) higher in the teenage spoken sample. What
might be viewed as a more literal or componential use, positioning
_kind, sort,_ or _type_ as a head noun followed by an _of-_phrase (i.e.,
what might be paraphrased as “a variety of” or “a class of”) was more
common in the written register. Similarly, Fetzer has analyzed the use
of type noun constructions in political speech (interviews, for
example), noting the differential use of certain types as hedging
devices. Politicians may appear too colloquial if they use _sorta_ as a
discourse particle, for example, but _that sort of thing_ as a reference
to a discourse-established referent can allow a quite useful level of
what Fetzer terms “fuzziness.” De Smedt et al. posit six major
categories of type-noun expressions, with subcategories of several of
these. Achieving this level of delicacy was beyond the scope of the
current paper, which limits itself to variations of two sequences:
[Determiner + kind/sort/type + OF], and [kinds/sorts/types + OF]; in the
first case, the determiners include _the, a(n_), _this, that,_ and
_some._

Results are presented in Tables B1a and B1b in Appendix B. Versions
using _types_ were at low frequencies across the samples, as were
expressions such as _these kind(s) of_ and _those kind(s) of,_ so these
will not be discussed. Figure 1, below, highlights some of the
interesting results. The pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that
Pratchett generally uses type expressions with _sort_ at a rate higher
than usual (keeping in mind “usual” here is defined only by the
reference corpora)—but with some interesting exceptions. He uses _the
kind of_ quite a bit more often than _the sort of_, although my initial
impressions of his style would have predicted exactly the opposite. He
also uses several expressions with _kind_ more often than either the BNC
or the COCA fiction rates, exceeding spoken rates in three cases as
well—again, not something that my conscious impressions of his style
included, although in general his usage correlates more strongly with
BNC-F (.87, p < .0002) than COCA-F (.80, p < .002), as one might expect.
One quite possible reason for the mismatch may lie in dialectal
variation: a comparison of the _kind_ and _sort_ sides of the figures
suggests a reversal of their frequencies between British and American
English, with British preferring _sort_. From the perspective of an
American English-speaker, _sort_ is a marked choice: I was positioned to
notice it more.

An additional point, not obvious from the charts in Figure 1, is that
Pratchett’s uses of _that sort of_ and _this sort of_ are usually
positioned in front of the word _thing_ (see Table 2, below). Across all
examined registers of the BNC and COCA, _sort_ is more likely to occur
than _kind_ in “[that/this] ____ of thing.” This may indicate the status
of “[that/this] sort of thing” as a multi-word unit (with limited
flexibility in the front position) that, in U.S. English, is not as
strongly affected by the general American preference for _kind_. _[A]nd
that sort of thing_ has specifically been discussed as a multi-word unit
by McCarthy and Carter (17–26) and Tagg (211) so the possibility of
_this/that sort of thing_ functioning analogously does not seem unlikely
(especially as it is shorter). A detailed examination of how Pratchett
uses _this sort of thing_ and _that sort of thing_ is beyond the scope
of this paper, but the approach developed by Fetzer in her analysis of
political discourse may be a useful starting point for further research.

[]

TABLE 2: PROPORTIONS OF _THAT KIND OF_ AND _THIS KIND OF_ TO _THAT KIND
OF THING_ AND _THIS KIND OF THING._

When Pratchett’s usage is adjusted for dispersion and examined relative
to corresponding values from the additional author collections, he does
not appear to be using these expressions to a much higher extent than at
least some other authors: except in the case of _some sort of_, there is
always at least one author who uses any given sequence at a higher rate,
as shown in Figure 2, below (a number of sequences are again omitted
because of their low overall frequency). Doctorow and Wodehouse, in
particular, show much higher frequency of use than Pratchett, with
Doctorow favoring _kind_ and Wodehouse favoring _sort_. Doctorow is a
Canadian author, and it is possible that Canadian use of _kind_ vs.
_sort_ aligns more with AmE than BrE; Wodehouse, as a British author,
might be expected to favor _sort_ for similar national-variety issues.

In short, Pratchett’s use of type-noun sequences can be argued,
_provisionally_, to be higher than the general norm for British and
American fiction, and as having some potentially interesting internal
patterns for further exploration, but nothing well outside the envelope
created by the six other, very disparate authors considered here. What
he does _with_ the type noun sequences, of course, could nevertheless be
quite marked in a way that simple counts do not reveal. Type noun
expressions, as discussed above, can be used both for
creating/manipulating hyponymic relations and for hedging/”fuzzing.”
Some of Pratchett’s hyponymic constructions certainly stand out:

  But if it’s a lot heavier than you, then my suspicion is that you’ll
  appear over there traveling at the sort of speed normally only
  experienced by sleepwalkers in clifftop villages in a very terminal
  way [_Times_ 56].

  But people were people, even if they had four legs and had called
  themselves names like Dangerous Beans, which is the kind of name you
  gave yourself if you learned to read before you understood what all
  the words actually meant, and reading the warning notices and the
  labels on the old rusty cans gave you names you liked the sound of
  [_Maurice_ 17].

The kind of archetypal “scientific” hyponymic expression one typically
encounters introduces a subcategory based on a relevant feature that is
presupposed to exist—“a fir tree is a kind of conifer with short
needles,” for example, presupposes that there are, in fact, conifers,
and that having short needles is a characteristic of a subcategory that
pre-existed the use of the expression, even if the hearer had not
noticed it before. Pratchett sometimes establishes subcategories that
_logically_ could pre-exist the reference to them, but that outside of a
philosophical argument or a comedy routine (assuming a clear difference
for the moment) would be on the vanishing edge of possibility or
relevance. We can talk about “the sort of marmot that rarely
spontaneously combusts” (presumably this is 100 percent of marmots, but
it is a standard feature of set theory that a subset can have exactly
the same members as its superordinate set), but normally marmots would
be put in subcategories on more socially-relevant critera.

[]

FIGURE 1: TOTAL FREQ. (IN WPM) FOR SELECTED [DET] TYPE EXPRESSIONS IN
BNC (SOLID LINE), COCA (DOTTED LINE) AND PRATCHETT (TRIANGLE). NOTE THAT
SCALES ARE NOT IDENTICAL ACROSS SEQUENCE TYPES.

[]

FIGURE 2: FREQUENCIES FOR EXPRESSIONS WITH _KIND_ (DOTTED LINE) AND
_SORT_ (SOLID LINE) ACROSS AUTHOR COLLECTIONS, ADJUSTED FOR DP
(WPM*(1-DP)).

SELECTED “SPEECH-TAG VERBS”

The term “speech-tag verb” here is an informal one; I am using it to
refer to verbs whose selection is tied directly to choices in what
Halliday and Matthiessen term speech function (108). They are among what
are sometimes termed performative verbs in linguistic pragmatics, and
their meaning is directly tied to what major interactional “moves” we
view speakers as making. The set was chosen partly to test for contrast
with the noise verbs in the next subsection; McGillis (in this book) has
suggested that words referring to noise have particular significance in
Pratchett, and these speech-tag verbs occupy some of the same functional
space but with different affective implications. _Say_, of course, is an
obvious member of the set, but its frequency precluded its investigation
for the Pratchett corpus (because of the 100-item limit). The five verbs
discussed here are _asked, declared, demanded, insisted,_ and _stated_,
although these are obviously not the only five verbs in the general
category. Pratchett, like many writers, frequently tags dialog for the
reader, using expressions such as “X, said Granny” or “X, Tiffany said”;
he is not one of those authors for whom the reader has to carefully
count lines to determine who has uttered what. The verbs used in such
tags rarely occupy center stage, but can be particularly interesting
_because_ of that, influencing perceptions of tone without being
obvious.

The tabulated frequency rates (see tables B2a and B2b in Appendix B) for
Pratchett and the BNC and COCA subcorpora do not show Pratchett’s use of
these terms as standing out in any obvious way. As might be expected,
rate of use is much higher in fiction (including Pratchett’s), but
Pratchett’s scores correlated positively with all subcorpora except for
the academic ones. English-speakers in general use _asked_ more often
than _insisted_, etc. Among the adjusted author rates, the author
Pratchett _least_ correlates with is Lovecraft (.77, p < .13), who uses
fewer of these verbs overall. Most readers of Pratchett and Lovecraft,
however, can probably articulate better candidates for stylistic
differences between the two already.

SELECTED “NOISE VERBS”

Like the speech-tag verbs, these can be used in dialog tags, e.g., “X,
shouted Rincewind.” Unlike the expression verbs, they directly indicate
physical, acoustic properties of the utterance while simultaneously
indicating affect—shouting and yelling are both loud, but if one is
overcome with joy the first is the likeliest word choice; sighing and
muttering may have equal amplitude but one would typically pair
“mutinously” only with the second. As with the expression verbs, no
attempt is made here to be exhaustive.

The tabulated frequency rates for these verbs (see tables B2a and B2b in
Appendix B) suggest more interesting relations among subcorpora and
authors than do those for the expression verbs. First, there appears to
be more variation in general in their use. In terms of the unadjusted
WPM rates, Pratchett correlates with the fiction subcorpora (BNC .97, p
< .05; COCA .88, p < .05) but not the other subcorpora—this is not,
perhaps, surprising. In comparison to BNC-F and COCA-F, Pratchett’s
usage rates appear to be markedly higher for all verbs except _yelled_,
as shown in Figure 3 below; his use of _sighed_ and of _shouted_ are
particularly high.

NOISE VERBS (BNC/COCA FICTION & PRATCHETT ONLY)

[183-fig-Alton]

FIGURE 3: NOISE VERBS IN BNC FICTION, COCA FICTION, AND PRATCHETT (WPM).

SIGHED / SHOUTED / MUTTERED, DP-ADJUSTED, BY AUTHOR

[174-fig-Alton]

FIGURE 4: SELECTED NOISE-VERB FREQUENCY PER AUTHOR, ADJUSTED FOR DP
(WPM*(1-DP)).

When compared to other authors’ DP-adjusted rates, his use of these
verbs still appears quite high; rates for the three most common verbs in
the set are shown below in Figure 4. Wells edges ahead of Pratchett in
shouting and Bulwer-Lytton in muttering, but for those two authors those
verbs constitute high proportions of their overall usage (_shouted_
represents almost 77 percent of the noise verbs used by Wells, and
_muttered_ is almost 56 percent of Bulwer-Lytton’s, but _sighed_,
Pratchett’s most frequent verb in this set, comprises only 30 percent of
his total). Pratchett’s adjusted scores correlate positively only with
Wodehouse’s (.90, p < .05), with Doctorow’s being the next closest (.74,
p < .1).

VISION VERBS WITH [UP / DOWN / AROUND]

This set of items comprises the four verbs _looked, peered, glanced,_
and _stared_ positioned before _up, down,_ and _around_, and like the
other items, they were chosen essentially as “probe expressions” to test
whether they were more common in Pratchett (how authors present situated
perception can be interesting). _Looked up_ is, of course, ambiguous in
English—“I looked up a word in the dictionary,” “Things looked up after
the fever passed,” “Bjorn looked up the chimney,” and “I looked up at
the sky” all arguably involve different patterns, and “I looked a word
up in the dictionary” is usually taken to involve the same pattern as
the first of the previous even though _looked_ and _up_ are not
contiguous. In many grammatical approaches, even when _up_ refers
transparently to a direction, cases in which _upwards_ can substitute
for it are considered to be adverbial, while in cases like “Bjorn looked
up the chimney,” it is taken to be a regular preposition. The approach
used here is necessarily syntax-blind, since part-of-speech tagging and
parsing was not a viable option for Pratchett. It cannot accommodate
linking “looked up a word” to “looked a word up,” nor can it treat
“looked up a word” as an idiom separate from “looked up the chimney.”
However, on the specific topic of the adverbial vs. preposition
distinction, Huddleston and Pullum (272–88) have argued strongly for
considering the distinction void, claiming that both represent
prepositional phrases, the difference being one of whether the
preposition has a complement.

Results of the tabulation (tables B3a and B3b in Appendix B) show an
interesting pattern of differences, although many of these expressions
were too uncommon to serve as good bases for argumentation. Of the
sequences that occur with moderate or higher frequencies, by far the
most frequent are those with _looked,_ all of which Pratchett uses quite
regularly (his DP scores on these three are all under .2). He also uses
_glanced up_ and _stared down_ with some frequency. In terms of which
sequences he uses more frequently than others, he appears to match
almost every other subcorpus and author—correlations among all the
subcorpora are extremely high. Among the adjusted author scores, the
only ones not to correlate significantly were E. E. Smith and Lovecraft
relative to each other and to Bulwer-Lytton and Wodehouse, who correlate
with each other almost exactly (again, however, the low number of items
suggests caution). In other words, it appears that most English-speakers
in general use _looked up_ more often than _peered down_, etc.—not very
surprisingly—but Pratchett certainly uses looked+[up/down/around]
_more_. Figure 5, below, illustrates the disparity.

_
_

LOOKED + P (ADJUSTED)

[]

FIGURE 5: [LOOKED] + [UP/DOWN/AROUND] BY AUTHOR, ADJUSTED FOR DP
(WPM*(1-DP)).

VAGUE BITS, SOME PREMODIFIED

The set of terms examined here is heterogeneous; one of my impressions
of Pratchett’s style was that he uses the words _bit_ and _bits_ fairly
often, particularly with modifying elements immediately before them
(e.g., “burnt crunchy bits”)—but I did not want to take the impression
at face value. I was conscious of finding _bits_ to be unaccountably
funnier than _pieces_ in general, and had to acknowledge that this (a)
might be a completely idiosyncratic reaction, and (b) might well be
causing me to notice differentially what instances are actually in the
text.

_Bit(s)_ can be used similarly to words like _fragment_ or _piece_, but
the (morphologically singular) form _bit_ can also occur in the hedging
or adverbial qualifying expression _a bit_ (“the soup is a bit spicy”).
This “noun/qualifier” split status is quite similar to that observed for
_kind_ and _sort_ above, and may be motivated to some extent by a
metaphor linking partitivity (“not the whole thing”-ness) to
approximation and then to hedging. For purposes of this paper, only four
expressions are considered: the plural _bits_, and the sequence _a bit_
along with two comparators, _somewhat_ and _vaguely_. Singular _bit_ as
an independent noun was left out because of its homography with the
_bit_ that is the past tense of _bite_, and while _rather_ would be a
natural comparator, its multiple functions rendered it similarly
problematic for the limited form of analysis here.

Of course, not every example of “a” followed by “bit” is an instance of
the qualifying expression _a bit_; in order to address this issue at
least partially, values for _a bit_ were determined by taking initial
counts for the sequence “a bit” and subtracting counts for “a bit of” in
the same text (thus the label “a bit (~of)” in the discussion to
follow). This will leave in instances in which _a bit_ refers to an
indeterminate period of time (“We waited around a bit”) and those in
which it refers to a fragment but has no _of-_phrase (“I was looking for
any aluminum foil that might have been left behind, and noticed a bit in
the corner”). The “indeterminate period of time” use might be argued to
be a form of hedge as well, and hence still relevant; the second type of
case is fully a “false positive”; all of the figures for _a bit_
discussed below should be interpreted as potentially including these.

Results of the tabulations are presented in Tables B4a and B4b in
Appendix B; Figure 6, below, summarizes the per-corpora WPM counts for
Pratchett in relation to the BNC and COCA subcorpora, while Figure 7
presents a summary of the DP-adjusted per-author results. Pratchett
does, in fact, appear to use _bits_ relatively frequently, both when
compared to the BNC and COCA subcorpora scores for total WPM and when
compared to the usage of other authors in DP-adjusted counts. He also
appears to use _a bit (~of)_ more frequently as well. Note that in the
BNC and COCA, both of these items occur more often in the spoken
register than in the others, and that in the spoken register, both occur
more often in British than in American English. The situation thus
appears analogous to the one with _sort_—there is a national-variety
difference in usage that is likely to cause American readers to consider
the item more marked than do British readers, who (if the BNC is
representative) are positioned to consider _a bit (~of)_ and _bits_
simply as colloquial or informal. My inference that _bits_ is a comic
option was quite likely based on heavy skewing in my reference set—until
the cable-only channel explosion in the late 1980s and early 1990s, BBC
programs in the U.S. were largely confined to PBS (Public Broadcast
Service) stations, which showed BBC comedies very frequently but British
dramas much less often (self-selection is likely a factor as well).

[]

FIGURE 6: TOTAL FREQ. (IN WPM) FOR SELECTED BIT-EXPRESSIONS AND
QUALIFIERS FOR BNC (SOLID LINE), COCA (DOTTED LINE), AND PRATCHETT
(TRIANGLE).

A BIT/SOMEWHAT/VAGUELY, DP-ADJUSTED WPM, BY AUTHOR

[226-fig-Alton]

BITS/PIECES, DP-ADJUSTED WPM, BY AUTHOR

[]

FIGURE 7: DP-ADJUSTED SCORES PER AUTHOR FOR SELECTED QUALIFYING
EXPRESSIONS (SOMEWHAT / VAGUELY / A BIT) AND PORTION TERMS (BITS /
PIECES).

While part-of-speech tagging was not feasible in general for the
Pratchett texts, it was possible to manually count the number of
instances of _bits_ with preceding adjectives for comparison with
figures from the BNC and COCA; results are shown in Figure 8, below.
Pratchett has a higher incidence of premodified _bits_, but this appears
to be simply a function of his using _bits_ more often in general; about
30 percent of his uses are premodified, compared to about 28 percent for
spoken British English and (interestingly) 36 percent for American
spoken English. Americans do not use the word nearly as often, but when
they do, it is premodified at least as often as in British English. The
lowest proportion is in British academic register (about 18 percent);
perhaps the association with informality renders it more to be avoided.

PREMODIFIED AND NON-PREMODIFIED BITS—BNC, COCA, AND PRATCHETT ONLY (WPM)

[]

FIGURE 8: FREQUENCY (IN WPM) OF _BITS_ WITH AND WITHOUT PREMODIFIERS PER
CORPUS.

As with _bits_ in general, my association of premodified versions of the
word with comedy is probably a result of a skewed reference set,
although in this case it may be one shared by many other Americans.
_Naughty_ appears to be one of the top five adjectives distinctively
associated with _bits_ in COCA (as measured using mutual information
scores, which are based on how much more often those two words occur
together than random chance would predict) with the others being
_browned, crunchy, stray,_ and _leftover_; for the BNC, the top five are
_boring, odd, pink, little,_ and _various_ (although eight of the ten
instances of _pink bits_ are all from the same source, dialog among a
family whose children are confronting food with a pink garnish).

_Counting Potentials_

Discussion in the previous section focused on items that, in theory at
least, the analyst could expect to find across a wide range of
texts—_look up_, and _shouted_, and _the kind of_ are familiar
expressions, and were chosen partly because they are so familiar that
one can imagine interestingly patterned use escaping conscious notice.
They were also “observable,” given a set of assumptions that a large
group of ordinary literate language-users could be expected to agree on
(there are specific Roman letters there, and there are spaces between
some of them, etc.), and except for the sequencing internal to the item,
the discussion did not have to make reference to any other facts about
positioning within a specific text—what mattered was how many times it
was there, not where it was. It is easy to imagine the question “how
many times did X occur?” in these cases as providing information that
_could_ be useful. For uncommon words, basic frequency information may
be useful as well because of its potential to let us identify author, or
text topic (the latter through the phenomenon of burstiness discussed
above). For example, the word _silts_ is quite rare in everyday English,
not occurring at all in many of the BNC and COCA subcorpora (it is most
common in BNC Academic, where it occurs at .52 WPM); but it occurs more
than forty times as often in Stephen Erikson’s _Malazan_ novels, a fact
that may have something to do with Erikson’s being an archaeologist.
Pratchett’s _knurd_, with its iconic letter-reversal altering _drunk_ to
a word for a state of pitched sobriety, likewise may tell us something
about Pratchett the wordwright while acting as a marker of texts’
association with Discworld.

Sentences and personal names are a different issue, and highlight the
need for approaches that address the _potential_ for a system to produce
a given result—that go beyond past frequency of item occurrence, and
allow constrained conjecture about the range of things that might occur,
and in what proportions. We do not, by default, expect specific versions
of either names or sentences to show up in identical form across a wide
range of texts unless they are particularly famous. We expect this
uniqueness despite it not holding as often as we might think—there is
more use of formulaic sentences than one would expect (“Results are
presented in Figure 1.” occurs four times in COCA), and personal names
are frequently far from unique (Guha and Garg, cited in Iria et.al. p.
480, found that 90,000 names covered a pool of 1,000,000 people). Given
two equally rare examples, however, it is not the case that readers will
view them as equally memorable. Take, for example, _Edgar Snow_, who
appears in the BNC exactly once, the same number of times as _Clyde
Kluckhohn_. It does not take any close reading to determine that
frequency of occurrence may not accurately predict readers’ ideas about
which is more memorable in this case. Regardless of observed frequency,
Edgar sounds the more _likely_. Likewise, neither “Cherry exports from
the Traverse City area decreased last year despite increased
consumption” nor “Bjarki deployed the surströmming to great effect
against enraged marmots” appear to exist on the internet at the time
this is being written, but they are unequally odd. Both are, however,
much more likely than “City exports the from decreased year Traverse
consumption cherry despite,” because whatever patterns any given
linguistic theory posits English uses, that sequence does not use enough
of them. In addition to “how many times does X occur?” we need some way
of addressing questions like “How likely is it that someone would _make_
X?” and “How often would Recipe Y get you X?”

Many Discworld names strike readers as highly distinctive—_Mightily
Oats, Dangerous Beans, Punctuality Riddle, Hrun—_but if I can venture
generalizing from personal experience, they do not sound equally
distinctive and they do not sound distinctive in the same ways; they may
thus serve as interesting examples to work with. For this discussion, I
will use _Mightily Oats_ and _Dangerous Beans,_ and as comparators _John
Smith_, _Jeremiah Silts_, and the usefully and awkwardly ambiguous
_Sleep Orange,_ along with the _Edgar Snow_ and _Clyde Kluckhohn_ we met
earlier. As an initial step, one of the simplest approaches to the “How
likely is it…?” question is to ignore the possibility of recipes:
pretend that there _is_ total chance and that a speaker makes multi-unit
expressions by randomly picking words out of a bag (this is rather
uninventively termed a “bag of words model”; see Goldsmith for a general
introduction).

If we adopt a probability scale ranging from 0 (“never”) to 1
(“always”), and start with a bag containing tokens with letters on them,
the chance of getting the sequence AB can be figured by simply
multiplying the chance of getting A by the chance of getting B (assuming
there is no chance we will run out of tokens any time soon). For
example, if _all_ the tokens have either an A or a B and they are in
equal proportions, this would make the chance for drawing AB equal to .5
times .5, or .25. We can thus derive one value of likelihood for
two-part names by assigning probabilities to their parts—using the BNC
Fiction values for those words, for example—and cross-multiplying. The
WPM measures, used in the previous section, are not directly pertinent
here; the actual proportional probabilities for the words must be used,
and the results are usually percentages small enough that converting
them back into WPM yields figures that are still hard to read. An
alternate measure for the results, one that remains readable for very
low probabilities, is _surprisal_ (Jaeger), also known as Shannon
information; it is the inverse log probability in base 2, and
_increases_ as a combination becomes less probable. For example _the_ is
the most common word in English; in COCA, it has a surprisal value of
about 4.16, while any word that occurs only once in COCA’s 450 million
words would have a surprisal value of 28.75. Using the BNC Fiction
counts for our set of names and plugging in a value of 1/100,000,000 for
words that do not occur at all in BNC-Fiction (e.g., _silts_), produces
the following²⁷:

[]

TABLE 3: BAG-OF-WORDS _PREDICTED_ SURPRISAL VALUES FOR NAME SET.

These values only partially match up with intuition (mine, at any rate).
For the non-fictional names, base frequency suggests that _John Smith_
will seem less surprising than _Edgar Snow_, who in turn is less
surprising than _Clyde Kluckhohn_; so far, so good. Names that we
probably already think could be “normal” may seem differentially
distinctive based on componential rarity. But Clyde is more surprising
than Mightily, and _Dangerous Beans_ and _Sleep Orange_ both end up
being less surprising simply by virtue of their parts being
frequent—this does not seem right.

Of course, language is not random—Kilgarriff has argued that it never
is—and part of either the reason or the explanation is grammar. The
field of linguistics has proven robustly immune from consensus about
exactly _which_ categories to use and how to talk about their
arrangements (the situation is one that invites comparisons with the
social dynamics of Pratchett’s wizards, minus any actual power
whatsoever), but the fact remains that words appear to go in categories,
and the categories do not combine by chance; adjective-ish words are far
more likely to go before noun-ish ones than after them. Both the BNC and
COCA code words for part-of-speech category, and the “Phrases in
English” site allows frequency counts for the BNC by part-of-speech
code. It is thus possible to calculate the same kind of surprisal values
as used for orthographic words above, but this time for category pairs;
a sample is given below in Table 4 (the scores are much lower because
there are far fewer category-labels than words).

[]

TABLE 4: SURPRISAL VALUES FOR SELECTED PART-OF-SPEECH BIGRAMS OCCURRING
IN THE BNC (VIA _PHRASES IN ENGLISH_; CODES IN PARENTHESES ARE PIE POS
TAGS).

Note that each of the names in our set can be interpreted as one or more
of these category combinations. To the degree that we can successfully
think of them as proper names, they are all “NP0 NP0” combinations and
hence have a categorical surprisal value of 6.44—and if words really did
act like variables to which we could seamlessly attach new meanings by
spot-patching the social contract, that would be the end of it. But some
of those names lend themselves easily to other interpretations, and
English-speakers cannot simply block those interpretations by noting the
initial capital letters on a sequence. Capitalization is a cue, but it
is one among many.

If we start with the assumption that readers’ prototypes for personal
names involve words that are specialized for _being_ personal names (as
the experience of most native English-speakers would suggest), then the
probability of a two-word sequence being a personal name should be
inversely proportional to the degree to which either of the component
parts has non-personal-name uses. _Mightily Oats,_ for example, does not
sound like a pair of personal names; it sounds like an adverb followed
by a plural common noun, although enough family names are derived from
plural common nouns to render that perhaps less incongruous. Neither
_dangerous_ nor _beans_ occurs in BNC Fiction as a proper noun, although
COCA has a couple of examples of a _Mr. Beans_. _Sleep Orange_ is
particularly ambiguous (it was designed to be), since _sleep_ can be
used as either a noun or a verb and _orange_ can be a noun or adjective,
but only the second word occurs more than a few times as a proper noun,
and it only rarely (_sleep_ is not found as a proper noun in the BNC at
all; in COCA, it exists because of text pertaining to the movie _Dark
City_, one of whose more disturbing characters is a Mr. Sleep). _Edgar_
and _Jeremiah_, on the other hand, rarely appear as anything but proper
nouns, _Smith_ occurs in non-proper-noun service comparatively rarely
(proper-noun use outnumbers common-noun use in the BNC at about an 11:1
ratio, and the verb use does not appear at all), and _John_ is likewise
far more often a proper noun than a common one (the ratio in BNC Fiction
is approximately 460:1). Words such as _Kluckhohn_ are quite easily
assigned to the proper noun category because of the frequency of
non–English-origin names in English (the other option is that it is
being used as a foreign borrowing). If we calculate surprisal values for
personal-name use by taking percentages representing the proportion of
total uses of each term in BNC Fiction that are proper names (again
using a dummy value of 1/100,000,000 instead of zero) and
cross-multiplying, we get the following:

[]

TABLE 5: APPROXIMATE SURPRISAL VALUES FOR COMBINATIONS AS PROPER NOUN +
PROPER NOUN SEQUENCES.

At this point, we are in a position to assign composite scores that
attempt to measure the likelihood of drawing tokens that, rather than
having sequences of two words or two category labels, have each of the
words attached to specific category labels. One of the useful points
about logarithms is that adding them together is equivalent to
multiplying what they stand for (which is why slide rules and logarithm
tables were standard tools before calculators), so figuring out the
surprisal value for drawing _dangerous_ as a proper noun and _beans_ as
a proper noun in that order—again, within a dramatically simplified
model of language—is a matter of adding together (a) the value for the
word combination, (b) the value for the proper-noun + proper-noun
combination, and (c) the value representing how unlikely (a) is to match
up with (b). For _Dangerous Beans,_ this is 29.73 + 6.44 + 30.06, or
66.23. For _dangerous beans_ interpreted as an “adjective + plural
common noun” sequence, on the other hand, it is 29.73 + 5.84 + 0 (the
last being the rounded form of the dummy value .001), or 35.57.
_Mightily Oats_ as a proper name ends up with a 66.24, very close to
_Dangerous Beans_, although what I regard to be its likely
interpretation—as an adverb followed by a plural common noun, is at
48.43. The total ranking for these combinations as proper names is
presented below in Table 6:

[]

TABLE 6: COMPOSITE SURPRISAL SCORES FOR NAMES.

This kind of ranking is obviously highly artificial and has numerous
flaws. We do not draw tokens out of a bag at random when we produce
language; when given a two-word sequence in which the first is almost
always a proper name, we are probably far more likely to expect the
second to be a proper noun (since we commonly operate with two-word
personal names in everyday life); and barring favism, for most of us the
world is a place in which beans are among life’s less dangerous
components, placing references to dangerous beans in roughly the same
category as those to nominalist porpoises or elegiac accountants. We
know far more about our language and what we do with it than this
approach represents, which is simply a construal of some frequency
information. We know, for example, that many parents actively avoid
giving their children names that sound like sentences or noun phrases,
making those names that do seem the more surprising. And readers of
fantasy and science-fiction know, when reading a novel in these forms,
to expect names that are not ordinarily expected—that is part of what
“learning the genre” entails. Names like _Hrun_ are, in fact, not very
surprising at all as a class once the reader places Pratchett’s texts in
a relation to Robert E. Howard’s or August Derleth’s; _Margaret
Thatcher_ in the Discworld very much would be, despite the fact that
both Margarets and Thatchers would be initially unremarkable.²⁸

But despite its flaws, this is a construal that lets us explicitly
describe proposals about _where_ some of the unlikeliness of expressions
resides, and it does seem to capture some of what is going on, albeit in
a way that appears cumbersome when applied to small sets of examples
(after all, why not just say “that’s a rare word, and it’s not usually a
name?”). It is, significantly, a kind of construal that can be
implemented automatically and applied to vast amounts of text; many of
the natural-language processing algorithms that underlie contemporary
search engines and data mining techniques involve much more elegant and
elaborated versions of similar strategies. It can connect narrow
discussions of Pratchett’s naming strategies to much wider discussions
of how language works, and to what degree an automated construal fails.

_Counting Humor (an Inconclusion)_

In the sections above, readers have been barraged with a set of
technical terms (some insidiously disguised as normal words like
“text”), item inventories that treat language examples in somewhat the
same way _Going Postal_’s Stanley Howler treats pins and stamps, and
some exposition on how to take pieces of common sense (“you don’t expect
rare words, but you don’t expect some of them less in fantasy”) and
somehow subject them to logarithms. Pratchett readers are likely
suspecting that whatever I have put in the bun and tried to sell them,
it warrants caution at least proportional to the sales pitch (and arcane
terminology and the trappings of math(s)²⁹ most certainly serve as a
sales pitch, even if that is not all they do and even if scholars try
not to admit it even to themselves). The discussion has largely avoided
trying to position linguistic description in detailed relation to
theories of humor. This is in part because humor is yet another enormous
area of study in its own right, and other scholars—for Pratchett,
specifically, Butler, Scholz, and particularly Haberkorn (in this
book)—have dealt with it in much more detail than I can begin to. Also,
of course, humor is notoriously resistant to algorithmic approaches.

But Pratchett’s humor is relevant to the subject at hand, and regardless
of the complexity of questions about _why_ we think things are funny, or
about what the different varieties of attempts at funniness are, I am
probably safe in saying that humor frequently involves incongruity, and
that it frequently uses a “setup + punch” structural pattern. The reader
(or hearer, or viewer) has to be able to build up a certain confidence
in what is going on before it is overturned. Humor can, and frequently
does, involve a moment of confusion leading to surprise, but the
transition from confusion to surprise does not happen if the confusion
is constant. Jokes in languages that we do not understand are never
funny, although we might laugh anyway if native speakers do. The
incongruity in humor has to be “spread out” to some extent for it to
work, and this creates an interesting area of intersection between work
on humor and work on information flow, with Pratchett’s texts, I think,
being a particularly interesting area for further study. All I will be
able to do here is sketch out connections between domains that are
entire fields of study; the difference between “interdisciplinarity” and
“dabbling” will be rather thin. But the potential connections _are_
interesting.

Attempts to apply quantitative text-analysis procedures to humor have
frequently focused on puns, because they are viewed as _comparatively_
easy; i.e., not obviously impossible. The archetypal pun is centered
around a single word that can be perceived as having two meanings, or
around a pair of words that either sound or look very similar. If
meaning is considered as a function of the word’s context, and context
is interpreted as constituted by or realized as “which other words are
around that one,” then in principle, part of detecting or generating a
pun involves sudden shifts in word co-occurrence. As a dismal, but
illustrative example, consider “He didn’t wreak havoc in that epic, but
he did reek epically.” _Wreak_ is the standard classroom example of a
word that collocates with one particular other word—_havoc_. The
_epically_ in the second clause is a cue for the context shift even in
the absence of spelling, and given sufficient exposure to large amounts
of tagged text, a machine-learning algorithm can acquire “expectations”
that are sensitive to such shifts in co-occurrence, and similarity
between non-identical forms (_wreak/reek_) can be evaluated using
Levenshtein distances between the spellings, pronunciations, or both
(see Mihalcea and Strapparava; Kao et al.; Mihalcea et al.).

In Prachett, of course, even what seem like simple puns frequently do
not fit the archetype; Prachett sometimes waits until the next sentence
to confound the reader’s interpretation, and the item acting as the
“hinge” of the play does not have to be orthographically a single word:

  As they said, you always knew where you stood with Quezovercoatl. It
  was generally with a lot of people on top of a great stepped pyramid
  with someone in an elegant feathered headdress chipping an exquisite
  obsidian knife for your very own personal use [_Eric_ 40].

The sequence “[KNOW] where [PRONOUN] [STAND] with X” is formulaic; in
Sinclair’s terms, it would be a lexical item. Pratchett lets the reader
glide through it before suddenly dissolving it with the next sentence,
using a sort of syllepsis (or crypto-antanaclasis; either term dresses
types of puns in loftier clothing, and makes a better sales pitch). In
principle, these types of structures are computationally not too
different from the simple puns research like Mihalcea et al.’s or Kao et
al.’s has already started working with.

At a more general level, separate from discussions of humor (although
Kao et al. is an exception) there is a rapidly growing body of research
exploring how a range of linguistic phenomena might be explained by
language-users’ attempting to manage information flow rate in a “noisy”
channel so that it stays within optimal boundaries (see Jaeger, who
terms this the “uniform information density” hypothesis, for an overview
to 2010) and by the communicative role of ambiguity (see Piantidosi et
al.). These are highly relevant to humor because of its reliance on the
“confidence/disruption” pattern: humor has to be more like walking along
effortlessly and then being tripped up than like carefully picking one’s
way across broken glass, staring at one’s feet every minute.

If those _comprehending_ language attempt to keep the incoming
information flow rate within an envelope created by processing and
channel constraints, readers would, logically, react to higher
information density by slowing down—a point which corresponds well to
most of our experiences of attempting to read material such as dense
philosophical texts or poems by Gerard Manley Hopkins. Douthwaite has
noted that “[n]ormality in reading is proceeding at a breakneck speed,
making predictions as to what will come next, then sampling the text to
verify these forecasts, in a cyclical fashion” (103); high information
density means that predictions made at full speed would fail more often
(keeping in mind that if the text is doing something the reader already
expects, its information density is lower for that reader). For most
verbal humor, ambiguity has to be present—for puns, for example, the
reader has to _know_ the other word—but drawing the reader’s attention
to specific ambiguities immediately, or placing the reader in a constant
state of alert, is counterproductive. If a humorist is to keep her
audience at a useful level of incaution, information has to be “spread
out” sufficiently; comedy is a confidence game, although comics, unlike
public relations flacks or politicians, operate by revealing the scam.
Density-_lowering_ devices may therefore be of particular interest for
humor analysts.

It might be interesting to note, for example, that among the sequences
examined in section two, above, the type-noun constructions and the
visual-verb constructions are “information-sparse” in certain respects.
Given the way human vision works, we know that if someone looks (or
glances or peers), the act will involve at least one direction; there is
an implied “x-wards,” and a preposition can supply direction without
having to supply any targeted detail (compare “look up” and “look
towards the sky”). Type-noun constructions in which _kind/sort/type_ act
as heads modified by _of-_phrases manage to warn the reader that some
kind of “thing” is about to be mentioned in advance of mentioning it,
thus parceling out part of the meaning of the expression early. In
addition, _any_ multi-word unit, to the extent that it constitutes an
“item” that is distributed across a longer span than (on average) many
single-word units, can be seen as comparatively less dense than a short
(especially monomorphemic) alternate choice. In other words, you know
where you stand with them (until you don’t). Verbs like _yelled_ or
_stated_, on the other hand, move more specific information about the
utterance into the same word that bears the primary tense; they could be
seen as denser. However, they are doing so by incorporating the
information into a schema that is already predictable in other ways. We
_know_ narrative can have tags like this, and the tags usually do not
introduce new participants (in Pratchett, the unsettling advent of
small-caps frequently lacks the tag). We expect them in a way we do not
usually expect other subject + verb pairs, and they prevent us from
having to engage in the unnatural speaker-matching task their absence
would necessitate.³⁰ Pratchett’s word-play may certainly slow down
readers for a moment, but these devices do not.

And this, of course, brings us back to _Ulysses_, and to the Russian
Formalists. If we think of “surprise” in terms of the frequency of
unexpected items or item-combinations within a given stretch of the
text, and consider the kind of “encumbrance” the Formalists celebrated
as being a function of a high surprise-frequency in this sense, then
most humor will fail to meet their criterion for literariness. It cannot
be dense enough and remain humor—except to audiences who are already
familiar enough with the material that it is not dense to them (this may
be why many post–Structuralist texts that valorize playfulness so seldom
appear to achieve it; they wear it like the more dutiful sort of hipster
wears a fedora, and performance art rarely manages to rollick). If,
however, we consider the amount of surprise _per time unit per reader
per act of reading_, we might get a different picture entirely. The
surprises are more spread out in humor, but the reader moves towards
them faster; to misuse yet another term from physics (and science
fiction), they are blue-shifted. This may not, of course, produce the
same effect that slow, encumbered reading does; the humor reader
(typically) does not feel her grasp of the language, and her
understanding of the context, challenged at every instant. But it still
does _something_. And if we are talking about Pratchett’s novels, it
does that something to a great many people. Audiences _voluntarily_ read
Pratchett. If we view texts through the lens of social praxis, Pratchett
has been enormously effective.

Roman Jakobson, with good reason by his definitions, described poetry as
“organized violence committed on ordinary language” (Erlich _Russian_
219_n_33); literariness is positioned as revolution, storming the
Bastille of automatization (and hence of ideology) to free its
prisoners. While the discourse of literary theory appears to have
largely abandoned Jakobson’s intrinsically binarist approach, and
certainly the Formalists’ early sharp distinction between literary and
non-literary language, some of the framing of the approach endures.
“Writerly” texts with high encumbrance are valorized. A reader forced to
become acutely aware of constant squance can make it an object of
consideration rather than a window that s/he does not know s/he is
looking through—while also emphasizing the author’s power even if the
author denies authority. _Rupture_ and _interrogate_ are uncommonly
common terms in literary theoretic parlance; it’s all about the leather,
and the theorist is firmly cast in the role that gets the cop hat. Adora
Belle would probably add a comment about horseradish.

Pratchett, however, does not seem to be the type to commit organized
violence on his language; he is honestly playful with it. If we accept a
position advocated by usage-based theories of language—that the process
of reading a text alters readers’ expectations about language in
general—the juxtapositional surprises he distributes across his text may
act as a form of noise injection, preventing the reader’s model of
English, or of genre, from assigning too high a probability to only what
has gone before. By decreasing confidence _a bit_, it increases
flexibility (see also Haberkorn, in this book). To borrow terms from
Sinclair, Pratchett’s word-play emphasizes the _Thespian_ model of
language (in which production and comprehension are seen as actively
interpretational and performative) over the _Academician_ one, in which
language is interpreted via a conduit metaphor and seen as
“transmission” of optimally-stable meanings (see also Reddy).
Pratchett’s dissolution of formulaic sequences lays bare the devices of
linguistic convention, but in measured doses.

Does reading Pratchett produce ostranenie? Here, we are firmly in the
realm of the subjective. Ask his readership (but define the term first,
and expect them to attempt to find the snake behind it,³¹ armed with
third thoughts and/or a pan and some garlic butter). As for the
eight-question Pratchesimilitude survey that section one carelessly
informed the reader that I would get back to, it may be interesting to
note that number seven is actually from Pratchett, that the cormorant
sentence in number three is indeed a transparent ploy to make my
discussion of type-noun sequences slightly more relevant, that number
two deploys a level of tentativeness arguably somewhat similar to that
achieved by hedging, and that pointing out where things aren’t is both
Pratchettic and Structuralist.³²

Grammars and style guides, as we typically think about them, are a bit
like Discworld’s gods. As soon as they do something useful, they start
garnering belief and can easily end up pretending they created what
prompted them (“tiny bundles containing nothing more than a pinch of
pure ego and some hunger” [_Turtle_ 130] is an excellent description of
the archetypal grammar pedant). Pratchett’s prose adopts roughly the
same stance towards grammars as the witches do toward gods: Regardless
of the gods’ (constructed) existence, “[there’s] no call to go around
believing in them; that only encourages them” (_Lords&Ladies_ 59).
Despite the splendor of the language below them, grammarians are seldom
satisfied. It is embarrassing to know that one’s job is to document a
creative phrase that only exists because every improbability curve must
have its far end; especially when one can peer into other grammars that
work seamlessly because their Creators have more mechanical aptitude
than imagination (to steal a phrase from _Turtle_ 131 and do something
untoward with it). Pratchett readers, accustomed to seeing gaps treated
joyfully as loopholes, can Rob Anybody.

Notes

1. See, for example, Leech (54), “A style X is the sum of linguistic
features associated with texts or textual samples defined by some set of
contextual parameters, Y.”

2. This would, however, be displacing signs from their places, and quite
arguably inciting insurrections among things.

3. See Leech (179–207) for a much more nuanced discussion of different
models of text and the basis of stylistic analysis, and Fischer-Starcke
(34–62) for a comparatively recent overview of a range of linguistic
stylistic studies (and the volume as a whole for a good example of
modern corpus stylistic analysis). The approach taken here will, in
addition to being highly exploratory, differ from these approaches via
an internalization move, heavily emphasizing reader variability and what
might be called _style-as-experienced_ as opposed to
_style-as-external-pattern_. Any problems inherent in this—and any
misuse of terminology—are entirely my fault.

4. Note that _choice_ here is not used with its typical connotations of
intention. The sense is that the language presents only certain forms as
“within the pale”—I can, for example, use a present-tense verb, or a
past-tense verb (usually with an -ed suffix), but English doesn’t
provide any basis for expecting a proleptic perfect with a -kzarr
suffix. Someone can certainly use one (providing whatever “proleptic
perfect” means can be devised or at least convincingly prophesied), but
it will not _mean_ anything from a discourse-community standpoint unless
the speaker can manage social interaction so as to “bootstrap” the item
into the language.

5. See Halliday and Matthiessen’s _Introduction to Functional Grammar_
for an overview of SFL, and Mann and Thompson’s “Rhetorical structure
theory” for an outline of RST.

6. By author fiat, if nothing else.

7. For Russian Formalism in general, see Erlich’s overview in “Russian
Formalism” and his detailed discussion in _Russian Formalism:
History—Doctrine_. For Shklovsky, see the translated collection of
essays in _Theory of Prose,_ and, for a recent discussion of his
positions in relation to Brecht and Tolstoy, see Robinson, who advances
an analysis drawing on theories of embodied cognition. For Jakobson’s
stylistics, see the collected essays in _Language and Literature_ and
“Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics.” For a discussion of
Mukařovský’s typology of deviation, see Leech 61–64.

8. See Erlich’s _Russian Formalism_ and particularly Robinson for
detailed discussions of the development of this concept; as a term,
_ostranenie_ has been used in a number of different senses, some of
which appear synonymous with terms like _estrangement, verfremdung_ and
_foregrounding_ and others not. As with any critical movement, Formalism
was not static. Since I will be concerned partly with the degree to
which textual features might be perceived as distinctive, I would like
to have a term for an upper boundary, something that the reader is
fairly sure _happened_ even if she does not completely know what it is.
I therefore want to use ostranenie (with the warning lack of italics)
specifically in the sense Bogdanov discusses it: “In the most common
cases of _ostranenie,_ the object still remains recognizable but it
undergoes a transition on the plane of representation and signification
that involves a revelatory participation of the other (reader) who
experiences this shift [sdvig] as an instance of being-as-event (in
Bakhtin’s terms) or as vision (in Shklovsky’s terms)” (51–2).

9. See Douthwaite for an in-depth discussion of foregrounding, from a
cognitivist/functionalist perspective, within a model of reading and
textual interpretation.

10. “There is no requirement that foregrounding should be consciously
noted by the reader” (Leech 61).

11. E.g., the Karrank%, a species in David Brin’s _Startide Rising_
whose name, we are conclusively informed by the glossary, “[i]s
impossible for humans to pronounce correctly” (606).

12. Even without readers’ other likely experiences with eye dialect,
these could be viewed a substitution-based English language-games (like
Pig Latin), with the “distance” of each word from what is expected in
standard English prose being a function of the number of substitutions
necessary to get from one to another, a measure known as Levenshtein
distance.

13. I noted this informally in an entry on _Hogfather_ in terms of
Pratchett commenting on his own text (199).

14. Labels vary by linguistic theory, but these are _which_-clauses that
are usually set off with a comma in standard written English and that
introduce a comment about the previous material; they are relative
clause structures conscripted as the grammatical equivalent of
parentheses.

15. Not adumbrate; that creates a recursion problem.

16. For recent discussions of how long-lasting effects can be, and
different factors establishing them, see Ivanova et. al; and Zervakis
and Mazuka. As examples of usage-driven models of grammar, see Croft;
Tomasello; and Hoey (it may be useful to note that Hoey uses the term
_priming_ with a different specific sense than it has in psychology).
Arguments _against_ the centrality of usage have been most strongly
articulated by Chomsky, most of whose work in linguistics has addressed
the issue; see Berwick, Chomsky, and Piattelli-Palmarini for a recent
statement of the position.

17. There is also a very real possibility that the reader may be
suspecting circularity at this point: “it’s distinctive because it feels
distinctive.” I am viewing “distinctive” as a label for a category that
presupposes the experience of Robinson’s somatic response but is not
identical to it. One might, for example, interpret a somatic response as
meaning that an item is _wrong_, rather than that it is _distinctive_;
centuries of linguistic chauvinism exemplify exactly this.

18. The term is based on an American dialect expression _squantswise_,
“off from the perpendicular,” famous among U.S. teachers of
undergraduate linguistics courses because of its use in the documentary
_American Tongues_.

19. As distinct from writers who have found after lengthy exposure to
Pratchett’s prose that it has worn grooves in their heads, even if
whatever is flowing through them is not nearly as entertaining.

20. The position that words, as usually conceived, are not always the
basic unit relevant to textual meaning—that sequences of _n_ words are
actually the primary “ground level” of linguistic production and
comprehension, with single words being simply cases with _n_ being equal
to 1—has been strongly argued by John Sinclair. The usage-based theories
mentioned above draw in part on this position, and there is an active
field of research on the following: the extent to which particular
sequences might act as multi-word units (see Arnon and Snyder); of what
the consequences of this may be for models of how the lexicon works (or
whether it exists—see Elman); how much the frequency of particular
sequences affects learning and production (see Ellis).

21. Proportional frequencies, which are expressed with numbers between 0
and 1, are the values actually used to calculate probabilities of
co-occurrence, etc., but these typically involve either a large number
of zeroes after the decimal place or scientific notion; for presentation
purposes, alternate presentations such as WPM are preferable.

22. RStudio was used as the interface; additional packages used were tau
(Buchta, Hornik, Feinerer and Meyer), openNLP (Feinerer and Hornik),
stringr (Wickham), and Hmisc (Harrell et al.).

23. As of the time of writing, the iBook reader allows searches that
produce more than 100 hits, but does not appear to recognize spaces at
the ends of search expressions—e.g., “looked up” will also match “looked
upon.”

24. An additional reason for including the author-based text collections
is that BNC and COCA, as they are compiled from very wide-ranging
samples (the point, after all, is to be representative), can be expected
to demonstrate regression to the mean. The larger the pool of
measurements, the more average the average. Single-author collections
can provide a few “envelope” points.

25. See Gries for a discussion of this topic, including the DP metric
that is discussed below.

26.
http://www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/faculty/stgries/research/dispersion/links.html.

27. The choice of .000000001 to represent the probability of all items
that do not appear in the BNC is obviously rather arbitrary. It treats
_any_ possible sequence as equivalent to a hapax legomenon in the BNC,
and thus overestimates frequency wildly for those that violate basic
conventions of English, e.g., _vrksl%nnnnk_. It should suffice for the
present argument, however.

28. “Initially” because Pratchett does not allow one to rest comfortably
in one’s assumptions about occupation titles; witness the seamstresses.

29. As a speaker of American English, I find one of them hard enough as
it is.

30. In spoken language, even if one does not know exactly who is
speaking, the speakers rarely have exactly the same voice. Matching
lines up to speakers is not something pre-literate societies usually
have to do.

31. “The thing about words is that meanings can twist just like a snake,
and if you want to find snakes, look for them behind words that have
changed their meaning” (_Lords&Ladies_ 122).

32. There are thirteen instances of “<personal-name>-shaped NOUN”
sequences in Pratchett (far more than in the BNC or COCA), and at least
seven of them involve <personal-name>-shaped holes, gaps, or shadows.

_Appendix A_

_EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON_

_Alice, or the Mysteries—Book 01
The Caxtons—A Family Picture
The Coming Race
Devereaux—Complete
The Disowned
Earnest Maltravers—Complete
Godolphin, Complete
Harold: The Last of the Saxon Kings—Complete
The Haunted and the Haunters
Kenelm Chillingly—Complete
The Lady of Lyons
The Last Days of Pompeii
The Last of the Barons
Leila, or, the Siege of Granada, Book I
Lucile
Lucretia—Complete
The Pilgrims of the Rhine
The Parisians
Rienzi: The Last of the Roman Tribunes
A Strange Story
What Will He Do with It?
Zanoni
Zicci: A Tale—Complete_

_
_

_CORY DOCTOROW_

_Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom
Eastern Standard Tribe
Home Again
Little Brother
Makers
A Place so Foreign
Someone Comes to Town, Someone Leaves Town_

_
_

_H. P. LOVECRAFT_

“The Affair of Charles Dexter Ward”
“The Alchemist”
_At the Mountains of Madness
_“Azathoth”
“Beyond the Wall of Sleep”
“The Call of Cthulhu”
“The Color Out of Space”
“Cool Air”
“The Crawling Chaos”
“The Dream Quest of Unknown Kadath”
“Dreams in the Witch House”
“The Dunwich Horror”
“Ex Oblivione”
“Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn”
“The Festival”
“The Haunter of the Dark”
“He”
“Herbert West: Reanimator”
“The Horror of Red Hook”
“The Hound”
“Imprisoned with the Pharaohs”
“The Lurking Fear”
“Medusa’s Coil”
“Memory”
“The Music of Erich Zann”
“Pickman’s Model”
“The Picture in the House”
“The Rats in the Walls”
“The Shadow Out of Time”
“The Shadow Over Innsmouth”
“The Shunned House”
“The Strange High House in the Mist”
“The Temple”
“The Thing on the Doorstep”
“Through the Gates of the Silver Key”
“The Tomb”
“What the Moon Brings”
“The Whisperer in Darkness”

_E. E. SMITH_

_The Galaxy Primes
Masters of Space
The Skylark of Space
Skylark Three
Spacehounds of IPC
Subspace Survivors
Triplanetary
The Vortex Blaster_

_
_

_H. G. WELLS_

_The First Men in the Moon
The Food of the Gods
The Island of Dr. Moreau
The Sleeper Awakes
The Time Machine
War of the Worlds
The World Set Free_

_
_

_P. G. WODEHOUSE_

_The Clicking of Cuthbert
The Coming of Bill
A Damsel in Distress
Death at the Excelsior
The Gem Collector
The Gold Bat
The Head of Kay’s
The Indiscretion of Archie
The Intrusion of Jimmy
Jill the Reckless
The Little Nuggett
The Little Warrior
Love Among the Chickens
A Man of Means
The Man Upstairs & Other Stories
The Man with Two Left Feet
Mike
Mike & PSmith
My Man Jeeves
Not George Washington
Piccadilly Jim
The Politeness of Princes
The Pothunters
A Prefect’s Uncle
The Prince & Betty
PSmith in the City
PSmith, Journalist
Right Ho, Jeeves
Something New
Swoop!
Tales of St. Austin’s
Three Men and a Maid
Uneasy Money
The White Feather
William Tell
A Wodehouse Miscellany_

_
_

_Appendix B_

B1A: TYPE-NOUN SEQUENCE FREQUENCY (WPM) FOR THE BNC, COCA, AND PRATCHETT

[]

B1B: TYPE-NOUN SEQUENCE FREQUENCY PER AUTHOR (DP-ADJUSTED WPM)

[]

[]

B2A: “NOISE” AND “SPEECH-TAG” VERB FREQUENCY (WPM) FOR THE BNC, COCA,
AND PRATCHETT

[]

B2B: “NOISE” AND “SPEECH-TAG” VERB FREQUENCY PER AUTHOR (DP-ADJUSTED
WPM)

[]

B3A: VISUAL-VERB + P FREQUENCY (WPM) FOR THE BNC, COCA, AND PRATCHETT

[]

B3B: VISUAL-VERB + P FREQUENCY PER AUTHOR (DP-ADJUSTED WPM)

[]

B4A: BITS AND PIECES FREQUENCY (WPM) FOR THE BNC, COCA, AND PRATCHETT

[]

B4B: BITS AND PIECES FREQUENCY, PER AUTHOR (DP-ADJUSTED WPM)

[]

Works Cited

Altmann, Eduardo G., Janet B. Pierrehumbert, and Adilson E. Motter.
“Beyond Word Frequency: Bursts, Lulls, and Scaling in the Temporal
Distributions of Words.” _PLoS ONE_ 4.1 (2009): e7678. 15 July 2013.

Alverez, Louis, and Andrew Kolker. _American Tongues_. Center for New
American Media, 1988.

American Psychological Association. _Publication Manual of the American
Psychological Association_. 6th ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2009.

Anderson, Poul. “Operation Afreet.” _The Magazine of Fantasy and Science
Fiction_. Sept. 1956.

Arnon, Inbal, and Neal Snyder. “More Than Words: Frequency Effects for
Multi-Word Phrases.” _Journal of Memory and Language_ 62 (2010): 67–82.

Barnwell, Colin. “Dumbledore’s Death in the Style of Terry Pratchett.”
_Guardian_ 15 July 2009. Web. 22 May 2013.

Berwick, R. C., N. Chomsky, and M. Piattelli-Palmarini. “Poverty of the
Stimulus Stands: Why Recent Challenges Fail.” _Rich Languages from Poor
Inputs._ Eds. M. Piattelli-Palmarini and R. C. Berwick. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2012. 19–42.

Bogdanov, Alexei. “Ostranenie, Kenosis, and Dialogue: the Metaphysics of
Formalism According to Shklovsky.” _The Slavic and East European
Journal_ 49.1 (2005): 48–62.

Brems, Lieselotte, and Kristin Davidse. “The Reanalysis and
Grammaticalization of Nominal Constructions with Kind/Sort of:
Chronology and Paths of Change.” _English Studies_ 91.2 (2010): 180–202.

Brin, David. _Startide Rising_. 1983. New York: Spectra, 2010.

Burchta, Christian, Kurt Hornick, Ingo Feinerer and David Meyer. “tau:
Text Analysis Utilities.” _R Package_ version 0.0–15. _CRAN Repository_.
2012.

Chiaro, Delia. _The Language of Jokes_. New York: Routledge, 1992.

Cooper, Gordon Burns. _Mysterious Music._ Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1998.

Davies, Mark. _BYU-BNC (Based on the British National Corpus from Oxford
University Press_). 2004–. Web. 2012–13.

_____. _The Corpus of Contemporary American English: 450 Million Words,
1990–Present._ 2008–. Web. 2012–13.

De Smedt, Liesbeth, Lieselotte Brems, and Kristin Davidse. “NP-Internal
Functions and Extended Uses of the ‘Type’ Nouns _Kind_, _Sort_, and
_Type_: Towards a Comprehensive, Corpus-Based Description.” _Language
and Computers_ 62.1 (2007): 225–255.

Douthwaite, John_. Towards a Linguistic Theory of Foregrounding_.
Alessandria: Edizione dell’Orso, 2000.

Dżereń-Głowacka, Sylwia. “Imagery in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld.”
_Imagery in Language_. Ed. Barbara Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk and Alina
Kwiatkowska. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang, 2004. 723–32.

Ellis, Nick C. “Frequency Effects in Language Processing.” _Studies in
Second Language Acquisition_ 24 (2002): 143–188.

Elman, J. L. “On the Meaning of Words and Dinosaur Bones: Lexical
Knowledge Without a Lexicon.” _Cognitive Science_ 33 (2009): 547–582.

Erlich, Victor. “Russian Formalism.” _Journal of the History of Ideas_
34.4 (1973): 627–638.

_____. _Russian Formalism: History—Doctrine_. 2d rev. ed. The Hague:
Mouton, 1965.

Feinerer, Ingo, and Kurt Hornik. “openNLP: openNLP Interface.” _R
package_ version 0.0–8. _CRAN Repository_ 2010. Code.

Fetzer, Anita. “Hedges in context: form and function of _sort of_ and
_kind of_.” _New Approaches to Hedging_. Ed. Gunther Kattenböck, Wiltrud
Mihatsch, and Stefan Schneider. Bingley, UK: Emerald. 49–71.

Fish, Stanley. _Is There a Text in the Class? The Authority of
Interpretive Communities._ Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980.

_____. “What Is Stylistics and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things
About It?” _Approaches to Poetics: Selected Papers from the English
Institute._ Ed. S. Chatman. New York: Columbia University Press, 1973.
109–52.

Fischer-Starcke, Bettina. _Corpus Linguistics in Literary Analysis: Jane
Austen and her Contemporaries_. New York: Continuum, 2010.

Francom, Jend, and Adam Ussishkin. “Converging Methodologies: Assessing
Corpus Representativeness Through Psycholinguistic Measures.” _American
Association of Corpus Linguistics_. Georgia State University. October
2011. Presentation.

Goldsmith, John. “Probability for Linguists.” 2008. Web. 15 July 2011.

Gries, Stefan Th. “Dispersions and Adjusted Frequencies in Corpora:
Further Explorations.” _Corpus Linguistic Applications: Current Studies,
New Directions._ Ed. Stefan Th. Gries, Stefanie Wulff, and Mark Davies.
Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2010. 197–212.

Halliday, M. A. K., and Christian Matthiessen. _Introduction to Systemic
Functional Grammar_. 3d ed. New York: Routledge, 2004.

Harrell, Frank E., Jr., et al. “Hmisc: Harrell Miscellaneous.” _R
package_ version 3.10–1.1. _CRAN Repository_. 2013.

Hoey, Michael_. Lexical Priming: A New Theory of Words and Language_.
New York: Routledge, 2005.

_____. “Lexical Priming and Literary Creativity.” _Text, Discourse, and
Corpora: Theory and Analysis_. Ed. Michel Hoey, Michaela Mahlberg,
Michael Stubbs, and Wolfgang Teubert. New York: Continuum, 2007.

Huddleston, Rodney, and Geoffrey K. Pullum. _The Cambridge Grammar of
the English Language_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Iria, José, Lei Xia, and Ziqi Zhang. “WIT: Web People Search
Disambiguation Using Random Walks.” _Proceedings of the 4th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007)._ Prague:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2007. 480–83. PDF.

Ivanova, Iva, et al. “The Comprehension of Anomalous Sentences: Evidence
from Structural Priming.” _Cognition_ 122.2 (2012): 193–209.

Jaeger, T. Florian. “Redundancy and Reduction: Speakers Manage Syntactic
Information Density.” _Cognitive Psychology_ 61.1 (2010): 23–62.

Jakobson, Roman. “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics.” _Style in
Language_. Ed. T. A. Sebeok. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960. 149–63.

_____. _Language in Literature_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1987.

Kao, Justine T., Roger Levy, and Noah D. Goodman. “The Funny Thing About
Incongruity: A Computational Model of Humor in Puns.” _Proceedings of
the 35th Conference of the Cognitive Science Society_. 2013.

Kilgarriff, Adam. “Language Is Never, Ever, Ever Random.” _Corpus
Linguistics and Linguistic Theory_ 1.2 (2005): 263–275.

Leech, Geoffrey. _Language in Literature: Style and Foregrounding_. New
York: Routledge, 2008.

Liberman, Mark. “Presidential Pronouns, One More Time.” _Language Log._
22 May 2011. 25 July 2013.

McCarthy, M., and R. Carter. “_This that and the other_: Multi-Word
Clusters in Spoken English as Visible Patterns of Interaction.” Ed. M.
McCarthy. _Exploration in Corpus Linguistics_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2006_._ 7–26.

Mihalcea, Rada, Carlo Strapparava, and Stephen Pulman. “Computational
Models for Incongruity Detection in Humour.” _Proceedings of the
Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing_. Iasi, Romania. 2010.

Mukařovský, Jan. _Structure, Sign, and Function_. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1977.

Mann, William C., and Sandra A. Thompson. “Rhetorical Structure Theory:
Toward a Functional Theory of Text Organization.” _Text_ 8.3 (1988):
243–281.

Neumann, Robert. “Statistics.” _L-Space_. 2012–13.

Piantadosi, Steven T., Harry Tily, and Edward Gibson. “The Communicative
Function of Ambiguity in Language.” _Cognition_ 122.3 (2012): 280–291.

Pratchett, Terry. _Faust_ _Eric_. 1990. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.

_____. _Interesting Times_. 1994. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.

_____. _Lords and Ladies_. 1992. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.

Reddy, Michael J. “The Conduit Metaphor: A Case of Frame Conflict in our
Language About Language.” _Metaphor and Thought_ 2 (1979): 164–201.

Robinson, Douglas. _Estrangement and the Somatics of Literature:
Tolstoy, Shklovsky, Brecht._ Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2008.

Rossbacher, Peter. “Šklovskij’s Concept of _ostranenie_ and Aristotle’s
_admiratio._” _MLN_ 92.5 (1977): 1038–1043.

Scholz, T. “The Making of a Hilarious Undead: Bisociation in the Novels
of Terry Pratchett.” _Fastitocalon: Studies in Fantasticism Ancient to
Modern_ 1.2 (2010): 141–152.

Shannon, C. E. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” _The Bell
System Technical Journal_ 27 (1948): 379–423.

Shklovsky, Viktor. _Theory of Prose_. Trans. Benjamin Sher. Elmwood
Park, IL: Dalkey Archive, 1990.

Sinclair, John. _Trust the Text_. New York: Routledge, 2004.

Snyder, William. “An Experimental Investigation of Syntactic Satiation
Effects.” _Linguistic Inquiry_ 31.3 (2000): 575–582.

Sprouse, John. “Revisiting Satiation: Evidence for an Equalization
Response Strategy.” _Linguistic Inquiry_ 40.2 (2009): 329–341.

Spruiell, William. “_Hogfather_.” _Beacham’s Encyclopedia of Popular
Fiction_. Vol. 13. Ed. Kirk H. Beetz. New York: Gale, 2001. 197–201.

Tagg, Caroline. “A Corpus Linguistics Study of SMS Text Messaging.”
Diss. University of Birmingham, 2009. 27 July 2013.

Tomasello, Michael. _Constructing a Language_. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2003.

Venour, Chris, Graeme Ritchie and Chris Mellish. “Dimensions of
Incongruity in Register Humour.” _The Pragmatics of Humour Across
Discourse Domains_. Ed. Marta Dynel. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2011.
125–146.

Wickham R. “stringr: make it easier to work with strings.” _R package_
version 0.6.2. _CRAN Repository_. 2012.

Zervakis, Jennifer, and Reiko Mazuka. “Effect of Repeated Evaluation and
Repeated Exposure on Acceptability Ratings of Sentences.” _Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research_. N. pag. 23 Nov. 2012.


Debugging the Mind

_The Rhetoric of Humor and the Poetics of Fantasy_

Gideon Haberkorn

The human brain is a device for making the world meaningful. It is the
hardware on which our mind, the software, endlessly weaves patterns of
meaning by creating connections and relationships. Fantasy can
foreground the tools we use to make meaning. Humor can help us notice
and correct mistakes our mind makes in its meaning-making. The space
opened up by the interplay between humor and fantasy is one in which
readers can probe their mental patterns for mistakes and try out new
ones. This interplay is present in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld novels,
which are both funny, and fantasy: Thus, the rhetoric of humor and the
poetics of fantasy are central aspects of the Discworld novels.

The course this essay will take begins with a few notes about minds
making meaning, leads to a discussion of the humor of the Discworld
novels, progresses to their position in the fantasy tradition, and ends
with a look at the interplay between the two aspects. Let me emphasize
that this essay does not, and cannot, aim to achieve a definite and
final statement, since books can be, and have been, written on all
theoretical areas touched upon—cognition, humor, fantasy—and since the
Discworld series itself has long become extensive enough to warrant
several books and articles of analysis. This article is the product of
much research, but more importantly, it will, hopefully, provoke much
research. With that in mind, let us begin.

_Cognition, and the Making of Meaning_

The mind makes meaning—it takes the straw of sensual perception and
spins it into the gold of a meaningful pattern, by creating connections
and relationships (cf_._ Baumeister 16). Things _mean_ by being part of
a pattern, and it is this pattern of connections and relations that
Geertz refers to when he describes man as “an animal suspended in webs
of significance he himself has spun” (5; see also Baumeister 16–17).¹
Since the crucial relationships, such as causal connections, cannot be
observed, they have to be inferred. That is why the webs within which
man is suspended are effectively self-made rather than found—and this is
a problem.

The problem lies in the fact that, as a rule, we are very good at
weaving webs: Paul Valéry maintained that “[t]here is no discourse so
obscure, no tale so odd or remark so incoherent that it cannot be given
a meaning” (qtd. W. Martin 86)—and Culler suggests that

  [i]f a computer were programmed to produce random sequences of English
  sentences we could make sense of the texts it produced by imagining a
  variety of functions and contexts. If all else failed, we could read a
  sequence of words with no apparent order as signifying absurdity or
  chaos and then, by giving it an allegorical relation to the world,
  take it as a statement about the incoherence and absurdity of our own
  languages [161].

Yet if everything is connected, connections become meaningless. If the
urge to make patterns is irrepressible, inevitable, we need other
processes which help ensure as much internal coherence as possible, make
sure the pattern is still adequate to the reality it structures—and if
necessary, weed out the mistakes. That is part of what philosophy,
critical thinking, and the empirical sciences do. As a rule, though, we
do not much like criticizing our ideas. We like to regard them as
natural, permanent and without alternative: Baumeister notes that
symbolic systems tend to overestimate the stability of the phenomena of
which they make sense, i.e., “[t]he idea is unchanging, but the reality
changes” (Baumeister 66)—and Midgley notes that “we assume that the
ideas we are using are the only ideas that have ever been possible,” and
go on to do so, “[u]ntil they explode” (6). In this context, the
question of whether the work of a widely read author offers a chance to
practice making meaning and troubleshooting that meaning is an important
one.

_A Rhetoric of Humor, or Why Did the Goat Cross the Bridge?_

Terry Pratchett often writes things that are funny. Fantasy writer
Michael Moorcock calls the Discworld novels “broad comedy” and
“excellent farce”—“one of the few specifically comic series in epic
fantasy (if that’s what it is)” (119). Fantasy scholar Brian Attebery
calls them “endlessly inventive, self-reflexive”—parody which has taken
on “a life beyond that of its ostensible target” (“Foreword” 310). John
Clute, editor of the _Encyclopedia of Fantasy_, has written repeatedly
and very eloquently about the way in which Pratchett’s Discworld is
home, for the most part, to comedy but not to comic novels—it is “a
Garden of Repose” precisely because its creator does not “shiver it to
growth, which is another Death” (_Evidence_ 168). For the intents and
purposes of this essay, all such distinctions can be put aside. It is
sufficient that Pratchett uses language in a way readers tend to find
funny.

There have been many theories of what exactly, as Martin puts it, “are
the mental processes involved in ‘getting a joke’ or perceiving
something as funny” (_Psychology_ 31). Serious overviews of humor theory
reach back as far as Plato and Aristotle,² and the most prominent
explanations are based on _superiority_, _relief_ or _incongruity_—humor
is a context in which we can feel superior to the butt of the joke, can
release suppressed feelings and thoughts, or can stumble across cracks
in our mental landscape. Although “most researchers agree that humor can
often be used to express aggression” (Martin 55), the superiority
theory, favored by Plato and Hobbes, has a problem: As Morreall notes,
there are many instances in which we feel superior, but are not likely
to be amused (9). Superiority and aggression are apparently neither
necessary nor sufficient for perceiving something as funny. While the
relief theory offers a neat explanation for the “predominance of
aggressive and sexual themes in most (if not all) jokes” (Martin 43), it
has its roots, via supporters like Spencer and Freud, in “an outdated
hydraulic theory of the mind” (Morreall 23). Philosophers like Kant,
Kierkegaard and Schopenhauer have supported variations of the
incongruity theory—an approach vulnerable to the criticism that “only
young children are irrational enough to enjoy incongruity by itself,”
while “rational adults should, or even can, face it only one way, by
trying to eliminate it” (Morreall 15). This criticism contains the seeds
of a promising alternative—one which preserves aspects of theories
focused on superiority and incongruity, but is grounded in cognitive
linguistics.

Before we get to this theory, I will just quickly note that I am aware
that there are other theories of humor; indeed, there are other
theoretical discussions of humor in Pratchett’s writing. Most notably, a
discussion of Pratchett’s work in the context of Pirandello, Bergson,
Freud, Lacan and Bakhtin has been undertaken by Andrew M. Butler. In
some cases, these authorities in their field have produced humor
theories long discredited; in some, they deal with humor as a mood or
mode or social phenomenon, rather than addressing the question of _how_
something is funny. In some cases, one might be forgiven for suspecting
that, instead of explaining humor, the aim is simply to prop up an
existing theoretical framework. In any case, it is neither useful nor
necessary to retrace Butler’s steps here. All that is necessary is a
rhetorical theory of humor, an argument for humor as a kind of mental
spellchecker, and evidence for the claim that it is an important aspect
to Pratchett’s Discworld novels.

If a psychological theory of humor needs to explain “the mental
processes involved in ‘getting a joke’ or perceiving something as
funny,” a rhetorical theory of humor needs to explain how to provoke
such processes. Rhetoric is the art and science of speaking well—_ars et
scientia bene dicendi_—“well” in the sense of “effectively,” and most
often, the effects rhetorical theorists are interested in are things
like _persuasion_ and _defense_. However, language can be used to
achieve quite a few other effects. A rhetoric of humor deals with the
question of how the tools of language can be used to make something
funny. The desired effect is what John Morreall calls _a playful
cognitive shift_—a rapid move from a _set-up_, which embodies a
“background pattern of thoughts and attitudes,” to a _punch_, which
“causes our thoughts and attitudes to change quickly” (50). Such
patterns can be thought of as _schemas_, _frames_ or _scripts_. It is
possible to think of set-ups as activating one script and punches as
activating another, incongruous with the first (R. Martin 86–87). One of
the most prominent current theories in the humor research community is
the _Semantic-Script Theory of Humor_ (SSTH), or rather its revised
incarnation, the _General Theory of Verbal Humor_ (GTVH), which offers a
complex set of tools and concepts for the analysis of jokes and, by
extension, longer humorous narratives (Attardo 108, 121). To apply it in
all its complexity is not necessary to support my thesis, and would
indeed be beyond the scope of this argument, but briefly: A joke
expresses in _language_ (L) a _narrative_ (NS) which puts a _target_ (T)
in a _situation_ (SI) evoking at least two distinct and _opposed
scripts_ (SO)—and it contains a _logical mechanism_ (LM) with which this
opposition can be playfully explained and resolved (Attardo 108). We
will have to leave it to future research to attempt a more detailed
survey of Pratchett’s most common Ts and LMs. For now, it is sufficient
to note that humor can be seen as a playful process of noting that there
is more than one way of looking at something, and then resolving the
opposition. In humor, it is fun to change your script, if not your mind.
At that point, those who follow the shift and discover the mistake get a
chance to feel superior, if only to their own erring, pre-shift selves.
The shift or reinterpretation usually moves from “higher” to
“lower”—“towards what is less desirable, such as failure, mistakes,
ignorance, and vice” (Morreall 51). A rhetoric of humor deals with ways
in which we can create that moment of discovery and shift—and make it
enjoyable.

This is vital: There is research that indicates we are happy if we can
fit our experience into a pattern, and unhappy if we cannot
(Csikszentmihalyi 36, 39), and Baumeister even describes human beings as
addicted to meaning (358). We also hate to find inconsistencies in our
views or actions, which may lead to _cognitive dissonance_, resulting in
tension and the urge to find the easiest way to resolve it (Cooper 6–9).
Since we like to see ourselves as intelligent, we do not like the
thought of making mistakes—and thus cognitive dissonance means we have a
hard time admitting being wrong (96). Humor not only provides a context
in which we can probe our meaningful patterns for flaws, it provides a
context in which finding and correcting such flaws can be enjoyable.

_A Pun, on Any Other Name…_

Armed with this basic theoretical framework, onwards to Discworld. One
aspect of Pratchett’s humor fairly frequently remarked upon is wordplay,
specifically funny names and puns. To begin with, there is Lord Havelock
Vetinari, ruler of the city state of Ankh-Morpork. His last name sounds
vaguely suitable for a Renaissance Italian nobleman, which fits the
context, but it also is a near homophone of _veterinary physician_, or
_veterinarian_. His first name is a real name, but also alludes to his
habit of collecting information by various secret means—it is, after
all, a near homophone of _have a look_. Another such name is Magrat
Garlick. While Magrat sounds near enough to Margaret to be a simple
corruption, the witch herself notes unhappily that it “sounded like
something that lived in a hole in a river bank and was always getting
flooded out” (_Abroad_ 31). Sure enough, we find Magrat, muck rat,
muskrat—_ondatra zibethicus_, a semi-aquatic rodent living in wetlands.

Places on the Disc often get similarly humorous names, such as
Djelibeybi and Hersheba, suitably Middle-Eastern sounding desert
locations, both of which are near enough in sound to the sweets _Jelly
Baby_ and _Hershey bar_. Rhetorically, what is interesting about these
and other funny names in Pratchett’s writing is that the two scripts are
activated by the same one or two words, based on identical or similar
sound. These sounds can make sense in two contexts: They usually sound
more or less fitting and reasonable as names, but they appear in a
context related to the alternative meaning. As in the cases of Havelock
and Magrat, the better examples allude to an alternative meaning which
also fits the context—like Qu, one of the history monks featured in
_Thief of Time_ and _Night_ _Watch_, who provides various gadgets and
devices: His name sounds suitably oriental, while also sounding enough
like the Q who performs a similar job for James Bond. At the heart of
these names is the pun.

One way in which Pratchett adds complexity to his puns is the inclusion
of additional languages: Here, readers will only understand the pun if
they know the necessary language(s), and often some more or less obscure
facts. For example, the Director of Music at the Ankh-Morpork Opera
House in _Maskerade_ is called Mr. Salzella. This sounds suitable
enough, but you need to know Italian, have some knowledge of the history
of table paraphernalia, and remember some music history—or the plot of
_Amadeus_—to understand why his name sounds so much like s_alt_
_cellar_—after all, the Italian for the _salt_ _cellar_, the precursor
of the salt shaker, is _Saliera_.

The Discworld country of Überwald contains mountains and dark coniferous
forests, peopled by werewolves and vampires, which makes sense to any
reader who knows both German and Latin: _Überwald_ translates as _over_
or _across (the) wood_, which, via Latin, gets you to _Transylvania_. A
particularly nice group of names occurs in _The_ _Truth_, where the
dwarfs who own and operate Ankh-Morpork’s first printing press using
movable type are called Boddony, Caslong and Gunilla Goodmountain. The
first two are the names of typefaces, while Goodmountain sounds like a
fairly standard Discworld dwarf name, until you translate it into German
and get _Gutberg_, which is near enough to Johannes Gutenberg, who
invented printing with movable type. One of the most complex examples
concerns the heads of two feuding noble families: Lord Albert Selachii
and Lord Charles Venturi. The _venturi effect_ is a principle utilized
in jet engines, while _Selachii_ refers to the biological classification
of sharks. Two warring families associated with _jets_ and _sharks_
should lead you, via the gang names from _West Side_ _Story_, to the
Shakespeare play the musical is based on: _Romeo and Juliet_, with its
two households, both alike in dignity. After such mental gymnastics, we
do not need to discuss at length why the nation of Klatch is famous for
its coffee.³

For each of these cases, two different patterns are activated in the
mind of the reader. More complex humor creates the
_assumption_/_mistake_/_correction_ sequence not in the minds of the
audience but rather in other minds, which the audience can witness in
the act—more complex because readers have to infer what is going on in
the minds of fictional characters for the humor to work. Pratchett
offers such puns as well:

  Sergeant Colon went back to his desk, surreptitiously opened his
  drawer and pulled out the book he was reading. It was called _Animal
  Husbandry_. He’d been a bit worried about the title—you heard stories
  about strange folk in the country—but it turned out to be nothing more
  than a book about how cattle and pigs and sheep should breed [_Feet_
  29].

The pun at the core of this joke is based on the true meaning of animal
husbandry—the breeding and raising of livestock—and Sergeant Colon’s
misinterpretation, which connects it to bestiality. It is complicated by
the fact that the mistaken interpretation is only vaguely hinted
at—“strange folk in the country”—so that the reader needs to fill in the
blanks.

Another way to complicate puns is to slip them into dialogue, as
illustrated in this snippet from a conversation between Death and one of
his customers:

  “I wish to make a complaint. I pay my taxes, after all.”

  I AM DEATH, NOT TAXES. _I_ TURN UP ONLY ONCE.

  The shade of Mr Hopkinson began to fade. “It’s simply that I’ve always
  tried to plan ahead in a sensible way…”

  I FIND THE BEST APPROACH IS TO TAKE LIFE AS IT COMES [_Feet_ 27].

While the connection of death and taxes is a straightforward allusion,
the taking of life as it comes is a pun, which has one meaning as a
piece of advice for mortals, and quite another when applied to Death.

Pratchett’s use of puns and wordplay links him to two British
traditions, which are embedded in a general fondness for puns notable in
a lot of British humor. The first specific tradition is that of the
_Carry On_ films, made mostly from the late 1950s to the 1970s, which
Porter describes as a “frantic mix of farce, parody and double
entendres” (61). The films’ frequent use of “puns both in dialogue and
character and location names” can be compared to Pratchett’s style,
although Pratchett is usually less bawdy (61). The second tradition is
that of the cryptic crossword, where “such a range of food is said to be
satisfactory” leads readers to connect _food_ to _fare_ and _fare_ to
_fair_, which is another word for _satisfactory_, or “headgear on
communist evokes intense dislike” prompts them to connect _hat_
(headgear) to _red_ (communist) to get _hatred_, which is an _intense
dislike_ (Manley 38, 50). Against that background, the move from
_Salzella_ to _Salieri_ seems almost straightforward.

_Low, Linked and Like: Understatement, Footnote and Simile_

It is practically common knowledge that English humor is especially fond
of irony and understatement. To understand what that means, it is useful
to look at Jerome K. Jerome’s _Three Men in a Boat_, and almost anything
by P. G. Wodehouse. Both work with what Muecke calls _impersonal irony_:
They create a “rational, casual, matter-of-fact, modest, unemotional”
narrator, who affects a tone of “dryness or gravity of manner” (52). But
there is more to their humor than that. When Wodehouse writes, “In life
it is not aunts that matter but the courage which one brings to them”
(11) or, “She wrinkles her nose at me as if I were a drain that had got
out of order” (157), then there are at least two steps involved: First,
there is an exaggeration—aunts are included among the serious trials
life has in store, and people are linked to blocked drains with all that
can entail. Second, the exaggerated image is put in understated
language—instead of aunts described in harsh words as catastrophes, the
drama is only hinted at in the notion that one needs courage to deal
with them. Instead of reading distressing descriptions of raw sewage
bubbling up from god knows where, readers are simply given a “drain that
had got out of order.” Things are taken one step further in two of the
better-known episodes from Jerome’s novel: After a detailed description
of the destruction caused by the narrator’s uncle Podger trying to hang
a picture, the man finally leans over too far and falls off his chair
and onto the piano, “a really fine musical effect being produced by the
suddenness with which his head and body struck all the notes at the same
time” (20). And then his wife comments, “that she would not allow the
children to stand around and hear such language” (21). A man’s
incompetent attempts to hang a picture are extended to near epic
proportions, then described with impersonal irony. The inevitable crash
is turned into a musical interlude, and the final explosion of cursing
is left out completely, only commented on by an earwitness. Similarly,
when the eponymous three men want to open a tin of pine-apples, they
fail miserably—and dramatically—until finally, one of them holds the
tin, another holds a sharp stone, and the third brings down the boat’s
mast on the whole affair.

  It was George’s straw hat that saved his life that day. He keeps that
  hat now (what is left of it), and, of a winter’s evening, when the
  pipes are lit and the boys are telling stretchers about the dangers
  they have passed through, George brings it down and shows it round,
  and the stirring tale is told anew, with fresh exaggerations every
  time.

  Harris got off with merely a flesh wound [100–101].

Again, the event climactic to an exaggerated series is left out
completely, and only hinted at mysteriously with the mention of stirring
tales, hats and flesh wounds.

All of these devices can be found in Pratchett’s Discworld novels. Here
is an example from _The_ _Truth_:

  “What happened to Mr Dibbler?”

  The dwarf put his head on one side. “The skinny man with the
  sausages?” he said.

  “That’s right. Was he hurt?”

  “I don’t think so,” said the dwarf carefully. “He sold young
  Thunderaxe a sausage in a bun, I do know that.”

  William thought about this. Ankh-Morpork had many traps for the unwary
  newcomer. “Well, then, is Mr Thunderaxe all right?” he said.

  “Probably. He shouted under the door just now that he was feeling a
  lot better but would stay where he was for the time being,” said the
  dwarf [23–24].

First, CMOT Dibbler’s famous sausages in a bun are described as traps
for unwary newcomers, and shown to be a reason to worry about a man’s
health. However, what these fiendish foods might do to the unwary is
then mercifully only described in terms of its vague results. Similarly,
_Lords and Ladies_ features a delay involving a troll, who ill-advisedly
refers to Unseen University’s librarian, who happens to be a orang-utan,
as a _monkey_, when he obviously is an _ape_. “Several minutes later,
the travellers leaned on the parapet, looking down reflectively at the
river far below” (194). In both cases, humor is created through a
pattern of _expectation_ (first script), _discovered mistake_
(opposition) and _reinterpretation_ (second script). A sausage and the
rather common confusion of apes and monkeys should be trivial things,
but they turn out to be dramatic. Yet these dramatic events are
described without the expected emotion, and when we expect dramatic
results, we get not even an understated description—we get a metonymic
description of an event through its effects (and those, again, rather
understated).

_Feet of Clay_ contains a further example of this, which also
illustrates Pratchett’s use of a device not usually associated with
narrative fiction—the footnote. A golem, who finds himself with money,
but no need for it, gives it to a beggar. Ordinarily, readers have every
right to expect that to be the end of it, the beggar being only on the
fringes of the narrative and of no consequence to its further course. He
is surely a trivial character. Yet, as soon as he is made “richer by a
whole thirty dollars,” he is annotated: “He subsequently got dead-drunk
and was shanghaied aboard a merchantman bound for strange and foreign
parts, where he met lots of young ladies who didn’t wear many clothes.
He eventually died from stepping on a tiger. A good deed goes around the
world” (12). The note ends in a statement that refers to a saying, but
also to the literal fact that the man has gone around the world as a
result of a good deed—it’s a play on words. The description of the
“young ladies” who do not “wear many clothes” is clearly an
understatement, and the description of the man’s death is again
metonymic, substituting the cause for the effect—the act of stepping on
the tiger was not what killed him, it was what presumably followed.
Finally, Pratchett uses the footnote, which in non-fiction is often used
to expand on tangential topics, to give a trivial character a whole
adventure worthy of its own novel.⁴

In a final example we can see two more cases of glossing, one case of a
footnote containing a comment or aside, a further pun, and more funny
names:

  “Right you are, Captain Carrot!” said the dwarf baker. “C’mon, lads!
  Let’s hang ’em up by the _bura’zak-ka_!”

  “Ooo,” murmured the weak of heart, damply.

  “Now, now, Mr Ironcrust,” said Carrot patiently. “We don’t practise
  that punishment in Ankh-Morpork.”

  “They bashed Bjorn Tightbritches senseless! _And_ they kicked Olaf
  Stronginthearm in the _bad’dhakz!_ We’ll cut their–”

  “Mr Ironcrust!” [_Feet_ 47].

Now, even without the footnotes, there is humor here. Pratchett’s dwarf
names often contain metals or connections to mining, but a baker called
Ironcrust has additional meaning. (We will skip discussing Tightbritches
and Carrot.) If you read through it too quickly, you almost miss the
metonymic “damply”—Pratchett has a tendency to have people wet
themselves in moments of fear or panic, although he never mentions it
directly. The passage gets three footnotes. _Bura’zak-ka_, which readers
might assume to be a part of the human anatomy, possibly a tender one,
turns out to mean “town hall.” This completely changes the meaning of
the surrounding sentence, because “by” does no longer refer to the part
the rope will be attached to, but rather specifies the location. Captain
Carrot’s note on Ankh-Morpork legal custom is annotated “Because
Ankh-Morpork doesn’t have a town hall,” changing what sounded like the
moral high ground into simple pragmatism. Finally, _bad’dhakz_, which
readers might again have associated with tender elements of the anatomy,
turns out to mean “yeast bowl”—thus, again, forcing us to reassess our
reading of the context, specifically the meaning of “in.”

Another aspect which links Pratchett’s writing with that of Wodehouse is
the use of figurative language, specifically the use of metaphor and
simile. Wodehouse writes of people moving “slowly off with bowed heads,
like a couple of pallbearers who have forgotten their coffin and had to
go back for it” (163), and describes somebody as “looking like a
bereaved tapeworm” (169). Pratchett describes geography as “physics
slowed down and with a few trees stuck on it” (_Feet_ 12), Nobby Nobbs
as having “a certain resemblance to a chimpanzee who never got invited
to tea parties” (_Guards_ 54), and summer as “a moving creature” which
“likes to go south for the winter” (_Feet_ 12). Getting an education, to
add a final example, is described in _Hogfather_ as “a bit like a
communicable sexual disease,” in that “[i]t made you unsuitable for a
lot of jobs and then you had the urge to pass it on” (40). If one thing
is described by a comparison with something else, we expect a certain
degree of similarity. The first moment of readjustment is caused,
therefore, by the outlandish point of reference. A second is quite often
caused by the realization that the comparison makes sense nevertheless.
One of the most brilliant examples comes from _Moving_ _Pictures_:

  Over Holy Wood, the stars were out. They were huge balls of hydrogen
  heated to millions of degrees, so hot they could not even burn. Many
  of them would swell enormously before they died, and then shrink to
  tiny, resentful dwarfs remembered only by sentimental astronomers. In
  the meantime, they glowed because of metamorphoses beyond the reach of
  alchemists, and turned mere boring elements into pure light [121].

If stars are mentioned in the context of the Discworld’s version of
Hollywood, we expect the equation of people with celestial objects along
the usual lines—above us, bright and beautiful, etc. Instead, Pratchett
provides a fairly literal description of physical properties of real
stars—and in the process, actually offers a far less glamorous but
probably far more realistic image of celebrities.

_Just Asking_

Apart from the impersonal irony described above, at least one more of
Muecke’s types of irony can be found in Pratchett’s writing:
self-disparaging irony, in which a character puts on the mask of an
“ignorant, credulous, earnest, or over-enthusiastic person” (56). The
two most famous practitioners of this type of irony are possibly
Socrates and Columbo. In the Discworld novels, this ironic stance is
often taken in conversations with people who feel very sure that they
are in possession of the one true interpretation of the world—only to
find themselves faced with innocent questions they have no good answers
for. An example from _Hogfather_ takes place in Unseen University’s
Great Hall, where Archchancellor Ridcully and the Senior Wrangler
discuss the mistletoe hanging from the ceiling. Ridcully opens with, “we
never invited any _women_ to the Hogswatchnight Feast, did
we?”—Hogswatch being the Discworld equivalent of Christmas. It turns out
that, of course, women would spoil everything, and have therefore never
been invited. Ridcully then wonders, what purpose the mistletoe could
possibly serve—which leads to a discussion of symbolism:

  “Well, er … it’s … well, it’s … it’s symbolic, Archchancellor.”

  “Ah?”

  The Senior Wrangler felt that something more was expected. […]

  “Of … the leaves, d’y’see … they’re symbolic of … of green, d’y’see,
  whereas the berries, in fact, yes, the berries symbolize … symbolize
  white. Yes. White and green. Very … symbolic.”

  [….]

  “What of?”

  The Senior Wrangler coughed.

  “I’m not sure there _has_ to _be_ an _of_,” he said.

  “Ah? So,” said the Archchancellor, thoughtfully, “It could be said
  that the white and green symbolize a small parasitic plant?”

  “Yes, indeed,” said the Senior Wrangler.

  “So mistletoe, in fact, symbolizes mistletoe?” [182–183].

By patiently and perceptively asking harmless questions from the point
of view of one who merely wants to understand, Ridcully gets the Senior
Wrangler to admit that the mistletoe hanging in the Great Hall is in
fact a thing of no practical use, which may be symbolic, but not of
anything in particular. It is, in fact, a rather pointless tradition.
The whole scene takes place in a novel about the point of Hogswatch
stories and traditions, and therefore makes an important point in a
humorous way. The same device is used on a different topic in _The Last_
_Hero_, when Lord Vetinari asks,

  “What exactly has Cohen the Barbarian done that is _heroic_?” he said.
  [….]

  “Well … you know … heroic deeds … [….] Fighting monsters, defeating
  tyrants, stealing rare treasures, rescuing maidens … that sort of
  thing,” said Mr Betteridge vaguely. “You know … heroic things.”

  “And who, precisely, defines the monstrousness of the monsters and the
  tyranny of the tyrants?” said Lord Vetinari, his voice suddenly like a
  scalpel—not vicious like a sword, but probing its edge into vulnerable
  places.

  Mr Betteridge shifted uneasily. “Well … the hero, I suppose.”

  “Ah. And the theft of these rare items … I think the word that
  interests me here is the term ‘theft,’ an activity frowned on by most
  of the world’s major religions, is it not? The feeling stealing over
  me is that _all_ these terms are defined by the hero. You could say: I
  am a hero, so when I kill you that makes you, _de facto_, the kind of
  person suitable to be killed by a hero. You could say that a hero, in
  short, is someone who indulges every whim that, within the rule of
  law, would have him behind bars or swiftly dancing what I believe is
  known as the hemp fandango. The words we might use are: murder,
  pillage, theft and rape. Have I understood the situation?” [20].

Again, careful questioning leads to the rather important point that the
difference between a hero and a villain may have much more to do with
perspective than we care to admit. In both cases, the questioning of the
ironic persona forces a discovery of flaws in a certain thought pattern.
The characters in question _may_ see the flaws and learn. The readers
who are made to laugh—via the _assumption_/_mistake_/_correction_
sequence—by definition see the flaws and may well correct them in their
own mental landscape.

Pratchett’s rhetoric of humor first of all creates a playful
atmosphere—the puns and the plays on words have a central role in this.
The use of understatement, humorous footnotes and comparisons—as well as
several types of irony—creates a safe environment in which to practice
questioning our mental patterns and assumptions. If the mind is usually
busy cheerfully spinning the straw of sensual perception into the gold
of a meaningful pattern, Pratchett’s humor gets it to happily check the
end result for knots and flaws. Since such questioning can become a
habit, it is not crucial whether these examples of humor deal with
important mental constructions or not. A mind that has learned how much
fun can be had questioning its own assumptions will not be stopped that
easily. Whether you want to pigeonhole them as broad comedy, farce,
parody, or even comic novels—humor is a central aspect of the Discworld
books, and their use of humor helps make them a training ground for
joyfully debugging the mind.

_Fantasy, a Modern Tradition_

I have mentioned John Clute’s essay about Discworld, comedy and the
comic novel. His argument may not have been central to my discussion of
humor, but it is keenly relevant to my discussion of fantasy, because he
argues that Pratchett keeps his novels in the realm of comedy rather
than comic novels by preventing change. Discworld characters are
resigned to an untransformable world, writes Clute—and “in this sense”
he argues “they are not native creatures of fantasy” (“Coming of Age”
26). Clute’s point here is that it is the “true secret of Discworld …
that it has remained free … of the dangerous pieties of transformative
healing”—and thus free of fantasy (30). However, the next step in my
argument will be that, based on my understanding of fantasy, the
Discworld novels are not free of fantasy at all, but are in fact steeped
in it. Fantasy is a central element of their makeup.

_Modern fantasy_ as a distinct literary field is a surprisingly young
phenomenon, younger than for instance _detective fiction_, and it
crystallized in the middle of the late 20th century. What does it mean
that modern fantasy crystallized at that point? The rules of genre, just
like natural laws, are predictions or expectations based on experience:
If you drop a stone, it will fall to the ground. If you read a mystery,
it will feature a crime, a victim, a detective, an investigation, a
culprit, and a resolution. Human beings tend to understand categories,
such as genres, “through a very concrete logic of typicality,” taking “a
robin or a sparrow to be more central” to the category _birds_ “than an
ostrich” (Frow 54); this is known as the prototype effect. As a result
it seems that, “[r]ather than having clear boundaries, essential
components, and shared and uniform properties, classes defined by
prototypes have a common core and then fade into fuzziness at the edges”
(Frow 54).⁵ In this view, we would expect literary genres to aggregate
around a core text, or a collection of such texts.

Thus, any definition of fantasy as a genre ought to presuppose something
of a tradition. The beginning of such a tradition, its wellspring,
should supply the prototypical core texts around which to cluster the
genre. Any future text is part of the tradition if it relates in one of
three ways to relevant aspects of the core texts: It can _repeat_ what
has gone before, it can _amplify_ what has gone before, or it can
_repudiate_ what has gone before. Amplification, which expands on its
precedents, can be seen as an evolutionary method of change, while
repudiation, which opposes or contradicts its precedents, can be seen as
a revolutionary one (cf. Carroll 63, 67–69).

When I say that modern fantasy as a distinct literary field crystallized
in the late middle of the twentieth century, I am referring to a moment
when two separate traditions came together. The two unwitting founding
fathers were J. R. R. Tolkien and Robert E. Howard (cf. Schweitzer,
“Conan” 977, and “Heroic” 379), and Pesch thus pinpoints the birth of
modern fantasy to the unauthorized publication of Tolkien’s _The Lord of
the Rings_ in the United States by Ace in 1965, and the publication of
the paperback edition of Howard’s _Conan_ stories in 1966 (36–37).⁶

On Howard’s side, fantasy is a child of _pulp_ _fiction_ with its
cursory characterization and formulaic plots (cf. Pesch 36; Attebery,
“Magazine Era” 34). It “emphasizes physical conflict between heroes and
supernatural creatures like gods and goddesses, demons, witches, or
wizards” and is hence most commonly labelled _sword and sorcery_
(Gramlich 779). In _science fiction_, the pulp plots “were often thinly
disguised westerns, mysteries or lost-world romances” (Attebery,
“Magazine Era” 34), and in _fantasy_, it is not difficult to see the
barbarian hero in the tradition of either the lone western hero or the
hardboiled detective: The heroes of sword and sorcery are “bigger than
life, violent and wield swords or axes,” and are usually far less moral
and altruistic than the term hero implies (Gramlich 779–780; cf. also
Clute, “Howard” 481). They may face “monsters or survivors of elder
races,” but they seldom encounter elves, dwarfs, or fairies (Gramlich
779). “The setting is generally a recognizable version of Earth where
magic works, either in the distant past or future” (780). This tradition
shares with classical science fiction a _sense of wonder._ Nicholls and
Robu argue for this concept as a feature that distinguishes _science
fiction_ from all other forms of fiction, “including most fantasy,” and
describe it as “a sudden opening of a closed door in the reader’s
mind”—a moment in which readers “can glimpse for themselves … a scheme
of things where mankind is seen in a new perspective” (1084). Sawyer
agrees that this sense of wonder, “the thrill of being forced into new
ways of seeing things,” is “[o]ne of the core effects of science
fiction,” but he is far less adamant when it comes to its exclusivity
(707). In science fiction, wonder can be triggered through “vastness of
scale,” or a level of alien complexity which “causes readers to reflect
upon their own positions as inhabitants of a universe stranger than they
imagined”—but also, in more naïve readers, through “technological
effects” and “big dumb objects” (707).⁷ In general, wonder is a profound
shift of perspective which makes new insights available to the reader.
It can be provoked by any “description of the indescribable,” any
“charting of places no one has ever been,” any “encounter with aliens”
(708). It has the power to make readers conscious of their world, to
transform acceptance into amazement, and to make the mundane appear
spectacular (cf. Senior 117–118). As such, a sense of wonder is
definitely an aspect of modern fantasy.

The second tradition which spawned modern fantasy is the one which
culminated, in the first half of the twentieth century, in Tolkien’s
_Lord of the Rings_, and which Schweitzer refers to as the “literary
stream” (“Heroic” 379). This stream “grew out of and has been greatly
influenced by fairy tales, the body of narratives derived from the oral
folktales of magic” (Eilers 319). It can be argued that the main reason
fantasy does not simply form a continuous tradition with most if not all
fiction that went before is simply the profound shift in the horizon of
expectation effected, at least in Europe and Anglo-America, by the rise
of the novel (see Eilers 335; Clute, “Taproot” 921).⁸ Clute emphasizes
the changes the realist novel brought to readerly expectations, while
Eilers insists that fantasy “originated when writers began applying the
techniques of literary realism in stories in which the extranatural
played a fundamental role” (335). Thus, the literary stream brings to
fantasy a fusion of conventional realism with the subject matter of
non-realistic fiction. Its writers “manifested a modern emphasis on the
individual by developing original plots, particular characters, and
particular settings,” and employed “a largely descriptive, referential
prose instead of the refined, condensed style that had been
traditionally employed” (335). In essence, the tradition of literary
fantasy carries at its heart the depiction of extranatural events in a
way which creates an “illusion of reality” (318). Clute suggests that
texts on which modern fantasy clearly draws but which were written
before this shift be labelled taproot texts (“Taproot” 921).⁹ Through
its taproot texts, the literary tradition of fantasy links back to a
largely oral tradition of storytelling.

The modern fantasy tradition is largely a body of narratives featuring
_existents_ (i.e., characters and settings) and _events_ (i.e., actions
and happenings) which are to a large extent not consistent with what we
see as reality. These are inherited from traditions which worked with a
different understanding of reality. The narratives will usually feature
physical conflict, and heroes more or less deserving of the label. They
will link both to the formulas of pulp and the rich traditions of myth
and legend, and will in some way provoke wonder—i.e., a profound shift
of perspective. Yet they will present these events and existents using
techniques of realism established by the tradition of the modern novel.
Modern fantasy in this sense could not begin to congeal as a genre
before the conventions of literary realism had fully developed. The
modern fantasy novel is, if you will, a counterfactual realistic novel.

_Some Boundary Issues_

I will digress for a moment and mention two theoretical concepts from
which the modern fantasy tradition needs to be distinguished. The first
is the _fantastic_, the second is _magical_ _realism_.

The concept of the fantastic is inextricably linked to Todorov’s work on
the subject, which is still widely regarded as the central text (see
Durst 12–13, Horstkotte 14, 17). In essence, the Todorovian _fantastic_
is not so much a genre as a state of indecision between two genres: it
is the dividing line between the _uncanny_ and the _marvelous_—a
critical and a magical reading (see _Fantastic_ 27). “In a world which
is indeed our world, the one we know,” i.e., the world of the
enlightened western industrial nations, “there occurs an event which
cannot be explained by the laws of this same familiar world” (25).
Either this event is not real within the fictional world, “and laws of
the world then remain what they are,” or the event is indeed real within
the fictional world, “but then this reality is controlled by laws
unknown to us” (25). The fantastic evaporates as soon as the reader
decides to read certain events and existents as either real or imaginary
within the world of a work, thereby reading the work as either uncanny
or marvelous. The fantastic exists only in the moment of uncertainty, of
hesitation (25, 31–33, 41). It should be obvious why the Todorovian
fantastic is of little use in working with modern fantasy fiction. Even
in so-called “urban fantasy”—narratives set in a world resembling ours
very closely, but containing elements of magic—it is made perfectly
clear to the reader that the counterfactual or non-mimetic events or
characters depicted are in fact intended to be as real as their mimetic,
factual context. This is even more so when the whole setting is
counterfactual: Discworld really is a disc resting on the backs of four
giant elephants—Berilia, Tubul, Great T’Phon, and Jerakeen—who in turn
stand on the back of an even more gigantic turtle, Great A’Tuin. Not
everybody may believe it—the Omnians hold the absurd belief that the
world is in fact round—but readers are left in no doubt that it is fact.

While the lexical similarity between _fantasy_ and _the fantastic_ has
caused many a scholar to attempt to connect, relate, and compare the
two, there is no conceptual similarity to warrant this. As Italo Calvino
pointed out at the time of its publication, the subject of Todorov’s
study is not what it may sound like, since the French term _fantastique_
refers mainly to horror stories “which involve a somewhat
nineteenth-century relationship with the reader” (71).¹⁰ In Italian, he
notes, “the words _fantasia_ and _fantastico_” imply “the acceptance of
a different logic based on objects and connections other than those of
everyday life or the dominant literary conventions” (72)—and of course
Tolkien makes a similar point regarding _fantasy_ and _fantastic_ when
he links them to the notions of both imagination and unreality, and thus
to “images of things that are not only ‘not actually present,’ but which
are indeed not to be found in our primary world at all, or are generally
believed not to be found there” (69). Unfortunately, then, a perfectly
useful concept, which can be applied with great benefit to discussions
of horror and the Gothic, has come to be associated with a genre to
which it adds nothing and to which it was never intended to add
anything—bear in mind that a Todorovian literature of the fantastic
would have to exclude works like _The Lord of the Rings_—simply through
an intercultural translation problem.

In fact, the notion that this is a world where different things are real
than in the reality we all agree to live in is emphasized as well as
turned on its head for comic effect in _The_ _Colour of Magic_ and _The_
_Light Fantastic_, when Twoflower—a boring accountant looking for
romance (_Colour_ 27–28)—meets Rincewind the failed wizard. If you like
to see fantasy literature as escapist, you could regard Twoflower as a
caricature of a fantasy reader. In this, as in so many other things, he
is balanced by Rincewind, a sort of inverted romantic: He lives in a
world that works by magic and longs for a rational world of science. He
feels there must be a “better way of doing things…. Something with a bit
of sense in it” (_Colour_ 53). When he tells Twoflower: “I just think
the world ought to be more sort of organized[,]” the tourist replies:
“That’s just fantasy” (_Colour_ 80). Even while our notions of reality
and fantasy are turned on their heads, it is made very clear to the
reader that there is no room for the ambiguity of the fantastic.

This also separates the modern fantasy tradition from _magical realism_.
There is a tendency, it is true, to use that label for those select
works of modern fantasy which a critic might want to distance from what
he or she perceives to be literature of lesser quality.¹¹ Such a rather
unqualified usage seems to equate magic realism with respectable
literature of a vaguely fantastic nature. Indeed, its “increasingly
ubiquitous use for any text that has a fabulous or mythic dimension” has
opened it up to the accusation “that it has become a catch-all for any
narrative device that does not adhere to Western realist conventions”
(Ashcroft, Griffith, Tiffin 133). Briefly, magic realism, or magical
realism, has come to mean “all narrative fiction that includes magical
happenings in a realist matter-of-fact narrative” (Bowers 2), making the
supernatural ordinary and everyday, “admitted, accepted, and integrated
into the rationality and materiality of literary realism” (Zamora and
Faris qtd. Bowers 2). It “combines realism and the fantastic in such a
way that magical elements grow organically out of the reality portrayed”
(Faris qtd. Horstkotte 41). Like modern fantasy, magic realism uses the
tools of realism to depict magic as mundane. It does so, however, simply
because it depicts a different social reality (cf. Bowers 1, 25).¹²
Magic realism suggests that the world is different from the way it is
commonly believed to be. Modern fantasy makes no such claim. It presents
a world patently unlike the world we agree to live in, and it
acknowledges this. There is a tension between the accepted social world
and the outrageous claims of fantasy. Just as realism explicitly
excludes unacceptable magical thinking, so fantasy explicitly excludes
the usual mundane explanations for its magic. Magic realism does not
create such tension, simply because it does not accept consensus reality
(cf. Easterbrook 491–492). Returning to Rincewind’s yearning for a
rational world of science, it is perfectly clear that the wizard has no
chance of realizing this dream—just as none of us can ever ride a dragon
or unfurl a set of giant wings and soar into the warm air of a summer
evening.

Magic realism is inherently political. Because it works from a different
consensus reality, magical realism is useful to writers writing against
totalitarian governments as “a means to attack the definitions and
assumptions which support such systems (e.g., colonialism) by attacking
the stability of the definitions upon which these systems rely” (Bowers
4). It becomes possible to subvert modern western consensus reality by
presenting a different reality in the same terms, i.e., using the tools
of realism (cf. Bowers 22; Horstkotte 39–40).¹³ It offers a different
vision, a different point of view. Essentially, magic realism is an
alternative realism, based on an alternative concept of reality.

Fantasy is also political—but quite differently so. Attebery suggests
that such politics manifests in three strategies, namely the deliberate
violation of the norms of Western consensus reality, the deliberate
anachronism of locating the work in a time other than the here and now,
and “the borrowing of motifs and story structures from folk tradition”
(“Politics” 10). If I understand his text correctly, he equates the
impossible of fantasy with the consensus reality of non–Western
cultures, a notion that seems to entail the view that there is such a
thing as a singular non–Western reality. I would rather argue that
modern fantasy accepts the social reality it exists in, while at the
same time contrasting it with a world that violates accepted rules of
reality. Because no single part of it is to be taken metaphorically, the
whole work can be likened to a metaphor. The truth of a metaphor emerges
from the tension between two irreconcilable concepts, and the truth—and
with it the politics—of fantasy emerges from a similar tension.

Thus, unlike the fantastic, modern fantasy is openly and decidedly
counterfactual—its narratives deal with things that cannot be; yet these
narratives present these things that cannot be, using various tools
usually employed to ensure things seem very real. Unlike magical
realism, modern fantasy does not make statements about the nature of
reality because it is concerned with real politics—it makes statements
about the nature of reality because it is concerned with the politics of
the real.

I have elsewhere presented an argument about how Pratchett fits into the
twin traditions of fantasy, and how he builds on and reinvents the
figure of the traditional fantasy hero (Haberkorn, “Cultural
Palimpsests”). Coming at it from a different direction, Verena Reinhardt
and I have also discussed the Discworld in the context of magical
education in various fantasy worlds, again locating Pratchett’s work
within that tradition (Reinhardt and Haberkorn). I will here take yet
another approach, and locate Pratchett within the politics of fantasy,
which allows writers to foreground the tools we use to make sense of the
world, and allows readers to practice using them. Fantasy has this
potential largely because of its counterfactual or non-mimetic realism.

_The Poetics of Non-Mimetic Realism_

Poetics is the theory of literary form. It explores not so much _what_ a
text is about as _how_ it is about what it is about. It deals with
literariness, with style, form, genre, as well as structural elements
like grammar and syntax; tropes and figures; assonance and echo. A
poetics of fantasy needs to concern itself with the question: What makes
a text a fantasy text? What does a fantasy text do? And how does it do
that?

Let us begin with the realistic representation of counterfactual events
and existents. In this context, it is worth remembering Avram Davidson’s
point that, “although the wombat is real and the dragon is not, nobody
knows what a wombat looks like and everyone knows what a dragon looks
like” (207). And the Discworld equivalent occurs when, in _Hogfather_,
the Auditors pay the Guild of Assassins to assassinate the Hogfather,
Discworld’s equivalent of Santa Claus. When Lord Downey, head of the
Guild, observes that “[t]here are many who would say this … person does
not exist” the Auditor replies: “He must exist. How else could you so
readily recognize his picture?” (26). Since fantasy texts cannot create
verisimilitude through accuracy, they must compensate through
adequacy—i.e., the deficit in historical plausibility is compensated
through narrative plausibility.

I need not argue here that novels set upon the back of a giant turtle
and peopled with dwarfs and trolls and whatnot are non-mimetic,
counterfactual. Even if we frequently recognize familiar thoughts and
mindsets, even if the dialogue often appears familiar, the Discworld
novels are very clearly not set in our consensus reality. But how are
such narratives made plausible?

Right from its early days, the novel achieved realism through its “its
sober, secular, hard-headed, investigative spirit” (Eagleton 7). A novel
appears realistic if it conforms to the way we, the readers, tend to see
the world: Loofbourow suggests that a realistic novel is “a kind of
fiction that results when the artist and his audience share the same
assumptions” (257; cf. also Culler 164). As discussed in Morris, Barthes
claims that “the very gratuitousness of apparently insignificant detail
in a realist story” serves as what he terms the _reality effect_—it
makes fiction seem real (101). Making sense of reality entails sorting
through endless detail, determining what matters and what does not. The
more reality-like a work is in its challenge to our meaning-making
faculties, the more filtering a reader has to do, the more realistic it
will seem.¹⁴ Culler, finally, lists several further ways in which a
novel creates realism, among them what he calls “the natural attitude to
the artificial” (164)—that is, the text explicitly draws attention to
literary conventions and claims not to follow them—but of course “the
forms that such claims take are also literary conventions” (173; cf.
Martin, _Theories_ 69). I think it is easily apparent, but perhaps
difficult to prove with isolated snippets, that Pratchett writes in a
naturalistic, realistic manner about the unnatural things he describes.
I will nevertheless try it with a short excerpt from _Reaper Man_:

  Death stood at the window of his dark study, looking out onto his
  garden. Nothing moved in that still domain. Dark lilies bloomed by the
  trout pool, where little plaster skeleton gnomes fished. There were
  distant mountains.

  It was his own world. It appeared on no map.

  But now, somehow, it lacked something.

  Death selected a scythe from the rack in the huge hall. He strode past
  the huge clock without hands and went outside. He stalked through the
  black orchard, where Albert was busy about the beehives, and on until
  he climbed a small mound on the edge of the garden. Beyond, to the
  mountains, was unformed land—it would bear weight, it had an existence
  of sorts, but there had never been any reason to define it further.

  Until now, anyway [_Reaper_ 285].

I would contend that this passage is soberly described. It actually has,
despite being set in such a fantastical location, a certain almost
mundane feel to it—as indeed it should from the perspective of the
characters involved. It contains gratuitous detail: The skeleton gnomes
are there for a joke, but the lilies and the trout pool, even the bees,
are there not because they are relevant. They are irrelevant. Albert
could be doing anything, and Pratchett could be mentioning any other
details to suggest that there is in fact an infinite grab-bag of details
waiting to be grabbed because this is a real place, which he is not
inventing but merely describing. The passage also implies assumptions we
all share, among them that you cannot look through walls but have to use
windows; that you cannot appear elsewhere but have to walk the distance;
that if death is in fact personified as Death, he has to be some place;
that if you work from home you are likely to have a study; and so on and
so forth.

What the passage does not really do is draw attention to literary
conventions and then claim not to follow them. Yet if we turn to _The_
_Wee Free Men_, we find the protagonist Tiffany Aching investigating the
case of a witch. When the Baron’s son disappears, people decide that it
was the fault of the lonely old woman living all by herself in her
cottage, because she must obviously be a witch. So they burn her cottage
and her books, kill her cat, and she is reduced to begging from door to
door. She dies that winter. When Tiffany goes to inspect the ruins of
her house, she wonders how an old woman with no teeth and a tiny oven
could possibly have cooked and eaten a strong young boy (_Free_ 45–47).

  And all the stories had, somewhere, the witch. The _wicked old witch_.

  And Tiffany had thought: Where’s the _evidence_?

  The stories never said _why_ she was wicked. It was enough to be an
  old woman, enough to be all alone, enough to look strange because you
  had no teeth. It was enough to be _called_ a witch [_Free_ 37].

In passages like this, Pratchett clearly draws attention to the way
things are supposed to happen in stories and makes the implicit argument
that they do not happen like this here, because this is after all not a
story. This is real.

This is a statement about the politics of the real. The old woman
becomes a witch because people’s minds have created a pattern in which
she is clearly labelled as one. She becomes a witch because enough
people call her one. Figments of people’s imagination have a very real,
very negative effect on this woman’s life.

Attebery maintains that fantasy’s political claims are “that reality is
a social contract, easily voided; that the individual character is a
conditional thing, subject to unnerving transformations into trees and
axolotls and cockroaches and disembodied discourses” (“Politics” 23).
Finally, fantasy can “let the Other become a self,” at which point “the
past threatens to break into the present, colonies become capitals, and
the natural world takes its revenge on civilization” (23). I would go
further and claim that modern fantasy—a specialized version of the
literary game in which players agree to treat things as real which they
in fact believe to be empirically impossible—creates fictional worlds
which depart from the consensus reality of the social world, but which
are nevertheless depicted using the tools and conventions of realism,
and that it thereby potentially foregrounds the narrative techniques and
the fictionality of narratives. That means that it can be a commentary
on the narrative construction of the human world, and readers can use it
to practice dealing with their narrative worlds and their narrative
selves. Modern fantasy fiction can not only thematize the fictionality
of consensus reality, but the tools and techniques used to manufacture
such realities. Such are the politics of fantasy. As Attebery poetically
claims, “the untruth shall make you free” (“Politics” 25).

_Fantasy as Theoretical Fiction_

Tiffany Aching is clearly in a story about stories—such fiction is
commonly called _metafiction_; Currie calls it _theoretical fiction_.
Pratchett’s characters frequently find themselves at least in scenes and
moments which are clearly about stories, and about the fact that the
human mind cannot help making them up. There is a moment in _Hogfather_,
for example, when Archchancellor Ridcully declares that “man is
naturally a mythopoeic creature,” and when the Senior Wrangler asks what
that means, the Dean responds, without looking up, that it “[m]eans we
make things up as we go along” (245–246). This is clearly a comment on
the human tendency to construct meaning-making patterns.

Tiffany questions the pattern of a traditional fairy tale story. In the
excerpt quoted earlier, Lord Vetinari deconstructs the hero. In
_Hogfather_, Susan Sto-Helit, Death’s grand-daughter, takes the approach
a step further when she tells the story of Jack and the Beanstalk:

  and then Jack chopped down the beanstalk, adding murder and ecological
  vandalism to the theft, enticement and trespass charges already
  mentioned, but he got away with it and lived happily ever after
  without so much as a guilty twinge about what he had done. Which
  proves that you can be excused just about anything if you’re a hero,
  because no one asks inconvenient questions [40].

And she does not only subvert stories by retelling them. In her job as a
governess, she physically intervenes: When the little girl Twyla tells
her she is afraid of the monster in the cellar, Susan gets a poker and
follows her downstairs (_Hogfather_ 15–16). Susan is fighting stories
the previous governess has put into the heads of Twyla and her
brother—but not in the way other adults think: “Little gel gets it into
her head there’s a monster in the cellar, you go in with the poker and
make a few bashing noises while the child listens, and then everything’s
all right” (17). In fact, after Susan enters the cellar, “[t]here was a
short period of silence and then a terrifying scream” (17–18). When
Susan finally comes back upstairs, “[t]he poker was bent at right
angles. There was nervous applause” (18). Later, when the other adults
have gone, “Susan went back into the cellar and emerged towing something
large and hairy with eight legs” (18). The final confrontation of that
novel reveals that Susan has not just taught the children that monsters
can be defeated: she has taught them what makes a monster. When an
insane murderer called Teatime threatens to kill Death, the children
have no problem identifying Death as normal and Teatime as “creepy”—so
when Susan throws her poker, it passes right through Death and impales
the man (429–431).

In _Witches_ _Abroad_, Granny Weatherwax fights her sister Lily, who
manipulates people through stories, and treats others “like they was
characters, like they was things” (270). Throughout the book, Granny
subverts traditional fairy tales, and the fact that story structure is
alien to her is illustrated, amusingly, by the fact that she cannot tell
a joke—although she keeps trying (176, 205, 227).

On Discworld, stories are real. When the human mind processes the world,
gives it a pattern, that pattern is real. The law of cliché is a law of
nature, as we can observe if we open _Soul_ _Music_ and witness a
crashing vehicle: “Satchelmouth shut his eyes and held on tight until
the last scream and crackle and splinter had died away. When he opened
them, it was just in time to see a burning wheel bounce down the canyon”
(278). Compare this with a similar event in _Night_ _Watch_: “Vimes
counted under his breath, and had only reached two when a cartwheel
rolled out of the smoke and away down the road. This always happens”
(293). Of course, once such patterns have become observable laws,
characters are bound to recognize and understand them, and they begin
using them for their own ends. When the City Watch want to kill a dragon
by shooting an arrow at its vulnerable spot, they consider their chances
highly unlikely—but they know that “[w]hen you really need them the most
… million-to-one chances always crop up. Well known fact” (_Guards_
262). The problem then becomes whether it really is a million-to-one
chance. The situation, it turns out, has to be finely tuned: “No-one
ever said ‘It’s a 999,943-to-one chance but it just might work’” (266).
And so, the City Watch begin to adjust the odds, that is, make success
ever more unlikely, until they are truly faced with a million-to-one
chance—which cannot fail (267, 271–272). All of these examples are ways
of saying that the patterns human minds spin can become a kind of
reality. Believing things can make them true. Not, I hasten to add, in a
factual sense; belief cannot move physical mountains. In that sense,
Discworld is counterfactual. But if all of us believe that the mountain
is the home of our gods, then to all intents and purposes, within our
community, it will be. If all of us believe that an old woman is a
witch, then to all intents and purposes, within our community, she will
be.

Pratchett goes beyond that, however. If we recognize and understand
these patterns, if we understand that they are merely creations of our
minds, then we can use them, we can reinterpret them, we can change
them. This is where Pratchett’s Discworld novels clearly become
theoretical fiction, i.e., self-reflexive fiction, fiction about fiction
(Currie 52). Waugh defines the more usual term for this kind of fiction,
_metafiction_, as works that “create a fiction and … make a statement
about the creation of that fiction” (6). Not all works of modern fantasy
realize this potential, of course, in fact the majority probably do not,
at least not fully. Not all of Pratchett’s Discworld novels realize this
potential either. Nevertheless, they often “contemplate the logic and
the ideology of narrative in the act of construing the world” (68).¹⁵
Such works can be read as commentaries on narrative worldmaking, and
thus can be used by readers to better understand the way in which their
worlds and their selves are narrative constructions.

_Debugging the Mind_

Terry Pratchett’s Discworld novels are funny, and they are fantasy.
Using the poetics of the modern fantasy tradition, Pratchett creates a
space in which he can foreground our mind’s act of spinning sensory
perception into meaningful pattern. Employing the rhetoric of humor, he
encourages his readers to practice questioning such mental patterns. By
combining the two, the Discworld novels are at least potentially a space
in which readers can probe their mental patterns for mistakes and try
out new ones.

Discworld is not just about recognizing stories and conventions, using
them, playing with them. It is about resisting them. In _Feet of Clay_,
Pratchett introduces golems to Discworld. Traditionally, a golem is “a
man made out of clay (replicating God’s creation of Adam) brought to
life through words of power … written on paper and inserted into the
golem’s mouth” (Ashley 421). In _Feet of Clay_, however, the words are
stuck inside the creature’s forehead: Golems are people who are enslaved
by words in their heads. It is widely believed they cannot exist without
those words, but then one golem survives their removal—as it puts it:
“Words in the heart can not be taken” (374–5). When someone comments
that this is the first golem which has got no words written by a priest
in its head, Captain Carrot observes: “He’ll make up his own words”
(_Clay_ 381). When Vetinari probes our unquestioning acceptance of the
means a hero uses, when Susan helps the children overcome the
nightmarish stories of their previous governess, even when Ridcully
gently questions the traditions of Hogswatchnight, Pratchett uses the
Discworld to explore the role of the words in our heads, and how they
control us. And how we can make up our own.

Notes

1. Even though Geertz notes that he believes this “with Max Weber,” he
gives no further reference (5). While his “webs of significance” are
frequently quoted, they are usually either attributed solely to him, or
Weber is mentioned only in passing. This article is, alas, no different.

2. Both Morreall and Martin provide examples of such detailed summaries,
which are beyond the scope of this article. There is also a fairly
recent article by Perks on “The Ancient Roots of Humor Theory” that is
well worth reading.

3. The German term _Kaffeeklatsch_ has entered the English language as
coffee klatch. It refers to a meeting for coffee and conversation or
gossip.

4. A second footnote on the same page expands on the term “real
science,” which is glossed as, “the sort you can use to give something
three extra legs and then blow it up” (12)—combining wild exaggeration
(real science causes mutation/monstrosity and explosions/destruction),
impossible precision (three extra legs), and a fairly conversational
tone, underscored by the vagueness of “something.”

5. Attebery is repeatedly referenced as describing genres as fuzzy
sets—categories clustered around one or more central texts and fading
out towards the edges—and some scholars erroneously treat this as a
concept somehow particular to the fantasy genre, even though Attebery
himself clearly refers to genres in general (_Strategies_ 12). Some
scholars even seem to think that Attebery invented the concept.

6. The emphasis is thus on publication in the United States, and in book
form. The first volume of the _Lord of the Rings_ had been published in
Great Britain in 1954, its precursor, _The Hobbit_, in 1937. Conan the
Cimmerian had first appeared in the short story “The Phoenix and the
Sword” published in _Weird Tales_ in 1932 (cf. Tiner 221).

7. It is perhaps in this context that the term _gosh-wow! effect_ is
most appropriate (cf. Sawyer 707).

8. Texts which can arguably be termed fantasy do not appear with any
frequency before the middle of the nineteenth century, and noteworthy
works include William Morris’ _The Wood Beyond the World_ (1894), E. R.
Eddison’s _The Worm Ouroboros_ (1922), Lord Dunsany’s _The King of
Elfland’s Daughter_ (1924), and T. H. White’s _The Once and Future King_
(1958), among others (see Schweitzer, “Heroic” 379–380, and Eilers 318).

9. Tolkien himself drew on a large number of such texts, including
_Beowulf_, the _Völsung Saga_, the _Elder Edda_ and other Old English
and Old Norse poetry, but also fairy tale collections such as those by
Asbjörnsen, Campbell, and the Grimms, as well as the ballad tradition
(see Shippey 344–347). Indeed, Tolkien did not read—and was thus not
influenced by—much contemporary or even recent literature, although he
knew the work of William Morris, and probably Rudyard Kipling (351), and
he had a “relationship of intimate dislike” with the work of
Shakespeare, Spenser, George MacDonald, Hans Christian Andersen, and
Wagner (344).

10. Cf. also Attebery, _Strategies_ 20.

11. Attebery, by contrast, sees magic realism as a rather patronising
label, allowing critics of such literature to “dismiss it while
pretending to admire it” (“Politics” 17).

12. Attebery does not accept the division between fantasy and magic
realism, on the grounds that fantasy entails a deliberate deviation from
an accepted social world, apparently because he does not accept the
notion that different cultures might have different concepts of reality.
He caricatures it as the claim that “people from those Other places
obviously don’t know the difference between the real and the fantastic,
so it all gets jumbled together in their work” (“Politics”17). Such an
argument seems to be based on the notion that the real and the fantastic
are somehow interculturally accepted absolute concepts instead of
cultural constructs which may well not exist in some cultures (17).

13. Thus, most proponents of magic realism write from a cultural
perspective situated outside Western Europe, such as Russia (e.g.,
Mikhail Bulgakov, _The Master and Margerita_), India (e.g., Salman
Rushdie, _Midnight’s Children_), or South America (e.g., Gabriel García
Márquez, _One Hundred Years of Solitude_). They usually write against a
predominant, oppressive political power, e.g., Bulgakov, in some cases
after the fact, e.g., Günther Grass, _The Tin Drum_.

14. Similarly, Iser argues that the gaps of fiction are the reason “why
the reader often feels involved in events which, at the time of reading,
seem real to him, even though in fact they are very far from his own
reality” (283).

15. Cf. also Cupp and Arsinger, who explore the postmodern politics of
science fiction and fantasy.

Works Cited

Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffith, and Helen Tiffin. “Magic Realism.”
_Post-Colonial Studies: The Key Concepts_. 1998. London: Routledge,
2000. 132–133.

Ashley, Mike. “Golem.” _The Encyclopedia of Fantasy_. Ed. John Clute and
John Grant. London: Orbit, 1997. 421–422.

Attardo, Salvatore. “A Primer for the Linguistics of Humor.” _The Primer
of Humor Research_. Ed. Victor Raskin. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2008.
101–155.

Attebery, Brian. “Foreword.” _Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts_ 22.3
(2011): 310–312.

_____. “The Magazine Era: 1926–1960.” _The Cambridge Companion to
Science Fiction_. Ed. Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003. 32–47.

_____. “The Politics (If Any) of Fantasy.” _Journal of the Fantastic in
the Arts_ 13 (1991): 7–28.

_____. _Strategies of Fantasy_. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1992.

Baumeister, Roy F. _Meanings of Life_. New York: Guilford, 1991.

Bowers, Maggie Ann. _Magic(al) Realism_. London: Routledge, 2004.

Butler, Andrew. “Theories of Humor.” _Terry Pratchett: Guilty of
Literature_. Ed. Andrew M. Butler, Edward James, and Farah Mendlesohn.
Baltimore: Old Earth, 2004. 67–88.

Calvino, Italo. “Definitions of Territories: Fantasy.” _The Uses of
Literature_. San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1986. 71–73.

Carroll, Noël. “Art, Practice, und Narrative.” _Beyond Aesthetics:
Philosophical Essays_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
63–75.

Clute, John. “Coming of Age.” _Terry Pratchett: Guilty of Literature_.
Ed. Andrew M. Butler, Edward James, and Farah Mendlesohn. Baltimore: Old
Earth, 2004. 15–30.

_____. “Howard, Robert E(rvin).” _The Encyclopedia of Fantasy_. Ed. John
Clute and John Grant. London: Orbit, 1999. 481–483.

_____. _Look at the Evidence: Essays and Reviews_. New York: Jarconia,
1995.

_____. “Taproot Texts.” _The Encyclopedia of Fantasy_. Ed. John Clute
and John Grant. London: Orbit, 1999. 921–922.

Cooper, Joel. _Cognitive Dissonance: Fifty Years of a Classic Theory_.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007.

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. _Flow: The Psychology of Happiness_. London:
Rider, 1992.

Culler, Jonathan. _Structuralist Poetics: Structuralism, Linguistics and
the Study of Literature_. 1975. New York: Routledge, 2002.

Cupp, Jeff, and Charles Arsinger. “Do Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers Have Postmodern Dreams?” _Literature, Interpretation, Theory_ 4
(1993): 175–184.

Currie, Mark. _Postmodern Narrative Theory_. Basingstoke: Palgrave,
1998.

Davidson, Avram. “The Spoor of the Unicorn.” _Adventures in Unhistory:
Conjectures on the Foundations of Several Ancient Legends_. New York:
Tor, 1993. 207–223.

Durst, Uwe. _Theorie der phantastischen Literatur_. Tübingen: Franke,
2001.

Eagleton, Terry. _The English Novel: An Introduction_. Malden, MA:
Blackwell, 2005.

Easterbrook, Neil. “Magical Realism.” _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of
Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders_. Ed. Gary
Westfahl. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2005. 490–492.

Eilers, Michelle L. “On the Origins of Modern Fantasy.” _Extrapolation_
41 (2000): 317–337.

Frow, John. _Genre_. London: Routledge, 2006.

Geertz, Clifford. “Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of
Culture.” _The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays_. 1973.
London: Fontana, 1993. 3–30.

Gramlich, Charles. “Sword and Sorcery.” _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of
Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders_. Ed. Gary
Westfahl. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2005. 779–781.

Haberkorn, Gideon. “Cultural Palimpsests: Terry Pratchett’s New Fantasy
Heroes.” _Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts_ 18.3 (2008): 319–339.

Haberkorn, Gideon, and Verena Reinhardt. “Magic, Adolescence, and
Education on Terry Pratchett’s Discworld.” _Supernatural Youth: The Rise
of the Teen Hero in Literature and Popular Culture_. Ed. Jes Battis.
Lanham, MD: Lexington, 2011. 43–64.

Horstkotte, Martin. _The Postmodern Fantastic in Contemporary British
Fiction_. Trier: Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier, 2004.

Iser, Wolfgang. “The Reading Process: A Phenomenological Approach.” _New
Literary History_ 2 (1972): 278–299.

Jerome, Jerome K. _Three Men in a Boat & Three Men on the Bummel_.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.

Loofbourow, John W. “Realism in the Anglo-American Novel. The Pastoral
Myth.” _The Theory of the Novel._ Ed. John Halperin. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1974. 257–270.

Manley, Don. _Chambers Crossword Manual_. 1986. Edinburgh: Chambers,
2001.

Martin, Rod A. _The Psychology of Humor: An Integrative Approach_.
Burlington: Elsevier, 2007.

Martin, Wallace. _Recent Theories of Narrative_. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1986.

Midgley, Mary. “Philosophical Plumbing.” _Utopia, Dolphins and
Computers: Problems of Philosophical Plumbing_. London: Routledge, 1996.
1–14.

Moorcock, Michael. _Wizardry and Wild Romance_. Austin: Monkeybrain,
2004.

Morreall, John. _Comic Relief: A Comprehensive Philosophy of Humor_.
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.

Morris, Pam. _Realism_. London: Routledge, 2003.

Muecke, D.C. _Irony_. London: Methuen, 1970.

Nicholls, Peter, and Carnel Robu. “Sense of Wonder.” _The Encyclopedia
of Science Fiction_. Ed. John Clute and Peter Nicholls. London: Orbit,
1999. 1083–1085.

Perks, Lisa Glebatis. “The Ancient Roots of Humor Theory.” _Humor_ 25:2
(2012): 119–132.

Pesch, Helmut W. _Fantasy: Theorie und Geschichte_. Diss. U Köln, 1982.
Passau: Erster Deutscher Fantasy Club, 2001.

Porter, Alan J. “Carry-On Films.” _An Unofficial Companion to the Novels
of Terry Pratchett_. Ed. Andrew M. Butler. Oxford: Greenwood, 2007.
60–61.

Pratchett, Terry. _The Colour of Magic_. London: Corgi, 1985.

______. Feet of Clay_. London: Corgi, 1996.

_____. _Guards! Guards!_ London: Corgi, 1990.

_____. _Hogfather_. London: Corgi, 1997.

_____. _The_ _Last Hero: A Discworld Fable_. London: Gollancz, 2001.

_____. _The Light Fantastic_. London: Corgi, 1986.

_____. _Lords and Ladies_. London: Corgi, 1993.

_____. _Maskerade_. London: Corgi, 1995.

_____. _Moving_ _Pictures_. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. _Night Watch_. London: Gollancz, 2002.

_____. _Reaper Man_. London: Corgi, 1992.

_____. _Soul Music_. London: Gollancz, 1994.

_____. _Thief of Time_. London: Corgi, 2001.

_____. _The Truth_. London: Corgi, 2000.

_____. _The Wee Free Men_. London: Doubleday, 2003.

_____. _Witches_ _Abroad_. London: Corgi, 1992.

Sawyer, Andy. “Sense of Wonder.” _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science
Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders_. Ed. Gary Westfahl.
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005. 706–708.

Schweitzer, Darell. “Conan the Conqueror by Robert E. Howard (1959).”
_The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes,
Works, and Wonders_. Ed. Gary Westfahl. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005.
975–977.

_____. “Heroic Fantasy.” _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders_. Ed. Gary Westfahl. Westport,
CT: Greenwood, 2005. 379–381.

Senior, William A. “Oliphaunts in the Perilous Realm: The Function of
Internal Wonder in Fantasy.” _Functions of the Fantastic_. Ed. Joe
Sanders. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1995. 115–124.

Shippey, Tom. _The Road to Middle Earth: How J. R. R. Tolkien Created a
New Mythology_. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.

Tiner, Ron. “Conan.” _The Encyclopedia of Fantasy_. Ed. John Clute and
John Grant. London: Orbit, 1999. 221.

Todorov, Tzvetan. _The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary
Genre_. 1970. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1975.

Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy-Stories.” _The Tolkien Reader_. New York:
Ballantine, 1966. 33–99.

Waugh, Patricia. _Metafiction: The Theory and Practice of Self-Conscious
Fiction_. London: Routledge, 1984.

Wodehouse, P. G. _Wodehouse Nuggets_. Ed. Richard Usborne. 1983. London:
Vintage, 1992.


Primary Bibliography of Terry Pratchett’s Works Published in English

This list indicates first editions of UK imprints; the ⊗ symbol
indicates the work does not include any Discworld or Discworld-related
material.

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_. Illus. David Wyatt.
London: Doubleday, 2001.

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_. Stage Adaptation. Adapt.
Stephen Briggs. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.

_Ankh-Morpork City Watch Warrant Card_. Wincanton, UK: Cunning
Artificer, 2005.

_A Blink of the Screen: Collected Shorter Fiction_. Foreword A. S.
Byatt. London: Doubleday, 2012.

_The Bromeliad: Containing_ Truckers_,_ Diggers _and_ Wings. London:
Doubleday, 1998. ⊗

_Carpe Jugulum_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Doubleday, 1998.

_Carpe Jugulum, the Play_. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player.
London: Samuel French, 1999.

_The Carpet People_. Illus. by the author. London: Colin Smythe, 1971. ⊗

_The Colour of Magic_. London: Colin Smythe, 1983.

_The Dark Side of the Sun_. London: Colin Smythe, 1976. ⊗

_Diggers_. London: Doubleday, 1990. ⊗

_Dodger_. London: Doubleday, 2012. ⊗

_Dodger’s Guide to London_. Doubleday, 2013. ⊗

_Equal Rites_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1987.

_Faust_ _Eric_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1990.

_Feet of Clay_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1996.

_The Fifth Elephant_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Doubleday, 1999.

_The Fifth Elephant, the Play_. 1999. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Josh
Kirby. London: Methuen, 2002.

_From the Discworld_. Music by Dave Greenslade. London: Virgin, 1996.

_Going Postal_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2004.

_Going Postal_. Stage Adaptation. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Paul
Kidby. London: Methuen, 2005.

_Guards! Guards!_ Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1989.

_Guards! Guards! A Discworld Big Comic_. Illus. Graham Higgins. Adapt.
Stephen Briggs. London: Gollancz, 2000.

_Guards! Guards!, the Play_. 1993. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. 1993. Illus.
Stephen Player. London: Corgi, 1997.

_A Hat Full of Sky_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2004.

_Hogfather_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1996.

_I Shall Wear Midnight_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2010.

_The Illustrated Wee Free Men_. Illus. Stephen Player. London:
Doubleday, 2008.

_Interesting Times_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1994.

_Interesting Times, the Play_. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Josh Kirby.
London: Methuen, 2002.

_Jingo_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1997.

_Jingo, the Play_. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Josh Kirby. London:
Methuen, 2005.

_Johnny and the Bomb_. London: Doubleday, 1996. ⊗

_Johnny and the Dead_. London: Doubleday, 1993. ⊗

_Johnny and the Dead: Oxford Playscripts_. Adapt. Stephen Briggs.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. ⊗

_The Josh Kirby Poster Book_. Intro. Terry Pratchett. Illus. Josh Kirby.
London: Corgi, 1990.

_The Last Continent_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Doubleday, 1998.

_The Light Fantastic_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Colin Smythe, 1986.

_Lords and Ladies_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1992.

_Lords and Ladies, the Play_. Adapt. Irana Brown. Illus. Stephen Player.
London: Samuel French, 2001.

_Making Money_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2007.

_Making Money_. Stage Adaptation. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. London: Samuel
French, 2011.

_Maskerade_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1995.

_Maskerade, the Play_. 1995. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen
Player. London: Samuel French, 1998.

_Men at Arms_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1993.

_Men at Arms, the Play_. 1994. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen
Player. London: Corgi, 1997.

_Monstrous Regiment_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2003.

_Monstrous Regiment, the Play_. Adapted by Stephen Briggs. London:
Methuen, 2003.

_Mort_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1987.

_Mort, a Discworld Big Comic_. Illus. Graham Higgins. London: Gollancz,
1994.

_Mort, the Play_. 1992. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen Player.
London: Corgi, 1996.

_Moving Pictures_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1990.

_Nation_. London: Doubleday, 2008. ⊗

_Night Watch_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2002.

_Night Watch, the Play_. 2003. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Paul Kidby.
London: Methuen, 2004.

_Once More, with Footnotes_. Ed. Priscilla Olson and Sheila Perry.
Illus. Omar Rayyan. Intro. Esther M. Friesner. Framingham, MA: NESFA
Press, 2004.

_Only You Can Save Mankind_. London: Doubleday, 1992. ⊗

_Pyramids_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1989.

_Reaper Man_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1991.

_Raising Steam_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2013.

_A Slip of the Keyboard: Collected Non-Fiction_. London: Doubleday,
forthcoming 2014.

_Small Gods_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1992.

_Snuff_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2011.

_Soul Music_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1994.

_Soul Music. The Illustrated Screenplay_. London: Corgi, 1997.

_Sourcery_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1988.

_Strata_. London: Colin Smythe, 1981. ⊗

_Terry Pratchett’s_ The Colour of Magic_: The Graphic Novel_. 1991.
Illus. Steven Ross. Adapt. Scott Rockwell. Lettered by Vickie Williams.
Ed. David Campiti. London: Corgi, 1992.

_Terry Pratchett’s_ The Colour of Magic_: The Illustrated Screenplay_.
Adapt. Vadim Jean. Mucked about with by Terry Pratchett. London:
Gollancz, 2008.

_Terry Pratchett’s_ Hogfather_: The Illustrated Screenplay_. Adapt.
Vadim Jean. Mucked about with by Terry Pratchett. London: Gollancz,
2006.

_Terry Pratchett’s_ The Light Fantastic_: The Graphic Novel_. Illus.
Steven Ross and Joe Bennet. Adapt. Scott Rockwell. Lettered by Michelle
Beck and Vickie Williams. Ed. David Campiti. London: Corgi, 1993.

_Terry Pratchett’s_ Johnny and the Bomb_: A Time-Tickingly Tremendous
Musical_. Adapt. Matthew Holmes. London: A.C. Black, 2012. ⊗

_Thief of Time_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Doubleday, 2001.

_Thud!_ Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2005.

_Truckers_. London: Doubleday, 1989. ⊗

_The Truth_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Doubleday, 2000.

_The Truth, the Play_. 2000. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Josh Kirby.
London: Methuen, 2002.

_The Unadulterated Cat_. Illus. Gray Jolliffe. London: Gollancz, 1989. ⊗

_Unseen Academicals_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2009.

_The Wee Free Men_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2003.

_Where’s My Cow?_ Illus. Melvin Grant. London: Doubleday, 2005.

_Wings_. London: Doubleday, 1990. ⊗

_Wintersmith_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London: Doubleday, 2006.

_Witches Abroad_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1991.

_Wyrd Sisters_. Illus. Josh Kirby. London: Gollancz, 1988.

_Wyrd Sisters. The Illustrated Screenplay_. London: Corgi, 1997.

_Wyrd Sisters, the Play_. 1991. Adapt. Stephen Briggs. Illus. Stephen
Player. London: Corgi, 1996.

_WITH ALAN BATLEY AND BERNARD PEARSON_

_The Unseen University Cut-Out Book_. London: Transworld, 2006.

_WITH BERNARD PEARSON_

_The Discworld Almanak._ Illus. Paul Kidby, Bernard Pearson, and Sheila
Watkins. London: Corgi, 2004.

_WITH IAN STEWART AND JACK COHEN_

_The Science of Discworld_. London: Ebury, 1999.

_The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_. London: Ebury, 2002.

_The Science of Discworld III: Darwin’s Watch_. London: Ebury, 2005.

_The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day_. London: Ebury, 2013.

_WITH JACQUELINE SIMPSON_

_The Folklore of Discworld_. London: Doubleday, 2008.

_WITH NEIL GAIMON_

_Good Omens_. London: Gollancz, 1990. ⊗

_WITH PAUL KIDBY_

_The Art of Discworld_. London: Gollancz, 2004.

_Death’s Domain_: _A Discworld Mapp_. London: Corgi, 1999.

_The Last Hero_. London: Gollancz, 2001.

_The Pratchett Portfolio_. London: Gollancz, 1996.

_WITH PHIL MASTERS AND JOHN M. FORD_

_GURPS Discworld: Adventures on the Back of the Turtle._ Ed. Steve
Jackson. Illus. Paul Kidby. Austin: Steve Jackson Games, 1998.

_WITH STEPHEN BAXTER_

_The Long Earth_. London: Doubleday, 2012. ⊗

_The Long War_. London: Doubleday, 2013. ⊗

_WITH STEPHEN BRIGGS_

_Ankh-Morpork Post Office Handbook and Discworld Diary 2007._ Illus.
Paul Kidby. London: Gollancz, 2006.

_Discworld Assassin’s Guild Yearbook and Diary 2000._ Illus. Paul Kidby.
London: Gollancz, 1999.

_The Discworld Companion_. London: Gollancz, 1994.

_Discworld Fools’ Guild Yearbook and Diary 2001_. Illus. Paul Kidby.
London: Gollancz, 2000.

_The Discworld Mapp_. Illus. Stephen Player. London: Corgi, 1995.

_Discworld (Reformed) Vampyre’s Diary 2003_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London:
Gollancz, 2002.

_Discworld Thieves’ Guild Yearbook and Diary 2002_. London: Gollancz,
2001.

_Discworld’s Ankh-Morpork City Watch Diary 1999._ Illus. Paul Kidby.
London: Gollancz, 1998.

_Discworld’s Unseen University Diary_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London:
Gollancz, 1997.

_Lu-Tze’s Yearbook of Enlightenment_. Illus. Paul Kidby. London:
Gollancz, 2007.

_Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_. Illus. Paul Kidby. Recipes by Tina Hannan and
Stephen Briggs. London: Doubleday, 1999.

_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_. Illus. Stephen Player. London: Corgi,
1993.

_A Tourist Guide to Lancre: A Discworld Mapp_. Illus. Paul Kidby.
London: Corgi, 1998.

_Turtle Recall: The Discworld Companion … So Far_. London: Gollancz,
2012.

_The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld_. London: Doubleday, 2007.

_WITH THE DISCWORLD EMPORIUM_

_The Compleat Ankh-Morpork_. Additional Illus. Peter Dennis. London:
Doubleday, 2012.

_Discworld: The Ankh-Morpork Map_ iPad App. London: Transworld, 2013.

_The World of Poo_. Illus. Peter Dennis. London: Doubleday, 2012.


Annotated Critical Bibliography

This Annotated Critical Bibliography comprises three sections: short
summaries of Pratchett-related criticism that appears in articles,
chapters, and monographs; a list of interviews with both Terry Pratchett
and Paul Kidby; and a list of MA theses, dissertations, and equivalents.
There is an unavoidable bias towards English-language works, but for the
scholarly works we think it is largely representative at the time of
writing.

_A. ARTICLES, CHAPTERS AND MONOGRAPHS_

BAKER, DEIRDRE. “WHAT WE FOUND ON OUR JOURNEY THROUGH FANTASY LAND.”
_CHILDREN’S LITERATURE IN EDUCATION_ 37:3 (2006): 237–251.

This article touches on fantasy landscapes of a number of children’s
authors, including Ursula Le Guin, Philip Pullman, and Diana Wynne
Jones, but devotes only two paragraphs to Pratchett. Baker’s discussion
of _The Wee Free Men_ suggests that Tiffany’s skepticism about fairy
tales allows her to ignore their warnings and think for herself. In this
way, Baker claims, Pratchett “re-visions … both gender and narrative”
(249), but the article does not address how he does this beyond stating
that Pratchett “provides a different model; he spurs his readers to
question” (249).

BASSNETT, SUSAN. “IS THERE HOPE FOR THE HUMANITIES IN THE 21ST CENTURY?”
_ARTS & HUMANITIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION_ 1:1 (2002): 101–110.

This article considers the “current position of research in the
Humanities” in light of recent changes in society as well as in verbal
and visual literacy (101), and stresses the importance of
interdisciplinarity in tertiary education. In addition to commenting on
the value of writers such as Pratchett and J. K. Rowling in relation to
the larger context of literature, Bassnett notes that Pratchett
“maintains that he is now able to write in a much more complex way in
terms of narrative” than when he began writing in the 1970s (103).

BRIGGS, MELODY, AND RICHARD S. BRIGGS. “STEPPING INTO THE GAP:
CONTEMPORARY CHILDREN’S FANTASY LITERATURE AS A DOORWAY TO
SPIRITUALITY.” _TOWARDS OR BACK TO HUMAN VALUES? SPIRITUAL AND MORAL
DIMENSIONS OF CONTEMPORARY FANTASY_. ED. JUSTYNA DESZCZ-TRYHUBCZAK AND
MAREK OZIEWICZ. NEWCASTLE, UK: CAMBRIDGE SCHOLARS, 2006. 30–47.

This article considers the ways in which contemporary children’s fantasy
fills the spiritual gaps that exist in today’s Western culture. The
authors discuss _The Wee Free Men_ briefly in relation to the Nac Mac
Feegles’ view of life and death as a cyclical process and their belief
that they are already dead when they are in what Tiffany regards as the
“real” world. Their belief system “parodies the way in which modern
scientific structures claim knowledge about life based on empirical
evidence” (35), and Pratchett’s text invites readers to assess how they
have arrived at their own beliefs about life and death. In this way, the
authors claim that Pratchett “foregrounds the constructedness of
reality” (35) but, in keeping with postmodern tradition, does not
attempt to resolve this issue but merely poses the question. The rest of
the article assumes that fantasy authors’ fantasy worlds “will
inevitably be influenced by their personal beliefs” (36) and then
discusses the work of Philip Pullman, Gabriel Nix, and J. K. Rowling,
concluding that modern fantasy “fill[s] a gap left by the contemporary
marginalization of religion … [and thus] opens a door to spirituality”
(43–44).

BRIGGS, STEPHEN. “INTRODUCTORY MATERIALS.” _TURTLE RECALL: THE DISCWORLD
COMPANION … SO FAR_. BY TERRY PRATCHETT AND STEPHEN BRIGGS. LONDON:
GOLLANCZ, 2012. 1–5.

Briggs provides an overview of the creation of the _Discworld_
_Companion_ volumes, noting that this third _Discworld Companion_
includes all entries from both the first and the second _Companion_, and
has been updated to include entries for books published since then.

_____. “TURTLES ALL THE WAY DOWN: EVEN MORE DISCWORLD STUFF!” _TURTLE
RECALL: THE DISCWORLD COMPANION … SO FAR_. BY TERRY PRATCHETT AND
STEPHEN BRIGGS. LONDON: GOLLANCZ, 2012. 325–52.

This section includes a reprint of “Terry Pratchett: The Definitive
Interview” that appeared in the original _Discworld Companion_; Briggs
notes that this interview is now approximately twenty years old and thus
has “taken on the air of an historical document. Almost” (325). A brief
piece on “Readers and Fan Mail,” also published in the original
_Companion,_ discusses how things have changed in terms of the kinds of
fan mail Pratchett receives since he first began writing and notes the
internet’s impact on fandom. “The Language Barrier” provides an
excellent discussion of translation issues, noting some of the
challenges involved in translating the books into Dutch, German, French,
and other languages. The section concludes with an extensive overview of
the rules for the Discworld card game, Cripple Mr. Onion, which is
played with a full pack of seventy-three cards.

BROWN, SARAH ANNE. “SHAPING FANTASIES: RESPONSES TO SHAKESPEARE’S MAGIC
IN POPULAR CULTURE.” _SHAKESPEARE_ 5:2 (2009): 162–76.

This article discusses the ways in which Neil Gaiman’s _The Sandman,_
Pratchett’s _Lords and Ladies_, and Gareth Roberts’ “The Shakespeare
Code” serve as responses to Shakespeare’s _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_.
Utilizing the theoretical frameworks of New Historicism and
Poststructuralism, Brown suggests that these works oppose the modern
critical trend of participating in a “skeptical demystification” of
Shakespeare and instead present responses to his works that demonstrate
a more sophisticated awareness of their complexity. Brown spends the
majority of the article discussing Gaiman’s work; the sections on
Pratchett and Roberts are each quite short, and her comments on
Pratchett do little more than point out the correspondence between
_Lords and Ladies_ and _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_, though Brown also
briefly mentions a Newtonian reference in relation to Ponder Stibbons.

BUCHBINDER, DAVID. “THE ORANGUTAN IN THE LIBRARY: THE COMFORT OF
STRANGENESS IN TERRY PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD NOVELS.” _YOUTH CULTURES:
TEXTS, IMAGES, AND IDENTITIES_. ED. KERRY MALAN AND SHARING PEARCE.
WESTPORT, CT: PRAEGER, 2003. 169–82.

This article discusses some of the ways in which Pratchett satirizes,
ridicules, and deconstructs traditional fantasy’s narrative and epic
form. Using Tolkien as a touchstone for comparison, Buchbinder observes
that Pratchett’s world subverts fantasy’s traditionally “closed” worlds
through their numerous intertextual references and discusses Pratchett’s
“participation in a British tradition of satiric comedy fiction” (174),
targeting greed, fame and celebrity, technology, and managerialism.
After a brief discussion of how Pratchett’s treatment of such political
issues as gender and orientation, power, sex, and age reworks the
fantasy genre, the remainder of the article focuses on the ways in which
the Discworld series resonates with younger readers. Buchbinder suggests
that cultural references including issues of women’s rights, racial
prejudice, religious fundamentalism, media influence, fantasies of
island vacations and Australian travel, and the presence and fear of
death are all of interest to younger readers, as are certain threads of
Pratchett’s stories, including the Cinderella motif and the theme of
parental control. The article concludes with a discussion of the
Librarian as a representation of the process of male adolescence.

BUTLER, ANDREW. “‘A STORY ABOUT STORIES’: TERRY PRATCHETT’S _THE AMAZING
MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS_.” _VECTOR_ 227 (JAN./FEB. 2003):
10–11.

This review article briefly considers Pratchett as an author of
children’s books, and then discusses the various stories encompassed in
_Maurice_. After noting that “stories are double-edged things” (11),
Butler concludes that by the end of the novel it becomes imperative for
characters to favor dialogue among and between themselves over stories.

_____. _TERRY PRATCHETT_. THE POCKET ESSENTIAL SERIES. HARPENDEN, UK:
POCKET ESSENTIALS, 2001.

This relatively short book consists of an introduction and four chapters
that consider Pratchett’s books from _The Carpet People_ to _Thief of
Time_. The introduction discusses Pratchett’s background and provides a
sketch of the history of fantasy before turning to the Discworld novels
and their composition; after very briefly mentioning Pratchett’s other
works, Butler discusses the use of power in Discworld, and concludes
with an overview of the book’s contents. Two of the book’s chapters
focus on Pratchett’s non–Discworld works: Chapter One on _The Carpet
People_, _The Dark Side of the Sun_, and _Strata_, and Chapter Three on
_The Bromeliad_ and _The Johnny Maxwell Trilogy_. Chapter Two focuses on
the Discworld novels, and Chapter Four focuses on collaborations
including _The Unadulterated Cat_, _Good Omens_, _The Discworld
Companion_, the Maps, _The Science of Discworld_, and _Nanny Ogg’s
Cookbook_. All of the chapters consist of film-review style entries on
individual books and share a similar format: a sentence noting the
book’s first British publication, a paragraph on the setting, a plot
summary, and a short critical section. This section is divided into
“Major Targets,” which generally include comments related to the book’s
theme and its use of comedy, “Cameos,” which notes minor characters, and
“Subtext,” a commentary on the book’s meaning which often overlaps or
intersects with the “Major Targets” section. Each entry concludes with
“The Verdict,” Butler’s ranking of the book on a 1–5 point scale, the
criteria for which is not clearly articulated beyond his comment that
“the purpose of this last is clearly to annoy people” (17). The book
concludes with a list of Pratchett’s books and a very short list of
critical materials.

_____. “TERRY PRATCHETT AND THE COMEDIC BILDUNGSROMAN.” _FOUNDATION: THE
REVIEW OF SCIENCE FICTION_ 67 (SUMMER 1996): 56–62.

This article applies Bakhtin’s notions of the chronotope and the
carnivalesque to an analysis of _Mort_. Butler views _Mort_ as
exemplifying one of the five subtypes of the _Bildungsroman_, one in
which both the world and the hero emerge changed from a marked
transition point; for _Mort_, Butler locates the transition in the
resolution of the paradox the eponymous protagonist creates. Butler also
lists several diagnostic features of the carnivalesque—ritual inversion,
scatological parody, and insulting friendship—providing examples from
the novel to illustrate their presence.

_____. “THEORIES OF HUMOUR.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF LITERATURE_.
ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN. READING, UK:
SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 35–50.

This article is constructed so as to provide brief illustrations of five
different approaches to explaining humor—Pirandello’s, Freud’s,
Bergson’s, Lacan’s, and Bakhtin’s; each of the five is applied to
analysis of _Mort_. In keeping with the “survey” design of the article,
each of the theory discussions is quite short, sketching out a few
important concepts from each of the five and relating them to several
examples from the novel. While Butler notes features common to these
five approaches, the presentation does not attempt a synthesis position.

_____, ED. _AN UNOFFICIAL COMPANION TO THE NOVELS OF TERRY PRATCHETT_.
WESTPORT, CT: GREENWOOD, 2007.

This detailed encyclopedia includes entries related to all of
Pratchett’s writings, not only the Discworld books. Entries focus on a
wide range of characters, places, individual novels and book series,
genres, authors (including Shakespeare) and significant people,
publishers, and topics including fandom, Greek mythology, L-Space,
Hollywood films, sexism, and animation, to name only a few. The
introduction consists of a short biographical sketch and background on
Pratchett’s writing, and the book concludes with a Select Bibliography
of Primary sources (short works, novels, and other writings by
Pratchett) and Secondary sources (anything not written by Pratchett,
starting with Douglas Adams’ _Hitch-Hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy_),
finishing with a list of web pages.

CABELL, CRAIG. _TERRY PRATCHETT: THE SPIRIT OF FANTASY_. LONDON: JOHN
BLAKE, 2011.

This full-length biography provides a solid overview of Pratchett’s life
and work, the latter of which Cabell considers “against the backdrop of
[Pratchett’s] life, philosophy and career” xvii). After a brief
discussion of fantasy, science fiction, and horror genres, the book
outlines Pratchett’s early history in terms of his schooling and
literary influences, his marriage to Lynn Purves, and his career in
journalism. It then traces Pratchett’s composition and publication of
_The Carpet People_, _The Dark Side of the Sun_, _Strata_, and his early
Discworld books, including _The Color of Magic, The Light Fantastic,
Equal Rites, Mort,_ and _Eric_. After a brief “Intermission” that
reconsiders _The Carpet People_, Cabell discusses Pratchett’s characters
and their connection to the history of Discworld, and then moves on to
chapters that focus on Pratchett’s treatment of cliché, childhood
(specifically in relation to _Hogfather_), Pratchett’s enjoyment of
music and its connections to _Soul Music_ and _Maskerade_, and darkness
(the Tiffany Aching books). This leads to chapters on Pratchett’s
writing for children, including _The Bromeliad Trilogy_, the Johnny
Maxwell trilogy, and _Nation_. The book’s final chapters consider
Pratchett’s 1995 documentary _Terry Pratchett’s Jungle Quest_ and his
contributions to founding The Orangutan Foundation, his diagnosis with
Posterior Cortical Atrophy, a rare form of Alzheimer’s Disease, and his
activism in the Dignity in Dying organization, as well as chapters on
Death and “A Note About Cats,” the latter of which discusses _The
Unadulterated Cat_ and _The Amazing Maurice_. Three appendices provide
information about film adaptations, theatrical productions, and book
collecting.

CLUTE, JOHN. “COMING OF AGE.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF LITERATURE_.
ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN. READING, UK:
SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 7–20.

Clute points out the inherent tension between formal Comedy (which
returns the world to its original state) and the modern fantasy
tradition, which he argues is heavily influenced by Christian authors
such as Tolkien and hence does not allow a simple return, instead
creating a pseudo-circular linearity by remaking the “return” state a
fundamentally transformed version of the initial one; the comic novel is
simply transformative. Using the notion of the “incipit”—a term from
music denoting a sequence borrowed from another work and used as a kind
of seed for further development—he provides a historical discussion of
Pratchett’s pre–Discworld (_Carpet People_, _Dark Side of the Sun_,
_Strata_) and Discworld work, connecting particular pieces to authors
such as Larry Niven and Gene Wolfe, and arguing that the Discworld has
maintained Comedy in the face of modern fantasy, remaining “[f]ree of
the dangerous pieties of transformative Healing” (19).

COCKRELL, AMANDA. “WHERE THE FALLING ANGEL MEETS THE RISING APE: TERRY
PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD.” _HOLLINS CRITIC_ 43:1 (FEB. 2006): 1–15.

This essay relies heavily on identification rather than analysis.
Cockrell notes Pratchett’s tendency towards parody, commenting on his
treatment of religion and belief in _Small Gods_ and _Hogfather_,
fantasy in _The Color of Magic_, and war and politics in _Jingo_. In
addition to observing Pratchett’s ability to create amusing names and
perfect phrases, the author comments on his reliance on folklore,
popular culture, and the collective unconscious. Cockrell provides a
general discussion of Pratchett’s characters, including Death and Susan,
the Witches, the City Watch, and the Wizards, and briefly comments on
his various settings. The essay concludes with a short biographical note
on Pratchett and a primary bibliography of his works.

CROFT, JANET BRENNAN. “THE EDUCATION OF A WITCH: TIFFANY ACHING,
HERMIONE GRANGER, AND GENDERED MAGIC IN DISCWORLD AND POTTERWORLD.”
_MYTHLORE: A JOURNAL OF J. R. R. TOLKIEN, C. S. LEWIS, CHARLES WILLIAMS,
AND MYTHOPOEIC LITERATURE_ 27: 3–4 (2009): 129–42.

This essay explores the different sorts of education available to girls
who are witches in Pratchett’s Tiffany Aching books and J. K. Rowling’s
_Harry Potter_ series. While Tiffany and Hermione both realize that
gaining knowledge means gaining power, they achieve their education
differently and in fantasy worlds that make different gender
assumptions. In the Discworld, males and females study and perform magic
differently. Wizards study magic at Unseen University, where their
magical education is heavily influenced by book-learning and academic
study. In contrast, witches’ magical education is considered a more
organic type of knowledge, and in the end Tiffany learns that “being a
witch is all about doing for those who can’t and speaking for those who
have no voices” (134). That said, since female characters in Discworld
are adopting what have traditionally been considered male Discworld
occupations, it is possible that their representation will increase as
the series progresses. The gender divisions in the _Harry Potter_
series, while less clear, can be seen better through Rowling’s
presentation of house-elves, who are presented as occupying a space
traditionally filled by housewives during the 20th century. Despite
their differences, Croft concludes, both series provide role models for
readers and suggest that “the truly determined will find a way to thrive
under any system” (140).

_____. “THE GOLEMPUNK MANIFESTO: OWNERSHIP OF THE MEANS OF PRODUCTION IN
PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD.” _PRESENTATIONS OF THE 2010 UPSTATE STEAMPUNK
EXTRAVAGANZA AND MEETUP_. ED. GYPSEY ELAINE TEAGUE. NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE,
UK: CAMBRIDGE SCHOLARS, 2011. 3–16.

This article argues that Pratchett’s treatment of golems in his
“technology” series critiques “the socially transformative power of
technological innovation” (3), and that in this way the Discworld series
overlaps with both steampunk literature and the Industrial Revolution.
Croft suggests Pratchett’s primary technological books are _The Truth_,
_Going Postal_, and _Making Money_, although she concedes that other
books also consider various aspects of technology, including _Monstrous
Regiment_ (for the effects of the telegraph, the free press, and
photography), _Soul Music_ (Hex), _Reaper Man_ (a combination
harvester), _Men at Arms_ (firearms in the form of the “gonne”), _Moving
Pictures_ (motion pictures), and _The Last Hero_ (a space-going craft).
Croft argues that golems “perfectly represent two essential elements of
the Industrial Revolution” in the steam that powered the machines and
the lives of the workers (5). After discussing the folkloric origins of
golems in medieval Jewish legends and noting their strong connections to
community and family, Croft adds that golems often serve as a
contemporary metaphor for anxiety about the modern world and the pace of
technological change, citing _Frankenstein, 2001,_ and _Blade Runner_ as
examples. The remainder of the article considers Pratchett’s golems in
_Feet of Clay_, _Going Postal_, and _Making Money_, relying heavily on
close reading to provide their mythological beginnings within
Discworld’s mythology, their development within Ankh-Morpork’s society,
and their connections to the economic well-being of the city. Croft
concludes by noting the questions that Pratchett’s Industrial Revolution
series has raised in relation to philosophical and ethical questions
about golems, specifically in terms of legal status, identity, and
ethics, and modern economic concerns related to unemployment,
immigration, and new technology.

_____. “NICE, GOOD, OR RIGHT: FACES OF THE WISE WOMAN IN TERRY
PRATCHETT’S “WITCHES” NOVELS.” _MYTHLORE_ 26:3/4 (SPRING/SUMMER 2008):
151–64.

This article provides an excellent explication of Pratchett’s use of the
concepts of Nice, Good, and Right to explore the themes of free will,
right and wrong, and the ethics of power. The three words act “as
shorthand for a complex of ideas about how a witch should or should not
deal with this moral imperative: how she should handle her power, treat
other people, and face her responsibilities to the world” (155). In the
Witches novels, the concept of “Nice” involves the avoidance of making
moral choices while not offending people. “Good” means following an
externally imposed moral system, while “Right” means seeing past both
the concepts of Nice and Good and embracing justice and moral
correctness. Croft appears to argue that none of Pratchett’s witches are
perfectly good or right, and only Magrat is fully Nice (Croft does not
discuss her behavior in _Lords and Ladies_), nor are they perfect
examples of any single trait. Granny Weatherwax resents having been
forced into the role of Good, as she more closely resembles Right,
though her “Right is tempered by an understanding of human nature and
the willingness to take on the burdens of others” (159). Nanny Ogg also
can be considered Right, but “given her more elastic approach to the
truth, Nanny has no compunction about hiding her Rightness under a
veneer of Niceness when needed” (160). The article concludes that
witchcraft’s ethics are based on striving for Rightness, which Croft
posits as being neutral, at least on the Discworld; this corresponds
with the way that magic on the Discworld is also neutral, and is there
to be drawn on by anyone who can use it.

CURRY, PATRICK. _DEFENDING MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN, MYTH AND MODERNITY_.
NEW YORK: MARINER, 2004. _GOOGLE SCHOLAR_. 24 AUG. 2013.

Curry includes a short paragraph distinguishing Pratchett’s humanist,
comedic, postmodernist fantasy from Tolkien’s “mythic fiction.”

DŻEREŃ-GŁOWACKA, SYLWIA. “IMAGERY IN TERRY PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD.”
_IMAGERY IN LANGUAGE_. ED. BARBARA LEWANDOWSKA-TOMASZCZYK AND ALINA
KWIATKOWSKA. FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY: PETER LANG, 2004. 723–32.

This relatively brief article applies concepts taken from Langacker’s
Cognitive Grammar, and from Gricean linguistic pragmatics, to the
analysis of a range of examples taken from Discworld texts, arguing that
these frameworks help elucidate elements of Pratchett’s humor. Cognitive
Grammar accounts for a number of linguistic phenomena by hypothesizing
that representations of meaning encoded in language are structured by
metaphors (“a city is a person” is one of the examples discussed in the
article) and manipulation of figure/ground distinctions; Dżereń-Głowacka
is thus able to position the “surprise” underlying examples of
Pratchett’s humor as being sudden exchanges of metaphor, or
figure/ground reversals. The article is designed to provide initial
illustrations of the utility of the approach, rather than to argue for a
specific interpretation of Pratchett’s imagery.

EKMAN, STEFAN. “TIME AND TIME AGAIN: PRATCHETT’S DJELIBEYBI.” _HERE BE
DRAGONS: EXPLORING FANTASY MAPS AND SETTINGS._ MIDDLETOWN, CT: WESLEYAN
UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2013. 117–124_._

This article argues that the quasi–Egyptian kingdom of Djelibeybi in
_Pyramids_ is a kind of a temporal polder—a domain “whose rules are such
that the surrounding world would destroy them if the boundary were ever
breached” (12). Ekman argues that Pratchett’s use of the polder differs
from typical uses (_cf_. Tolkien’s Lothlórien and Holdstock’s Ryhope
Wood) because of both the way readers become aware of its boundaries and
Pratchett’s use of “the very nature of time to create the opposition
between the polder and the surrounding world” (118). Time in Djelibeybi
is converted and stored in the pyramids in much the same way that
batteries convert and store energy; both can be turned into light and
heat. Time, which is often connected with water metaphors throughout the
novel, functions as a duality—dimension versus power—related to quantum
mechanics, and uncontrolled buildup eventually causes a shift in the
four dimensions of reality. Ekman suggests that Djelibeybi’s
polder-nature appears in the way it has been sealed away from the rest
of the Discworld; his logic here is somewhat inconsistent, but his
discussion of Dios is more convincing about the ways that he fails to
actively maintain the polder’s boundaries, instead focusing on opposing
changes in the kingdom in order to protect its reality. The article
concludes by noting that the polder is brought to an end not only by
Teppic’s repeated crossings of its boundaries (during his departures and
returns) but also by the foreign education both Teppic and Ptaclusp IIb
receive from the outside, which leads to reforms inside the kingdom.
However, as Ekman notes, rather than being destroyed, the “anachronistic
polder” is re-created as a kind of endless temporal loop of 7,000 years
in which Dios “is destined to create Djelibeybi as a changeless polder,
maintain it, and finally see it destroyed over and over again” (125); in
this way Djelibeybi’s polder-boundaries are temporal rather than
spatial.

ESPINOSA ANKE, LUIS. “QUANTIFYING IRONY WITH SENTIMENT ANALYSIS METHODS:
THE CASE OF TERRY PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD.” _CURRENT RESEARCH IN APPLIED
LINGUISTICS: ISSUES ON LANGUAGE AND COGNITION,_ ED. PAULA
RODRIGUEZ-PUENTE, TERESA FANEGO, EVELYN GANDÓN-CHAPELA, SARA
RIVEIRO-OUTEIRAL AND MARÍA LUISA ROCA-VARELA. NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, UK:
CAMBRIDGE SCHOLARS, 2013. 220–239.

This article discusses disparities between the kind of assignment of
ratings of positivity and negativity that are possible with algorithmic
approaches such as Sentiment Analysis (a data-mining technique) and
those human readers give to Pratchett’s novels. Espinosa notes that
current implementations of Sentiment Analysis are optimized for short
texts, and thus will require alteration to be more useful in the
examination of longer literary texts.

FARR, TIMOTHY. “THE SUBJECT OF ENTS, ENTWIVES AND HUORNS IN THE OLD
FOREST.” _MYTHLORE_ 135 (SEPT. 1995): 13–14.

This short piece points out a variety of Tolkien references that appear
in some of the Discworld books, including _Moving Pictures_ (the
Balgrog, Ridcully the Brown), _Equal Rites_ (Granpone the White /
Granpone the Grey), _Mort_ and _Lords and Ladies_ (comments about not
meddling in the affairs of wizards), and _Witches Abroad_ (dwarves and
invisible runes and dwarf bread and a Gollum-like creature).

FORNET-PONSE, THOMAS. “‘THE GODS PLAY GAMES WITH THE FATE OF MEN’: ZUM
VERHALTNIS VON GOTTERN UND MENSCHEN BEI TERRY PRATCHETT.” _INKLINGS_ 22
(2004): 130–153. [IN GERMAN]

Fornet-Ponse analyzes the relationships among gods, humans, and belief
in the Discworld novels, carefully tracing Pratchett’s development of
different versions of the quantified “belief/power” dynamic, and the
“priest as professional” image across a number of the novels. His
primary focus is _The Last Hero_, in which he sees the juxtaposition of
Cohen, the Bard, Carrot, Rincewind, and Leonard of Quirm as a device
that allows the presentation of five major types of relation to the
divine (lacking only the Atheist, who, as he notes Pratchett tells us,
tends to have a very brief existence on the Discworld). Fornet-Ponse
argues that the “game of the gods,” as Pratchett has constructed it, is
one that—particularly because of the way belief shapes the gods as they
attempt to shape belief—creates a structure in which the gods may
restrict humans’ ranges of options but not deny free will.

_THE GREENWOOD ENCYCLOPEDIA OF SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY: THEMES,
WORKS, AND WONDERS_. ED. GARY WESTFAHL. 3 VOLS. WESTPORT, CT: GREENWOOD,
2005.

This encyclopedia includes only a few sporadic mentions of Pratchett’s
works in the form of book titles or character names.

GRUNER, ELISABETH ROSE. “TEACH THE CHILDREN: EDUCATION AND KNOWLEDGE IN
RECENT CHILDREN’S FANTASY.” _CHILDREN’S LITERATURE_ 37 (2009): 216–35.

This article focuses on portrayals of learning in children’s fantasy
series, and particularly in J. K. Rowling’s _Harry Potter_ series,
Pratchett’s Tiffany Aching books, and Philip Pullman’s _His Dark
Materials_. The three authors depict three different models of
education: the traditional boarding school, an apprenticeship, and a
“benign neglect of education” (219), respectively. Each of the
protagonists finds mentors as well as peers, and each series shows how
the making, telling, and reading of stories are central to their
educational process. Unlike Harry or Lyra, however, Tiffany must learn
to “take control of the stories that form part of the received wisdom of
Discworld” (220), since these serve as objects that “require
interpretation and revision” (227) rather than merely serving as sources
of information. Pratchett’s novels demonstrate that acting on stories
without thinking carefully first is dangerous, and Tiffany participates
in a kind of “unschooling” or “autonomous education” process, as she
learns through doing rather than studying. Thus, Tiffany’s education as
a witch is more of a “socialization into being magical” (229) rather
than an education in learning how to perform magic, and in this sense it
is akin to an apprenticeship. All three series suggest that the more
children direct their own education the more they learn, and thus they
seem to “endorse” the concept of autonomous education for not only their
protagonists but also for their readers, who become “unschooled” through
narrative that teaches children how to read stories while they read
them.

_____. “WRESTLING WITH RELIGION: PULLMAN, PRATCHETT, AND THE USES OF
STORY.” _CHILDREN’S LITERATURE ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY_ 36: 3 (2011):
276–95.

This article argues that both Philip Pullman’s _His Dark Materials_
trilogy and Pratchett’s Tiffany Aching series link the impulses of
narration and religion through narrative causality, and contain
protagonists who not only resist narrative causality’s extremes but also
teach readers to resist its demands. Both heroines “turn story-making
into a religious act” and revitalize the traditions or beliefs they
appear to be undermining, and in this way become embodiments of “a new
theology for a new world” (278). Instead of working from Judeo-Christian
traditions, like Pullman, Pratchett works from traditions of English
folklore and paganism, and “reanimates what might have been thought to
have devolved into fairy tale, legend, and superstition [by]
refresh[ing] and defamiliariz[ing] stories that may form the groundwork
of faith” (286). Tiffany’s work as a witch “reinfuses her world with a
sense of the numinous and a reverence for creation” (290). Both series
suggest that the interdependence between the human and the divine
results from the storytelling capacity.

GUNELIUS, SUSAN. “TERRY PRATCHETT.” _HARRY POTTER: THE STORY OF A GLOBAL
BUSINESS PHENOMENON_. BASINGSTOKE, HAMPSHIRE: PALGRAVE MACMILLAN, 2008.
134–35.

This very short piece discusses Pratchett in relation to “branding” and
compares the Discworld series with J. K. Rowling’s _Harry Potter_
series. Gunelius makes some unsupported assumptions about both
Pratchett’s intentions and readers’ responses to the Discworld books,
arguing that Pratchett’s goal has been “to release two books a year for
the past two decades” (135) and that, as a result of the market having
been over-saturated with Discworld books, fans were “not able to develop
the same level of emotional involvement” with the series and thus do not
have the same desire for Discworld books as they had for new books in
the _Harry Potter_ series. Gunelius also states that the Discworld
series “was intentionally written so that readers could pick up any book
at any time and enjoy it as a standalone novel” (135), though this
assertion is not supported.

HABERKORN, GIDEON. “CULTURAL PALIMPSESTS: TERRY PRATCHETT’S NEW FANTASY
HEROES.” _JOURNAL OF THE FANTASTIC IN THE ARTS_ 18:3 (2007): 319–39.

This article argues that Pratchett’s reinvention of heroes from
traditions set up by the modern fantasy hero can be regarded as a kind
of palimpsest, in the sense that his heroes are superimposed on earlier
appearances of cultural heroes. The first half of the article provides
background, with a discussion of the theoretical work of Joseph Campbell
and J. R. R. Tolkien followed by an overview of the fantasy hero
tradition. Haberkorn then turns to an analysis of Pratchett’s
construction of heroes, and begins with the argument that Pratchett’s
earlier Discworld novels, especially with the figures of Rincewind and
the barbarian heroes Hrun and Cohen, ridicule rather than imitate the
typical “uniform, simplified, standardized” (328) fantasy hero mold and
portray its inadequacy. With his later protagonists, Pratchett
consciously subverts stereotypical traditions and reinvents the heroic
figure with Carrot and Vimes, as well as provides alternatives to it
with Lord Vetinari. Though the article does not discuss female heroes,
Haberkorn notes this is a topic for another paper. The article concludes
that Pratchett’s changes to the hero stereotype, as part of the cultural
discourse on heroism, significantly contribute to shaping the
contemporary fantasy hero.

HABERKORN, GIDEON, AND VERENA REINHARDT. “MAGIC, ADOLESCENCE, AND
EDUCATION ON TERRY PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD.” _SUPERNATURAL YOUTH: THE RISE
OF THE TEEN HERO IN LITERATURE AND POPULAR CULTURE_. ED. JES BATTIS.
PLYMOUTH, UK: LEXINGTON, 2011. 43–64. _MYLIBRARY_. 25 JULY 2012.

This chapter considers the ways in which Pratchett’s novels use magic
and magical education as a metaphor for moving through adolescence and
learning to deal with the world. The authors suggest that Pratchett
develops a kind of humanistic education that relies on inquiry-based
learning and thus stimulates students to think and to explore in order
to solve problems (47). After categorizing Pratchett’s different systems
of education as including apprenticeship, training by a guild, religious
education, the Quirm College for Young Ladies, and Magical education,
the rest of the chapter focuses on Tiffany Aching’s education as “an
argument for a humanistic education in general, and for problem-based
learning specifically” (48). The authors note that Tiffany’s formal
education and vocational training coincide with her personal growth and
maturation, and they note that this process stresses the importance of a
witch’s use of “inquiry and critical thinking, observation and evidence,
logic and rational analysis” to understand her world and deal with its
problems (50). Tiffany’s education as a witch is contrasted with
Eskarina Smith’s education as a wizard in _Equal Rites_, and the authors
note that witch magic and wizard magic are different types: wizardry has
a “more sensational effect” that seems to be about show, while
witchcraft relies on applied psychology and is about understatement
(52). After a brief application of Ginsburg and Jablow’s theory of
attributes of resilience—competence, confidence, connection, character,
contribution, coping, and control—to Tiffany’s character, the chapter
concludes by noting that, since coming-of-age stories usually are
associated with males, Pratchett’s four books on the education and
adolescence of a girl are thus “very important” (57) because they
“provoke” readers to think about magic as well as loss of illusion,
humanist values, and virtues essential to adulthood, concluding,
“[t]hus, it seems more likely that his books are not so much guides to
childhood, but rather guides to adulthood, no matter the age of the
reader” (58).

HANES, STACIE L. “THE NINETEENTH-CENTURY FOUNDATIONS OF THE DISCWORLD,
OR, MORE THAN YOU NEEDED TO KNOW ABOUT GRANNY WEATHERWAX’S KNICKERS.”
_NEW YORK REVIEW OF SCIENCE FICTION_ 21:11 [251] (JULY 2009): 11–12.

This essay briefly touches on the connections between aspects of British
nineteenth century history and Discworld. Hanes connects Granny
Weatherwax’s underclothing to Victorian attitudes towards modesty, Nanny
Ogg’s tin bath and Archchancellor Ridcully’s shower to Victorian
plumbing and health, and the seamstresses of Ankh-Morpork to the
connections between seamstresses and prostitutes in Victorian London.
While Hanes’ observations are interesting, the article is very general
in scope.

HARVEY, GRAHAM. “DISCWORLD AND OTHERWORLD: THE IMAGINATIVE USE OF
FANTASY LITERATURE AMONG PAGANS.” _POPULAR SPIRITUALITIES: THE POLITICS
OF CONTEMPORARY ENCHANTMENT_. ED. LYNNE HUME AND KATHLEEN MCPHILLIPS.
ALDERSHOT, UK: ASHGATE, 2006. 41–51.

After setting up some terminological distinctions among three different
varieties of what he terms “Paganisms” (in rough terms, Wicca/Druidry
vs. Germanic Heathenry vs. Animistic Heathenry), Harvey goes on to
examine possible reasons for the popularity of Pratchett’s Discworld and
Holdstock’s Mythago Wood among Pagan audiences, and sketches out Pagan
readings of particular elements of the texts. In the Pratchett section,
Harvey appears to assume as a given that the Discworld is extremely
popular among Pagans (perhaps this is common knowledge among scholars
who study Paganism, but as Pratchett is extremely popular in general,
some evidence that he is _more_ popular among Pagans would have been
useful). Harvey argues that Pratchett’s portrayal of the elves as “bad”
is not couched in terms of moral absolutes but rather only in terms of
their being bad _for humans_ (and bees), a point that raises some
interesting questions that the article does not have room to pursue in
detail. On a minor point, it refers to Granny, Nanny, and Magrat all as
living in Bad Ass; there is a substantive question involved in where
each of the characters lives.

HILL, PENELOPE. “UNSEEN UNIVERSITY.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF
LITERATURE_. ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDELSSOHN.
READING, UK: SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 51–65.

This essay carefully charts the development of Unseen University and its
associated characters (faculty, staff, students, and in some cases,
facilities) across the Discworld novels up to the time of the essay’s
publication; along with detailed treatments of the earlier novels, it
includes discussions of _The Last Continent_, and some preliminary
remarks about _The Truth,_ but was printed well before _Unseen
Academicals_, and because it was included in a volume with separate
discussions of the Librarian, it mentions him only in passing. Hill
details the early inconsistencies in the presentation of the
institution, and discusses its use (and subsequent lack of use) as a
backdrop for treatments of sexism, and its role as a stage on which
relations of power are played out; she also relates the novels to their
wider literary and cultural contexts in terms of “the academic novel”
(anchoring the discussion by reference to authors who are directly
mentioned on Pratchett’s book jackets or to whose works there are fairly
clear allusions in the Discworld novels themselves) and British
academia. Hill does venture a conjecture, in hindsight mistaken, that
Pratchett had perhaps gotten all the use out of UU that he would likely
want, but the texts available at the time supported such a view. The
essay is more concerned with contextualization and with recording UU’s
development than with advancing a unitary critical claim, but
foregrounds the “uneasy compromise between the twin images of academia
as the refuge of the lazy and as the repository of intellect and
learning” (65).

HILLS, MATTHEW. “MAPPING NARRATIVE SPACES.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF
LITERATURE_. ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN.
READING, UK: SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 129–44.

Hills discusses Pratchett’s construction of Discworld in relation to
definitions of the postmodern, noting in particular its emphasis on the
vulgar and marginal (e.g. the sewer system exists for reasons other than
narrative), and argues that in this sort of fantasy, the world will only
persist “through the discovery of new lands, or through the creative and
deliberate use of discontinuity” (143). He concludes that “Pratchett
neither radically subverts the conventions of the fantasy map nor merely
reproduces these conventions; his work both observes the co-ordinates of
the fantasy genre and re-places these co-ordinates through a
‘postmodern’ emphasis on waste and marginality rather than upon heroic
centrality,” and comments on fantasy mapping as a moral as well as
spatial project.

HUNT, PETER. “TERRY PRATCHETT.” _ALTERNATIVE WORLDS IN FANTASY FICTION_.
ED. PETER HUNT AND MILLICENT LENZ. LONDON: CONTINUUM, 2001. 86–121.

This chapter focuses on Pratchett’s first seven non–Discworld children’s
books—_The Carpet People_, _The Bromeliad Trilogy_ (_Truckers_,
_Diggers_, _Wings_), and the three Johnny Maxwell books: _Only You Can
Save Mankind_, _Johnny and the Dead_, and _Johnny and the Bomb_—but also
discusses the Discworld series up to 1998’s _Carpe Jugulum_. Commending
Pratchett as “a satirist every bit as incisive and erudite and
wide-ranging” (87) as Jonathan Swift, Hunt suggests that Pratchett’s
frequent use of academics as satiric fodder in their appearance as the
Wizards of Unseen University mirrors his disdain for literary research:
Pratchett has said that he “‘save[s] about twenty drafts…. Once [the
final one] has been printed out … there’s a cry of “Tough Shit, literary
researchers of the future, try getting a proper job!” and the rest are
wiped’” (87). Hunt briefly discusses Pratchett’s fans, observing that
they act very like literary scholars in their creation of annotations,
discussion boards, and newsletters, but suggests that this behavior is
justified since “the Pratchett books belong directly to the fans” (88).
Due to their range of allusions as well as their treatment of fantasy,
Hunt considers Pratchett’s books as “modern fantasy at its most
successful” and here mentions the “joke that no British railway train is
allowed to depart unless at least one passenger is reading a Pratchett
novel” (91). His discussion of Pratchett’s children’s books notes the
way they overturn expectations about Children’s literature in their
exploration of the differences between literature for children and
adults; arguing that what really separates books for children and adults
is their point of view, Hunt claims that the Discworld books generally
assume an adult point of view, despite their “gnomic pronouncements” as
being “for anyone who can understand / for adults of all ages” (114).
Ultimately Hunt disagrees with Colin Manlove’s contention that
Pratchett’s books are for entertainment alone, and argues that instead
they provide not only a “complete course in narratology” (119) but also
astute social and political satire and philosophical insights.

JAKMAKEJIAN, AURÉLIA. “TERRY PRATCHETT, LE JOKER 2003 DES ‘UTOPIALES.’”
_RENDEZVOUS_ 534 (14 NOV. 2003): 60–64. 15 JUNE 2012. [IN FRENCH].

This brief article in French, whose title translates as “Terry
Pratchett, the ‘Utopiales’ 2003 Joker,” discusses Pratchett’s appearance
at the Utopiales Festival in Nantes, France in November 2003. It
provides a brief introduction to Pratchett, and corrects French
misperceptions that he isn’t “nice” and that he doesn’t like the French,
noting that both were proven untrue during his visit. It also discusses
the fame of the Discworld series, commenting on the 32 million copies of
his books sold in countries ranging from Estonia, Germany, the United
States, Australia, New Zealand, and Czechoslovakia to the Netherlands,
Italy, Spain, and France; Pratchett comments that the only holdout is
China, perhaps due to the Western flavor of his novels. Jakmakejian also
mentions Pratchett’s perennial presence on the bestseller lists in
Britain and his wide and varied readership. The article then segues into
a discussion of the Festival and the topic of science and parascience
before concluding with a discussion about fantasy author James Morrow,
who is agitating in favor of the translation of more European fantasy
novels for American markets.

JAMES, EDWARD. “THE CITY WATCH.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF
LITERATURE_. ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN.
READING, UK: SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 112–28.

James juxtaposes Vimes as hero with Carrot as Hero, framing both as
parodic extensions of media tropes: the American detective or cop for
Vimes, the British bobby for Carrot (with the “Destined King” trope, of
course, added in for good measure). James views the City Watch novels as
“the most political of Pratchett’s works” (119), and provides numerous
examples of ways in which the novels address issues of political power,
community, and prejudice.

JAMES, EDWARD, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN, EDS. _THE CAMBRIDGE COMPANION TO
FANTASY LITERATURE._ CAMBRIDGE: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2012.

Several among this collection of essays make passing mention of
Pratchett, although none focus on him in any detail.

LANGFORD, DAVID. _JOSH KIRBY: A COSMIC CORNUCOPIA_. ILLUS. JOSH KIRBY.
FOREWORD BY TOM HOLT. LONDON: PAPER TIGER, 1999.

This lavishly illustrated book provides a detailed history for and
critical commentary on the work of fantasy artist Josh Kirby, a prolific
fantasy and horror artist best known for his _Discworld_ covers. After a
brief biographical sketch, six chapters—organized loosely by
genre—discuss Kirby’s art, and two of these focus on Discworld
illustrations. Although Langford notes that his discussion starts with
_Reaper Man_, since the earlier Discworld covers are discussed in Nigel
Suckling’s _In the Garden of Unearthly Delights_, he nevertheless
includes occasional comments about Kirby’s earlier Discworld art and
general observations about Kirby’s style, such as information about
Kirby’s artistic influences, which include Titian and Rubens for form,
Hogarth for characterization, Hieronymus Bosch and Pieter Bruegel the
Elder for a sense of an overflowing “abundance of bustling, imperfect
humanity” (6), and muralist Frank Brangwyn for the use of bold color.
Langford discusses Kirby’s composition process, his choice of media, his
preferred size of paintings for covers, and his policy “‘not to do a
Discworld cover that does not have a frameable painting at the end of
it’” (99). He also provides a detailed analysis of Kirby’s paintings
from _Reaper Man_ through _The Fifth Elephant_, along with his
illustrations for other Discworld stories, including four computer
games, short stories, the musical CD _From the Discworld_, and Kirby’s
illustrations for Pratchett’s illustrated novella, _Eric_.

_____. “PRATCHETT, TERRY.” _THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF FANTASY_. 1997. ED. JOHN
CLUTE AND JOHN GRANT. NEW YORK: ST. MARTIN’S GRIFFIN, 1999. 783–85.

This encyclopedia entry lists Pratchett’s publications to 1996, mentions
Pratchett’s concepts of “narrative causality” and “morphic resonance,”
and then provides an overview of the novels according to their groupings
and themes. In addition to the Rincewind sequence, the Witch sequence,
the Death stories, and the City Guard or Night Watch sequence, Langford
discusses Discworld books that do not fit tidily into one of the main
story arcs, including _Moving Pictures, Pyramids,_ and _Small Gods_. In
addition to pointing out various authors parodied in the Discworld
series, such as H. P. Lovecraft, Fritz Leiber, and Anne McCaffrey, along
with topics including astrology, druids, dwarfs, heroic fantasy, magic
shops and spells, and trolls, Langford also notes that “a steadfast
seriousness in matters of life and death underpins the humour of the
finer novels” (784), and that the Discworld series is becoming
increasingly shaped by Pratchett’s “interplay of belief and Story”
(784).

_____. “PRATCHETT, TERRY (DAVID JOHN).” _ST. JAMES GUIDE TO FANTASY
WRITERS_. ED. DAVID PRINGLE. NEW YORK: ST. JAMES, 1996. 486–88.

This encyclopedia entry provides a brief summary of Pratchett’s life and
work to 1996, and comments that the Discworld novels “offer the most
recognizable brand image of funny fantasy in Britain today” (486).

LEWIS, HELEN. “THE POLITICS OF PRATCHETT.” _NEW STATESMAN_ 21 NOV. 2012.
WEB. 15 JULY 2013.

This very short piece notes that the Discworld books, despite being
fantasy, are not irrelevant to real world concerns but instead have
become increasingly political. Lewis then cites several Discworld
novels’ treatment of political issues, including power (_Feet of Clay_),
capitalism (_Going Postal_), religion and the strength of belief (_Small
Gods_), and war (_Jingo_), and then briefly summarizes their content
before noting Vimes and Granny Weatherwax as the series’ “moral cores.”

MACKEY, MARGARET. “THE SURVIVAL OF ENGAGED READING IN THE INTERNET AGE:
NEW MEDIA, OLD MEDIA, AND THE BOOK.” _CHILDREN’S LITERATURE IN
EDUCATION_ 32:3 (SEPT. 2001): 167–189.

This article considers the spin-off texts engendered by J. K. Rowling’s,
Philip Pullman’s, and Pratchett’s series, and argues that “extended
reading is supported rather than undermined by many of these associated
texts” (167). Mackey’s discussion of Pratchett is far less extensive
than the discussions of Rowling and Pullman, and does little other than
providing an incomplete list of some of the offshoots of the Discworld
books, including one of the maps, one _Companion_, a graphic novel, an
illustrated compendium, and two computer games. Mackey does note two
interesting statistics about Pratchett: his books “account for an
astonishing 1 percent of all fiction sold in the Dillons chain [and] he
rises to the status of legend by being regularly nominated as the most
shoplifted author in Britain” (168).

MANLOVE, COLIN. _THE FANTASY LITERATURE OF ENGLAND_. NEW YORK: ST.
MARTIN’S, 1999. 135–37.

Despite introducing him as “a parodist of ‘genre’ fantasy,” Manlove
acknowledges Pratchett to be “a highly inventive fantasist in his own
right” (135) and credits him with popularizing the genre of comic
fantasy. Manlove briefly summarizes _The Color of Magic_, noting
Pratchett’s use of Tolkien, Robert E. Howard, and Anne McCaffrey as his
sources of parody, calling Pratchett a “creative comic genius” (136).
After a lengthy quotation describing the Rimfall, Manlove concludes that
Pratchett’s fantasy, despite being “a display of inventive pyrotechnics:
it asks only that we enjoy, it does not seek to change us” (137), mixes
textual realities in postmodern ways similar to Salman Rushdie and
Robert Irwin.

MENDLESOHN, FARAH. “FAITH AND ETHICS.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF
LITERATURE_. ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN.
READING, UK: SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 145–61.

Mendlesohn argues in this essay that Pratchett’s work can be read as
constructing a consistent theory of morality, one that positions an
identity-derived (rather than image-defined) valuation of life, and the
acceptance of the potentialities and responsibilities of choice, as the
locus of the Good (or the Better than Otherwise, at least). The article
develops this reading by an examination of _Jingo, Small Gods_, and the
first and third _Johnny and the Bomb_ novels in particular (although the
Agataeans of _Interesting Times_ enter the discussion as well), focusing
on Pratchett’s treatment of evil as objectification of human life and
how this treatment interacts with the complex of motifs with which
Pratchett surrounds notions of warfare and honor.

_____. _RHETORICS OF FANTASY_. MIDDLETOWN, CT: WESLEYAN UNIVERSITY
PRESS, 2008.

Mendlesohn refers to Pratchett several times in this work, but he is
positioned primarily as one among many sources of examples to illustrate
categories in the typology of fantasy that she develops in the volume.
For example, she connects Ankh-Morpork citizens’ “city mindset” (in the
Watch sequence and later novels) to the notion of a pocket universe
(91–2) and the parodically unsubtle clue-dropping in _Carpe Jugulum_ to
the more earnest preceding versions in what she terms intrusion
fantasies (126). She and Edward James consider Pratchett in more detail
in _A Short History of Fantasy_.

MENDLESOHN, FARAH, AND EDWARD JAMES. _A SHORT HISTORY OF FANTASY_.
LONDON: MIDDLESEX UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2009. 167–84.

Most of the discussion of Pratchett in this highly readable volume is in
the tenth chapter, titled simply “Pullman, Rowling, Pratchett.” In
keeping with its title, the book is designed to provide historical
contextualization rather than to argue for a particular theoretic
framework for a specialist audience. It provides a particularly useful,
brief, but non-reductionist discussion of the relation between these
authors’ “blockbuster” status and shifts in the economics of the fantasy
book market—for example, the advent of Amazon, and changes in British
law controlling book-pricing—and discusses some of Pratchett’s impact on
the genre itself, noting that “while sword-and-sorcery makes an
impressive reappearance in the twenty-first century … it looks very
different, at least in part because Pratchett mocked some of the older
clichés to death” (183). Its other mentions of Pratchett are primarily
as illustrative examples.

MOODY, NIKIANNE. “DEATH.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF LITERATURE_. ED.
ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN. READING, UK:
SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 99–111.

Focusing primarily on the novels in which Death is a central character,
such as _Mort_, _Reaper Man_, and _Hogfather_, this article considers
Pratchett’s construction of Death, and of the contexts Death becomes a
participant in, as critiques of Thatcherian political/enterprise
discourse and as statements about the relationship between work and
identity. Moody contextualizes the books’ popularity with discussions of
changes in the science fiction book market (which became the “fantasy
and science fiction market”) and in wider British culture, concluding
that “by insisting on and achieving an integrity for the character of
Death, Pratchett disrupts the terrain proposed by political rhetoric of
the 1980s and 1990s, which had established itself as the only agenda for
debating everyday life, social change, and consensus” (111).

MOORCOCK, MICHAEL. _WIZARDRY AND WILD ROMANCE: A STUDY OF EPIC FANTASY_.
LONDON: GOLLANCZ, 1987. 63–4; 117–19.

Moorcock makes two short mentions in passing of Pratchett, the first of
which notes Pratchett’s emphasis on landscape as being like that of
other sorts of sword and sorcery tales, the second of which positions
Pratchett relative to authors such as Pratt, de Camp, and Leiber.

NOONE, KRISTIN. “SHAKESPEARE IN DISCWORLD: WITCHES, FANTASY, AND
DESIRE.” _JOURNAL OF THE FANTASTIC IN THE ARTS_ 21:1 (77) (2010): 28–40.
_OMNIFILE FULL TEXT SELECT_.

This article discusses the correspondences between Shakespeare’s
_Macbeth_ and _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ and Pratchett’s _Wyrd Sisters_
and _Lords and Ladies_, and argues that “while desire is an unavoidable,
powerful, and ambivalent part of life, with all attendant dangers and
strengths, the heart of successful magical thinking lies in human
response and choice” (10 of 12). Noone defines desire in _Wyrd Sisters_
and _Macbeth_ as a craving for power, and in _Lords and Ladies_ and _A
Midsummer Night’s Dream_ as a love of beauty and glamour. Noone notes
that magic is paradoxical since it is invoked only when desire cannot be
realized in reality, and suggests that Pratchett’s witches provide a
resolution to this problem in the shape of human response. The article
concludes that Pratchett uses Shakespeare like Shakespeare used fantasy:
to provide “a space for the exploration of human desires and choices”
(10 of 12).

“OUT OF THIS WORLD: THE ART OF JOSH KIRBY. 15 JUNE–30 SEPTEMBER 2007.”
_WALKER ART GALLERY EXHIBITION_. 2007. LIVERPOOL, UK. 10 OCT. 2012.

This art exhibition overview discusses Kirby in light of his reputation
for having created cover art for “some of the most iconic science
fiction and fantasy novels” as well as film posters for _Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi_ and _Monty Python’s Life of Brian_. The catalogue
provides biographical material, a discussion of his fantasy artwork, and
a lengthy discussion of his Discworld paintings, suggesting that
Pratchett’s novels in translation were “re-branded when books that had
originally been launched with artwork by other artists were given new
Josh Kirby covers, guaranteeing their saleability on the foreign
market.” It claims that Kirby’s covers are “synonymous with
[Pratchett’s] work, capturing the frenetic pace of life in the
Discworld,” and notes that some of his Discworld illustrations became
“iconic within Kirby’s output,” including “Rincewind Running” as well as
the universe’s creation in “The Big Bang,” both from _Eric_.

OZIEWICZ, MAREK. “‘INTO OUR HANDS THEY ARE ABSOLUTELY DELIVERED?’ ANIMAL
FANTASY AS A FORM OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.” _RELEVANT ACROSS CULTURES;
VISIONS OF CONNECTEDNESS IN MODERN FANTASY LITERATURE FOR YOUNG
READERS_. ED. JUSTYNA DESZCZ-TRYHUBCZAK, MAREK OZIEWICZ AND AGATA
ZARZYCKA. WROCLAW: OFICYNA WYDAWNICZA, 2009. 119–32.

This article focuses on four works of rat fantasy—Robert C. O’Brien’s
_Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH_, Ursula Le Guin’s “Mazes,” Philip
Pullman’s _I Was a Rat_, and Pratchett’s _The Amazing Maurice—_and
argues that anthropomorphism is the alternative to animal degradation,
since it encourages empathy and helps promote a sense of
interconnectedness between animal life and reader. After tracing
historical attitudes towards degradation of animals, Oziewicz discusses
each of the stories in turn, providing a brief plot summary for each. He
suggests that Pratchett’s view of inter-species relationships and
evolution of the animal consciousness theme “offers a look at the human
world through non-human eyes” (129) and that this perspective creates
anthropomorphism for both the rats and Maurice.

_____. “‘WE COOPERATE, OR WE DIE’: SUSTAINABLE COEXISTENCE IN TERRY
PRATCHETT’S _THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS_.” _CHILDREN’S
LITERATURE IN EDUCATION_ 40 (2009): 85–94.

This article invokes Fritjof Capra’s concept of ecological
sustainability and his usage of the terms “ecoliteracy” and “ecodesign”
as scaffolding for Oziewicz’s argument that _The Amazing Maurice_
presents “a modern example of environmentally informed social dreaming
about sustainable coexistence” (85). Moreover, it considers the problem
of connecting economic, social, and political discourses to things that
are non-human, and thus functions as “a work with a transformative
purpose. It suggests that cooperation and coexistence are workable
beyond what we assume to be their limits” (85). Oziewicz concludes by
suggesting that Pratchett’s novel illustrates his conviction that “we
can learn how to recondition ourselves to accept attitudes and
priorities compatible with ecological sustainability.”

PARKER, VIC. _TERRY PRATCHETT (WRITERS UNCOVERED)_. LONDON: HEINEMANN,
2007.

The Writers Uncovered series is aimed at schoolchildren and provides
background on Pratchett, an introduction to his works for children, and
“tips” to inspire younger readers’ own writing. Printed in color and
including numerous photographs and text-boxes, it opens with a
biographical sketch that traces Pratchett’s schooling, his earliest
publications, and his jobs as a journalist and as Publicity Officer for
the Central Electricity Generating Board. After noting his creation of
Discworld, it shifts to short sections devoted to the children’s books;
each section provides plot summary and a short paragraph of “Inside
Information” with related interesting facts. These are followed with
pages on Pratchett’s honors and awards, the adaptations of _Truckers_ as
an animated film and _Johnny and the Dead_ and _The Amazing Maurice_
into plays, and an example of a book review of _The Amazing Maurice_,
coupled with a suggestion that readers try to write their own book
review. After briefly discussing future projects, the book concludes
with a timeline, further resources, a glossary (keyed to words that have
appeared in bold throughout the text, such as “conventions,”
“extra-terrestrial,” “draft,” “parody,” and “touch-typing”), and an
index.

PETTY, ANNE C. “TERRY PRATCHETT: FUNNY SIDE UP.” _DRAGONS OF FANTASY_.
COLD SPRING HARBOR, NY: COLD SPRING, 2004. 96–121.

This chapter discusses Pratchett’s dragons in _The Color of Magic,
Guards! Guards!_, and _The Last Hero_ and notes their parodic
correspondences with dragons in Anne McCaffrey’s _Pern_ tales, Ursula Le
Guin’s _Earthsea_ tales, and J. R. R. Tolkien’s _The Hobbit_. Petty
notes several examples of Pratchett’s humor, his ironic reversals, and
his comic technique of shifting focus before moving to a detailed
discussion of _The Color of Magic_ and the correspondences between its
dragons and McCaffrey’s. After noting similarities between Pratchett’s
dragons in _Guards! Guards!_ and those in Tolkien and McCaffrey, the
chapter discusses their correspondences with western dragon mythology.
Several paragraphs are devoted to the Dragon of Ankh-Morpork’s
characterization, physical description, and sound imagery before the
chapter segues into a discussion of swamp dragons and the ways in which
they parody British dog and horse breeders, as well as briefly
mentioning the moon dragons in _The Last Hero_. Petty concludes with
praising Pratchett’s parody.

PETZOLD, DIETER. “‘A CHRISTIAN ATHEIST’: RELIGION IN TERRY PRATCHETTS
POST-MODERNER FANTASY FICTION.” _SPIRITUALITÄT UND TRANSZENDENZ IN DER
MODERNEN ENGLISCH-SPRACHIGEN LITERATUR_. ED. SUSANNE BACH. PADERBORN:
SCHÖNINGH, 2001. 49–69. [IN GERMAN]

This chapter is cited in Fornet-Ponse’s “‘The Gods play games with the
fate of men’” but was unobtainable at date of writing.

PRATCHETT, TERRY, AND JACQUELINE SIMPSON. _THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD_.
ILLUS. PAUL KIDBY. LONDON, UK: TRANSWORLD, 2008.

The entries in this work are written from a “faux-real” stance (with the
Discworld and Earth as two environments within a multiverse) and
position selected Discworld topics in relation to general information
from folklore studies. In keeping with its stance, it is intended for a
popular audience, not researchers—it does refer to several specific
studies, and often includes excerpts from collected folktales, but uses
these as illustration instead of focusing on argumentation or
documentation issues (of course, one could argue that actual folklore
rarely focuses on argumentation or documentation issues either). Its
relatively brief bibliography is designed to be a list of suggested
further reading for those with no specialized knowledge of folklore or
mythology.

PRINGLE, DAVID, ED. _ULTIMATE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF FANTASY: THE DEFINITIVE
ILLUSTRATED GUIDE_. 1998. FOREWORD BY TERRY PRATCHETT. LONDON: CARLTON,
2006.

This colorful illustrated encyclopedia is divided into eight main
sections, of which the two largest contain alphabetically arranged
entries on major authors and fantasy characters and entities. The other
six sections, which are not arranged in a discernible order, comprise
entries on fantasy types, cinema and television fantasies, games,
settings, and fantasy magazines. The book concludes with a short
glossary of terms. The entry on Pratchett is quite short, providing a
brief overview of the various clusters of the Discworld books—Rincewind,
the Witches, Death, and the Watch—as well as the books that do not
clearly fit into these clusters. In the Fantasy Characters section, the
only entry relating to Discworld is the entry on Death, which lists the
books he appears in, while the entry on Discworld in the Settings
section is somewhat longer but essentially descriptive.

“RHIANNA PRATCHETT ON RECLAIMING LARA CROFT AND HAVING DISCWORLD CREATOR
TERRY AS A DAD.” _METRO_. 4 MAR. 2013. WEB. 6 MAR. 2013.

In this interview with Pratchett’s daughter, a videogame scriptwriter,
she comments on her father’s love for “electronics, robotics and
computers” and comments that, despite having been diagnosed with
Alzheimer’s in 2007, Pratchett is doing well and now writes using
“TalkingPoint speech software because he can’t type any more.” She
regards herself as “the protector of Discworld and that means protecting
it from myself as well,” and also notes that she and her father are
working with BBC Worldwide on a television series of The Watch books.

RUSNAK, MARCIN. “PLAYING WITH DEATH: HUMOROUS TREATMENT OF DEATH-RELATED
ISSUES IN TERRY PRATCHETT’S AND NEIL GAIMAN’S YOUNG ADULT FICTION.”
_FASTITOCALON: STUDIES IN FANTASTICISM ANCIENT TO MODERN_ 2:1–2 (2011):
81–95.

Rusnak examines the intersection of humor and depictions of death in
Gaiman’s _The Graveyard Book_ and Pratchett’s _The Amazing Maurice and
His Educated Rodents_, using Freudian interpretations of humor as a
basis. Drawing on work by Philippe Ariés, Douglas Davies, and Benjamin
Noys, he notes that Western attitudes toward death have changed
dramatically in the past fifty years, and argues that the increase in
death/dying motifs and “black humor” in YA fiction represent attempts to
develop new means of dealing with an increasingly taboo topic, since
“humour in its numerous forms may alleviate fear and other negative
emotions usually associated with death and death-related issues” (84).
Rusnak particularly notes as stylistic devices the casual attitude
Pratchett’s characters frequently adopt about death, the ways in which
discussion shifts from the abstract to the corporeal, and, of course,
Pratchett’s memorable personalization of Death himself. The article does
not address criticisms of Freud’s theory of humor, or of
additional/competing explanations for the increase in death themes in YA
literature, but such would have been beyond its practical scope, and
Rusnak does an excellent job of stating his grounds.

RÜSTER, JOHANNES. _ALL-MACHT UND RAUM-ZEIT: GOTTESBILDER IN DER
ENGLISCHSPRACHIGEN FANTASY UND SCIENCE FICTION._ BERLIN, DE: LIT VERLAG,
2007. _GOOGLE BOOKS_. 18 AUG. 2013 [IN GERMAN]

This detailed analysis of the ways in which science-fiction and fantasy
authors have constructed theories about the nature of divinities and the
divine incorporates examinations of a number of Discworld novels
(including _Eric_, _The Color of Magic_, _Small Gods_, _The Last Hero_,
and _Pyramids_, as well as the non–Discworld novel _Good Omens_), in
addition to analyses of a number of texts by other authors (e.g.,
Gaiman, Bradbury, Lem, Vonnegut). It should therefore be of particular
interest to scholars contextualizing Pratchett within the wider field of
science-fiction/fantasy studies.

_____. “‘IT’S ALIVE!’: DER MAD SCIENTIST ALS AMORALAPOSTEL.” _INKLINGS:
JAHRBUCH FÜR LITERATUR UND ÄSTHETIK_. 26 (2008): 119–137. [IN GERMAN]

Rüster examines the figure of the “mad scientist,” contextualizing the
discussion by placing mad scientists into relation with both the
“wizard” and “evil genius” images. By Rüster’s definitions, the
distinguishing feature of mad scientists is their amorality—unlike evil
geniuses, they are not primarily concerned with the pursuit of power,
but rather of knowledge; the danger they pose is constituted by their
disinterest in the wider consequences of that pursuit. Pratchett is
brought into the exposition as an example of postmodern conceptions of
the mad scientist (following discussions of _Frankenstein_ as a
pre-modern case and _Dr. Strangelove_ as a modern exemplar). After
tracing the origin of “the Igor” in film, Rüster argues that while
Pratchett’s Igor trope is obviously connected to the mad scientist
motif, it acts as a “magic mirror” to it, by virtue of Igors’
application of their knowledge to addressing community needs and by
their humanity in contrast to that of their masters. Teatime, on the
other hand, evinces a number of mad-scientist traits without so
obviously fitting the image.

SAWYER, ANDY. “THE LIBRARIAN AND HIS DOMAIN.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY
OF LITERATURE_. ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH
MENDLESOHN. READING, UK: SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 66–82.

Sawyer discusses Pratchett’s Librarian as an affectionate and
celebratory parody, pointing out the Librarian’s (and librarians’)
crucial role as facilitator and guardian. The article includes a brief
but nuanced overview of the history of library science and some of its
major figures (Edwards, Dewey, Ranganathan), noting the rapid
reconfigurations made possible by the internet’s potential to decouple
content from physical artifact and by database technologies’
emancipation of organization from a single sort order. Sawyer sets up a
three-way distinction of Clever vs. Skilful vs. Knowledgeable as a
parallel to Martin’s Right, Good, and Nice, and then goes on to argue
that the appeal to librarians of the Knowledgeable Librarian—whose
overwhelmingly positive reaction to a parody might seem odd—is tied to
Pratchett’s obvious understanding of their mission. Pratchett has, for
example, an unusually clear grasp of the relative social value of
librarians and academics, for whom Sawyer argues the Librarian is a
foil. Thus, Pratchett’s parodic figure is one that reclaims it, that
loudly but silently wrests it from the distinctly unpassionate grasp of
the standard cultural stereotype. As the article can be read as rather
slyly performing a number of the points it makes about librarians while
describing them, it is interesting from a general rhetorical standpoint
as well.

_____. “NARRATIVIUM AND LIES-TO-CHILDREN: ‘PALATABLE INSTRUCTION’ IN
_THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD_.” _JOURNAL OF THE FANTASTIC IN THE ARTS_ 13:1
[49] (2002): 62–81.

In this examination of the first volume of _The Science of Discworld_
sequence, Sawyer places Pratchett, Stewart, and Cohen’s treatment of the
science/fiction relationship into opposition with a unidirectional,
didactic one he characterizes as Gernsbeckian, arguing that in Science,
“the threads of the ‘fiction’ and ‘science’ aspects are there to
illuminate and interrogate each other rather than merely to be
‘entertaining’ or ‘instructive’” (63). His argument has bearing both on
typologies of science fiction and on discussions of science as
explanatory narrative.

SAYER, KAREN. “THE WITCHES.” _TERRY PRATCHETT: GUILTY OF LITERATURE_.
ED. ANDREW M. BUTLER, EDWARD JAMES, AND FARAH MENDLESOHN. READING, UK:
SCIENCE FICTION FOUNDATION, [2004]. 83–98.

Sayer examines the status of Pratchett’s witches in relation to the
tripartite maiden/mother/crone figure as presented in popular syntheses
such as Dexter’s _Whence the Goddesses_, which Sayer uses extensively,
noting that in Pratchett’s novels, “[t]here is an adherence to the
(reproductive) pagan model of maiden, mother, crone, yet women’s
sexuality is not constructed simply—there are various models of
motherhood (Magrat and Gytha), maidenhood (Granny, Agnes, and Magrat),
and of being a crone (Gytha and Esme)” (97). Using concepts from Lacan
and Kristeva, the article also examines ways in which Pratchett’s
witches lend themselves to being read as feminist (their independence,
their power, their physicality) or resist such a reading (their
connection to domestic sites such as their huts).

SCHANOES, VERONICA L. “BOOK AS MIRROR, MIRROR AS BOOK: THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF THE LOOKING-GLASS IN CONTEMPORARY REVISIONS OF FAIRY TALES.” _JOURNAL
OF THE FANTASTIC IN THE ARTS_ 20:1 (2009): 5–23. _PROQUEST_. 3 JUNE
2012.

After reviewing feminist analyses of the mirror as a symbol of
patriarchal objectification, making specific reference to Gilbert and
Gubar’s as well as Irigaray’s theories, Schanoes examines Angela
Carter’s presentation of mirrors in detail. She argues that Carter has
transformed the mirror as a symbol for later fantasy writers such as
Tanith Lee and Terry Pratchett, supporting the argument with critical
analyses of _Wyrd Sisters_ and Lee’s _White as Snow_. Schanoes argues
that the mirrors in these feminist revisions of fairy tales function as
symbols that represent reflections—comprising stories, which are in turn
composed of memories of the past and fantasies for the future—and that,
despite their ephemeral nature (because they are constructed by and
contained in the mind), these reflections are necessary to how one
constructs and relates to the world; similarly, “fantasy is utterly
necessary to our understanding of reality.”

SCHOLZ, THOMAS. “THE MAKING OF A HILARIOUS UNDEAD: BISOCIATION IN THE
NOVELS OF TERRY PRATCHETT.” _FASTITOCALON: STUDIES IN FANTASTICISM
ANCIENT TO MODERN_ 1:2 (2010): 141–52.

Scholz applies Arthur Koestler’s notion of creativity as
“bisociation”—the juxtaposition of two frames of reference that
conflict, with the dissolution of the conflict resulting from
application of a consistent but novel logic—to an analysis of
Discworld’s undead characters, such as zombies (Reg Shoe and Windle
Poons), the vampires, and the ghost of Verence I. After pointing out the
devices by which bisociation is accomplished in a number of examples and
discussing the frames being juxtaposed, he refers to increasing
frequency of humorous undead, citing J. K. Rowling’s _Harry Potter_
series particularly. The article does not attempt to trace the history
of humorous undead, and it is unclear whether he considers them as
essentially a recent phenomenon.

SIMPSON, JACQUELINE. “ON THE AMBIGUITY OF ELVES.” _FOLKLORE_ 122:1 (APR.
2011): 76–83.

Simpson discusses Pratchett’s, Tolkien’s, and Rowling’s construction of
“elf” figures in relation to folkloric depictions from northern Germanic
texts, specifically Norse, including Sturluson’s _Edda_, and Old
English, including _Beowulf_ and several of the metrical charms. She
confines the discussion to direct cognates of “elf” (_ælf, álfar_), thus
excluding in a principled way a discussion of similar figures from
neighboring cultures / linguistic groups, and highlights the extent to
which folkloric elf-figures have persistently retained both benevolent
and malefic traits. Her discussion of Pratchett’s elves occupies a
comparatively small portion of the argument, using them primarily as an
example of a modern author’s employment of their negative
characteristics. The article is likely to be particularly useful to
those unfamiliar with northern European folklore, as it provides a
highly accessible overview of material treated in greater detail in
scholarly monographs.

SMITH, EVE. “SELLING TERRY PRATCHETT’S DISCWORLD: MERCHANDISING AND THE
CULTURAL ECONOMY OF FANDOM.” _PARTICIPATIONS: JOURNAL OF AUDIENCE AND
RECEPTION STUDIES_ 8.2 (NOV. 2011): 239–256.

Smith applies Bourdieu’s notions of economic and cultural capital to the
analysis of the results of a 2007 online survey of fan ownership of
merchandise and collectibles. The discussion of the survey itself is
focused on integrating a few of the major findings with a summary of
Bourdieu’s theory and details about the fan base; it does not focus on
survey construction or statistical analysis, and appears designed to
clearly introduce the areas of discussion and connect them, rather than
to address a specialist audience of social scientists. One of Smith’s
major points is that Pratchett’s fan base values openness, so this
non-specialization may be a statement as well. The survey results
indicate that level of education (a proxy for cultural capital) does not
predict ownership patterns except in the case of very hard-to-obtain
items, with “items” here including abstract ones, e.g., “having a
Discworld character named after you” (254).

SMITH, KEVIN PAUL. “BATTLING THE NIGHTMARE OF MYTH, TERRY PRATCHETT’S
FAIRYTALE INVERSIONS.” _THE POSTMODERN FAIRYTALE: FOLKLORIC INTERTEXTS
IN CONTEMPORARY FICTION_. NEW YORK: PALGRAVE, 2007. 133–163.

This extended essay on Pratchett applies Baudrillardian concepts to a
detailed examination of _Witches Abroad_, arguing that the novel
effectively addresses social concerns with “the reign of the hyper-real
and the way that fairytales can become repressive myths that, like the
panopticon, are part of a society’s power structures” (160). He notes
that Pratchett’s undermining of fairy tales’ efficacy as vectors of
ideology works in some ways like feminist revisions of fairy tales do:
by making figures that were previously simply narrative objects central
and dynamic, and by (simultaneously) drawing readers’ attention to
narrative conventions through this shift. After examining each of the
prototypical fairy tale scenarios that the witches cheerfully demolish
on their way to Genua (and how Pratchett accomplishes the destruction),
Smith draws detailed parallels between Genua and Disney Land in a
discussion of the hyper-real and dystopia.

SMYTHE, COLIN. “A SHORT BIOGRAPHY.” _L-SPACE WEB_. 1996–2011. 3 JULY
2012.

This short biographical essay provides an overview of Pratchett’s
education, his job history prior to becoming a full-time writer, his
honorary degrees, his marriage and the birth of his daughter, his
diagnosis with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease in 2007, and the
ever-increasing rise of Discworld fandom. Progressing chronologically,
Smythe focuses on Pratchett’s publications and their history, beginning
with his first publication at the age of thirteen—a short story entitled
“The Hades Business” appearing first in his school magazine _Technical
Cygnet_ and then commercially two years later in _Science Fantasy_
magazine—and concluding with _Snuff_. Smythe notes Corgi’s publication
of _The Colour of Magic_ in 1985 as “the turning point in Terry’s
writing career,” and adds that Pratchett began writing full-time in 1987
after finishing _Mort_. The essay also notes Pratchett’s work for the
Orang-Utan Foundation. It concludes with a discussion of the recent
live-action films of _Hogfather, The Colour of Magic, Going Postal,_ and
the upcoming production of _Unseen Academicals._

SUCKLING, NIGEL. _IN THE GARDEN OF UNEARTHLY DELIGHTS: THE PAINTINGS OF
JOSH KIRBY_. FOREWORD BY BRIAN ALDISS. 1991. LONDON: PAPER TIGER, 1995.

This book traces artist Josh Kirby’s career from its beginning until
1991. Essentially a collection of color reproductions of Kirby’s
artwork, each chapter begins with a short essay discussing the different
themes that appear in his work, ranging from “Vapours of Forgotten
Worlds” through “Maidens and Monsters” and “Sword and Sorcery” to
“Hitchcock, Poe and Horror.” Of the eight chapters, only the sixth
focuses on the illustrations for Pratchett’s Discworld, though Kirby’s
illustrations for the covers of Pratchett’s _Bromeliad_ trilogy as well
as _The Dark Side of the Sun_ and _Strata_ are also included. Kirby’s
understanding of the Discworld books appears nicely in his comment that
“humour and shrewd social comment and airy philosophy and droll science
thread their way through the frantic, even manic, efforts of the
inhabitants of the Discworld to survive…. Here perhaps we have Bruegel
in literary form” (92). One chapter of the book highlights Kirby’s
“Voyage of the Ayeguy,” his _magnum opus_, and the book concludes with a
selection of his science fiction illustrations.

THOMAS, MELISSA. “TEACHING FANTASY: OVERCOMING THE STIGMA OF FLUFF.”
_ENGLISH JOURNAL_ 92:5 (MAY 2003): 60–64.

This short piece provides a surface-level overview of the history of
fantasy and its topics, mentioning wizards, gender roles, and heroism.
Its paragraph on Pratchett notes his popularity, his humor, and his
social commentary, concluding that his fantasy “has come a long way from
theological speculation to a sort of human spiritual spanking” (63).

TIFFIN, JESSICA. “STRUCTURED SWORD AND SORCERY: THE POPULAR FAIRY TALES
OF LEE, PRATCHETT, AND TEPPER.” _MARVELLOUS GEOMETRY: NARRATIVE AND
METAFICTION IN MODERN FAIRY TALE_. DETROIT: WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY
PRESS, 2009. 131–178.

In this well-contextualized essay drawing on a number of theorists of
fairy tales (Bettelheim, Tatar, Zipes), popular fiction (Cavetti), and
orality (Ong, Harres), Tiffin points out similarities between the fairy
tale and popular narrative (both, for example, rely on minor surface
variations on very fixed generic structures) and notes that within the
“SF Ghetto,” literary fairy tales and innovative popular fantasy novels
exist in a state of tension: the audience expects a level of
predictability that the works seek to undermine. She goes on to examine
how the three authors listed in her title may be read as negotiating
this tension; for Pratchett, she argues that “the Discworld’s narrative
structures … provide the necessary element of familiarity which enables
the popular audience comfortably to consume the disrupted view of modern
culture the novels provide” (161). The subsection on Pratchett focuses
on _Witches Abroad_, with its deflation of the Disneyesque by the
witches’ ironic realism, stating that “the use of fairy tale in
[Pratchett’s] novels is inevitable; like Byatt, he appears to be drawn
to structural narrative which counteracts the fragmentary nature of the
modern culture he parodies” (161).

WASHINGTON, LINDA, AND CARRIE PYYKKONEN. _SECRETS OF THE WEE FREE MEN
AND DISCWORLD: THE MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF TERRY PRATCHETT’S MULTIVERSE_.
NEW YORK: ST. MARTIN’S GRIFFIN, 2008.

This fan-created appreciation piece relies heavily on Wikipedia as a
major source for its information, and adopts a conversational style
throughout. The authors provide their rationale for writing with “Call
us crazy, but we really like Pratchett’s books and are dying to tell you
why—hence this book” (2). Its three loosely-organized sections address
the literary roots of Discworld, Pratchett’s characters, and other
aspects of the Discworld including magic, power, time, the City Watch,
and Pratchett’s use of technology.

WATT-EVANS, LAWRENCE. _THE TURTLE MOVES! DISCWORLD’S STORY
UNAUTHORIZED_. DALLAS: BENBELLA, 2008.

Watt-Evans is a well-established fantasy author, and the volume is
constructed rather like an informal travel guide: the reader is
presented with the author’s comments about the text couched _as_ the
author’s comments about the text. It does not attempt to construct a
scholarly critique (in the traditional sense) or connect observations to
formal critical theory, although Watt-Evans does provide
stylistically-aware commentary grounded in intimate practical and
historical knowledge of the field. One major section presents individual
plot descriptions and comments on each of the novels to the time of
publication, and another examines development across “sequences” (e.g.,
the Watch books); Watt-Evans accompanies these with shorter sections,
some focused on particular elements occurring in multiple texts (e.g.,
the Luggage) and others involving Discworld’s status as a whole. The
edition includes links to online resources.

WEBB, CAROLINE. “‘CHANGE THE STORY, CHANGE THE WORLD’: WITCHES/CRONES AS
HEROES IN NOVELS BY TERRY PRATCHETT AND DIANA WYNNE JONES.” _PAPERS_
16:2 (2006): 156–61.

This article discusses the positive portrayals of the witch/crone
figures in _The Wee Free Men_ and Diana Wynne Jones’ _Howl’s Moving
Castle_ and suggests that, by showing how their protagonists gain power
by identifying with the role of the witch, young readers realize “that
stories, and the social conventions they represent, may themselves be
resisted in the course of establishing individual identity” (156). In
Pratchett’s novel, Tiffany realizes that a witch is someone who has
responsibility for the community’s well-being and indeed its life; her
understanding that the power of story changes one’s vision of the real
world allows her to resist this power of story and claim her identity as
her community’s witch. In Jones’ novel, Sophie is liberated by her new
identity as crone, and her acceptance of this new identity eventually
leads to her power and her liberation. Webb briefly contrasts both
novels with treatments of the witches in E. L. Konigsburg’s _Jennifer,
Hecate, Macbeth, William McKinley, and Me, Elizabeth_ (1967) and
Elizabeth George Speare’s _The Witch of Blackbird Pond_ (1958). She then
argues that both Pratchett’s and Jones’ novels invite re-valuation of
our conceptions of the witch/crone figures and critique fairy tale
conventions as well as the power of story to shape and reflect
“potentially destructive social conventions” (160).

_B. INTERVIEWS_

1. INTERVIEWS WITH TERRY PRATCHETT

“‘Discworld’ Author Terry Pratchett.” Book World Live. _Washington
Post_, 1 Oct. 2008. Web. 21 Feb. 2009.

“Fantastic Voyager.” By John Gilbey. _Times Higher Education
Supplement,_ 16 Sept. 2010. Web. 23 Oct. 2010.

“‘Fantasy is the whole cake’: An Interview with Terry Pratchett.” By
Aleandra Rehfeld, Jan Schnitker, Matthias Schröder. _“Do you consider
yourself a postmodern author?” Interviews with Contemporary English
Writers_. Ed. Rudolf Freiburg and Jan Schnitker. Münster: Transaction,
1999. 173–200.

“Humour Can Exist in the Most Dreadful Trials.” By Alison Flood. _The
Bookseller_ 5328 (18 Apr. 2008): 26. _Academic OneFile_. 4 June 2012.

“I know the books have their heart in the right place.” _Bookwitch_. 24
Apr. 2012. Web. 15 July 2013.

“I will always be the fellow who writes funny books.” _Bookwitch_. 10
Sept. 2010. Web. 15 July 2013.

Interview. National Book Festival. 29 Sept. 2007. Library of Congress.
15 July 2013.

Interview. _SFX._ 14 Sept. 2010. Web. 16 Sept. 2010.

“An Interview with Sir Terry Pratchett.” By Neil Gaiman. _boing boing_.
10 Oct. 2011. Web. 15 July 2013.

“A Life in Writing: Terry Pratchett.” By Alison Flood. _Guardian,_ 15
Oct. 2011. Web. 3 Nov. 2011.

“My Hols.” By Cally Law. _The Times_. 29 July 2001. Web. 2 Jan. 2002.

“Profile: Terry Pratchett.” _BBC News_. 31 Dec. 2008. Web. 2 Nov. 2011.

“Promotional Interview for _The Amazing Maurice and His Educated
Rodents_.” HarperCollins. N.d. Web. 19 Oct. 2004.

“The SF Kick: Terry Pratchett Talks to Stella Hargreaves About SF,
Fantasy and Why He Won’t Be Taking the Devil’s Bargain Just Yet.”
_Interzone_ 81 (1994): 25–28.

“Sweet Fantasy: 25 Years of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld.” By Neil
Gaiman. Waterstones. N.d. Web. 4 Mar. 2013.

“Terry Pratchett.” By Linda L. Richards. _January Magazine._ Aug. 2002.
Web. 10 Mar. 2011.

“Terry Pratchett.” By Liz Holliday. _Science Fiction Chronicle_ 13:7
(Apr. 1992): 5, 26–27.

“Terry Pratchett.” _The Wand in the Word: Conversations with Writers of
Fantasy_. By Leonard S. Marcus. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick, 2006.
153–166.

“Terry Pratchett: Discworld and Beyond.” _LOCUS_ 43:6 (Dec. 1999): 4,
73–76.

“Terry Pratchett: ‘Fantasy Is Uni-Age.’” By Stephen Moss. _Guardian_ 21
Apr. 2013. Web. 21 Apr. 2013.

“Terry Pratchett: ‘I had a stroke—and I didn’t even notice.’” By Moira
Petty. _Daily Mail_, 29 Oct. 2007. Web. 9 Jan. 2011.

“Terry Pratchett: ‘If I’d known what a progressive brain disease could
do for your PR profile I may have had one earlier.’” By Deborah Orr.
_Independent,_ 29 Nov. 2008. Web. 9 Jan. 2011.

“Terry Pratchett on His Latest Visit to Discworld, Alzheimer’s, and
Where He Got That Hat.” By Sanjida O’Connell. _New Scientist_ 2732 (31
Oct. 2009): 30–31. Web. 28 Feb. 2013.

“Terry Pratchett: Sex, Death and Nature.” By Laurie Penny. _New
Statesman,_ 21 Nov. 2012. Web. 12 May 2013.

“Terry Pratchett: Truth Is Stranger Than Fiction.” By Sanjida O’Connell.
_New Scientist,_ 31 Oct. 2009: 30–31. Web. 28 Feb. 2013.

“Words from the Master.” _L-Space Web_. 2 Feb. 2008. Web. 26 Jan. 2011.

2. INTERVIEWS WITH PAUL KIDBY

“Design Q&A with Paul Kidby.” By Rachel. _Talk About Random_. 20 June
2013. Web. 21 June 2013.

“Entrevista a Paul Kidby, magia con las manos y mucho cuteness.”
_Beliterature_. Np. 4 Mar. 2013. Web. 14 May 2013. [In Spanish].

“Fantastic Fantasy Artwork #2: _Night Watch_ (Discworld: Book 29) by
Paul Kidby.” By Lee. _Fantasy Book Review_. 11 Oct. 2011. Web. 27 Oct.
2011.

“Как се рисува светът на Тери Пратчет ‘How to Paint the World of Terry
Pratchett.’” By Asia Vladimirova. _Culture_ [Култура]. 2 Feb. 2013. Web.
15 May 2013. [In Bulgarian].

“The Illustrator Who Makes Terry Pratchett’s Characters Come Alive!” By
Ms. Z. _The Genius Salon_. 27 Nov. 2012. Web. 30 Nov. 2012.

“Paul Kidby.” By Lloyd Harvey. _Inside the Artist’s Studio_. 4 Mar.
2010. Web. 30 May 2012.

_C. MA THESES AND DISSERTATIONS_

Abbott, William T. “White Knowledge and the Cauldron of Story: The Use
of Allusion in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld.” MA thesis. East Tennessee
State University, 2002. _ProQuest_. 20 Jan. 2011.

Andersen, Dorthe. “Bewitching Writing: An Analysis of Intertextual
Resonance in the Witch-Sequence of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld.” MA
Thesis. Aalborg University, 2006.

Andersson, Lorraine. “Which Witch Is Which? A Feminist Analysis of Terry
Pratchett’s Discworld Witches.” MA thesis. University of Halmstad, 2006.

Crowe, Jen. “A War of Words: Humour in the Novels of Terry Pratchett.”
MA thesis. University of Birmingham, 2003. Cited in Kristiansen’s
“Subverting the Genre” but unobtainable at date of writing.

Hall, Carey Olive. “The Consumer/Contributor Role of Discworld Fans: The
Uses and Gratifications of Online Community Membership.” MA thesis.
Royal Roads University, 2006. _ProQuest_. 12 Aug. 2013.

Hudson, Walter C., IV. “When Can I Read That? Changing Literacy Goals in
Children’s Literature.” MA thesis. University of Arkansas, 2007.
_ProQuest_. 12 Aug. 2013.

Ipfelkofer, Alexander. “Formen und Funktionen von Zitaten und
Anspielungen in ausgewählten Romanen Terry Pratchetts.” Magisterarbeit.
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 2000. _Google Books_.
18 Aug. 2013. [in German]

Kristiansen, Andreas. “Subverting the Genre: Terry Pratchett’s Discworld
as a Critique of Heroic Fantasy.” MA thesis. Department of Modern
Languages, NTNU, 2003. _L-Space Web_. 1 Feb. 2011.

LaHaie, Jeanne Hoeker. “Girls, Mothers and Others: Female Representation
in the Adolescent Fantasy of J. K. Rowling, Philip Pullman, and Terry
Pratchett.” Diss. Western Michigan University, 2012. _ProQuest_. 12 Aug.
2013.

Lawless, Daphne Antonia. “Weird Sisters and Wild Women: The Changing
Depiction of Witches in Literature, from Shakespeare to Science
Fiction.” MA Thesis. Victoria University of Wellington, 1999. 7 Aug.
2013.

Rüster, Johannes. “The Turtle Moves! Kosmologie und Theologie in den
Scheibenweltromanen Terry Pratchetts.” Thesis. Wetzlar: Förderkreis
Phantastik, 2003. Cited in Fornet-Ponse’s “‘The Gods play games with the
fate of men’” but unobtainable at date of writing. [In German].

Stypczynski, Brent A. “Evolution of the Werewolf Archetype from Ovid to
J. K. Rowling.” Diss. Kent State University, 2008. _ProQuest_. 12 Aug.
2013.

Walther, Nichole. “Fantasie als Parodie: Humorvolle Verfremdung in
diversen Themenbereichen und Figurenkonstellationen der
Discworld-Romane.” Diplomarbeit. Fachhochschule Köln [Cologne], 2007.
_Google Books_, 2010. 15 Aug. 2013. [In German].

_ADDITIONAL RESOURCES_

The Colin Smythe Ltd. Terry Pratchett page.
http://www.colinsmythe.co.uk/terrypages/tpindex.htm.

The Colin Smythe Terry Pratchett Archive, University of London, Senate
House Library.
http://www.senatehouselibrary.ac.uk/our-collections/historic-collections/printed-special-collections/pratchett/.

Discworld Monthly Newsletter. http://www.discworldmonthly.co.uk/.

L-Space Web, including The Annotated Pratchett File v.9.0.
http://www.lspace.org/.

Wossname: Newsletter of the Klatchian Foreign Legion.
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/WOSSNAME/.


About the Contributors

Anne Hiebert ALTON is a professor of English at Central Michigan
University, where she teaches literature of all sorts. Her research
interests include British and children’s literature, illustration, and
interdisciplinarity. In addition to essays on the _Harry Potter_ series
and on Arthur Rackham, recent publications include edited scholarly
editions of _Peter Pan_ and _Little Women._

Gideon HABERKORN teaches English, ethics and philosophy in Germany’s
secondary education system and has written articles about popular
culture, fantasy fiction, realism, rhetoric and humor. He is co-editor
of _Comics as a Nexus of Cultures_ (McFarland, 2010). He is a member of
the International Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.

Gray KOCHHAR-LINDGREN is a professor of interdisciplinary arts and
sciences and associate vice chancellor for undergraduate learning at the
University of Washington, Bothell. He is the author of _Narcissus
Transformed_, _Starting Time_, _TechnoLogics_, _Night Café_, and
_Philosophy, Art, and the Specters of Jacques Derrida_ and is working on
projects on philosophy in the streets, global noir, and the emerging
global university.

Roderick MCGILLIS is an emeritus professor of English at the University
of Calgary. Along with Yan Wu and Kerry Mallan, he has edited the
collection of essays _(Re)imagining the World: Children’s Literature’s
Response to Changing Times_.

William C. SPRUIELL is an associate professor of English at Central
Michigan University, where he teaches English linguistics, Old English,
and science fiction and fantasy literature. His research interests
include functional theories of grammar and theories of creative language
use. He has co-edited _Relations and Functions Within and Around
Language_ and _The Speculative Grammarian Essential Guide to
Linguistics_.

Caroline WEBB is a senior lecturer in English at the University of
Newcastle, Australia. She specializes in study of British modernism and
contemporary fiction, and is interested in fantastic fiction, including
fantasy for children. Her articles include discussions of works by
Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, Angela Carter, Terry Pratchett, Diana Wynne
Jones, and J. K. Rowling.


List of Names and Terms

A dagger symbol (†) after a name indicates a Discworld character

abbreviations, list of

Aching, Tiffany†

Adams, Tamla Ebony

advertisements, fictional

Ahlberg, Allan

Ahmed, 71-hour†

Albert†

_Alice in Wonderland_

_Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland_

_Amadeus_

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_

ambiguity

_American Tongues_

“The Ancient Roots of Humor Theory”

Anderson, Poul

Angua†

Ankh-Morpork

_Ankh-Morpork Map for iPad_

_Ankh-Morpork Post Office Handbook Discworld Diary 2007_

Anoia† (goddess)

Anybody, Rob†

apophenia

Archimedes

Ardent†

Aristotle

Armoured Raven

Arsinger, Charles

art

_The Art of Discworld_

“Art of Noises”

Assassins, Guild of

Attebery, Brian

the Auditors†

automatization

awards

bag of words model

Bakhtin, Mikhail

Baldry, Cherith

Barker, Clive

Barthes, Roland

Bashfulsson† (dwarf)

Bassnett, Susan

_Bat Out of Hell_

Batley, Alan

Baumeister, Roy

_beaux-arts_ movement

Beeton, Isabella

_Beeton’s Book of Household Management_

_Beowulf_

_Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language_

Bergman, Ingmar

Berwick, R. C., et al.

_Bildungsroman_

Billy, Awf’ly Wee†

bit(s)

_Black Adder_

Blind Hugh†

_A Blink of the Screen_

Bloodaxe, B’hrian†

BNC

Boddony† (dwarf)

body, theories of

Bogdanov, Alexei

Bond, James

Bonestell, Chesley

Bosch, Hieronymus

Bradbury, Ray

Brangwyn, Frank

Brick† (troll)

Briggs, Stephen

Brin, David

British Book Award

British Fantasy Award for Professional Artist

British Fantasy Society

_British National Corpus_

British Science Fiction and Fantasy Association Award

British Science Fiction Association

Browne, Gordon

Browne, Hablot Knight

Bruegel, Pieter, the Elder

Bulwer-Lytton, Edward

Buonarroti, Michaelangelo

burstiness

Butler, Andrew M.

Byatt, A. S.

_Caldecott & Co.: Notes on Books & Pictures_

calendars, Discworld

Calvino, Italo

capitalization

Carnegie Medal

carnivalesque

_Carpe Jugulum_

Carroll, Lewis

Carrot†

_Carry On_ series

Carter, R.

cartography, fictional

cartoons, political

Caslong† (dwarf)

Chagall, Marc

the Chalk

_Changing Places_

chapter art

characterization

Chaucer

“Check Mort”

Chesley Award

chiaroscuro

childhood

children’s literature

choice in language system

Chomsky, Noam

Chrysostom, John

City Guide

Clarecraft

class, social

“Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics”

Clute, John

COCA

cognitive dissonance

cognitive linguistics

cognitive scripts

Cohen the Barbarian†

Cohen, Jack

coins, illustration of

Colon, Sergeant Frederick†

colonialism

_The Color of Magic_

_The Colour of Magic_ (Corgi edition)

_The Colour of Magic_ (film)

_The Colour of Magic_ (graphic novel)

_The Colour of Magic_ and _The Light Fantastic_ (omnibus edition), cover

COLT

Columbo, “Frank” (television character)

comedy

competence / performance distinction

_The Compleat Ankh-Morpork City Guide_

Conan the Barbarian†

constructed languages

conventions, Discworld

Cooper, Gordon Burns

Cooperative Principle

corpus linguistics

_Corpus of Contemporary American English_

correlation measure

cover art

_Creation of Adam_

Crisplock, Sacharissa,† illustration of

crivens (exclamation)

Croft, William

crossword puzzle, cryptic

Cubism

Cuddy, Acting-Constable†

Culler, Jonathan

the Cunning Man†

Cupp, Jeff

Currie, Mark

Czech Structuralism

D’Achille, Gino

Dadd, Richard

Dangerous Beans†

_Dark City_

_David Copperfield_

Davidson, Avram

da Vinci, Leonardo

_The Da Vinci Code_

the Dean†

Dearheart, Adora Belle†

Death† (character)

Death of Rats†

_Death’s Domain_

decorative art

defamiliarization

_deixis_

Deleuze, Gilles

_De Nachtwacht_

Dennis, Peter

derivation, as coinage device

Derrida, Jacques

de Smedt et al.

detective fiction

Detritus†

deviation

deviation of proportions

de Worde, William†

dialect, regional

diaries

Dibbler, Claud Maximillian Overton Transpire, a.k.a. Cut-Me-Own-Throat,
a.k.a. C.M.O.T.†

Dickens, Charles

Dickinson, Emily

Didactylos†

difference, experienced

Diogenes

discourses

Discworld

_The Discworld Almanak_

Discworld and Terry Pratchett Wiki

_Discworld: Ankh-Morpork_ board game

_The Discworld Companion_

Discworld Emporium

_The Discworld Mapp_

_Discworld Noir_

_Discworld (Reformed) Vampyre’s Diary 2003_

_Discworld: The Ankh-Morpork Map_ (app)

_Discworld Thieves’ Guild Yearbook & Diary 2002_

_Discworld Unseen University Diary 1998_

_Discworld’s Ankh-Morpork City Watch Diary 1999_

Disney

dispersion

dissonance

distinctiveness

Djelibeybi

Doctorow, Cory

_Dodger_

Doré, Gustave

Douthwaite, John

Downey, Lord†

DP score

Duchamp, Marcel

Dumbledore, Professor Albus

Dunmanifestan, illustration of

Dunsany, Lord Alfred

Dürer, Albrecht

dwarfish language

dwarfs

Eddison, E. R.

Edwards, Les

Edwards, Mark

Ekman, Stefan

_The Elder Edda_

Eliot, T. S.

Elizabeth I (Queen of England)

Elves, King of,† illustration of

Elves, Queen of,† illustration of

_The Encyclopedia of Fantasy_

English Arts and Crafts Movement

ephemera

_Equal Rites_

Erikson, Stephen

Erlich, Victor

estrangement

ethics

expletives

eye dialect

fairies

_Fairies and How to Avoid Them_

Fairy Queen†

_The Fairy Feller’s Master-Stroke_

fairy tales

fantasy

_Faust_ _Eric_

Feegles

_Feet of Clay_

Fetzer, Anita

fiction

fictional cartography

fictional geography

Fields, W. C.

_The Fifth Elephant_

figurines

“The First Blast of the Trumpet”

Fischer-Starcke, Bettina

Fish, Stanley

“Flavor Pairing in Medieval European Cuisine”

folklore

_The Folklore of Discworld_

football (soccer)

footnotes (as device)

foregrounding

Foul Ole Ron,† illustration of

_Fountain_

Fox and Geese (game)

Frankland, David

frequency illusion

_Die fröhliche Wissenschaft_

_From the Discworld_

frontispieces

futurism

games

_The Garden of Earthly Delights_

Garg, A.

Garlick, Magrat†

Garner, Alan

Gaspode,† illustration of

Geertz, Clifford

Geisel, Theodore

gender

_General Theory of Verbal Humor_

Genette, Gérard

genre

Geoffrey,† in _The World of Poo_, illustration of

geography, fictional

Giles, Ann

Glenn, John

glossing

gods

_Going Postal_

golems

Gollancz (publisher)

Goodmountain, Gunilla†

goodness vs. niceness

_The Goon Show_

The Gothic

Goulart, Ron

grags

grammars

Grant, Melvyn

graphic novels

Greenslade, Dave

Grice, Stefan

grotesque

_Guards! Guards!_

Guha, R.

The Guild of Assassins

Gulf War

GURPS

Haberkorn, Gideon

Hackford, Terry

Halliday, M. A. K.

_Hama_

Hamcrusher, Grag†

_Hamlet_

hapex legomena

Harman, Dominic

_Harry Potter and International Relations_

_Harvest in Provence_

_A Hat Full of Sky_

headology

hedging

Hegel, G. W. F.

Heidegger, Martin

Heller, Steven

Helmclever†

“Here Be Cartographers”

_Here Be Dragons: Exploring Fantasy Maps and Settings_

hero

Hersheba

Hex†

_The Hidden Adult_

Higgins, Graham

Hildebrandt, the Brothers

_A History of Discworld Stamps_

the hiver†

Hmisc

_The Hobbit_

Hoey, Michael

Hogarth, William

_Hogfather_

the Hogfather†

Hollywood

horror

_How Picturebooks Work_

Howard, Robert E.

Howells, Richard

Howler, Stanley†

Hrun†

Huddleston, Rodney

Hugo Award for Best Artist

Huizinga, Johan

humor

Hutcheon, Linda

hyponymy

hypotrochoid

_I Shall Wear Midnight_

iBook reader

identity

ideology

Igors

illustrated novels

_The Illustrated Wee Free Men_

illustrations

imagery

indexicality

information density and humor

information theory

interdisciplinarity

_Interesting Times_

_International Communications_

intertextuality

_Introduction to Functional Grammar_

inverse log probability, as information measure

Iria, José, et al.

Ironfoundersson, Captain Carrot†

irony

Iser, Wolfgang

Ivanova et al.

Jackson, Steve

Jacques, Brian

Jaeger, Florian

Jakobson, Roman

James, Edward

Jean, Vadim

Jerome, Jerome K.

Jezebel

_Jingo_

Johnson, Bergholt Stuttley†

Johnson, Bloody Stupid†

jokes

Jones, Diana Wynne

_The Josh Kirby Discworld Portfolio_

_The Josh Kirby Poster Book_

_Kaffeeklatsch_

Kao et al.

kelda

Kidby, Paul

Kilgarriff, Adam

_The King of Elfland’s Daughter_

Kipling, Rudyard

Kirby, Josh

Klatch

Knox, John

knurd

Kress, Gunther

Laetitia†

Landow, George

Langford, David

language

_Language and Literature_

_langue / parole_ distinction

_The Last Hero_

Leech, Geoffrey

legal code, Discworld in

legend

Le Guin, Ursula

Lessing, G. E.

Level, Miss†

Levenshtein distance

Lewis, David

Librarian,† illustration of

Lieberman, Mark

_The Light Fantastic_

linguistic pragmatics

literacy

the literary stream

Littlebottom, Sergeant Cheery†

LOCUS Award

Lodge, David

the Long Man, illustration of

Loofbourow, John

_The Lord of the Rings_

_Lords and Ladies_

Lovecraft, H. P.

L-Space

_Lu-Tze’s Yearbook_

Lyall, Francis

MacDonald, George

magic

magic realism

_Making Money_

_The Malazan Book of the Fallen_

Malich, Albert†

Malory, Thomas

Mann, William

maps

Margaret A. Edwards Award

marketing

Martin, Wallace

Mary I (Queen of England)

_Maskerade_

Matthiessen, Christian

Maxwell, Johnny

Mayhew, James

Mazuka, Reiko

McCarthy, M.

McGillis, Roderick

Meat Loaf

_Men at Arms_

Mendlesohn, Farah

merchandise

metafiction

metanarrative

metaphor

Midgley, Mary

Mightily Oats† (as name)

Mihalcea et al.

Miller, Edward

mimesis

the Minstrel,† illustration of

_mise en abyme_

_Missing Presumed …_

_Mr. Bunnsy Has an Adventure_

Mitchell, Ian

Mitchell, W. J. T.

modernity

Moebius, William

the monstrous

_Monstrous Regiment_

Monty Python

_Monty Python’s Flying Circus_

Moody, Nickianne

Moorcock, Michael

Morreall, John

Morris, Jackie

Morris, Pam

Morris, William

_Mort_

_Moving Pictures_

Mucha, Alphonse

Muecke, D. C.

Mukařovský, Jan

multi-word unit

Munch, Edvard

music

Myerson, Jonathan

_Mysterious Music_

mystery

myth

names, Discworld

_Nanny Ogg’s Cookbook_

narrative

_Nation_

natural language processing

naturalism, philosophical

Nesbit, E.

New Criticism

_The New Discworld Companion_

n-grams

Nicholls, Peter

_Night Watch_

_The Night Watch_ (painting)

Nightingale, Sandy

Nikolajeva, Maria

_No Rat Shall Kill Another Rat_

Nobbs, Corporal Cecil Wormsborough St John (Nobby)†

Nodelman, Perry

noise

noise injection

novel, realist

octarine

Ogg, Nanny Gytha†

_The Once and Future King_

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

openNLP

“Operation Afreet”

orality

Orientalism

ornaments

orthography

ostrananie

The Other

parallelism

paratexts

_Paratexts_

Pareto distribution

parody

Parrish, Maxfield

patriotism

Pearson, Bernard

Pearson, Isobel

Penrose, Roland

perception

performative verb

Perks, Lisa

perspective, narrative technique

Pesch, Helmut

Petulia†

phallogocentrism

phenomenology

_Phenomenology of Spirit_

philosophy

Phiz

“The Phoenix and the Sword”

_Physics IV_

_The Physics of Star Trek_

_A Pictorial Guide to the Lancre Fells_

pictsies

picture book

_Picture Theory_

pie, carrot and oyster

Plato

play

Player, Stephen

_The Pleasures of the Text_

poetics

poetry

Pogo

police procedural

Polly†

Pooh

Porter, Alan

Pouterina, Daniella†

power-law distribution

pragmatics, linguistic

Pratchett, Terry, illustration of

_The Pratchett Portfolio_

Pratella, Francesco Balilla

prepositions

Pre-Raphaelites

Project Gutenberg

prominence

pronunciation

prototypes

Pullman, Philip

Pullum, Geoffrey

pulp fiction

Punctuality Riddle†

punctuation

pundits

puns

Purdeigh, Roderick, General Sir†

Qu†

The Queen of Hearts

R programming language

_Rabelais and His World_

race

Rackham, Arthur

Radloff, Bernard

“Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima”

Ramtops

Rascal, Methodia†

reader, idealized

Reader Response

reading

realism

_Reaper Man_

referentiality

register

Reinhardt, Verena

Rembrandt van Rijn

repetition

_The Republic_

rhetoric

Rhetorical Structure Theory

Ridcully, Archchancellor Munstrom†

Riddell, Chris

_The Right Stuff_

Rinaldi, Angelo

Rincewind†

Robin Hood

Robinson, Douglas

Robu, Carnel

Rockwell, Norman

Rockwell, Scott

Roland†

romanticism

_Romeo and Juliet_

Rosenthal, Joe

Rowling, J. K.

_Le Royaume Enchanté_

RStudio

Rubens, Peter Paul

Russian Formalism

_Russian Formalism_

_Russian Formalism: History—Doctrine_

Russolo, Luigi

Rust, Lord Ronald†

sales figures

Sally†

Salzella†

Saussure, Ferdinand de

Sawyer, Andy

Scholz, Thomas

Schweitzer, Darell

science fiction

_The Science of Discworld_

Scott, Carole

Scraps,† illustration of

_The Scream_

seagully

Selachii, Lord Albert†

_Semantic-Script Theory of Humor_

semiosis

semiotics, visual

Sendak, Maurice

Senior Wrangler†

_Sensation and Sublimation in Charles Dickens_

sense of wonder

“Sense-Certainty”

sets, fuzzy

_The Seventh Seal_

The Shades

Shakespeare

shamble, illustration of

Shannon information

Sharks vs. Jets

Shepard, Ernest

Shine, Mr.†

Shklovsky, Boris

Shulevitz, Uri

silence

silts

the Silver Horde†, illustration of

simile

Simonetti, Marc

Simpson, Jacqueline

Sinclair, John

Sipe, Lawrence

small caps

_Small Gods_

Smith, E. E.

Smith, Eskarina

Smythe, Colin

_Snuff_

Snyder, William

Socrates

somatic response

_Soul Music_

_Sourcery_

_Space Invaders_

Sprouse, John

squance

squantswise

stamps

_Star Trek_

_Star Wars_

_Starry Night_

_Startide Rising_

steampunk

stereotype

Stewart, Ian

Stibbons, Ponder†

Sto Helit, Susan†

story

_The Streets of Ankh-Morpork_

stringr

structuralism

style

style guides

stylistics

Suckling, Nigel

Sullivan, Jon

the Summoning Dark†

surprisal

surprise

surrealism

sword and sorcery

syllepsis

_Synchrony_ vs. _diachrony_ distinction

synesthesia

Systemic Functional Linguistics

Tagg, Caroline

tailpieces

Tam, Nicholas

taproot text

tau, R Package

Tawneee†

Teatime, Jonathan†

Tenniel, John

text

theoretical fiction

_Theory of Prose_

thespian vs. academician models of language

_Thief of Time_

Thompson, Sandra

_Three Men and a Boat_

thriller

_Thud!_

_Thud! The Discworld Board Game_

_Thus Spake Zarathustra_

Tick, Miss Perspicacia†

Titian, Tiziano Vecelli

Todorov, Tzvetan

Tolkien J. R. R.

Tomasello, Michael

tone

torque

totalitarianism

_A Tourist Guide to Lancre_

“Tradition and the Individual Talent”

transgression

translations, number of

Transylvania

trolls

_The Truth_

Turner, Megan Whalen

_Turtle Recall_

_Twilight Canyons_

“Two Out of Three Ain’t Bad”

_2001: A Space Odyssey_

Twoflower†

type nouns

Überwald

_Ulysses_

understatement

uniform information density hypothesis

_The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges’ Library of Babel_

_An Unofficial Companion to the Novels of Terry Pratchett_

_Unseen Academicals_, cover

Unseen University

_The Unseen University Cut-Out Book_

urban fantasy

usage-based theories of language

Valéry, Paul

vampires

Vance, Jack

Van Gogh, Vincent

Velten, Alexandra

Venturi, Charles

Venturi Effect

_Verfremdung_

verisimilitude

Vetinari, Havelock†

Vimes, Sir Samuel†

Vimes, Samuel, Jr.†

Vimes, Lady Sybil†

_Völsung Saga_

von Überwald, Delphine Angua†

_Voyage of the Ayeguy_

Voyce, Reb

the Watch sequence

Watkins, Sheila

Waugh, Patricia

Weatherwax, Granny Esmerelda†

Weatherwax, Lily†

_The Wee Free Men_

Wells, H. G.

werewolves

_West Side Story_

_Wheatfield with Crows_

Wheelbrace, Eric†

_Where’s My Cow?_

which-clauses

White, T. H.

Williams, Stuart

_Wintersmith_

the Wintersmith†

witches

_Witches Abroad_

the Witches sequence

Wodehouse, P. G.

_The Wood Beyond the World_

wordplay

World Fantasy Award for Art

_The World of Poo_

_The Worm Ouroboros_

_Writing with Pictures_

Wyatt, David

_Wyrd Sisters_

_The Wyrdest Link_

Zervakis, Jennifer

Zipf curve
