About the Book

For a quarter of a century, Terry Pratchett’s Discworld – a flat world
balanced on the backs of four elephants, which are standing on the back
of a giant turtle, flying through space – has enchanted readers with its
stories of a vast and diverse population, from ineffectual wizards to
reformed thieves, and vampires who have foresworn the drinking of blood.
It is a world that is vastly different from our own…except when it
isn’t.

_The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld_ is a collection of the wittiest,
pithiest and wisest quotations from this mad, chaotic and seductive
universe, compiled by Stephen Briggs, a man who, they say, knows even
more about Discworld than Terry Pratchett himself. Guaranteed to
transport you back to your favourite or forgotten Discworld moments, it
is the perfect book for die-hard Pratchett fans, with its comprehensive
index and aid to finding specific quotations: as well as an ideal
introduction for anyone coming to the Discworld for the first time.

[image]

_Cover_

_About the Book_

_Title Page_

_Introduction_: THROUGH THE WARDROBE INTO DISCWORLD

_1_. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

_2_. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

_3_. EQUAL RITES

_4_. MORT

_5_. SOURCERY

_6_. WYRD SISTERS

_7_. PYRAMIDS

_8_. GUARDS! GUARDS!

_9_. ERIC

_10_. MOVING PICTURES

_11_. REAPER MAN

_12_. WITCHES ABROAD

_13_. SMALL GODS

_14_. LORDS AND LADIES

_15_. MEN AT ARMS

_16_. SOUL MUSIC

_17_. INTERESTING TIMES

_18_. MASKERADE

_19_. FEET OF CLAY

_20_. HOGFATHER

_21_. JINGO

_22_. THE LAST CONTINENT

_23_. CARPE JUGULUM

_24_. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

_25_. THE TRUTH

_26_. THIEF OF TIME

_27_. THE LAST HERO

_28_. NIGHT WATCH

_29_. THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

_30_. THE WEE FREE MEN

_31_. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

_32_. A HAT FULL OF SKY

_33_. GOING POSTAL

_34_. THUD!

_35_. WINTERSMITH

_36_. MAKING MONEY

_Index_

_About the Author_

_Also by Terry Pratchett_

_Copyright_

[image]

[image]

[image]

IT WAS THE wit of Terry Pratchett that first attracted me to the books,
and which then led to my pushing past the fur coats and finding myself
in his magical world – thankfully devoid of Turkish delight and talking
beavers.

One of the big questions about Discworld for a newcomer is ‘Where do I
start?’ This is a tricky one. For every diehard fan of Rincewind there’s
an advocate for _Small Gods_. For everyone who loves the ‘Witch’ or
‘City Watch’ books, there is another who prefers the ‘one theme’ books,
such as _Soul Music_ and _Moving Pictures_. I, as it happens, kicked off
with _Mort_.

Terry writes fantasy – but his books are grounded firmly in reality.
They contain heroes (not many), cowards, villains, bigots, crooks, the
strong-willed and the weak-willed. Sometimes they are human. A lot of
the time they are not. The series extends across many genres and deals
with real issues. But Terry uses his wit to sharpen his pen; the humour
in the books can be dark, and it can be so corny you may groan out loud
as you read him on the train.

In producing this book, I have not tried to extract every single gag and
witty exchange from the series. There are too many, and to do that, I
might just as well have tied a set of the novels up with string and
added a tag: ‘The Complete Wit of Pratchett’.

What I _have_ done is re-read every book in the canon, and pull out the
extracts that appealed to me. Sometimes they’ll be a page long,
sometimes they’ll be a single line of text. Sometimes a really good gag
has been omitted because it needs the buildup that the novel can give
but which would take too long to set up in a book of quotations. Here
and there, I’ve had to change the _odd_ word, or omit the _occasional_
phrase, to help the quotation work outside its context in the novel.

The extracts are presented book by book, in the order in which they were
published. Each book’s section starts with the cover blurb (which in
most cases was written by Terry), to give you the same sort of idea of
the novel’s plot as you’d get if you were browsing the shelves of your
local bookstore.

[image]

Don’t panic: you don’t need to sit and read this book section by
section, from cover to cover. This is more of a ‘dip into’ book. If
you’re new to Terry’s novels, this cornucopia of snippets may inspire
you to go out and buy and read one – or more – of them. Oh, and the
maps, diaries, audio books, scarf … As for you keen Discworld readers,
what I hope is that, as you browse through this book – by torchlight
under the covers last thing at night, smeared with sun lotion on a beach
in Greece, on a long coach trip, sat on the privy – you’ll find some of
your favourite pieces from the Discworld canon. I haven’t had the luxury
of doing my research in any of these exotic locations – but I enjoyed
the opportunity to wander once more through the roughly four million
words which currently make up the series … around twice the complete
wordage of the Bible and all Shakespeare’s plays.

_STEPHEN BRIGGS_

www.stephenbriggs.com / www.studiotheatreclub.com

[image]

[image]

 

ON A WORLD supported on the back of a giant turtle (sex unknown), a
gleeful, explosive, wickedly eccentric expedition sets out. There’s an
avaricious but inept wizard [Rincewind], a naive tourist [Twoflower]
whose luggage moves on hundreds of dear little legs, dragons who only
exist if you believe in them, and of course The Edge of the planet …

 

_How it all began:_

In a distant and second-hand set of dimensions, in an astral plane that
was never meant to fly, the curling star-mists waver and part …

*

There was the theory that A’Tuin had come from nowhere and would
continue at a uniform crawl, or steady gait, into nowhere, for all time.
This theory was popular among academics.

An alternative, favoured by those of a religious persuasion, was that
A’Tuin was crawling from the Birthplace to the Time of Mating, as were
all the stars in the sky which were, obviously, also carried by giant
turtles. When they arrived they would briefly and passionately mate, for
the first and only time, and from that fiery union new turtles would be
born to carry a new pattern of worlds. This was known as the Big Bang
hypothesis.

*

The twin city of Ankh-Morpork, foremost of all the cities bounding the
Circle Sea, was as a matter of course the home of a large number of
gangs, thieves’ guilds, syndicates and similar organizations. This was
one of the reasons for its wealth.

*

The stranger smiled widely and fumbled yet again in the pouch. This time
his hand came out holding a large gold coin. It was in fact slightly
larger than an 8,000-dollar Ankhian crown and the design on it was
unfamiliar, but it spoke inside Hugh’s mind in a language he understood
perfectly. My current owner, it said, is in need of succour and
assistance; why not give it to him, so you and me can go off somewhere
and enjoy ourselves?

*

If complete and utter chaos was lightning, then he’d be the sort to
stand on a hilltop in a thunderstorm wearing wet copper armour and
shouting ‘All gods are bastards’.

[image]

Tourist, Rincewind had decided, meant ‘idiot’.

[image]

At about this time a hitherto unsuccessful fortune-teller living on the
other side of the block chanced to glance into her scrying bowl, gave a
small scream and, within the hour, had sold her jewellery, various
magical accoutrements, most of her clothes and almost all her other
possessions that could not be conveniently carried on the fastest horse
she could buy. The fact that later on, when her house collapsed in
flames, she herself died in a freak landslide in the Morpork Mountains,
proves that Death, too, has a sense of humour.

*

The Patrician of Ankh-Morpork smiled, but with his mouth only.

*

‘I’m sure you won’t dream of trying to escape from your obligations by
fleeing the city …’

‘I assure you the thought never even crossed my mind, lord.’

‘Indeed? Then if I were you I’d sue my face for slander.’

*

‘Ah, Gorphal,’ said the Patrician pleasantly. ‘Come in. Sit down. Can I
press you to a candied starfish?’

‘I am yours to command, master,’ said the old man calmly. ‘Save,
perhaps, in the matter of preserved echinoderms.’

*

There are said to be some mystic rivers – one drop of which can steal a
man’s life away. After its turbid passage through the twin cities the
Ankh could have been one of them.

*

That’s what’s so stupid about the whole magic thing … You spend twenty
years learning the spell that makes nude virgins appear in your bedroom,
and then you’re so poisoned by quicksilver fumes and half-blind from
reading old grimoires that you can’t remember what happens next.

*

_Death, on Discworld, is a character in his own right, and throughout
the series is recognizable by always speaking_ IN BLOCK CAPITALS.

Death, insofar as it was possible in a face with no movable features,
looked surprised. RINCEWIND? … WHY ARE YOU HERE?

‘Um, why not?’ said Rincewind.

I WAS SURPRISED THAT YOU JOSTLED ME, RINCEWIND. FOR I HAVE AN
APPOINTMENT WITH THEE THIS VERY NIGHT.

‘Oh no, not—’

OF COURSE, WHAT’S SO BLOODY VEXING ABOUT THE WHOLE BUSINESS IS THAT I
WAS EXPECTING TO MEET THEE IN PSEUDOPOLIS.

‘But that’s five hundred miles away!’

YOU DON’T HAVE TO TELL ME, THE WHOLE SYSTEM’S GOT SCREWED UP AGAIN. I
CAN SEE THAT.

*

I’LL GET YOU YET, CULLY, said Death, in a voice like the slamming of
leaden coffin lids.

*

Death sat in His garden, running a whetstone along the edge of His
scythe. It was already so sharp that any passing breeze that blew across
it was sliced smoothly into two puzzled zephyrs.

*

‘Run away and leave Hrun with that thing?’ Twoflower said.

Rincewind looked blank. ‘Why not?’ he said. ‘It’s his job.’

‘But it’ll kill him!’

‘It could be worse,’ said Rincewind.

‘What?’

‘It could be _us_,’ Rincewind pointed out logically.

*

‘We’ve strayed into a zone with a high magical index,’ Rincewind said.
‘Don’t ask me how. Once upon a time a really powerful magic field must
have been generated here, and we’re feeling the after-effects.’

‘Precisely,’ said a passing bush.

*

‘You don’t understand!’ screamed the tourist, above the terrible noise
of the wingbeats. ‘All my life I’ve wanted to see dragons!’

‘From the inside?’ shouted Rincewind.

*

‘You’re your own worst enemy, Rincewind,’ said the sword.

Rincewind looked up at grinning men.

‘Bet?’ he said wearily.

*

‘Well,’ said the voice. ‘You see, one of the disadvantages of being dead
is that one is released as it were from the bonds of time and therefore
I can see everything that has happened or will happen, all at the same
time except that of course I now know that Time does not, for all
practical purposes, exist.’

‘That doesn’t sound like a disadvantage,’ said Twoflower.

‘You don’t think so? Imagine every moment being at one and the same time
a distant memory and a nasty surprise and you’ll see what I mean.’

[image]

I’d rather be a slave than a corpse.

[image]

Plants on the Disc, while including the categories known commonly as
_annuals_, … and _perennials_, … also included a few rare _reannuals_
which, because of an unusual four-dimensional twist in their genes,
could be planted this year to come up _last year_. The _vul_ nut vine
was particularly exceptional in that it could flourish as many as eight
years prior to its seed actually being sown. _Vul_ nut wine was reputed
to give certain drinkers an insight into the future which was, from the
nut’s point of view, the past. Strange but true.

*

‘We know all about you, Rincewind the magician. You are a man of great
cunning and artifice. You laugh in the face of Death. Your affected air
of craven cowardice does not fool me.’

It fooled Rincewind.

*

‘What is your name?’ he said.

‘My name is immaterial,’ she said.

‘That’s a pretty name,’ said Rincewind.

*

‘I hope you’re not proposing to enslave us,’ said Twoflower.

Marchesa looked genuinely shocked. ‘Certainly not! Whatever could have
given you that idea? Your lives in Krull will be rich, full and
comfortable—’

‘Oh, good,’ said Rincewind.

‘—just not very long.’

[image]

[image]

 

AS IT MOVES towards a seemingly inevitable collision with a malevolent
red star, the Discworld has only one possible saviour. Unfortunately,
this happens to be the singularly inept and cowardly wizard called
Rincewind, who was last seen falling off the edge of the world …

 

It is said that someone at a party once asked the famous philosopher Ly
Tin Wheedle ‘Why are you here?’ and the reply took three years.

*

Cori Celesti, upon whose utter peak the world’s quarrelsome and somewhat
bourgeois gods lived in a palace of marble, alabaster and uncut moquette
three-piece suites they had chosen to call Dunmanifestin. It was always
a considerable annoyance to any Disc citizen with pretensions to culture
that they were ruled by gods whose idea of an uplifting artistic
experience was a musical doorbell.

*

Trymon didn’t smile often enough, and he liked figures and the sort of
organization charts that show lots of squares with arrows pointing to
other squares. In short, he was the sort of man who could use the word
‘personnel’ and mean it.

*

‘Do you think there’s anything to eat in this forest?’

‘Yes,’ said the wizard bitterly, ‘us.’

*

‘[There are] some big mushrooms … Can you eat them?’

Rincewind looked at them cautiously. ‘No, no good to eat at all.’

‘Why?’ called Twoflower. ‘Are the gills the wrong shade of yellow?’

‘No, not really …’

‘I expect the stems haven’t got the right kind of fluting, then.’

‘They look okay, actually.’

‘The cap, then, I expect the cap is the wrong colour,’ said Twoflower.

‘Not sure about that.’

‘Well then, why can’t you eat them?’

Rincewind coughed. ‘It’s the little doors and windows,’ he said
wretchedly, ‘it’s a dead giveaway.’

*

He moved in a way that suggested he was attempting the world speed
record for the nonchalant walk.

*

‘I said I hope it is a good party,’ said Galder, loudly.

AT THE MOMENT IT IS, said Death levelly. I THINK IT MIGHT GO DOWNHILL
VERY QUICKLY AT MIDNIGHT.

‘Why?’

THAT’S WHEN THEY THINK I’LL BE TAKING MY MASK OFF.

He vanished, leaving only a cocktail stick and a short paper streamer
behind.

*

When the first explorers from the warm lands around the Circle Sea
travelled into the chilly hinterland they filled in the blank spaces on
their maps by grabbing the nearest native, pointing at some distant
landmark, speaking very clearly in a loud voice, and writing down
whatever the bemused man told them. Thus were immortalized in
generations of atlases such geographical oddities as Just A Mountain, I
Don’t Know, What? and, of course, Your Finger You Fool.

*

_Cohen the Barbarian enters the Discworld canon:_

The barbarian chieftain said: ‘What then are the greatest things that a
man may find in life?’

The man on his right spoke thus: ‘The crisp horizon of the steppe, the
wind in your hair, a fresh horse under you.’

The man on his left said: ‘The cry of the white eagle in the heights,
the fall of snow in the forest, a true arrow in your bow.’

The chieftain nodded, and said: ‘Surely it is the sight of your enemy
slain, the humiliation of his tribe and the lamentation of his women.’

Then the chieftain turned respectfully to his guest, and said: ‘But our
guest, whose name is legend, must tell us truly: what is it that a man
may call the greatest things in life?’

The warriors leaned closer. This should be worth hearing.

The guest thought long and hard and then said, with deliberation: ‘Hot
water, good dentishtry and shoft lavatory paper.’

*

[He was] a very old man, the skinny variety that generally gets called
‘spry’, with a totally bald head, a beard almost down to his knees, and
a pair of matchstick legs on which varicose veins had traced the street
map of quite a large city …

*

‘When I was a young man, carving my name in the world, well, then I
liked my women red-haired and fiery.’

‘Ah.’

‘And then I grew a little older and for preference I looked for a woman
with blonde hair and the glint of the world in her eye.’

‘Oh? Yes?’

‘But then I grew a little older again and I came to see the point of
dark women of a sultry nature.’

He paused. Rincewind waited.

‘And?’ he said. ‘Then what? What is it that you look for in a woman
now?’

Cohen turned one rheumy blue eye on him.

‘Patience,’ he said.

*

Cohen [had] … spent his life living rough under the sky [and] knew the
value of a good thick book, which ought to outlast at least a season of
cooking fires if you were careful how you tore the pages out. Many a
life had been saved on a snowy night by a handful of sodden kindling and
a really dry book. If you felt like a smoke and couldn’t find a pipe, a
book was your man every time.

Cohen realized people wrote things in books. It had always seemed to him
to be a frivolous waste of paper.

*

‘If you kill me a thousand will take my place,’ said the man, who was
now backed against the wall.

‘Yes,’ said Cohen, in a reasonable tone of voice, ‘but that isn’t the
point, is it? The point is, _you’ll_ be dead.’

*

Greyhald Spold, currently the oldest wizard on the Disc and determined
to keep it that way, has been very busy. The servants have been
dismissed. The doorways have been sealed with a paste made from powdered
mayflies, and protective octograms have been drawn on the windows. Rare
and rather smelly oils have been poured in complex patterns on the
floor; in the very centre of the room is the eightfold octogram of
Withholding, surrounded by red and green candles. And in the centre of
that is a box, lined with red silk and yet more protective amulets.
Because Greyhald Spold knows that Death is looking for him, and has
spent many years designing an impregnable hiding place.

He has just set the complicated clockwork of the lock and shut the lid,
lying back in the knowledge that here at last is the perfect defence
against the most ultimate of all his enemies, although as yet he has not
considered the important part that airholes must play in an enterprise
of this kind.

And right beside him, very close to his ear, a voice has just said: DARK
IN HERE, ISN’T IT?

*

Seven league boots are a tricksy form of magic at best, and the utmost
caution must be taken in using a means of transport which, when all is
said and done, relies for its effectiveness on trying to put one foot
twenty-one miles in front of the other.

[image]

Cohen had heard of fighting fair, and had long ago decided he wanted no
part of it.

[image]

Twoflower didn’t just look at the world through rose-tinted spectacles,
Rincewind knew – he looked at it through a rose-tinted brain, too, and
heard it through rose-tinted ears.

*

There was no real point in trying to understand anything Twoflower said,
and all anyone could do was run alongside the conversation and hope to
jump on as it turned a corner.

[image]

‘His name’s Twoflower. He isn’t from these parts.’

‘Doeshn’t look like it. Friend of yoursh?’

‘We’ve got this sort of hate–hate relationship, yes.’

[image]

That’s old Twoflower, Rincewind thought. It’s not that he doesn’t
appreciate beauty, he just appreciates it in his own way. I mean, if a
poet sees a daffodil he stares at it and writes a long poem about it,
but Twoflower wanders off to find a book on botany. And treads on it.

*

Then they all heard it; a tiny distant crunching, like something moving
very quickly over the snow crust.

… It was louder now, a crisp rhythm like someone eating celery very
fast.

*

Rincewind was to magic what a bicycle is to a bumblebee.

*

Trolls were not unknown in Ankh-Morpork, of course, where they often got
employment as bodyguards. They tended to be a bit expensive to keep
until they learned about doors and didn’t simply leave the house by
walking aimlessly through the nearest wall.

*

There were many drawbacks to being a swordswoman, not least of which was
that men didn’t take you seriously until you’d actually killed them, by
which time it didn’t really matter anyway.

*

‘It’s the star, friend,’ the man said. ‘Haven’t you seen it in the sky?’

‘We couldn’t help noticing it, yes.’

‘They say that it’ll hit us on Hogswatchnight and the seas will boil and
the countries of the Disc will be broken and kings will be brought down
and the cities will be as lakes of glass,’ said the man. ‘I’m off to the
mountains.’

‘That’ll help, will it?’ said Rincewind.

‘No, but the view will be better.’

*

Ankh-Morpork!

Pearl of cities!

This is not a completely accurate description, of course – it was not
round and shiny – but even its worst enemies would agree that if you had
to liken Ankh-Morpork to anything, then it might as well be a piece of
rubbish covered with the diseased secretions of a dying mollusc.

*

There have been bigger cities. There have been richer cities. There have
certainly been prettier cities. But no city in the multiverse could
rival Ankh-Morpork for its smell.

*

Ankh-Morpork, largest city in the lands around the Circle Sea, slept.

That statement is not really true.

On the one hand, those parts of the city which normally concerned
themselves with, for example, selling vegetables, shoeing horses,
carving exquisite small jade ornaments, changing money and making
tables, on the whole, slept. Unless they had insomnia. Or had got up in
the night as it might be, to go to the lavatory. On the other hand, many
of the less law-abiding citizens were wide awake and, for instance,
climbing through windows that didn’t belong to them, slitting throats,
mugging one another, listening to loud music in smoky cellars and
generally having a lot more fun. But most of the animals were asleep,
except for the rats. And the bats, too, of course. As far as the insects
were concerned …

The point is that descriptive writing is very rarely entirely accurate
and during the reign of Olaf Quimby II as Patrician of Ankh some
legislation was passed in a determined attempt to put a stop to this
sort of thing and introduce some honesty into reporting. Thus, if a
legend said of a notable hero that ‘all men spoke of his prowess’ any
bard who valued his life would add hastily ‘except for a couple of
people in his home village who thought he was a liar, and quite a lot of
other people who had never really heard of him’. Poetic simile was
strictly limited to statements like ‘his mighty steed was as fleet as
the wind on a fairly calm day, say about Force Three’, and any loose
talk about a beloved having a face that launched a thousand ships would
have to be backed by evidence that the object of desire did indeed look
like a bottle of champagne.

Quimby was eventually killed by a disgruntled poet during an experiment
conducted in the palace grounds to prove the disputed accuracy of the
proverb ‘The pen is mightier than the sword’, and in his memory it was
amended to include the phrase ‘only if the sword is very small and the
pen is very sharp’.

[image]

Unseen University had never admitted women,

muttering something about problems with the plumbing, but the real
reason was an unspoken dread that if women were allowed to mess around
with magic they would probably be embarrassingly good at it …

[image]

The Octavo filled the room with a dull, sullen light, which wasn’t
strictly light at all but the opposite of light; darkness isn’t the
opposite of light, it is simply its absence, and what was radiating from
the book was the light that lies on the far side of darkness, the light
fantastic.

It was a rather disappointing purple colour.

*

It looked the sort of book described in library catalogues as ‘slightly
foxed’, although it would be more honest to admit that it looked as
though it had been badgered, wolved and possibly beared as well.

*

‘All the shops have been smashed open, there was a whole bunch of people
across the street helping themselves to musical instruments, can you
believe that?’

‘Yeah,’ said Rincewind. ‘Luters, I expect.’

[image]

‘You know, I think I might re-enroll,’ said Rincewind cheerfully.

‘I think I could really make a go of things this time. I can really see
myself getting to grips with magic and graduating really well. They do
say if it’s summa cum laude, then the living is easy—’

[image]

A Thaum is the basic unit of magical strength. It has been universally
established as the amount of magic needed to create one small white
pigeon or three normal-sized billiard balls.

[image]

 [image]

 

THE LAST THING the wizard Drum Billet did, before Death laid a bony hand
on his shoulder, was to pass on his staff of power to the eighth son of
an eighth son. Unfortunately for his colleagues in the chauvinistic (not
to say misogynistic) world of magic, he failed to check on the new-born
baby’s sex …

 

_The Discworld is_ …

… as round and flat as a geological pizza, although without the
anchovies.

*

He came walking through the thunderstorm and you could tell he was a
wizard, partly because of the long cloak and carven staff but mainly
because the raindrops were stopping several feet from his head, and
steaming.

*

There was a village tucked in a narrow valley between steep woods. It
wasn’t a large village, and wouldn’t have shown up on a map of the
mountains. It barely showed up on a map of the village.

*

Often there is no more than a little plaque to reveal that, against all
gynaecological probability, someone very famous was born halfway up a
wall.

*

Granny Weatherwax was a witch. That was quite acceptable in the Ramtops,
and no one had a bad word to say about witches. At least, not if he
wanted to wake up in the morning the same shape as he went to bed.

*

Granny had heard that broomsticks were once again very much the fashion
among younger witches, but she didn’t hold with it. There was no way a
body could look respectable while hurtling through the air aboard a
household implement. Besides, it looked decidedly draughty.

*

Although she was aware that somewhere under her complicated strata of
vests and petticoats there was some skin, that didn’t mean to say she
approved of it.

*

The old woman had a flat, measured way of speaking sometimes. It was the
kind of voice the Creator had probably used. Whether there was magic in
it, or just headology, it ruled out any possibility of argument. It made
it clear that whatever it was talking about was exactly how things
should be.

*

The witch’s cottage consisted of so many extensions and lean-tos that it
was difficult to see what the original building had looked like, or even
if there had ever been one.

*

Front doors in Bad Ass were used only by brides and corpses, and Granny
had always avoided becoming either.

*

Granny had a philosophical objection to reading, but she’d be the last
to say that books, especially books with nice thin pages, didn’t have
their uses.

*

‘Do you know how wizards like to be buried?’

‘Yes!’

‘Well, how?’

Granny Weatherwax paused at the bottom of the stairs.

‘Reluctantly.’

*

Esk felt that bravery was called for, but on a night like this bravery
lasted only as long as a candle stayed alight.

*

Everyone knew there were wolves in the mountains, but they seldom came
near the village – the modern wolves were the offspring of ancestors
that had survived because they had learned that human meat had sharp
edges.

*

‘But,’ Smith said, ‘if it’s wizard magic she’s got, learning witchery
won’t be any good, will it? You said they’re different.’

‘They’re both magic. If you can’t learn to ride an elephant, you can at
least learn to ride a horse.’

‘What’s an elephant?’

‘A kind of badger,’ said Granny. She hadn’t maintained
forest-credibility for forty years by ever admitting ignorance.

*

Granny grinned. ‘That’s one form of magic, of course.’

‘What, just knowing things?’

‘Knowing things that other people _don’t know_.’

*

‘Hoki’s a nature god,’ Granny said. ‘Sometimes he manifests himself as
an oak tree, or half a man and half a goat, but mainly I see him in his
aspect as a bloody nuisance.’

*

A boxful of marzipan ducks on a nearby stall came to life and whirred
past the stallholder to land, quacking happily, in the river (where, by
dawn, they had all melted: that’s natural selection for you).

[image]

No one can out-stare a witch, ’cept a goat, of course.

[image]

Granny, meanwhile, was two streets away. She was also, by the standards
of other people, lost. She would not see it like that. She knew where
she was, it was just that everywhere else didn’t.

*

He had the kind of real deep tan that rich people spend ages trying to
achieve with expensive holidays and bits of tinfoil, when really all you
need to do to obtain one is work your arse off in the open air every
day.

*

A person ignorant of the possibility of failure can be a halfbrick in
the path of the bicycle of history.

[image]

If women were as good as men they’d be a lot better!

[image]

The air around them reeked of incense and grain and spices and beer, but
mainly of the sort of smell that was caused by a high water-table,
thousands of people, and a robust approach to drainage.

*

The Shades: an ancient part of the city whose inhabitants were largely
nocturnal and never enquired about one another’s business because
curiosity not only killed the cat but threw it in the river with weights
tied to its feet.

*

The lodgings were on the top floor next to the well-guarded premises of
a respectable dealer in stolen property because, as Granny had heard,
good fences make good neighbours.

*

At some time in the recent past someone had decided to brighten the
ancient corridors of the University by painting them, having some vague
notion that Learning Should Be Fun. It hadn’t worked. It’s a fact known
throughout the universes that no matter how carefully the colours are
chosen, institutional decor ends up as either vomit green, unmentionable
brown, nicotine yellow or surgical appliance pink. By some little
understood process of sympathetic resonance, corridors painted in those
colours _always smell slightly of boiled cabbage_ – even if no cabbage
is ever cooked in the vicinity.

*

It wasn’t that Granny could make herself invisible, it was just that she
had this talent for being able to fade into the foreground so that she
wasn’t noticed.

*

Books tend to react with one another, creating randomized magic with a
mind of its own …

One such accident had turned the librarian into an ape, since when he
had resisted all attempts to turn him back, explaining in sign language
that life as an orang-utan was considerably better than life as a human
being, because all the big philosophical questions resolved themselves
into wondering where the next banana was coming from. Anyway, long arms
and prehensile feet were ideal for dealing with high shelves.

*

‘You’re wizards!’ Esk screamed. ‘Bloody well wizz!’

*

Cutangle stood with legs planted wide apart, arms akimbo and stomach
giving an impression of a beginners’ ski slope, the whole of him
therefore adopting a pose usually associated with Henry VIII but with an
option on Henry IX and X as well.

*

‘Million-to-one chances,’ Granny said, ‘crop up nine times out of ten.’

*

She hit one, which had a face like a small family of squid, and it
deflated into a pile of twitching bones and bits of fur and odd ends of
tentacle, very much like a Greek meal.

*

But this was a storm of the Circle Sea plains, and its main ambition was
to hit the ground with as much rain as possible. It was the kind of
storm that suggests that the whole sky has swallowed a diuretic. The
thunder and lightning hung around in the background, supplying a sort of
chorus, but the rain was the star of the show. It tap-danced across the
land.

*

‘I was born up in the mountains. I get seasick on damp grass, if you
must know.’

*

‘You can’t cross the same river twice, I always say,’ [said Granny.]

Cutangle gave this some thought.

‘I think you’re wrong there,’ he said. ‘I must have crossed the same
river, oh, thousands of times.’

‘Ah, but it wasn’t the same river.’

‘It wasn’t?’

‘No.’

Cutangle shrugged. ‘It looked like the same bloody river.’

*

… the endless rooftops of the University, which by comparison made
Gormenghast look like a tool-shed on a railway allotment …

*

One thing the water couldn’t do was gurgle out of the ornamental
gargoyles ranged around the roofs. This was because the gargoyles
wandered off and sheltered in the attics at the first sign of rain. They
held that just because you were ugly it didn’t mean you were stupid.

*

‘I don’t think there’s ever been a lady wizard before,’ said Cutangle.
‘I rather think it might be against the lore.’

[image]

[image]

 

DEATH COMES TO us all. When he came to Mort, he offered him a job. After
being assured that being dead was not compulsory, Mort accepted.
However, he soon found out that romantic longings did not mix easily
with the responsibilities of being Death’s apprentice …

 

Reannuals are plants that grow backwards in time. You sow the seeds this
year and they grow last year.

A farmer who neglects to sow ordinary seeds only loses the crop, whereas
anyone who forgets to sow seeds of a crop that has already been
harvested twelve months before risks disturbing the entire fabric of
causality, not to mention acute embarrassment.

*

Then there was the puzzle of why the sun came out during the day,
instead of at night when the light would come in useful.

*

THANK YOU, BOY, said the skull. WHAT IS YOUR NAME?

‘Uh,’ said Mort, ‘Mortimer … sir. They call me Mort.’

WHAT A COINCIDENCE.

*

‘I suppose we were all young once.’

Death considered this.

NO, he said, I DON’T THINK SO.

*

Death leaned over the saddle and looked down at the kingdoms of the
world.

I DON’T KNOW ABOUT YOU, he said, BUT I COULD MURDER A CURRY.

*

‘Sir?’

YES?

‘What’s a curry?’

The blue fires flared deep in the eyes of Death.

HAVE YOU EVER BITTEN A RED-HOT ICE CUBE?

‘No, sir,’ said Mort.

CURRY’S LIKE THAT.

*

Ankh-Morpork is as full of life as an old cheese on a hot day, as loud
as a curse in a cathedral, as bright as an oil slick, as colourful as a
bruise and as full of activity, industry, bustle and sheer exuberant
busyness as a dead dog on a termite mound.

*

‘What are we going to do now?’

BUY YOU SOME NEW CLOTHES.

‘These were new today.’

REALLY? IT CERTAINLY ADDS A NEW TERROR TO POVERTY.

*

They turned into a wider street leading into a more affluent part of the
city (the torches were closer together and the middens further apart).

*

Although the Death of the Discworld is, in his own words, an
ANTHROPOMORPHIC PERSONIFICATION, he long ago gave up using the
traditional skeletal horses, because of the bother of having to stop all
the time to wire bits back on.

*

Death was standing behind a lectern, poring over a map.

YOU HAVEN’T HEARD OF THE BAY OF MANTE, HAVE YOU? he said.

‘No, sir,’ said Mort.

FAMOUS SHIPWRECK THERE.

‘Was there?’

THERE WILL BE, said Death, IF I CAN FIND THE DAMN PLACE.

*

Albert grunted. ‘Do you know what happens to lads who ask too many
questions?’

Mort thought for a moment.

‘No,’ he said eventually, ‘what?’

There was silence.

Then Albert straightened up and said, ‘Damned if I know. Probably they
get answers, and serve ’em right.’

*

Mort remembered the woodcut in his grandmother’s almanack, between the
page on planting times and the phases of the moon section, showing Dethe
thee Great Levyller Comes To Alle Menne. He’d stared at it hundreds of
times when learning his letters. It wouldn’t have been half so
impressive if it had been generally known that the flame-breathing horse
the spectre rode was called Binky.

*

WHY IS THERE A CHERRY ON A STICK IN THIS DRINK? … IT’S NOT AS IF IT DOES
ANYTHING FOR THE FLAVOUR. WHY DOES ANYONE TAKE A PERFECTLY GOOD DRINK
AND THEN PUT IN A CHERRY ON A POLE? … TAKE THESE THINGS, NOW, said
Death, fingering a passing canape. I MEAN, MUSHROOMS YES, CHICKEN YES,
CREAM YES, I’VE NOTHING AGAINST ANY OF THEM, BUT WHY IN THE NAME OF
SANITY MINCE THEM ALL UP AND PUT THEM IN LITTLE PASTRY CASES? …

THAT’S MORTALS FOR YOU, Death continued. THEY’VE ONLY GOT A FEW YEARS IN
THIS WORLD AND THEY SPEND THEM ALL IN MAKING THINGS COMPLICATED FOR
THEMSELVES. FASCINATING.

*

‘He doesn’t look a _bad_ king,’ said Mort. ‘Why would anyone want to
kill him?’

SEE THE MAN NEXT TO HIM? WITH THE LITTLE MOUSTACHE AND THE GRIN LIKE A
LIZARD? … HIS COUSIN, THE DUKE OF STO HELIT. NOT THE NICEST OF PEOPLE,
said Death. A HANDY MAN WITH A BOTTLE OF POISON. FIFTH IN LINE TO THE
THRONE LAST YEAR, NOW SECOND IN LINE. BIT OF A SOCIAL CLIMBER, YOU MIGHT
SAY.

[image]

‘My granny says that dying is like going to sleep,’ Mort added, a shade
hopefully.

I WOULDN’T KNOW. I HAVE DONE NEITHER.

[image]

This part of Ankh-Morpork was known as The Shades, an inner-city area
sorely in need either of governmental help or, for preference, a
flamethrower. It couldn’t be called squalid because that would be
stretching the word to breaking point. It was beyond squalor and out the
other side, where by a sort of Einsteinian reversal it achieved a
magnificent horribleness that it wore like an architectural award. It
was noisy and sultry and smelled like a cowshed floor.

*

Even before it entered the city [the River Ankh] was slow and heavy with
the silt of the plains, and by the time it got to The Shades even an
agnostic could have walked across it. It was hard to drown in the Ankh,
but easy to suffocate.

*

‘Why do you trouble Igneous Cutwell, Holder of the Eight Keys, Traveller
in the Dungeon Dimensions, Supreme Mage of—’

‘Excuse me,’ said Mort, ‘are you really?’

‘Really what?’

‘Master of the thingy, Lord High Wossname of the Sacred Dungeons?’

‘In a figurative sense.’

‘What does that mean?’

‘Well, it means no,’ said Cutwell.

*

‘Is it possible to walk through walls?’ said Mort desperately.

‘Using magic?’

‘Um,’ said Mort, ‘I don’t think so.’

‘Then pick very thin walls,’ said Cutwell.

[image]

‘What time’s sunset around here?’ ‘We normally manage to fit it in
between night and day.’

[image]

He felt as if he’d been shipwrecked on the _Titanic_ but in the nick of
time had been rescued. By the _Lusitania_.

*

‘… and the princesses were beautiful as the day is long and so noble
they, they could pee through a dozen mattresses—’

‘What?’

Albert hesitated. ‘Something like that, anyway.’

*

She looked around slowly and met the impertinent gaze of the
doorknocker. It waggled its metal eyebrows at her and spoke indistinctly
through its wrought-iron ring.

‘I am Princess Keli, heir to the throne of Sto Lat,’ she said haughtily
… ‘And I don’t talk to door furniture.’

‘Fwell, _I’m_ just a doorknocker and I can talk to fwhoever I please,’
said the gargoyle pleasantly. ‘And I can ftell you the fmaster iff
having a trying day and duff fnot fwant to be disturbed. But you could
ftry to use the magic word,’ it added. ‘Coming from an attractiff fwoman
it works nine times out of eight.’

‘Magic word? What’s the magic word?’

The knocker perceptibly sneered. ‘Haff you been taught nothing, miss?’

She drew herself up to her full height, which wasn’t really worth the
effort.

‘I have been _educated_,’ she informed it with icy precision, ‘by some
of the finest scholars in the land.’

The doorknocker did not appear to be impressed.

‘Iff they didn’t teach you the magic word,’ it said calmly, ‘they
couldn’t haff fbeen all that fine.’

Keli reached out, grabbed the heavy ring, and pounded it on the door.
The knocker leered at her.

‘Ftreat me rough,’ it lisped. ‘That’f the way I like it!’

‘You’re disgusting!’

‘Yeff. Ooo, that waff nife, do it again …’

The door opened a crack. There was a shadowy glimpse of curly hair.

‘Madam, I said we’re cl—’

Keli sagged.

‘_Please_ help me,’ she said. ‘Please!’

‘See?’ said the doorknocker triumphantly. ‘Sooner or later _everyone_
remembers the magic word!’

*

‘The first thing you learn when you enroll at Unseen University, I’m
afraid, is that people don’t pay much attention to that sort of thing.
It’s what their minds tell them that’s important.’ …

‘Actually it’s not the _first_ thing you learn when you enroll,’ he
added. ‘I mean, you learn where the lavatories are and all that sort of
thing before that. But after all that, it’s the first thing.’

*

Keli drummed her fingers on the table, or tried to. It turned out to be
difficult. She stared down in vague horror.

Cutwell hurried forward and wiped the table with his sleeve.

‘Sorry,’ he muttered, ‘I had treacle sandwiches for supper last night.’

*

_You can tell from the following exchange that these two are made for
each other_.

‘I don’t want to get married to anyone yet,’ Mort added. ‘And certainly
not to you, no offence meant.’

‘I wouldn’t marry you if you were the last man on the Disc,’ Ysabell
said sweetly.

‘At least I don’t look like I’ve been eating doughnuts in a wardrobe for
years,’ he said, as they stepped out on to Death’s black lawn.

‘At least I walk as if my legs only had one knee each,’ she said.

‘_My_ eyes aren’t two juugly poached eggs.’

Ysabell nodded. ‘On the other hand, _my_ ears don’t look like something
growing on a dead tree. What does juugly mean?’

‘You know, eggs like Albert does them.’

‘With the white all sticky and runny and full of slimy bits?’

‘Yes.’

‘A good word,’ she conceded thoughtfully. ‘But _my_ hair, I put it to
you, doesn’t look like something you clean a privy with.’

‘Certainly, but neither does mine look like a wet hedgehog.’

‘Pray note that my chest does not appear to be a toast rack in a wet
paper bag.’

Mort glanced sideways at the top of Ysabell’s dress, which contained
enough puppy fat for two litters of Rottweilers, and forbore to comment.

‘_My_ eyebrows don’t look like a pair of mating caterpillars,’ he
hazarded.

‘True. But _my_ legs, I suggest, could at least stop a pig in a
passageway.’

‘Sorry—?’

‘They’re not bandy,’ she explained.

‘Ah.’

‘Enough?’ she said.

‘Just about.’

‘Good. Obviously we shouldn’t get married, if only for the sake of the
children.’

*

History unravels gently, like an old sweater. It has been patched and
darned many times, reknitted to suit different people, shoved in a box
under the sink of censorship to be cut up for the dusters of propaganda,
yet it always – eventually – manages to spring back into its old
familiar shape. History has a habit of changing the people who think
they are changing _it_. History always has a few tricks up its frayed
sleeve. It’s been around a long time.

[image]

‘Would you like a strawberry?’

Mort glanced at the small wooden punnet in the wizard’s hands.

‘In mid-winter?’

‘Actually, they’re sprouts with a dash of enchantment.’

‘They taste like strawberries?’

Cutwell sighed. ‘No, like sprouts.’

[image]

‘I shall die nobly, like Queen Ezeriel,’ [said Keli.]

Mort’s forehead wrinkled. History was a closed book to him.

‘Who’s she?’

‘She lived in Klatch and she had a lot of lovers and she sat on a
snake,’ said Cutwell.

‘She meant to! She was crossed in love!’

‘All I can remember was that she used to take baths in asses’ milk.
Funny thing, history,’ said Cutwell reflectively. ‘You become a queen,
reign for thirty years, make laws, declare war on people and then the
only thing you get remembered for is that you smelled like yoghurt and
were bitten in the—’

*

_The most famous inn on Discworld used to be called the Broken Drum
(Broken Drum – You Can’t Beat It!). Renamed after a particularly bad
fire_.

The Mended Drum in Filigree Street, foremost of the city’s taverns. It
was famed not for its beer, which looked like maiden’s water and tasted
like battery acid, but for its clientele. It was said that if you sat
long enough in the Drum, then sooner or later every major hero on the
Disc would steal your horse.

*

Ysabell was heavily into frills. Even the dressing table seemed to be
wearing a petticoat. The whole room wasn’t so much furnished as
lingeried.

*

_Mort is reading from a very old book in the Library of Death:_

‘… turnered hys hand, butt was sorelie vexed that alle menne at laste
comme to nort, viz. Deathe, and vowed hymme to seke Imortalitie yn his
pride … It’s written in Old,’ he said. ‘Before they invented spelling.’

*

_Death visits a job centre:_

‘It would seem that you have no useful skill or talent whatsoever,’
Keeble said. ‘Have you thought of going into teaching?’

Death’s face was a mask of terror. Well, it was always a mask of terror,
but this time he meant it to be.

[image]

They opened the ledger.

They looked at it for a long time.

Then Mort said, ‘What do all those symbols mean?’

‘Sodomy non sapiens,’ said Albert under his breath.

‘What does that mean?’

‘Means I’m buggered if I know.’

[image]

Harga’s House of Ribs down by the docks is probably not numbered among
the city’s leading eateries, catering as it does for the type of beefy
clientele that prefers quantity and breaks up the tables if it doesn’t
get it. They don’t go in for the fancy or exotic, but stick to
conventional food like flightless bird embryos, minced organs in
intestine skins, slices of hog flesh and burnt ground grass seeds dipped
in animal fats; or, as it is known in their patois, egg, soss and bacon
and a fried slice.

*

‘Rincewind!’ bawled Albert. ‘Take this thing away and dispose of it.’

The toad crawled into Rincewind’s hand and gave him an apologetic look.

‘That’s the last time that bloody landlord gives any lip to a wizard,’
said Albert with smug satisfaction. ‘It seems I turn my back for a few
hundred years and suddenly people in this town are encouraged to think
they can talk back to wizards, eh?’

‘As the bursar of this university I must say that we’ve always
encouraged a good neighbour policy with respect to the community,’
mumbled a wizard, trying to avoid Albert’s gimlet stare.

‘You spineless maggots! I didn’t found this university so you could lend
people the bloody lawnmower!’

*

The Rite of AshkEnte, quite simply, summons and binds Death. Students of
the occult will be aware that it can be performed with a simple
incantation, three small bits of wood and 4cc of mouse blood, but no
wizard worth his pointy hat would dream of doing anything so
unimpressive; they knew in their hearts that if a spell didn’t involve
big yellow candles, lots of rare incense, circles drawn on the floor
with eight different colours of chalk and a few cauldrons around the
place then it simply wasn’t worth contemplating.

*

_The wizards have escaped unscathed from an encounter with their
long-dead founder, whose statue had hitherto graced the campus_.

‘I propose here and now we replace the statue [said the bursar]. And to
make sure no students deface it in any way I suggest we then erect it in
the deepest cellar.

‘And then lock the door,’ he added. Several wizards began to cheer up.

‘And throw away the key?’ said Rincewind.

‘And _weld_ the door,’ the bursar said. ‘And then brick up the doorway.’
There was a round of applause.

‘And throw away the bricklayer!’ chortled Rincewind, who felt he was
getting the hang of this.

The bursar scowled at him. ‘No need to get carried away,’ he said.

*

The princess sprang to her feet and launched herself at her uncle, but
Cutwell grabbed her.

‘No,’ he said, quietly. ‘This isn’t the kind of man who ties you up in a
cellar with just enough time for the mice to eat your ropes before the
flood-waters rise. This is the kind of man who just kills you here and
now.’

*

‘It’s not that I mind being a duke,’ said Mort. ‘It’s being married to a
duchess that comes as a shock.’

[image]

I WASN’T CUT OUT TO BE A FATHER, AND CERTAINLY NOT A GRANDAD. I HAVEN’T
GOT THE RIGHT KIND OF KNEES.

[image]

The Disc’s greatest lovers were undoubtedly Mellius and Gretelina, whose
pure, passionate and soul-searing affair would have scorched the pages
of History if they had not, because of some unexplained quirk of fate,
been born two hundred years apart on different continents.

*

Ankh-Morpork had dallied with many forms of government and had ended up
with that form of democracy known as One Man, One Vote. The Patrician
was the Man; he had the Vote.

[image]

[image]

 

THERE WAS AN eighth son of an eighth son. He was, naturally, a wizard.
And there it should have ended. However (for reasons we’d better not go
into), he had seven sons. And then he had an eighth son … a wizard
squared … a source of magic … a Sourcerer.

 

Far below, the sea sucked on the shingle as noisily as an old man with
one tooth who had been given a gob-stopper.

*

‘Children are our hope for the future.’

THERE IS NO HOPE FOR THE FUTURE, said Death.

‘What does it contain, then?’

ME.

‘Besides you I mean!’

Death gave him a puzzled look. I’M SORRY?

*

‘What is there in this world that makes living worth while?’

Death thought about it.

CATS, he said eventually, CATS ARE NICE.

*

There was no analogy for the way in which Great A’Tuin the world turtle
moved against the galactic night. When you are ten thousand miles long,
your shell pocked with meteor craters and frosted with comet ice, there
is absolutely nothing you can realistically be like except yourself.

So Great A’Tuin swam slowly through the interstellar deeps like the
largest turtle there has ever been, carrying on its carapace the four
huge elephants that bore on their backs the vast, glittering
waterfall-fringed circle of the Discworld, which exists either because
of some impossible blip on the curve of probability or because the gods
enjoy a joke as much as anyone.

*

Spring had come to Ankh-Morpork. It wasn’t immediately apparent, but
there were signs that were obvious to the cognoscenti. For example, the
scum on the River Ankh, that great wide slow waterway that served the
double city as reservoir, sewer and frequent morgue, had turned a
particularly iridescent green. The city’s drunken rooftops sprouted
mattresses and bolsters as the winter bedding was put out to air in the
weak sunshine, and in the depths of musty cellars the beams twisted and
groaned when their dry sap responded to the ancient call of root and
forest. Birds nested among the gutters and eaves of Unseen University,
although it was noticeable that however great the pressure on the
nesting sites they never, ever, made nests in the invitingly open mouths
of the gargoyles that lined the rooftops, much to the gargoyles’
disappointment.

*

Books of magic have a sort of life of their own. Some have altogether
too much; for example, the first edition of the _Necrotelicomnicon_ has
to be kept between iron plates, the _True Arte of Levitatione_ has spent
the last one hundred and fifty years up in the rafters, and _Ge Fordge’s
Compenydyum of Sex Majick_ is kept in a vat of ice in a room all by
itself and there’s a strict rule that it can only be read by wizards who
are over eighty and, if possible, dead.

*

In most old libraries the books are chained to the shelves to prevent
them being damaged by people. In the Library of Unseen University, of
course, it’s more or less the other way about.

[image]

The Librarian ambled back down the aisles. He had a face that only a
lorry tyre could love.

[image]

There are eight levels of wizardry on the Disc; after sixteen years
Rincewind has failed to achieve even level one. In fact it is the
considered opinion of some of his tutors that he is incapable even of
achieving level zero, which most normal people are _born_ at; to put it
another way, it has been suggested that when Rincewind dies the average
occult ability of the human race will actually go up by a fraction.

*

On top of the wardrobe, wrapped in scraps of yellowing paper and old
dust sheets, was a large brass-bound chest. It went by the name of the
Luggage. Why it consented to be owned by Rincewind was something only
the Luggage knew, and it wasn’t telling, but probably no other item in
the entire chronicle of travel accessories had quite such a history of
mystery and grievous bodily harm. It had been described as half
suitcase, half homicidal maniac. It had many unusual qualities … but
currently there was only one that set it apart from any other
brass-bound chest. It was snoring, with a sound like someone very slowly
sawing a log.

*

The Luggage might be magical. It might be terrible. But in its enigmatic
soul it was kin to every other piece of luggage throughout the
multiverse, and preferred to spend its winters hibernating on top of a
wardrobe.

*

But it wasn’t the sight of the cockroaches that was so upsetting. It was
the fact that they were marching in step, a hundred abreast … There was
something particularly unpleasant about the sound of billions of very
small feet hitting the stones in perfect time.

Rincewind stepped gingerly over the marching column … The Luggage, of
course, followed them with a noise like someone tap-dancing over a bag
of crisps.

*

There was a lot of beer about. Here and there red-faced wizards were
happily singing ancient drinking songs which involved a lot of
knee-slapping and cries of ‘Ho!’ The only possible excuse for this sort
of thing is that wizards are celibate, and have to find their amusement
where they can.

*

The higher levels of wizardry are a perilous place. Every wizard is
trying to dislodge the wizards above him while stamping on the fingers
of those below; to say that wizards are healthily competitive by nature
is like saying that piranhas are naturally a little peckish.

*

One of Rincewind’s tutors had said of him that ‘to call his
understanding of magical theory _abysmal_ is to leave no suitable word
to describe his grasp of its practice’.

*

The reason that wizards didn’t rule the Disc was quite simple. Hand any
two wizards a piece of rope and they would instinctively pull in
opposite directions. Something about their genetics or their training
left them with an attitude towards mutual cooperation that made an old
bull elephant with terminal toothache look like a worker ant.

*

The last thing Rincewind saw before he was dragged away was the
Librarian. Despite looking like a hairy rubber sack full of water, the
orang-utan had the weight and reach of any man in the room and was
currently sitting on a guard’s shoulders and trying, with reasonable
success, to unscrew his head.

*

‘I said come on,’ she repeated. ‘What are you afraid of?’

Rincewind took a deep breath. ‘Murderers, muggers, thieves, assassins,
pickpockets, cutpurses, reevers, snigsmen, rapists and robbers,’ he
said.

[image]

Down these mean streets a man must walk, he thought. And along some of
them he will break into a run.

[image]

It might be thought that the Mended Drum was a seedy disreputable
tavern. In fact it was a _reputable_ disreputable tavern. Its customers
had a certain rough-hewn respectability – they might murder each other
in an easygoing way, as between equals, but they didn’t do it
vindictively. A child could go in for a glass of lemonade and be certain
of getting nothing worse than a clip round the ear when his mother heard
his expanded vocabulary. On quiet nights, and when he was certain the
Librarian wasn’t going to come in, the landlord was even known to put
bowls of peanuts on the bar.

*

‘Is he a fair and just ruler?’

‘I would say that he is unfair and unjust, but scrupulously even-handed.
He is unfair and unjust to everyone, without fear or favour.’

*

The current Patrician, head of the extremely rich and powerful Vetinari
family, was thin, tall and apparently as cold-blooded as a dead penguin.
Just by looking at him you could tell he was the sort of man you’d
expect to keep a white cat, and caress it idly while sentencing people
to death in a piranha tank; and you’d hazard for good measure that he
probably collected rare thin porcelain, turning it over and over in his
blue-white fingers while distant screams echoed from the depths of the
dungeons. You wouldn’t put it past him to use the word ‘exquisite’ and
have thin lips. He looked the kind of person who, when they blink, you
mark it off on the calendar.

Practically none of this was in fact the case, although he did have a
small and exceedingly elderly wire-haired terrier called Wuffles that
smelled badly and wheezed at people. It was said to be the only thing in
the entire world he truly cared about. He did of course sometimes have
people horribly tortured to death, but this was considered to be
perfectly acceptable behaviour for a civic ruler and generally approved
of by the overwhelming majority of citizens. The people of Ankh are of a
practical persuasion, and felt that the Patrician’s edict forbidding all
street theatre and mime artists made up for a lot of things. He didn’t
administer a reign of terror, just the occasional light shower.

*

‘I can’t swim,’ [said Rincewind.]

‘What, not a stroke?’

‘About how deep is the sea here, would you say? Approximately?’ he said.

‘About a dozen fathoms, I believe.’

‘Then I could probably swim about a dozen fathoms, whatever they are.’

*

Abrim laughed. It wasn’t a nice sound. It sounded as though he had had
laughter explained to him, probably slowly and repeatedly, but had never
heard anyone actually do it.

*

‘They’ll throw you into a seraglio!’

Conina shrugged. ‘Could be worse.’

‘But it’s got all these spikes and when they shut the door—’ hazarded
Rincewind.

‘That’s not a seraglio. That’s an Iron Maiden. Don’t you know what a
seraglio is?’

‘Um …’

She told him. He went crimson.

*

It was said that everything in Ankh-Morpork was for sale except for the
beer and the women, both of which one merely hired.

*

Of course, Ankh-Morpork’s citizens had always claimed that the river
water was incredibly pure in any case. Any water that had passed through
so many kidneys, they reasoned, had to be very pure indeed.

*

The shape of DNA, it is popularly said, owes its discovery to the chance
sight of a spiral staircase when the scientist’s mind was just at the
right receptive temperature. Had he used the lift, the whole science of
genetics might have been a good deal different.¹

*

In the bathtub of history the truth is harder to hold than the soap, and
much more difficult to find …

*

‘Death walks abroad,’ added Nijel helpfully.

‘Abroad I don’t mind,’ said Rincewind. ‘They’re all foreigners. It’s
Death walking around here I’m not looking forward to.’

*

‘If we get a chance,’ whispered Rincewind to Nijel, ‘we run, right?’

‘Where to?’

‘From,’ said Rincewind, ‘the important word is _from_.’

*

Nijel was one of those people who, if you say ‘don’t look now’, would
immediately swivel his head like an owl on a turntable. These are the
same people who, when you point out, say, an unusual crocus just beside
them, turn round aimlessly and put their foot down with a sad little
squashy noise. If they were lost in a trackless desert you could find
them by putting down, somewhere on the sand, something small and fragile
like a valuable old mug that had been in your family for generations,
and then hurrying back as soon as you heard the crash.

*

_Rincewind tries to explain a wizard’s inbuilt desire to construct a
tower:_

‘Wizards always used to build a tower around themselves, like those …
what do you call those things you find at the bottom of rivers?’

‘Frogs.’

‘Stones.’

‘Unsuccessful gangsters.’

‘Caddis flies is what I meant,’ said Rincewind.

*

Rincewind wasn’t very good at precognition; in fact he could barely see
into the present.

*

There came a thunderous knock at the door.

There is a mantra to be said on these occasions. It doesn’t matter if
the door is a tent flap, a scrap of hide on a wind-blown yurt, three
inches of solid oak with great iron nails in or a rectangle of chipboard
with mahogany veneer, a small light over it made of horrible bits of
coloured glass and a bellpush that plays a choice of twenty popular
melodies that no music lover would want to listen to even after five
years’ sensory deprivation.

One wizard turned to another and duly said: ‘I wonder who that can be at
this time of night?’

*

The astro-philosophers of Krull once succeeded in proving conclusively
that all places are one place and that the distance between them is an
illusion, and this news was an embarrassment to all thinking
philosophers because it did not explain, among other things, sign-posts.
After years of wrangling the whole thing was then turned over to Ly Tin
Wheedle, arguably the Disc’s greatest philosopher, who after some
thought proclaimed that although it was indeed true that all places were
one place, that place was _very large_.

*

_The Four Horsemen of the Disc’s Apocralypse have had three of their
horses stolen while they were in an inn_.

WEIGHT DOESN’T COME INTO IT. MY STEED HAS CARRIED ARMIES. MY STEED HAS
CARRIED CITIES. YEA, HE HATH CARRIED ALL THINGS IN THEIR DUE TIME, said
Death. BUT HE’S NOT GOING TO CARRY YOU THREE.

‘Why not?’

IT’S A MATTER OF THE LOOK OF THE THING.

‘It’s going to look pretty good, then, isn’t it,’ said War testily, ‘the
One Horseman and Three Pedestrians of the Apocralypse.’

*

‘If we’re going to die anyway, I’d rather die like this. Heroically,’
[said Nijel.]

‘Is it heroic to die like this?’ said Conina.

‘_I_ think it is,’ he said, ‘and when it comes to dying, there’s only
one opinion that matters.’

[image]

1 Although, possibly, quicker. And only licensed to carry fourteen
people.

[image]

 

WITCHES ARE NOT by nature gregarious, and they certainly don’t have
leaders. Granny Weatherwax was the most highly regarded of the leaders
they didn’t have. But even she found that meddling in royal politics was
a lot more difficult than certain playwrights would have you believe …

 

Granny Weatherwax paused with a second scone halfway to her mouth.

‘Something comes,’ she said.

‘Can you tell by the pricking of your thumbs?’ said Magrat earnestly.
Magrat had learned a lot about witchcraft from books.

‘The pricking of my ears,’ said Granny.

*

‘I didn’t become a soldier for this. Not to go round killing people.’

*

‘If I was you, I’d become a sailor,’ said Granny thoughtfully. ‘Yes, a
nautical career. I should start as soon as possible. Now, in fact. Run
off, man. Run off to sea where there are no tracks. You will have a long
and successful life, I promise.’ She looked thoughtful for a moment, and
added, ‘At least, longer than it’s likely to be if you hang around
here.’

*

Lancre Castle was built on an outcrop of rock by an architect who had
heard about Gormenghast but hadn’t got the budget. He’d done his best,
though, with a tiny confection of cut-price turrets, bargain basements,
buttresses, crenellations, gargoyles, towers, courtyards, keeps and
dungeons; in fact, just about everything a castle needs except maybe
reasonable foundations and the kind of mortar that doesn’t wash away in
a light shower.

*

‘There is a knocking without,’ the porter said.

‘Without what?’ said the Fool.

‘Without the door, idiot.’

The Fool gave him a worried look. ‘A knocking without a door?’ he said
suspiciously. ‘This isn’t some kind of Zen, is it?’

*

‘How many times have you thrown a magic ring into the deepest depths of
the ocean and then, when you get home and have a nice bit of turbot for
your tea, there it is?’

They considered this in silence.

‘Never,’ said Granny irritably. ‘And nor have you.’

*

It was one of the few sorrows of Granny Weatherwax’s life that, despite
all her efforts, she’d arrived at the peak of her career with a
complexion like a rosy apple and all her teeth. No amount of charms
could persuade a wart to take root on her handsome if slightly equine
features, and vast intakes of sugar only served to give her boundless
energy.

*

_Granny explains her view on the proposition that replicas can be more
convincing than the real thing:_

‘Things that try to look like things often do look more like things than
things.’

*

The best you could say for Magrat was that she was decently plain and
well-scrubbed and as flat-chested as an ironing board with a couple of
peas on it.

*

_The duke has sent some guards to arrest a witch. They come back
empty-handed_.

‘Admit it – she offered you hedonistic and licentious pleasures known
only to those who dabble in the carnal arts, didn’t she?’

‘No, sir. She offered me a bun.’

‘A bun?’

‘Yes, sir. It had currants in it.’

Felmet sat absolutely still while he fought for internal peace. Finally,
all he could manage was, ‘And what did your men do about this?’

‘They had a bun too, sir. All except young Roger, who isn’t allowed
fruit, sir, on account of his trouble. He had a biscuit, sir.’

*

‘Fool?’

‘Marry, sir—’ said the Fool nervously.

‘I am already extremely married. Advise me, my Fool.’

‘I’faith, nuncle—’ said the Fool.

‘Nor am I thy nuncle. I feel sure I would have remembered,’ said Lord
Felmet, leaning down until the prow of his nose was a few inches from
the Fool’s stricken face. ‘If you preface your next remark with nuncle,
i’faith or marry, it will go hard with you.’

‘How do you feel about Prithee?’

The duke knew when to allow some slack. ‘Prithee I can live with,’ he
said. ‘So can you.’

*

Magrat tried. Every morning her hair was long, thick and blond, but by
the evening it had always returned to its normal worried frizz. To
ameliorate the effect she had tried to plait violets and cowslips in it.
The result was not all she had hoped. It gave the impression that a
window box had fallen on her head.

*

The Fool fumbled in his sleeve and produced a rather soiled red and
yellow handkerchief embroidered with bells. The duke took it with an
expression of pathetic gratitude and blew his nose. Then he held it away
from him and gazed at it with demented suspicion.

‘Is this a dagger I see before me?’ he mumbled.

‘Um. No, my lord. It’s my handkerchief, you see. You can sort of tell
the difference if you look closely. It doesn’t have as many sharp
edges.’

*

On the crest of the moor … was a standing stone …

The stone was about the same height as a tall man, and made of a bluish
tinted rock. It was considered intensely magical because, although there
was only one of it, _no one had ever been able to count it_.

*

_Granny, Nanny and Magrat have summoned a demon_.

‘Who’re you?’ said Granny, bluntly.

‘_My name is unpronounceable in your tongue, woman_,’ it said.

‘I’ll be the judge of that,’ warned Granny.

‘_Very well. My name is WxrtHltljwlpklz_,’ said the demon smugly.

[image]

‘We haven’t got time to bandy legs with you all night,’ said Granny.

[image]

Magrat blurted out, ‘You know the Fool, who lives up at the castle?’ …

‘It’s a steady job,’ said Nanny. ‘I’ll grant you that.’

‘Huh,’ said Granny. ‘A man who tinkles all day. No kind of husband for
anyone, I’d say.’

*

Nanny Ogg was also out early. She hadn’t been able to get any sleep
anyway, and besides, she was worried about Greebo. Greebo was one of her
few blind spots. While intellectually she would concede that he was
indeed a fat, cunning, evil-smelling multiple rapist, she nevertheless
instinctively pictured him as the small fluffy kitten he had been
decades before. The fact that he had once chased a female wolf up a tree
and seriously surprised a she-bear who had been innocently digging for
roots didn’t stop her worrying that something bad might happen to him.
It was generally considered by everyone else in the kingdom that the
only thing that might slow Greebo down was a direct meteorite strike.

*

The books said that the old-time witches had sometimes danced in their
shifts. Magrat had wondered about how you danced in shifts. Perhaps
there wasn’t room for them all to dance at once, she’d thought.

*

_Nanny Ogg is being held captive in a torture chamber_.

The duchess leaned forward until her big red face was inches away from
Nanny’s nose.

‘This insouciance gives you pleasure,’ she hissed, ‘but soon you will
laugh on the other side of your face!’

‘It’s only got this side,’ said Nanny.

The duchess fingered a tray of implements lovingly. ‘We shall see,’ she
said, picking up a pair of pliers.

*

‘It’s gone too far this time,’ said a peasant. ‘All this burning and
taxing and now this. I blame you witches. It’s got to stop. I know my
rights.’

‘What rights are they?’ said Granny.

‘Dunnage, cowhage-in-ordinary, badinage, leftovers, scrommidge, clary
and spunt,’ said the peasant promptly. ‘And acornage, every other year,
and the right to keep two-thirds of a goat on the common. Until he set
fire to it. It was a bloody good goat, too.’

*

Hour gongs were being struck all across the city and nightwatchmen were
proclaiming that it was indeed midnight and also that, in the face of
all the evidence, all was well. Many of them got as far as the end of
the sentence before being mugged.

*

The River Ankh, the cloaca of half a continent, was already pretty wide
and silt laden when it reached the city’s outskirts. By the time it left
it didn’t so much flow as exude. Owing to the accretion of the mud of
centuries the bed of the river was in fact higher than some of the low
lying areas and now, with the snow melt swelling the flow, many of the
low-rent districts on the Morpork side were flooded, if you can use that
word for a liquid you could pick up in a net.

*

‘You know, Hwel, I reckon responsible behaviour is something to get when
you grow older. Like varicose veins.’

*

Vitoller shifted uneasily. ‘I already owe Chrystophrase the Troll more
than I should.’

‘He’s the one that has people’s limbs torn off!’ said Tomjon.

‘How much do you owe him?’ said Hwel.

‘An arm and a leg.’

*

_The dwarf playwright Hwel is leaving actor-manager Vitoller’s company_.

‘I’ll miss you, laddie. I don’t mind telling you. You’ve been like a son
to me. How old are you, exactly? I never did know.’

‘A hundred and two.’

‘You’ve been like a father to me, then,’ Vitoller said.

*

‘When’s this play going to be, then?’ Magrat said, moving closer.

‘Marry, I’m sure I’m not allowed to tell you,’ said the Fool. ‘The duke
said to me, he said, don’t tell the witches that it’s tomorrow night.’

‘I shouldn’t, then,’ agreed Magrat.

‘At eight o’clock.’

‘I see.’

‘But meet for sherry beforehand at seven-thirty, i’faith.’

*

Nanny … leaned towards the empty seat. ‘Walnut?’

‘No, thank you,’ said King Verence [a ghost], waving a spectral hand.
‘They go right through me, you know.’

[image]

[image]

 

BEING TRAINED BY the Assassins’ Guild in Ankh-Morpork did not fit Teppic
for the task assigned to him by fate. He inherited the throne of the
desert kingdom of Djelibeybi rather earlier than he expected (his father
wasn’t too happy about it either), but that was only the beginning of
his problems …

 

All assassins had a full-length mirror in their rooms, because it would
be a terrible insult to anyone to kill them when you were badly dressed.

*

He … had also heard that only one student in fifteen actually became an
assassin. He wasn’t entirely certain what happened to the other
fourteen, but he was pretty sure that if you were a poor student in a
school for assassins they did a bit more than throw the chalk at you,
and that the school dinners had an extra dimension of uncertainty.

*

Djelibeybi really was a small, self-centred kingdom. Even its plagues
were half-hearted. All self-respecting river kingdoms have vast
supernatural plagues, but the best the Old Kingdom had been able to
achieve in the last hundred years was the Plague of Frog.¹

*

It was said that life was cheap in Ankh-Morpork. This was, of course,
completely wrong. Life was often very expensive; you could get death for
free.

*

‘What’s your name, kiddo?’

Teppic drew himself up. ‘Kiddo? I’ll have you know the blood of pharaohs
runs in my veins!’

The other boy looked at him unabashed, with his head on one side and a
faint smile on his face.

‘Would you like it to stay there?’ he said.

[image]

[My mother] died when I was young … She went for a moonlight swim in
what turned out to be a crocodile.

[image]

… Ptraci, his favourite handmaiden. She was _special_. Her singing
always cheered him up. Life seemed so much brighter when she stopped.

*

The Ankh … drained the huge silty plains all the way to the Ramtop
mountains, and by the time it had passed through Ankh-Morpork, pop. one
million, it could only be called a liquid because it moved faster than
the land around it; being sick in it would probably make it, on average,
marginally cleaner.

*

One of the two legends about the founding of Ankh-Morpork relates that
the two orphaned brothers who built the city were in fact found and
suckled by a hippopotamus.

The other legend, not normally recounted by the citizens, is that at an
even earlier time a group of wise men survived a flood sent by the gods
by building a huge boat, and on this boat they took two of every type of
animal then existing on the Disc. After some weeks the combined manure
was beginning to weigh the boat low in the water so – the story runs –
they tipped it over the side, and called it Ankh-Morpork.

*

‘Cats are sacred,’ said Dios.

‘Long-legged cats with silver fur and disdainful expressions are,
maybe,’ said Teppic. ‘I’m sure sacred cats don’t leave dead ibises under
the bed. And I’m certain that sacred cats that live surrounded by
endless sand don’t come indoors and do it in the king’s sandals, Dios.’

*

Descendants! The gods had seen fit to give him one son who charged you
for the amount of breath expended in saying ‘Good morning’, and another
one who worshipped geometry and stayed up all night designing aqueducts.
You scrimped and saved to send them to the best schools, and then they
went and paid you back by getting educated.

*

‘Why are you here?’

The man hung his head. ‘I spoke blasphemy against the king.’

‘How did you do that?’

‘I dropped a rock on my foot. Now my tongue is to be torn out.’

The dark figure nodded sympathetically.

‘A priest heard you, did he?’ he said.

‘No. I told a priest. Such words should not go unpunished,’ said the man
virtuously.

[image]

The old king told me once that the gods gave people a sense of humour to
make up for giving them sex.

[image]

It’s a fact as immutable as the Third Law of Sod that there is no such
thing as a good Grand Vizier. A predilection to cackle and plot is
apparently part of the job spec.

*

‘Would your sire still be honouring us with the capping-out ceremony?
There’s drinks,’ Ptaclusp stuttered. ‘And a silver trowel that you can
take away with you. Everyone shouts hurrah and throws their hats in the
air.’

‘Certainly,’ said Dios. ‘It will be an honour.’

‘And for us too, your sire,’ said Ptaclusp loyally.

‘I _meant_ for you,’ said the high priest.

*

Pyramids are dams in the stream of time. Correctly shaped and
orientated, with the proper paracosmic measurements correctly plumbed
in, the temporal potential of the great mass of stone can be diverted to
accelerate or reverse time over a very small area, in the same way that
a hydraulic ram can be induced to pump water _against the flow_.

The original builders, who were of course ancients and therefore wise,
knew this very well and the whole point of a correctly built pyramid was
to achieve absolute null time in the central chamber so that a dying
king, tucked up there, would indeed live forever – or at least, never
actually die. The time that should have passed in the chamber was stored
in the bulk of the pyramid and allowed to flare off once every
twenty-four hours.

After a few aeons people forgot this and thought you could achieve the
same effect by a) ritual b) pickling people and c) storing their soft
inner bits in jars.

This seldom works.

[image]

He … liked my singing. Everyone else said it sounded like a flock of
vultures who’ve just found a dead donkey.

[image]

He knew about tortoises. They could be called a lot of things –
vegetarians, patient, thoughtful, even extremely diligent and persistent
sex-maniacs – but never, up until now, fast. Fast was a word
particularly associated with tortoises because they were not it.

*

The fastest _insect_ is the .303 bookworm. It evolved in magical
libraries, where it is necessary to eat extremely quickly to avoid being
affected by the thaumic radiations. An adult .303 bookworm can eat
through a shelf of books so fast that it ricochets off the wall.

*

Kings who hadn’t got a kingdom any more were not likely to be very
popular in neighbouring countries. There had been one or two like that
in Ankh-Morpork – deposed royalty, who had fled their suddenly dangerous
kingdoms … carrying nothing but the clothes they stood up in and a few
wagonloads of jewels. The city, of course, welcomed anyone – regardless
of race, colour, class or creed – who had spending money in incredible
amounts, but nevertheless the inhumation of surplus monarchs was a
regular source of work for the Assassins’ Guild. There was always
someone back home who wanted to be certain that deposed monarchs stayed
that way. It was usually a case of heir today, gone tomorrow.

[image]

The Ephebians made wine out of anything they could put in a bucket, and
ate anything that couldn’t climb out of one.

He pushed the food around on his plate. Some of it pushed back.

[image]

‘The diameter divides into the circumference, you know. It ought to be
three times. But does it? No. Three point one four one and lots of other
figures. There’s no end to the buggers … It tells me that the Creator
used the wrong kind of circles.’

*

Someone was just putting a torch to the lighthouse, which was one of the
More Than Seven Wonders of the World and had been built to a design by
Pthagonal using the Golden Rule and the Five Aesthetic Principles.
Unfortunately it had then been built in the wrong place because putting
it in the right place would have spoiled the look of the harbour, but it
was generally agreed by mariners to be a very beautiful lighthouse and
something to look at while they were waiting to be towed off the rocks.

*

Ptraci didn’t just derail the train of thought, she ripped up the rails,
burned the stations and melted the bridges for scrap.

*

It was another nice day in the high desert. It was always a nice day, if
by nice you meant an air temperature like an oven and sand you could
roast chestnuts on.

*

It is now known to science that there are many more dimensions than the
classical four. Scientists say that these don’t normally impinge on the
world because the extra dimensions are very small and curve in on
themselves, and that since reality is fractal most of it is tucked
inside itself. This means either that the universe is more full of
wonders than we can hope to understand or, more probably, that
scientists make things up as they go along.

*

_Teppic takes a novel approach to the age-old Riddle of the Sphinx_:

‘What goes on four legs in the morning, two legs at noon, and three legs
in the evening?’ said the Sphinx smugly.

Teppic considered this.

‘That’s a tough one,’ he said, eventually.

‘You’ll never get it.’

‘You’re right.’ Teppic stared at the claws.

‘The answer is: “A Man”,’ said the Sphinx.

‘What do you mean, a man?’

‘It’s easy,’ said the Sphinx. ‘A baby crawls in the morning, stands on
both legs at noon, and at evening an old man walks with a stick. Good,
isn’t it?’

Teppic bit his lip. ‘We’re talking about _one day_ here?’ he said
doubtfully.

There was a long, embarrassing silence.

‘It’s a wossname, a figure of speech,’ said the Sphinx irritably.
‘Nothing wrong with the riddle. Damn good riddle. Had that riddle for
fifty years, sphinx and cub.’ It thought about this. ‘Chick,’ it
corrected.

‘It’s a good riddle,’ Teppic said soothingly. ‘But is there internal
consistency within the metaphor? Let’s say for example that the average
life expectancy is seventy years, okay?’

‘Okay,’ said the Sphinx, in the uncertain tones of someone who has let
the salesman in and is now regretfully contemplating a future in which
they are undoubtedly going to buy life insurance.

‘_Right_. Good. So noon would be age 35, am I right? Now considering
that most children can toddle at a year or so, the four legs reference
is really unsuitable, wouldn’t you agree? I mean, most of the morning is
spent on two legs. According to your analogy … only about twenty minutes
immediately after 00.00 hours, half an hour tops, is spent on four legs.
Am I right? Be fair.’

‘Well—’ said the Sphinx.

‘By the same token you wouldn’t be using a stick by six p.m. because
you’d be only, er, 52,’ said Teppic, scribbling furiously. ‘In fact you
wouldn’t really be looking at any kind of walking aid until at least
half past nine, I think … I’m sorry, it’s basically okay, but it doesn’t
work … You just need to alter it a bit, that’s all.’

‘Okay,’ it said doubtfully. ‘I suppose I could ask: What is it that
walks on four legs—’

‘Metaphorically speaking,’ said Teppic.

‘Four legs, metaphorically speaking,’ the Sphinx agreed, ‘for about—’

‘Twenty minutes, I think we agreed.’

‘—okay, fine, twenty minutes in the morning, on two legs—’

‘But I think calling it “in the morning” is stretching it a bit,’ said
Teppic. ‘It’s just after midnight. I mean, technically it’s the morning,
but in a very real sense it’s still last night … Let’s just see where
we’ve got to, shall we? What, metaphorically speaking, walks on four
legs just after midnight, on two legs for most of the day—’

‘—barring accidents,’ said the Sphinx, pathetically eager to show that
it was making a contribution.

‘Fine, on two legs barring accidents, until at least suppertime, when it
walks with three legs—’

‘I’ve known people use two walking sticks,’ said the Sphinx helpfully.

‘Okay. How about: when it continues to walk on two legs or with any
prosthetic aids of its choice?’

The Sphinx gave this some consideration.

‘Ye–ess,’ it said gravely. ‘That seems to fit all eventualities.’

*

The city of the dead lay before Teppic. After Ankh-Morpork, which was
almost its direct opposite (in Ankh, even the bedding was alive) it was
probably the biggest city on the Disc.

[image]

1 It was quite a big frog, however, and got into the air ducts and kept
everyone awake for weeks.

[image]

 

THIS IS WHERE the dragons went. They lie … not dead, not asleep, but …
dormant. And although the space they occupy isn’t like normal space,
nevertheless they are packed in tightly. They could put you in mind of a
can of sardines, if you thought sardines were huge and scaly. And
presumably, somewhere, there’s a key …

 

The Library was the greatest assemblage of magical texts anywhere in the
multiverse. Thousands of volumes of occult lore weighted its shelves.

It was said that, since vast amounts of magic can seriously distort the
mundane world, the Library did not obey the normal rules of space and
time. It was said that it went on _forever_. It was said that you could
wander for days among the distant shelves, and that there were lost
tribes of research students somewhere in there.

Wise students in search of more distant volumes took care to leave chalk
marks on the shelves as they roamed deeper into the fusty darkness, and
told friends to come looking for them if they weren’t back by supper.

*

Not many people these days remarked upon the fact that the Librarian was
an ape. The change had been brought about by a magical accident, always
a possibility where so many powerful books are kept together, and he was
considered to have got off lightly. After all, he was still basically
the same shape. And he had been allowed to keep his job, which he was
rather good at, although ‘allowed’ is not really the right word. It was
the way he could roll his upper lip back to reveal more incredibly
yellow teeth than any other mouth the University Council had ever seen
before that somehow made sure the matter was never really raised.

*

The figure rapped a complex code on the dark woodwork. A tiny barred
hatch opened and one suspicious eye peered out.

‘“The significant owl hoots in the night,”’ said the visitor, trying to
wring the rainwater out of its robe.

‘“Yet many grey lords go sadly to the masterless men,”’ intoned a voice
on the other side of the grille.

‘“Hooray, hooray for the spinster’s sister’s daughter,”’ countered the
dripping figure.

‘“To the axeman, all supplicants are the same height.”’

‘“Yet verily, the rose is within the thorn.”’

‘“The good mother makes bean soup for the errant boy,”’ said the voice
behind the door.

There was a pause, broken only by the sound of the rain. Then the
visitor said, ‘What?’

‘“The good mother makes bean soup for the errant boy.”’

There was another, longer pause. Then the damp figure said, ‘Are you
sure the ill-built tower doesn’t tremble mightily at a butterfly’s
passage?’

‘Nope. Bean soup it is. I’m sorry.’

‘What about the cagèd whale?’ said the soaking visitor, trying to
squeeze into what little shelter the dread portal offered.

‘What about it?’

‘It should know nothing of the mighty deeps, if you must know.’

‘_Oh_, the cagèd _whale_. You want the _Elucidated_ Brethren of the Ebon
Night. Three doors down.’

*

The Supreme Grand Master rapped his gavel for attention. ‘I call the
Unique and Supreme Lodge of the Elucidated Brethren to order,’ he
intoned. ‘Is the Door of Knowledge sealed fast against heretics and
knowlessmen?’

‘Stuck solid,’ said Brother Doorkeeper. ‘It’s the damp. I’ll bring my
plane in next week, soon have it—’

‘All right, all _right_,’ said the Supreme Grand Master testily. ‘Just a
yes would have done.’

*

_Minor thief Zebbo Mooty has just been incinerated by a dragon_.

‘Do you know, a fortune-teller once told me I’d die in my bed,
surrounded by grieving great-grandchildren,’ said Mooty. ‘What do you
think of that, eh?’

I THINK SHE WAS WRONG.

*

The Patrician nodded.

‘I shall deal with the matter momentarily,’ he said. It was a good word.
It always made people hesitate. They were never quite sure whether he
meant he’d deal with it _now_, or just deal with it _briefly_. And no
one ever dared ask.

*

You came to [the Patrician] with a perfectly reasonable complaint. Next
thing you knew, you were shuffling out backwards, bowing and scraping,
relieved simply to be getting away. You had to hand it to the Patrician,
he admitted grudgingly. If you didn’t, he sent men to come and take it
away.

[image]

The Patrician gave him a sweet smile. ‘Thank you for coming to see me.
Don’t hesitate to leave.’

[image]

The Watch hadn’t liked it, but the plain fact was that the thieves were
far better at controlling crime than the Watch had ever been. After all,
the Watch had to work twice as hard to cut crime just a little, whereas
all the Thieves’ Guild had to do was to work less.

*

The only reason you couldn’t say that Nobby was close to the animal
kingdom was that the animal kingdom would get up and walk away.

*

Nobby was a small, bandy-legged man, with a certain resemblance to a
chimpanzee who never got invited to tea parties.

*

Sergeant Colon owed thirty years of happy marriage to the fact that Mrs
Colon worked all day and Sergeant Colon worked all night. They
communicated by means of notes. He got her tea ready before he left at
night, she left his breakfast nice and hot in the oven in the mornings.
They had three grown-up children, all born, Vimes had assumed, as a
result of extremely persuasive handwriting.

*

You could describe Sergeant Colon like this: he was the sort of man who,
if he took up a military career, would automatically gravitate to the
post of sergeant. You couldn’t imagine him ever being a corporal. Or,
for that matter, a captain. If he didn’t take up a military career, then
he looked cut out for something like, perhaps, a sausage butcher; some
job where a big red face and a tendency to sweat even in frosty weather
were practically part of the specification.

*

Every town in the multiverse has a part that is something like
Ankh-Morpork’s Shades. It’s a sort of black hole of
bred-in-the-brickwork lawlessness. Put it like this: even the
_criminals_ were afraid to walk the streets.

*

You need a special kind of mind to rule a city like Ankh-Morpork, and
Lord Vetinari had it. But then, he was a special kind of person.

You had to get up very early in the morning to get the better of the
Patrician; in fact, it was wiser not to go to bed at all.

But he was popular, in a way. Under his hand, for the first time in a
thousand years, Ankh-Morpork _operated_. It might not be fair or just or
particularly democratic, but it worked. It was said that he would
tolerate absolutely anything apart from anything that threatened the
city¹ …

[image]

Ankh-Morpork!

Brawling city of a hundred thousand souls! And, as the Patrician
privately observed, ten times that number of actual people.

[image]

From a high point of vantage, Ankh-Morpork looked as though someone had
tried to achieve in stone and wood an effect normally associated with
the pavements outside all-night takeaways.

*

The Librarian rolled his eyes. It was strange, he felt, that so-called
intelligent dogs, horses and dolphins never had any difficulty
indicating to humans the vital news of the moment, e.g., that the three
children were lost in the cave, or the train was about to take the line
leading to the bridge that had been washed away or similar, while he,
only a handful of chromosomes away from wearing a vest, found it
difficult to persuade the average human to come in out of the rain.

*

‘A book has been taken. A book has been taken? You summoned the Watch,’
Carrot drew himself up proudly, ‘because someone’s taken a _book_? You
think that’s worse than murder?’

The Librarian gave him the kind of look other people would reserve for
people who said things like ‘What’s so bad about genocide?’

*

Jimkin Bearhugger’s Old Selected Dragon’s Blood Whiskey. Cheap and
powerful, you could light fires with it, you could clean spoons. You
didn’t have to drink much of it to be drunk, which was just as well.

*

It was the usual Ankh-Morpork mob in times of crisis; half of them were
here to complain, a quarter of them were here to watch the other half,
and the remainder were here to rob, importune or sell hot-dogs to the
rest.

*

Vimes looked into the grinning, cadaverous face of Cut-Me-Own-Throat
Dibbler, purveyor of absolutely anything that could be sold hurriedly
from an open suitcase in a busy street and was guaranteed to have fallen
off the back of an oxcart.

*

‘Anti-dragon cream. Personal guarantee: if you’re incinerated you get
your money back, no quibble.’

‘What you’re saying,’ said Vimes slowly, ‘if I understand the wording
correctly, is that if I am baked alive by the dragon you’ll return the
money?’

‘Upon personal application,’ said Cut-Me-Own-Throat.

*

Vimes’d had a look at Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler’s dragon detectors,
which consisted solely of a piece of wood on a metal stick. When the
stick was burned through, you’d found your dragon. Like a lot of
Cut-Me-Own-Throat’s devices, it was completely efficient in its own
special way while at the same time being totally useless.

*

Ankh-Morpork did not have many hospitals. All the Guilds maintained
their own sanitariums, but by and large medical assistance was
nonexistent and people had to die inefficiently, without the aid of
doctors. It was generally thought that the existence of cures encouraged
slackness and was in any case probably against Nature’s way.

[image]

It was a plate stacked high with bacon, fried potatoes and eggs. Vimes
could hear his arteries panic just by looking at it.

[image]

Captain Vimes limped forward from the shadows.

A small and extremely frightened golden dragon was clamped firmly under
one arm. His other hand held it by the tail.

The rioters watched it, hypnotized.

‘Now I know what you’re thinking,’ Vimes went on, softly. ‘You’re
wondering, after all this excitement, has it got enough flame left? And,
y’know, I ain’t so sure myself …’

He leaned forward, sighting between the dragon’s ears, and his voice
buzzed like a knife blade:

‘What you’ve got to ask yourself is: Am I feeling lucky?’

*

Vimes gave his men his usual look of resigned dismay.

‘My squad,’ he mumbled.

‘Fine body of men,’ said Lady Ramkin. ‘The good old rank and file, eh?’

‘The rank, anyway,’ said Vimes.

*

It is difficult for an orang-utan to stand to attention. Its body can
master the general idea, but its skin can’t. The Librarian was doing his
best, however, standing in a sort of respectful heap at the end of the
line and maintaining the kind of complex salute you can only achieve
with a four-foot arm.

*

‘Do you think picking someone up by their ankles and bouncing their head
on the floor comes under the heading of Striking a Superior Officer?’
said Carrot.

*

‘Ah, pageantry,’ said the monarchist, pointing with his pipe. ‘Very
important. Lots of spectacles.’

‘What, free?’ said Throat.

‘We–ell, I think maybe you have to pay for the frames,’ said the
monarchist.

*

Books bend space and time. One reason the owners of those aforesaid
little rambling, poky second-hand bookshops always seem slightly
unearthly is that many of them really _are_, having strayed into this
world after taking a wrong turning in their own bookshops in worlds
where it is considered commendable business practice to wear carpet
slippers all the time and open your shop only when you feel like it. You
stray into L-space at your peril.

*

The truth is that even big collections of ordinary books distort space,
as can readily be proved by anyone who has been around a really
old-fashioned second-hand bookshop, one of those that look as though
they were designed by M. Escher on a bad day and have more staircases
than storeys and those rows of shelves which end in little doors that
are surely too small for a full-sized human to enter. The relevant
equation is: Knowledge = power = energy = matter = mass; a good bookshop
is just a genteel Black Hole that knows how to read.

*

People were stupid, sometimes. They thought the Library was a dangerous
place because of all the magical books, which was true enough, but what
made it really one of the most dangerous places there could ever be was
the simple fact that it was a library.

_Energy equals matter_ …

_Matter equals mass_.

And mass distorts space. It distorts it into polyfractal L-space.

So, while the Dewey system has its fine points, when you’re setting out
to look something up in the multidimensional folds of L-space what you
really need is a ball of string.

*

The three rules of the Librarians of Time and Space are: 1) Silence; 2)
Books must be returned no later than the last date shown; and 3) Do not
interfere with the nature of causality.

*

_The Summoning of Dragons_. Single copy, first edition, slightly foxed
and extremely dragoned.

*

Vimes strolled along for breakfast at Harga’s House of Ribs. Normally
the only decoration in there was on Sham Harga’s vest and the food was
good solid stuff for a cold morning, all calories and fat and protein
and maybe a vitamin crying softly because it was all alone.

*

Time could bifurcate, like a pair of trousers. You could end up in the
wrong leg, living a life that was actually happening in the _other_ leg,
talking to people who weren’t in your leg, walking into walls that
weren’t there any more. Life could be horrible in the wrong trouser of
Time.

*

‘Never build a dungeon you wouldn’t be happy to spend the night in
yourself,’ said the Patrician.

*

Vimes landed in damp straw and also in pitch darkness.

[image]

Never trust any ruler who puts his faith in tunnels and bunkers and
escape routes. The chances are that his heart isn’t in the job.

[image]

Eventually Great A’Tuin would reach the end of the universe. Eventually
the stars would go out. Eventually Nobby might have a bath, although
that would probably involve a radical rethinking of the nature of Time.

*

‘Oh, you think you’re so clever, so in-control, so _swave_, just because
I’ve got a sword and you haven’t!’

*

The Patrician steepled his hands and looked at Vimes over the top of
them.

‘Let me give you some advice, Captain,’ he said. ‘It may help you make
some sense of the world. I believe you find life such a problem because
you think there are the good people and the bad people. You’re wrong, of
course. There are, always and only, the bad people, _but some of them
are on opposite sides_.’

He waved his thin hand towards the city and walked over to the window.

‘A great rolling sea of evil. Shallower in some places, of course, but
deeper, oh, so much _deeper_ in others. But people like you put together
little rafts of rules and vaguely good intentions and say, this is the
opposite, this will triumph in the end. Amazing. Down there,’ he said,
‘are people who will follow any dragon, worship any god, ignore any
iniquity. All out of a kind of humdrum, everyday badness. Not the really
high, creative loathsomeness of the great sinners, but a sort of
mass-produced darkness of the soul. Sin, you might say, without a trace
of originality. They accept evil not because they say _yes_, but because
they don’t say _no_. I’m sorry if this offends you,’ he added, patting
the captain’s shoulder, ‘but you fellows really need us. We’re the only
ones who know how to make things work. You see, the only thing the good
people are good at is overthrowing the bad people. And you’re _good_ at
that, I’ll grant you. But the trouble is that it’s the _only_ thing
you’re good at. One day it’s the ringing of the bells and the casting
down of the evil tyrant, and the next it’s everyone sitting around
complaining that ever since the tyrant was overthrown no one’s been
taking out the trash. Because the bad people know how to _plan_. It’s
part of the specification, you might say. Every evil tyrant has a plan
to rule the world. The good people don’t seem to have the knack.’

[image]

1 And mime artists. It was a strange aversion, but there you are. Anyone
in baggy trousers and a white face who tried to ply their art anywhere
within Ankh’s crumbling walls would very quickly find themselves in a
scorpion pit, on one wall of which was painted the advice: Learn The
Words.

[image]

 

ERIC IS THE Discworld’s only demonology hacker. Pity he’s not very good
at it. All he wants is his three wishes granted. Nothing fancy – to be
immortal, rule the world, have the most beautiful woman in the world
fall madly in love with him, the usual stuff.

But instead of a tractable demon, he calls up Rincewind, probably the
most incompetent wizard in the universe, and the extremely _in_tractable
and hostile form of travel accessory known as the Luggage.

With them on his side, Eric’s in for a ride through space and time that
is bound to make him wish (quite fervently) again – this time that he’d
never been born.

 

[image]

Like all beekeepers, Death wore a veil.

It wasn’t that he had anything to sting, but sometimes a bee would get
inside his skull and buzz around and give him a headache.

[image]

No enemies had ever taken Ankh-Morpork. Well, _technically_ they had,
quite often; the city welcomed free-spending barbarian invaders, but
somehow the puzzled raiders always found, after a few days, that they
didn’t own their own horses any more, and within a couple of months they
were just another minority group with its own graffiti and food shops.

*

‘All right. I give in. We _will_ try the Rite of AshkEnte.’

The Rite of AshkEnte is the most serious ritual eight wizards can
undertake. It summons Death …

It took place in the mid-night in the University’s Great Hall, in a
welter of incense, candlesticks, runic inscriptions and magic circles,
none of which was strictly necessary but which made the wizards feel
better. Magic flared, the chants were chanted, the invocations were
truly invoked.

The wizards stared into the magic octogram, which remained empty. After
a while the circle of robed figures began to mutter amongst themselves.

‘We must have done something wrong.’

‘Oook.’

‘Maybe He is out.’

‘Or busy …’

‘Do you think we could give up and go back to bed?’

WHO ARE WE WAITING FOR, EXACTLY?

*

Rincewind wanted to say: Look, what you should do is stop all this
messing around with chemicals in dark rooms and have a shave, a haircut,
a bath, make that _two_ baths, buy yourself a new wardrobe and get out
of an evening and then – but he’d have to be honest, because even
washed, shaved and soaked in body splash Thursley wasn’t going to win
any prizes – and then you could have your face slapped by any woman of
your choice.

I mean, it wouldn’t be much, but it would be body contact.

*

If there is one thing a wizard would trade his grandmother for, it is
power. But … any wizard bright enough to survive for five minutes was
also bright enough to realize that if there was any power in demonology,
then it lay with the demons. Using it for your own purposes would be
like trying to beat mice to death with a rattlesnake.

*

Lord Astfgl’s patience, which in any case had the tensile strength of
putty, snapped at this point.

*

Rincewind tried some. It was a bowl of cereal, nuts, and dried fruit. He
didn’t have any quarrel with any of that. It was just that somewhere in
the preparation something had apparently done to these innocent
ingredients what it takes a million gravities to do to a neutron star.
If you died of eating this sort of thing they wouldn’t have to bury you,
they would just need to drop you somewhere where the ground was soft.

*

Pre-eminent amongst Rincewind’s talents was his skill in running away,
which over the years he had elevated to the status of a genuinely pure
science; it didn’t matter if you were fleeing from or to, so long as you
were fleeing. It was flight alone that counted. I run, therefore I am;
more correctly, I run, therefore with any luck I’ll still _be_.

But he was also skilled in languages and in practical geography. He
could shout ‘help!’ in fourteen languages and scream for mercy in a
further twelve.

*

The Tezuman Empire in the jungle valleys of central Klatch is known for
its organic market gardens, its exquisite craftsmanship in obsidian,
feathers and jade, and its mass human sacrifices in honour of
Quezovercoatl, the Feathered Boa, god of mass human sacrifices. As they
said, you always knew where you stood with Quezovercoatl. It was
generally with a lot of people on top of a great stepped pyramid with
someone in an elegant feathered headdress chipping an exquisite obsidian
knife for your very own personal use.

[image]

‘Why do you keep saying wossname?’ said Rincewind.

‘Limited wossname. Doodah. Thingy. You know. It’s got words in it,’ said
the parrot.

‘Dictionary?’ said Rincewind.

[image]

‘It’s their god Quezovercoatl. Half man, half chicken, half jaguar, half
serpent, half scorpion and half mad.’

*

_Rincewind and companions have been tied up and left_.

‘In fact,’ said da Quirm, ‘I think—’ He rolled from side to side
experimentally, tugging at the vines which were holding him down. ‘Yes,
I think when they did these ropes up – yes, definitely, they—’

‘What? What?’ said Rincewind.

‘Yes, definitely,’ said da Quirm. ‘I’m absolutely sure about it. They
did them up very tightly and professionally. Not an inch of give in them
anywhere.’

*

They were discussing strategy when Rincewind arrived. The consensus
seemed to be that if really large numbers of men were sent to storm the
mountain, then enough might survive the rocks to take the citadel. This
is essentially the basis of all military thinking.

*

‘It’s probably some kind of magic, or something,’ Rincewind said.
‘There’s no air. That’s why there’s no sound. All the little bits of air
sort of knock together, like marbles. That’s how you get sound, you
know.’

‘Is it? Gosh.’

‘So we’re surrounded by absolutely nothing,’ said Rincewind. ‘Total
nothing.’ He hesitated. ‘There’s a word for it,’ he said. ‘It’s what you
get when there’s nothing left and everything’s been used up.’

‘Yes. I think it’s called the bill,’ said Eric.

*

Hell, it has been suggested, is other people.

This has always come as a bit of a surprise to many working demons, who
had always thought hell was sticking sharp things into people and
pushing them into lakes of blood and so on.

This is because demons, like most people, have failed to distinguish
between the body and the soul.

The fact was that, as droves of demon kings had noticed, there was a
limit to what you could do to a soul with, e.g., red-hot tweezers,
because even fairly evil and corrupt souls were bright enough to realize
that since they didn’t have the concomitant body and nerve endings
attached to them there was no real reason, other than force of habit,
why they should suffer excruciating agony. So they didn’t. Demons went
on doing it anyway, because numb and mindless stupidity is part of what
being a demon is all about, but since no one was suffering they didn’t
enjoy it much either and the whole thing was pointless. Centuries and
centuries of pointlessness.

*

Astfgl had achieved in hell a particularly high brand of boredom which
is like the boredom you get which a) is costing you money, and b) is
taking place _while you should be having a nice time_.

*

The speaker was Duke Vassenego, one of the oldest demons. How old, no
one knew. But if he didn’t actually invent original sin, at least he
made one of the first copies.

*

Rincewind looked down at the broad steps they were climbing. They were
something of a novelty; each one was built out of large stone letters.
The one he was just stepping on to, for example, read: I Meant It For
The Best.

The next one was: I Thought You’d Like It.

Eric was standing on: For The Sake Of The Children.

‘Weird, isn’t it?’ he said. ‘Why do it like this?’

‘I think they’re meant to be good intentions,’ said Rincewind. This was
a road to hell, and demons were, after all, traditionalists.

[image]

Old Tom was the single cracked bronze bell in the University bell tower.

The clapper dropped out shortly after it was cast, but the bell still
tolled out some tremendously sonorous silences every hour.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

THE ALCHEMISTS OF the Discworld have discovered the magic of the silver
screen. But what is the dark secret of Holy Wood hill?

It’s up to Victor Tugelbend (‘Can’t sing. Can’t dance. Can handle a
sword a little’) and Theda Withel (‘I come from a little town you’ve
probably never heard of’) to find out …

 

This is space. It’s sometimes called the final frontier.

(Except that of course you can’t have a _final_ frontier, because
there’d be nothing for it to be a frontier _to_, but as frontiers go,
it’s pretty penultimate …)

*

The Discworld is as unreal as it is possible to be while still being
just real enough to exist.

*

There’s a saying that there’s a saying that all roads lead to
Ankh-Morpork.

And it’s wrong. All roads lead _away_ from Ankh-Morpork, but sometimes
people just walk along them the wrong way.

[image]

Meat pies! Hot sausages! Inna bun! So fresh the pig hasn’t noticed
they’re gone!

[image]

Unseen University had had many different kinds of Archchancellor over
the years. Big ones, small ones, cunning ones, slightly insane ones,
extremely insane ones – they’d come, they’d served, in some cases not
long enough for anyone to be able to complete the official painting to
be hung in the Great Hall, and they’d died. The senior wizard in a world
of magic had the same prospects of long-term employment as a pogo stick
tester in a minefield.

*

The name might change occasionally, but what _did_ matter was that there
always was _an_ Archchancellor …

At the time, it had seemed a really good idea to elect an Archchancellor
who hadn’t set foot in the University in forty years. A search of the
records turned up Ridcully the Brown. He looked ideal …

A messenger had been sent. Ridcully the Brown had sighed, cursed a bit,
found his staff in the kitchen garden where it had been supporting a
scarecrow, and had set out.

Within twelve hours of arriving, Ridcully had installed a pack of
hunting dragons in the butlers’ pantry, fired his dreadful crossbow at
the ravens on the ancient Tower of Art, drunk a dozen bottles of red
wine, and rolled off to bed at two in the morning singing a song with
words in it that some of the older and more forgetful wizards had to
look up.

And then he got up at five o’clock to go duck hunting down in the
marshes on the estuary.

And came back complaining that there wasn’t a good trout fishin’ river
for miles. (You couldn’t fish in the river Ankh; you had to jump up and
down on the hooks even to make them sink.)

And he ordered beer with his breakfast.

And told _jokes_.

On the other hand, at least he didn’t interfere with the actual running
of the University. Ridcully the Brown wasn’t the least interested in
running anything except maybe a string of hounds. If you couldn’t shoot
arrows at it, hunt it or hook it, he couldn’t see much point in it.

*

A full moon glided above the smoke and fumes of Ankh-Morpork, thankful
that several thousand miles of sky lay between it and them.

[image]

The Alchemists’ Guildhall was new. It was always new.

It had been explosively demolished and rebuilt four times in the last
two years, on the last occasion without a lecture and demonstration room
in the hope that this might be a helpful move.

[image]

By and large, the only skill the alchemists of Ankh-Morpork had
discovered so far was the ability to turn gold into less gold.

*

The Patrician’s stare had him pinned. It was a good stare, and one of
the things it was good at was making people go on talking when they
thought they had finished.

*

‘Well, what you do is, you take some corn, and you put it in, say, a
Number 3 crucible, with some cooking oil, you see, and then you put a
plate or something on top of it, and when you heat it up it goes bang, I
mean, not _seriously_ bang, and when it’s stopped banging you take the
plate off and it’s metamorphosed into these, er, things … If you put
butter and salt on it, it tastes like salty butter … I just call it
banged grains.’

*

When you became a wizard you were expected to stop shaving and grow a
beard like a gorse bush. Very senior wizards looked capable of straining
nourishment out of the air via their moustaches, like whales.

*

Victor eyed the glistening tubes in the tray around Dibbler’s neck. They
smelled appetizing. They always did. And then you bit into them, and
learned once again that Cut-Me-Own-Throat Dibbler could find a use for
bits of an animal that the animal didn’t know it had got. Dibbler had
worked out that with enough fried onions and mustard people would eat
_anything_.

*

Most people think in curves and zigzags. For example, they start from a
thought like: I wonder how I can become very rich, and then proceed
along an uncertain course which includes thoughts like: I wonder what’s
for supper, and: I wonder who I know who can lend me five dollars?

Whereas Throat was one of those people who could identify the thought at
the other end of the process, in this case _I am now very rich_, draw a
line between the two, and then think his way along it, slowly and
patiently, until he got to the other end.

Not that it worked. There was always, he found, some small but vital
flaw in the process. It generally involved a strange reluctance on the
part of people to buy what he had to sell.

*

‘Mr Dibbler can even sell sausages to people that have bought them off
him _before_ … And a man who could sell Mr Dibbler’s sausages twice
could sell anything.’

*

There was a dog sitting by his feet.

It was small, bow-legged and wiry, and basically grey but with patches
of brown, white and black in outlying areas …

It looked up slowly, and said ‘Woof?’

Victor poked an exploratory finger in his ear. It must have been a trick
of an echo, or something. It wasn’t that the dog had gone ‘woof!’,
although that was practically unique in itself; most dogs in the
universe _never_ went ‘woof!’, they had complicated barks like
‘whuuugh!’ and ‘hwhoouf!’. No, it was that it hadn’t in fact _barked_ at
all. It had _said_ ‘woof’.

‘Could have bin worse, mister. I could have said “miaow”.’

[image]

He was aware of a strange smell. It was hard to place, but could perhaps
have been a very old and slightly damp nursery rug.

‘Woof bloody woof,’ said Gaspode the Wonder Dog.

[image]

Dibbler gave Gaspode a long, slow stare, which was like challenging a
centipede to an arse-kicking contest. Gaspode could outstare a mirror.

*

‘I never had a chance, you know. I mean, look at the start I had in
life. Frone inna river inna sack. An actual sack. Dear little puppy dog
opens his eyes, looks out in wonder at the world, style of fing, he’s in
this sack.’ The tears dripped off his nose. ‘For two weeks I thought the
brick was my mother.’ …

‘Just my luck they threw me in the Ankh,’ Gaspode went on. ‘Any other
river, I’d have drowned and gone to doggy heaven.’

*

Victor was aware of a cold sensation against his leg. It was as though a
half-melted ice cube was soaking through his trousers. He tried to
ignore it, but it had a definite unignorable quality.

He looked down.

‘ ’scuse me,’ said Gaspode.

*

Mrs Marietta Cosmopilite of 3 Quirm Street, Ankh-Morpork, believed the
world was round, that a sprig of garlic in her underwear drawer kept
away vampires, that it did you good to get out and have a laugh
occasionally, that there was niceness in everyone if you only knew where
to look, and that three horrible little dwarfs peered in at her
undressing every night.¹

*

‘Well, of course,’ said Silverfish, ‘a lot of very talented people want
to be in moving pictures. Can you sing?’

‘A bit. In the bath. But not very well,’ Victor conceded.

‘Can you dance?’

‘No.’

‘Swords? Do you know how to handle a sword?’

‘A little,’ said Victor.

‘I see,’ said Silverfish gloomily. ‘Can’t sing. Can’t dance. Can handle
a sword a little.’

[image]

You would have to go a long way to find air that was realer than
Ankh-Morpork air.

You could tell just by breathing it that other people had been doing the
same thing for thousands of years.

[image]

‘I don’t understand her,’ he said. ‘Yesterday she was quite normal,
today it’s all gone to her head.’

‘Bitches!’ said Gaspode, sympathetically.

‘Oh, I wouldn’t go that far,’ said Victor. ‘She’s just aloof.’

‘Loofs!’ said Gaspode.

*

The _Necrotelicomnicon_ was written by a Klatchian necromancer known to
the world as Achmed the Mad, although he preferred to be called Achmed
the I Just Get These Headaches.

It contained forbidden knowledge.

Well, not actually _forbidden_. No one had ever gone so far as
forbidding it. Apart from anything else, in order to forbid it you’d
have to know what it was, which was forbidden. But it definitely
contained the sort of information which, once you knew it, you wished
you didn’t.

[image]

‘Come _on_,’ said Gaspode. ‘It’s not right, you being alone in a lady’s
boodwah.’

‘I’m not alone,’ Victor said. ‘She’s with me.’

‘That’s the point,’ said Gaspode.

[image]

‘Did I hear things, or can that little dog speak?’ said Dibbler.

‘He says he can’t,’ said Victor.

Dibbler hesitated. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘I suppose he should know.’

*

The universe contains any amount of horrible ways to be woken up, such
as the noise of the mob breaking down the front door, the scream of fire
engines, or the realization that today is the Monday which on Friday
night was a comfortably long way off. A dog’s wet nose is not strictly
speaking the worst of the bunch, but it has its own peculiar
dreadfulness which connoisseurs of the ghastly and dog owners everywhere
have come to know and dread. It’s like having a small piece of
defrosting liver pressed lovingly against you.

*

_As the magic of the movies infects everyone, there are spillages from
our own roundworld_.

‘I don’t know what it’s called, but we’re doing one about going to see a
wizard. Something about following a yellow sick toad,’ a man in one half
of a lion suit explained to a companion in the queue.

*

A Man and A Woman Aflame With Passione in A Citie Riven by Sivil War!

Brother against brother! Women in crinoline dresses slapping people’s
faces! A mighty dynasty brought low!

A great city aflame!

All it needed was a title. Something with a ring to it. Something that
people would remember. Something – Dibbler scratched his chin with the
pen – that said that the affairs of ordinary people were so much chaff
in the great storms of history. Storms, that was it. Good imagery, a
storm. You got thunder. Lightning. Rain. Wind.

Wind. That was it!

He crawled up to the top of the sheet and, with great care, wrote:

BLOWN AWAY.

*

Soll was standing over the artist who lettered the cards …

The lettering artist tugged at his sleeve.

‘I was just wondering, Mr Soll, what you wanted me to put in the big
scene now—’

‘Don’t worry me now, man!’

‘But if you could just give me an idea—’

Soll firmly unhooked the man’s hand from his sleeve. ‘Frankly,’ he said,
‘I don’t give a damn,’ and he strode off towards the set.

The artist was left alone. He picked up his paintbrush. His lips moved
silently, shaping themselves around the words.

Then he said, ‘Hmm. Nice one.’

*

According to the history books, the decisive battle that ended the
Ankh-Morpork Civil War was fought between two handfuls of bone-weary men
in a swamp early one misty morning and, although one side claimed
victory, ended with a practical score of Humans 0, ravens 1,000, which
is the case with most battles.

*

The real city had been burned down many times in its long history – out
of revenge, or carelessness, or spite, or even just for the insurance.
Most of the big stone buildings that actually made it a _city_, as
opposed simply to a load of hovels all in one place, survived them
intact and many people considered that a good fire every hundred years
or so was essential to the health of the city since it helped to keep
down the rats, roaches, fleas and, of course, people not rich enough to
live in stone houses.

[image]

Inside every old person is a young person wondering what happened.

[image]

There’s a bar like it in every town. It’s dimly lit and the drinkers,
although they talk, don’t address their words to one another and they
don’t listen, either. They just talk the hurt inside. It’s a bar for the
derelict and the unlucky and all of those people who have been
temporarily flagged off the racetrack of life and into the pits.

*

Yetis are a high-altitude species of troll, and quite unaware that
eating people is out of fashion. Their view is: if it moves, eat it. If
it doesn’t, then wait for it to move. And then eat it.

*

An inviolable rule about buildings for the showing of moving pictures,
applicable throughout the multiverse, is that the ghastliness of the
architecture around the back is inversely proportional to the
gloriousness of the architecture in the front. At the front: pillars,
arches, gold leaf, lights. At the back: weird ducts, mysterious
prolapses of pipework, blank walls, fetid alleys.

And the window to the lavatories.

*

‘_Fascinating_,’ said the Patrician. He had not got where he was today
by bothering how things worked. It was how people worked that intrigued
him.

*

‘ ’Twas beauty killed the beast,’ said the Dean, who liked to say things
like that.

‘No it wasn’t,’ said the Chair. ‘It was it splatting into the ground
like that.’

[image]

All dwarfs have beards and wear many layers of clothing.

Their courtships are largely concerned with finding out, in delicate and
circumspect ways, what sex the other dwarf is.

[image]

The flooded stairs lay in front of them.

‘Can you swim?’ said Victor.

‘Not very well,’ said Ginger.

‘Me neither,’ he said …

‘Still,’ he said, taking her hand. ‘We could look on this as a great
opportunity to improve really _quickly_.’

[image]

1 She was right about that, but only by coincidence.

[image]

 

DEATH IS MISSING – presumed … er … gone. Which leads to the kind of
chaos you always get when an important public service is withdrawn.

Meanwhile, on a little farm, far, far away, a tall dark stranger is
turning out to be really good with a scythe. There’s a harvest to be
gathered in …

 

[image]

Not a muscle moved on Death’s face, because he hadn’t got any.

[image]

The shortest-lived creatures on the Disc were mayflies, which barely
make it through twenty-four hours. Two of the oldest zigzagged aimlessly
over the waters of a trout stream, discussing history with some younger
members of the evening hatching.

‘You don’t get the kind of sun now that you used to get,’ said one of
them.

‘You’re right there. We had proper sun in the good old hours. It were
all yellow. None of this red stuff.’

‘It were higher, too.’

‘It was. You’re right.’

‘And nymphs and larvae showed you a bit of respect.’

‘They did. They did,’ said the other mayfly vehemently.

‘I reckon, if mayflies these hours behaved a bit better, we’d still be
having proper sun.’

The younger mayflies listened politely.

‘I remember,’ said one of the oldest mayflies, ‘when all this was
fields, as far as you could see.’

The younger mayflies looked around.

‘It’s still fields,’ one of them ventured, after a polite interval.

‘I remember when it was _better_ fields,’ said the old mayfly sharply.

‘Yeah,’ said his colleague. ‘And there was a cow.’

‘That’s right! You’re right! I remember that cow! Stood right over there
for, oh, forty, fifty minutes. It was brown, as I recall.’

‘You don’t get cows like that these hours.’ …

‘What were we doing before we were talking about the sun?’

‘Zigzagging aimlessly over the water,’ said one of the young flies. This
was a fair bet in any case.

‘No, before that.’

‘Er … you were telling us about the Great Trout.’

‘Ah. Yes. Right. The Trout. Well, you see, if you’ve been a good mayfly,
zigzagging up and down properly—’

‘—taking heed of your elders and betters—’

‘—then eventually the Great Trout—’

_Clop_

_Clop_

‘Yes?’ said one of the younger mayflies.

There was no reply.

‘The Great Trout what?’ said another mayfly, nervously.

They looked down at a series of expanding concentric rings on the water.

‘The holy sign!’ said a mayfly. ‘I remember being told about that! A
Great Circle in the water! Thus shall be the sign of the Great Trout!’

*

Whereas the oldest things on the Discworld were the famous Counting
Pines.

The six Counting Pines in this clump were listening to the oldest, whose
gnarled trunk declared it to be thirty-one thousand, seven hundred and
thirty-four years old. The conversation took seventeen years, but has
been speeded up.

‘I remember when all this wasn’t fields.’

‘What was it, then?’ said the nearest pine.

‘Ice. If you can call it ice. We had _proper_ glaciers in those days.
Not like the ice you get now, here one season and gone the next. It hung
around for ages.’

‘Wow. That was a sharp one.’

‘What was?’

‘That winter just then.’

‘Call that a winter? When I was a sapling we had winters—’

Then the tree vanished.

After a shocked pause for a couple of years, one of the clump said: ‘He
just went! Just like that! One day he was here, next he was gone!’

Since the trees were unable even to sense any event that took place in
less than a day, they never heard the sound of axes.

*

Death’s pale horse’s name was Binky. He was a real horse. Death had
tried fiery steeds and skeletal horses in the past, and found them
impractical, especially the fiery ones, which tended to set light to
their own bedding and stand in the middle of it looking embarrassed.

[image]

Killing off a wizard of a higher grade was a recognized way of getting
advancement in the orders.

[image]

Wizards don’t believe in gods in the same way that most people don’t
find it necessary to believe in, say, tables. They know they’re there,
they know they’re there for a purpose, they’d probably agree that they
have a place in a well-organized universe, but they wouldn’t see the
point of _believing_, of going around saying, ‘O great table, without
whom we are as naught’. Anyway, either the gods are there whether you
believe or not, or they exist only as a function of the belief, so
either way you might as well ignore the whole business and, as it were,
eat off your knees.

*

The Bursar … didn’t eat much, but lived on his nerves. He was certain he
was anorectic, because every time he looked in a mirror he saw a fat
man. It was the Archchancellor, standing behind him and shouting at him.

*

Mustrum Ridcully was, depending on your point of view, either the worst
or the best Archchancellor that Unseen University had had for a hundred
years.

There was too much of him, for one thing. It wasn’t that he was
particularly big, it was just that he had the kind of huge personality
that fits any available space. He’d get roaring drunk at supper and that
was fine and acceptable wizardly behaviour. But then he’d go back to his
room and play darts all night and leave at five in the morning to go
duck hunting. He shouted at people. He tried to _jolly them along_. And
he hardly ever wore proper robes. He’d persuaded Mrs Whitlow, the
University’s dreaded housekeeper, to make him a sort of baggy trouser
suit in garish blue and red; twice a day the wizards stood in bemusement
and watched him jog purposefully around the University buildings, his
pointy wizarding hat tied firmly on his head with string. He’d shout
cheerfully up at them, because fundamental to the make-up of people like
Mustrum Ridcully is an iron belief that everyone else would like it,
too, if only they tried it.

*

Intellectually, Ridcully maintained his position for two reasons. One
was that he never, ever, changed his mind about anything. The other was
that it took him several minutes to understand any new idea put to him,
and this is a very valuable trait in a leader, because anything anyone
is still trying to explain to you after two minutes is probably
important and anything they give up after a mere minute or so is almost
certainly something they shouldn’t have been bothering you with in the
first place.

*

Although not common on the Discworld there are, indeed, such things as
anti-crimes, in accordance with the fundamental law that everything in
the multiverse has an opposite. They are, obviously, rare. Merely giving
someone something is not the opposite of robbery; to be an anti-crime,
it has to be done in such a way as to cause _outrage and/or humiliation
to the victim_. So there is breaking-and-decorating,
proffering-with-embarrassment (as in most retirement presentations) and
whitemailing (as in threatening to reveal to his enemies a mobster’s
secret donations, for example, to charity). Anti-crimes have never
really caught on.

*

For more than a century Windle Poons had lived inside the walls of
Unseen University. In terms of accumulated years, he may have lived a
long time. In terms of experience, he was about thirteen.

*

The Shades was the oldest part of the city. If you could do a sort of
relief map of sinfulness, wickedness and all-round immorality, rather
like those representations of the gravitational field around a Black
Hole, then even in Ankh-Morpork The Shades would be represented by a
shaft.

*

‘If anyone’s going to bury a wizard at a crossroads with a stake
hammered through him, then wizards ought to do it. After all, we’re his
friends.’

*

Mustrum Ridcully, Archchancellor of Unseen University, was a shameless
autocondimentor.¹

*

‘All right, you fellows,’ Ridcully said.

‘No magic at Table, you know the rules. Who’s playing silly buggers?’

The other senior wizards stared at him.

‘I, I, I don’t think we can play it any more,’ said the Bursar, ‘I, I, I
think we lost some of the pieces …’

*

The relationship between the University and the Patrician, absolute
ruler and nearly benevolent dictator of Ankh-Morpork, was a complex and
subtle one.

The wizards held that, as servants of a higher truth, they were not
subject to the mundane laws of the city.

The Patrician said that, indeed, this was the case, but they would
bloody well pay their taxes like everyone else.

The wizards said that, as followers of the light of wisdom, they owed
allegiance to no mortal man.

The Patrician said that this may well be true but they also owed a city
tax of two hundred dollars per head per annum, payable quarterly.

The wizards said that the University stood on magical ground and was
therefore exempt from taxation and anyway you couldn’t put a tax on
knowledge.

The Patrician said you could. It was two hundred dollars per capita; if
per capita was a problem, decapita could be arranged.

The wizards said that the University had never paid taxes to the civil
authority.

The Patrician said he was not proposing to remain civil for long.

The wizards said, what about easy terms?

The Patrician said he was _talking_ about easy terms. They wouldn’t want
to know about the hard terms.

The wizards said that there was a ruler back in, oh, it would be the
Century of the Dragonfly, who had tried to tell the University what to
do. The Patrician could come and have a look at him if he liked.

The Patrician said that he would. He truly would.

In the end it was agreed that while the wizards of course paid no taxes,
they would nevertheless make an entirely voluntary donation of, oh,
let’s say two hundred dollars per head, without prejudice, _mutatis
mutandis_, no strings attached, to be used strictly for non-militaristic
and environmentally acceptable purposes.

[image]

Thin, pale, and clad all in dusty black,

the Patrician always put Ridcully in mind of a predatory flamingo, if
you could find a flamingo that was black and had the patience of a rock.

[image]

People get exactly the wrong idea about belief. They think it works back
to front. They think the sequence is, first object, then belief. In
fact, it works the other way.

Belief sloshes around in the firmament like lumps of clay spiralling
into a potter’s wheel. That’s how gods get created, for example. They
clearly must be created by their own believers, because a brief résumé
of the lives of most gods suggests that their origins certainly couldn’t
be divine. They tend to do exactly the things people would do if only
they could, especially when it comes to nymphs, golden showers, and the
smiting of your enemies.

*

‘And you’re a vampire too, Countess Notfaroutoe?’ Windle Poons enquired
politely.

The Countess smiled. ‘My vord, yes,’ she said.

‘By marriage,’ said Arthur.

‘Can you do that? I thought you had to be bitten,’ said Windle.

‘I don’t see why I should have to go around biting my wife after thirty
years of marriage, and that’s flat,’ said the Count.

*

‘This vampiring’s not all it’s cracked up to be, you know. Can’t go out
in daylight, can’t eat garlic, can’t have a decent shave—’

‘Why can’t you have a—’ Windle began.

‘Can’t use a _mirror_,’ said Arthur.

*

‘By the way, Sister Drull is a ghoul. If she offers you any of her meat
patties, don’t accept.’

‘Oh, dear,’ Windle said. ‘You mean she makes them out of human flesh?’

‘What? Oh. No. She just can’t cook very well.’

*

SOMETIMES PEOPLE CHALLENGE ME TO A GAME. FOR THEIR LIVES, YOU KNOW,
[said Death.]

‘Do they ever win?’

NO. LAST YEAR SOMEONE GOT THREE STREETS AND ALL THE UTILITIES.

‘What? What sort of game is that?’

I DON’T RECALL. ‘EXCLUSIVE POSSESSION’, I THINK. I WAS THE BOOT.

*

_A compost heap comes to life and threatens a group of wizards:_

The heap swivelled and lunged towards the Bursar.

The wizards backed away.

‘It can’t be intelligent, can it?’ said the Bursar.

‘All it’s doing is moving around slowly and eating things,’ said the
Dean.

‘Put a pointy hat on it and it’d be a faculty member,’ said the
Archchancellor.

*

Miss Flitworth had said that before they could start a graveyard in
these parts they’d had to hit someone over the head with the shovel.

*

People have believed for hundreds of years that newts in a well mean
that the water’s fresh and drinkable, and _in all that time_ never asked
themselves whether the newts got out to go to the lavatory.

*

The ability of skinny old ladies to carry huge loads is phenomenal.
Studies have shown that an ant can carry one hundred times its own
weight, but there is no known limit to the lifting power of the average
tiny eighty-year-old Spanish peasant grandmother.

[image]

‘Why are you called One Man Bucket?’

_in my tribe we’re traditionally named after the first thing the mother
sees when she looks out of the teepee after the birth. it’s short for
One-Man-Pouring-a-Bucket-of-Water-over-Two-Dogs_.

‘That’s pretty unfortunate,’ said Windle.

_it’s not too bad_, said One-Man-Bucket. _it was my twin brother you had
to feel sorry for. she looked out ten seconds before me to give him_ his
_name_.

‘Don’t tell me, let me guess,’ Windle said. ‘Two-Dogs-Fighting?’

_Two-Dogs-Fighting? Two-Dogs_-Fighting? said One-Man-Bucket. _wow, he’d
have given his right arm to be called Two-Dogs_-Fighting.

[image]

In the Ramtop village where they dance the real Morris dance, for
example, they believe that no one is finally dead until the ripples they
cause in the world die away – until the clock he wound up winds down,
until the wine she made has finished its ferment, until the crop they
planted is harvested. The span of someone’s life, they say, is only the
core of their actual existence.

[image]

‘Who’s playing the maracas?’

Death grinned.

MARACAS? I DON’T NEED … MARACAS.

[image]

In the village in the Ramtops where they understand what the Morris
dance is all about, they dance it just once, at dawn, on the first day
of spring. They don’t dance it after that, all through the summer. After
all, what would be the point? What use would it be?

But on a certain day when the nights are drawing in, the dancers leave
work early and take, from attics and cupboards, the _other_ costume, the
black one, and the _other_ bells. And they go by separate ways to a
valley among the leafless trees. They don’t speak. There is no music.
It’s very hard to imagine what kind there could be.

The bells don’t ring. They’re made of octiron, a magic metal. But
they’re not, precisely, silent bells. Silence is merely the absence of
noise. They make the opposite of noise, a sort of heavily textured
silence.

And in the cold afternoon, as the light drains from the sky, among the
frosty leaves and in the damp air, they dance the _other_ Morris.
Because of the balance of things.

You’ve got to dance both, they say. Otherwise you can’t dance either.

[image]

1 Someone who will put certainly salt and probably pepper on any meal
you put in front of them _whatever it is and regardless of how much it’s
got on it already and regardless of how it tastes_. Behavioural
psychiatrists working for fast-food outlets around the universe have
saved billions of whatever the local currency is by noting the
autocondimenting phenomenon and advising their employers to leave
seasoning out in the first place. This is really true.

[image]

 

IT SEEMED AN easy job … After all, how difficult could it be to make
sure that a servant girl doesn’t marry a prince?

But for the witches Granny Weatherwax, Nanny Ogg and Magrat Garlick,
travelling to the distant city of Genua, things are never that simple …

Servant girls _have_ to marry the Prince. That’s what life is all about.
You can’t fight a Happy Ending.

At least, up until now …

 

Just superstition. But a superstition doesn’t have to be wrong.

*

Bad spelling can be lethal. For example, the greedy Seriph of Al-Ybi was
once cursed by a badly educated deity and for some days everything he
touched turned to Glod, which happened to be the name of a small dwarf
from a mountain community hundreds of miles away who found himself
magically dragged to the kingdom and relentlessly duplicated. Some two
thousand Glods later the spell wore off. These days, the people of
Al-Ybi are renowned for being unusually short and bad-tempered.

*

She had buried three husbands, and at least two of them had been already
dead.

[image]

Never trust a dog with orange eyebrows.

[image]

Artists and writers have always had a rather exaggerated idea about what
goes on at a witches’ sabbat. This comes from spending too much time in
small rooms with the curtains drawn, instead of getting out in the
healthy fresh air.

For example, there’s the dancing around naked. In the average temperate
climate there are very few nights when anyone would dance around at
midnight with no clothes on, quite apart from the question of stones,
thistles, and sudden hedgehogs.

Then there’s all that business with goat-headed gods. Most witches don’t
believe in gods. They know that the gods exist, of course. They even
deal with them occasionally. But they don’t believe in them. They know
them too well. It would be like believing in the postman.

And there’s the food and drink – the bits of reptile and so on. In fact,
witches don’t go for that sort of thing. The worst you can say about the
eating habits of the older type of witch is that they tend to like
ginger biscuits dipped in tea with so much sugar in it that the spoon
won’t move _and_ will drink it out of the saucer if they think it’s too
hot. And do so with appreciative noises more generally associated with
the cheaper type of plumbing system. Legs of toad and so on might be
better than this.

Then there’s the mystic ointments. By sheer luck, the artists and
writers are on firmer ground here. Most witches are elderly, which is
when ointments start to have an attraction, and at least two of those
present tonight were wearing Granny Weatherwax’s famous
goose-grease-and-sage chest liniment. This didn’t make you fly and see
visions, but it _did_ prevent colds, if only because the distressing
smell that developed around about the second week kept everyone else so
far away you couldn’t catch anything from them.

And finally there’s sabbats themselves. Your average witch is not, by
nature, a social animal as far as other witches are concerned. There’s a
conflict of dominant personalities. There’s a group of ringleaders
without a ring. The natural size of a coven is one.

[image]

‘I can’t be having with foreign parts,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘You’ve been to Ankh-Morpork,’ said Nanny mildly. ‘That’s foreign.’

‘No it’s not. It’s just a long way off.’

[image]

Magrat would be the first to admit that she had an open mind. It was as
open as a field, as open as the sky. No mind could be more open without
special surgical implements. And she was always waiting for something to
fill it up.

*

‘I used to come over here quite often to look at Desiderata’s books,’
Magrat confessed. ‘And … and she liked to cook foreign food and no one
else round here would eat it, so I’d come up to keep her company.’

‘Ah-_ha_! Curryin’ favour!’ snapped Granny.

*

_Magrat has adopted trousers as practical wear for travelling by
broomstick_.

‘I don’t ’old with it,’ said Granny. ‘Everyone can see her legs.’

‘No they can’t,’ said Nanny. ‘The reason being, the material is in the
way.’

‘Yes, but they can see where her legs _are_,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘That’s silly. That’s like saying everyone’s naked under their clothes,’
said Magrat.

‘Magrat Garlick, may you be forgiven,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Well, it’s true!’

‘_I’m_ not,’ said Granny flatly, ‘I got three vests on.’

*

To the rest of the world he was an enormous tomcat, a parcel of
incredibly indestructible life forces in a skin that looked less like a
fur than a piece of bread that had been left in a damp place for a
fortnight. Ferocious dogs would whine and hide under the stairs when
Greebo sauntered down the street. Foxes kept away from the village.
Wolves made a detour.

‘He’s an old softie really,’ said Nanny.

*

Above the noise of the river they could all hear, now, the steady
slosh-slosh of another craft heading towards them.

‘Someone’s following us!’ hissed Magrat.

Two pale glows appeared at the edge of the lamplight. Eventually they
turned out to be the eyes of a small grey creature, vaguely froglike,
paddling towards them on a log.

It reached the boat. Long clammy fingers grabbed the side, and a
lugubrious face rose level with Nanny Ogg’s.

‘ ’ullo,’ it said. ‘It’sss my birthday.’

All three of them stared at it for a while. Then Granny Weatherwax
picked up an oar and hit it firmly over the head. There was a splash,
and a distant cursing.

‘Horrible little bugger,’ said Granny, as they rowed on. ‘Looked like a
troublemaker to me.’

*

‘Blessings be on this house,’ Granny said, perfunctorily. It was always
a good opening remark for a witch. It concentrated people’s minds on
what _other_ things might be on this house.

*

Sometimes Magrat really wondered about the others’ commitment to
witchcraft. Half the time they didn’t seem to _bother_.

Take medicine, for example … Granny just gave people a bottle of
coloured water and told them they felt a lot better.

And what was so annoying was that they often did.

Where was the witchcraft in that?

*

Granny Weatherwax waking up was quite an impressive sight, and one not
seen by many people.

Most people, on waking up, accelerate through a quick panicky
pre-consciousness check-up: who am I, where am I, who is he/she, good
god, why am I cuddling a policeman’s helmet, _what happened last night_?

And this is because people are riddled by Doubt.

Granny Weatherwax went straight from fast asleep to instant operation on
all six cylinders. She never needed to find herself because she always
knew who was doing the looking.

[image]

Vampires have risen from the dead,

the grave and the crypt, but have never managed it from the cat.

[image]

Nanny Ogg sent a number of cards home to her family, not a single one of
which got back before she did. This is traditional, and happens
everywhere in the universe.

*

In a quiet little inn in a tiny country Granny Weatherwax sat and
regarded the food with deep suspicion.

‘Good simple home cooking,’ said Granny. ‘That’s all I require. I just
want simple food. Not all grease and stuff. It comes to something when
you complain about something in your lettuce and it turns out to be what
you ordered.’

[image]

Knowing how stories work is almost all the battle.

For example, when an obvious innocent sits down with three experienced
card sharpers and says ‘How do you play this game, then?’, someone is
about to be shaken down until their teeth fall out.

[image]

The dwarf bread was brought out for inspection. But it was miraculous,
the dwarf bread. No one ever went hungry when they had some dwarf bread
to avoid. You only had to look at it for a moment, and instantly you
could think of dozens of things you’d rather eat. Your boots, for
example. Mountains. Raw sheep. Your own foot.

*

There were only six suits of chain mail in the whole of Lancre, made on
the basis of one-size-doesn’t-quite-fit-all.

*

‘When did _you_ last have a bath, Esme?’

‘What do you mean, _last_? Baths is unhygienic,’ Granny declared. ‘You
know I’ve never agreed with baths. Sittin’ around in your own dirt like
that.’

‘What do _you_ do, then?’ said Magrat.

‘I just washes,’ said Granny. ‘All the bits. You know. As and when they
becomes available.’

*

Granny Weatherwax had never turned anyone into a frog. The way she saw
it, there was a technically less cruel but cheaper and much more
satisfying thing you could do. You could leave them human and make them
_think_ they were a frog, which also provided much innocent
entertainment for passers-by.

*

‘I don’t mind criticism,’ said Granny. ‘You know me. I’ve never been one
to take offence at criticism. No one could say I’m the sort to take
offence at criticism—’

‘Not twice, anyway,’ said Nanny.

*

People like Nanny Ogg turn up everywhere. It’s as if there’s some
special morphic generator dedicated to the production of old women who
like a laugh and aren’t averse to the odd pint, especially of some drink
normally sold in very small glasses. You find them all over the place,
often in pairs.¹

*

Nanny Ogg quite liked cooking, provided there were other people around
to do things like chop up the vegetables and wash the dishes afterwards.

*

‘That’s the trouble with second sight,’ Desiderata said. ‘You can _see_
what’s happenin’, but you don’t know what it _means_. I’ve seen the
future. There’s a coach made out of a pumpkin. And that’s impossible.
And there’s coachmen made out of mice, which is unlikely. And there’s a
clock striking midnight, and something about a glass slipper. And it’s
all going to happen. Because that’s how stories have to work.’

*

_But then Granny and Nanny have to try to stop the story from
happening_.

‘It’s no good, you know [said Lily Weatherwax]. You can’t stop this sort
of thing. It has the momentum of inevitability. You can’t spoil a good
story. I should know.’

She handed the slipper to the Prince, but without taking her eyes off
Granny.

‘It’ll fit her,’ she said.

Two of the courtiers held Magrat’s leg as the Prince wrestled the
slipper past her protesting toes.

‘There,’ said Lily, still without looking down. ‘And do stop trying that
hedge-witch hypnotism on me, Esme.’

‘It fits,’ said the Prince, but in a doubtful tone of voice.

‘Yes, anything would fit,’ said a cheerful voice from somewhere towards
the back of the crowd, ‘if you were allowed to put two pairs of hairy
socks on first.’

Lily looked down. Then she looked at Magrat’s mask. She reached out and
pulled it off.

‘Wrong girl,’ said Lily. ‘But it still doesn’t matter, Esme, because it
is the right slipper. So all we have to do is find the girl whose foot
it fits—’

There was a commotion at the back of the crowd. Courtiers parted,
revealing Nanny Ogg.

‘If it’s a five-and-a-half narrow fit, I’m your man,’ she said. ‘Just
let me get these boots off …’

‘I wasn’t referring to you, old woman,’ said Lily coldly.

‘Oh, yes you was,’ said Nanny. ‘We know how this bit goes, see. The
Prince goes all round the city with the slipper, trying to find the girl
whose foot fits. That’s what you was plannin’. So I can save you a bit
of trouble, how about it?’

There was a flicker of uncertainty in Lily’s expression.

‘A _girl_,’ she said, ‘of _marriageable_ age.’

‘No problem there,’ said Nanny cheerfully …

Nanny grabbed the slipper out of the Prince’s hands and, before anyone
else could move, slid it on to her foot.

Then she waggled the foot in the air.

It was a perfect fit.

‘There!’ she said. ‘See? You could have wasted the whole day.’

‘Especially because there must be hundreds of five-and-a-half—’

‘– narrow fit –’

‘—narrow fit wearers in a city this size,’ Granny went on. ‘Unless, of
course, you happened to sort of go to the right house right at the
start. If you had, you know, a lucky guess?’

‘But that’d be _cheatin_’,’ said Nanny.

She nudged the Prince.

‘I’d just like to add,’ she said, ‘that I don’t mind doin’ all the
waving and opening things and other royal stuff, but I draw the line at
sleepin’ in the same bed as sunny jim here.’

‘Because he doesn’t sleep in a bed,’ said Granny.

‘No, he sleeps in a pond,’ said Nanny.

‘Because he’s a frog,’ said Granny.

[image]

‘This is Greebo. Between you and me, he’s a fiend from hell.’

‘Well, he’s a cat,’ said Mrs Gogol. ‘It’s only to be expected.’

[image]

No one knew better than Granny Weatherwax that hats were important. They
weren’t just clothing. Hats defined the head. They defined who you
_were_. No one had ever heard of a wizard without a pointy hat – at
least, no wizard worth speaking of. And you certainly never heard of a
witch without one … It wasn’t the wearing of the hats that counted so
much as having one to wear. Every trade, every craft had its hat. That’s
why kings had hats. Take the crown off a king and all you had was
someone good at having a weak chin and waving to people. Hats had power.
Hats were important.

*

‘You always used to say _I_ was wanton, when we was younger,’ said
Nanny.

‘You was, of course,’ said Granny. ‘But you never used magic for it, did
you?’

‘Din’t have to,’ said Nanny happily. ‘An off-the-shoulder dress did the
trick most of the time.’

‘Right off the shoulder and on to the grass, as I recall,’ said Granny.

*

Every established kitchen has one ancient knife, its handle worn thin,
its blade curved like a banana, and so inexplicably sharp that reaching
into the drawer at night is like bobbing for apples in a piranha tank.

*

‘Look at the three of you,’ Lily said. ‘The maiden, the mother and the
crone.’

‘Who are you calling a maiden?’ said Nanny Ogg.

‘Who are you calling a mother?’ said Magrat.

Granny Weatherwax glowered briefly like the person who has discovered
that there is only one straw left and everyone else has drawn a long
one.

*

‘Don’t you talk to me about progress. Progress just means bad things
happen faster.’

*

‘How come you’re in the palace guard, Casanunda? All the rest of ’em are
six foot tall and you’re – of the shorter persuasion.’

‘I lied about my height, Mrs Ogg.’

*

‘I don’t want to hurt you, Mistress Weatherwax,’ said Mrs Gogol.

‘That’s good,’ said Granny. ‘I don’t want you to hurt me either.’

[image]

1 Always in front of you in any queue, for a start.

[image]

 

IN THE BEGINNING was the Word. And the Word was: ‘Hey, you!’

For Brutha the novice is the Chosen One. He wants peace and justice and
brotherly love.

He also wants the Inquisition to stop torturing him now, please …

 

Brother Preptil, the master of the music, had described Brutha’s voice
as putting him in mind of a disappointed vulture arriving too late at
the dead donkey.

*

There was something creepy about that boy [Brutha], Nhumrod thought. It
was the way he looked at you when you were talking, as if he was
_listening_.

*

‘It’s a big bull,’ said the tortoise.

‘The very likeness of the Great God Om in one of his worldly
incarnations!’ said Brutha proudly. ‘And you say you’re _him_?’

‘I haven’t been well lately,’ said the tortoise.

*

‘How should I know? I don’t know!’ lied the tortoise.

‘But you … you’re omnicognizant,’ said Brutha.

‘That doesn’t mean I know everything.’

Brutha bit his lip. ‘Um. Yes. It does.’

*

Everyone in the city knew Cut-Me-Own-Hand-Off Dhblah, purveyor of
suspiciously new holy relics, suspiciously old rancid sweetmeats on a
stick, gritty figs, and long-past-their-sell-by dates.

*

‘I – I do not know how to ride, my lord,’ said Brutha.

‘Any man can get on a mule,’ said Vorbis. ‘Often many times in a short
distance.’

*

It was a small mule and Brutha had long legs; if he’d made the effort he
could have remained standing and let the mule trot out from underneath.

[image]

‘My grandmother used to give me a thrashing every morning because I
would certainly do something to deserve it during the day,’ said Brutha.

[image]

If you spend your whole time thinking about the universe, you tend to
forget the less important bits of it. Like your pants.

*

People think that professional soldiers think a lot about fighting, but
_serious_ professional soldiers think a lot more about food and a warm
place to sleep, because these are two things that are generally hard to
get, whereas fighting tends to turn up all the time.

*

Humans! They lived in a world where the grass continued to be green and
the sun rose every day and flowers regularly turned into fruit, and what
impressed them? Weeping statues. And wine made out of water! A mere
quantum-mechanistic tunnel effect, that’d happen anyway if you were
prepared to wait zillions of years. As if the turning of sunlight into
wine, by means of vines and grapes and time and enzymes, wasn’t a
thousand times more impressive and happened all the time …

*

No other library anywhere, for example, has a whole gallery of unwritten
books – books that _would_ have been written if the author hadn’t been
eaten by an alligator around chapter 1, and so on. Atlases of imaginary
places. Dictionaries of illusory words. Spotters’ guides to invisible
things. Wild thesauri in the Lost Reading Room. A library so big that it
distorts reality and has opened gateways to all other libraries,
everywhere and everywhen …

*

‘Prince Lasgere of Tsort asked me how he could become learned,
especially since he hadn’t got any time for this reading business. I
said to him, “There is no royal road to learning, sire,” and he said to
me, “Bloody well build one or I shall have your legs chopped off. Use as
many slaves as you like.” A refreshingly direct approach, I always
thought. Not a man to mince words. People, yes. But not words.’

*

Gods are not very introspective. It has never been a survival trait. The
ability to cajole, threaten and terrify has always worked well enough.
When you can flatten entire cities at a whim, a tendency towards quiet
reflection and seeing-things-from-the-other-fellow’s-point-of-view is
seldom necessary.

Which had led, across the multiverse, to men and women of tremendous
brilliance and empathy devoting their entire lives to the service of
deities who couldn’t beat them at a quiet game of dominoes. For example,
Sister Sestina of Quirm defied the wrath of a local king and walked
unharmed across a bed of coals and propounded a philosophy of sensible
ethics on behalf of a goddess whose only real interest was in
hairstyles, and Brother Zephilite of Klatch left his vast estates and
his family and spent his life ministering to the sick and poor on behalf
of the invisible god F’rum, generally considered unable, should he have
a backside, to find it with both hands, should he have hands. Gods never
need to be very bright when there are humans around to be it for them.

*

Mountains rise and fall, and under them the Turtle swims onward. Men
live and die, and the Turtle Moves. Empires grow and crumble, and the
Turtle Moves. Gods come and go, and still the Turtle Moves. The Turtle
Moves.

*

Words are the litmus paper of the mind. If you find yourself in the
power of someone who will use the word ‘commence’ in cold blood, go
somewhere else very quickly. But if they say ‘Enter,’ don’t stop to
pack.

[image]

[image]

 

THE FAIRIES ARE back – but this time they don’t just want your teeth …

Granny Weatherwax and her tiny coven are up against real elves.

It’s Midsummer Night.

No time for dreaming …

With full supporting cast of dwarfs, wizards, trolls, Morris dancers and
one orang-utan. And lots of hey-nonny-nonny and blood all over the
place.

 

Nanny Ogg never did any housework herself, but she was the cause of
housework in other people.

*

Lancre was so small that you couldn’t lie down without a passport.

*

WILLIAM SCROPE.

‘Yes?’

IF YOU WOULD PLEASE STEP THIS WAY.

‘Are you a hunter?’

I LIKE TO THINK I AM A PICKER-UP OF UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES.

Death grinned hopefully. Scrope’s post-physical brow furrowed.

‘What? Like … sherry, custard … that sort of thing?’

*

‘Someone got killed up here.’

‘Oh, no,’ moaned Nanny Ogg.

‘A tall man. He had one leg longer’n the other. And a beard. He was
probably a hunter.’

‘How’d you know all that?’

‘I just trod on ’im.’

*

‘Hope Magrat does all right as queen,’ said Nanny.

‘We taught her everything she knows,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘Yeah,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘D’you think … maybe …?’

‘What?’

‘D’you think maybe we ought to have taught her everything _we_ know?’

*

The thing about the Librarian was that no one _noticed_ he was an
orang-utan any more, unless a visitor to the University happened to
point it out. In which case someone would say, ‘Oh, yes. Some kind of
magical accident, wasn’t it? Pretty sure it was something like that. One
minute human, next minute an ape. Funny thing, really … can’t remember
what he looked like before. I mean, he _must_ have been human, I
suppose. Always thought of him as an ape, really. It’s more _him_.’

*

Magrat normally wore a simple dress with not much underneath it except
Magrat.

*

_Nanny subtly breaks the news of a death:_

‘Well, now,’ said Nanny, ‘you know the widow Scrope, lives over in
Slice?’

Quarney’s mouth opened.

‘She’s not a widow,’ he said. ‘She—’

‘Bet you half a dollar?’ said Nanny.

*

Esme’s skill at Borrowing unnerved Nanny Ogg. It was all very well
entering the minds of animals and such, but too many witches had never
come back. For several years Nanny had put out lumps of fat and bacon
rind for a bluetit that she was sure was old Granny Postalute, who’d
gone out Borrowing one day and never came back.

*

Granny Weatherwax had a feeling she was going to die. This was beginning
to get on her nerves.

*

‘I do apologize for this,’ said the very small highwayman. ‘I find
myself a little short.’

*

The dwarf bowed and produced a slip of pasteboard from one grubby but
lace-clad sleeve.

‘My card,’ he said.

It read:

[image]

‘Are you really an outrageous liar?’

‘No.’

‘Why are you trying to rob coaches, then?’

‘I am afraid I was waylaid by bandits.’

‘But it says here,’ said Ridcully, ‘that you are a finest swordsman.’

‘I was outnumbered.’

‘How many of them were there?’

‘Three million.’

*

‘You know,’ said Ponder, ‘this reminds me of that famous logical puzzle
… There was this man, right, who had to choose between going through two
doors, apparently, and the guard on one door always told the truth and
the guard on the other door always told a lie, and the thing _was_,
behind one door was certain death, and behind the other door was
freedom, and he didn’t know which guard was which, and he could only ask
them one question and so: what did he ask?’

‘Hang on,’ said Casanunda, ‘I think I’ve worked it out. One question,
right?’

‘Yes,’ said Ponder, relieved.

‘And he can ask either guard?’

‘_Yes_.’

‘Oh, right. Well, in that case he goes up to the smallest guard and
says, “Tell me which is the door to freedom if you don’t want to see the
colour of your kidneys and incidentally I’m walking through it _behind_
you, so if you’re trying for the Mr Clever Award just remember who’s
going through it _first_.”’

‘No, no, no!’

‘Sounds logical to me,’ said Ridcully. ‘Very good thinking.’

‘But you haven’t got a weapon!’

‘Yes I have. I wrested it from the guard while he was considering the
question,’ said Casanunda.

*

_Ponder Stibbons tries to explain parallel universes to Ridcully:_

‘_Parallel_ universes, I said. Universes where things didn’t happen
like—’ He hesitated. ‘Well, you know that girl?’

‘What girl?’

‘The girl you wanted to marry?’

‘How’d you know that?’

‘You were talking about her just after lunch.’

‘Was I? More fool me. Well, what about her?’

‘Well … in a way, you _did_ marry her,’ said Ponder.

Ridcully shook his head. ‘Nope. Pretty certain I didn’t. You remember
that sort of thing.’

‘Ah, but not in _this_ universe—’

‘You suggestin’ I nipped into some other universe to get married?’ said
Ridcully.

‘No! I mean, you got married in that universe and not in this universe,’
said Ponder.

‘Did I? What? A proper ceremony and everything?’

‘Yes!’

‘Hmm.’ Ridcully stroked his beard. ‘You sure?’

‘Certain, Archchancellor.’

‘My word! I never knew that.’

Ponder felt he was getting somewhere.

‘So—’

‘Yes?’

‘Why don’t I remember it?’

Ponder had been ready for this.

‘Because the you in the other universe is different from the you here,’
he said. ‘It was a different you that got married. He’s probably settled
down somewhere. He’s probably a great-grandad by now.’

‘He never writes, I know that,’ said Ridcully. ‘And the bastard never
invited me to the wedding.’

‘Who?’

‘Him.’

‘But he’s you!’

‘Is he? Huh! You’d think _I’d_ think of _me_, wouldn’t you? What a
bastard!’

[image]

It wasn’t that Ridcully was stupid.

Truly stupid wizards have the life expectancy of a glass hammer. He had
quite a powerful intellect, but it was powerful like a locomotive, and
ran on rails and was therefore almost impossible to steer.

[image]

Shawn took a deep breath and leaned over the battlements.

‘Halt! Who Goes There?’ he said.

‘It’s me, Shawn. Your mum.’

‘Oh, hello, Mum. Hello, Mistress Weatherwax.’

‘Let us in, there’s a good boy.’

‘Friend or Foe?’

‘What?’

‘It’s what I’ve got to say, Mum. It’s official. And then you’ve got to
say Friend.’

‘I’m your _mum_.’

‘You’ve got to do it properly, Mum,’ said Shawn, ‘otherwise what’s the
point?’

‘It’s going to be Foe in a minute, my lad.’

‘Oooaaaww, _Mum_!’

‘Oh, all right. Friend, then.’

‘Yes, but you could just be saying that—’

*

A witch’s cottage is a very specific architectural item. It is not
exactly built, but put together over the years as the areas of repair
join up, like a sock made entirely of darns. The chimney twists like a
corkscrew. The roof is thatch so old that small but flourishing trees
are growing in it, the floors are switchbacks, it creaks at night like a
tea clipper in a gale. If at least two walls aren’t shored up with balks
of timber then it’s not a true witch’s cottage at all, but merely the
home of some daft old bat who reads tea leaves and talks to her cat.

*

The bandit chief knocked on the coach door. The window slid down.

‘I wouldn’t like you to think of this as a robbery,’ he said. ‘I’d like
you to think of it more as a colourful anecdote you might enjoy telling
your grandchildren about.’

A wizard’s staff poked out. The chieftain saw the knob on the end.

‘Now, then,’ he said, pleasantly. ‘I know the rules. Wizards aren’t
allowed to use magic against civilians except in genuine
life-threatening situa—’

There was a burst of octarine light.

‘Actually, it’s not a rule,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s more a guideline.’

*

‘I thought that sort of thing was, you know,’ the king grinned sickly,
‘folklore?’

‘Of course it’s folklore, you stupid man!’

‘I _do_ happen to be king, you know,’ said Verence reproachfully.

‘You stupid king, your majesty.’

‘Thank you.’

[image]

‘Elves are beautiful. They’ve got _style_. Beauty. Grace.

That’s what matters. If cats looked like frogs we’d realize what nasty,
cruel little bastards they are. Style. That’s what people remember.’

[image]

‘Nanny, would you like to be a bridesmaid?’

‘Not really, dear. Bit old for that sort of thing.’ Nanny hovered.
‘There isn’t anything you need to ask me, though, is there?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘What with your mum being dead and you having no female relatives and
everything …’

Magrat still looked puzzled.

‘After the wedding, is what I’m hinting about,’ said Nanny.

‘Oh, _that_. No, most of that’s being done by a caterer.’

*

It wasn’t that Nanny Ogg sang badly. It was just that she could hit
notes which, when amplified by a tin bath half full of water, ceased to
be sound and became some sort of invasive presence.

There had been plenty of singers whose high notes could smash a glass,
but Nanny’s high C could clean it.

*

‘Swish city bastards.’

‘They don’t know what it’s like to be up to the armpit in a cow’s
backside on a snowy night. Hah!’

‘And there ain’t one of ’em that—what’re you talking about? You ain’t
got a cow.’

‘No, but I know what it’s like.’

*

‘What do we do with the mail?’ said Ridcully.

‘I take the palace stuff, and we generally leave the sack hanging up on
a nail outside the tavern so that people can help themselves,’ said
Shawn.

‘Isn’t that dangerous?’ said Ponder.

‘Don’t think so. It’s a strong nail,’ said Shawn.

*

‘I remember years ago my granny telling me about Queen Amonia, well, I
say queen, but she never was queen except for about three hours because
of what I’m about to unfold, on account of them playing hide-and-seek at
the wedding party and her hiding in a big heavy old chest in some attic
and the lid slamming shut and no one finding her for seven months, by
which time you could definitely say the wedding cake was getting a bit
stale.’

[image]

‘That’s the thing about witchcraft,’ she said. ‘It doesn’t exactly keep
you young, but you do stay old for longer.’

[image]

Nanny said, ‘Funny to think of our Magrat being married and everything.’

‘What do you mean, everything?’

‘Well, _you_ know – _married_,’ said Nanny. ‘I gave her a few tips.
Always wear something in bed. Keeps a man interested.’

‘You always wore your hat.’

‘Right.’

*

‘What was that dance your Jason and his men did when they’d got drunk?’
said Granny.

‘It’s the Lancre Stick and Bucket Dance, Esme.’

‘It’s legal, is it?’

‘Technically they shouldn’t do it when there’s women present,’ said
Nanny. ‘Otherwise it’s sexual morrisment.’

*

The Monks of Cool, whose tiny and exclusive monastery is hidden in a
really cool and laid-back valley in the lower Ramtops, have a
passing-out test for a novice. He is taken into a room full of all types
of clothing and asked: Yo, my son, which of these is the most stylish
thing to wear? And the correct answer is: Hey, whatever I select.

[image]

[image]

 

BE A MAN in the City Watch! The City Watch needs MEN!’

But what it’s _got_ includes Corporal Carrot (technically a dwarf),
Lance-Constable Detritus (a troll), Lance-Constable Angua (a woman …
most of the time) and Corporal Nobbs (disqualified from the human race
for shoving).

And they need all the help they can get. Because they’ve only got
twenty-four hours to clean up the town and this is Ankh-Morpork we’re
talking about …

 

‘Sergeant Colon,’ said Angua. ‘He was the fat one, yes?’

‘That’s right.’

‘Why has he got a pet monkey?’

‘Ah,’ said Carrot. ‘I think it is Corporal Nobbs to whom you refer …’

*

‘Who was that man with the granite face I saw in the Watch House?’ said
Angua.

‘That was Detritus the troll,’ said Carrot.

‘No, that _man_,’ said Angua, learning as had so many others that Carrot
tended to have a bit of trouble with metaphors. ‘Face like thu—face like
someone very disgruntled.’

‘Oh, that was Captain Vimes. But he’s never _been_ gruntled, I think.’

*

Vimes’s meeting with the Patrician ended as all such meetings did, with
the guest going away in possession of an unfocused yet nagging suspicion
that he’d only just escaped with his life.

*

Sybil Ramkin lived in the kind of poverty that was only available to the
very rich, a poverty approached from the other side. Women who were
merely well-off saved up and bought dresses made of silk edged with lace
and pearls, but Lady Ramkin was so rich she could afford to stomp around
the place in rubber boots and a tweed skirt that had belonged to her
mother. She was so rich she could afford to live on biscuits and cheese
sandwiches. She was so rich she lived in three rooms in a
thirty-four-roomed mansion; the rest of them were full of very expensive
and very _old_ furniture, covered in dust sheets.

*

The reason that the rich were so rich, Vimes reasoned, was because they
managed to spend less money.

Take boots, for example. He earned thirty-eight dollars a month plus
allowances. A really good pair of leather boots cost fifty dollars. But
an _affordable_ pair of boots, which were sort of okay for a season or
two and then leaked like hell when the cardboard gave out, cost about
ten dollars. Those were the kind of boots Vimes always bought, and wore
until the soles were so thin that he could tell where he was in
Ankh-Morpork on a foggy night by the feel of the cobbles.

But the thing was that _good_ boots lasted for years and years. A man
who could afford fifty dollars had a pair of boots that’d still be
keeping his feet dry in ten years’ time, while a poor man who could only
afford cheap boots would have spent a hundred dollars on boots in the
same time and _would still have wet feet_.

This was the Captain Samuel Vimes ‘Boots’ theory of socio-economic
unfairness.

*

The natural condition of the common swamp dragon is to be chronically
ill, and the natural state of an unhealthy dragon is to be laminated
across the walls, floor and ceiling of whatever room it is in. A swamp
dragon is a badly run, dangerously unstable chemical factory one step
from disaster. One quite small step.

It has been speculated that its habit of exploding violently when angry,
excited, frightened or merely plain bored is a developed survival trait¹
to discourage predators. Eat dragons, it proclaims, and you’ll have a
case of indigestion to which the term ‘blast radius’ will be
appropriate.

*

To understand why dwarfs and trolls don’t like each other you have to go
back a long way.

They get along like chalk and cheese. Very like chalk and cheese,
really. One is organic, the other isn’t, and also smells a bit cheesy.
Dwarfs make a living by smashing up rocks with valuable minerals in them
and the silicon-based lifeform known as trolls are, basically, rocks
with valuable minerals in them.

*

Carrot often struck people as simple. And he was.

Where people went wrong was thinking that simple meant the same thing as
stupid.

Carrot was not stupid. He was direct, and honest, and good-natured and
honourable in all his dealings. In Ankh-Morpork this would normally have
added up to ‘stupid’ in any case and would have given him the survival
quotient of a jellyfish in a blast furnace, but there were a couple of
other factors. One was a punch that even trolls had learned to respect.
The other was that Carrot was genuinely, almost supernaturally,
likeable. He got on well with people, even while arresting them. He had
an exceptional memory for names.

[image]

Vimes would be the first to admit that he wasn’t a good copper,

but he’d probably be spared the chore because lots of other people would
happily admit it for him.

[image]

There were such things as dwarf gods. Dwarfs were not a naturally
religious species, but in a world where pit props could crack without
warning and pockets of fire damp could suddenly explode they’d seen the
need for gods as the sort of supernatural equivalent of a hard hat.
Besides, when you hit your thumb with an eight-pound hammer it’s nice to
be able to blaspheme. It takes a very special and strong-minded kind of
atheist to jump up and down with their hand clasped under their other
armpit and shout, ‘Oh, random-fluctuations-in-the-space-time-continuum!’
or ‘Aaargh, primitive-and-outmoded-concept on a crutch!’

[image]

No clowns were funny.

That was the whole purpose of a clown. People laughed at clowns, but
only out of nervousness. The point of clowns was that, after watching
them, anything else that happened seemed enjoyable. It was nice to know
there was someone worse off than you.

[image]

Three and a half minutes after waking up, Captain Samuel Vimes, Night
Watch, staggered up the last few steps on to the roof of the city’s
opera house, gasped for breath and threw up _allegro ma non troppo_.

*

He didn’t know much about gargoyles. Carrot had said something once
about how marvellous it was, an urban troll species that had evolved a
symbiotic relationship with gutters, and he had admired the way they
funnelled run-off water into their ears and out through fine sieves in
their mouths. You didn’t get many birds nesting on buildings colonized
by gargoyles.

*

Vimes snorted. I grew up here, he thought, and when I walk down the
street everyone says, ‘Who’s that glum bugger?’ Carrot’s been here a few
months and _everyone_ knows him. And he knows everyone. _Everyone_ likes
him. I’d be annoyed about that, if only he wasn’t so likeable.

*

‘I’d like a couple of eggs,’ said Vimes, ‘with the yolks real hard but
the whites so runny that they drip like treacle. And I want bacon, that
special bacon all covered with bony nodules and dangling bits of fat.
And a slice of fried bread. The kind that makes your arteries go clang
just by looking at it.’

‘Tough order,’ said Harga.

‘You managed it yesterday.’

*

Probably no other world in the multiverse has warehouses for things
which only exist _in potentia_, but the pork futures warehouse in
Ankh-Morpork is a product of the Patrician’s rules about baseless
metaphors, the literal-mindedness of citizens who assume that everything
must exist somewhere, and the general thinness of the fabric of reality
around Ankh, which is so thin that it’s as thin as a very thin thing.
The net result is that trading in pork futures – in pork _that doesn’t
exist yet_ – led to the building of the warehouse to store it in until
it does.

*

C. M. O. T. Dibbler had a number of bad points, but species prejudice
was not one of them. He liked anyone who had money, regardless of the
colour and shape of the hand that was proffering it. For Dibbler
believed in a world where a sapient creature could walk tall, breathe
free, pursue life, liberty and happiness, and step out towards the
bright new dawn. If they could be persuaded to gobble something off
Dibbler’s hot-food tray at the same time, this was all to the good.

*

Leonard of Quirm was not all that old. He was one of those people who
started looking venerable around the age of thirty, and would probably
still look about the same at the age of ninety. He wasn’t exactly bald,
either. His head had just grown up through his hair, rising like a
mighty rock dome through heavy forest.

*

‘This city is full of clever men,’ said the Patrician … ‘They never
_think_. They do things like open the Three Jolly Luck Take-Away Fish
Bar on the site of the old temple in Dagon Street on the night of the
winter solstice when it also happens to be a full moon.’

*

‘Captain Vimes?’ said Carrot, waving a hand in front of his eyes. There
was no response.

‘How much has he had?’

‘Two nips of whiskey, that’s all.’

‘That shouldn’t do this to him, even on an empty stomach,’ said Carrot.

Angua pointed at the neck of a bottle protruding from Vimes’s pocket.

‘I don’t think he’s been drinking on an empty stomach,’ she said. ‘I
think he put some alcohol in it first.’

*

‘Oh, no,’ said Sergeant Colon. ‘He’s had a whole bottle!’

Angua picked out the bottle and looked at the label.

‘C. M. O. T. Dibbler’s Genuine Authentic Soggy Mountain Dew,’ she read.
‘He’s going to die! It says, “One hundred and fifty per cent proof”!’

‘Nah, that’s just old Dibbler’s advertising,’ said Nobby. ‘It ain’t got
no _proof_. Just circumstantial evidence.’

*

‘He only drinks when he gets depressed,’ said Carrot.

‘Why does he get depressed?’

‘Sometimes it’s because he hasn’t had a drink.’

*

‘I appear … to be losing a lot of blood,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘Who would have thought you had it in you,’ said Vimes, with the
frankness of those probably about to die.

[image]

‘Captain _Quirke_?’ said Carrot. ‘But he’s … not a good choice.’

‘Mayonnaise Quirke, we used to call him,’ said Colon. ‘He’s a pillock.’

‘Don’t tell me,’ said Angua. ‘He’s rich, thick and oily, yes?’

‘And smells faintly of eggs,’ said Carrot.

[image]

It’s generally very quiet in the Unseen University library. There’s
perhaps the shuffling of feet as wizards wander between the shelves, the
occasional hacking cough to disturb the academic silence, and every once
in a while a dying scream as an unwary student fails to treat an old
magical book with the caution it deserves.

*

Carrot could lead armies, Angua thought. Some people have inspired whole
countries to great deeds because of the power of their vision. And so
could he. Not because he dreams about marching hordes, or world
domination, or an empire of a thousand years. Just because he thinks
that everyone’s really decent underneath and would get along just fine
if only they made the effort, and he believes that so strongly it burns
like a flame which is bigger than he is. He’s got a dream and we’re all
part of it, so that it shapes the world around him. And the weird thing
is that no one wants to disappoint him. It’d be like kicking the biggest
puppy in the universe. It’s a kind of magic.

*

‘Captain Vimes always told me, sir, that there’s big crimes and little
crimes. Sometimes the little crimes look big and the big crimes you can
hardly see, but the crucial thing is to decide which is which.’

*

Foul Ole Ron was a Beggars’ Guild member in good standing. He was a
Mutterer, and a good one. He would walk behind people muttering in his
own private language until they gave him money not to. People thought he
was mad, but this was not, technically, the case. It was just that he
was in touch with reality on the cosmic level, and had a bit of trouble
focusing on things smaller, like other people, walls and soap (although
on very small things, such as coins, his eyesight was Grade A).

[image]

‘You can really talk?’ said Carrot. Gaspode rolled his eyes. ‘ ’Course
not,’ he said.

[image]

‘Who are you?’ said the Patrician.

‘Corporal Nobbs, sir!’ said Nobby, saluting.

‘Do we employ you?’

‘Yessir!’

‘Ah. You’re the dwarf, are you?’

‘Nosir. That was the late Cuddy, sir! I’m one of the human beings, sir!’

‘You’re not employed as the result of any … special hiring procedures?’

‘Nosir,’ said Nobby, proudly.

‘My word.’

*

The Patrician steepled his fingers and looked at Carrot over the top of
them. It was a mannerism that had unnerved many.

[image]

1 From the point of view of the species as a whole. Not from the point
of view of the dragon now landing in small pieces around the landscape.

[image]

 

OTHER CHILDREN GOT given xylophones. Susan just had to ask her
grandfather to take his vest off.

Yes. There’s a Death in the family.

It’s hard to grow up normally when Grandfather rides a white horse and
wields a scythe – especially when you have to take over the family
business, and everyone mistakes you for the Tooth Fairy. And
_especially_ when you have to face the new and addictive music that has
entered the Discworld.

It’s lawless. It changes people.

It’s called _Music With Rocks In_.

It’s got a beat and you can dance to it, but …

It’s _alive_.

And it won’t fade away.

 

It was raining in the small, mountainous country of Llamedos. It was
always raining in Llamedos. Rain was the country’s main export. It had
rain mines.

[image]

People came to Ankh-Morpork to seek their fortune.

Unfortunately, other people sought it too.

[image]

Lord Vetinari had encouraged the growth of the Guilds. They were the big
wheels on which the clockwork of a well-regulated city ran. A drop of
oil here … a spoke inserted there, of course … and by and large it all
_worked_.

*

It looked the kind of musical instrument emporium which doubles as a
pawnshop, since every musician has at some time in his life to hand over
his instrument if he wants to eat and sleep indoors.

*

‘We haven’t even practised together properly,’ said Imp.

‘We’ll practise as we go along,’ said Glod. ‘Welcome to the world of
professional musicianship.’

*

The raven had grown up in the forever-crumbling, ivy-clad Tower of Art,
overlooking Unseen University in far Ankh-Morpork …

The wizard who thought he owned him called him Quoth.

*

There is a type of girl who, while incapable of cleaning her bedroom
even at knifepoint, will fight for the privilege of being allowed to
spend the day shovelling manure in a stable.

*

Quirm wasn’t a night town. People who came to Quirm looking for a good
time went somewhere else. Quirm was so respectable that even dogs asked
permission before going to the lavatory.

*

‘Ride the horse.’

‘Where to?’

‘That’s for me not to know and you to find out.’

*

CURRY GARDENS

_Curry with Vegetable . . . . . . . . 8p_

_Curry with Meat . . . . . . . . . . . 10p_

_Curry with Named Meat . . . . . 15p_

*

Albert was bent over the stove. ‘Morning,’ he said. ‘You want fried
bread with your sausages?’

Susan looked at the mess sizzling in the huge frying pan. It wasn’t a
sight to be seen on an empty stomach, although it could probably cause
one. Albert could make an egg wish it had never been laid.

*

The Mended Drum had traditionally gone in for, well, traditional pub
games, such as dominoes, darts and Stabbing People In The Back And
Taking All Their Money.

*

‘Why’d you want to come here?’ she said.

‘This is a battlefield, isn’t it?’ said the raven patiently. ‘You’ve got
to have ravens afterwards.’ Its freewheeling eyes swivelled in its head.
‘Carrion regardless, as you might say.’

*

_Death decides to join the Klatchian Foreign Legion. He arrives at one
of their forts and knocks:_

IS THIS THE KLATCHIAN FOREIGN LEGION?

The face of the little man on the other side of the door went blank.

‘Ah,’ he said, ‘you’ve got me there. Hang on a moment.’ The hatch shut.
There was a whispered discussion on the other side of the door. The
hatch opened.

‘Yes, it appears we are the … the … what was that again? Right, got it …
the Klatchian Foreign Legion. Yes. What was it you were wanting?’

I WISH TO JOIN.

‘Join? Join what?’

THE KLATCHIAN FOREIGN LEGION.

‘Where’s that?’

There was some more whispering.

‘Oh. Right. Sorry. Yes. That’s us.’

The doors swung open. The visitor strode in. A legionary with corporal’s
stripes on his arm walked up to him.

‘You’ll have to report to …’ his eyes glazed a little, ‘… you know … big
man, three stripes … on the tip of my tongue a moment ago …’

SERGEANT?

‘Right,’ said the corporal, with relief. ‘What’s your name, soldier?’

ER …

‘You don’t have to say, actually. That’s what the … the …’

KLATCHIAN FOREIGN LEGION?

‘… what it’s all about. People join to … to … with your mind, you know,
when you can’t … things that happened …’

FORGET?

‘Right. I’m …’ The man’s face went blank. ‘Wait a minute, would you?’

He looked down at his sleeve. ‘Corporal …’ he said. He hesitated,
looking worried. Then an idea struck him and he pulled at the collar of
his vest and twisted his neck until he could squint, with considerable
difficulty, at the label thus revealed.

‘Corporal … Medium? Does that sound right?’

I DON’T THINK SO.

‘Corporal … Hand Wash Only?’

PROBABLY NOT.

‘Corporal … Cotton?’

IT’S A POSSIBILITY.

‘Right. Well, welcome to the … er …’

KLATCHIAN FOREIGN LEGION …

‘Right. The pay is three dollars a week and all the sand you can eat.’

*

The tradition of promotion in the University by filling dead men’s
shoes, sometimes by firstly ensuring the death of the man in those
shoes, had lately ceased. This was largely because of Ridcully himself,
who was big and kept himself in trim and, as three late-night aspirants
to the Archchancellorship had found, also had very good hearing. They
had been variously hung out of the window by their ankles, knocked
unconscious with a shovel, and had their arm broken in two places.
Besides, Ridcully was known to sleep with two loaded crossbows by his
bed. He was a kind man and probably wouldn’t shoot you in _both_ ears.

*

There was an Ankh-Morpork legend about some old drum in the Palace that
was supposed to bang itself if an enemy fleet was seen sailing up the
Ankh. The legend had died out in recent centuries, partly because this
was the Age of Reason and also because no enemy fleet could sail up the
Ankh without a gang of men with shovels going in front.

*

Unseen University was used to eccentricity among the faculty. After all,
humans derive their notions of what it means to _be_ a normal human
being by constant reference to the humans around them, and when those
humans are other wizards the spiral can only wiggle downwards. The
Librarian was an orang-utan, and no one thought that was at all odd. The
Reader in Esoteric Studies spent so much time reading in what the Bursar
referred to as ‘the smallest room’ that he was generally referred to as
the Reader in The Lavatory, even on official documents.¹ The Bursar
himself in any normal society would have been considered more unglued
than a used stamp in a downpour. The Archchancellor, who regularly used
the long gallery above the Great Hall for archery practice and had
accidentally shot the Bursar twice, thought the whole faculty was as
crazy as loons, whatever a loon was. ‘Not enough fresh air,’ he’d say.
‘Too much sittin’ around indoors. Rots the brain.’ More often he’d say,
‘Duck!’

*

Leonard of Quirm: skilled artist and certified genius with a mind that
wandered so much it came back with souvenirs.

Leonard’s books were full of sketches – of kittens, of the way water
flows, of the wives of influential Ankh-Morporkian merchants whose
portraits had provided his means of making a living. But Leonard had
been a genius and was deeply sensitive to the wonders of the world, so
the margins were full of detailed doodles of whatever was on his mind at
that moment – vast water-powered engines for bringing down city walls on
the heads of the enemy, new types of siege guns for pumping flaming oil
over the enemy, gunpowder rockets that showered the enemy with burning
phosphorus, and other manufactures of the Age of Reason.

*

‘Proper footwear for a wizard is pointy shoes or good stout boots,’ said
Ridcully. ‘When one’s footwear turns creepy, something’s amiss.’

‘It’s crêpe,’ said the Dean. ‘It’s got a little pointy thingy over the—’

Ridcully breathed heavily. ‘_When your boots change by themselves_—’ he
growled.

‘There’s magic afoot?’

*

Susan … it wasn’t a good name, was it? It wasn’t a truly _bad_ name, it
wasn’t like poor Iodine in the fourth form, or Nigella, a name which
means ‘oops, we wanted a boy’. But it was _dull_. Susan. Sue. Good old
Sue. It was a name that made sandwiches, kept its head in difficult
circumstances and could reliably look after other people’s children.

It was a name used by no queens or goddesses anywhere.

And you couldn’t do much even with the spelling. You could turn it into
Suzi, and it sounded as though you danced on tables for a living. You
could put in a Z and a couple of Ns and an E, but it still looked like a
name with extensions built on. It was as bad as Sara, a name that cried
out for a prosthetic H.

[image]

Dwarfs respected learning, provided they didn’t have to experience it.

[image]

The Patrician leaned back in an attitude that suggested attentive
listening. He was extremely good at listening. He created a kind of
mental suction. People told him things just to avoid the silence.

*

‘mumblemumblemumble,’ said the Dean defiantly, a rebel without a pause.

*

Chrysoprase had been a very quick learner when he arrived in
Ankh-Morpork. He began with an important lesson: hitting people was
thuggery. Paying other people to do the hitting on your behalf was good
business.

*

There is something very sad about an empty dressing room. It’s like a
discarded pair of underpants, which it resembles in a number of
respects. It’s seen a lot of activity. It may even have witnessed
excitement and a whole gamut of human passions. And now there’s nothing
much left but a faint smell.

*

Foul Ole Ron was a physical schizophrenic. There was Foul Ole Ron, and
there was the _smell_ of Foul Ole Ron, which had obviously developed
over the years to such an extent that it had a distinct personality.
Anyone could have a smell that lingered long after they’d gone somewhere
else, but the smell of Foul Ole Ron could actually arrive somewhere
several minutes _before_ he did, in order to spread out and get
comfortable before he arrived. It had evolved into something so striking
that it was no longer perceived with the nose, which shut down instantly
in self-defence; people could tell that Foul Ole Ron was approaching by
the way their ear wax started to melt.

*

‘Ah, Drumknott,’ said Lord Vetinari, ‘just go and tell the head of the
Musicians’ Guild he wants a word with me, will you?’

*

Glod the dwarf looked up at a blank wall.

‘I knew it!’ he said. ‘Didn’t I say? Magic! How many times have we heard
this story? There’s a mysterious shop no one’s ever seen before, and
someone goes in and buys some rusty old curio, and it turns out to—’

‘Glod—’

‘—be some kind of talisman or a bottle full of genie, and then when
there’s trouble they go back and the shop—’

‘Glod—?’

‘—has _mysteriously disappeared_ and gone back to whatever dimension it
came from— yes, what is it?’

‘You’re on the wrong side of the road. It’s over here.’

*

Senior wizards developed a distinctive 50″ waist, 25″ leg shape that
suggested someone who sat on a wall and required royal assistance to be
put together again.

*

The Patrician was a pragmatist. He never tried to fix things that
worked. Things that didn’t work, however, got broken.

*

The question seldom addressed is _where_ Medusa had snakes. Underarm
hair is an even more embarrassing problem when it keeps biting the top
of the deodorant bottle.

*

According to rural legend – at least in those areas where pigs are a
vital part of the household economy – the Hogfather is a winter myth
figure who, on Hogswatchnight, gallops from house to house on a crude
sledge drawn by four tusked wild boars to deliver presents of sausages,
black puddings, pork scratchings and ham to all children who have been
good. He says ‘Ho ho ho’ a lot. Children who have been bad get a bag
full of bloody bones (it’s these little details which tell you it’s a
tale for the little folk). There is a song about him. It begins: _You’d
Better Watch Out_ …

The Hogfather is said to have originated in the legend of a local king
who, one winter’s night, happened to be passing, or so he said, the home
of three young women and heard them sobbing because they had no food to
celebrate the midwinter feast. He took pity on them and threw a packet
of sausages through the window.³

*

Rats had featured largely in the history of Ankh-Morpork. Shortly before
the Patrician came to power there was a terrible plague of rats. The
city council countered it by offering twenty pence for every rat tail.
This did, for a week or two, reduce the number of rats – and then people
were suddenly queuing up with tails, the city treasury was being
drained, and no one seemed to be doing much work. And there _still_
seemed to be a lot of rats around. Lord Vetinari had listened carefully
while the problem was explained, and had solved the thing with one
memorable phrase which said a lot about him, about the folly of bounty
offers, and about the natural instinct of Ankh-Morporkians in any
situation involving money: ‘Tax the rat farms.’

[image]

Old shoes always turn up in the bottom of every wardrobe.

If a mermaid had a wardrobe old shoes would turn up in the bottom of it.

[image]

[image]

1 The Reader had a theory that all the really good books in any building
– at least, all the really funny ones² – gravitate to a pile in the
privy but no one ever has time to read all of them, _or even knows how
they came to be there_.

2 The ones with cartoons about cows and dogs. And captions like: ‘As
soon as he saw the duck, Elmer knew it was going to be a bad day.’

3 Badly concussing one of them, but there’s no point in spoiling a good
legend.

[image]

 

MIGHTY BATTLES! REVOLUTION! Death! War! (and his sons Terror and Panic,
and daughter Clancy).

The oldest and most inscrutable empire on the Discworld is in turmoil,
brought about by the revolutionary treatise _What I Did On My Holidays_.
Workers are uniting, with nothing to lose but their water buffaloes. War
(and Clancy) are spreading throughout the ancient cities.

And all that stands in the way of terrible doom for everyone is:

Rincewind the Wizzard, who can’t even spell the word ‘wizard’…

Cohen the barbarian hero, five foot tall in his surgical sandals, who
has a lifetime’s experience of not dying …

… and a very _special_ butterfly.

 

It was, as always, a matter of protocol …

Lord Vetinari, as supreme ruler of Ankh-Morpork, could in theory summon
the Archchancellor of Unseen University to his presence and, indeed,
have him executed if he failed to obey.

On the other hand Mustrum Ridcully, as head of the college of wizards,
had made it clear in polite but firm ways that he could turn him into a
small amphibian and, indeed, start jumping around the room on a pogo
stick.

Alcohol bridged the diplomatic gap nicely. Sometimes Lord Vetinari
invited the Archchancellor to the Palace for a convivial drink. And of
course the Archchancellor went, because it would be _bad manners_ not
to. And everyone understood the position, and everyone was on their best
behaviour, and thus civil unrest and slime on the carpet were averted.

*

Many things went on at Unseen University and, regrettably, teaching had
to be one of them. The faculty had long ago confronted this fact and had
perfected various devices for avoiding it. But this was perfectly all
right because, to be fair, so had the students.

The system worked quite well and, as happens in such cases, had taken on
the status of a tradition. Lectures clearly took place, because they
were down there on the timetable in black and white. The fact that no
one attended was an irrelevant detail. It was occasionally maintained
that this meant that the lectures did not in fact happen at all, but no
one ever attended them to find out if this was true. Anyway, it was
argued that lectures had taken place _in essence_, so that was all
right, too.

And therefore education at the University mostly worked by the age-old
method of putting a lot of young people in the vicinity of a lot of
books and hoping that something would pass from one to the other, while
the actual young people put themselves in the vicinity of inns and
taverns for exactly the same reason.

*

‘Round everyone up. My study. Ten minutes,’ said Ridcully. He was a
great believer in this approach. A less direct Archchancellor would have
wandered around looking for everyone. His policy was to find one person
and make their life difficult until everything happened the way he
wanted it to.

*

‘Oh, no,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, pushing his chair back.
‘Not that. That’s meddling with things you don’t understand.’

‘Well we _are_ wizards,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’re supposed to meddle with
things we don’t understand. If we hung around waitin’ till we understood
things we’d never get anything done.’

*

Lord Hong had risen to the leadership of one of the most influential
families in the Empire by relentless application, total focusing of his
mental powers, and six well-executed deaths. The last one had been that
of his father, who’d died happy in the knowledge that his son was
maintaining an old family tradition. The senior families venerated their
ancestors, and saw no harm in prematurely adding to their number.

*

‘Comrades, we must strike at the very heart of the rottenness. We must
storm the Winter Palace!’

‘Excuse me, but it is June.’

‘Then we can storm the Summer Palace!’

*

Lord Hong was playing chess, against himself. It was the only way he
could find an opponent of his calibre but, currently, things were
stalemated because both sides were adopting a defensive strategy which
was, admittedly, brilliant.

*

There was this to be said about Cohen. If there was no reason for him to
kill you, such as you having any large amount of treasure or being
between him and somewhere he wanted to get to, then he was good company.

*

‘You know their big dish down on the coast?’ [said Cohen.]

‘No.’

‘Pig’s ear soup. Now, what’s that tell you about a place, eh?’

Rincewind shrugged. ‘Very provident people?’

‘Some other bugger pinches the pig … There’s men here who can push a
wheelbarrow for thirty miles on a bowl of millet with a bit of scum in
it. What does that tell you? It tells _me_ someone’s porking all the
beef.’

*

Self-doubt was not something regularly entertained within the Cohen
cranium. When you’re trying to carry a struggling temple maiden and a
sack of looted temple goods in one hand and fight off half a dozen angry
priests with the other there is little time for reflection. Natural
selection saw to it that professional heroes who at a crucial moment
tended to ask themselves questions like ‘What is my purpose in life?’
very quickly lacked both.

*

Cohen’s father had taken him to a mountain top, when he was no more than
a lad, and explained to him the hero’s creed and told him that there was
no greater joy than to die in battle.

Cohen had seen the flaw in this straight away, and a lifetime’s
experience had reinforced his belief that in fact a greater joy was to
kill the _other_ bugger in battle and end up sitting on a heap of gold
higher than your horse.

*

‘We are a travelling theatre,’ she said. ‘It is convenient. Noh actors
are allowed to move around.’

‘Aren’t they?’ said Rincewind.

‘You do not understand. We _are_ Noh actors.’

‘Oh, you weren’t too bad.’

*

Merchants always had money. But it seemed wrong to think of it as
_belonging_ to them; it _belonged_ to whoever took it off them.
Merchants didn’t actually _own_ it, they were just looking after it
until it was needed.

*

The Silver Horde were honest (from their specialized point of view) and
decent (from their specialized point of view) and saw the world as
hugely simple. They stole from rich merchants and temples and kings.
They didn’t steal from poor people; this was not because there was
anything virtuous about poor people, it was simply because poor people
had no money.

And although they didn’t set out to give the money _away_ to the poor,
that was nevertheless what they did (if you accepted that the poor
consisted of innkeepers, ladies of negotiable virtue, pickpockets,
gamblers and general hangers-on), because although they would go to
great lengths to steal money they then had as much control over it as a
man trying to herd cats. It was there to be spent and lost. So they kept
the money in circulation, always a praiseworthy thing in any society.

*

Eventually an officious voice said, ‘What do you have to say for
yourself, miserable louse?’

‘Well, I—’

‘Silence!’

Ah. So it was going to be _that_ kind of interview.

*

Six Beneficent Winds had the same sense of humour as a chicken
casserole. True, he played the accordion for amusement, and disliked
cats intensely, and had a habit of dabbing his upper lip with his napkin
after his tea ceremony in a way that had made Mrs Beneficent Winds
commit murder in her mind on a regular basis over the years. And he kept
his money in a small leather shovel purse, and counted it out very
thoroughly whenever he made a purchase, especially if there was a queue
behind him.

*

Rincewind and Twoflower lay in their separate cells and talked about the
good old days. At least, Twoflower talked about the good old days.
Rincewind worked at a crack in the stone with a piece of straw, it being
all he had to hand. It would take several thousand years to make any
kind of impression, but that was no reason to give up …

A little piece of mortar fell away. Not bad for ten minutes’ work,
thought Rincewind. Come the next Ice Age, we’re out of here …

*

‘But there are causes worth dying for,’ said Butterfly.

‘No, there aren’t! Because you’ve only got one life but you can pick up
another five causes on any street corner!’

‘Good grief, how can you _live_ with a philosophy like that?’

Rincewind took a deep breath.

‘Continuously!’

[image]

‘Luck is my middle name,’ said Rincewind, indistinctly. ‘Mind you, my
first name is Bad.’

[image]

It was something about Cohen. Maybe it was what they called charisma. It
overpowered even his normal smell of a goat that had just eaten curried
asparagus.

*

There was muttering from the Horde.

‘Bruce the Hoon never went in the back way.’

‘Shut up.’

‘Never one for back gates, Bruce the Hoon.’

‘Shut up.’

‘When Bruce the Hoon attacked Al Khali, he did it right at the main
guard tower, with a thousand screaming men on very small horses.’

‘Yeah, but … last I saw of Bruce the Hoon, his head was on a spike.’

‘All right, I’ll grant you that. But at least it was over the main gate.
I mean, at least he got in.’

‘His head did.’

*

‘Who’re you?’ said Cohen. He drew his sword. ‘I need to know so’s it can
be put on your gravestone—’

*

‘They want to parley,’ said Six Beneficent Winds.

‘Why don’t we just invite them to dinner and massacre them all when
they’re drunk?’

‘You heard the man. There’s seven hundred thousand of them.’

‘Ah? So it’d have to be something simple with pasta, then.’

*

The Four Horsemen whose Ride presages the end of the world are known to
be Death, War, Famine and Pestilence. But even less significant events
have their own Horsemen. For example, the Four Horsemen of the Common
Cold are Sniffles, Chesty, Nostril and Lack of Tissues; the Four
Horsemen whose appearance fore-shadows any public holiday are Storm,
Gales, Sleet and Contra-flow.

*

Lord Hong looked at himself in the mirror.

He’d gone to great lengths to achieve this. He had used several agents,
none of whom knew the whole plan. But the Ankh-Morpork tailor had been
good at his work and the measurements had been followed exactly. From
pointy boots to hose to doublet, cloak and hat with a feather in it,
Lord Hong knew he was a perfect Ankh-Morpork gentleman. The cloak was
lined with silk.

He’d walk through the city on that first great day and the people would
be silent when they saw their natural leader.

It never crossed his mind that anyone would say, ‘ ’Ere, wot a toff!
’Eave ’arf a brick at ’im!’

*

‘You sound a very educated man for a barbarian,’ said Rincewind.

‘I didn’t start out a barbarian. I used to be a school teacher. But I
decided to give it up and make a living by the sword.’

‘After being a teacher all your life?’

‘It did mean a change of perspective, yes.’

‘But … well … surely … the privation, the terrible hazards, the daily
risk of death …’

Mr Saveloy brightened up. ‘Oh, you’ve _been_ a teacher, have you?’

*

‘There’s a lot of waiting in warfare,’ said Boy Willie.

‘Ah, yes,’ said Mr Saveloy. ‘I’ve heard people say that. They say
there’s long periods of boredom followed by short periods of
excitement.’

‘Not really,’ said Cohen. ‘It’s more like short periods of waiting
followed by long periods of being dead.’

*

There were a large number of ranks in the armies of the Empire, and many
of them were untranslatable. Three Pink Pig and Five White Fang were,
loosely speaking, privates, and not just because they were pale,
vulnerable and inclined to curl up and hide when danger threatened.

*

Pushing their way angrily through the soldiers came an altogether
different breed of warrior. They were taller, and heavier armoured, with
splendid helmets and moustaches that looked like a declaration of war in
themselves.

‘Wassat?’ said Cohen.

‘He’s a samurai,’ said Mr Saveloy.

One samurai glared at Cohen. He pulled a scrap of silk out of his armour
and tossed it into the air. His other hand grabbed the hilt of his long,
thin sword …

There was hardly even a hiss, but three shreds of silk tumbled gently to
the ground.

‘Get back, Teach,’ said Cohen slowly. ‘I reckon this one’s mine. Got
another hanky? Thanks.’

The samurai looked at Cohen’s sword. It was long, heavy and had so many
notches it could have been used as a saw.

‘You’ll never do it,’ he said. ‘With that sword? Never.’

Cohen blew his nose noisily.

‘You say?’ he said. ‘Watch this.’

The handkerchief soared into the air. Cohen gripped his sword …

He’d beheaded three upward-staring samurai before the handkerchief
started to tumble.

‘And the message is,’ said Cohen, ‘either fight or muck about, it’s up
to you.’

*

_Golem_ … They were usually just figures made out of clay and animated
with some suitable spell or prayer. They pottered about doing simple odd
jobs. The problem was not putting them to work but stopping them from
working; if you set a golem to digging the garden and then forgot about
it, you’d come back to find it’d planted a row of beans 1500 miles long.

[image]

Woolly Thinking. Which is like Fuzzy Logic, only less so.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

THE OPERA HOUSE, Ankh-Morpork …

… a huge, rambling building, where masked figures and hooded shadows do
wicked deeds in the wings … where dying the death on stage is a little
bit more than just a metaphor … where innocent young sopranos are lured
to their destiny by an evil mastermind in a hideously deformed evening
dress …

Where …

… there’s a couple of old ladies in pointy hats eating peanuts in the
gods and looking up at the big chandelier and saying things like:
‘There’s an accident waiting to happen if ever I saw one.’

Yes … Granny Weatherwax and Nanny Ogg, the Discworld’s greatest witches,
are back for an innocent night out at the opera.

So there’s going to be trouble (but nevertheless a good evening’s
entertainment with murders you can really _hum_ …)

 

Black Aliss; pushed into her own stove by a couple of kids, and everyone
said it was a damn’ good thing, even if it took a whole week to clean
the oven.

They said weapons couldn’t pierce her. Swords bounced off her skin. And
she turned people into gingerbread and had a house made of frogs.

*

She stopped. At least, _most_ of Agnes stopped. There was a lot of
Agnes. It took some time for outlying regions to come to rest.

*

Agnes had woken up one morning with the horrible realization that she’d
been saddled with a lovely personality. It was the lack of choice that
rankled. No one had asked her, before she was born, whether she wanted a
lovely personality or whether she’d prefer, say, a miserable personality
but a body that could take size 9 in dresses. Instead, people would take
pains to tell her that beauty was only skin-deep, as if a man ever fell
for an attractive pair of kidneys.

*

People were generally glad to see Nanny Ogg. She was good at making them
feel at home in their own home.

*

Lancre had always bred strong, capable women. A Lancre farmer needed a
wife who’d think nothing of beating a wolf to death with her apron when
she went out to get some firewood. And, while kissing initially seemed
to have more charms than cookery, a stolid Lancre lad looking for a
bride would bear in mind his father’s advice that kisses eventually lost
their fire but cookery tended to get even better over the years, and
direct his courting to those families that clearly showed a tradition of
enjoying their food.

*

_Granny is always there for the difficult times_.

‘Maybe you could … help us?’

‘What’s wrong?’

‘It’s my boy …’

Granny opened the door further and saw the woman standing behind Mr
Slot. One look at her face was enough. There was a bundle in her arms.

Granny stepped back. ‘Bring him in and let me have a look at him.’

She took the baby from the woman, sat down on the room’s one chair, and
pulled back the blanket.

‘Hmm,’ said Granny, after a while.

‘There’s a curse on this house, that’s what it is,’ said Slot. ‘My best
cow’s been taken mortally sick, too.’

‘Oh? You have a cowshed?’ said Granny. ‘Very good place for a sickroom,
a cowshed. It’s the warmth. You better show me where it is.’

‘You want to take the boy down there?’

‘Right now.’

The man looked at his wife, and shrugged. ‘Well, I’m sure you know your
business best,’ he said. ‘It’s this way.’

He led the witches down some back stairs and across a yard and into the
fetid sweet air of the byre. A cow was stretched out on the straw. It
rolled an eye madly as they entered, and tried to moo.

Granny took in the scene and stood looking thoughtful for a moment.

Then she said, ‘This will do.’

‘What do you need?’ said Slot.

‘All I shall require is a candle,’ said Granny. ‘A new one, for
preference.’

‘That’s all?’

‘And some matches,’ said Granny. ‘A pack of cards might be useful, too.’

The child was brought down in a blanket and made as comfortable as
possible.

‘You just leave me in here tonight. And no one is to come in, right? No
matter what.’

The mother gave a worried curtsey. ‘But I thought I might look in about
midn—’

‘No one. Now, off you go.’

Granny closed the door.

She spent some time arranging boxes and barrels so that she had a crude
table and something to sit on. The air was warm and smelled of bovine
flatulence. Periodically she checked the health of both patients,
although there was little enough to check.

She waited a little longer and then lit the candle. Its cheery flame
gave the place a warm and comforting glow.

After some immeasurable piece of time the flame flickered. It would have
passed unnoticed by anyone who hadn’t been concentrating on it for some
while.

She took a deep breath and—

‘Good morning,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

GOOD MORNING, said a voice by her ear.

Granny breathed out, slowly.

‘Come and sit where I can see you. That’s good manners. And let me tell
you right now that I ain’t at all afraid of you.’

The tall, black-robed figure walked across the floor and sat down on a
handy barrel, leaning its scythe against the wall. Then it pushed back
its hood. Granny folded her arms and stared calmly at the visitor,
meeting his gaze eye-to-socket.

Death leaned forward. The candlelight raised new shadows on his skull.

COURAGE IS EASY BY CANDLELIGHT. YOUR FAITH, I SUSPECT, IS IN THE FLAME.

Granny leaned forward, and blew out the candle. Then she folded her arms
again and stared fiercely ahead of her.

After some length of time a voice said, ALL RIGHT, YOU’VE MADE YOUR
POINT.

Granny lit a match. Its flare illuminated the skull opposite, which
hadn’t moved.

‘Fair enough,’ she said, as she relit the candle. ‘We don’t want to be
sitting here all night, do we? How many have you come for?’

ONE.

‘The cow?’

Death shook his head.

‘It could _be_ the cow.’

NO. THAT WOULD BE CHANGING HISTORY.

‘History is about things changing.’

NO.

Granny sat back.

‘Then I challenge you to a game. That’s traditional. That’s _allowed_.’

Death was silent for a moment.

THIS IS TRUE.

‘Good.’

HOWEVER … YOU UNDERSTAND THAT TO WIN ALL YOU MUST GAMBLE ALL?

‘Double or quits? Yes, I know.’

BUT NOT CHESS.

‘Can’t abide chess.’

OR CRIPPLE MR ONION. I’VE NEVER BEEN ABLE TO UNDERSTAND THE RULES.

‘Very well. How about one hand of poker? Five cards each, no draws?
Sudden death, as they say.’

Death thought about this, too.

YOU KNOW THIS FAMILY?

No.

THEN WHY?

‘Are we talking or are we playing?’

OH, VERY WELL.

Granny picked up the pack of cards and shuffled it, not looking at her
hands, and smiling at Death all the time. She dealt five cards each.

Granny looked at her cards, and threw them down.

FOUR QUEENS. HMM. THAT _IS_ VERY HIGH.

Death looked down at his cards, and then up into Granny’s steady,
blue-eyed gaze.

Neither moved for some time.

Then Death laid the hand on the table.

I LOSE, he said. ALL I HAVE IS FOUR ONES.

He looked back into Granny’s eyes for a moment. There was a blue glow in
the depth of his eye-sockets. Maybe, for the merest fraction of a
second, barely noticeable even to the closest observation, one winked
off.

Granny nodded, and extended a hand.

She prided herself on the ability to judge people by their gaze and
their handshake, which in this case was a rather chilly one.

‘Take the cow,’ she said.

IT IS A VALUABLE CREATURE.

‘Who knows what the child will become?’

Death stood up, and reached for his scythe.

He said, OW.

‘Ah, yes. I couldn’t help noticing,’ said Granny Weatherwax, as the
tension drained out of the atmosphere, ‘that you seem to be sparing that
arm.’

OH, YOU KNOW HOW IT IS. REPETITIVE ACTIONS AND SO ON …

‘It could get serious if you left it.’

HOW SERIOUS?

‘Want me to have a look?’

WOULD YOU MIND? IT CERTAINLY ACHES ON COLD NIGHTS.

Granny’s hands touched smooth bone. She felt, thought, gripped, twisted
…

There was a click.

OW.

‘Now try it above the shoulder.’

ER. HMM. YES. IT DOES SEEM CONSIDERABLY MORE FREE. YES, INDEED. MY WORD,
YES. THANK YOU VERY MUCH.

Death walked away. A moment later there was a faint gasp from the cow.
That and a slight sagging of the skin were all that apparently marked
the transition from living animal to cooling meat.

Granny picked up the baby and laid a hand on its forehead.

‘Fever’s gone,’ she said.

MISTRESS WEATHERWAX? said Death from the doorway.

‘Yes, sir?’

I HAVE TO KNOW. WHAT WOULD HAVE HAPPENED IF I HAD NOT … LOST?

‘At the cards, you mean?’

YES. WHAT WOULD YOU HAVE DONE?

Granny laid the baby down carefully on the straw, and smiled.

‘Well,’ she said, ‘for a start … I’d have broken your bloody arm.’

*

‘So you’ll go and see Mr Goatberger and have this stopped, right?’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘And I’ll come with you to make sure you do.’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘And we’ll talk to the man about your money.’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘And we might just drop in on young Agnes to make sure she’s all right.’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘But we’ll do it diplomatic like. We don’t want people thinkin’ we’re
pokin’ our noses in.’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘No one could say I interfere where I’m not wanted. You won’t find
anyone callin’ _me_ a busybody.’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘That was, “Yes, Esme, you won’t find anyone callin’ _you_ a busybody”,
was it?’

‘Oh, yes, Esme.’

‘You sure about that?’

‘Yes, Esme.’

‘Good.’

[image]

‘It’s too draughty on broomsticks this time of year, Esme. The breeze
gets into places I wouldn’t dream of talking about.’

‘Really? Can’t imagine where those’d be, then.’

[image]

She looked around with a wide, friendly grin at the occupants of the
coach.

‘Morning,’ she said, delving into the sack. ‘I’m Gytha Ogg, I’ve got
fifteen children, this is my friend Esme Weatherwax, we’re going to
Ankh-Morpork, would anyone like an egg sandwich? I’ve brung plenty. The
cat’s been sleepin’ on them but they’re fine, look, they bend back all
right. No? Please yourself, I’m sure. Let’s see what else we’ve got …
ah, has anybody got an opener for a bottle of beer?’

A man in the corner indicated that he might have such a thing.

‘Fine,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘Anyone got something to drink a bottle of beer
out of?’

Another man nodded hopefully.

‘Good,’ said Nanny Ogg. ‘Now, has anybody got a bottle of beer?’

[image]

Ahahahahaha! Ahahahaha! Aahahaha! BEWARE!!!!! Yrs sincerely, The Opera
Ghost

‘What sort of person,’ said Salzella, ‘sits down and _writes_ a maniacal
laugh? And all those exclamation marks, you notice? Five? A sure sign of
someone who wears his under-pants on his head. Opera can do that to a
man.’

[image]

Most people in Lancre, as the saying goes, went to bed with the chickens
and got up with the cows.¹

*

‘I grew up in Rookery Yard in The Shades. They’re in Ankh-Morpork,’ said
Henry. ‘It was a terrible rough place. There were only three ways out.
You could sing your way out or you could fight your way out.’

‘What was the third way?’ said Nanny.

‘Oh, you could go down that little alleyway into Shamlegger Street and
then cut down into Treacle Mine Road,’ said Henry. ‘But no one ever
amounted to anything who went _that_ way.’

*

‘You … you do _know_ what _kind_ of place this is, do you, Esme?’ said
Nanny Ogg.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Granny, calmly.

Nanny’s patience gave out. ‘It’s a house of ill repute, is what it is!’

‘On the contrary,’ said Granny. ‘I believe people speak very highly of
it.’

*

‘I’m Mrs Ogg,’ said Nanny Ogg.

The man looked her up and down.

‘Oh yes? Can you identify yourself?’

‘Certainly. I’d know me anywhere.’

*

‘Honestly, Salzella … what _is_ the difference between opera and
madness?’

‘Is this a trick question?’

*

The Opera House was that most efficiently multifunctional of building
designs. It was a cube. But the architect had suddenly realized late in
the day that there ought to be _some_ sort of decoration, and had shoved
it on hurriedly, in a riot of friezes, pillars, corybants and curly
bits. Gargoyles had colonized the higher reaches. The effect, seen from
the front, was of a huge wall of tortured stone.

Round the back, of course, there was the usual drab mess of windows,
pipes and damp stone walls. One of the rules of a certain type of public
architecture is that it only happens at the front.

*

‘Well, basically there are two sorts of opera,’ said Nanny, who also had
the true witch’s ability to be confidently expert on the basis of no
experience whatsoever. ‘There’s your heavy opera, where basically people
sing foreign and it goes like “Oh oh oh, I am dyin’, oh, I am dyin’, oh,
oh, oh, that’s what I’m doin’”, and there’s your light opera, where they
sing in foreign and it basically goes “Beer! Beer! Beer! Beer! I like to
drink lots of beer!”, although sometimes they drink champagne instead.
That’s basically all of opera, reely.’

*

Someone tapped Granny Weatherwax on her shoulder. ‘Madam, kindly remove
your hat.’

Nanny Ogg choked on her peppermint.

Granny Weatherwax turned to the red-faced gentleman behind her. ‘You do
know what a woman in a pointy hat is, don’t you?’ she said.

‘_Yes_, madam. A woman in a pointy hat is sitting in front of me.’

*

People didn’t take any notice of little old ladies who looked as though
they fitted in, and Nanny Ogg could fit in faster than a dead chicken in
a maggot factory.

[image]

Nanny had a mind like a buzzsaw behind a face like an elderly apple.

[image]

This was Ankh-Morpork’s most prestigious dress shop, and one way of
telling was the apparent absence of anything so crass as merchandise.
The occasional carefully placed piece of expensive material merely
hinted at the possibilities available.

This was not a shop where things were bought. This was an emporium where
you had a cup of coffee and a chat. Possibly, as a result of that muted
conversation, four or five yards of exquisite fabric would change
ownership in some ethereal way, and yet nothing so crass as _trade_
would have taken place.

[image]

There was a crash from the direction of the kitchen,

although it was really more of a crashendo—the long-drawn-out clatter
that begins when a pile of plates begins to slip, continues when someone
tries to grab at them, develops a desperate counter-theme when the
person realizes they don’t have three hands, and ends with the
_roinroinroin_ of the one miraculously intact plate spinning round and
round on the floor.

[image]

‘Everyone acts as if it’s only the music that matters! The plots don’t
make sense! Half the stories rely on people not recognizing their
servants or wives because they’ve got a tiny mask on! Large ladies play
the part of consumptive girls! No one can act properly! There should be
a sign on the door saying “Leave your common sense here”! If it wasn’t
for the music the whole thing would be ridiculous!’

*

‘Madam has _marvellous_ hair,’ said the hairdresser. ‘What is the
secret?’

‘You’ve got to make sure there’s no newts in the water,’ said Granny.

*

The hulking figure seated at the organ turned around and gave her a
friendly grin, which was much wider than the average grin. Its owner was
covered in red hair and, while short-changed in the leg department, had
obviously been first in the queue when the arm counter opened. And had
also been given a special free offer of lip.

*

Nanny didn’t so much enter places as insinuate herself; she had
unconsciously taken a natural talent for liking people and developed it
into an occult science.

*

‘And what can I get you, officers?’ she said.

‘Officers? Us? What makes you think we’re watchmen?’

‘He’s got a helmet on,’ Nanny pointed out.

‘Milit’ry chic,’ Nobby said. ‘It’s just a fashion accessory. Actually,
we are gentlemen of means and have nothing to do with the City Watch
whatsoever.’

‘Well, _gentlemen_, would you like some wine?’

‘Not while we on duty, t’anks,’ said the troll.

*

Granny Weatherwax could be nasty, but then nastiness was always in the
window: you were aware that it might turn up on the menu. Sharpness from
Nanny Ogg, though, was like being bitten by a big friendly dog. It was
all the worse for being unexpected.

‘What about the show? We can’t just stop! You _never_ stop the show, not
even if someone dies!’

‘Oh, we have stopped when people died …’

‘Yes, but only as long as it took to get the body off-stage!’

*

‘Corporal Nobbs has got some papers to prove he’s a human being.’

‘Forged?’

‘I don’t think so.’

[image]

1 Er. That is to say, they went to bed at the same time as the chickens
went to bed, and got up at the same time as the cows got up. Loosely
worded sayings can really cause misunderstandings.

[image]

 

THERE’S A WEREWOLF with Pre-Lunar Tension in Ankh-Morpork.

And a dwarf with attitude and a golem who’s begun to think for itself.

But for Commander Vimes, Head of Ankh-Morpork City Watch, that’s only
the start …

There’s treason in the air.

A crime has happened.

He’s not only got to find out whodunit, but howdunit too. He’s not even
sure what they dun.

But as soon as he knows what the questions are, he’s going to want some
answers.

 

‘Your sedan chair is outside, sir.’

It had been a wedding present from the Patrician. Lord Vetinari knew
that Vimes loved walking the streets of the city, and so it was very
typical of the man that he presented him with something that did not
allow him to do so.

It was waiting outside. The two bearers straightened up expectantly.

Vimes looked at the front man and motioned with a thumb to the chair’s
door. ‘Get in,’ he commanded.

‘But sir—’

‘It’s a nice morning,’ said Vimes, taking off his coat. ‘I’ll drive
myself.’

*

Through werewolf eyes the world was _different_.

For one thing, it was in black-and-white. At least, that small part of
it which as a human she’d thought of as ‘vision’ was monochrome – but
who cared that vision had to take a back seat when smell drove instead,
laughing and sticking its arm out of the window and making rude gestures
at all the other senses?

*

She kept telling herself she had it under control and she did, in a way.
She prowled the city on moonlit nights and, okay, there was the
occasional chicken, but she always remembered where she’d been and went
round next day to shove some money under the door.

It was hard to be a vegetarian who had to pick bits of meat out of her
teeth in the morning.

It was easy to be a vegetarian by day. It was preventing yourself from
becoming a humanitarian at night that took the real effort.

*

_Vimes has some problems with his imp-driven personal organizer:_

‘Memo: See Corporal Nobbs re time-keeping; also re Earldom.’

‘Got it,’ said the imp. ‘Would you like to be reminded of this at any
particular time?’

‘I think I’ll write it in my notebook, if you don’t mind,’ said Vimes.

‘Oh, well, if you prefer, I can recognize handwriting,’ said the imp
proudly. ‘I’m quite advanced.’

Vimes pulled out his notebook and held it up. ‘Like this?’ he said.

The imp squinted for a moment. ‘Yep,’ it said. ‘That’s handwriting, sure
enough. Curly bits, spiky bits, all joined together. Yep. Handwriting.
I’d recognize it anywhere.’

*

Mr Raddley drew himself up.

‘We want to take Father Tubelcek away to bury him,’ he said.

Detritus turned to Cheery Littlebottom. ‘You done everyt’ing you need?’

‘I suppose so …’

‘He dead?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘He gonna get any better?’

‘Better than dead? I doubt it.’

‘Okay, den you people can take him away.’

[image]

_The Patrician is taken unwell and receives a visit from horse doctor
Doughnut Jimmy_.

‘Commander Vimes is right. It _could_ be arsenic,’ Cheery said. ‘It
looks like arsenic poisoning to me. Look at his colour.’

‘Nasty stuff,’ said Doughnut Jimmy. ‘Has he been eating his bedding?’

‘All the sheets seem to be here, so I suppose the answer is no.’

‘How’s he pissing?’

‘Er. The usual way, I assume.’

‘Walk him round a bit on the loose rein,’ Doughnut said.

The Patrician opened his eyes. ‘You _are_ a doctor, aren’t you?’ he
said.

‘Well, yeah … I have a lot of patients,’ he said.

‘Indeed? I have very little,’ said the Patrician.

[image]

‘Do you remember your father, Nobby?’

‘Old Sconner, sir? Not much, sir. Never used to see him much except when
the milit’ry police used to come for to drag him outa the attic.’

Vimes waved a hand vaguely. ‘He didn’t … leave you anything? Or
anything?’

‘Coupla scars, sir. And this trick elbow of mine. It aches sometimes,
when the weather changes. And this, o’ course …’ The corporal pulled out
a leather thong that hung around his neck. There was a gold ring on it.

‘He left it to me when he was on his deathbed,’ said Nobby. ‘Well, when
I say “left it” …’

‘Did he say anything?’

‘Well, yeah, he did say “Give it back, you little bugger!”, sir.’

*

_Cheery is new to the Watch and has gone out on an official visit with
Angua_.

‘You can knock.’

‘Me? They won’t take any notice of me!’ said Cheery.

‘You show them your badge and tell them you’re the Watch.’

‘They’ll ignore me! They’ll laugh at me!’

‘You’re going to have to do it sooner or later. Go on.’

The door was opened by a stout man … A dwarf voice in the region of his
navel said, ‘We’re the Watch, right? Oh, yes! And if you don’t let us in
we’ll have your guts for starters!’

‘Good try,’ murmured Angua.

*

‘I’ve got a lot to learn, I can see,’ said Cheery. ‘I never thought you
had to carry bits of blanket, for a start!’

‘It’s special equipment if you’re dealing with the undead.’

‘Well, I knew about garlic and vampires. Anything holy works on
vampires. What else works on werewolves?’

‘A gin and tonic’s always welcome,’ said Angua distantly.

*

_The tincture of night began to suffuse the soup of the afternoon_.

Lord Vetinari considered the sentence, and found it good. He liked
‘tincture’ particularly. Tincture. _Tinc_ture. It was a distinguished
word, and pleasantly countered by the flatness of ‘soup’. The soup of
the afternoon. Yes. In which may well be found the croutons of teatime.

*

‘I have to admit,’ said Mrs Palm, ‘that under Vetinari it has certainly
been safer to walk the streets—’

‘You should know, madam,’ said Mr Sock. Mrs Palm gave him an icy look.
There were a few sniggers.

‘I _meant_ that a modest payment to the Thieves’ Guild is all that is
required for perfect safety,’ she finished.

‘And, indeed, a man may visit a house of ill—’

‘Negotiable hospitality,’ said Mrs Palm quickly.

‘Indeed, and be quite confident of not waking up stripped stark naked
and beaten black and blue,’ said Sock.

‘Unless his tastes run that way,’ said Mrs Palm. ‘We aim to give
satisfaction. Very accurately, if required.’

‘Life has certainly been more reliable under Vetinari,’ said Mr Potts of
the Bakers’ Guild.

‘He does have all street-theatre players and mime artists thrown into
the scorpion pit,’ said Mr Boggis of the Thieves’ Guild.

‘True. But let’s not forget that he has his bad points too.’

[image]

‘What’s this?’

‘A Klatchian Hots without anchovies,’ said Vimes, lifting the cover. ‘We
got it from Ron’s Pizza Hovel round the corner.’

‘Has someone _already_ eaten this, Vimes?’

‘No, sir. That’s just how they chop up the food.’

‘Oh, I _see_. I thought perhaps the food-tasters were getting
over-enthusiastic,’ said the Patrician. ‘My word. What a treat I have to
look forward to.’

[image]

‘I think he’s got a sort of soft spot for the Patrician, in his way. He
once said that if anyone was going to kill Vetinari he’d like it to be
him.’

*

‘I’ve been running around looking for damn Clues instead of just
thinking for five minutes!’ said Vimes. ‘What is it I’m always telling
you?’

‘Never trust anybody, sir?’

‘No, not that.’

‘Everyone’s guilty of something, sir?’

‘Not that, either.’

‘Just because someone’s a member of an ethnic minority doesn’t mean
they’re not a nasty small-minded little jerk, sir?’

‘N—When did I say that?’

‘Last week, sir. After we’d had that visit from the Campaign for Equal
Heights, sir.’

*

_Angua thinks Carrot is about to propose_.

‘Hello, Angua!’ said Carrot cheerfully. ‘I was just coming to see you.’

He took off his helmet, and smoothed back his hair. ‘Er …’ he began.

‘I know what you’re going to ask,’ said Angua.

‘You do?’

‘I know you’ve been thinking about it. You knew I was wondering about
going.’

‘It was obvious, was it?’

‘And the answer’s no. I wish it could be yes.’

Carrot looked astonished. ‘It never occurred to me that you’d say no,’
he said. ‘I mean, why should you?’

‘Good grief, you amaze me,’ she said. ‘You really do.’

‘I thought it’d be something you’d want to do,’ said Carrot. He sighed.
‘Oh, well … it doesn’t matter, really.’

Angua felt that a leg had been kicked away. ‘It doesn’t _matter_?’ she
said.

‘I mean, yes, it’d have been nice, but I won’t lose any sleep over it.’

‘You won’t?’

‘Well, no. Obviously not. You’ve got other things you want to do. That’s
fine. I just thought you might enjoy it. I’ll do it by myself.’

‘What? How can …?’ Angua stopped. ‘What are you _talking_ about,
Carrot?’

‘The Dwarf Bread Museum. I promised Mr Hopkinson’s sister that I’d tidy
it up. I just thought it might cheer you up, but I appreciate that bread
isn’t everyone’s cup of tea.’

[image]

Detritus was particularly good when it came to asking questions. He had
three basic ones. They were the direct (‘Did you do it?’), the
persistent (‘Are you sure it wasn’t you what done it?’) and the subtle
(‘It was you what done it, wasn’t it?’). Although they were not the most
cunning questions ever devised, Detritus’s talent was to go on patiently
asking them for hours on end, until he got the right answer, which was
generally something like: ‘Yes! Yes! I did it! I did it!

Now please tell me what it was I did!’

[image]

It is a pervasive and beguiling myth that the people who design
instruments of death end up being killed by them. There is _almost_ no
foundation in fact. Colonel Shrapnel wasn’t blown up, M. Guillotin died
with his head on, Colonel Gatling wasn’t shot. If it hadn’t been for the
murder of cosh and blackjack maker Sir William Blunt-Instrument in an
alleyway, the rumour would never have got started.

[image]

The Ankh-Morpork view of crime and punishment

was that the penalty for the first offence should prevent the
possibility of a second offence.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

IT’S THE NIGHT before Hogswatch. And it’s too quiet.

Where is the big jolly fat man? Why is _Death_ creeping down chimneys
and trying to say Ho Ho Ho? The darkest night of the year is getting a
lot darker …

Susan the gothic governess has got to sort it out by morning, otherwise
there won’t _be_ a morning. Ever again …

The 20th Discworld novel is a festive feast of darkness and Death (but
with jolly robins and tinsel too).

As they say: You’d better watch out …

 

Everything starts somewhere, although many physicists disagree.

*

The senior wizards of Unseen University stood and looked at the door.

There was no doubt that whoever had shut it wanted it to stay shut.
Dozens of nails secured it to the door frame. Planks had been nailed
right across. And finally it had, up until this morning, been hidden by
a bookcase that had been put in front of it.

‘And there’s the sign, Ridcully,’ said the Dean. ‘You _have_ read it, I
assume. You know? The sign which says “Do not, under any circumstances,
open this door”?’

‘Of course I’ve read it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Why d’yer think I want it
opened?’

*

Lord Downey was an assassin. Or, rather, an Assassin. The capital letter
was important. It separated those curs who went around murdering people
for money from the gentlemen who were occasionally consulted by other
gentlemen who wished to have removed, for a consideration, any
inconvenient razorblades from the candyfloss of life.

*

The members of the Guild of Assassins considered themselves cultured men
who enjoyed good music and food and literature. And they knew the value
of human life. To a penny, in many cases.

*

It was a quiet day for Susan, although on the way to the park Gawain
trod on a crack in the pavement. On purpose.

‘Gawain?’ she said, eyeing a nervous bear who had suddenly spotted her
and was now trying to edge away nonchalantly.

‘Yes?’

‘You meant to tread on that crack so that I’d have to thump some poor
creature whose only fault is wanting to tear you limb from limb.’

‘I was just skipping—’

‘Quite. Real children don’t go hoppity-skip unless they are on drugs.’

He grinned at her.

‘If I catch you being twee again I will knot your arms behind your
head,’ said Susan levelly.

*

_Susan reads a bedtime story_:

‘… and then Jack chopped down the beanstalk, adding murder and
ecological vandalism to the theft, enticement and trespass charges
already mentioned, but he got away with it and lived happily ever after
without so much as a guilty twinge about what he had done. Which proves
that you can be excused just about anything if you’re a hero, because no
one asks inconvenient questions.’

*

Death in person did not turn up upon the cessation of every life. It was
not necessary. Governments govern, but prime ministers and presidents do
not personally turn up in people’s homes to tell them how to run their
lives, because of the mortal danger this would present. There are laws
instead.

*

It was the night before Hogswatch. All through the house …

… one creature stirred. It was a mouse.

And someone, in the face of all appropriateness, had baited a trap.
Although, because it was the festive season, they’d used a piece of pork
crackling. The smell of it had been driving the mouse mad all day but
now, with no one about, it was prepared to risk it.

The mouse didn’t know it was a trap. Mice aren’t good at passing on
information. Young mice aren’t taken up to famous trap sites and told,
‘This is where your Uncle Arthur passed away.’ All it knew was that,
what the hey, here was something to eat. On a wooden board with some
wire round it.

A brief scurry later and its jaw had closed on the rind.

Or, rather, passed through it.

The mouse looked around at what was now lying under the big spring, and
thought, ‘Oops …’

Then its gaze went up to the black-clad figure that had faded into view
by the wainscoting.

‘Squeak?’ it asked.

SQUEAK, said the Death of Rats.

[image]

‘Never say die, master. That’s our motto, eh?’ said Albert. I CAN’T SAY
IT’S EVER REALLY BEEN MINE.

[image]

In Biers, unless you weren’t choosy, it paid to order a drink that was
transparent because Igor also had undirected ideas about what you could
stick on the end of a cocktail stick. If you saw something spherical and
green, you just had to hope that it was an olive.

*

‘Did you check the list?’

YES. TWICE. ARE YOU SURE THAT’S ENOUGH?

‘Definitely.’

COULDN’T REALLY MAKE HEAD OR TAIL OF IT, TO TELL YOU THE TRUTH. HOW CAN
I _TELL_ IF HE’S BEEN NAUGHTY OR NICE, FOR EXAMPLE?

‘Oh, well … I don’t know … Has he hung his clothes up, that sort of
thing …’

AND IF HE HAS BEEN GOOD I MAY GIVE HIM THIS KLATCHIAN WAR CHARIOT WITH
REAL SPINNING SWORD BLADES?

‘That’s right.’

AND IF HE’S BEEN BAD?

Albert scratched his head. ‘When I was a lad, you got a bag of bones.
’s’mazing how kids got better behaved towards the end of the year.’

OH DEAR. AND NOW?

Albert held a package up to his ear and rustled it. ‘Sounds like socks.’

SOCKS.

‘Could be a woolly vest.’

SERVE HIM RIGHT, IF I MAY VENTURE TO EXPRESS AN OPINION …

*

The guard was cowering behind an overturned cabinet. He cringed back as
Teatime stepped over it. ‘What’re you doing here?’ he shouted. ‘Who
_are_ you?’

‘Ah, I’m glad you asked. I’m your worst nightmare!’ said Teatime
cheerfully.

The man shuddered.

‘You mean … the one with the giant cabbage and the sort of whirring
knife thing?’

‘Sorry?’ Teatime looked momentarily nonplussed.

‘Then you’re the one about where I’m falling, only instead of ground
underneath it’s all—’

‘No, in fact I’m—’

The guard sagged. ‘Awww, _not_ the one where there’s all this kind of,
you know, mud and then everything goes blue—’

‘No, I’m—’

‘Oh, _shit_, then you’re the one where there’s this door only there’s no
floor beyond it and then there’s these claws—’

‘No,’ said Teatime. ‘Not that one.’ He withdrew a dagger from his
sleeve. ‘I’m the one where this man comes out of nowhere and kills you
stone dead.’

The guard grinned with relief. ‘Oh, _that_ one,’ he said. ‘But that
one’s not very—’

*

The snow had done what even wizards and the Watch couldn’t do, which was
clean up Ankh-Morpork. It hadn’t had time to get dirty. In the morning
it’d probably look as though the city had been covered in coffee
meringue, but for now it mounded the bushes and trees in pure white.

*

Susan had never been able to see the attraction in cats. They were owned
by the kind of people who liked puddings. There were actual people in
the world whose idea of heaven would be a chocolate cat.

*

The late (or at least severely delayed) Bergholt Stuttley Johnson was
generally recognized as the worst inventor in the world, yet in a very
specialized sense. Merely _bad_ inventors made things that failed to
operate. He wasn’t among these small fry. Any fool could make something
that did absolutely nothing when you pressed the button. He scorned such
fumble-fingered amateurs. Everything he built worked. It just didn’t do
what it said on the box. If you wanted a small ground-to-air missile,
you asked Johnson to design an ornamental fountain. It amounted to
pretty much the same thing. But this never discouraged him, or the
morbid curiosity of his clients. Music, landscape gardening,
architecture – there was no start to his talents.

*

Johnson’s inventiveness didn’t just push the edge of the envelope but
often went across the room and out through the wall of the sorting
office.

*

‘Amazin’,’ said Ridcully. ‘This thing’s a kind of big artificial brain,
then?’

‘You _could_ think of it like that,’ said Ponder, carefully. ‘Of course,
Hex doesn’t actually think. Not as such. It just _appears_ to be
thinking.’

‘Ah. Like the Dean,’ said Ridcully. ‘Any chance of fitting a brain like
this into the Dean’s head?’

‘It does weigh ten tons, Archchancellor.’

‘Ah. Really? Oh. Quite a large crowbar would be in order, then.’

*

‘I … _think_ my name is Bilious. I’m the … I’m the oh God of Hangovers.’

‘I’ve never heard of a God of Hangovers …’

‘You’ve heard of Bibulous, the God of Wine?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘Big fat man, wears vine leaves round his head, always pictured with a
glass in his hand … Ow. Well, you know _why_ he’s so cheerful? Him and
his big face? It’s because he knows he’s going to feel good in the
morning! It’s because it’s _me_ that—’

‘—gets the hangovers?’ said Susan.

‘I don’t even drink!’ Bilious swayed. ‘You know when people say “I had
fifteen lagers last night and when I woke up my head was clear as a
bell”?’

‘Oh, yes.’

‘Bastards! That’s because _I_ was the one who woke up groaning in a pile
of recycled chilli. Just once, I mean just _once_, I’d like to open my
eyes in the morning without my head sticking to something.’

*

‘How do we usually test stuff?’

‘Generally we ask for student volunteers,’ said the Dean.

‘What happens if we don’t get any?’

‘We give it to them anyway.’

‘Isn’t that a bit unethical?’

‘Not if we don’t tell them, Archchancellor.’

*

‘I am _not_ losing my hair!’ snapped the Dean. ‘It is just very finely
spaced.’

‘Half on your head and half on your hairbrush,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘No sense in bein’ bashful about goin’ bald,’ said Ridcully evenly.
‘Anyway, you know what they say about bald men, Dean.’

‘Yes, they say, “Look at him, he’s got no hair.”’

*

At the far end of the corridor was one of the very tall, very thin
windows. It looked out on to the black gardens. Black bushes, black
grass, black trees. Skeletal fish cruising in the black waters of a
pool, under black water lilies.

There was colour, in a sense, but it was the kind of colour you’d get if
you could shine a beam of black through a prism. There were hints of
tints, here and there a black you might persuade yourself was a very
deep purple or a midnight blue. But it was basically black, under a
black sky, because this was the world belonging to Death and that was
all there was to it.

*

‘Just shut up, will you?’ Ridcully said. ‘It’s Hogswatch! That’s _not_
the time for silly arguments, all right?’

‘Oh, yes it is,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies glumly. ‘It’s
exactly the time for silly arguments. In our family we were lucky to get
through dinner without a reprise of What A Shame Henry Didn’t Go Into
Business With Our Ron. Or Why Hasn’t Anyone Taught Those Kids To Use A
Knife? That was another favourite.’

‘And the sulks,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Oh, the sulks,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies. ‘Not a proper
Hogswatch without everyone sitting staring at different walls.’

‘The games were worse,’ said Ponder.

‘Worse than the kids hitting one another with their toys, do you think?
Not a proper Hogswatch afternoon without wheels and bits of broken dolly
everywhere and everyone whining. Assault and battery included.’

‘We had a game called Hunt the Slipper,’ said Ponder. ‘Someone hid a
slipper. And then we had to find it. And then we had a row.’

‘And then later on someone’ll suggest a board game,’ said Ponder.

‘That’s right. Where no one exactly remembers all the rules.’

‘Which doesn’t stop someone suggesting that you play for pennies.’

‘And five minutes later there’s two people not speaking to one another
for the rest of their lives because of tuppence.’

‘And some horrible little kid—’

‘I know, I know! Some little kid who’s been allowed to stay up wins
everyone’s money by being a nasty little cut-throat swot!’

‘And don’t forget the presents,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies,
as if reading off some internal list of gloom. ‘How … how full of
potential they seem in all that paper, how pregnant with possibilities …
and then you open them and basically the wrapping paper was _more_
interesting and you have to say “How thoughtful, that _will_ come in
handy!” It’s not better to give than to receive, in my opinion, it’s
just less embarrassing.’

‘I’ve worked out,’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘that over the years I have
been a net exporter of Hogswatch presents—’

‘Oh, everyone is,’ said the Chair. ‘You spend a fortune on other people
and what you get when all the paper is cleared away is one slipper
that’s the wrong colour and a book about ear wax.’

*

‘You didn’t get _that_ stuff out of the sack! Not cigars and peaches in
brandy and grub with fancy foreign names!’

YES, IT CAME OUT OF THE SACK.

Albert gave him a suspicious look.

‘But you put it in the sack in the first place, didn’t you?’

NO.

‘You did, didn’t you?’ Albert stated.

NO.

‘You put all those things in the sack.’

NO.

‘You got them from somewhere and put them in the sack.’

NO.

‘You _did_ put them in the sack, didn’t you?’

NO.

‘You put them in the sack.’

YES.

*

‘They’re title deeds,’ said Medium Dave. ‘And they’re better than
money.’

‘Paper’s better’n money?’ said Catseye.

‘If we steal them, do they become ours?’ said Chickenwire.

‘Is that a trick question?’ said Catseye, smirking.

[image]

‘I know people say I’d kill them as soon as look at them,’ whispered
Teatime. ‘And in fact I’d _much_ rather kill you than look at you, Mr
Lilywhite.’

[image]

‘And what’ll you do when he comes after you?’

‘He can’t look everywhere.’

Medium Dave shook his head. You only had to look into Teatime’s
mismatched eyes to know one thing, which was this: that if Teatime
wanted to find you he would _not_ look everywhere. He’d look in only one
place, which would be the place where you were hiding.

[image]

‘They’ve piled the teeth up in a magic circle downstairs,’ said Susan.

Violet’s eyes and mouth formed three Os. It was like looking at a pink
bowling ball.

‘What for?’

‘I think they’re using them to control the children. By magic.’

Violet’s mouth opened wider.

‘That’s _horrid_.’

Horrible, thought Susan. The word is ‘horrible’. ‘Horrid’ is a childish
word selected to impress nearby males with one’s fragility, if I’m any
judge.

[image]

It is said that the prospect of hanging concentrates the mind
wonderfully, but it was Valium compared to being watched by Mister
Teatime.

*

‘I could certainly run a marvellous university here if only we didn’t
have to have these damn students underfoot all the time.’

*

‘All right,’ said Susan. ‘I’m not stupid. You’re saying humans need …
_fantasies_ to make life bearable.’

REALLY? AS IF IT WAS SOME KIND OF PINK PILL? NO. HUMANS NEED FANTASY TO
BE HUMAN. TO BE THE PLACE WHERE THE FALLING ANGEL MEETS THE RISING APE.

‘Tooth fairies? Hogfathers? Little—’

YES. AS PRACTICE. YOU HAVE TO START OUT LEARNING TO BELIEVE THE _LITTLE_
LIES.

‘So we can believe the big ones?’

YES. JUSTICE. MERCY. DUTY. THAT SORT OF THING.

‘They’re not the same at all!’

YOU THINK SO? THEN TAKE THE UNIVERSE AND GRIND IT DOWN TO THE FINEST
POWDER AND SIEVE IT THROUGH THE FINEST SIEVE AND THEN _SHOW_ ME ONE ATOM
OF JUSTICE, ONE MOLECULE OF MERCY. AND YET—Death waved a hand. AND YET
YOU ACT AS IF THERE IS SOME IDEAL ORDER IN THE WORLD, AS IF THERE IS
SOME … SOME _RIGHTNESS_ IN THE UNIVERSE BY WHICH IT MAY BE JUDGED.

‘Yes, but people have _got_ to believe that, or what’s the _point_—’

MY POINT EXACTLY.

*

Death fumbled inside his robe.

I HAVE MADE THIS FOR YOU.

Susan reached out and took a square of damp cardboard. Water dripped off
the bottom. Somewhere in the middle, a few brown feathers seemed to have
been glued on.

‘Thank you. Er … what is it?’

ALBERT SAID THERE OUGHT TO BE SNOW ON IT, BUT IT APPEARS TO HAVE MELTED,
said Death. IT IS, OF COURSE, A HOGSWATCH CARD.

‘Oh …’

THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN A ROBIN ON IT AS WELL, BUT I HAD CONSIDERABLE
DIFFICULTY IN GETTING IT TO STAY ON.

‘Ah …’

IT WAS NOT AT ALL CO-OPERATIVE.

‘Really …?’

IT DID NOT SEEM TO GET INTO THE HOGSWATCH SPIRIT AT ALL.

[image]

[image]

 

DISCWORLD GOES TO war, with armies of sardines, warriors, fishermen,
squid and at least one very camp follower.

As two armies march, Commander Vimes of Ankh-Morpork City Watch faces
unpleasant foes who are out to get him … and that’s just the people on
_his_ side. The enemy might be even worse.

_Jingo_ makes the World Cup look like a friendly five-a-side.

 

As every student of exploration knows, the prize goes not to the
explorer who first sets foot upon the virgin soil but to the one who
gets that foot home first. If it is still attached to his leg, this is a
bonus.

*

Detritus’s intelligence wasn’t too bad for a troll, falling somewhere
between a cuttlefish and a line-dancer.

*

Lord Vetinari looked attentive, because he’d always found that listening
keenly to people tended to put them off.

[image]

‘Oh, _history_,’ said Lord Selachii. ‘That’s all in the past!’

[image]

‘Gentlemen, please,’ said the Patrician. ‘Let’s have no fighting,
please. This is, after all, a council of war.’

*

‘A Klatchian bigwig is coming _here_?’ said Vimes. ‘No one told me!’

‘Strange as it may seem, Sir Samuel, I am occasionally capable of
governing this city for minutes at a time without seeking your advice
and guidance.’

*

‘My mum’s uncle was a sailor,’ said Nobby. ‘But after the big plague he
got press-ganged. Bunch of farmers got him drunk, he woke up next
morning tied to a plough.’

*

Sergeant Colon had had a broad education. He’d been to the School of My
Dad Always Said, the College of It Stands to Reason, and was now a
postgraduate student at the University of What Some Bloke In the Pub
Told Me.

*

Technically they were all in uniform, too, except that mostly they
weren’t wearing the same uniform as anyone else. Everyone had just been
sent down to the armoury to collect whatever fitted, and the result was
a walking historical exhibit: Funny-Shaped Helmets Through the Ages.

*

‘Dad?’

‘Yes, lad?’

‘Who was Mr Hong?’

‘How should I know?’

‘Only, when we was all heading back for the boats one of the other men
said, “We all know what happened to Mr Hong when he opened the Three
Jolly Luck Take-Away Fish Bar on the site of the old fish-god temple in
Dagon Street on the night of the full moon, don’t we …?” Well, _I_ don’t
know.’

‘Ah …’ Solid Jackson hesitated. Still, Les was a big lad now …

‘He … closed up and left in a bit of a hurry, lad. So quick he had to
leave some things behind.’

‘Like what?’

‘If you must know … half an ear-hole and one kidney.’

*

A few moments later Sergeant Colon walked carefully down to the main
office. He toyed with some paper for a while and then said:

‘You don’t mind what people call _you_, do you, Nobby?’

‘I’d be minding the whole time if I minded that, sarge,’ said Corporal
Nobbs cheerfully.

‘Right. Right! And _I_ don’t mind what people call _me_, neither.’ Colon
scratched his head. ‘Don’t make sense, really. I reckon Sir Sam is
missing too much sleep.’

‘He’s a very busy man, Fred.’

‘Trying to do everything, that’s his trouble. And … Nobby?’

‘Yes?’

‘It’s Sergeant Colon, thanks.’

*

There was sherry. There was always sherry at these occasions. Sam Vimes
had heard they made sherry by letting wine go rotten. He couldn’t see
the _point_ of sherry.

*

Vimes stood up. ‘You know what I always say,’ he said.

Carrot removed his helmet and polished it with his sleeve. ‘Yes, sir.
“Everyone’s guilty of something, especially the ones that aren’t,” sir.’

‘No, not that one …’

‘Er … “Always take into consideration the fact that you might be dead
wrong,” sir?’

‘No, nor that one either.’

‘Er … “How come Nobby ever got a job as a watchman?”, sir? You say that
a lot.’

‘No! I meant “Always act stupid,” Carrot.’

‘Ah, right, sir. From now on I shall remember that you always said that,
sir.’

*

‘Colon and Nobbs are investigating this?’ said the Patrician. ‘Really?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘If I were to ask you why, you’d pretend not to understand?’

Vimes let his forehead wrinkle in honest perplexity. ‘Sir?’

‘If you say “Sir?” again in that stupid voice, Vimes, I swear there will
be trouble.’

‘They’re good men, sir.’

‘However, some people might consider them to be unimaginative, stolid
and … how can I put this? … possessed of an inbuilt disposition to
accept the first explanation that presents itself and then bunk off
somewhere for a quiet smoke? A certain lack of imagination? An ability
to get out of their depth on a wet pavement?’

*

Vetinari peered at a small heap of bent and twisted metal.

‘What was it, Leonard?’ he said.

‘An experimental device for turning chemical energy into rotary motion,’
said Leonard. ‘The problem, you see, is getting the little pellets of
black powder into the combustion chamber at exactly the right speed and
one at a time. If two ignite together, well, what we have is the
_external_ combustion engine.’

‘And, er, what would be the purpose of it?’ said the Patrician.

‘I believe it could replace the horse,’ said Leonard proudly.

They looked at the stricken thing.

‘One of the advantages of horses that people often point out,’ said
Vetinari, after some thought, ‘is that they very seldom explode.’

*

Leonard’s incredible brain sizzled away alarmingly, an overloaded chip
pan on the Stove of Life. It was impossible to know what he would think
of next, because he was constantly reprogrammed by the whole universe.
The sight of a waterfall or a soaring bird would send him spinning down
some new path of practical speculation that invariably ended in a heap
of wire and springs and a cry of ‘I think I know what I did wrong.’ He’d
been a member of most of the craft guilds in the city but had been
thrown out for getting impossibly high marks in the exams or, in some
cases, correcting the questions. It was said that he’d accidentally
blown up the Alchemists’ Guild using nothing more than a glass of water,
a spoonful of acid, two lengths of wire and a ping-pong ball.

*

_Nobby and Colon go on a call – in plain clothes:_

‘Come on, open up! Watch business!’

Corporal Nobbs pulled at Sergeant Colon’s sleeve and whispered in his
ear.

‘_Not_ Watch business!’ said Colon, pounding the door again. ‘Nothing to
do with the Watch at all! We are just civilians, all right?’

The door opened a crack.

‘_Are_ you the Watch?’ said a voice.

‘No! I think I just made that clear—’

‘Piss off, copper!’

The door slammed. ‘You sure this is the right place, sarge?’

‘Don’t call me sarge when we’re in plain clothes!’

‘Right you are, Fred.’

‘That’s—’ Colon hesitated in an agony of status. ‘Well, that’s
_Frederick_ to you, Nobby.’

‘Right, Frederick. And that’s Cecil, thank you.’

‘Cecil?’

‘That is my name,’ said Nobby coldly.

‘Have it your way,’ said Colon. ‘Just remember who’s the superior
civilian around here, all right?’

He hammered on the door again. ‘We hear you’ve got a room to let,
missus!’ he yelled.

‘Brilliant, Frederick,’ said Nobby. ‘That was bloody _brilliant_!’

‘Well, I _am_ the sergeant, right?’ Colon whispered.

‘No.’

‘Er … yeah … right … well, just you remember that, right?’

*

‘_Sam?_’

Vimes looked up from his reading.

‘Your soup will be cold,’ said Lady Sybil from the far end of the table.
‘You’ve been holding that spoonful in the air for the last five minutes
by the clock.’

‘Sorry, dear.’

Belatedly, his nuptial radar detected a certain chilliness from the far
side of the cruet.

‘Is, er, there something wrong, dear?’ he said.

‘Can you remember when we last had dinner together, Sam?’

‘Tuesday, wasn’t it?’

‘That was the Guild of Merchants’ annual dinner, Sam.’

Vimes’s brow wrinkled. ‘But you were there too, weren’t you?’

*

Ankh-Morpork no longer had a fire brigade. The citizens had a rather
disturbingly direct way of thinking at times, and it did not take long
for people to see the rather obvious flaw in paying a group of people by
the number of fires they put out. The penny really dropped shortly after
Charcoal Tuesday.

Since then they had relied on the good old principle of enlightened
self-interest. People living close to a burning building did their best
to douse the fire, because the thatch they saved might be their own.

[image]

‘Mr Vimes saved the day!’ said Sergeant Colon excitedly.

‘Just went straight in and saved everyone, in the finest tradition of
the Watch!’

‘Fred?’ said Vimes, wearily.

‘Yessir?’

‘Fred, the finest tradition of the Watch is having a quiet smoke
somewhere out of the wind at 3 a.m. Let’s not get carried away, eh?’

[image]

Colon rummaged in a pocket and produced a very small book, which he held
up for inspection.

‘This belonged to my great-grandad,’ he said. ‘He was in the scrap we
had against Pseudopolis and my great-gran gave him this book of prayers
for soldiers, ’cos you need all the prayers you can get, believe you me,
and he stuck it in the top pocket of his jerkin, ’cos he couldn’t afford
armour, and next day in battle – whoosh, this arrow came out of nowhere,
wham, straight into this book and it went all the way through to the
last page before stopping, look. You can see the hole.’

‘Pretty miraculous,’ Carrot agreed.

‘Yeah, it was, I s’pose,’ said the sergeant. He looked ruefully at the
battered volume. ‘Shame about the other seventeen arrows, really.’

[image]

Another little memory burst open as silently as a mouse passing wind in
a hurricane.

[image]

‘He is a D’reg!’

‘Dreg?’ said Angua.

‘A warlike desert tribe,’ said Carrot. ‘Very fierce. Honourable, though.
They say that if a D’reg is your friend he’s your friend for the rest of
your life.’

‘And if he’s _not_ your friend?’

‘That’s about five seconds.’

*

‘Everything’s gone all to pot these days.’

‘Not like when we were kids, sarge.’

‘Not like when we were kids indeed, Nobby.’

‘People trusted one another in them days, didn’t they, sarge?’

‘People trusted one another, Nobby.’

‘Yes, sarge. I know. And people didn’t have to lock their doors, did
they?’

‘That’s right, Nobby. And people were always ready to help. They were
always in and out of one another’s houses.’

‘ ’sright, sarge,’ said Nobby vehemently. ‘I know no one ever locked
their houses down _our_ street.’

‘That’s what I’m talking about. That’s my point.’

‘It was ’cos the bastards even used to steal the locks.’

Colon considered the truth of this.

‘Yes, but at least it was _each other’s_ stuff they were nicking,
Nobby.’

*

Lord Rust’s expression would have preserved meat for a year.

‘You, Vimes, certainly are no knight. Before a knight is created he must
spend a night’s vigil watching his armour—’

‘Practically every night of my life,’ said Vimes. ‘A man doesn’t keep an
eye on his armour round here, that man’s got no armour in the morning.’

‘In _prayer_,’ said Rust sharply.

‘That’s me,’ said Vimes. ‘Not a night has gone by without me thinking,
“Ye gods, I hope I get through this alive.”’

‘—and he must have proved himself on the field of combat. Against other
trained men, Vimes. Not vermin and thugs.’

Vimes started to undo the strap of his helmet.

‘Well, this isn’t the best of moments, my lord, but if someone’ll hold
your coat I can spare you five minutes …’

*

‘It is always useful to face an enemy who is prepared to die for his
country. This means that both you and he have exactly the same aim in
mind.’

*

The Engravers’ Guild was against printing. There was something pure,
they said, about an engraved page of text. It was there, whole,
unsullied. Their members could do very fine work at very reasonable
rates. Allowing unskilled people to bash lumps of type together showed a
disrespect for words and no good would come of it.

The only attempt ever to set up a printing press in Ankh-Morpork had
ended in a mysterious fire and the death by suicide of the luckless
printer. Everyone knew it was suicide because he’d left a note. The fact
that this had been engraved on the head of a pin was considered an
irrelevant detail.

*

71-hour Ahmed was not _super_stitious. He _was_ substitious, which put
him in a minority among humans. He didn’t believe in the things everyone
believed in but which nevertheless weren’t true. He believed instead in
the things that were true in which no one else believed. There are many
such substitions, ranging from ‘It’ll get better if you don’t pick at
it’ all the way up to ‘Sometimes things just happen.’

[image]

‘So what’re you going to do when we catch the other ship?’

‘Er …’ Vimes hadn’t given this a lot of thought. But he recalled a very
bad woodcut he’d once seen in a book about pirates.

‘We’ll swing across on to them with our cutlasses in our teeth?’ he
said.

‘Really?’ said Jenkins. ‘That’s good. I haven’t seen that done in years.
Only ever seen it done once, in fact.’

‘Oh, yes?’

‘Yes, this lad’d seen the idea in a book and he swung across into the
other ship’s rigging with his cutlass clenched, as you say, between his
teeth.’

‘Yes?’

‘Topless Harry, we wrote on his coffin.’

[image]

Angua was aware that she had a slight advantage over male werewolves in
that naked women caused fewer complaints, although the downside was that
they got some pressing invitations. Some kind of covering was essential,
for modesty and the prevention of inconvenient bouncing, which was why
fashioning impromptu clothes out of anything to hand was a lesser-known
werewolf skill.

*

‘It’s the waiting that’s the worst part,’ said his sergeant, next to
him.

‘It _might_ be the worst part,’ said the commander. ‘Or, there again,
the bit where they suddenly rise out of the desert and cut you in half
might be the worst part.’

*

Lord Vetinari helped him up. ‘Our very lives depend on your appearing to
be a stupid fat idiot,’ he hissed, putting Colon’s fez back on his head.
‘I ain’t very good at acting, sir—’

‘Good!’

*

‘Your predecessor, Lord Snapcase, now he _was_ mental. But, like I’ve
always said, people know where they stand with Lord Vetinari …’

‘Well done.’

‘They might not _like_ where they’re standing of course …’

[image]

[image]

 

IT’S THE DISCWORLD’S last continent and it’s going to die in a few days,
except …

Who is this hero striding across the red desert? Sheep shearer, beer
drinker, bush ranger, and someone who’ll even eat a Meat Pie Floater
when he’s _sober_.

A man in a hat whose Luggage follows him on little legs. Yes, it’s
Rincewind, the inept wizard who can’t even _spell_ wizard. He’s the only
hero left.

Still … no worries, eh?

 

There are some people who have a legend that the whole universe is
carried in a leather bag by an old man.

Other people say: hold on, if he’s carrying the entire universe in a
sack, right, that means he’s carrying himself and the sack _inside_ the
sack, because the universe contains everything. Including him. And the
sack, of course. Which contains him and the sack already. As it were.

To which the reply is: well?

All tribal myths are true, for a given value of ‘true’.

*

The Ceremony of the Keys went on every night in every season. Mere ice,
wind and snow had never stopped it. You couldn’t stop Tradition. You
could only add to it.

McAbre, Head Bledlow, with his two escorts, reached the shadows by the
main gate. The bledlow on duty was waiting for them.

‘Halt! Who Goes There?’ he shouted.

McAbre saluted. The Archchancellor’s Keys!’

‘Pass, The Archchancellor’s Keys!’

The Head Bledlow took a step forward, extended both arms in front of him
with his palms bent back towards him, and patted his chest at the place
where some bledlow long buried had once had two breast pockets. Pat,
pat. Then he extended his arms by his sides and stiffly patted the sides
of his jacket. Pat, pat.

‘Damn! Could Have Sworn I Had Them A Moment Ago!’ he bellowed,
enunciating each word with a sort of bulldog carefulness.

The gatekeeper saluted. McAbre saluted.

‘Have You Looked In All Your Pockets?’

McAbre saluted. The gatekeeper saluted.

‘I Think I Must Have Left Them On The Dresser. It’s Always The Same,
Isn’t It?’

‘You Should Remember Where You Put Them Down!’

‘Hang On, Perhaps They’re In My Other Jacket!’

The young bledlow who was this week’s Keeper of the Other Jacket stepped
forward. Each man saluted the other two. The youngest cleared his throat
and managed to say:

‘No, I Looked In … There This … Morning!’

McAbre gave him a slight nod to acknowledge a difficult job done well,
and patted his pockets again.

‘Hold On, Stone The Crows, They Were In This Pocket After All! What A
Muggins I Am!’

‘Don’t Worry, I Do The Same Myself!’

‘Is My Face Red! Forget My Own Head Next! … Here’s The Keys, Then!’ said
McAbre.

‘Much Obliged!’ …

‘All Safe And Secure!’ shouted the gatekeeper, handing the keys back.

‘Gods Bless All Present!’

‘Careful Where You Put Them This Time. Ha! Ha! Ha!’

‘Ho! Ho! Ho!’ yelled McAbre. He saluted stiffly, went About Turn with a
large amount of foot stamping and, the ancient exchange completed,
marched back to the bledlows’ lodge.

*

Light travels slowly on the Disc and is slightly heavy, with a tendency
to pile up against high mountain ranges. Research wizards have
speculated that there is another, much speedier type of light which
allows the slower light to be seen, but since this moves too fast to see
they have been unable to find a use for it.

*

Ponder Stibbons was one of those unfortunate people cursed with the
belief that if only he found out enough things about the universe it
would all, somehow, make sense. The goal is the Theory of Everything,
but Ponder would settle for the Theory of Something and, late at night,
he despaired of even a Theory of Anything.

*

Any true wizard, faced with a sign like ‘Do not open this door. Really.
We mean it. We’re not kidding. Opening this door will mean the end of
the universe,’ would _automatically_ open the door in order to see what
all the fuss was about.

*

‘Hah, I remember when I was a student,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘Old “Bogeyboy” Swallett took us on an expedition to find the
Lost Reading Room. Three weeks we were wandering around. Had to eat our
own boots.’

‘Did you find it?’ said the Dean.

‘No, but we found the remains of the previous year’s expedition.’

‘What did you do?’

‘We ate their boots, too.’

*

‘We’re a university! We _have_ to have a library!’ said Ridcully. ‘What
sort of people would we be if we didn’t go into the Library?’

‘Students,’ said the Senior Wrangler morosely.

[image]

… a man whose ability to find water was limited to checking if his feet
were wet…

[image]

Ridcully was good at doing without other people’s sleep.

*

Unseen University was much bigger on the inside. Thousands of years as
the leading establishment of practical magic in a world where dimensions
were largely a matter of chance in any case had left it bulging in
places where it shouldn’t have places. There were rooms containing rooms
which, if you entered them, turned out to contain the room you’d started
with, which can be a problem if you are in a conga line.

*

Rincewind had always been happy to think of himself as a racist. The One
Hundred Metres, the Mile, the Marathon – he’d run them all. Later, when
he’d learned with some surprise what the word actually _meant_, he’d
been equally certain he wasn’t one. He was a person who divided the
world quite simply into people who were trying to kill him and people
who weren’t.

*

‘When you’ve been a wizard as long as I have, my boy [said the Senior
Wrangler], you’ll learn that as soon as you find anything that offers
amazing possibilities for the improvement of the human condition it’s
best to put the lid back on and pretend it never happened.’

*

Droit de mortis: broadly speaking, the acceleration of a wizard through
the ranks of wizardry by killing off more senior wizards. It is a
practice currently in abeyance, since a few enthusiastic attempts to
remove Mustrum Ridcully resulted in one wizard being unable to hear
properly for two weeks. Ridcully felt that there was indeed room at the
top, and he was occupying all of it.

*

It is a simple universal law. People always expect to use a holiday in
the sun as an opportunity to read those books they’ve always meant to
read, but an alchemical combination of sun, quartz crystals and coconut
oil will somehow metamorphose any improving book into a rather thicker
one with a name containing at least one Greek word or letter (_The Gamma
Imperative, The Delta Season, The Alpha Project_ and, in the more
extreme cases, even _The Mu Kau Pi Caper_). Sometimes a hammer and
sickle turn up on the cover. This is probably caused by sunspot
activity, since they are invariably the wrong way round.

*

Any seasoned traveller soon learns to avoid anything wished on them as a
‘regional speciality’, because all the term means is that the dish is so
unpleasant the people living everywhere else will bite off their own
legs rather than eat it. But hosts still press it upon distant guests
anyway: ‘Go on, have the dog’s head stuffed with macerated cabbage and
pork noses – it’s a _regional speciality_.’

*

The University’s housekeeper [it had been unkindly said] had a face full
of chins; there _was_ a glossiness about her that put some people in
mind of a candle that had been kept in the warm for too long. There
wasn’t anything approaching a straight line anywhere on Mrs Whitlow,
until she found that something hadn’t been dusted properly, when you
could use her lips as a ruler.

*

The wizards were civilized men of considerable education and culture.
When faced with being inadvertently marooned on a desert island they
understood immediately that the first thing to do was place the blame.

*

‘Remember what we’d say in those days?’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘“Never trust a wizard over sixty-five”? Whatever happened?’

‘We got past the age of sixty-five, Senior Wrangler.’

*

The Bursar was, as he would probably be the first to admit, not the most
mentally stable of people. He would probably be the first to admit that
he was a tea-strainer.

*

Once a moderately jolly wizard camped by a dried-up waterhole under the
shade of a tree that he was completely unable to identify. And he swore
as he hacked and hacked at a can of beer, saying, ‘What kind of _idiots_
put beer in _tins_?’

*

Beer! It was only water, really, with stuff in it. Wasn’t it? And most
of what was in it was yeast, which was practically a medicine and
definitely a food. In fact, when you thought about it, beer was only a
kind of runny bread.

*

‘Is it true that your life passes before your eyes before you die?’

YES.

‘Ghastly thought, really.’ Rincewind shuddered. ‘Oh, _gods_, I’ve just
had another one. Suppose I _am_ just about to die and _this_ is my whole
life passing in front of my eyes?’

I THINK PERHAPS YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND. PEOPLE’S WHOLE LIVES _DO_ PASS IN
FRONT OF THEIR EYES BEFORE THEY DIE. THE PROCESS IS CALLED ‘LIVING’.

[image]

[image]

 

MIGHTILY OATS HAS not picked a good time to be a priest. He thought he’d
come to Lancre for a simple ceremony. Now he’s caught up in a war
between vampires and witches.

There’s Young Agnes, who is _really_ in two minds about everything.
Magrat, who is trying to combine witchcraft and nappies, Nanny Ogg … and
Granny Weatherwax, who is big trouble.

And the vampires are intelligent. They’ve got style and fancy
waistcoats. They’re out of the casket, and want a bite of the future.
Mightily Oats knows he has a prayer, but he wishes he had an axe.

 

In Lancre the only truly flat places were tables and the top of some
people’s heads.

*

Those who are inclined to casual cruelty say that inside a fat girl is a
thin girl and a lot of chocolate.

*

Agnes thought that a dumpy girl should not wear a tall hat, especially
with black. It made her look as though someone had dropped a
liquorice-flavoured ice-cream cone.

*

The Lancrastian idea of posh sanitation was a non-slippery path to the
privy and a mail-order catalogue with really soft pages.

*

_Sometimes witches have to be the ones that make the difficult decisions
for people. Life and death. Choosing between saving a mother or her
new-born son_.

‘You got to come to Mrs Ivy and her baby missus!’

‘I thought old Mrs Patternoster was seeing to her,’ said Granny, ramming
her hatpins into place with the urgency of a warrior preparing for
sudden battle.

‘She says it’s all gone wrong miss!’ …

Slice was perched along the sides of a cleft in the mountains that
couldn’t be dignified by the name of valley. In the moonlight Granny saw
the pale upturned face waiting in the shadows of the garden as she came
in to land.

‘Evening, Mr Ivy,’ she said, leaping off. ‘Upstairs, is she?’

‘In the barn,’ said Ivy flatly. ‘The cow kicked her … hard.’

Granny’s expression stayed impassive.

‘We shall see,’ she said, ‘what may be done.’

In the barn, one look at Mrs Patternoster’s face told her how little
that might now be.

‘It’s bad,’ she whispered, as Granny looked at the moaning figure on the
straw. ‘I reckon we’ll lose both of them … or maybe just one …’

There was, if you were listening for it, just the suggestion of a
question in that sentence. Granny focused her mind.

‘It’s a boy,’ she said.

Mrs Patternoster didn’t bother to wonder how Granny knew, but her
expression indicated that a little more weight had been added to a
burden.

‘I’d better go and put it to John Ivy, then,’ she said.

She’d barely moved before Granny Weatherwax’s hand locked on her arm.

‘He’s no part in this,’ she said.

‘But after all, he _is_ the—’

‘He’s no part in this.’

Mrs Patternoster looked into the blue stare and knew two things. One was
that Mr Ivy had no part in this, and the other was that anything that
happened in this barn was never, ever, going to be mentioned again.

‘I think I can bring ’em to mind,’ said Granny, letting go and rolling
up her sleeves. ‘Pleasant couple, as I recall. He’s a good husband, by
all accounts.’ She poured warm water from its jug into the bowl that the
midwife had set up on a manger.

Mrs Patternoster nodded.

‘Of course, it’s difficult for a man working these steep lands alone,’
Granny went on, washing her hands. Mrs Patternoster nodded again,
mournfully.

‘Well, I reckon you should take him into the cottage, Mrs Patternoster,
and make him a cup of tea,’ Granny commanded. ‘You can tell him I’m
doing all I can.’

This time the midwife nodded gratefully.

When she had fled, Granny laid a hand on Mrs Ivy’s damp forehead.

‘Well now, Florence Ivy,’ she said, ‘let us see what might be done. But
first of all … no pain …’

INDEED.

Granny didn’t bother to turn round.

‘I thought you’d be here,’ she said, as she knelt down in the straw.

WHERE ELSE? said Death.

‘Do you know who you’re here for?’

THAT IS NOT MY CHOICE. ON THE _VERY_ EDGE YOU WILL ALWAYS FIND SOME
UNCERTAINTY.

Granny felt the words in her head for several seconds, like little
melting cubes of ice. On the very, very edge, then, there had to be …
judgement.

‘There’s too much damage here,’ she said, at last. ‘Too much.’

A few minutes later she felt the life stream past her. Death had the
decency to leave without a word.

When Mrs Patternoster tremulously knocked on the door and pushed it
open, Granny was in the cow’s stall. The midwife saw her stand up,
holding a piece of thorn.

‘Been in the beast’s leg all day,’ she said. ‘No wonder it was fretful.
Try and make sure he doesn’t kill the cow, you understand? They’ll need
it.’

Mrs Patternoster glanced down at the rolled-up blanket in the straw.
Granny had tactfully placed it out of sight of Mrs Ivy, who was sleeping
now.

‘I’ll tell him,’ said Granny, brushing off her dress. ‘As for her, well,
she’s strong and young and you know what to do. You keep an eye on her,
and me or Nanny Ogg will drop in when we can.’

It was doubtful that anyone in Slice would defy Granny Weatherwax, but
Granny saw the faintest grey shadow of disapproval in the midwife’s
expression.

‘You still reckon I should’ve asked Mr Ivy?’ she said.

‘That’s what I would have done …’ the woman mumbled.

‘You don’t like him? You think he’s a bad man?’ said Granny, adjusting
her hatpins.

‘No!’

‘Then what’s he ever done to _me_, that I should hurt him so?’

*

The people of Lancre wouldn’t dream of living in anything other than a
monarchy. They’d done so for thousands of years and knew that it worked.
But they’d also found that it didn’t do to pay too much attention to
what the King wanted, because there was bound to be another king along
in forty years or so and he’d be certain to want something different and
so they’d have gone to all that trouble for nothing. In the meantime,
his job as they saw it was to mostly stay in the palace, practise the
waving, have enough sense to face the right way on coins and let them
get on with the ploughing, sowing, growing and harvesting. It was, as
they saw it, a social contract. They did what they always did, and he
let them.

*

‘I used to know an Igor from Uberwald,’ said Nanny. ‘Walked with a limp.
One eye a bit higher than the other. Had the same manner of … speaking.
Very good at brain juggling, too.’

‘That thoundth like my Uncle Igor,’ said Igor. ‘He worked for the mad
doctor at Blinz. Ha, an’ he wath a _proper_ mad doctor, too, not like
the mad doctorth you get thethe dayth. And the thervantth? Even worthe.
No pride thethe dayth.’ He tapped the brandy flask for emphasis. ‘When
Uncle Igor wath thent out for a geniuth’th brain, that’th what you damn
well got. There wath none of thith fumble-finger thtuff and then
pinching a brain out of the “Really Inthane” jar and hopin’ no one’d
notithe. They alwayth do, anyway.’

Nanny took a step back. The only sensible way to hold a conversation
with an Igor was when you had an umbrella.

*

Not many people ever _tasted_ Nanny Ogg’s home-made brandy; it was
technically impossible. Once it encountered the warmth of the human
mouth it immediately turned into fumes. You drank it via your sinuses.

*

‘The trouble is that people always think of vampires in terms of their
diet,’ said the Count, as Nanny hurried away. ‘It’s really rather
insulting. _You_ eat animal flesh and vegetables, but it hardly defines
you, does it?’

*

‘How does Perdita work, then?’ said Nanny.

Agnes sighed. ‘Look, you know the part of you that wants to do all the
things you don’t dare do, and thinks the thoughts you don’t dare think?’

Nanny’s face stayed blank. Agnes floundered. ‘Like … maybe … rip off all
your clothes and run naked in the rain?’ she hazarded.

‘Oh, _yes_. Right,’ said Nanny.

‘Well … I suppose Perdita is that part of me.’

‘Really? I’ve always been that part of me,’ said Nanny. ‘The important
thing is to remember where you left your clothes.’

*

‘People have quite the wrong idea about vampires, you see. Are we
fiendish killers?’ He beamed at them. ‘Well, yes, of course we are. But
only when necessary.’

*

They were listening quite contentedly to the worst music since Shawn
Ogg’s bagpipes had been dropped down the stairs.

*

They watched the servant limp off. The Count shook his head.

‘He’ll never retire,’ said Vlad. ‘He’ll never take a hint.’

‘And it’s so old fashioned having a servant called Igor,’ said the
Countess. ‘He really is too much.’

‘Look, it’s simple,’ said Lacrimosa. ‘Just take him down to the cellars,
slam him in the Iron Maiden, stretch him on the rack over a fire for a
day or two, and then slice him thinly from the feet upwards, so he can
watch. You’ll be doing him a kindness, really.’

‘I suppose it’s the best way,’ said the Count sadly.

*

There was more to Mr Oats than met the eye. There had to be.

*

Books that were all about the world tended to be written by people who
knew all about books rather than all about the world.

*

‘Look, you said you’ve studied vampires, didn’t you? What’s good for
vampires?’

Oats thought for a moment. ‘Er … a nice dry coffin, er, plenty of fresh
blood, er, overcast skies …’ His voice trailed off when he saw her
expression. ‘Ah … well, it depends exactly where they’re from, I
remember. Uberwald is a very big place. Er, cutting off the head and
staking them in the heart is generally efficacious.’

‘But that works on everyone,’ said Nanny.

*

‘You don’t know what he’s like,’ said Agnes. ‘He looks at me as if he’s
undressing me with his eyes.’

‘Eyes is allowed,’ said Nanny.

*

Agnes’s arm whirled. The holy water spiralled out of the bottle and hit
Vlad full in the chest.

He threw his arms wide and screamed as water cascaded down and poured
into his shoes.

‘_Look_ at this waistcoat! Will you _look_ at this waistcoat? Do you
know what water does to silk? You just never get it out! No matter what
you do, there’s always a mark.’

*

Few birds could sit more meekly than the Lancre wowhawk, or lappet-faced
worrier, a carnivore permanently on the lookout for the vegetarian
option.

[image]

The Count blew a smoke ring.

‘Good evening,’ he said, as it drifted away. ‘You must be the mob.’

[image]

‘May I introduce you to Sergeant Kraput, and this gentleman here picking
his teeth with his knife is Corporal Svitz. They and their men will be
going on duty in, oh, about an hour. Purely for reasons of security, you
understand.’

‘An’ then we’ll gut yer like a clam and stuff yer with straw,’ said
Corporal Svitz.

‘Ah. This is technical military language of which I know little,’ said
the Count. ‘I do so hope there is no unpleasantness.’

‘I don’t,’ said Sergeant Kraput.

‘What scamps they are,’ said the Count.

*

‘It’th a pleathure to be commanded in a clear, firm authoritative
voithe, mithtreth,’ said Igor, lurching over to the bridles. ‘None of
thith “Would you mind …” rubbith. An Igor liketh to know where he
thtandth.’

‘Slightly lopsidedly?’ said Magrat.

*

‘The Prophet Brutha said that Om helps those who help one another.’

‘And does he?’

‘To be honest, there are a number of opinions of what was meant.’

‘How many?’

‘About one hundred and sixty, since the Schism of 10.30 a.m., February
23. That was when the Re-United Free Chelonianists (Hubwards
Convocation) schismed from the Re-United Free Chelonianists (Rimwards
Convocation). It was rather serious.’

‘Blood spilled?’ said Agnes. She wasn’t really interested, but it took
her mind off whatever might be waking up in a minute.

‘No, but there were fisticuffs and a deacon had ink spilled on him.’

*

‘The Omnians used to burn witches …’

‘They never did,’ said Granny.

‘I’m afraid I have to admit that the records show—’

‘They never burned witches,’ said Granny. ‘Probably they burned some old
ladies who spoke up or couldn’t run away. I wouldn’t look for witches
bein’ burned,’ she added, shifting position. ‘I might look for witches
doin’ the burning, though. We ain’t _all_ nice.’

*

‘There is a very interesting debate raging at the moment [among Omnians]
about the nature of sin, for example.’

‘And what do they think? Against it, are they?’ [said Granny.]

‘It’s not as simple as that. It’s not a black and white issue. There are
so many shades of grey.’

‘There’s no greys, only white that’s got grubby. I’m surprised you don’t
know that. And sin, young man, is when you treat people as things.
Including yourself. That’s what sin is.’

‘It’s a lot more complicated than that—’

‘No. It ain’t. When people say things are a lot more complicated than
that, they means they’re getting worried that they won’t like the truth.
People as things, that’s where it starts.’

‘Oh, I’m sure there are worse crimes—’

‘But they _starts_ with thinking about people as things …’

*

Scraps tried to lick Igor. He was a dog with a lot of lick to share.

‘Thcrapth, play dead,’ said Igor. The dog dropped and rolled over with
his legs in the air.

‘Thee?’ said Igor. ‘He rememberth!’

*

Agnes indicated the headless vampire. ‘Er … is that one Vlad?’ she said.

‘We can check. Piotr, show her the head.’

A young man obediently went to the fireplace, pulled on a glove, lifted
the lid of a big saucepan and held up a head by its hair.

‘That’s not Vlad,’ said Agnes, swallowing. _No_, said Perdita, _Vlad was
taller_.

*

The Countess clutched his arm.

‘Oh, this does so remind me of our honeymoon,’ she said. ‘Don’t you
remember those wonderful nights in Grjsknvij?’

‘Oh, fresh morning of the world indeed,’ said the Count solemnly.

‘Such romance … and we met such lovely people, too. Do you remember Mr
and Mrs Harker?’

‘Very fondly. I recall they lasted nearly all week.’

*

Vampires are not naturally co-operative creatures. It’s not in their
nature. Every other vampire is a rival for the next meal. In fact, the
ideal situation for a vampire is a world in which every other vampire
has been killed off and no one seriously believes in vampires any more.

[image]

[image]

 

SAM VIMES IS a man on the run.

Yesterday he was a duke, a chief of police and the ambassador to the
mysterious, fat-rich country of Uberwald.

Now he has nothing but his native wit and the gloomy trousers of Uncle
Vanya (don’t ask). It’s snowing. It’s freezing. And if he can’t make it
through the forest to civilization there’s going to be a terrible war.

But there are monsters on his trail. They’re bright. They’re fast.
They’re werewolves – and they’re catching up.

Starring dwarfs, diplomacy, intrigue and big lumps of fat.

 

All Jolson was a man who’d show up on an atlas and change the orbit of
small planets. Paving stones cracked under his feet. He combined in one
body – and there was plenty of room left over – Ankh-Morpork’s best chef
and its keenest eater, a circumstance made in mashed potato heaven. He’d
picked up the nickname by general acclaim, since no one seeing him in
the street for the first time could believe that it was _all_ Jolson.

*

It is in the nature of the universe that the person who always keeps you
waiting ten minutes will, on the day you are ten minutes tardy, have
been ready ten minutes early and will make a point of _not mentioning
this_.

*

Uberwald was so thickly forested, so creased by little mountain ranges
and beset by rivers, that it was largely unmapped. It was mostly
unexplored, too.

(At least by proper explorers. Just living there doesn’t count.)

[image]

‘I could’ve _bin_ a wolf, you know,’ said Gaspode.

‘With diff’rent parents, of course.’

[image]

‘Someone said something blotto voice,’ said Captain Colon.

‘I’m sure they didn’t, captain,’ said Nobby.

‘And I won’t be eyeballed like that, neither!’

‘No one’s looking at you!’ wailed Nobby.

‘Aha, you think I don’t know that one?’ Colon shouted. ‘There’s plenty
of ways to eyeball someone without lookin’ at ’em, corporal. That man
over there is earlobing me!’

*

Gaspode settled down in the pose he almost unconsciously categorized as
Faithful Companion Keeping Watch, got bored, scratched himself
absent-mindedly, curled up in the pose known as Faithful Companion
Curled Up With His Nose Pressed On His Bottom, and fell asleep.

*

Lord Vetinari paused. He found it difficult to talk to Frederick Colon.
He dealt on a daily basis with people who treated conversation as a
complex game, and with Colon he had to keep on adjusting his mind in
case he overshot.

*

Gaspode wasn’t sure of his own ancestry. There was some terrier, and a
touch of spaniel, and probably someone’s leg, and an awful lot of
mongrel.

*

[image]

‘I believe you were an alcoholic, Sir Samuel.’ ‘No,’ said Vimes. ‘I was
a drunk. You have to be richer than I was to be an alcoholic.’

[image]

‘Everyone’s heard of Commander Vimes. I mean no offence, of course, but
we were a little surprised when the Patrician said that you would be
coming. We were expecting one of the more … experienced … diplomats.’

‘Oh, I can hand around the thin cucumber sandwiches like anything,’ said
Vimes. ‘And if you want little golden balls of chocolate piled up in a
heap, I’m your man.’

*

‘Igors heal very fast,’ said Lady Sybil.

‘They’d have to.’

‘Mister Skimmer said they’re very gifted surgeons, Sam.’

‘Except cosmetically, perhaps.’

*

‘This stuff … this stuff is _spying_. I wondered how Vetinari always
seems to know so much!’

‘Did you think it came to him in dreams, dear?’

‘But there’s loads of details here … I didn’t know we did this sort of
thing!’

‘You use spies all the time, dear,’ said Sybil.

‘I do not!’

‘Well, what about people like Foul Ole Ron and No Way José and Cumbling
Michael?’

‘That is _not_ spying, that is _not_ spying! That’s just “information
received”. We couldn’t do the job if we didn’t know what’s happening on
the street!’

‘Well, perhaps Havelock just thinks in terms of … a bigger street,
dear.’

*

Vimes had once discussed the Ephebian idea of ‘democracy’ with Carrot,
and had been rather interested in the idea that everyone had a vote
until he found out that while he, Vimes, would have a vote, there was no
way in the rules that anyone could prevent Nobby Nobbs from having one
as well. Vimes could see the flaw there straight away.

*

The Marquis of Fantailler got into many fights in his youth, most of
them as a result of being known as the Marquis of Fantailler, and wrote
a set of rules for what he termed ‘the noble art of fisticuffs’, which
mostly consisted of a list of places where people weren’t allowed to hit
him. Many people were impressed with his work and later stood with noble
chest out-thrust and fists balled in a spirit of manly aggression
against people who hadn’t read the Marquis’s book but _did_ know how to
knock people senseless with a chair. The last words of a surprisingly
large number of people were ‘Stuff the bloody Marquis of Fantailler—’

*

_Vimes is being pursued through an unfriendly landscape_.

So, what were his options? Well, he could stay in the tree and die, or
run for it and die. Of the two, dying in one piece seemed better.

YOU’RE DOING VERY WELL FOR A MAN OF YOUR AGE.

Death was sitting on a higher branch of the tree.

‘Are you following me or what?’

ARE YOU FAMILIAR WITH THE WORDS ‘DEATH WAS HIS CONSTANT COMPANION’?

[image]

Lady Sybil wasn’t a good cook.

She’d never been taught proper cookery; at her school it had always been
assumed that other people would be doing the cooking and that in any
case it would be for fifty people using at least four types of fork.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

WILLIAM JUST WANTS to get at the truth.

Unfortunately, everyone else wants to get at William. And it’s only the
third edition …

William de Worde is the accidental editor of the Discworld’s first
newspaper. Now he must cope with the traditional perils of a
journalist’s life – people who want him dead, a recovering vampire with
a suicidal fascination for flash photography, some more people who want
him dead in a different way and, worst of all, the man who keeps begging
him to publish pictures of his humorously shaped potatoes.

 

The rumour spread through the city like wildfire (which had quite often
spread through Ankh-Morpork since its citizens had learned the words
‘fire insurance’).

*

Selling hot sausages from a tray was by way of being the ground state of
Dibbler’s existence, from which he constantly sought to extricate
himself and back to which he constantly returned when his latest venture
went all runny. Which was a shame, because Dibbler was an extremely good
hot sausage salesman. He had to be, given the nature of his sausages.

*

As for Mr Pin and Mr Tulip, all that need be known about them at this
point is that they are the kind of people who call you ‘friend’. People
like that aren’t friendly.

[image]

‘You know I’ve always wanted a paperless office—’

‘Yes, Archchancellor, that’s why you hide it all in cupboards and throw
it out of the window at night.’

[image]

There are, it has been said, two types of people in the world. There are
those who, when presented with a glass that is exactly half full, say:
this glass is half full. And then there are those who say: this glass is
half empty.

The world _belongs_, however, to those who can look at the glass and
say: ‘What’s up with this glass? Excuse me? Excuse _me_? _This_ is my
glass? I don’t _think_ so. _My_ glass was full! _And_ it was a bigger
glass!’

*

Hugglestones was a boarding school so bleak and spartan that only the
upper classes would dream of sending their sons there.

It was a granite building on a rain-soaked moor, and its stated purpose
was to make men from boys. The policy employed involved a certain amount
of wastage, and consisted of very simple and violent games in the
healthy outdoor sleet. The small, slow, fat or merely unpopular were
mown down, as nature intended.

*

‘Ah,’ said Mr Pin. ‘Right. You are concerned citizens.’ He knew about
_concerned citizens_. Wherever they were, they all spoke the same
private language, where ‘traditional values’ meant ‘hang someone’.

*

‘Clear my appointments this morning, will you? I will see the Guild of
Towncriers at nine o’clock and the Guild of Engravers at ten past.’

‘I wasn’t aware they had appointments, sir.’

‘They will have,’ said Lord Vetinari.

*

‘I am looking for Mister William der Worde,’ rumbled a voice.

‘That’s me,’ said William.

‘Der Patrician will see you now,’ said the troll.

‘I don’t have an appointment with Lord Vetinari!’

‘Ah, well,’ said the troll, ‘you’d be amazed at how many people has
appointments wid der Patrician an’ dey don’t know it.’

*

Dibbler opened the _special_ section of his tray, the high-class one
that contained sausages whose contents were 1) meat, 2) from a known
four-footed creature, 3) probably land-dwelling.

*

‘… a naked man, hotly pursued by Members of the Watch, burst through the
Window and ran around the Room, causing much Disarray of the Tarts
before being Apprehended by the Trifles.’

An innocent young reporter writes.

*

William wondered why he always disliked people who said ‘no offence
meant’. Maybe it was because they found it easier to say ‘no offence
meant’ than actually refrain from giving offence.

*

William felt predisposed to like Vimes, if only because of the type of
enemies he made, but as far as he could see everything about the man
could be prefaced by the word ‘badly’, as in -spoken, -educated and -in
need of a drink.

*

‘Ah, just the man I was looking for!’ said William.

‘Am I?’ wheezed Nobbs, smoke curling out of his ears.

‘Yes, I’ve been talking to Commander Vimes, and now I would like to see
the room where the crime was committed.’ William had great hopes of that
sentence. It _seemed_ to contain the words ‘and he gave me permission
to’ without actually doing so.

*

One of the strange things about eating at Mrs Arcanum’s was that you got
more leftovers than you got original meals. That is, there were far more
meals made up from what were traditionally considered the prudently
usable remains of earlier meals – stews, bubble-and-squeak, curry – than
there were meals at which those remains could have originated.

The curry was particularly strange, since Mrs Arcanum considered foreign
parts only marginally less unspeakable than private parts and therefore
added the curious yellow curry powder with a very small spoon, lest
everyone should suddenly tear their clothes off and do foreign things.
The main ingredients appeared to be swede and gritty rainwater tasting
sultanas and the remains of some cold mutton.

*

The best way to describe Mr Windling would be like this: you are at a
meeting. You’d like to be away early. So would everyone else. There
really isn’t very much to discuss, anyway. And just as everyone can see
Any Other Business coming over the horizon and is already putting their
papers neatly together, a voice says ‘If I can raise a minor matter, Mr
Chairman …’ and with a horrible wooden feeling in your stomach you
_know_, now, that the evening will go on for twice as long with much
referring back to the minutes of earlier meetings. The man who has just
said that, and is now sitting there with a smug smile of dedication to
the committee process, is as near Mr Windling as makes no difference.
And something that distinguishes the Mr Windlings of the universe is the
term ‘in my humble opinion’, which they think _adds_ weight to their
statements rather than indicating, in reality, ‘these are the mean
little views of someone with the social grace of duckweed’.

*

Classically, very few people have considered that cleanliness is next to
godliness, apart from in a very sternly abridged dictionary. A rank
loincloth and hair in an advanced state of matted entanglement have
generally been the badges of office of prophets whose injunction to
disdain earthly things starts with soap.

*

‘You don’t think a dress like this would be a bit … forward, do you?’
said Sacharissa, holding the dress against herself.

Rocky looked worried.

‘You’re quite a lot forward already,’ he opined.

[image]

Sacharissa’s knowledge of vintages extended just as far as knowing that
Chateau Maison was a very popular wine.

[image]

Sacharissa pulled a brown leather wallet out of the jacket.

‘Any clue to who he is?’ said William.

‘Er … there’s something done on the leather in pokerwork,’ said
Sacharissa.

‘What does it say?’

‘“Not A Very Nice Person At All”,’ she read. ‘I wonder what kind of
person would put _that_ on a wallet?’

‘Someone who wasn’t a very nice person,’ said William.

Death sighed and shook his head.

WHO KNOWS WHAT EVIL LURKS IN THE HEART OF MEN?

The Death of Rats looked up.

SQUEAK, he said.

Death waved a hand dismissively. WELL, YES, OBVIOUSLY _ME_, he said. I
JUST WONDERED IF THERE WAS ANYONE ELSE.

*

‘Oh, I see,’ said Lord Vetinari. ‘You mean you should be free to print
what you like?’

‘Well … broadly, yes, sir.’

‘Because that’s in the public interest?’

‘I think so, sir.’

‘Stories about man-eating goldfish and people’s husbands disappearing in
big silver dishes?’

‘No, sir. That’s what the public is interested in. We do the other
stuff, sir.’

‘Amusingly shaped vegetables?’

‘Well, a _bit_ of that, sir. Sacharissa calls them human interest
stories.’

‘About vegetables and animals?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘So … we have what the people are interested in, and human interest
stories, which is what humans are interested in, and the public
interest, which no one is interested in.’

‘Except the public, sir,’ said William, trying to keep up.

‘Which isn’t the same as people and humans?’

‘I think it’s more complicated than that, sir.’

‘Obviously. Do you mean that the public is a different thing from the
people you just see walking about the place? The public thinks big,
sensible, measured thoughts while _people_ run around doing silly
things?’

‘I think so. I may have to work on that idea too, I admit.’

*

‘I’m sure we can pull together, sir.’

Lord Vetinari raised his eyebrows. ‘Oh, I do hope not, I really do hope
not. Pulling together is the aim of despotism and tyranny. Free men pull
in all kinds of directions.’ He smiled. ‘It’s the only way to make
progress.’

*

‘You think that’s really true?’ William said.

Sacharissa shrugged. ‘Really true? Who knows? This is a newspaper, isn’t
it? It just has to be true until tomorrow.’

[image]

[image]

 

TIME IS A resource. Everyone knows it has to be managed.

And on Discworld that is the job of the Monks of History, who store it
and pump it from the places where it’s wasted (like underwater – how
much time does a codfish need?) to places like cities, where there’s
never enough time.

But the construction of the world’s first truly accurate clock starts a
race against, well, time for Lu-Tze and his apprentice Lobsang Ludd.
Because it will stop time. And that will only be the start of everyone’s
problems.

Complete with a full supporting cast of heroes and villains, yetis,
martial artists and Ronnie, the fifth Horseman of the Apocalypse (who
left before they became famous).

 

‘She has told me everything,’ said Wen. ‘I know that time was made for
men, not the other way round. I have learned how to shape it and bend
it. I know how to make a moment last for ever, because it already has.
And I can teach these skills even to you, Clodpool. I have heard the
heartbeat of the universe. I know the answers to many questions. Ask
me.’

The apprentice gave him a bleary look.

‘Er … what does master want for breakfast?’ he said.

Wen looked down from their camp and across the snowfields and purple
mountains to the golden daylight creating the world, and mused upon
certain aspects of humanity.

‘Ah,’ he said. ‘One of the _difficult_ ones.’

*

This is the desk of a professional. It is clear that their job is their
life. There are … human touches, but these are the human touches that
strict usage allows in a chilly world of duty and routine.

Mostly they’re on the only piece of real colour in this picture of
blacks and greys. It’s a coffee mug. Someone somewhere wanted to make it
a _jolly_ mug. It bears a rather unconvincing picture of a teddy bear,
and the legend ‘To The World’s Greatest Grandad’ and the slight change
in the style of lettering on the word ‘Grandad’ makes it clear that this
has come from one of those stalls that have _hundreds_ of mugs like
this, declaring that they’re for the world’s greatest
Grandad/Dad/Mum/Granny/Uncle/Aunt/Blank. Only someone whose life
contains very little else, one feels, would treasure a piece of
gimcrackery like this.

*

They were not lifeforms. They were … non-lifeforms. They were the
observers of the operation of the universe, its clerks, its _auditors_.
They saw to it that things spun and rocks fell.

And they believed that for a thing to exist it had to have a position in
time and space. Humanity had arrived as a nasty shock. Humanity
practically _was_ things that didn’t have a position in time and space,
such as imagination, pity, hope, history and belief. Take those away and
all you had was an ape that fell out of trees a lot.

Intelligent life was, therefore, an anomaly. It made the filing untidy.
The Auditors _hated_ things like that.

*

Wen considered the nature of time and understood that the universe is,
instant by instant, recreated anew. Therefore, he understood, there is
in truth no past, only a memory of the past. Blink your eyes, and the
world you see next did not exist when you closed them. Therefore, he
said, the only appropriate state of the mind is surprise. The only
appropriate state of the heart is joy. The sky you see now, you have
never seen before. The perfect moment is now. Be glad of it.

*

Lobsang heard the dojo master say: ‘Dojo! What is Rule One?’

‘Do not act incautiously when confronting little bald wrinkly smiling
men!’

*

If children were weapons, Jason would have been banned by international
treaty. Jason had doting parents and an attention span of minus several
seconds, except when it came to inventive cruelty to small furry
animals, when he could be quite patient. Jason kicked, punched, bit and
spat. His artwork had even frightened the life out of Miss Smith, who
could generally find something nice to say about any child. He was
definitely a boy with special needs. In the view of the staffroom, these
began with an exorcism.

Madam Frout had stooped to listening at the keyhole. She had heard
Jason’s first tantrum of the day, and then silence. She couldn’t quite
make out what Miss Susan said next.

When she found an excuse to venture into the classroom half an hour
later, Jason was helping two little girls to make a cardboard rabbit.

Later his parents said they were amazed at the change, although
apparently now he would only go to sleep with the light on.

*

‘What precisely was it you wanted, madam?’ she said. ‘It’s just that
I’ve left the class doing algebra, and they get restless when they’ve
finished.’

‘Algebra?’ said Madam Frout, perforce staring at her own bosom, which no
one else had ever done. ‘But that’s far too difficult for
seven-year-olds!’

‘Yes, but I didn’t tell them that and so far they haven’t found out,’
said Susan.

[image]

The class had built a full-size white horse out of cardboard boxes,

during which time they’d learned a lot about horses and Susan learned
about Jason’s remarkably accurate powers of observation. She’d had to
take the cardboard tube away from him and explain that this was a
_polite_ horse.

[image]

The Stationery Cupboard! That was one of the great battlegrounds of
classroom history, that and the playhouse. But the ownership of the
playhouse usually sorted itself out without Susan’s intervention, so
that all she had to do was be ready with ointment, a nose-blow and mild
sympathy for the losers, whereas the Stationery Cupboard was a war of
attrition. It contained pots of powder paint and reams of paper and
boxes of crayons and more idiosyncratic items like a spare pair of pants
for Billy, who did his best. It also contained The Scissors, which under
classroom rules were treated as some kind of Doomsday Machine, and, of
course, the boxes of stars. The only people allowed in the cupboard were
Susan and, usually, Vincent. Despite everything Susan had tried, short
of actual deception, he was always the official ‘best at everything’ and
won the coveted honour every day, which was to go into the Stationery
Cupboard and fetch the pencils and hand them out. For the rest of the
class, and especially Jason, the Stationery Cupboard was some mystic
magic realm to be entered whenever possible.

Honestly, thought Susan, once you learn the arts of defending the
Stationery Cupboard, outwitting Jason and keeping the class pet alive
until the end of term, you’ve mastered at least half of teaching.

*

_According to the Second Scroll of Wen the Eternally Surprised_, Wen the
Eternally Surprised sawed the first Procrastinator from the trunk of a
_wamwam_ tree, carved certain symbols on it, fitted it with a bronze
spindle and summoned the apprentice, Clodpool.

‘Ah. Very nice, master,’ said Clodpool. ‘A prayer wheel, yes?’

‘No, this is nothing like as complex,’ said Wen. ‘It merely stores and
moves time.’

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen. He gave it a half-turn with his
hand.

‘Ah. Very nice, master,’ said Clodpool. ‘A prayer wheel, yes?’

‘No, this is nothing like as complex,’ said Wen. ‘It merely stores and
moves time.’

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen. He moved it a little less this
time.

‘That simple, eh?’

‘And now I shall test it,’ said Wen.

*

Lu-Tze bent down, picked up a fallen cork helmet, and solemnly handed it
to Lobsang.

‘Health and safety at work,’ he said. ‘Very important.’

‘Will it protect me?’ said Lobsang, putting it on.

‘Not really. But when they find your head, it may be recognizable.’

*

‘All roads lead to Ankh-Morpork.’

‘I thought all roads led _away_ from Ankh-Morpork.’

‘Not the way we’re going.’

*

Now the cold crept in, slowly, like a sadist’s knife.

Lu-Tze strode on ahead, seemingly oblivious of it.

Lu-Tze, it was said, would walk for miles during weather when the clouds
themselves would freeze and crash out of the sky. Cold did not affect
him, they said.

‘Sweeper!’

Lu-Tze stopped and turned. ‘Yes, lad?’

‘I don’t know how you can stand this cold!’

‘Ah, you don’t know the secret?’

‘Is it the Way of Mrs Cosmopilite that gives you such power?’

Lu-Tze hitched up his robe and did a little dance in the snow, revealing
skinny legs encased in thick, yellowing tubes.

‘Very good, very good,’ he said. ‘She still sends me these double-knit
combinations, silk on the inside, then three layers of wool, reinforced
gussets and a couple of handy trapdoors. Very reasonably priced at six
dollars a pair because I’m an old customer. For it is written, “Wrap up
warm or you’ll catch your death.”’

*

The Auditors _hated_ questions. They hated them almost as much as they
hated decisions, and they hated decisions almost as much as they hated
the idea of the individual personality. But what they hated most was
things moving around randomly.

*

The apprentice Clodpool, in a rebellious mood, approached Wen and spake
thusly:

‘Master, what is the difference between a humanistic, monastic system of
belief in which wisdom is sought by means of an apparently nonsensical
system of questions and answers, and a lot of mystic gibberish made up
on the spur of the moment?’

Wen considered this for some time, and at last said: ‘A fish!’

And Clodpool went away, satisfied.

*

The Code of the Igors was very strict.

Never Contradict: it was no part of an Igor’s job to say things like
‘No, thur, that’th an artery.’ The marthter was always right.

Never Complain: an Igor would never say ‘But that’th a thouthand mileth
away!’

Never Make Personal Remarks: no Igor would dream of saying anything like
‘I thould have thomething done about that laugh, if I wath you.’

And never, ever Ask Questions. Admittedly, Igor knew, that meant never
ask BIG questions. ‘Would thur like a cup of tea around now?’ was fine,
but ‘What do you need a hundred virginth for?’ or ‘Where do you ecthpect
me to find a brain at thith time of night?’ was not.

*

Death found Pestilence in a hospice in Llamedos. Pestilence liked
hospitals. There was always something for him to do.

Currently he was trying to remove the ‘Now Wash Your Hands’ sign over a
cracked basin.

*

_And what is_ this_?_

‘It is a cat. It arrived. It does not appear to wish to depart.’

_And the reason for its presence?_

‘It appears to tolerate the company of humans, asking nothing in return
but food, water, shelter and comfort.’

*

‘Look at the bird.’

It was perched on a branch by a fork in the tree, next to what looked
like a birdhouse.

‘Looks like some kind of old box to me,’ said Lobsang. He squinted to
see better. ‘Is it an old … clock?’ he added.

‘Look at what the bird is nibbling,’ suggested Lu-Tze.

‘Well, it looks like … a crude gear-wheel? But why—’

‘Well spotted. That, lad, is a clock cuckoo. A young one, by the look of
it, trying to build a nest that’ll attract a mate. Not much chance of
that … See? It’s got the numerals all wrong and it’s stuck the hands on
crooked.’

‘A bird that _builds_ clocks? I thought a cuckoo clock was a clock with
a mechanical cuckoo that came out when—’

‘And where do you think people got such a strange idea from?’

‘But that’s some kind of miracle!’

‘Why?’ said Lu-Tze. ‘They barely go for more than half an hour, they
keep lousy time and the poor dumb males go frantic trying to keep them
wound.’

*

Of the very worst words that can be heard by anyone high in the air, the
pair known as ‘Oh-oh’ possibly combine the maximum of bowel-knotting
terror with the minimum wastage of breath.

*

‘We’re having rabbit,’ Mrs War said. ‘I’m _sure_ I can make it stretch
to three.’

War’s big red face wrinkled. ‘Do I like rabbit?’

‘Yes, dear.’

‘I thought I liked beef.’

‘No, dear. Beef gives you wind.’

‘Oh.’ War sighed. ‘Any chance of onions?’

‘You don’t like onions, dear.’

‘I don’t?’

‘Because of your stomach, dear.’

‘Oh.’

War smiled awkwardly at Death. ‘It’s rabbit,’ he said.

Despite himself, Death was fascinated. He had never come across the idea
of keeping your memory inside someone else’s head.

‘Perhaps I would like a beer?’ War ventured.

‘You don’t like beer, dear.’

‘I don’t?’

‘No, it brings on your trouble.’

‘Ah. Uh, how do I feel about brandy?’

‘You don’t like brandy, dear. You like your special oat drink with the
vitamins.’

‘Oh, yes,’ said War mournfully. ‘I’d forgotten I liked that.’

*

‘The poet Hoha once dreamed he was a butterfly, and then he awoke and
said, “Am I a man who dreamed he was a butterfly, or am I a butterfly
dreaming he is a man?”’ said Lobsang.

‘Really?’ said Susan briskly. ‘And which was he?’

‘What? Well … who knows?’

‘How did he write his poems?’ said Susan.

‘With a brush, of course.’

‘He didn’t flap around making information-rich patterns in the air or
laying eggs on cabbage leaves?’

‘No one ever mentioned it.’

‘Then he was probably a man.’

[image]

Lu-Tze had long considered that everything happens for a reason, except
possibly football.

[image]

Ankh-Morpork had not had a king for many centuries, but palaces tend to
survive. A city might not need a king, but it can always use big rooms
and some handy large walls, long after the monarchy is but a memory and
the building is renamed the Glorious Memorial to the People’s Industry.

*

Wienrich and Boettcher were foreigners, and according to Ankh-Morpork’s
Guild of Confectioners they did not understand the peculiarities of the
city’s tastebuds.

Ankh-Morpork people, said the Guild, were hearty, no-nonsense folk who
did not _want_ chocolate that was stuffed with cocoa liquor, and were
certainly not like effete la-di-dah foreigners who wanted cream in
everything. In fact they actually _preferred_ chocolate made mostly from
milk, sugar, suet, hooves, lips, miscellaneous squeezings, rat
droppings, plaster, flies, tallow, bits of tree, hair, lint, spiders and
powdered cocoa husks. This meant that according to the food standards of
the great chocolate centres in Borogravia and Quirm, Ankh-Morpork
chocolate was formally classed as ‘cheese’ and only escaped, through
being the wrong colour, being defined as ‘tile grout’.

*

The Quirm College for Young Ladies had been very advanced in that
respect, and its teachers took the view that a girl who couldn’t swim
two lengths of the pool with her clothes on wasn’t making an effort.

[image]

Her one chocolate today and it was damn artificial damn pink-and-white
damn sickly damn stupid _nougat_!

Well, no one could be expected to believe _that_ counted.¹

[image]

The yeti of the Ramtops, where the Discworld’s magical field is so
intense that it is part of the very landscape, are one of the few
creatures to utilize control of personal time for genetic advantage. The
result is a kind of physical premonition – you find out what is going to
happen next by allowing it to happen. Faced with danger, or any kind of
task that involves risk of death, a yeti will _save_ its life up to that
point and then proceed with all due caution, yet in the comfortable
knowledge that, should everything go pancake-shaped, it will wake up at
the point where it saved itself with, and this is the important part,
_knowledge of the events which have just happened but which will not now
happen because it’s not going to be such a damn fool next time_. This is
not quite the paradox it appears because, after it has taken place, it
hasn’t happened. All that actually remains is a memory in the yeti’s
head, which merely turns out to be a remarkably accurate premonition.
The little eddies in time caused by all this are just lost in the noise
of all the kinks, dips and knots put in time by every other living
creature.

*

Susan returned to the classroom and spent the rest of the day performing
small miracles, which included removing the glue from Richenda’s hair,
emptying the wee out of Billy’s shoes and treating the class to a short
visit to the continent of Fourecks.

[image]

1 This is true. A chocolate you did not want to eat does not count as
chocolate. This discovery is from the same branch of culinary physics
that determined that food eaten while walking contains no calories.

[image]

 

HE’S BEEN A legend in his own lifetime.

He can remember the great days of high adventure.

He can remember when a hero didn’t have to worry about fences and
lawyers and civilization.

He can remember when people didn’t tell you off for killing dragons.

But he can’t always remember, these days, where he put his teeth …

He’s really not happy about that bit.

So now, with his ancient sword and his new walking stick and his old
friends – and they’re very old friends – Cohen the Barbarian is going on
one final quest. It’s been a good life. He’s going to climb the highest
mountain in the Discworld and meet his gods. He doesn’t like the way
they let men grow old and die.

It’s time, in fact, to give something back.

The last hero in the world is going to return what the first hero stole.
With a vengeance. That’ll mean the end of the world, if no one stops him
in time.

Someone is going to try. So who knows who the last hero really is?

 

The place where the story happened was a world on the back of four
elephants perched on the shell of a giant turtle. That’s the advantage
of space. It’s big enough to hold practically _anything_, and so,
eventually, it does.

*

People think that it is strange to have a turtle ten thousand miles long
and an elephant more than two thousand miles tall, which just shows that
the human brain is ill-adapted for thinking and was probably originally
designed for cooling the blood. It believes mere size is _amazing_.

There’s nothing amazing about size. Turtles are amazing, and elephants
are quite astonishing. The fact that there’s a big turtle is far less
amazing than the fact that there is a turtle anywhere.

*

‘Ah, well, life goes on,’ people say when someone dies. But from the
point of view of the person who has just died, it doesn’t. It’s the
universe that goes on. Just as the deceased was getting the hang of
everything it’s all whisked away, by illness or accident or, in one
case, a cucumber. Why this has to be is one of the imponderables of
life, in the face of which people either start to pray … or become
really, really angry.

*

The wizards, once they understood the urgency of a problem, and then had
lunch, and argued about the pudding, could actually work quite fast.

Their method of finding a solution was by creative hubbub. If the
question was, ‘What is the best spell for turning a book of poetry into
a frog?’, then the one thing they would _not_ do was look in any book
with a title like _Major Amphibian Spells in a Literary Environment: A
Comparison_. That would, somehow, be cheating. They would argue about it
instead, standing around a blackboard, seizing the chalk from one
another and rubbing out bits of what the current chalk-holder was
writing before he’d finished the other end of the sentence. Somehow,
though, it all seemed to work.

*

The gods play games with the fate of men. Not complex ones, obviously,
because gods lack patience.

Cheating is part of the rules. And gods play hard. To lose all believers
is, for a god, the _end_. But a believer who survives the game gains
honour and extra belief. Who wins with the most believers, lives.

Believers can include other gods, of course. Gods _believe_ in belief.

*

Lord Vetinari, despite his education, had a mind like an engineer. If
you wished to open something, you found the appropriate spot and applied
the minimum amount of force necessary to achieve your end. Possibly the
spot was between a couple of ribs and the force was applied via a
dagger, or between two warring countries and applied via an army, but
the important thing was to find that one weak spot which would be the
key to everything.

*

The dungeons of the Palace held a number of felons imprisoned ‘at his
lordship’s pleasure’, and since Lord Vetinari was seldom very pleased
they were generally in for the long haul.

*

Leonard of Quirm was so absent-mindedly clever that he could paint
pictures that didn’t just follow you around the room but went home with
you and did the washing-up.

*

‘So how come you left the Evil Dark Lord business, Harry?’ said Cohen.

‘Werl, you know how it is these days,’ said Evil Harry Dread.

The Horde nodded. They knew how it was these days.

‘People these days, when they’re attacking your Dark Evil Tower, the
first thing they do is block up your escape tunnel,’ said Evil Harry.

‘Bastards!’ said Cohen. ‘You’ve _got_ to let the Dark Lord escape.
Everyone knows that.’

‘That’s right,’ said Caleb. ‘Got to leave yourself some work for
tomorrow.’

*

‘Anyone heard of Ning the Uncompassionate?’

‘Sort of,’ said Boy Willie. ‘I killed him.’

‘You couldn’t have done! What was it he always said? “I shall revert to
this vicinity!”’

‘Sort of hard to do that,’ said Boy Willie, pulling out a pipe and
beginning to fill it with tobacco, ‘when your head’s nailed to a tree.’

*

‘How about Pamdar the Witch Queen?’ said Evil Harry. ‘Now _there_ was—’

‘Retired,’ said Cohen.

‘She’d never retire!’

‘Got married,’ Cohen insisted.

‘But she was a devil woman!’

‘We all get older, Harry. She runs a shop now. Pam’s Pantry. Makes
marmalade,’ said Cohen.

‘What? She used to queen it in a throne on top of a pile of skulls!’

‘I didn’t say it was very _good_ marmalade.’

*

Hughnon Ridcully, Chief Priest of Blind Io, shared many of the
characteristics of his brother Mustrum. He also saw his job as being,
essentially, one of organizer. There were plenty of people who were good
at the actual _believing_, and he left them to it. It took a lot more
than prayer to make sure the laundry got done and the building was kept
in repair.

*

There were so many gods now … at least two thousand. Many were, of
course, still very small. But you had to watch them. Gods were very much
a fashion thing. Look at Om, now. One minute he was a bloodthirsty
little deity in some mad hot country, and then suddenly he was one of
the top gods. It had all been done by not answering prayers, but doing
so in a sort of _dynamic_ way that left open the possibility that one
day he might and _then_ there’d be fireworks.

*

And then, of course, you had your real newcomers like Aniger, Goddess of
Squashed Animals. Who would have thought that better roads and faster
carts would have led to that? But gods grew bigger when called upon at
need, and enough minds had cried out, ‘Oh god, what was that I hit?’

*

_Death tries to come to grips with Schroedinger’s Cat:_

In the study of his dark house on the edge of Time, Death looked at the
wooden box.

PERHAPS I SHALL TRY ONE MORE TIME, he said.

He reached down and lifted up a small kitten, patted it on the head,
lowered it gently into the box, and closed the lid.

THE CAT DIES WHEN THE AIR RUNS OUT?

‘I suppose it might, sir,’ said Albert, his manservant. ‘But I don’t
reckon that’s the point. If I understand it right, you don’t know if the
cat’s dead or alive until you look at it.’

THINGS WILL HAVE COME TO A PRETTY PASS, ALBERT, IF _I_ DID NOT KNOW
WHETHER A THING WAS DEAD OR ALIVE WITHOUT HAVING TO GO AND LOOK.

‘Er … the way the theory goes, sir, it’s the _act_ of lookin’ that
determines if it’s alive or not.’

Death looked hurt. ARE YOU SUGGESTING I WILL KILL THE CAT JUST BY
LOOKING AT IT?

‘It’s not quite like that, sir.’

I MEAN, IT’S NOT AS IF I MAKE FACES OR ANYTHING.

‘To be honest with you, sir, I don’t think even the wizards understand
the uncertainty business,’ said Albert.

Death opened the box and took out the kitten. It stared at him with the
normal mad amazement of kittens everywhere.

I DON’T HOLD WITH CRUELTY TO CATS, said Death, putting it gently on the
floor.

[image]

‘Some people say you achieve immortality through your children,’ said
the minstrel.

‘Yeah?’ said Cohen. ‘Name one of your great-grandads, then.’

[image]

_Discworld briefly discovers space travel, and Carrot, Rincewind and
Leonard of Quirm look down on the Disc from its moon:_

‘You know, I’m not sure I ever really believed it before,’ said Carrot.
‘You know … about the turtle and the elephants and everything. Seeing it
all like this makes me feel very … very …’

‘Scared?’ suggested Rincewind.

‘No.’

‘Upset?’

‘No.’

‘Easily intimidated?’

‘No.’

Beyond the Rimfall, the continents of the world were coming into view
under swirls of white cloud.

‘You know … from up here … you can’t see the boundaries between
nations,’ said Carrot, almost wistfully.

‘Is that a problem?’ said Leonard. ‘Possibly something could be done.’

‘Maybe huge, really _huge_ buildings in lines, along the frontiers,’
said Rincewind. ‘Or … or very wide roads. You could paint them different
colours to save confusion.’

‘Should aerial travel become widespread,’ said Leonard, ‘it would be a
useful idea to grow forests in the shape of the name of the country, or
of other areas of note. I will bear this in mind.’

‘I wasn’t actually _sugges_—’ Carrot began. And then he stopped, and
just sighed.

*

On the veldt of Howondaland live the N’tuitif people, the only tribe in
the world to have _no imagination whatsoever_.

For example, their story about the thunder runs something like this:
‘Thunder is a loud noise in the sky, resulting from the disturbance of
the air masses by the passage of lightning.’ And their legend ‘How the
Giraffe Got His Long Neck’ runs: ‘In the old days the ancestors of Old
Man Giraffe had slightly longer necks than other grassland creatures,
and the access to the high leaves was so advantageous that it was mostly
long-necked giraffes that survived, passing on the long neck in their
blood just as a man might inherit his grandfather’s spear. Some say,
however, that it is all a lot more complicated and this explanation only
applies to the shorter neck of the okapi. And so it is.’

The N’tuitif are a peaceful people, and have been hunted almost to
extinction by neighbouring tribes, who have lots of imagination, and
therefore plenty of gods, superstitions and ideas about how much better
life would be if they had a bigger hunting ground.

Of the events on the moon that day, the N’tuitif said: ‘The moon was
brightly lit and from it rose another light which then split into three
lights and faded. We do not know why this happened. It was just a
thing.’

They were then wiped out by a nearby tribe who _knew_ that the lights
had been a signal from the god Ukli to expand the hunting ground a bit
more. However, _they_ were soon defeated entirely by a tribe who _knew_
that the lights were their ancestors, who lived in the moon, and who
were urging them to kill all non-believers in the goddess Glipzo. Three
years later they in turn were killed by a rock falling from the sky, as
a result of a star exploding a billion years ago.

What goes around, comes around. If not examined too closely, it passes
for justice.

*

Few religions are definite about the size of Heaven, but on the planet
Earth the Book of Revelation (ch. XXI, v.16) gives it as a cube 12,000
furlongs on a side. This is somewhat less than
500,000,000,000,000,000,000 cubic feet. Even allowing that the Heavenly
Host and other essential services take up at least two thirds of this
space, this leaves about one million cubic feet of space for each human
occupant – assuming that every creature that could be called ‘human’ is
allowed in, and that the human race eventually totals a thousand times
the number of humans alive up until now. This is such a generous amount
of space that it suggests that room has also been provided for some
alien races or – a happy thought – that pets are allowed.

*

Many of the things built by the architect and freelance designer
Bergholt Stuttley (‘Bloody Stupid’) Johnson were recorded in
Ankh-Morpork, often on the line where it says ‘Cause of Death’. He was,
people agreed, a genius, at least if you defined the word broadly.
Certainly no one else in the world could make an explosive mixture out
of common sand and water. A good designer, he always said, should be
capable of anything. And, indeed, he was.

[image]

[image]

 

TRUTH! JUSTICE! FREEDOM! And a Hard-boiled Egg!

Commander Sam Vimes of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch had it all. But now
he’s back in his own rough, tough past without even the clothes he was
standing up in when the lightning struck.

Living in the past is hard. Dying in the past is incredibly easy. But he
must survive, because he has a job to do. He must track down a murderer,
teach his younger self how to be a good copper and change the outcome of
a bloody rebellion. There’s a problem: if he wins, he’s got no wife, no
child, no future.

A Discworld Tale of One City, with a full chorus of street urchins,
ladies of negotiable affection, rebels, secret policemen and other
children of the revolution.

 

Plain old Sam Vimes had ended up with a dress uniform that at least
looked as though its owner was male. But the helmet had gold decoration,
and the bespoke armourers had made a new, gleaming breastplate with
useless gold ornamentation on it. Sam Vimes felt like a class traitor
every time he wore it. He hated being thought of as one of those people
that wore stupid ornamental armour. It was gilt by association.

*

‘If I had a dollar for every copper’s funeral I’ve attended up here,’
said Colon, ‘I’d have … nineteen dollars and fifty pence.’

‘Fifty pence?’ said Nobby.

‘That was when Corporal Hildebiddle woke up just in time and banged on
the lid,’ said Colon.

[image]

Privilege just means ‘private law’. Two types of people laugh at the
law: those that break it and those that make it.

[image]

Sweeper took a deep, long breath. ‘I like building gardens,’ he said.
‘Life should be a garden.’

Vimes stared blankly at what was in front of them. ‘Okay,’ he said. ‘The
gravel and rocks, yes, I can see that. Shame about all the rubbish. It
always turns up, doesn’t it …’

‘Yes,’ said Lu-Tze. ‘It’s part of the pattern.’

‘What? The old cigarette packet?’

‘Certainly. That invokes the element of air,’ said Sweeper.

‘And the cat doings?’

‘To remind us that disharmony, like a cat, gets everywhere.’

‘The cabbage stalks? The used sonky?’¹

‘At our peril we forget the role of the organic in the total harmony.
What arrives seemingly by chance in the pattern is part of a higher
organization that we can only dimly comprehend. This is a very important
fact, and has a bearing on your case.’

‘And the beer bottle?’

For the first time since Vimes had met him, the monk frowned.

‘Y’know, some bugger always tosses one over the wall on his way back
from the pub on Friday nights. If it wasn’t forbidden to do that kind of
thing, he’d feel the flat of my hand and no mistake.’

‘It’s not part of the higher organization?’

‘Possibly. Who cares?’

*

The Night Watch. They were in the Night Watch because they were too
scruffy, ugly, incompetent, awkwardly shaped or bloody-minded for the
Day Watch. They were honest, in that special policeman sense of the
word. That is, they didn’t steal things too heavy to carry. And they had
the morale of damp gingerbread.

*

‘A copper doesn’t keep flapping his lip. He doesn’t let on what he
knows. He doesn’t say what he’s thinking. No. He watches and listens and
he learns and he bides his time. His mind works like mad but his face is
a blank. Until he’s ready.’

*

Dr Lawn opened his back door and Vimes brushed past, the body over his
shoulders.

‘You minister to all sorts, right?’ said Vimes.

‘Within reason, but—’

‘This one’s an Unmentionable,’ said Vimes. ‘Tried to kill me. Needs some
medicine.’

‘Why’s he unconscious?’ said the doctor.

‘Didn’t want to take his medicine.’

*

Apart from the curfew and manning the gates, the Night Watch didn’t do a
lot. This was partly because they were incompetent, and partly because
no one expected them to be anything else. They walked the streets,
slowly, giving anyone dangerous enough time to saunter away or melt into
the shadows, and then rang the bell to announce to a sleeping world, or
at any rate a world that had been asleep, the fact that all was, despite
appearances, well. They also rounded up the quieter sort of drunk and
the more docile kinds of stray cattle.

[image]

‘What’re you going to charge our man with, sarge?’ said Sam.

‘Attempted assault on a copper. You saw the knives.’

‘You did kick him, though.’

‘Right, I forgot. We’ll do him for resisting arrest, too.’

[image]

Dr Lawn put the tweezers down and pinched the bridge of his nose.
‘That’s it,’ he said, wearily. ‘A bit of stitching and he’ll be fine.’

‘And there’s some others I need you to take a look at,’ said Vimes.

‘You know, that comes as no surprise,’ said the doctor.

‘One’s got a lot of holes in his feet, one dropped through the privy
roof and has got a twisted leg, and one’s dead.’

‘I don’t think I can do much about the dead one,’ said the doctor. ‘How
do you know he’s dead? I realize that I may regret asking that
question.’

‘He’s got a broken neck from falling off a roof and I reckon he fell off
because he got a steel crossbow bolt in his brain.’

‘Ah. That sounds like dead, if you want my medical opinion. Did you do
it?’

‘No!’

‘Well, you’re a busy man, sergeant. You can’t be everywhere.’

*

‘I understand, Havelock, that you scored zero in your examination for
stealthy movement.’

‘May I ask how you found that out, madam?’

‘Oh, one hears things,’ Madam said lightly.

‘Well, it was true,’ said the Assassin.

‘And why was this?’

‘The examiner thought I’d used trickery, madam.’

‘And did you?’

‘Of course. I thought that was the idea.’

‘And you never attended his lessons, he said.’

‘Oh, I did. Religiously.’

‘He says he never saw you at any of them.’

Havelock smiled. ‘And your point, madam, is …?’

*

Vimes turned his back and faced the crowd. He said, ‘Anything’s a
weapon, used right. Your bell is a club. Anything that pokes the other
man hard enough to give you more time is a good thing. Never, ever
threaten anyone with your sword unless you really mean it, because if he
calls your bluff you suddenly don’t have many choices and they’re all
the wrong ones. Don’t be frightened to use what you learned when you
were kids. We don’t get marks for playing fair. And for close-up
fighting, as your senior sergeant I explicitly forbid you to investigate
the range of coshes, blackjacks and brass knuckles sold by Mrs Goodbody
at No. 8 Easy Street, at a range of prices to suit all pockets, and
should any of you approach me privately I absolutely will not
demonstrate a variety of specialist blows suitable for these useful yet
tricky instruments.’

*

_Sometimes the principles behind a glorious revolution don’t stand much
close examination_.

‘I’ve got a question,’ said someone in the crowd of onlookers. ‘Harry
Supple’s my name. Got a shoe shop in New Cobblers …’

‘Yes, comrade Supple?’

‘It says here in article seven of this here list—’ Mr Supple ploughed
on.

‘—People’s Declaration of the Glorious Twenty-fourth of May,’ said Reg.

‘Yeah, yeah, right … well, it says we’ll seize hold of the means of
production, sort of thing, so what I want to know is, how does that work
out regarding my shoe shop? I mean, I’m in it anyway, right? It’s not
like there’s room for more’n me and my lad Garbut and maybe one
customer.’

‘Ah, but after the revolution all property will be held in common by the
people … er … that is, it’ll belong to you but _also_ to everyone else,
you see?’

Comrade Supple looked puzzled. ‘But I’ll be the one making the shoes?’

‘Of course. But everything will _belong_ to the people.’

‘So … who’s going to pay for the shoes?’ said Mr Supple.

‘Everyone will pay a reasonable price for their shoes and you won’t be
guilty of living off the sweat of the common worker,’ said Reg, shortly.
‘Now, if we—’

‘You mean the cows?’ said Supple.

‘What?’

‘Well, there’s only the cows, and the lads at the tannery, and frankly
all they do is stand in a field all day, well, not the tannery boys,
obviously, but—’

‘Look,’ said Reg. ‘Everything will belong to the people and everyone
will be better off. Do you understand?’

The shoemaker’s frown grew deeper. He wasn’t certain if he was part of
the people.

*

The major was not a fool, even though he looked like one. He was
idealistic, and thought of his men as ‘jolly good chaps’ despite the
occasional evidence to the contrary, and on the whole did the best he
could with the moderate intelligence at his disposal. When he was a boy
he’d read books about great military campaigns, and visited the museums
and looked with patriotic pride at the paintings of famous cavalry
charges, last stands and glorious victories. It had come as rather a
shock, when he later began to participate in some of these, to find that
the painters had unaccountably left out the intestines. Perhaps they
just weren’t very good at them.

*

‘What’s it look like to you, Tom?’ said the major.

‘We’ve lost nearly eighty men,’ said the captain.

‘What? That’s terrible!’

‘Oh, about sixty of them are deserters, as far as I can see. As for the
rest, well, as far as I can see only six or seven of them went down to
definite enemy action. Three men got stabbed in alleyways, for example.’

‘Sounds like enemy action to _me_.’

‘Yes, Clive. But you were born in Quirm. Getting murdered in alleyways
is just part of life in the big city.’

*

‘Tom?’

‘Yes, Clive?’

‘Have you ever sung the national anthem?’

‘Oh, lots of times, sir.’

‘I don’t mean officially.’

‘You mean just to show I’m patriotic? Good gods, no. That would be a
rather odd thing to do,’ said the captain.

‘And how about the flag?’

‘Well, obviously I salute it every day, sir.’

‘But you don’t wave it, at all?’ the major enquired.

‘I think I waved a paper one a few times when I was a little boy.
Patrician’s birthday or something. We stood in the streets as he rode by
and we shouted “Hurrah!”’

‘Never since then?’

‘Well, _no_, Clive,’ said the captain, looking embarrassed. ‘I’d be very
worried if I saw a man singing the national anthem and waving the flag,
sir. It’s really a thing foreigners do.’

‘Really? Why?’

‘_We_ don’t need to show _we’re_ patriotic, sir. I mean, this is
Ankh-Morpork. We don’t have to make a big fuss about being the best,
sir. We just _know_.’

*

‘It’s called Victory Stew, sergeant,’ said Dibbler. ‘Tuppence a bowl or
I’ll cut my throat, eh?’

‘Close enough,’ said Vimes, and looked at the strange (and, what was
worse, occasionally hauntingly familiar) lumps seething in the scum.
‘What’s in it?’

‘It’s stew,’ explained Dibbler. ‘Strong enough to put hairs on your
chest.’

‘Yes, I can see that some of those bits of meat have got bristles on
them already,’ said Vimes.

*

There were rules. When you had a Guild of Assassins, there had to be
rules which everyone knew and were never, ever broken.

An Assassin, a real Assassin, had to look like one – black clothes,
hood, boots and all. If they could wear any clothes, any disguise, then
what could anyone do but spend all day sitting in a small room with a
loaded crossbow pointed at the door?

And they couldn’t kill a man incapable of defending himself (although a
man worth more than AM$10,000 a year was considered automatically
capable of defending himself or at least of employing people to do it
for him).

And they had to give the target a chance.

[image]

1 Named after Wallace Sonky, a man without whose experiments with thin
rubber pressure on the housing in Ankh-Morpork would have been a good
deal more pressing.

[image]

 

IMAGINE A MILLION clever rats. Rats that don’t run. Rats that fight …

Maurice, a scruffy tomcat with an eye for the main chance, has the
perfect fiddle going. He has a stupid-looking kid for a piper, and he
has his very own plague of rats – rats who are strangely educated, so
Maurice can no longer think of them as ‘lunch’. And everyone knows the
stories about rats and pipers – and is giving him lots of money …

Until they try the trick in the far-flung town of Bad Blintz, and the
nice little con suddenly goes down the drain.

Someone there is playing a different tune. A dark, shadowy tune.
Something very, very bad is waiting in the cellars. The rats must learn
a new word.

Evil.

 

[image]

Everyone needs their little dreams. If you knew what it was that people
really, _really_ wanted, you very nearly controlled them.

[image]

Cats are _good_ at steering people. A miaow here, a purr there, a little
gentle pressure with a claw … Cats didn’t have to think. They just had
to know what they wanted. Humans had to do the thinking. That’s what
they were for.

*

Everyone knew about plagues of rats. There were famous stories about the
rat pipers, who made their living going from town to town getting rid of
plagues of rats.

And that, really, was it. You didn’t need _many_ rats for a plague, not
if they knew their business. One rat, popping up here and there,
squeaking loudly, taking a bath in the fresh cream and widdling in the
flour, could be a plague all by himself.

After a few days of this, it was amazing how glad people were to see the
stupid-looking kid with his magical rat pipe. And they were amazed when
rats poured out of every hole to follow him out of the town. They were
so amazed that they didn’t bother much about the fact that there were
only a few hundred rats.

They’d have been _really_ amazed if they’d ever found out that the rats
and the piper met up with a cat somewhere in the bushes out of town, and
solemnly counted out the money.

*

There were three loud knocks from below. They were repeated. And then
they were repeated again. Finally, Malicia’s voice said: ‘Are you two up
there or not?’

Keith crawled out of the hay and looked down. ‘Yes,’ he said.

‘Didn’t you hear the secret knock?’ said Malicia, staring up at him in
annoyance.

‘It didn’t sound like a secret knock,’ said Maurice.

‘It _is_ a secret knock!’ Malicia snapped. ‘I know about these things!
And you’re supposed to give the secret knock in return!’

‘But if it’s just someone knocking on the door in, you know, general
high spirits, and we knock back, what are they going to think is up
here?’ said Maurice. ‘An extremely heavy beetle?’

Malicia went uncharacteristically silent for a moment. Then she said:
‘Good point, good point. I know, I’ll shout “It’s me, Malicia!” and
_then_ give the secret knock, and that way you’ll know it’s me and you
can give the secret knock back. Okay?’

‘Why don’t we just say “Hello, we’re up here”?’ said Keith innocently.

Malicia sighed. ‘Don’t you have _any_ sense of drama?’

[image]

Cat singing consists of standing two inches in front of other cats and
screaming at them until they give in.

[image]

‘Never rush, never run. We don’t want to be like the first mouse, eh?’

‘No, Darktan,’ the rats chorused dutifully. ‘We don’t want to be like
the first mouse!’

‘Right! What mouse do we want to be like?’

‘The second mouse, Darktan!’ said the rats, who’d had this lesson dinned
into them many times.

‘Right! And why do we want to be like the second mouse?’

‘Because the second mouse gets the cheese, Darktan!’

‘Good!’ said Darktan.

A young rat was holding up its paw.

‘Yes?’

‘Er … can I ask a question, sir?’

‘All right,’ he said.

‘Er … you said the second mouse gets the cheese, sir? But … doesn’t the
_first_ mouse get something, sir?’

Darktan stared at the young rat. ‘I can see you’re going to be a
valuable addition to the squad.’ He raised his voice. ‘Squad! What does
the _first_ mouse get?’

The roar of voices made dust fall down from the ceiling. ‘The Trap!’

*

‘You were stolen away at birth, I expect [said Malicia]. You probably
_are_ the rightful king of some country, but they found someone who
looked like you and did a swap. You were probably found on a doorstep.’

‘I was, yes,’ said Keith.

‘See? I’m always right!’

‘What were you doing on a doorstep?’ said Maurice.

‘I don’t know. Gurgling, I expect,’ said Keith.

‘There was a magic sword or a crown in the basket with you, probably.
And you’ve got a mysterious tattoo or a strange-shaped birthmark, too,’
said Malicia.

‘I don’t think so. No one ever mentioned them,’ said Keith. ‘There was
just me and a blanket. And a note.’

‘A note? But that’s _important_!’

‘It said “19 pints and a Strawberry Yoghurt”,’ said Keith.

*

‘Well, you probably won’t be surprised to know that I’ve got two
dreadful step-sisters,’ said Malicia. ‘And I have to do all the chores!’

‘Gosh, really,’ said Maurice.

‘Well, most of the chores,’ said Malicia, as if revealing an unfortunate
fact. ‘Some of them, definitely. I have to clean up my own room, you
know! And it’s _extremely_ untidy!’

‘Gosh, really.’

‘_And_ it’s very nearly the smallest bedroom. There’re practically no
cupboards and I’m running out of bookshelf space!’

‘Gosh, really.’

‘And people are incredibly cruel to me. You will note that we’re here in
a _kitchen_. And I’m the mayor’s daughter. Should the daughter of a
mayor be expected to wash up at least once a week? I think _not_!’

‘Gosh, really.’

‘And will you just look at these torn and bedraggled clothes I have to
wear?’

Maurice looked. As far as he could tell, Malicia’s dress was pretty much
like any other dress.

‘Here, just here,’ said Malicia, pointing to a place on the hem which,
to Maurice, looked no different from the rest of the dress. ‘I had to
sew that back myself, you know?’

*

Keith grabbed the back edge of the dresser with both hands, and braced
one foot against the wall, and heaved.

Slowly, like a mighty forest tree, the dresser pitched forward. The
crockery started to fall out as it tipped, plate slipping off plate in
one glorious chaotic deal from a very expensive pack of cards. Even so,
some of them survived the fall on to the floor, and so did some of the
cups and saucers as the cupboard opened and added to the fun, but that
didn’t made any difference because then the huge, heavy woodwork
thundered down on top of them.

One miraculously whole plate rolled past Keith, spinning round and round
and getting lower on the floor with the groiyuoiyoi-_yooooinnnnggg_
sound you always get in these distressing circumstances.

*

‘Do you know what an aglet is?’

‘Aglet? Aglet? What’s an aglet got to do with anything?’ snapped
Malicia.

‘It’s those little metal bits on the end of shoelaces,’ said Maurice.

‘How come a cat knows a word like that?’ said the girl.

‘Everyone’s got to know _something_,’ said Maurice.

*

‘They’ll tell my father I’ve been telling stories and I’ll get locked
out of my room again.’

‘You get locked _out_ of your room as a punishment?’ said Maurice.

‘Yes. It means I can’t get at my books. I’m rather a special person, as
you may have guessed,’ said Malicia, proudly.

[image]

OF COURSE THERE ARE NO CAT GODS. THAT WOULD BE TOO MUCH LIKE … WORK.

[image]

‘When I woke up there was a rat _dancing_ on my dressing-table,’ said
Corporal Knopf. ‘Tapitty, tapitty, tap.’

‘That’s odd,’ said Sergeant Doppelpunkt, giving his corporal a strange
look.

‘_And_ it was humming “There’s no Business like Show Business”. I call
that more than just “odd”!’

‘No, I meant it’s odd you’ve got a dressing-table. I mean, you’re not
even married.’

*

‘ ’scuse me, ’scuse me,’ said a voice from beside him. He looked down at
a dirty, half-scorched cat, which grinned at him.

‘Did that _cat_ just _speak_?’ said the mayor.

Maurice looked around. ‘Which one?’ he said.

‘You! Did you just talk?’

‘Would you feel better if I said no?’ said Maurice.

*

‘Look, there’s two types of people in the world.’ said Malicia. ‘There
are those who have got the plot, and those that haven’t.’

‘The world hasn’t got a _plot_,’ said Maurice. ‘Things just … happen,
one after another.’

‘Only if you think of it like that,’ said Malicia, far too smugly in
Maurice’s opinion. ‘There’s always a plot. You just have to know where
to look.’ She paused for a moment and then said, ‘Look! That’s the word!
There’ll be a secret passage, of course! Everyone look for the entrance
to the secret passage!’

‘Er … how will we know it’s the entrance to a secret passage?’ said
Keith, looking even more bewildered than normal. ‘What does a secret
passage _look_ like?’

‘It won’t _look_ like one, of course!’

‘Oh, _well_, in that case I can see dozens of secret passages,’ said
Maurice. ‘Doors, windows, that calendar from the Acme Poison Company,
that cupboard over there, that rat hole, that desk, that—’

‘You’re just being sarcastic,’ said Malicia, lifting up the calendar and
sternly inspecting the wall behind it.

‘Actually, I was just being flippant,’ said Maurice. ‘But I can do
sarcastic if you like.’

Keith stared at the long bench which was in front of a window frosted
with ancient cobwebs.

‘You might try to be some help,’ said Malicia, tapping the walls.

‘I don’t know how to look for something that doesn’t look like the thing
I’m looking for,’ said Keith.

Malicia stood back and brushed her hair out of her eyes. ‘This isn’t
working,’ she said.

‘I suppose there might not _be_ a secret passage?’ said Maurice. ‘I know
it’s a rather daring idea, but perhaps this is just an ordinary shed?’

Even Maurice leaned back a little from the force of Malicia’s stare.

‘There _has_ to be a secret passage,’ she said. ‘Otherwise there’s no
_point_.’

She snapped her fingers. ‘Of course! We’re doing it wrong! _Everyone_
knows you never find the secret passage by _looking_ for it! It’s when
you give up and lean against the wall that you inadvertently operate the
secret switch!’

Maurice looked at Keith for help. He was a human, after all. He should
know how to deal with something like Malicia. But Keith was just
wandering around the shed, staring at things.

Malicia leaned against the wall with incredible nonchalance. There was
not a click. A panel in the floor did not slide back. ‘Probably the
wrong place,’ she said. ‘I’ll just rest my arm innocently on this coat
hook.’ A sudden door in the wall completely failed to happen. ‘Of
course, it’d help if there was an ornate candlestick,’ said Malicia.
‘They’re always a sure-fire secret passage lever. Every adventurer knows
that.’

‘There isn’t a candlestick,’ said Maurice.

‘I know. Some people totally fail to have any _idea_ of how to design a
proper secret passage,’ said Malicia. She leaned against another piece
of wall, which had no effect whatsoever.

‘I don’t think you’ll find it that way,’ said Keith, who was carefully
examining a trap.

‘Oh? Won’t I?’ said Malicia. ‘Well, at least I’m being _constructive_
about things! Where would you look, if you’re such an expert?’

‘Why is there a rat hole in a rat-catchers’ shed?’ said Keith. ‘It
smells of dead rats and wet dogs and poison. I wouldn’t come near this
place if I was a rat.’

‘Ye–es,’ said Malicia. ‘That usually works, in stories. It’s often the
stupid person who comes up with the good idea by accident.’ She crouched
down and peered into the hole. ‘There’s a sort of little lever,’ she
said. ‘I’ll just give it a little push …’

There was a _clonk_ under the floor, part of it swung back, and Keith
dropped out of sight.

‘Oh, yes,’ said Malicia. ‘I thought something like that would probably
happen …’

*

‘Now I want to ask you a question,’ said Darktan. ‘You’ve been the
leader for … how long?’

‘Ten years,’ said the mayor.

‘Isn’t it hard?’

‘Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Everyone argues with me all the time,’ said the
mayor. ‘Although I must say I’m expecting a little less arguing if all
this works. But it’s not an easy job.’

‘It’s ridiculous to have to shout all the time just to get things done,’
said Darktan.

‘That’s right,’ said the mayor.

‘And everyone expects you to decide things,’ said Darktan.

‘True.’

‘The last leader gave me some advice just before he died, and do you
know what it was? “Don’t eat the green wobbly bit”!’

‘Good advice?’ said the mayor.

‘Yes,’ said Darktan. ‘But all he had to do was be big and tough and
fight all the other rats that wanted to be leader.’

‘It’s a bit like that with the council,’ said the mayor.

‘What?’ said Darktan. ‘You bite them in the neck?’

‘Not yet,’ said the mayor. ‘But it’s a thought, I must say.’

‘It’s just all a lot more complicated than I ever thought it would be!’
said Darktan, bewildered. ‘Because after you’ve learned to shout you
have to learn not to!’

‘Right again,’ said the mayor. ‘That’s how it works … See the river? See
the Houses? See the people in the streets? I have to make it all work.
Well, not the river, obviously, that works by itself. And every year it
turns out that I haven’t upset enough people for them to choose anyone
else as mayor. So I have to do it again. It’s a lot more complicated
than I ever thought it would be.’

‘What, for you too? But you’re a human!’ said Darktan in astonishment.

‘Hah! You think that makes it easier? I thought rats were wild and
free!’

‘Hah!’ said Darktan.

They stared out of the window.

‘It’s just like I always tell my daughter,’ said the man. ‘Stories are
just stories. Life is complicated enough as it is. We have to plan for
the real world. There’s no room for the fantastic.’

‘Exactly,’ said the rat.

[image]

The thing about stories is that you have to pick the ones that last.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

THERE’S TROUBLE ON the Aching farm – nightmares spreading down from the
hills. And now Tiffany Aching’s little brother has been stolen by the
Queen of the Fairies (although Tiffany doesn’t think this is entirely a
bad thing).

Tiffany’s got to get him back. To help her, she has a weapon (a frying
pan), her granny’s magic book (well, _Diseases of the Sheep_, actually)
and—

‘Crivens! Whut aboot us, ye daftie!’

—oh, yes. She’s also got the Nac Mac Feegle, the Wee Free Men, the
fightin’, thievin’, tiny blue-skinned pictsies who were thrown out of
Fairyland for being Drunk and Disorderly …

 

Ordinary fortune-tellers tell you what you _want_ to happen; witches
tell you what’s going to happen whether you want it to or not. Strangely
enough, witches tend to be more accurate but less popular.

*

There was a small part of Tiffany’s brain that wasn’t too certain about
the name Tiffany. She was nine years old and felt that Tiffany was going
to be a hard name to live up to. Besides, she’d decided only last week
that she wanted to be a witch when she grew up, and she was certain
Tiffany just wouldn’t work. People would laugh.

*

The teachers were useful. They went from village to village delivering
short lessons on many subjects. They kept apart from the other
travellers, and were quite mysterious in their ragged robes and strange
square hats. They used long words, like ‘corrugated iron’. They lived
rough lives, surviving on what food they could earn from giving lessons
to anyone who would listen. When no one would listen, they lived on
baked hedgehog. They went to sleep under the stars, which the maths
teachers would count, the astronomy teachers would measure and the
literature teachers would name. The geography teachers got lost in the
woods and fell into bear traps.

*

‘I would like a question answered today,’ said Tiffany. ‘It’s about
zoology.’

‘Zoology, eh? That’s a big word, isn’t it.’

‘No, actually it isn’t,’ said Tiffany. ‘Patronizing is a big word.
Zoology is really quite short.’

*

‘Are you a witch?’ said Tiffany. ‘I don’t mind if you are.’

‘What a strange question to spring on someone,’ said the woman. ‘Why
would I be a witch?’

‘You’re wearing a straw hat with flowers in it.’

‘Aha!’ said the woman. ‘That proves it, then. Witches wear tall pointy
hats. Everyone knows that, foolish child.’

‘Yes, but witches are also very clever,’ said Tiffany calmly. ‘They
sneak about. Probably they often don’t look like witches. And a witch
coming here would know about the Baron and so she’d wear the kind of hat
that everyone knows witches don’t wear.’

‘That was an incredible feat of reasoning,’ the woman said at last.
‘Whatever kind of hat I’ve got on, you’d say it proves I’m a witch,
yes?’

‘Well, the frog sitting on your hat is a bit of a clue, too,’ said
Tiffany.

‘I’m a toad, actually,’ said the creature, which had been peering at
Tiffany from between the paper flowers.

‘You’re very yellow for a toad.’

‘I’ve been a bit ill,’ said the toad.

‘And you talk,’ said Tiffany.

‘You only have my word for it,’ said the toad, disappearing into the
paper flowers. ‘You can’t prove anything.’

*

‘Witches have animals they can talk to, called familiars. Like your toad
there.’

‘I’m not familiar,’ said a voice from among the paper flowers. ‘I’m just
slightly presumptuous.’

*

‘If you have a grandmother who can pass on her pointy hat to you, that
saves a great deal of expense. They are incredibly hard to come by,
especially ones strong enough to withstand falling farmhouses.’

*

‘You might make a decent witch one day,’ she said. ‘But I don’t teach
people to be witches. They learn in a special school. I just show them
the way, if they’re any good. All witches have special interests, and I
like children.’

‘Why?’

‘Because they’re much easier to fit in the oven,’ said Miss Tick.

*

‘I will give you some free advice.’

‘Will it cost me anything?’

‘You could say it is priceless. Are you listening?’

‘Yes.’

‘Good. Now … if you trust in yourself …’

‘Yes?’

‘… and believe in your dreams …’

‘Yes?’

‘… and follow your star …’

‘Yes?’

‘… you’ll still get beaten by people who spent _their_ time working hard
and learning things and weren’t so lazy.’

*

A lot of the stories were highly suspicious, in her opinion. There was
the one that ended when the two good children pushed the wicked witch
into her own oven. Tiffany had worried about that after all that trouble
with Mrs Snapperly. Stories like this stopped people thinking properly,
she was sure. She’d read that one and thought, Excuse me? _No one_ has
an oven big enough to get a whole person in, and what made the children
think they could just walk around eating people’s houses in any case?
And why does some boy too stupid to know a cow is worth a lot more than
five beans have the _right_ to murder a giant and steal all his gold?
Not to mention commit an act of ecological vandalism? And some girl who
can’t tell the difference between a wolf and her grandmother must either
have been as dense as teak or come from an extremely ugly family.

*

They were all about six inches tall and mostly coloured blue, although
it was hard to know if that was the actual colour of their skins or just
the dye from their tattoos, which covered every inch that wasn’t covered
with red hair. They wore short kilts, and some wore other bits of
clothing too, like skinny waistcoats. A few of them wore rabbit or rat
skulls on their heads, as a sort of helmet. And every single one of them
carried, slung across his back, a sword nearly as big as he was.

[image]

‘Whut’s the plan, Rob?’ said one of them.

‘Okay, lads, this is what we’ll do. As soon as we see somethin’, we’ll
attack it. Right?’

This caused a cheer.

‘Ach, ’tis a good plan,’ said Daft Wullie.

[image]

Glint, glisten, glitter, gleam …

Tiffany thought a lot about words. ‘Onomatopoeic’, she’d discovered in
the dictionary, meant words that sounded like the noise of the thing
they were describing, like ‘cuckoo’. But _she_ thought there should be a
word meaning ‘a word that sounds like the noise a thing would make if
that thing made a noise even though, actually, it doesn’t, but would if
it did’.

_Glint_, for example. If light made a noise as it reflected off a
distant window, it’d go ‘glint!’ And the light of tinsel, all those
little glints chiming together, would make a noise like
‘glitterglitter’. ‘Gleam’ was a clean, smooth noise from a surface that
intended to shine all day. And ‘glisten’ was the soft, almost greasy
sound of something rich and oily.

*

‘What’s your name, pictsie?’ she said.

‘No’-as-big-as-Medium-Sized-Jock-but-bigger-than-Wee-Jock-Jock,
mistress. There’s no’ that many Feegle names, ye ken, so we ha’ to
share.’

‘Well, Not-as-big-as-Little-Jock—’ Tiffany began.

‘That’d be Medium-Sized Jock, mistress,’ said
Not-as-big-as-Medium-Sized-Jock-but-bigger-than-Wee-Jock-Jock.

‘Well, Not-as-big-as-Medium-Sized-Jock-but-bigger-than-Wee-Jock, I can—’

‘That’s No’-as-big-as-Medium-Sized-Jock-but-bigger-than-Wee-Jock-_Jock_,
mistress,’ said
Not-as-big-as-Medium-Sized-Jock-but-bigger-than-Wee-Jock-Jock. ‘Ye were
one jock short,’ he added helpfully.

*

There was some method in the way the Nac Mac Feegle fought. For example,
they always chose the biggest opponent because, as Rob Anybody said
later, ‘It makes them easier to hit, ye ken’. And they simply didn’t
_stop_. It was that which wore people down. It was like being attacked
by wasps with fists.

*

‘The thing about witchcraft,’ said Mistress Weatherwax, ‘is that it’s
not like school at all. _First_ you get the test, and then afterwards
you spend years findin’ out how you passed it. It’s a bit like life in
that respect.’

*

‘And what do you _really_ do?’ said Tiffany.

‘We look to … the edges,’ said Mistress Weatherwax. ‘There’re a lot of
edges, more than people know. Between life and death, this world and the
next, night and day, right and wrong … an’ they need watchin’. We watch
’em, we guard the sum of things. And we never ask for any reward. That’s
important.’

*

‘Hooses, banks, dreams, ’tis a’ the same to us,’ said Rob Anybody.
‘There’s nothing we cannae get in or oot of.’

‘Except maybe pubs,’ said Big Yan.

‘Oh, aye,’ said Rob Anybody cheerfully. ‘Gettin’ oot o’ pubs sometimes
causes us a cerrrtain amount o’ difficulty, I’ll grant ye that.’

[image]

[image]

 

IT BEGAN AS a sudden strange fancy …

Polly Perks had to become a boy in a hurry. Cutting off her hair and
wearing trousers was easy. Learning to fart and belch in public and walk
like an ape took more time …

And now she’s enlisted in the army, and is searching for her lost
brother.

But there’s a war on. There’s always a war on. And Polly and her fellow
recruits are suddenly in the thick of it, without any training, and the
enemy is hunting them.

All they have on their side is the most artful sergeant in the army and
a vampire with a lust for coffee. Well … they have the Secret. And as
they take the war to the heart of the enemy, they have to use all the
resources of … the Monstrous Regiment.

 

And then there was the young male walk. At least women swung only their
_hips_. Young men swung _everything_, from the shoulders down. You have
to try to occupy a lot of space. It makes you look bigger, like a tomcat
fluffing his tail. The boys tried to walk big in self-defence against
all those other big boys out there. I’m bad, I’m fierce, I’m cool, I’d
like a pint of shandy and me mam wants me home by nine …

*

Polly reached the troll bridge, which crossed the river in a narrow
gorge. It cost one penny to cross, or one hundred gold pieces if you had
a billygoat. Trolls might not be quick thinkers but they don’t forget in
a hurry, either.

*

‘Ever eaten scubbo? No? Nothing like a bowl of scubbo when you’re
hungry. You can put _anything_ in scubbo. Pork, beef, mutton, rabbit,
chicken, duck … anything. Even rats, if you’ve got ’em. It’s food for
the marching man, scubbo. Got some on the boil right now. You can have
some of that, if you like.’

The squad brightened up.

‘Thoundth good,’ said Igor. ‘What’th in it?’

‘Boiling water,’ said the corporal. ‘It’s what we call “blind scubbo”.’

*

‘You could try scrounging something at the inn.’

‘Scrounge?’ said Polly.

‘Yeah. Scrounge. Scrounge, nick, have a lend of, borrow, thieve, lift,
acquire, purrrr-loin. That’s what you’ll learn, if you’re gonna survive
this war.’

‘We have to _steal_ our food?’ said Maladict.

‘No, you can starve if that takes your fancy,’ said the corporal. ‘I’ve
starved a few times. There’s no future in it. Ate a man’s leg when we
were snowed up in the Ibblestarn campaign but, fair’s fair, he ate
mine.’

*

Lieutenant Blouse was standing in the middle of the floor in his
breeches and shirtsleeves, holding a sabre. Polly was no expert in these
matters, but she thought she recognized the stylish, flamboyant pose as
the one beginners tend to use just before they’re stabbed through the
heart by a more experienced fighter.

*

‘These are tricky times, sergeant. Command has never been so burdensome.
The great General Tacticus says that in dangerous times the commander
must be like the eagle and see the whole, and yet still be like the hawk
and see every detail.’

‘Yessir,’ said Jackrum. ‘And if he acts like a common tit, sir, he can
hang upside down all day and eat fat bacon.’

*

A woman always has half an onion left over, no matter what the size of
the onion, the dish or the woman.

*

Jackrum stepped back. ‘We are heading for the front, lads. The war. And
in a nasty war, where’s the best place to be? Apart from on the moon, o’
course? No one?’

Slowly, Jade raised a hand.

‘Go on, then,’ said the sergeant.

‘In the army, sarge,’ said the troll. ‘ ’cos …’ She began to count on
her fingers. ‘One, you got weapons an’ armour an’ dat. Two, you are
surrounded by other armed men. Er … Many, youse gettin’ paid and gettin’
better grub than the people in Civilian Street. Er … Lots, if’n you
gives up, you getting taken pris’ner and dere’s rules about that like
Not Kicking Pris’ners Inna Head and stuff, ’cos if you kick their
pris’ners inna head they’ll kick your pris’ners inna head so dat’s,
like, you’re kickin’ your own head, but dere’s no rule say you can’t
kick enemy civilians inna head. There’s other stuff too, but I ran outa
numbers.’

*

‘You know what most of the milit’ry training is, Perks?’ Jackrum went
on. ‘It’s to turn you into a man who will, on the word of command, stick
his blade into some poor sod just like him who happens to be wearing the
wrong uniform. He’s like you, you’re like him. He doesn’t really want to
kill you, you don’t really want to kill him. But if you don’t kill him
first, he’ll kill you. That’s the start and finish of it. It don’t come
easy without trainin’.’

*

Polly wondered if Jackrum ever slept. She did a spell of guard duty, and
he stepped out from behind her with ‘Guess who, Perks! You’re on
lookout. You should see the dreadful enemy before they see you. What’re
the four Ss?’

‘Shape, shadow, silhouette and shine, sarge!’ said Polly, snapping to
attention.

That caused a moment’s pause from the sergeant before he said: ‘Just
_knew_ that, did yer?’

‘Nosir! A little bird told me when we changed guard, sir! Said you’d
asked him, sir!’

‘Oh, so Jackrum’s little lads are gangin’ up on their kindly ol’
sergeant, are they?’ said Jackrum.

‘Nosir. Sharing information important to the squad in a vital survival
situation, sarge!’

‘But I see you’re not standing in a bleedin’ shadow, Perks, nor have you
done anything to change your bleedin’ shape, you’re silhouetted against
the bleedin’ light and your sabre’s shining like a diamond in a
chimney-sweep’s bleedin’ ear’ole! Explain!’

‘It’s because of the one C, sarge!’ said Polly, still staring straight
ahead.

‘And that is?’

‘Colour, sarge! I’m wearing bleedin’ red and white in a bleedin’ grey
forest, sarge!’

She risked a sideways glance. In Jackrum’s little piggy eyes there
gleamed a gleam. It was the one you got when he was secretly pleased.

‘Ashamed of your lovely, lovely uniform, Perks?’ he said.

‘Don’t want to be seen dead in it, sarge,’ said Polly.

*

‘General Tacticus said the fate of a battle may depend upon the actions
of one man in the right place, sergeant,’ said Blouse, calmly.

‘_And_ having a lot more soldiers than the other bugger, sir,’ Jackrum
insisted.

*

‘Is that rum, sarge?’ said Polly.

‘Well done, my little bar steward. And wouldn’t it be nice if it _was_
rum, upon my word. Or whisky or gin or brandy. But this don’t have none
of those fancy names. This is the genuine stingo, this is. Pure
hangman.’

‘Hangman?’ said Shufti.

‘One drop and you’re dead,’ said Polly.

*

‘All right,’ Polly whispered. ‘Remember, no swearing. No weapons,
either. Anyone brought a weapon?’

There was a shaking of heads.

‘Did you bring a weapon, Tonk—Magda?’

‘No, Polly.’

‘No item of any sort with a certain weapon-like quality?’ Polly
insisted.

‘No, Polly,’ said Tonker demurely.

‘Anything, perhaps, with an edge?’

‘Oh, you mean this?’

‘Yes, Magda.’

‘Well, a woman can carry a knife, can’t she?’

‘It’s a _sabre_, Magda. You’re trying to hide it, but it’s a sabre.’

‘But I’m only using it like a knife, Polly.’

‘It’s three feet long, Magda.’

‘Size isn’t important, Polly.’

‘No one believes that. Leave it behind a tree, please.’

[image]

It is an established fact that, despite everything society can do, girls
of seven are magnetically attracted to the colour pink.

[image]

‘Sir, you know you said you were going to steal a gate key off a guard
and break his neck?’ said Polly.

‘Indeed.’

‘Do you know _how_ to break a man’s neck, sir?’

‘I read a book on martial arts, Perks.’

‘But you haven’t actually _done_ it, sir?’

‘Well, no! I was at HQ, and you are not allowed to practise on real
people, Perks.’

‘Look, sir, I’m just a … what _is_ your name, please?’

‘Sam Vimes. Special envoy, which is kind of like an ambassador but
without the little gold chocolates.’

*

_Trying to break into a fortified and heavily guarded keep, the male
Lieutenant Blouse comes up with a cunning plan, which he explains to one
of his soldiers, who (unknown to him) is really female. This is the
Inexorable Law of Comic Cross-Dressing:_

‘Astonishingly enough, Perks,’ said Blouse, ‘in your boyish enthusiasm
you have given me a very interesting idea … because, of course, we only
need one “washerwoman” to get us inside, do we not? And if one thinks
“outside of the box”, the “woman” does not in fact need to be a woman!’

Blouse beamed. Polly allowed her brow to wrinkle in honest puzzlement.

‘Doesn’t she, sir?’ she said. ‘I don’t think I quite understand, sir.’

‘“She”, could be a man! One of us! In disguise.’

‘I’ll go,’ said Polly quietly.

‘Really, private. It would simply not work,’ said Blouse. ‘Oh, you’re
brave, certainly, but what makes you think you stand a chance of passing
yourself off as a woman?’

‘Well, sir … what?’

Blouse shook his head. ‘No, they would see through you in a flash. You
are a fine bunch of lads, but there is only one man here who’d stand a
chance of getting away with it. Manickle?’

‘Yessir?’ said Shufti, rigid with instant panic.

‘Can you find me a dress, do you think?’

‘Sir, are you telling us … you’re going to try to get in dressed as a
woman?’

‘Well, I’m clearly the only one who’s had any practice,’ said Blouse,
rubbing his hands together. ‘At my old school we were in and out of
skirts all the time.’

He looked around at the circle of absolutely expressionless faces.

‘Theatricals, you see?’ he said brightly. ‘No gels at our boarding
school, of course. But we didn’t let that stop us. Why, my Lady Spritely
in _A Comedy of Cuckolds_ is still talked about. No, if we need a woman,
I’m your man.’

[image]

[image]

 

ELEVEN-YEAR-OLD TIFFANY ACHING wants to be a real witch.

But a real witch doesn’t casually step out of her body, leaving it
empty. Tiffany does – and there’s something just waiting for a handy
body to take over. Something ancient and horrible, which can’t die. Now
Tiffany’s got to learn to be a real witch really quickly, with the help
of arch-witch Mistress Weatherwax and the truly amazing Miss Level.

‘Crivens! And us!’

Oh, yes. And the Nac Mac Feegle – the rowdiest, toughest, smelliest
bunch of fairies ever to be thrown out of Fairyland for having been
drunk at two in the afternoon. They’ll fight anything …

 

The Nac Mac Feegle are the most dangerous of the fairy races,
particularly when drunk. They love drinking, fighting and stealing, and
will in fact steal anything that is not nailed down. If it _is_ nailed
down, they will steal the nails as well.

*

The origin of the Nac Mac Feegle is lost in the famous Mists of Time.
They say that they were thrown out of Fairyland by the Queen of the
Fairies because they objected to her spiteful and tyrannical rule.
Others say they were just thrown out for being drunk.

*

Little is known about their religion, if any, save for one fact: they
think they are dead. They like our world, with its sunshine and
mountains and blue skies and things to fight. An amazing world like this
couldn’t be open to just _anybody_, they say. It must be some kind of a
heaven or Valhalla, where brave warriors go when they are dead. So, they
reason, they have already been alive somewhere else, and then died and
were allowed to come here because they have been so _good_.

This is a _quite_ incorrect and fanciful notion because, as we know, the
truth is exactly the other way around.

*

The new boots were all wrong. They were stiff and shiny. Shiny boots!
That was disgraceful. Clean boots, that was different. There was nothing
wrong with putting a bit of a polish on boots to keep the wet out. But
boots had to work for a living. They shouldn’t _shine_.

[image]

Witches were a bit like cats.

They didn’t much like one another’s company, but they _did_ like to know
where all the other witches _were_, just in case they needed them.

[image]

People in the chalk country didn’t trust witches. They thought they
danced around on moonlit nights without their drawers on. (Tiffany had
made enquiries about this, and had been slightly relieved to find out
that you didn’t have to do this to be a witch. You could if you wanted
to, but only if you were certain where all the nettles, thistles and
hedgehogs were.)

*

If there’s one thing a Feegle likes more than a party, it’s a bigger
party, and if there’s anything better than a bigger party, it’s a bigger
party with someone else paying for the drink.

*

If you want to upset a witch you don’t have to mess around with charms
and spells, you just have to put her in a room with a picture that’s
hung slightly crooked and watch her squirm.

*

Rob Anybody had mastered the first two rules of writing, as he
understood them.

1) Steal some paper.

2) Steal a pencil.

Unfortunately there was more to it than that.

*

Twoshirts was just a bend in the road, with a name. There was nothing
there but an inn for the coaches, a blacksmith’s shop, and a small store
with the word SOUVENIRS written optimistically on a scrap of cardboard
in the window. And that was it. Around the place, separated by fields
and scraps of woodland, were the houses of people for whom Twoshirts
was, presumably, the big city. Every world is full of places like
Twoshirts. They are places for people to come from, not go to.

*

The wood was about half an hour’s walk away. It was nothing special, as
woods go, being mostly full-grown beech, although once you know that
beech drips unpleasant poisons on the ground beneath it to keep it clear
it’s not quite the timber you thought it was.

*

First Thoughts are the everyday thoughts. Everyone has those. Second
Thoughts are the thoughts you think about the _way_ you think. People
who enjoy thinking have those. Third Thoughts are thoughts that watch
the world and think all by themselves. They’re rare, and often
troublesome. Listening to them is part of witchcraft.

*

She had a dobby stone, which was supposed to be lucky because it had a
hole in it. (She’d been told that when she was seven, and had picked it
up. She couldn’t quite see how the hole made it lucky, but since it had
spent a lot of time in her pocket, and then safe and sound in the box,
it probably _was_ more fortunate than most stones, which got kicked
around and run over by carts and so on.)

*

Every kitchen drawer Tiffany had ever seen might have been _meant_ to be
neat but over the years had been crammed with things that didn’t quite
fit, like big ladles and bent bottle openers, which meant that they
always stuck unless you knew the trick of opening them.

*

‘Have you ever been to a circus?’

Once, Tiffany admitted. It hadn’t been much fun. Things that try too
hard to be funny often aren’t. There had been a moth-eaten lion with
practically no teeth, a tight-rope walker who was never more than a few
feet above the ground, and a knife-thrower who threw a lot of knives at
an elderly woman in pink tights on a big spinning wooden disc and
completely failed to hit her every time. The only real amusement was
afterwards, when a cart ran over the clown.

*

‘He’s always talking about … his funeral.’

‘Well, it’s important to him. Sometimes old people are like that. They’d
hate people to think that they were too poor to pay for their own
funeral. Mr Weavall’d die of shame if he couldn’t pay for his own
funeral.’

*

‘We do what can be done,’ said Miss Level. ‘Mistress Weatherwax said
you’ve got to learn that witchcraft is mostly about doing quite ordinary
things.’

‘And you have to do what she says?’ said Tiffany.

‘I listen to her advice,’ said Miss Level, coldly.

‘Mistress Weatherwax is the head witch, then, is she?’

‘Oh no!’ said Miss Level, looking shocked. ‘Witches are all equal. We
don’t have things like head witches. That’s _quite_ against the spirit
of witchcraft.’

‘Oh, I see,’ said Tiffany.

‘Besides,’ Miss Level added, ‘Mistress Weatherwax would never allow that
sort of thing.’

*

Tiffany couldn’t help noticing that Petulia had jewellery everywhere;
later she found that it was hard to be around Petulia for any length of
time without having to unhook a bangle from a necklace or, once, an
earring from an ankle bracelet (nobody ever found out how that one
happened). Petulia couldn’t resist occult jewellery. Most of the stuff
was to magically protect her from things, but she hadn’t found anything
to protect her from looking a bit silly.

*

You had to remember that pictsies weren’t brownies. In theory, brownies
would do the housework for you if you left them a saucer of milk.

The Nac Mac Feegle … wouldn’t.

*

In truth, most witches could get through their whole life without having
to do serious, undeniable magic (making shambles and curse-nets and
dreamcatchers didn’t really count, being rather more like
arts-and-crafts, and most of the rest of it was practical medicine,
common sense and the ability to look stern in a pointy hat). But being a
witch and wearing the big black hat was like being a policeman. People
saw the uniform, not you. When the mad axeman was running down the
street you weren’t allowed to back away muttering ‘Could you find
someone else? Actually, I mostly just do, you know, stray dogs and road
safety …’ You were there, you had the hat, you did the job. That was a
basic rule of witchery: _It’s up to you_.

*

‘How many fingers am I holdin’ up?’ he said.

‘Five,’ whispered Miss Level.

‘Am I? Ah, well, ye could be right, ye’d have the knowin’ o’ the
countin’,’ said Rob.

*

_The Feegle way of reading:_

‘Worrds,’ said Rob Anybody.

‘Yes, they say—’ Billy began.

‘I ken weel what they say!’ snapped Rob Anybody. ‘I ha’ the knowin’ of
the readin’! They say—’

He looked up again. ‘OK, they say … that’s the snake, an’ that’s the
kinda like a gate letter, an’ the comb on its side, two o’ that, an’ the
fat man standin’ still, an’ the snake again, and then there’s whut we
calls a “space” and then there’s the letter like a saw’s teeth, and two
o’ the letters that’s roound like the sun, and the letter that’s a man
sittin’ doon, and onna next line we ha’ … the man wi’ his arms oot, and
the letter that’s you, an’ ha, the fat man again but noo he’s walkin’,
an’ next he’s standin’ still again, an’ next is the comb, an’ the
up-an’-doon ziggy-zaggy letter, and the man’s got his arms oot, and then
there’s me, and that ziggy-zaggy and we end the line with the comb again
… an’ on the _next_ line we starts wi’ the bendy hook, that’s the letter
roound as the sun, them’s twa men sittin’ doon, there’s the letter
reaching ooot tae the sky, then there’s a space ’cos there’s nae letter,
then there’s the snaky again, an’ the letter like a hoose frame, and
then there’s the letter that’s me, aye, an’ another fella sitting doon,
an’ another big roound letter, and, ha, oor ol’ friend, the fat man
walkin’! The End!’

He stood back, hands on hips, and demanded: ‘There! Is that readin’ I
just did, or wuz it no’?’

_(And the words were: SHEEP’S WOOL, TURPENTINE, JOLLY SAILOR.)_

*

_Everyone_ in the mountains had heard of Mistress Weatherwax. If you
didn’t have respect, she said, you didn’t have anything.

They were treated like royalty – not the sort who get dragged off to be
beheaded or have something nasty done with a red-hot poker, but the
other sort, when people walk away dazed saying, ‘She actually said hello
to me, very graciously! I will never wash my hand again!’

*

‘Let’s get moving.’

‘We haven’t even had anything to eat!’ said Tiffany, running after her.

‘I had a lot of voles last night,’ said Mistress Weatherwax over her
shoulder.

‘Yes, but _you_ didn’t actually eat them, did you?’ said Tiffany. ‘It
was the owl that _actually_ ate them.’

‘Technic’ly, yes,’ Mistress Weatherwax admitted. ‘But if you think
you’ve been eating voles all night you’d be amazed how much you don’t
want to eat anything next morning.’

[image]

For an old woman Mistress Weatherwax could move quite fast. She strode
over the moors as if distance was a personal insult.

[image]

There were no judges, and no prizes. The Witch Trials weren’t like that,
as Petulia had said. The point was to show what you could do, to show
what you’d become, so that people would go away thinking things like
‘That Caramella Bottlethwaite, she’s coming along nicely’. It wasn’t a
competition, honestly. No one _won_.

And if you believed _that_ you’d believe that the moon is pushed around
the sky by a goblin called Wilberforce.

*

‘If you don’t know when to be a human being, you don’t know when to be a
witch. And if you’re too afraid of goin’ astray, you won’t go anywhere.’

*

‘I’m clever enough to know how you manage _not_ to think of a pink
rhinoceros if someone says “pink rhinoceros”,’ she managed to say aloud.

‘Ah, that’s deep magic, that is,’ said Granny Weatherwax.

‘No. It’s not. You don’t know what a rhinoceros looks like, do you?’

Sunlight filled the clearing as the old witch laughed, as clear as a
downland stream.

‘That’s right!’ she said.

[image]

[image]

 

MOIST VON LIPWIG is a con artist …

… and a fraud and a man faced with a life choice: be hanged, or put
Ankh-Morpork’s ailing postal service back on its feet.

It’s a tough decision.

But he’s got to see that the mail gets through, come rain, hail, sleet,
dogs, the Post Office Workers’ Friendly and Benevolent Society, the evil
chairman of the Grand Trunk Semaphore Company, and a midnight killer.

Getting a date with Adora Belle Dearheart would be nice, too.

 

They say that the prospect of being hanged in the morning concentrates a
man’s mind wonderfully; unfortunately, what the mind inevitably
concentrates on is that it is in a body that, in the morning, is going
to be hanged.

*

‘I’d get some rest if I was you, sir, ’cos we’re hanging you in half an
hour,’ said Mr Wilkinson.

‘Hey, don’t I get breakfast?’

‘Breakfast isn’t until seven o’clock, sir.’

*

‘I’m offering you a job, Mr Lipwig, that of Postmaster General of the
Ankh-Morpork Post Office. The job, Mr Lipwig, involves the refurbishment
and running of the city’s postal service, preparation of the
international packets, maintenance of Post Office property, et cetera,
et cetera—’

‘If you stick a broom up my arse I could probably sweep the floor, too,’
said Moist.

Lord Vetinari gave him a long, long look.

‘Well, if you wish,’ he said, and turned to a hovering clerk.
‘Drumknott, does the housekeeper have a store cupboard on this floor, do
you know?’

*

‘I _believe_ in freedom, Mr Lipwig. Not many people do, although they
will of course protest otherwise. And no practical definition of freedom
would be complete without the freedom to take the consequences. Indeed,
it is the freedom upon which all the others are based.’

*

The world was blessedly free of honest men, and wonderfully full of
people who believed they could tell the difference between an honest man
and a crook.

[image]

He had a beard of the short bristled type that suggested that its owner
had been interrupted halfway through eating a hedgehog.

[image]

A large black and white cat had walked into the room.

‘That’s Mr Tiddles, sir,’ said Groat.

‘_Tiddles?_’ said Moist. ‘You mean that really is a cat’s name? I
thought it was just a joke.’

‘Not so much a name, sir, more of a description,’ said Groat.

*

Before you could sell glass as diamonds you had to make people really
_want_ to see diamonds. That was _the_ trick, the trick of all tricks.
You changed the way people saw the world. You let them see it the way
_they_ wanted it to be …

*

Being an absolute ruler today was not as simple as people thought. At
least, it was not simple if your ambitions included being an absolute
ruler tomorrow. There were subtleties. Oh, you could order men to smash
down doors and drag people off to dungeons without trial, but too much
of that sort of thing lacked style and anyway was bad for business,
habit-forming and very, very dangerous for your health. A thinking
tyrant, it seemed to Vetinari, had a much harder job than a ruler raised
to power by some idiot vote-yourself-rich system like democracy. At
least they could tell the people he was their fault.

*

‘Looks like you’re genuine after all, then,’ the old man said. ‘One of
the dark clerks wouldn’t have [done] that. We thought you was one of his
lordship’s special gentlemen, see. No offence, but you’ve got a bit more
colour than the average penpusher.’

‘Dark clerks?’ said Moist, and then recollection dawned. ‘Oh … do you
mean those stocky little men in black suits and bowler hats?’

‘The very same. Scholarship boys at the Assassins’ Guild, some of ’em. I
heard that they can do some nasty things when they’ve a mind.’

‘I thought you called them penpushers?’

‘Yeah, but I didn’t say where, heehee.’

*

_Mr Pump, a golem, points out to conman Moist von Lipwig the downstream
consequences of what had seemed to Moist to be harmless scams to
separate fools from their money:_

‘You can’t just go around killing people!’ shouted Moist.

‘Why Not? You Do.’

‘What? I do not! Who told you that?’

‘I Worked It Out. You Have Killed Two Point Three Three Eight People,’
said the golem calmly.

‘I have never laid a finger on anyone in my life, Mr Pump. I may be –
all the things you know I am, but I am _not_ a killer! I have never so
much as drawn a sword!’

‘No, You Have Not. But You Have Stolen, Embezzled, Defrauded And
Swindled Without Discrimination, Mr Lipvig. You Have Ruined Businesses
And Destroyed Jobs. When Banks Fail, It Is Seldom Bankers Who Starve.
Your Actions Have Taken Money From Those Who Had Little Enough To Begin
With. In A Myriad Small Ways You Have _Hastened_ The Deaths Of Many. You
Do Not Know Them. You Did Not See Them Bleed. But You Snatched Bread
From Their Mouths And Tore Clothes From Their Backs. For Sport, Mr
Lipvig. For Sport. For The Joy Of The Game.’

Moist’s mouth had dropped open. It shut. It opened again. It shut again.
You can never find repartee when you need it.

‘I Have Read The Details Of Your Many Crimes, Mr Lipvig. You Took From
Others Because You Were Clever And They Were Stupid.’

‘Hold on, most of the time they thought they were swindling me!’

‘You Set Out To Trap Them, Mr Lipvig.’

[image]

People in Ankh-Morpork

always paid attention to people on rooftops, in case there was a chance
of an interesting suicide.

[image]

By law and tradition the great Library of Unseen University is open to
the public, although they aren’t allowed as far as the magical shelves.
They don’t realize this, however, since the rules of time and space are
twisted inside the Library and so hundreds of miles of shelving can
easily be concealed inside a space roughly the thickness of paint.

People flock in, nevertheless, in search of answers to those questions
only librarians are considered to be able to answer, such as ‘Is this
the laundry?’ ‘How do you spell surreptitious?’ and, on a regular basis:
‘Do you have a book I remember reading once? It had a red cover and it
turned out they were twins.’

*

The hub or nerve centre of the coach business was a big shed next to the
stable. It smelled – no, it stank – no, it _fugged_ of horses, leather,
veterinary medicine, bad coal, brandy and cheap cigars. That’s what a
fug was. You could have cut cubes out of the air and sold it for cheap
building material.

*

Ankh-Morpork was a lot more civilized these days. Between them the Watch
and the Guilds had settled things down enough to ensure that actually
being attacked while going about your lawful business in Ankh-Morpork
was now merely a possibility instead of, as it once was, a matter of
course. And the streets were so clean now that you could sometimes even
_see_ the street.

*

The Mended Drum could be depended upon. If someone didn’t come out of
the door backwards and fall down in the street just as you passed, then
there was something wrong with the world.

*

Stanley took down, from the shelf, the Book of Regulations. He turned
the pages methodically until he came to the bookmark he’d put in a
minute ago, on the page What To Do In Case Of Fire.

So far he’d done 1: Upon Discovery of the Fire, Remain Calm.

Now he came to 2: Shout ‘Fire!’ in a Loud, Clear Voice.

‘Fire!’ he shouted, and then ticked off 2 with his pencil.

Next was: 3: Endeavour to Extinguish Fire If Possible.

Stanley went to the door and opened it. Flames and smoke billowed in. He
stared at them for a moment, shook his head, and shut the door.

Paragraph 4 said: If Trapped by Fire, Endeavour to Escape. Do Not Open
Doors If Warm. Do Not Use Stairs If Burning. If No Exit Presents Itself
Remain Calm and Await a) Rescue or b) Death.

This seemed to cover it.

*

… Anoia, a minor goddess of Things That Stick In Drawers. Often, but not
uniquely, a ladle, but sometimes a metal spatula or, rarely, a
mechanical egg-whisk that nobody in the house admits to ever buying. The
desperate mad rattling and cries of ‘How can it close on the damn thing
but not open with it? Who bought this? Do we _ever_ use it?’ is as
praise unto Anoia. She also eats corkscrews.

*

Ankh-Morpork never slept; the city never did more than doze, and would
wake up around 3 a.m. for a glass of water.

[image]

Ridcully practised the First Available Surface method of filing.

[image]

‘Was there something else, Mr Stibbons?’

Ponder looked at his clipboard. ‘There’s a polite letter from Lord
Vetinari asking on behalf of the city whether the University might
consider including in its intake, oh, twenty-five per cent of less able
students, sir?’

‘Can’t have a bunch of grocers and butchers telling a university how to
run itself, Stibbons!’ Ridcully said firmly. ‘Thank them for their
interest and tell them we’ll continue to take one hundred per cent of
complete and utter dullards, as usual. Take ’em in dull, turn ’em out
sparklin’, that’s always been the UU way!’

*

If there’s one thing a wizard hates, it’s having to wait while the
person in front of them is in two minds about coleslaw. It’s a salad
bar, they say, it’s got the kind of stuff salad bars have, if it was
surprising it wouldn’t _be_ a salad bar, you’re not here to _look_ at
it. What do you expect to find? Rhino chunks? Pickled coelacanth?

The Lecturer in Recent Runes ladled more bacon bits into his salad bowl,
having artfully constructed buttresses of celery and breastworks of
cabbage to increase its depth five times.

*

‘The Grand Trunk will remain closed in the interim,’ said Lord Vetinari.

‘It’s private property!’ Greenham burst out.

‘Tyrant, remember,’ said Vetinari.

[image]

See a pin and pick it up, and all day long you’ll have a pin.

[image]

[image]

[image]

 

KOOM VALLEY? THAT was where the trolls ambushed the dwarfs, or the
dwarfs ambushed the trolls. It was far away. It was a long time ago.

But if he doesn’t solve the murder of just one dwarf, Commander Sam
Vimes of Ankh-Morpork City Watch is going to see it fought again, right
outside his office.

With his beloved Watch crumbling around him and war-drums sounding, he
must unravel every clue, outwit every assassin and brave any darkness to
find the solution. And darkness is _following_ him.

Oh … and at six o’clock every day, without fail, with no excuses, he
must go home to read _Where’s My Cow?_, with all the right farmyard
noises, to his little boy.

There are some things you _have_ to do.

 

_Vimes is chatting to his butler:_

‘Tell me, Willikins, did you fight much when you were a kid? Were you in
a gang or anything?’

‘I was privileged to belong to the Shamlegger Street Rude Boys, sir,’
said the butler.

‘Really?’ said Vimes, genuinely impressed. ‘They were pretty tough nuts,
as I recall.’

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Willikins smoothly. ‘I pride myself I used to
give somewhat more than I got if we needed to discuss the vexed area of
turf issues with the young men from Rope Street. Stevedore’s hooks were
their weapon of choice, as I recall.’

‘And yours …?’ said Vimes, agog.

‘A cap-brim sewn with sharpened pennies, sir.’

‘Ye gods, man! You could put someone’s eye out with something like
that.’

‘With care, sir, yes,’ said Willikins, meticulously folding a towel.

*

Vimes knew all the arguments for having different species in the Watch.
They were good arguments. Some of the arguments against them were bad
arguments. There were trolls in the Watch, _plenty_ of dwarfs, one
werewolf, three golems, an Igor and, not least, Corporal Nobbs¹ …

*

Fred Colon was not the greatest gift to policing. He was slow, stolid
and not very imaginative. But he’d plodded his way around the streets
for so long that he’d left a groove and somewhere inside that stupid fat
head was something very smart, which sniffed the wind and heard the buzz
and read the writing on the wall, admittedly doing the last bit with its
lips moving.

*

To look at Fred Colon, you’d see a man who might well, if he fell over a
cliff, have to stop and ask directions on the way down.

*

‘… that girl you’re going out with … She’s nearly six feet tall and
she’s got a bosom like … well, she’s a big girl, Nobby.’ Fred Colon was
at a loss. ‘She told me, Nobby, that she’s been Miss May on the
centre-fold of _Girls, Giggles and Garters_! Well, I mean …!’

‘_What_ do you mean, sarge? Anyway, she wasn’t just Miss May, she was
the first week in June as well,’ Nobby pointed out. ‘It was the only way
they had room.’

‘Err, well, I ask you,’ Fred floundered, ‘is a girl who displays her
body for money the right kind of wife for a copper? Ask yourself that!’

Nobby’s face wrinkled up in deep thought.

‘Is this a trick question, sarge?’ he said, at last.

*

_Corporal Nobbs attends a burglary at the Royal Art Museum_.

‘Hey, this must be a clue, sarge!’ said Nobby. ‘Look, someone dumped a
load of stinking ol’ rubbish here!’

‘Don’t touch that, please!’ said Sir Reynold, rushing over. ‘That’s
_Don’t Talk to Me About Mondays!_ It’s Daniellarina Pouter’s most
controversial hwork!’

‘It’s only a lot of old rubbish,’ Nobby protested, backing away.

‘Art is greater than the sum of its mere mechanical components,
corporal,’ said the curator.

‘What about this one, then?’ said Nobby, pointing to the adjacent
plinth. ‘It’s just a big stake with a nail in it! Is this art, too?’

‘_Freedom_? If it hwas ever on the market, it hwould probableah fetch
thirty thousand dollars,’ said Sir Reynold.

‘For a bit of wood with a nail in it?’ said Fred Colon. ‘Who did it?’

‘After he viewed _Don’t Talk to Me About Mondays!_ Lord Vetinari
graciously had Ms Pouter nailed to the stake by her ear,’ said Sir
Reynold. ‘However, she did manage to pull free during the afternoon.’

‘I bet she was mad!’ said Nobby.

‘Not after she hwon several awards for it. I believe she’s planning to
nail herself to several other things. It could be a very exciting
exhibition.’

*

Colon knew in his heart that spinning upside down around a pole wearing
a costume you could floss with definitely was not Art, and being painted
lying on a bed wearing nothing but a smile and a small bunch of grapes
was good solid Art, but putting your finger on why this was the case was
a bit tricky.

*

‘Dave said the government hushed it up.’

‘Yeah, but your mate Dave says the government always hushes things up,
Nobby,’ said Fred.

‘Well, they do.’

‘Except he always gets to hear about ’em, and _he_ never gets hushed
up,’ said Fred.

‘I know you like to point the finger of scoff, sarge, but there’s a lot
goes on that we don’t know about.’

‘Like what, exactly?’ Colon retorted. ‘Name me one thing that’s going on
that you don’t know about.’

*

‘Don’t try to put me at my ease,’ said Vimes. ‘It makes me nervous when
people do that.’

*

Coppers stayed alive by trickery. That’s how it _worked_. You had your
Watch Houses with the big blue lights outside, and you made certain
there were always burly watchmen visible in the big public places, and
you swanked around like you owned the place. But you didn’t own it. It
was all smoke and mirrors. You magicked a little policeman into
everyone’s head. You relied on people giving in, knowing the _rules_.
But in truth a hundred well-armed people could wipe out the Watch, if
they knew what they were doing. Once some madman finds out that a copper
taken unawares dies just like anyone else, the spell is broken.

*

Ankh-Morpork was built on Ankh-Morpork. Everyone knew that. They had
been building with stone here ten thousand years ago. As the annual
flooding of the Ankh brought more silt, so the city had risen on its
walls until attics had become cellars. Even at basement level today, it
was always said, a man with a pickaxe and a good sense of direction
could cross the city by knocking his way through underground walls,
provided he could also breathe mud.

*

_Blackboard monitor_. Well, he had been, in that little street school
more than forty-five years ago. Mum had insisted. Gods knew where she’d
sprung the penny a day it cost, although most of the time Dame Slightly
had been happy to accept payment in old clothes and firewood. Numbers,
letters, weights, measures; it was not what you’d call a rich
curriculum. Vimes had attended for nine months or so, until the streets
demanded he learn much harder and sharper lessons. But, for a while,
he’d been trusted to hand out the slates and clean the blackboard. Oh,
the heady, strutting power of it, when you’re six years old!

*

Vimes carefully lifted the top of the bacon, lettuce and tomato
sandwich, and smiled inwardly. Good old Cheery. She knew what a Vimes
BLT was all about. It was about having to lift up quite a lot of crispy
bacon before you found the miserable skulking vegetables. You might
never notice them at all.

[image]

A young man of godlike proportions² was standing in the doorway.

[image]

_Vimes takes parental duty seriously_ …

He’d be home in time. Would a minute have mattered? No, probably not,
although Young Sam appeared to have a very accurate internal clock.
Possibly even two minutes would be okay. Three minutes, even. You could
go to five, perhaps. But that was just it. If you could go to five
minutes then you’d go to ten, then half an hour, a couple of hours … and
not see your son all evening. So that was that. Six o’clock, prompt.
Every day. Read to Young Sam. No excuses. He’d promised himself that.
_No excuses_. No excuses at all. Once you had a good excuse, you opened
the door to bad excuses.

*

_and the book he reads_ …

It was called _Where’s My Cow?_

The unidentified complainant had lost their cow. That was the story,
really.

Page one started promisingly:

_Where’s my cow?_

_Is that my cow?_

_It goes, ‘Baa!_’

_It is a sheep!_

_That’s not my cow!_

Then the author began to get to grips with their material:

_Where’s my cow?_

_Is that my cow?_

_It goes, ‘Neigh!_’

_It is a horse!_

_That’s not my cow!_

At this point the author had reached an agony of creation and was
writing from the racked depths of their soul.

_Where’s my cow?_

_Is that my cow?_

_It goes, ‘Hruuugh!_’

_It is a hippopotamus!_

_That’s not my cow!_

_(Rest assured: the cow is found.)_

*

‘When did you last eat?’ said Sybil.

‘I had a lettuce, tomato and bacon sandwich, dear,’ Vimes said,
endeavouring by tone of voice to suggest that the bacon had been a mere
condiment rather than a slab barely covered by the bread.

‘I expect you jolly well did,’ said Sybil, rather more accurately
conveying the fact that she didn’t believe a word of it.

[image]

Tomato ketchup is not a vegetable.

[image]

‘What’s the password?’ Vimes said quickly.

The shadowy figure, who was cloaked and hooded, hesitated.

‘Pathword? Ecthcuthe me, I’ve got it written down thomewhere—’

‘Okay, Igor, come on in,’ said Carrot.

‘How did you know it wath me, thur?’ said Igor.

*

‘I’m going to have a look for Angua,’ said Carrot. ‘She hasn’t slept in
her bed.’

‘But at this time of the month—’

‘I know, sir. She hasn’t slept in her basket, either.’

*

Vetinari drummed his fingers on the table. ‘What would you do if I asked
you an outright question, Vimes?’

‘I’d tell you a downright lie, sir.’

‘Then I will not do so,’ said Vetinari, smiling faintly.

‘Thank you, sir. Nor will I.’

*

‘We need to talk to you,’ said Carrot. ‘Do you want a lawyer?’

‘No, I ate already.’

‘You _eat_ lawyers?’ said Carrot.

Brick gave him an empty stare until sufficient brain cells had been
mustered.

‘What d’y’call dem fings, dey kinda crumble when you eat dem?’ he
ventured.

Carrot looked at Detritus and Angua, to see if there was going to be any
help there.

‘_Could_ be lawyers,’ he conceded.

‘Dey go soggy if you dips ’em in somefing,’ said Brick.

‘More likely to be biscuits, then?’ Carrot suggested.

*

There was an old military saying that Fred Colon used to describe total
bewilderment and confusion. An individual in that state, according to
Fred, ‘couldn’t tell if it was arsehole or breakfast time’.

*

The plain fact was that while Tawneee had a body that every other woman
should hate her for, she was actually very likeable. This was because
she had the self-esteem of a caterpillar and, as you found out in any
kind of conversation with her, about the same amount of brain. Perhaps
it all balanced out, perhaps some kindly god had said to her: ‘Sorry,
kid, you are going to be thicker than a yard of lard, but the good news
is, that’s not going to matter.’

*

‘It’s the jerk syndrome. It means … sometimes a woman is so beautiful
that any man with half a brain isn’t going to _think_ of asking her out,
okay? Because it’s _obvious_ that she’s far too grand for the likes of
him. Are you with me?’

‘I think so.’

‘Well, that’s Tawneee. And, for the purposes of this explanation, Nobby
has not got half a brain. He’s so used to women saying no when he asks
them out that he’s not afraid of being blown out. So he asks her,
because he figures, why not? And _she_, who by now thinks there’s
something wrong with her, is so grateful she says okay.’

*

‘Needs eating up.’ That was a phrase of Sybil’s that got to Vimes. She’d
announce at lunch: ‘We must have the pork tonight, it needs eating up.’
Vimes never had an actual problem with this, because he’d been raised to
eat what was put in front of him, and do it quickly, too, before someone
else snatched it away. He was just puzzled at the suggestion that he was
there to do the food a favour.

*

When _did_ Lord Vetinari sleep? Presumably the man must get his head
down at some point, Vimes reasoned. Everyone slept. Catnaps could get
you by for a while, but sooner or later you need a solid eight hours,
right?

It was almost midnight, and there was Vetinari at his desk, fresh as a
daisy and chilly as morning dew.

*

Mustrum Ridcully was capable of enormous powers of concentration when
absolutely no alternative presented itself.

*

‘This is all rather fun,’ said Sybil, as the coaches headed out of the
city. ‘Do you remember when we last went on holiday, Sam?’

‘That wasn’t really a holiday, dear,’ said Vimes.

‘Well, it was very interesting, all the same,’ said Sybil.

‘Yes, dear. Werewolves tried to eat me.’

*

Historical Re-creation. With people dressing up and running around with
blunt weapons, and people selling hot dogs, and the girls all miserable
because they can only dress up as wenches, wenching being the only job
available to women in the olden days.

[image]

1 This was a bit of a slur on Nobby, Vimes had to admit. Nobby was
human, just like many other officers. It was just that he was the only
one who had to carry a certificate to prove it.

2 The better class of gods, anyway. Not the ones with the tentacles,
obviously.

[image]

 

TIFFANY ACHING PUT one foot wrong, made one little mistake …

And now the spirit of winter is in love with her. He gives her roses and
icebergs, says it with avalanches and showers her with snowflakes –
which is tough when you’re thirteen, but also just a little bit … cool.

And just because the Wintersmith wants to marry you is no excuse for
neglecting the chores. So she must look after Miss Treason, who’s 113
and has far too many eyes, learn the secret of Boffo, catch Horace the
cheese, stop Annagramma Hawkin from becoming an embarrassment to all
witches, avoid Nanny Ogg giving her a lecture on sex, stop the gods from
seeing her in the bath––

‘Crivens!’

—oh, yes, and be helped by the Nac Mac Feegles, whether she wants it or
not.

It’s unfair, but as Granny Weatherwax says, no one ever said it was
going to be fair. And if Tiffany doesn’t work it all out, there will
never be another springtime …

 

[image]

When the gods made sheep they must’ve left their brains in their other
coat.

[image]

‘Cackling’, to a witch, didn’t just mean nasty laughter. It meant your
mind drifting away from its anchor. It meant you losing your grip. It
meant loneliness and hard work and responsibility and other people’s
problems driving you crazy a little bit at a time, each bit so small
that you’d hardly notice it, until you thought that it was normal to
stop washing and wear a kettle on your head. It meant you thinking that
the fact you knew more than anyone else in your village made you better
than them. It meant thinking that right and wrong were negotiable. And,
in the end, it meant you ‘going to the dark’, as the witches said. That
was a bad road. At the end of that road were poisoned spinning-wheels
and gingerbread cottages.

*

Everyone had something inside them that told the world they were there.
That was why you could often sense when someone was behind you, even if
they were making no sound at all. You were receiving their ‘I am here!’
signal.

Some people had a very strong one. They were the people who got served
first in shops. Granny Weatherwax had an ‘I am here’ signal that bounced
off the mountains when she wanted it to; when she walked into a forest,
all the wolves and bears ran out the other side.

*

Mrs Earwig was all wrong to Granny Weatherwax. She wasn’t born locally,
which was almost a crime to begin with. She wrote books, and Granny
Weatherwax didn’t trust books. And Mrs Earwig believed in shiny wands
and magical amulets and mystic runes and the power of the stars, while
Granny Weatherwax believed in cups of tea, dry biscuits, washing every
morning in cold water and, well, she believed mostly in Granny
Weatherwax.

*

Most witches liked black, but Miss Treason even had black goats and
black chickens. The walls were black. The floor was black. If you
dropped a stick of liquorice, you’d never find it again. And, to
Tiffany’s dismay, she had to make her cheeses black, which meant
painting the cheeses with shiny black wax. It did keep them moist, but
Tiffany distrusted black cheeses. They always looked as though they were
plotting something.

*

‘Gods, elementals, demons, spirits … sometimes it’s hard to tell ’em
apart wi’oot a map.’

*

You could hear the snow falling. It made a strange little noise, like a
faint, cold sizzle.

*

The Chalk Hill Feegles were more at home with the drinkin’, stealin’ and
fightin’, and Rob Anybody was good at all three. But he’d learned to
read and write because Jeannie had asked him to. He did them with a lot
more optimism than accuracy. When he was faced with a long sentence he
tended to work out a few words and then have a great big guess.

*

The white kitten watched the snowflakes. It was called You, as in ‘You!
Stop that!’ and ‘You! Get off there!’ When it came to names, Granny
Weatherwax didn’t do fancy.

*

‘The important thing,’ said Miss Treason, ‘is to stay the passage of the
wind. You should avoid rumbustious fruits and vegetables. Beans are the
worst, take it from me.’

‘I don’t think I understand—’ Tiffany began.

‘Try not to fart, in a nutshell.’

‘In a nutshell I imagine it would be pretty unpleasant!’ said Tiffany,
nervously.

*

The Feegles didn’t know the meaning of the word ‘fear’. Sometimes
Tiffany wished they’d read a dictionary. They fought like tigers, they
fought like demons, they fought like giants. What they didn’t do was
fight like something with more than a spoonful of brain.

*

Nanny Ogg was good at listening, at least. She listened like a great big
ear, and before Tiffany realized it she was telling her everything.
Everything. Nanny sat on the opposite side of the big kitchen table,
puffing gently at a pipe with a hedgehog carved on it. Sometimes she’d
ask a little question, like ‘Why was that?’ or ‘And then what happened?’
and off they’d go again. Nanny’s friendly little smile could drag out of
you things you didn’t know you knew.

*

From the best chair in the room of ornaments, a large grey cat watched
Tiffany with a half-open eye that glinted with absolute evil. Nanny had
referred to him as ‘Greebo … don’t mind him, he’s just a big old
softie,’ which Tiffany knew enough to interpret as ‘He’ll have his claws
in your leg if you go anywhere near him.’

[image]

It was hard to be embarrassed by Nanny Ogg, because her laugh drove it
away. She wasn’t embarrassed about anything.

[image]

She opened the cutlery drawer for a spoon. It stuck. She rattled it,
pulled at it and swore a few times, but it stayed stuck.

‘Oh, yes, go ahead,’ said a voice behind her. ‘See how much help that
is. Don’t be sensible and stick your hand under the top and carefully
free up the stuck item. Oh no. Rattle and curse, that’s the way!’

Tiffany turned.

There was a skinny, tired-looking woman standing by the kitchen table.
She seemed to be wearing a sheet draped around her and was smoking a
cigarette. Tiffany had never seen a woman smoke a cigarette before, but
especially never a cigarette that burned with a fat red flame and gave
off sparks.

‘Who are you?’ she said sharply.

‘Anoia, Goddess of Things That Get Stuck In Drawers,’ said the woman.
‘Pleased to meet you.’

‘There’s a goddess just for that?’ said Tiffany.

‘Well, I find lost corkscrews and things that roll under furniture,’
said Anoia, off-handedly. ‘They want me to do stuck zips, and I’m
thinking about that. But mostly I manifest whensoever people rattle
stuck drawers and call upon the gods.’ She puffed on her cigarette. ‘Got
any tea?’

‘But I didn’t call on anyone!’

‘You did,’ said Anoia. ‘You cussed. Sooner or later, every curse is a
prayer.’ She waved the hand that wasn’t holding the cigarette and
something in the drawer went _pling_. ‘It’ll be all right now. It was
the fish slice. Everyone has one, and no one knows why. Did anyone in
the world ever knowingly go out one day and buy a fish slice? I don’t
think so.’

[image]

Annagramma was as vain as a canary in a room full of mirrors.

[image]

Roland tugged the sword out of its scabbard. It was heavy and not at all
like the flying, darting silver thing that he’d imagined. It was more
like a metal club with an edge.

He gripped it in both hands and managed to hurl it out into the middle
of the slow, dark river.

Just before it hit the water a white arm rose and caught it. The hand
waved the sword a couple of times, and then disappeared with it under
the water.

‘Was that supposed to happen?’ he said.

‘A man throwin’ his sword awa’?’ yelled Rob. ‘No! Ye’re no’ supposed tae
bung a guid sword intae the drinkie!’

‘No, I mean the hand,’ said Roland. ‘It just—’

‘Ach, they turn up sometimes.’ Rob Anybody waved a hand as if midstream
underwater sword jugglers were an everyday occurrence.

*

When the noise had died down a bit the drummer beat the drum a few times
and the accordionist played a long drawn-out chord, the legal signal
that a Morris Dance is about to begin, and people who hang around have
only got themselves to blame.

[image]

[image]

 

IT’S AN OFFER you can’t refuse.

Who would not wish to be the man in charge of Ankh-Morpork’s Royal Mint
_and_ the bank next door?

It’s a job for life. But, as former conman Moist von Lipwig is learning,
life is not necessarily for long.

The Chief Cashier is almost certainly a vampire. There’s something
nameless in the cellar (and the cellar itself is pretty nameless), and
it turns out that the Royal Mint runs at a loss. A
three-hundred-year-old wizard is after his girlfriend, he’s about to be
exposed as a fraud, but the Assassins’ Guild might get him first. In
fact, lots of people want him dead.

Oh. And every day he has to take the Chairman for walkies.

Everywhere he looks he’s making enemies.

What he _should_ be doing is … Making Money!

 

The Guild of Thieves paid a twenty-dollar bounty fee for a
non-accredited thief brought in alive, and there were oh, so many ways
of still being alive when you were dragged in and poured out on the
floor.

*

‘You Have An Appointment Now With Lord Vetinari,’ said the golem.

‘I’m sure I don’t.’

‘There Are Two Guards Outside Who Are Sure You Do.’

*

Lord Vetinari lifted an eyebrow with the care of one who, having found a
piece of caterpillar in his salad, raises the rest of the lettuce.

*

‘[The bank] was built as a temple, but never used as one.’

‘Really?’ said Moist. ‘Which god?’

‘None, as it turned out. One of the kings of Ankh commanded it to be
built about nine hundred years ago,’ said Bent. ‘I suppose it was a case
of speculative building. That is to say, he had no god in mind.’

‘He hoped one would turn up?’

‘Exactly, sir.’

‘Like bluetits?’ said Moist, peering around. ‘This place was a kind of
celestial bird box?’

*

‘It costs more than a penny to make a penny,’ Moist murmured. ‘Is it
just me, or is that _wrong_?’

‘But, you see, once you have made it, a penny keeps on being a penny,’
said Mr Bent. ‘That’s the magic of it.’

‘It is?’ said Moist. ‘Look, it’s a copper disc. What do you expect it to
become?’

‘In the course of a year, just about everything,’ said Mr Bent,
smoothly. ‘It becomes some apples, part of a cart, a pair of shoelaces,
some hay, an hour’s occupancy of a theatre seat. It may even become a
stamp and send a letter, Mr Lipwig. It might be spent three hundred
times and yet – and this is the good part – it is still one penny, ready
and willing to be spent again. It is not an apple, which will go bad.
Its worth is fixed and stable. It is not consumed.’

*

Mr Fusspot was the smallest and ugliest dog Moist had ever seen. It
reminded him of those goldfish with the huge bulging eyes that look as
though they are about to explode. Its nose, on the other hand, looked
stoved in. It wheezed, and its legs were so bandy that it must sometimes
trip over its own feet.

The dog gave a little yappy bark and then covered Moist’s face in all
that was best in dog slobber.

*

‘I don’t really understand how banks work.’

‘How do you _think_ they work?’

‘Well, you take rich people’s money and lend it to suitable people at
interest, and give as little as possible of the interest back.’

‘Yes, and what is a suitable person?’

‘Someone who can prove they don’t need the money?’

*

‘Old money’ meant that it had been made so long ago that the black deeds
which had originally filled the coffers were now historically
irrelevant. Funny, that: a brigand for a father was something you kept
quiet about, but a slave-taking pirate for a
great-great-great-grandfather was something to boast of over the port.
Time turned the evil bastards into rogues, and rogue was a word with a
twinkle in its eye and nothing to be ashamed of.

*

‘I did not become ruler of Ankh-Morpork by understanding the city. Like
banking, the city is depressingly easy to understand. I have remained
ruler by getting the city to understand _me_.’

[image]

The city bleeds, Mr Lipwig, and you are the clot I need.

[image]

The lady in the boardroom was certainly an attractive woman, but since
she worked for the _Times_ Moist felt unable to award her total ladylike
status. Ladies didn’t fiendishly quote exactly what you said but didn’t
exactly mean, or hit you around the ear with unexpectedly difficult
questions. Well, come to think of it, they did, quite often, but _she_
got paid for it.

*

‘The world is full of things worth more than gold. But we dig the damn
stuff up and then bury it in a different hole. Where’s the sense in
that? What are we, magpies? Good heavens, _potatoes_ are worth more than
gold!’

‘Surely not!’

‘If you were shipwrecked on a desert island, what would you prefer, a
bag of potatoes or a bag of gold?’

‘Yes, but a desert island isn’t Ankh-Morpork!’

‘And that proves gold is only valuable because we agree it is, right?
It’s just a dream. But a potato is always worth a potato, anywhere. A
knob of butter and a pinch of salt and you’ve got a meal, _anywhere_.
Bury gold in the ground and you’ll be worrying about thieves for ever.
Bury a potato and in due season you could be looking at a dividend of a
thousand per cent.’

*

‘Vetinari has a dog?’

‘Had. Wuffles. Died some time ago. There’s a little grave in the Palace
grounds. He goes there alone once a week and puts a dog biscuit on it.’

‘Vetinari does that?’

‘Yes.’

‘Vetinari the cool, heartless, calculating tyrant?’

‘Indeed.’

*

_Don’t let me detain you_. What a wonderful phrase Vetinari had devised.
The jangling double meaning set up undercurrents of uneasiness in the
most innocent of minds. The man had found ways of bloodless tyranny that
put the rack to shame.

*

Stamp collecting! It had started on day one, and then ballooned like
some huge … thing, running on strange, mad rules. Was there any other
field where flaws made things worth more? Would you buy a suit just
because one arm was shorter than the other? Or because a bit of spare
cloth was still attached?

*

Claud Maximillian Overton Transpire Dibbler, a name bigger than the man
himself. Everyone knew C. M. O. T. Dibbler. He sold pies and sausages
off a tray, usually to people who were the worse for drink who then
became the worse for pies.

*

Moist had eaten the odd pork pie and occasional sausage in a bun and
that very fact interested him. There was something about the stuff that
drove you back for more. There had to be some secret ingredient, or
maybe the brain just didn’t believe what the taste buds told it, and
wanted to feel once again that flood of hot, greasy, not entirely
organic, slightly crunchy substances surfing across the tongue. So you
bought another one.

And, it had to be said, there were times when a Dibbler sausage in a bun
was just what you wanted. Sad, yet true. Everyone had moments like that.
Life brought you so low that for a vital few seconds that charivari of
strange greases and worrying textures was your only friend in all the
world.

*

The Watch armour fitted like a glove. He’d have preferred it to fit like
a helmet and breastplate. It was common knowledge that the Watch’s
approach to uniforms was one-size-doesn’t-exactly-fit-anybody, and that
Commander Vimes disapproved of armour that didn’t have that
kicked-by-trolls look. He liked it to make it clear that it had been
doing its job.

[image]

‘I’m an Igor, thur. We don’t athk quethtionth.’

‘Really? Why not?’

‘I don’t know, thur. I didn’t athk.’

[image]

[image]

Students, eh? Love ’em or hate ’em, you’re not allowed to hit ’em with a
shovel.

[image]

‘I’m afraid I have to close the office now, reverend.’ The voice of Ms
Houser broke into Cribbins’s dreams …

Ms Houser was standing there, not gloriously naked and pink as so
recently featured in the reverie, but in a plain brown coat and an
unsuitable hat with feathers in it.

*

Talking to the Watch was like tap-dancing on a landslide. If you were
nimble you could stay upright, but you couldn’t steer and there were no
brakes and you just knew that it was going to end in a certain amount of
fuss.

*

The price of a good woman was proverbially above rubies, so a bad one
was presumably a lot more.

*

He slapped Hubert twice across the face and pulled a jar out of his
pocket.

‘Mr Hubert? How many fingerth am I holding up?’

Hubert slowly focused. ‘Thirteen?’ he quavered.

Igor relaxed, and dropped the jar back into his pocket. ‘Jutht in time.
Well done, thur!’

*

All heads turned. A path [in the crowd] cleared itself for Lord
Vetinari; paths do for men known to have dungeons in their basements.

*

‘The law must be obeyed, Miss Dearheart [said Lord Vetinari]. Even
tyrants have to obey the law.’ He paused, looking thoughtful, and
continued: ‘No, I tell a lie, tyrants do _not_ have to obey the law,
obviously, but they do have to observe the niceties. At least, I do.’

*

It was 6 a.m., and the fog seemed glued to the windows, so thick that it
should have contained croutons.

*

‘Is he allowed to do that?’

‘I think that comes under the rule of Quia Ego Sic Dico.’

‘Yes, what does that mean?’

‘“Because I say so”, I think.’

‘That doesn’t sound like much of a rule!’

‘Actually, it’s the only one he needs.’

*

‘Every problem is an opportunity,’ said Moist.

‘Well, if you upset Vetinari again you will have a wonderful opportunity
to never have to buy a hat.’

‘No, I think he likes a little opposition.’

‘And are you any good at knowing how much?’

‘No. It’s what I enjoy. You get a wonderful view from the point of no
return.’

*

_Moist von Lipwig quizzes staff at the bank about the cost of making
money:_

‘So how do you get paid?’

There was a moment’s silence, and then Mr Shady said, like a man talking
to a child: ‘This _is_ a mint, sir.’

‘You make your own wages? Well, at least you’re in a profitable
business,’ said Moist cheerfully. ‘I mean, you must be making money hand
over fist!’

‘We manage to break even, sir, yes,’ said Shady, as if it was a
close-run thing.

‘Break even? You’re a mint!’ said Moist. ‘How can you not make a profit
by making money?’

‘Overheads, sir. There’s overheads wherever you look.’

‘Even underfoot?’

‘There too, sir,’ said Shady. ‘It’s ruinous, sir, it really is. Y’see,
it costs a ha’penny to make a farthin’ an’ nearly a penny to make a
ha’penny. A penny comes in at a penny farthin’. Sixpences costs tuppence
farthin’, so we’re in pocket there. Half a dollar costs seven pence. And
it’s only sixpence to make a dollar, a definite improvement, but that’s
’cos we does ’em here. The real buggers are the mites, ’cos they’re
worth half a farthin’ but cost sixpence ’cos it’s fiddly work, bein’ so
small and havin’ that hole in the middle. The thrupenny bit, sir, we’ve
only got a couple of people makin’ those, a lot of work which runs out
at seven pence. And don’t ask me about the tuppenny piece!’

‘What about the tuppenny piece?’

‘I’m glad you asked me that, sir. Fine work, sir, tots up to seven and
one-sixteenth pence.’

[image]

[image]

The page references in this index correspond to the printed edition from
which this ebook was created. To find a specific word or phrase from the
index, please use the search feature of your ebook reader.

A

absentmindedness, 111, 225

Aching, Tiffany, 247–50, 259–63, 283–6

advertising

of moving pictures, 85–6

of whiskey, 128

Albert, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 133–4, 168–9, 172, 226

alchemists, 82

Angua, Sergeant, 125, 128, 129, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181

as werewolf, 159, 161, 183, 279

Ankh (river), 14, 35, 43, 47, 54, 57, 82, 84, 135

Ankh-Morpork, 22, 23, 33, 43, 47, 57, 62, 67, 81, 82, 84, 127–8, 169,
207, 215, 218, 270, 277

and barbarian invaders, 75

as haven for deposed royalty, 60

crime in, 13, 29, 54, 66, 67, 136–7, 163, 234, 269

economic activity in, 13, 47, 127–8, 133, 136–7

fire brigade, 180

founding of, 58

gangs in, 275

government, 40, 67

guilds, 57, 66, 68, 133, 161, 182, 235, 269, 289

history, 23, 86, 135, 138

medicine in, 68–9

Opera House, 154

patriotism in, 235

populace, 46, 67, 68, 138, 180, 181, 218, 269

Post Office, 267

smell of, 23, 29

_See also_ Ankh, Harga’s House of Ribs, Mended Drum, Shades, Unseen
University, Vetinari, Watch

anti-crimes, 93

Anybody, Rob, 249–50, 260, 262, 284, 286

architecture, 51, 59, 60, 87 120, 154

_See also_ Johnson

armaments, as product of Age of Reason, 136

inventors of, 163, 169–70

art

Colon on, 276

modern, 276

AshkEnte, Rite of, 39, 75

assassination

for career advancement, 34, 81, 92, 135, 142, 189

of surplus monarchs, 60

assassins, 57, 167, 235

Assassins’ Guild School, 57, 233, 268

astrophysics, 13

A’Tuin, Great, 13, 43, 71, 113

Auditors, the, 213, 216

autocondimenting, 94

B

balance, need for, 97

baldness, 128, 171

banking, 291–2

baths: Granny Weatherwax on, 104

beards, 82, 267

beer, 45, 47, 82, 190

bees, 75

belief, 95, 173

in gods, 92, 95, 101, 224, 227–8

power of, 129

beliefs, questionable popular, 84, 96, 126, 163, 224, 226, 260, 267

_See also_ superstition

Bent, Mr, 291

Biers, 168

blasphemy, 58, 127

Blouse, Lieutenant, 253, 255

books

Cohen on, 20

crimes against, Librarian on, 68

Granny Weatherwax on, 27, 283

holiday reading, 189

impractical ideas from, 182, 196, 203

Leonard of Quirm’s, 136

magical, 24, 43–4, 65, 85, 129

magic generated by, 29, 70

_Necrotelicomnicon_, the, 85

Octavo, the, 24

Post Office Regulations, 270

prayer book as protection in battle, 180–1

Reader in The Lavatory’s theory about, 135

unwritten, 112

_Where’s My Cow?_, 278

_See also_ Library, L-space

bookworm, .303, 59

boots

crêpe soles, 136

Tiffany Aching on, 259

Vimes on, 125

boredom, of Hell, 77

bravery, 28

Broken Drum _see_ Mended Drum

broomsticks, 27, 102, 152

Brutha, 111, 197

Bursar, the (Unseen University), 39, 93, 94, 96, 135, 190

business management, 19

C

cabbage, boiled, 29

Campaign for Equal Heights, 162

Carrot, _see_ Ironfoundersson

cats, 120, 217, 239, 240, 242, 259, 284

and vampires, 103

Death’s fondness for, 43, 226

Mr Tiddles, 267

sacred, 58

Susan on, 169

_See also_ Greebo, Maurice

chance, million-to-one, 30

charisma, 144

children

and Hogswatch, 138, 168–9, 171–2

as posterity, 43, 226

capabilities of, 214

normal behaviour of, 167

special needs, 214

children’s stories, 138, 167

Tiffany Aching on, 248

_Where’s My Cow?_, 278

chocolate, 193, 202, 219, 256

in Ankh-Morpork, 218

circus, 260–1

clerks, dark, 268

cliché, inevitability of, 48, 137, 241

clock cuckoos, 217

Clodpool, 213, 215, 216

clowns, 127, 261

Cohen the Barbarian, 20–1, 142–6, 225, 226

and women, 20

fighting technique, 21, 144, 145–6

on the greatest things in life, 20, 142–3

on the value of books, 20

Colon, Sergeant Frederick, 128, 129, 180–1, 231, 276, 279

and marriage, 67

appearance, 67, 125

mental powers, 177, 178, 183, 201, 275

on Art, 275

on protocol, 178, 179–80, 201

policing abilities, 178, 179–80, 275

Cool, Monks of, 122

conspiracy theory, 276

Cori Celesti, 19

Cosmopilite, Mrs Marietta, 84

Way of Mrs Cosmopilite, the, 216

Counting Pines, 92

crime

Mr Pump on, 268–9

punishment for, 163

Vimes on, 129

_See also_ Ankh-Morpork, anti-crimes

Cripslock, Sacharissa, 209, 210, 290

D

dancing

in witchcraft, 53, 259

Lancre Stick and Bucket Dance, 122

Morris dance, 97, 286

Darktan (rat), 240, 243–4

Dean, the (Unseen University), 87, 96, 136, 167, 170, 171, 188

death, being dead, 15, 21, 34, 48, 57, 66, 97, 168, 190, 224, 267

at the opera, 156

beliefs of Nac Mac Feegle, 259

for Counting Pines, 92

for mayflies, 91–2

gloriousness of, 142–3

in a worthy cause, 21, 144, 182

pyramids as mechanism to prevent, 59

Death, 14–15, 21, 33–4, 38–40, 43, 48, 66, 75, 91, 97, 150–2, 168–9,
172–4, 190, 194, 203, 209–10, 216

and cats, 43, 226

as family man, 40, 174, 213

as Hogfather, 168–9, 172

as partygoer, 19, 34

evidence of sense of humour, 13–14, 117

games with, 96, 151–2

horse of, 33, 34, 48, 92

house of, 171, 213

in the Klatchian Foreign Legion, 134–5

on curry, 33

on human behaviour, 34, 173

Death of Rats, 168, 209–10

decor, institutional, 29

democracy, 40, 202

demons, 53, 75, 77, 78

Duke Vassenego, 77

Lord Astfgl, 76, 77

Detritus, Sergeant, 125, 159–60, 162, 177

de Worde, William, 207–10

Dhblah, Cut-Me-Own-Hand-Off, 111

Dibbler, C. M. O. T., 68, 82–6, 128, 207, 208, 235, 293

Djelibeybi, 57

dobby stone, 260

dogs, 101

Mr Fusspot, 291

noses, as wake-up call, 85

Scraps, 198

Wuffles, 46, 292–3

_See also_ Gaspode

Doughnut Jimmy, 160

dragons, 15

anti-dragon devices, 68

swamp dragons, 69, 126

D’reg tribe, 181

dungeons, 71, 225, 292

attempted escape from, 142–3

Dunmanifestin, 19

dwarf bread, 104, 162

dwarfs, 87, 126–7, 136

and trolls, 126

Giamo Casanunda, 107, 118

Hwel, 54

_See also_ Littlebottom

E

education

at Assassins’ Guild School, 57, 233

at Dame Slightly’s, 277

at Quirm College for Young Ladies, 218

at Unseen University, 141, 270–1

boarding-school, 207

broad, of Sergeant Colon, 177

downside to, 36, 58

for witches, 248

provided by Susan, 167, 214–15

_See also_ learning, teachers

Elucidated Brethren of the Ebon Night, 65, 66

elves, 120

evolution, results of, 28, 59, 126

explorers, 19–20, 177, 188, 201

F

familiars, witches’, 248

fighting fair

Assassins’ code, 235

Cohen on, 21, 145–6, 225

Marquis of Fantailler’s rules, 203

Vimes on, 233

Flitworth, Miss, 96

flow charts, 19

food

army rations, 253

at Harga’s House of Ribs, 38, 70, 127

at Mrs Arcanum’s, 208–9

autocondimenting of, 94

banged grains, 82

BLT, 277, 278

canapés, Death on, 34

C. M. O. T. Dibbler’s specialities, 81, 82–3, 207, 208, 235, 293

currant buns, 52

curry, 33, 102, 133, 208–9

eggs, juugly, 37

Ephebian, 60

foreign, Granny Weatherwax on, 104

Greek, 30

healthiness of, Lady Sybil on, 278; Mrs War on, 217; Vimes on, 69, 278

in Agatean Empire, Cohen on, 142

muesli, 76

mushrooms, edibility of, 19

needing eating up, 279–80

pizza, 161

pork products and the Hogfather, 138

regional specialities, dangers of, 189

rumbustious, Miss Treason on, 284

salad bar, 271

strawberries, midwinter, 37

Fool, the, _see_ Verence II

Four Horsemen, the, 48, 144–5

_See also_ Death, Pestilence, War

funerals, 231, 261

G

games

at Hogswatch, 171

Exclusive Possession, 96

hide-and-seek, dangers of, 121

played by gods, 224

pub games, 134

gargoyles, 30, 43, 127

doorknocker, 35–6

Garlick, Magrat, 51–4, 102–7, 117, 120–1, 197

Gaspode the Wonder Dog, 83–5, 129, 201

genocide, result of religious conviction, 227–8

geography, 19–20, 27, 76, 117, 133, 193, 201, 260

geometry, 60

gods, 19, 28, 95, 112–13, 170, 224, 225, 227–8, 242, 277, 279, 283, 284,
291

Anoia, 270, 285

dwarfs and, 126–7

fashion in, 226

Hoki, 28

Om, 111, 226

Quezovercoatl, 76

witches and, 101

wizards and, 92

Gogol, Mrs, 106, 107

gold standard, Moist von Lipwig on, 292

golems, 146

Mr Pump, 268–9

Great Trout, the, 91–2

Greebo, 53, 102–3, 106, 285

Grim, Malicia, 239–43

H

hair

Dean on hair loss, 171

Granny Weatherwax on hair care, 155

problem, 137

Hangovers, oh God of, 170

Harga’s House of Ribs, 38, 70, 127

hats

Agnes on, 193

importance of, 106, 154, 215, 248

Tiffany Aching on, 247, 261

Heaven, size of, 218

Hell, 77, 78

highway robbery, unsuccessful, 118, 120

history

historical anecdote, 23, 37–8, 121, 138

Historical Re-creation, 280

Lord Selachii on, 177

nature of, 37–8

of Ankh-Morpork, 86

_See also_ legends

Hogfather, the, 138

Hogswatch, 138, 168

Death’s Hogswatch card, 174

UU faculty on, 171–2

holiday postcards, 103–4

Hong, Lord, 142, 145

Hong, Mr, 177–8

Howler, Stanley, 270

I

Igors, 195, 196, 197, 198, 202, 278, 293, 294

Code of the Igors, 216

imagination, as human characteristic, 213, 227–8

intellectual powers

Colon’s, 178, 183, 201, 275

compensations for lack of, 279

Detritus’s, 177

Leonard’s, 135–6, 179

Ridcully’s, 93, 119, 280

intentions, good, 71, 78

Ironfoundersson, Captain Carrot, 125, 128, 129, 181, 278–9

and Angua, 162

as policeman, 68, 69, 178, 279

character, 126, 127

leadership qualities, 129

on Discworld from space, 226–7

on gargoyles, 127

J

Jackrum, Sergeant, 253–5

Johnson, Bergholt Stuttley (‘Bloody

Stupid’), 169–70, 228

Jolson, All, 201

K

Keith, 239–43

Keli, Princess, 35–6, 37, 39

kitchen drawers, 260

Anoia, goddess responsible for, 270, 285

Klatchian Foreign Legion, 134–5

knowledge, power of, 28

L

Lancre, 117, 153, 193

Castle, 51

mail delivery, 121

military capacity, 104

monarchy, 195

women, 149

Lasgere of Tsort, Prince, 112

Lawn, Dr Mossy, 232–3

leadership

among witches, 102, 261, 262

dressing for, 145

effective, 71–2, 93, 129

problems of, 243–4, 268

learning

dwarfs on, 136

royal road to, 112

legends, Discworld, 135, 138, 187, 227

Leonard of Quirm, 128, 135–6, 179, 225, 226–7

military nature of inventions, 136

Librarian, the (Unseen University), 29–30, 44, 45, 46, 65, 69, 117, 135

as organist, 155

regard for books, 68

Library, the (Unseen University), 44, 65, 68, 70, 112, 129, 188, 269

light, nature of, 188

Lilywhite, Medium Dave, 172–3

Lipwig, Moist von, 267–9, 291–95

listening, art of, 111, 136, 177, 284

Littlebottom, Corporal Cheery, 159–61

Llamedos, 133

L-space, 70

Ludd, Lobsang, 214, 215–16, 217, 218

Luggage, the, 44

Lu-Tze (Sweeper), 215–16, 217, 218, 231–2

Ly Tin Wheedle, 19, 48

M

magic

long-term effects, 15, 219

magic word, the, 36

nature of, 28

occult jewellery, 261

of standing stone, 52–3

Rite of AshkEnte, 39, 75

rules of, 120

unit of measure, 24

usefulness of (or otherwise), 14, 21

witchcraft, 121, 248, 250, 261, 283

marriage, 39, 67

choice of partner, 36–7, 53, 149, 275

Nanny Ogg on, 120–1

vampirism by, 95

Maurice, 239–43

mayflies, 91–2

medical care, 68–9, 160, 232–3

_See also_ Igors, Weatherwax

Medusa, 137

Mended Drum, the, 38, 46, 134, 270

mental instability, instances of, 52, 85, 129, 135, 153, 190, 201, 283

metaphor

extended, 13, 21, 22, 24, 29, 37, 47, 60, 119, 161, 170

inherent inaccuracy of, 22, 23, 35, 61–2, 277

trouble with, 125, 127–8, 153, 169

military strategy, 77

General Tacticus on, 255

of Bruce the Hoon, 144

military training, 253–5

mime artists, 67

money

and banking, 291

circulation of, 143

language of, 13

old, 290

worth of, 291

Morris dance, 97, 122, 286

Mort, 33–9

musicians, 133

N

Nac Mac Feegle, the, 248–50, 259, 261, 284

and drink, 249–50, 259

and fighting, 249, 259, 284

_See also_ Anybody

names, as matter for remark, 16, 19–20, 34, 53, 96, 133, 136, 201, 247,
267, 284

in Klatchian Foreign Legion, 134–5

in the Nac Mac Feegle, 249

natural selection, 28, 142, 207

natural world

unpleasant aspects of, 96, 260

wonders of, 112, 224

newts, 96, 155

New York Second, 122

Nijel, 47, 48

Nitt, Agnes, 149, 193, 195–6, 198

Nobbs, Corporal Nobby, 71, 128, 160, 177, 231

acquires girlfriend (Tawneee), 275, 279

and Colon, 178, 179, 180, 181, 201, 275, 276

species questioned, 66, 67, 125, 130, 156

Noh theatre, 143

nostalgia, manifestations of, 91–2, 143, 181, 188

N’tuitif tribe, 227

nudity, 27, 102, 195–6, 294

and Art, 276

as part of witchcraft, 101, 259

magazine centrefold, 275

nude virgins, wizards’ desire for, 14

occupational hazard for werewolves, 183

O

Oats, Mightily, 196

Ogg, Mrs Gytha (Nanny), 53, 54, 102–7, 117, 119–22, 152–6, 195–6, 285

ability to fit in, 149, 152–3, 154, 155

and domestic skills, 105, 117

and drink, 105, 153, 195

and family, 103–4, 119–20

and Granny Weatherwax, 102, 104, 106–7, 117, 152, 153

and Greebo, 53, 102–3, 285

and sex, 106–7, 121

listening skills, 285

marriage guidance, 120–1

singing voice, 121

Ogg, Shawn, 119–20, 121, 196

old age, 20, 86, 93–4, 96, 105, 121, 190, 225, 261

Omnianism, 197–8

One-Man-Bucket, 96

opera, 155

effect of, 153, 154

Nanny Ogg on, 154

opposites, theory of

anti-crime, 93

Morris dance, 97

substition, 182

orang-utan _see_ Librarian

P

parallel universes, 118–19

passwords, difficulties with, 65, 119–20, 239–40, 278

Patrician, the, _see_ Vetinari

Perks, Polly, 253–5

personality

lovely, 149

objectionable, 143, 209, 214

Pestilence, 216

philosophy, 19, 30, 48, 111, 144, 207, 213, 216

pictsies, _see_ Nac Mac Feegle

pins, 271

potatoes, value of, 292

predictions of the future

shortcomings of, 13–14, 16, 66, 105, 247

unpleasant, 16, 22, 43, 51

printing, Engravers’ Guild on, 182

problem-solving, classic dilemmas

revisited:

poet and butterfly, 218

riddle of the Sphinx, 61–2

Schroedinger’s cat, 226

truth-telling and lying guards, 118

protocol, importance of observing, 120, 178, 179–80

Ptraci, 57, 59, 60

punctuation, as warning of madness, 153

pyramids, 59

Q

Quia Ego Sic Dico, rule of, 294

Quirke, Captain ‘Mayonnaise’, 128–9

Quirm, 133

Quoth (raven), 133, 134

R

Ramkin, Lady Sybil, _see_ Vimes

rats, plagues of, 138, 239

of the Tribe, 240, 242

_See also_ Darktan

reannual plants, 15, 33

religion

among dwarfs, 126–7

among mayflies, 91–2

among Nac Mac Feegle, 259

as cause of war, 227–8

misdirecting effects of, 112–13

organized religion: endemic faults in, 197–8; priestly role in, 225

_See also_ belief, gods

respectability, measure of, 133

revolutionary spirit, 71–2, 142, 144, 233–4

_See also_ death in a worthy cause

Ridcully, Hughnon, 225

Ridcully, Archchancellor Mustrum, 94, 95, 118, 171, 188

and paperwork, 207, 270

and Vetinari, 141

heartiness and sporting interests, 81–2, 93, 135

intellectual powers, 93, 119, 280

leadership qualities, 93, 141, 188, 189

on dangers of the unknown, 141, 167

on parallel universes, 118–19

on students, 170, 173, 270–1

on the faculty, 96, 135, 170

Rincewind, 13–16, 19–22, 24, 39, 44–8, 75–8, 142–5, 226–7

and magic, 22, 24, 44, 45

cowardice of, 15, 16, 45, 144

encounters with Death, 14, 190

instinct for survival, 14, 15, 76, 143–4

justified pessimism, 15, 143–4

on position in food chain, 19

on running, 45, 47, 76, 189

on Twoflower the tourist, 13, 21, 22

on wizards, 47–8

Ron, Foul Ole, 129, 137

S

safety drill, rats’, 240

science and scientists, 47, 60–1, 167, 188

_See also_ Igors

self-doubt, lack of

in Cohen, 142

in Granny Weatherwax, 103

seven-league boots, 21

sex

Cohen on, 20

dwarfs’ delicacy about, 87

houses of ill repute/negotiable

affection, 153, 161

humour as compensation for, 58

Nanny Ogg and, 106–7, 120–1

sexual morrisment, 122

wizards’ difficulty with, 14, 43–4, 45, 75

Shades, the, 29, 34–5, 67, 94, 153

sherry, Vimes on, 178

shops

effect of revolution on, 233–4

for haute couture, 154–5

for musical instruments, 133

magic, 137

Silver Horde, the, 143–6, 225

attitude to money, 143

simile, choice examples of, 13, 14, 22, 27, 30, 33, 35, 37, 43, 75, 81,
111, 137, 154, 181, 209, 275, 286, 291, 294

sin

nature of, 197–8

original, 77

unoriginal, 71

singing voice

of Brutha, 111

of cats, 240

of Nanny Ogg, 121

of Ptraci, 57, 59

of Victor Tugelbend, 84

Six Beneficent Winds, 143, 144

Smith, Eskarina, 28, 30

snow, 169, 284

soldiers

advantages enjoyed by, 254

Agatean, 145–6

in Klatchian Foreign Legion, 134–5

on battle experience, 183, 234

priorities of, 51, 112

uniform, 177, 254

spectacle, importance of, 69

spelling,

effects of, 136

importance of, 101, 167

invention of, 38

Sphinx, the, 61–2

stamp collecting, 293

Stationery Cupboard, the, 214–15

Stibbons, Ponder, 118–19, 170, 171–2 188, 270

Sto Helit, Susan, 133–4, 136, 167, 169, 173, 174, 214–15, 218

stories, power of, 48, 104, 105–6, 240–1, 242–3, 244

storm, 30

stupidity

in wizards, 119

not determined by appearance, 30

of demons, 77

of gods, 112–13

of sheep, 283

simple differentiated from stupid, 126

style, importance of, 120, 122

superstition, 101, 227

substition, 182

_See also_ beliefs

survival traits

among gods, 112

among professional heroes, 142–3

among swamp dragons, 126

among yetis, 219

in Ankh-Morpork, 126, 218

_See also_ evolution, Cohen, Rincewind

T

Tacticus, General, 253, 255

tan, how to, 28–9

Tawneee, 275, 279

taxes, 94–5

teachers, peripatetic, 247

teaching, as profession, 38, 145

Susan’s approach to, 214–15

Teatime, Jonathan, 169, 172–3

Teppic (Pteppicymon XXVIII), 57, 58, 61–2

Thieves’ Guild, 66, 291

thinking

cats and, 239

failure to think, 128

styles of, 83, 170, 224–5, 242

Thoughts, First, Second and Third, 260

Thursley, Eric, 75, 77, 78

time

control of, 59, 213, 215, 219

nature of, 70, 71, 213

trousers of, 70

tortoises, 59

trolls, 22

and dwarfs, 126

Chrysoprase, 136–7

debt collection methods, 54

Jade, 254

troll bridge, 253

_See also_ Detritus, gargoyles

trousers

Granny Weatherwax on, 102

of Time, 70

truth, slipperiness of, 47, 187, 210

Tugelbend, Victor, 82–5, 87

Twoflower, 15, 16, 19, 21–2, 143

Twoshirts, 260

U

Uberwald, 195, 196, 201

Überwald, Delphine Angua von, _see_ Angua

universal laws, 29, 58, 104, 138, 189, 201, 253, 255

Unseen University, 29, 30, 36, 39, 81, 93, 187–90

and women, 23

Archchancellorship, 81, 135

Ceremony of the Keys, 187–8

compost heap, 96

eccentricity in, 135

faculty members: Chair of Indefinite

Studies, 87, 171–2; Lecturer in

Recent Runes, 141, 171, 188, 271;

Reader in Esoteric Studies, 135;

Senior Wrangler, 172, 188, 189, 190

Hex, 170

housekeeper (Mrs Whitlow), 93, 189–90

Old Tom, 78

relations with Patrician, 141, 270–1

students, 141, 170, 173, 188, 270–1

tax status, 94–5

teaching at, 141

Tower of Art, 133

_See also_ Bursar, Dean, Librarian, Library, Ridcully, Rincewind,
Stibbons, wizards

V

vampires, 95, 103, 160–1, 195–8

Count and Countess Notfaroutoe, 95

Count de Magpyr, 195–8

Countess de Magpyr, 196, 198

Vlad de Magpyr, 196, 198

Verence II (formerly the Fool), 51–4, 120

Vetinari, Havelock, Lord (Patrician of

Ankh-Morpork), 46, 66, 87, 95, 130, 160, 161, 177, 178, 179, 202, 224–5,
280, 291–95

and Vimes, 71–2, 159, 161, 177, 178, 279

appointments to see, 137, 207–8, 291

art criticism, 276

as pet-owner, 46, 292–3

as student, 233

characteristic gestures, 14, 130, 291

choice of vocabulary, 66, 161, 293

diplomacy, 141

Guilds’ opinion of, 161

interview techniques, 14, 66, 82, 125, 136, 177, 201, 267

on citizens’ shortcomings, 128

on dungeons, 71

on freedom, 210, 267

on mime artists, 67

on pizza, 161

on public interest and the free press, 210

on the nature of evil, 71–2

political acumen, 138, 268

principles of government, 46, 67, 71–2, 133, 137, 210, 292

tyranny in practice, 94–5, 137, 225, 268, 271, 293, 294, 295

villainy, types of, 39

inherent in Grand Vizier, 58

Vimes, Sir Samuel, 67–71, 125–30, 159–62, 178, 180–3, 202–3, 231–3, 235,
275–80

and alcohol, 128, 202

and personal organizer, 159

and Vetinari, 159, 161, 177, 178, 279

blackboard monitor, 277

dictums of, 161–2, 178

family life, 180, 277–8

knighthood, 181–2

on democracy, 202

on diplomacy, 202, 256

on policing, 233, 276–7

on sherry, 178

on socio-economic unfairness, 125

taste in boots, 125

taste in food, 69, 127, 277, 278

taste in uniform, 231, 293

Vetinari on, 71–2

William de Worde on, 208

Vimes, Lady Sybil (_née_ Ramkin), 69, 125, 180, 202, 203, 278, 279, 280

vocabulary

dangerous, 113, 207, 217

objectionable, 173, 208, 209

Tiffany Aching on, 247, 249

_See also_ punctuation, spelling, Vetinari

vote, the, 40, 202

W

war, 177, 182

Cohen on, 145

paintings of, 234

results of, 86, 134

War, 48, 217

War, Mrs, 217

Watch, the, 66, 69, 155–6, 269, 275, 276–7, 294

Night Watch, 232

procedural techniques, 159–60, 162, 178, 179–80, 202, 231, 233, 279

traditions of, 180

uniform, 293

_See also_ Angua, Colon, Detritus, Ironfoundersson, Nobbs, Vimes

wealth

accumulation of, 125

measures of, 33, 125, 193, 202

_See also_ money

Weatherwax, Mistress Esmerelda

(Granny), 27–30, 51, 53, 101–7, 117, 118, 119, 149–56, 197–8, 262, 263,
283–4

Borrowing 117–18, 262

encounters with Death, 150–2, 193–4

healing skills, 101–2, 103, 149–52, 193–4

infallibility of, 27, 28

on baths, 104

on books, 27, 283

on hair care, 155

on hats, 106, 154

on imitations, 51

on nudity, 27, 102

on progress, 107

on sin, 197–8

on things foreign, 102, 104

on witches, 250, 263

use (or not) of witchcraft, 27, 29, 51, 104, 261, 262

Weatherwax, Lily, 105–6, 107

Wen the Eternally Surprised, 213, 215, 216

werewolves, 159, 183

_See also_ Angua

whale, cagèd, 65

whiskey: Bearhugger’s, 68; C. M. O. T.

Dibbler’s, 128

Willikins, 275

witches

black (Black Aliss), 149, 248, 283

cackling, 283

Miss Level, 261, 262

Miss Perspicacia Tick, 247–8

Miss Treason, 284

Mrs Earwig, 283

Omnians and, 197

respect commanded by, 27, 103, 262

sabbats, 101–2

suspicion and hostility towards, 52, 149, 247, 248

Tiffany Aching on, 247–8, 259

use of Borrowing, 117–18

use of magic, 261

witch’s cottage, 27, 120

Witch Trials, 263

_See also_ Aching, Garlick, magic, Nitt, Gytha Ogg, Weatherwax

wizards, 27, 45, 82, 92, 137, 188, 190, 224

and demons, 75

and food, 96, 224, 271

and gods, 92

and the Patrician, 94–5, 141

appearance of, 27, 137

attachment to life, 21, 28

competitiveness of, 45, 92

Cutangle, 30

Esk on, 30

fondness for occult display, 39, 75

Greyhald Spold, 21

Igneous Cutwell, 35, 36, 37–8, 39

research, 188

Ridcully on, 141

robes, 93

Windle Poons, 93–4, 95, 96

_See also_ Unseen University

women

abilities, 29

as ladies, 290

at disadvantage in careers, 22

Cohen on, 20

in Historical Re-creation, 280

jerk syndrome in, 279

price of, 294

universal laws relating to, 253, 255

wizards’ opinion of, 23, 30

wossname, 76

writing and reading, knowledge of, 159, 260, 262, 284

Y

yetis, 87, 219

Ysabell, 36–7, 38

Z

Zen, 51, 219

About the Author

Terry Pratchett is the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His books have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he is the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
After falling out with his keyboard he now talks to his computer.
Occasionally, these days, it answers back.

Also by Terry Pratchett

FOR YOUNGER READERS

THE BROMELIAD TRILOGY

(containing _Truckers_, _Diggers_ and _Wings_)

TRUCKERS [image]

DIGGERS [image]

WINGS [image]

THE CARPET PEOPLE [image]

ONLY YOU CAN

SAVE MANKIND [image]

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD [image]

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB [image]

THE JOHNNY MAXWELL TRILOGY

(_containing Only You Can Save Mankind_, _Johnny and the Dead_ and
_Johnny and the Bomb_)

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

playscript (adapted by Stephen Briggs) [image]

DISCWORLD FOR YOUNGER READERS

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND

HIS EDUCATED RODENTS [image]

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND

HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

playscript (adapted by Stephen Briggs) [image]

THE WEE FREE MEN [image]

A HAT FULL OF SKY [image]

WINTERSMITH [image]

FOR ADULTS OF ALL AGES THE DISCWORLD® SERIES

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC [image]

THE LIGHT FANTASTIC [image]

EQUAL RITES [image]

MORT [image]

SOURCERY [image]

WYRD SISTERS [image]

PYRAMIDS [image]

GUARDS! GUARDS! [image]

ERIC [image] [image]

MOVING PICTURES [image]

REAPER MAN [image]

WITCHES ABROAD [image]

SMALL GODS [image]

LORDS AND LADIES [image]

MEN AT ARMS [image]

SOUL MUSIC [image]

INTERESTING TIMES [image]

MASKERADE [image]

FEET OF CLAY [image]

HOGFATHER [image]

JINGO [image]

THE LAST CONTINENT [image]

CARPE JUGULUM [image]

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT [image]

THE TRUTH [image]

THIEF OF TIME [image]

NIGHT WATCH [image]

MONSTROUS REGIMENT [image]

GOING POSTAL [image]

THUD! [image]

MAKING MONEY [image]

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC – GRAPHIC NOVEL

THE LIGHT FANTASTIC – GRAPHIC NOVEL

MORT: A DISCWORLD BIG COMIC

(illustrated by Graham Higgins) [image]

GUARDS! GUARDS!: A DISCWORLD BIG COMIC

(adapted by Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Graham Higgins) [image]

SOUL MUSIC: THE ILLUSTRATED SCREENPLAY

WYRD SISTERS: THE ILLUSTRATED SCREENPLAY

MORT – THE PLAY

(adapted by Stephen Briggs)

WYRD SISTERS – THE PLAY

(adapted by Stephen Briggs)

GUARDS! GUARDS! – THE PLAY

(adapted by Stephen Briggs)

MEN AT ARMS – THE PLAY

(adapted by Stephen Briggs)

MASKERADE

(adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs) [image]

CARPE JUGULUM

(adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs) [image]

LORDS AND LADIES

(adapted for the stage by Irana Brown) [image]

INTERESTING TIMES

(adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs) [image]

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

(adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs) [image]

THE TRUTH

(adapted for the stage by Stephen Briggs) [image]

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD

(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen) [image]

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE

(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen) [image]

THE DISCWORLD COMPANION

(with Stephen Briggs) [image]

THE STREETS OF

ANKH-MORPORK

(with Stephen Briggs)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP

(with Stephen Briggs)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE – A DISCWORLD MAPP

(with Stephen Briggs and Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN

(with Paul Kidby)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK

(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO

(with Paul Kidby) [image]

THE LAST HERO

(with Paul Kidby) [image]

THE CELEBRATED DISCWORLD ALMANAK

(with Bernard Pearson)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD

(with Paul Kidby)

WHERE’S MY COW?

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY

CUT-OUT BOOK

(with Bernard Pearson)

GOOD OMENS

(with Neil Gaiman)

STRATA

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

THE UNADULTERATED CAT

(cartoons by Gray Jolliffe) [image]

[image] also available in audio/CD

[image] published by Victor Gollancz

[image] published by Samuel French

[image] published by Methuen Drama

[image] published by Ebury Press

[image] published by Oxford University Press

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
A Random House Group Company
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

First published in Great Britain
in 2007 by Doubleday
an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett and Stephen Briggs 2007

Terry Pratchett has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988 to be identified as the author of this work.

Discworld ® is a trademark registered by Terry Pratchett

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

ISBN 9780385611770
Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781407035505

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Quotations from the first twenty-one Discworld novels and _The Last
Hero_ reproduced by kind permission of Victor Gollancz Ltd. Quotations
from _The Amazing Maurice and his Educated Rodents, The Wee Free Men, A
Hat Full of Sky_ and _Wintersmith_ reproduced by kind permission of
Random House Children’s Books.

Addresses for Random House Group Ltd companies outside the UK can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk
The Random House Group Ltd Reg. No. 954009

2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1
