[]



THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD



TERRY PRATCHETT, IAN STEWART, AND JACK COHEN


Terry Pratchett is the acclaimed creator of the best-selling Discworld
series, the latest of which is _Raising Steam_. He has been appointed
OBE and a Knight Bachelor in recognition of his services to literature.

www.terrypratchett.com

Ian Stewart is a Fellow of the Royal Society, a professor of mathematics
at the University of Warwick, and the author of numerous books on math
and popular science, as well as science fiction novels coauthored with
Jack Cohen.

Jack Cohen is a professor of biology and honorary professor of
mathematics at the University of Warwick, and has coauthored several
books with Ian Stewart.



BY THE SAME AUTHORS



TERRY PRATCHETT


BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD®

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III: DARWIN’S WATCH

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD IV: JUDGEMENT DAY

_(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)_

TURTLE RECALL: THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION … SO FAR

_(with Stephen Briggs)_

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK

_(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan, and Paul Kidby)_

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO

_(with Paul Kidby)_

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK

_(with Bernard Pearson)_

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK

_(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)_

WHERE’S MY COW?

_(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)_

THE ART OF DISCWORLD

_(with Paul Kidby)_

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD

_(compiled by Stephen Briggs)_

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD

_(with Jacqueline Simpson)_

THE WORLD OF POO

_(with the Discworld Emporium)_

THE COMPLEAT ANKH-MORPORK

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK

_(with Stephen Briggs; painted by Stephen Player)_

THE DISCWORLD MAPP

_(with Stephen Briggs; painted by Stephen Player)_

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE—A DISCWORLD MAPP

_(with Stephen Briggs; illustrated by Paul Kidby)_

_DEATH’S DOMAIN_

_(with Paul Kidby)_

THE DISCWORLD® SERIES

THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

EQUAL RITES

MORT

SOURCERY

WYRD SISTERS

PYRAMIDS

GUARDS! GUARDS!

ERIC

_(illustrated by Josh Kirby)_

MOVING PICTURES

REAPER MAN

WITCHES ABROAD

SMALL GODS

LORDS AND LADIES

MEN AT ARMS

SOUL MUSIC

MASKERADE

FEET OF CLAY

HOGFEATHER

JINGO

THE LAST CONTINENT

CARPE JUGULUM

THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

THE TRUTH

THIEF OF TIME

THE LAST HERO

_(illustrated by Paul Kidby)_

THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

_(for young adults)_

NIGHT WATCH

THE WEE FREE MEN

_(for young adults)_

MONSTROUS REGIMENT

A HAT FULL OF SKY

_(for young adults)_

GOING POSTAL

THUD

WINTERSMITH

_(for young adults)_

MAKING MONEY

UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT

_(for young adults)_

SNUFF

RAISING STEAM

SHORTER WRITING

A BLINK OF THE SCREEN

NON-DISCWORLD® BOOKS

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT

_(illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)_

GOOD OMENS

_(with Neil Gaiman)_

THE LONG EARTH

_(with Stephen Baxter)_

THE LONG WAR

_(with Stephen Baxter)_

NON-DISCWORLD® NOVELS FOR YOUNGER READERS

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

IAN STEWART

CONCEPTS OF MODERN MATHEMATICS

GAME, SET, AND MATH

THE PROBLEMS OF MATHEMATICS

DOES GOD PLAY DICE?

ANOTHER FINE MATH YOU’VE GOT ME INTO

FEARFUL SYMMETRY

NATURE’S NUMBERS

FROM HERE TO INFINITY

THE MAGICAL MAZE

LIFE’S OTHER SECRET

FLATTERLAND

WHAT SHAPE IS A SNOWFLAKE?

THE ANNOTATED FLATLAND

JACK COHEN

LIVING EMBRYOS

REPRODUCTION

PARENTS MAKING PARENTS

SPERMS, ANTIBODIES AND INFERTILITY

THE PRIVILEGED APE

STOP WORKING AND START THINKING

_(with Graham Medley)_

IAN STEWART AND JACK COHEN

THE COLLAPSE OF CHAOS

FIGMENTS OF REALITY

WHEELERS

EVOLVING THE ALIEN

[]

[]

FIRST ANCHOR BOOKS EDITION, JUNE 2014

_Copyright © 1999, 2002 by Terry Pratchett, Lyn Pratchett_, _Joat
Enterprises, and Jack Cohen_
_Line drawings copyright © 1999, 2002 by Paul Kidby and Sandra Kidby_

All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Anchor Books, a
division of Random House LLC, New York, a Penguin Random House company.
Originally published in Britain by Ebury Press, an imprint of Ebury
Publishing, a division of the Random House Group Ltd., London, in 1999.
This revised edition published by Ebury Press, an imprint of Ebury
Publishing, a division of the Random House Group Ltd., London, in 2002.

Anchor Book and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House LLC.

Terry Pratchett® and Discworld® are registered trademarks.

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events,
or locales is entirely coincidental.

The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data has been applied
for.

ANCHOR TRADE PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-0-8041-6894-6
EBOOK ISBN: 978-0-8041-6895-3

Cover illustration by Justin Gerard
Cover design by Jason Booher

v3.1

_Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic_.

— ARTHUR C. CLARKE

_Any technology distinguishable from magic is insufficiently advanced_.

— GREGORY BENFORD

_The reason why truth is so much stranger than fiction is that there is
no requirement for it to be consistent_.

— MARK TWAIN

_There are no turtles anywhere_.

— PONDER STIBBONS



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_About the Authors_

_Other Titles_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Epigraph_

The Story Starts Here …

1      Splitting the Thaum

2      Squash Court Science

3      I Know My Wizards

4      Science and Magic

5      The Roundworld Project

6      Beginning and Becomings

7      Beyond the Fifth Element

8      We Are Stardust (or, At Least We Went to Woodstock)

9      Eat Hot Naphtha, Evil Dog!

10    The Shape of Things

11    Never Trust a Curved Universe

12    Where Do Rules Come From?

13    No, It Can’t Do That

14    Disc Worlds

15    The Dawn of Dawn

16    Earth and Fire

17    Suit of Spells

18    Air and Water

19    There Is a Tide …

20    A Giant Leap for Moonkind

21    The Light You See the Dark By

22    Things That Aren’t

23    No Possibility of Life

24    Despite Which …

25    Unnatural Selection

26    The Descent of Darwin

27    We Need More Blobs

28    The Iceberg Cometh

29    Going for a Paddle

30    Universals and Parochials

31    Great Leap Sideways

32    Don’t Look Up

33    The Future Is Newt

34    Nine Times Out of Ten

35    Still Bloody Lizards

36    Running from Dinosaurs

37    I Said, Don’t Look Up!

38    The Death of Dinosaurs

39    Backsliders

40    Mammals on the Make

41    Don’t Play God

42    Anthill Inside

43    Ook: A Space Odyssey

44    Extel Outside

45    The Bleat Goes On

46    Ways to Leave Your Planet

47    You Need Chelonium

48    Eden and Camelot

49    As Above, So Below



THE STORY STARTS HERE …


ONCE UPON A TIME, there was Discworld. There still is an adequate
supply.

Discworld is the flat world, carried through space on the back of a
giant turtle, which has been the source of – so far – twenty-seven
novels, four maps, an encylopaedia, two animated series, t-shirts,
scarves, models, badges, beer, embroidery, pens, posters, and probably,
by the time this is published, talcum powder and body splash (if not, it
can only be a matter of time).

It has, in short, become immensely popular.

And Discworld runs on magic.

Roundworld – our home planet, and by extension the universe in which it
sits – runs on rules. In fact, it simply _runs_. But we have watched the
running, and those observations and the ensuing deductions are the very
basis of science.

Magicians and scientists are, on the face of it, poles apart. Certainly,
a group of people who often dress strangely, live in a world of their
own, speak a specialized language and frequently make statements that
appear to be in flagrant breach of common sense have _nothing_ in common
with a group of people who often dress strangely, speak a specialized
language, live in … er …

Perhaps we should try this another way. Is there a connection between
magic and science? Can the magic of Discworld, with its eccentric
wizards, down-to-Earth witches, obstinate trolls, fire-breathing
dragons, talking dogs, and personified DEATH, shed any useful light on
hard, rational, solid, Earthly science?

We think so.

We’ll explain why in a moment, but first, let’s make it clear what _The
Science of Discworld_ is _not_. There have been several media tie-in
_The Science of …_ books, such as _The Science of the X-Files_ and _The
Physics of Star Trek_. They tell you about areas of today’s science that
may one day lead to the events or devices that the fiction depicts. Did
aliens crash-land at Roswell? Could an anti-matter warp drive ever be
invented? Could we ever have the ultra long-life batteries that Scully
and Mulder must be using in those torches of theirs?

We could have taken that approach. We could, for example, have pointed
out that Darwin’s theory of evolution explains how lower lifeforms can
evolve into higher ones, which in turn makes it entirely reasonable that
a human should evolve into an orangutan (while remaining a librarian,
since there is no higher life form than a librarian). We could have
speculated on which DNA sequence might reliably incorporate asbestos
linings into the insides of dragons. We might even have attempted to
explain how you could get a turtle ten thousand miles long.

We decided not to do these things, for a good reason … um, two reasons.

The first is that it would be … er … dumb.

And this because of the second reason. Discworld does not run on
scientific lines. Why pretend that it might? Dragons don’t breathe fire
because they’ve got asbestos lungs – they breathe fire because everyone
knows that’s what dragons _do_.

What runs Discworld is deeper than mere magic and more powerful than
pallid science. It is _narrative imperative_, the power of story. It
plays a role similar to that substance known as phlogiston, once
believed to be that principle or substance within inflammable things
that enabled them to burn. In the Discworld universe, then, there is
narrativium. It is part of the spin of every atom, the drift of every
cloud. It is what causes them to be what they are and continue to exist
and take part in the ongoing story of the world.

On Roundworld, things happen because the _things_ want to happen.*1 What
people want does not greatly figure in the scheme of things, and the
universe isn’t there to tell a story.

With magic, you can turn a frog into a prince. With science, you can
turn a frog into a Ph.D and you still have the frog you started with.

That’s the conventional view of Roundworld science. It misses a lot of
what actually makes science tick. Science doesn’t just exist in the
abstract. You could grind the universe into its component particles
without finding a single trace of Science. Science is a structure
created and maintained by people. And people choose what interests them,
and what they consider to be significant and, quite often, they have
thought narratively.

Narrativium is powerful stuff. We have always had a drive to paint
stories on to the Universe. When humans first looked at the stars, which
are great flaming suns an unimaginable distance away, they saw in
amongst them giant bulls, dragons, and local heroes.

This human trait doesn’t affect what the rules _say –_ not much, anyway
– but it does determine which rules we are willing to contemplate in the
first place. Moreover, the rules of the universe have to be able to
produce everything that we humans observe, which introduces a kind of
narrative imperative into science too. Humans think in stories*2.
Classically, at least, science itself has been the discovery of
‘stories’ – think of all those books that had titles like _The Story of
Mankind_, _The Descent of Man_, and, if it comes to that, _A Brief
History of Time_.

Over and above the stories of science, though, Discworld can play an
even more important role: What if? We can use Discworld for thought
experiments about what science might have looked like if the universe
had been different, or if the history of science had followed a
different route. We can look at science from the outside.

To a scientist, a thought experiment is an argument that you can run
through in your head, after which you understand what’s going on so well
that there’s no need to do a real experiment, which is of course a great
saving in time and money and prevents you from getting embarrassingly
inconvenient results. Discworld takes a more practical view – there, a
thought experiment is one that you can’t do and which wouldn’t work if
you could. But the kind of thought experiment we have in mind is one
that scientists carry out all the time, usually without realizing it;
and you don’t need to do it, because the whole _point_ is that it
wouldn’t work. Many of the most important questions in science, and
about our understanding of it, are _not_ about how the universe actually
is. They are about what would happen if the universe were different.

Someone asks ‘why do zebras form herds?’ You could answer this by an
analysis of zebra sociology, psychology, and so on … or you could ask a
question of a very different kind: ‘What would happen if they didn’t?’
One fairly obvious answer to that is ‘They’d be much more likely to get
eaten by lions.’ This immediately suggests that zebras form herds for
self-protection – and now we’ve got some insight into what zebras
actually do by contemplating, for a moment, the possibility that they
might have done something else.

Another, more serious example is the question ‘Is the solar system
stable?’, which means ‘Could it change dramatically as a result of some
tiny disturbance?’ In 1887 King Oscar II of Sweden offered a prize of
2,500 crowns for the answer. It took about a century for the world’s
mathematicians to come up with a definite answer: ‘Maybe’. (It was a
good answer, but they didn’t get paid. The prize had already been
awarded to someone who didn’t get the answer and whose prizewinning
article had a big mistake right at the most interesting part. But when
he put it right, at his own expense, he invented Chaos Theory and paved
the way for the ‘maybe’. Sometimes, the best answer is a more
interesting question.) The point here is that stability is not about
what a system is actually doing: it is about how the system would change
if you disturbed it. Stability, by definition, deals with ‘what if?’.

Because a lot of science is really about this non-existent world of
thought experiments, our understanding of science _must_ concern itself
with worlds of the imagination as well as with worlds of reality.
Imagination, rather than mere intelligence, is the truly human quality.
And what better world of the imagination to start from than Discworld?
Discworld is a consistent, well-developed universe with its own kinds of
rules, and convincingly real people live on it despite the substantial
differences between their universe’s rules and ours. Many of them also
have a thoroughgoing grounding in ‘common sense’, one of science’s
natural enemies.

Appearing regularly within the Discworld canon are the buildings and
faculty of Unseen University, the Discworld’s premier college of magic.
The wizards*3 are a lively bunch, always ready to open any door that has
‘This door to be kept shut’ written on it or pick up anything that has
just started to fizz. It seemed to us that they could be useful …

Clearly, as the wizards of Unseen University believe, this world is a
parody of the Discworld one. If we, or they, compare Discworld’s magic
to Roundworld science, the more similarities and parallels we find. And
when we didn’t discover parallels, we found that the _differences_ were
very revealing. Science takes on a new character when you stop asking
questions like ‘What does newt DNA look like?’ and instead ask ‘I wonder
how the wizards would react to this way of thinking about newts?’

There is no science _as such_ on Discworld. So we have put some there.
By magical means, the wizards on Discworld are led to create their own
brand of science – some kind of ‘pocket universe’ in which magic no
longer works, but rules do. Then, as the wizards learn to understand how
the rules make interesting things happen – rocks, bacteria,
civilizations – we watch them watching … well, us. It’s a sort of
recursive thought experiment, or a Russian doll wherein the smaller
dolls are opened up to find the largest doll inside.

And then we found that … ah, but that is _another_ story.

TP, IS, & JC, DECEMBER 1998

PS We have, we are afraid, mentioned in the ensuing pages Schrödinger’s
Cat, the Twins Paradox, and that bit about shining a torch ahead of a
spaceship travelling at the speed of light. This is because, under the
rules of the Guild of Science Writers, they _have_ to be included. We
have, however, tried to keep them short.

We’ve managed to be very, very brief about the Trousers of Time, as
well.

PPS Sometimes scientists change their minds. New developments cause a
rethink. If this bothers you, consider how much damage is being done to
the world by people for whom new developments do _not_ cause a rethink.

This second edition has been changed to reflect three years of
scientific progress … forwards or backwards. (You will find both.) And
we’ve added two completely new chapters: one on the life of dinosaurs,
because the existing chapter on the death of dinosaurs seemed a bit
depressing; and one on cosmic disasters, because in many ways the
universe _is_ depressing.

The Discworld story has proved more robust than the science. As should
be expected. Discworld makes so much more sense than Roundworld does.

TP, IS, & JC, JANUARY 2002

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 In a manner of speaking. They happen because things obey the rules of
the universe. A rock has no detectable opinion about gravity.

*2 It took three years for this sentence to sink in. When it did, we
wrote _The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_.

*3 Like the denizens of any Roundworld university, they have unlimited
time for research, unlimited funds and no worries about tenure. They are
also by turns erratic, inventively malicious, resistant to new ideas
until they’ve become old ideas, highly creative at odd moments and
perpetually argumentative – in this respect they bear no relation to
their Roundworld counterparts at _all_.



ONE



SPLITTING THE THAUM


[] SOME QUESTIONS SHOULD NOT BE ASKED. However, someone always does.

‘How does it work?’ said Archchancellor Mustrum Ridcully, the Master of
Unseen University.

This was the kind of question that Ponder Stibbons hated almost as much
as ‘How much will it cost?’ They were two of the hardest questions a
researcher ever had to face. As the university’s _de facto_ head of
magical development, he especially tried to avoid questions of finance
at all costs.

‘In quite a complex way,’ he ventured at last.

‘Ah.’

‘What _I’d_ like to know,’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘is when we’re
going to get the squash court back.’

‘You never play, Senior Wrangler,’ said Ridcully, looking up at the
towering black construction that now occupied the centre of the old
university court.*

‘I might want to one day. It’ll be damn hard with that thing in the way,
that’s my point. We’ll have to completely rewrite the rules.’

Outside, snow piled up against the high windows. This was turning out to
be the longest winter in living memory – so long, in fact, that living
memory itself was being shortened as some of the older citizens
succumbed. The cold had penetrated even the thick and ancient walls of
Unseen University itself, to the general concern and annoyance of the
faculty. Wizards can put up with any amount of deprivation and
discomfort, provided it is not happening to them.

And so, at long last, Ponder Stibbons’s project had been authorized.
He’d been waiting three years for it. His plea that splitting the thaum
would push back the boundaries of human knowledge had fallen on deaf
ears; the wizards considered that pushing back the boundaries of
_anything_ was akin to lifting up a very large, damp stone. His
assertion that splitting the thaum might significantly increase the sum
total of human happiness met with the rejoinder that everyone seemed
pretty happy enough already.

Finally he’d ventured that splitting the thaum would produce vast
amounts of raw magic that could very easily be converted into cheap
heat. That worked. The Faculty were lukewarm on the subject of knowledge
for knowledge’s sake, but they were boiling hot on the subject of warm
bedrooms.

Now the other senior wizards wandered around the suddenly-cramped court,
prodding the new thing. Their Archchancellor took out his pipe and
absent-mindedly knocked out the ashes on its matt black side.

‘Um … please don’t do that, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Why not?’

‘There might be … it might … there’s a chance that …’ Ponder stopped.
‘It will make the place untidy, sir,’ he said.

‘Ah. Good point. So it’s not that the whole thing might explode, then?’

‘Er … no, sir. Haha,’ said Ponder miserably. ‘It’d take a lot more than
that, sir –’

There was a _whack_ as a squash ball ricocheted off the wall, rebounded
off the casing, and knocked the Archchancellor’s pipe out of his mouth.

‘That was _you_, Dean,’ said Ridcully accusingly. ‘Honestly, you fellows
haven’t taken any notice of this place in years and suddenly you all
want to – Mr Stibbons? Mr Stibbons?’

He nudged the small mound that was the hunched figure of the
University’s chief research wizard. Ponder Stibbons uncurled slightly
and peered between his fingers.

‘I really think it might be a _good_ idea if they stopped playing
squash, sir,’ he whispered.

‘Me too. There’s nothing worse than a sweaty wizard. Stop it, you
fellows. And gather round. Mr Stibbons is going to do his presentation.’
The Archchancellor gave Ponder Stibbons a rather sharp look. ‘It is
going to be very informative and interesting, isn’t it, Mister Stibbons.
He’s going to tell us what he spent AM$55,879.45p on.’

‘And why he’s ruined a perfectly good squash court,’ said the Senior
Wrangler, tapping the side of the thing with his squash racket.

‘And if this is _safe_,’ said the Dean. ‘I’m against dabbling in
physics.’

Ponder Stibbons winced.

‘I assure you, Dean, that the chances of anyone being killed by the, er,
reacting engine are even greater than the chance of being knocked down
while crossing the street,’ he said.

‘Really? Oh, well … all right then.’

Ponder reconsidered the impromptu sentence he’d just uttered and
decided, in the circumstances, not to correct it. Talking to the senior
wizards was like building a house of cards; if you got _anything_ to
stay upright, you just breathed out gently and moved on.

Ponder had invented a little system he’d called, in the privacy of his
head, Lies-to-Wizards. It was for their own good, he told himself. There
was no _point_ in telling your bosses _everything_; they were busy men,
they didn’t want _explanations_. There was no _point_ in burdening them.
What they wanted was little stories that they felt they could
understand, and then they’d go away and stop worrying.

He’d got his students to set up a small display at the far end of the
squash court. Beside it, with pipes looping away through the wall into
the High Energy Magic building next door, was a terminal to HEX, the
University’s thinking engine. And beside that was a plinth on which was
a very large red lever, around which someone had tied a pink ribbon.

Ponder looked at his notes, and then surveyed the faculty.

‘Ahem …’ he began.

‘I’ve got a throat sweet somewhere,’ said the Senior Wrangler, patting
his pockets.

Ponder looked at his notes again, and a horrible sense of hopelessness
overcame him. He realized that he could explain thaumic fission very
well, provided that the person listening already knew all about it. With
the senior wizards, though, he’d need to explain the meaning of every
word. In some cases this would mean words like ‘the’ and ‘and’.

He glanced down at the water jug on his lectern, and decided to
extemporize.

Ponder held up a glass of water.

‘Do you realize, gentlemen,’ he said, ‘that the thaumic potential in
this water … that is, I mean to say, the magical field generated by its
narrativium content which tells it that it _is_ water and lets it keep
on being water instead of, haha, a pigeon or a frog … would, if we could
release it, be enough to move this whole university all the way to the
moon?’

He beamed at them.

‘Better leave it in there, then,’ said the Chair of Indefinite Studies.

Ponder’s smile froze.

‘Obviously we cannot extract _all_ of it,’ he said, ‘But we –’

‘Enough to get a small part of the university to the moon?’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘The Dean could do with a holiday,’ said the Archchancellor.

‘I resent that remark, Archchancellor.’

‘Just trying to lighten the mood, Dean.’

‘_But we can_ release just enough for all kinds of useful work,’ said
Ponder, already struggling.

‘Like heating my study,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘My water
jug was iced up _again_ this morning.’

‘Exactly!’ said Ponder, striking out madly for a useful Lie-to-Wizards.
‘We can use it to boil a great big kettle! That’s all it is! It’s
perfectly harmless! Not dangerous in any way! That’s why the University
Council let me build it! You wouldn’t have let me build it if it was
dangerous, would you?’

He gulped down the water.

As one man, the assembled wizards took several steps backwards.

‘Let us know what it’s like up there,’ said the Dean.

‘Bring us back some rocks. Or something,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes.

‘Wave to us’, said the Senior Wrangler. ‘We’ve got quite a good
telescope.’

Ponder stared at the empty glass, and readjusted his mental sights once
more.

‘Er, no,’ he said. ‘The fuel has to go inside the reacting engine, you
see. And then … and then …’

He gave up.

‘The magic goes round and round and it comes up under the boiler that we
have plumbed in and the university will then be lovely and warm,’ he
said. ‘Any questions?’

‘Where does the coal go?’ said the Dean. ‘It’s wicked what the dwarfs
are charging these days.’

‘No, sir. No coal. The heat is … free,’ said Ponder. A little bead of
sweat ran down his face.

‘Really?’ said the Dean. ‘That’ll be a saving, then, eh, Bursar? Eh?
Where’s the Bursar?’

‘Ah … er … the Bursar is assisting me today, sir,’ said Ponder. He
pointed to the high gallery over the court. The Bursar was standing
there, smiling his distant smile, and holding an axe. A rope was tied
around the handrail, looped over a beam, and held a long heavy rod
suspended over the centre of the reaction engine.

‘It is … er … _just_ possible that the engine may produce too much
magic,’ said Ponder. ‘The rod is lead, laminated with rowan wood.
Together they naturally damp down any magical reaction, you see. So if
things get too … if we want to settle things down, you see, he just
chops through the rope and it drops into the very centre of the reacting
engine, you see.’

‘What’s that man standing next to him for?’

‘That’s Mr Turnipseed, my assistant. He’s the backup fail-safe device.’

‘What does he do, then?’

‘His job is to shout “For gods’ sakes cut the rope now!” sir.’

The wizard nodded at one another. By the standards of Ankh-Morpork,
where the common thumb was used as a temperature measuring device, this
was health and safety at work taken to extremes.

‘Well, that all seems safe enough to me,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Where did you get the idea for this, Mister Stibbons?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, er, a lot of it is from my own research, but I got quite a few
leads from a careful reading of the Scrolls of Loko in the Library,
sir.’ Ponder reckoned he was safe enough there. The wizards liked
ancient wisdom, provided it was ancient _enough_. They felt wisdom was
like wine, and got better the longer it was left alone. Something that
hadn’t been known for a few hundred years probably wasn’t worth knowing.

‘Loko … Loko … Loko,’ mused Ridcully. ‘That’s up on Uberwald, isn’t it?’

‘That’s right, sir.’

‘Tryin’ to bring it to mind,’ Ridcully went on, rubbing his beard.
‘Isn’t that where there’s that big deep valley with the ring of
mountains round it? Very deep valley indeed, as I recall.’

‘That’s right, sir. According to the library catalogue the scrolls were
found in a cave by the Crustley Expedition –’

‘Lots of centaurs and fauns and other curiously shaped magical whatnots
are there, I remember reading.’

‘Is there, sir?’

‘Wasn’t Stanmer Crustley the one who died of planets?’

‘I’m not familiar with –’

‘Extremely rare magical disease, I believe.’

‘Indeed, sir, but –’

‘Now I come to think about it, everyone on that expedition contracted
something seriously magical within a few months of getting back,’
Ridcully went on.

‘Er, yes, sir. The suggestion was that there was some kind of curse on
the place. Ridiculous notion, of course.’

‘I somehow feel I need to ask, Mister Stibbons … what chance is there of
this just blowin’ up and destroyin’ the entire university?’

Ponder’s heart sank. He mentally scanned the sentence, and took refuge
in truth. ‘None, sir.’

‘Now try honesty, Mister Stibbons.’ And that was the problem with the
Archchancellor. He mostly strode around the place shouting at people,
but when he did bother to get all his brain cells lined up he could
point them straight at the nearest weak spot.

‘Well … in the unlikely event of it going seriously wrong, it … wouldn’t
_just_ blow up the university, sir.’

‘What would it blow up, pray?’

‘Er … everything, sir.’

‘Everything there is, you mean?’

‘Within a radius of about fifty thousand miles out into space, sir, yes.
According to HEX it’d happen instantaneously. We wouldn’t even know
about it.’

‘And the odds of this are …?’

‘About fifty to one, sir.’

The wizards relaxed.

‘That’s pretty safe. I wouldn’t bet on a horse at those odds,’ said the
Senior Wrangler. There was half an inch of ice on the _inside_ of his
bedroom windows. Things like this give you a very personal view of risk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Wizard or ‘Real’ Squash bears very little relationship to the high
speed sweat bath played elsewhere. Wizards see no point in moving fast.
The ball is lobbed lazily. Certain magical inconsistencies are built
into the floor and walls, however, so that the wall a ball hits is not
necessarily the wall it rebounds from. This was one of the factors
which, Ponder Stibbons realized some time afterwards, he really ought to
have taken into consideration. Nothing excites a magical particle like
meeting itself coming the other way.



TWO



SQUASH COURT SCIENCE


[] A SQUASH COURT CAN BE USED to make things go _much_ faster than a
small rubber ball …

On 2 December 1942, in a squash court in the basement of Stagg Field at
the University of Chicago, a new technological era came into being. It
was a technology born of war, yet one of its consequences was to make
war so terrible in prospect that, slowly and hesitantly, war on a global
scale became less and less likely.*1 At Stagg Field, the Roman-born
physicist Enrico Fermi and his team of scientists achieved the world’s
first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. From it came the atomic
bomb, and later, civilian nuclear power. But there was a far more
significant consequence: the dawn of Big Science and a new style of
technological change.

Nobody played squash in the basement of Stagg Field, not while the
reactor was in place – but a lot of the people working in the squash
court had the same attitudes as Ponder Stibbons … mostly insatiable
curiosity, coupled with periods of nagging doubt tinged with a flicker
of terror. It was curiosity that started it all and terror that
concluded it.

In 1934, following a lengthy series of discoveries in physics related to
the phenomenon of radioactivity, Fermi discovered that interesting
things happen when substances are bombarded with ‘slow neutrons’ –
subatomic particles emitted by radioactive beryllium, and passed through
paraffin to slow them down. Slow neutrons, Fermi discovered, were just
what you needed to persuade other elements to emit their own radioactive
particles. That looked interesting, so he squirted streams of slow
neutrons at everything he could think of, and eventually he tried the
then obscure element uranium, up until then mostly used as a source of
yellow pigment. By something apparently like alchemy, the uranium turned
into something new when the slow neutrons cannoned into it – but Fermi
couldn’t work out _what_.

Four years later three Germans – Otto Hahn, Lise Meitner, and Fritz
Strassmann – repeated Fermi’s experiments, and being better chemists,
they worked out what had happened to the uranium. Mysteriously, it had
turned into barium, krypton, and a small quantity of other stuff.
Meitner realized that this process of ‘nuclear fission’ produced energy,
by a remarkable method. Everyone knew that chemistry could turn matter
into other kinds of matter, but now some of the matter in uranium was
being transformed into _energy_, something that nobody had seen before.
It so happened that Albert Einstein had already predicted this
possibility on theoretical grounds, with his famous formula – an
equation which the orangutan Librarian of Unseen University*2 would
render as ‘Ook’.*3 Einstein’s formula tells us that the amount of energy
‘contained’ in a given amount of matter is equal to the mass of that
matter, multiplied by the speed of light and then multiplied by the
speed of light again. As Einstein had immediately noticed, light is so
fast it doesn’t even appear to move, so its speed is decidedly big … and
the speed multiplied by itself is _huge_. In other words: you can get an
awful lot of energy from a tiny bit of matter, if only you can find a
way to do it. Now Meitner had worked out the trick.

A single equation may or may not halve your book sales, but it can
change the world completely.

Hahn, Meitner and Strassmann published their discovery in the British
scientific journal _Nature_ in January 1939. Nine months later Britain
was at war, a war which would be ended by a military application of
their discovery. It is ironic that the greatest scientific secret of
World War II was given away just before the war began, and it shows how
unaware politicians then were of the potential – be it for good or bad –
of Big Science. Fermi saw the implications of the _Nature_ article
immediately, and he called in another top-ranking physicist, Niels Bohr,
who came up with a novel twist: the chain reaction. If a particular,
rare form of uranium, called uranium-235, was bombarded with slow
neutrons, then not only would it split into other elements and release
energy – it would also release more neutrons. Which, in turn, would
bombard more uranium-235 … The reaction would become self-sustaining,
and the potential release of energy would be _gigantic_.

Would it work? Could you get ‘something for nothing’ in this way?
Finding out was never going to be easy, because uranium-235 is mixed up
with ordinary uranium (uranium-238), and getting it out is like looking
for a needle in a haystack when the needle is made of straw.

There were other worries _too …_ in particular, might the experiment be
too successful, setting off a chain reaction that not only spread
through the experiment’s supply of uranium-235, but through everything
else on Earth as well? Might the atmosphere catch fire? Calculations
suggested: probably not. Besides, the big worry was that if the Allies
didn’t get nuclear fission working soon then the Germans would beat them
to it. Given the choice between our blowing up the world and _the enemy_
blowing up the world, it was obvious what to do.

That is, on reflection, not a happy sentence.

Loko is remarkably similar to Oklo in southeastern Gabon, where there
are deposits of uranium. In the 1970s, French scientists unearthed
evidence that some of that uranium had either been undergoing unusually
intense nuclear reactions or was much, much older than the rest of the
planet.

It _could_ have been an archaeological relic of some ancient
civilization whose technology had got as far as atomic power, but a
duller if more plausible expanation is that Oklo was a ‘natural
reactor’. For some accidental reason, that particular patch of uranium
was richer than usual in uranium-235, and a spontaneous chain reaction
ran for hundreds of thousands of years. Nature got there well ahead of
Science, and without the squash court.

Unless, of course, it _was_ an archaeological relic of some ancient
civilization.

Until late in 1998, the natural reactor at Oklo was also the best
evidence we could find to show that one of the biggest ‘what if?’
questions in science had an uninteresting answer. This question was
‘What if the natural constants _aren’t_?’

Our scientific theories are underpinned by a variety of numbers, the
‘fundamental constants’. Examples include the speed of light, Planck’s
constant (basic to quantum mechanics), the gravitational constant (basic
to gravitational theory), the charge on an electron, and so on. All of
the accepted theories assume that these numbers have always been the
same, right from the very first moment when the universe burst into
being. Our calculations about that early universe _rely_ on those
numbers having been the same; if they used to be different, we don’t
know what numbers to put into the calculations. It’s like trying to do
your income tax when nobody will tell you the tax rates. From time to
time maverick scientists advance the odd ‘what if?’ theory, in which
they try out the possibility that one or more of the fundamental
constants isn’t. The physicist Lee Smolin has even come up with a theory
of evolving universes, which bud off baby universes with different
fundamental constants. According to this theory, our own universe is
particularly good at producing such babies, and is also particularly
suited to the development of life. The conjunction of these two
features, he argues, is not accidental (the wizards at UU, incidentally,
would be quite at home with ideas like this – in fact, sufficiently
advanced physics is indistinguishable from magic).

Oklo tells us that the fundamental constants have not changed during the
last two billion years – about half the age of the Earth and ten per
cent of that of the universe. The key to the argument is a particular
combination of fundamental constants, known as the ‘fine structure
constant’.*4 Its value is very close to ¹/₁₃₇ (and a lot of ink was
devoted to explanations of that whole number 137, at least until more
accurate measurements put its value at 137.036). The advantage of the
fine structure constant is that its value does not depend on the chosen
units of measurement – unlike say, the speed of light, which gives a
different number if you express it in miles per second or kilometres per
second. The Russian physicist Alexander Shlyakhter analysed the
different chemicals in the Oklo reactor’s ‘nuclear waste’, and worked
out what the value of the fine structure constant must have been two
billion years ago when the reactor was running. The result was the same
as today’s value to within a few parts in ten million.

In late 1998, though, a team of astronomers led by John Webb made a very
accurate study of the light emitted by extremely distant, but very
bright, bodies called quasars. They found subtle changes in certain
features of that light, called spectral lines, which are related to the
vibrations of various types of atom. In effect, what they seem to have
discovered is that many billion years ago – much further back than the
Oklo reactor – atoms didn’t vibrate at quite the same rate as they do
today. In very old gas clouds from the early universe, the fine
structure constant differs from today’s value by one part in 50,000.
That’s a _huge_ amount by the standards of this particular area of
physics. As far as anyone can tell, this unexpected result is not due to
experimental error. A theory suggested in 1994 by Thibault Damour and
Alexander Polyakov does indicate a possible variation in the fine
structure constant, but only one-ten thousandth as large as that found
by Webb’s team.

In 2001 another team led by John Webb analysed the absorption of light
from distant quasars by clouds of interstellar gas, and announced that
the fine structure constant has increased by one hundred thousandth
since the Big Bang. This result, if true, implies that the
gravitational, weak nuclear, and strong nuclear forces have all changed
over time. The work is being checked for possible systematic errors,
which might produce the same observations.

It’s all a bit of a puzzle, and most theorists sensibly prefer to hedge
their bets and wait for further research. But it could be a straw in the
wind: perhaps we will soon have to accept that the laws of physics were
subtly different in the distant reaches of time and space. Not
turtle-shaped, perhaps, but … different.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Or at least, less radioactive. We can but hope.

*2 He was the victim of a magical accident, which he rather enjoyed. But
you _know_ this.

*3 They say that every formula halves the sales of a popular science
book. This is rubbish – if it was true, then _The Emperor’s New Mind_ by
Roger Penrose would have sold one-eighth of a copy, whereas its actual
sales were in the hundreds of thousands. However, just in case there is
some truth to the myth, we have adopted this way of describing the
formula to double our potential sales. You all know which formula we
mean. You can find it written out in symbols on page 118 of Stephen
Hawking’s _A Brief History of Time –_ so if the myth is right, he could
have sold twice as many copies, which is a mindboggling thought.

*4 The fine structure constant is defined to be the square of the charge
of an electron, divided by 2 times Planck’s constant times the speed of
light times the permittivity of the vacuum (as a handy lie, the last
term might be thought as ‘the way it reacts to an electric charge’).
Thank you.



THREE



I KNOW MY WIZARDS


[] IT DID NOT TAKE LONG for the faculty to put its collective finger on
the philosophical nub of the problem, _vis-à-vis_ the complete
destruction of everything.

‘If no one will know if it happens, then in a very real sense it
wouldn’t have happened,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. His bedroom
was on one of the colder sides of the university.

‘Certainly we wouldn’t get the blame,’ said the Dean, ‘even if it did.’

‘As a matter of fact,’ Ponder went on, emboldened by the wizards’
relaxed approach, ‘there is some theoretical evidence to suggest that it
could not possibly happen, due to the non-temporal nature of the thaumic
component.’

‘Say again?’ said Ridcully.

‘A malfunction would not result in an _explosion_ exactly, sir,’ said
Ponder. ‘Nor, as far as I can work out, would it result in things
ceasing to exist from the present onwards. They would cease to have
existed at all, because of the multidirectional collapse of the thaumic
field. But since we _are_ here, sir, we must be living in a universe
where things did not go wrong.’

‘Ah, I know this one,’ said Ridcully. ‘This is because of quantum, isn’t
it? And there’s some usses in some universe next door where it _did_ go
wrong, and the poor devils got blown up?’

‘Yes, sir. Or, rather, no. They didn’t get blown up because the device
the other Ponder Stibbons would have built would have gone wrong, and
so … he didn’t exist not to build it. That’s the theory, anyway.’

‘I’m glad that’s sorted out, then,’ said the Senior Wrangler briskly.
‘We’re here because we’re here. And since we’re here, we might as well
be warm.’

‘Then we seem to be in agreement,’ said Ridcully. ‘Mr Stibbons, you may
start this infernal engine.’ He nodded towards the red lever on the
plinth.

‘I was rather assuming you would do the honours, Archchancellor,’ said
Ponder, bowing. ‘All you need to do is pull the lever. That will, ahem,
release the interlock, allowing the flux to enter the exchanger, where a
simple octiron reaction will turn the magic into heat and warm up the
water in the boiler.’

‘So it really _is_ just a big kettle?’ said the Dean.

‘In a manner of speaking, yes,’ said Ponder, trying to keep his face
straight.

Ridcully grasped the lever.

‘Perhaps you would care to say a few words, sir?’ said Ponder.

‘Yes.’ Ridcully looked thoughtful for a moment, and then brightened up.
‘Let’s get this over quickly, and have lunch.’

There was a smattering of applause. He pulled the lever. The hand on a
dial on the wall moved off zero.

‘Well, we’re not blown up after all,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘What
are the numbers on the wall for, Stibbons?’

‘Oh, er … they’re … they’re to tell you what number it’s got to,’ said
Ponder.

‘Oh. I see.’ The Senior Wrangler grasped the lapels of his robe. ‘Duck
with green peas today, gentlemen, I believe,’ he said, in a far more
interested tone of voice. ‘Well done, Mr Stibbons.’

The wizards ambled off in the apparently slow yet deceptively fast way
of wizards heading towards food.

Ponder breathed a sigh of relief, which turned into a gulp when he
realized that the Archchancellor had not, in fact, left but was
inspecting the engine quite closely.

‘Er … is there anything else I can tell you, sir?’ he said, hurriedly.

‘When did you _really_ start it, Mister Stibbons?’

‘Sir?’

‘Every single word in the sentence was quite short and easy to
understand. Was there something wrong about the way I assembled them?’

‘I … we … it was started just after breakfast, sir,’ said Ponder meekly.
‘The needle on the dial was just turned by Mr Turnipseed by means of a
string, sir.’

‘Did it blow up at all when you started it up?’

‘No sir! You’d … well, you’d have _known_, sir!’

‘I thought you said back there that we wouldn’t have known, Stibbons.’

‘Well, no, I mean –’

‘I know you, Stibbons,’ said Ridcully. ‘And you would _never_ test
something out publicly before trying it to see if it worked. No one
wants egg all over their face, do they?’

Ponder reflected that egg on the face is only of minor concern when the
face is part of a cloud of particles expanding outwards at an
appreciable fraction of the speed of dark.*

Ridcully slammed his hand against the black panels of the engine,
causing Ponder visibly to leave the ground.

‘Warm already,’ he said. ‘You all right up there, Bursar?’

The Bursar nodded happily.

‘Good man. Well done, Mister Stibbons. Let’s have lunch.’

After a while, when the footsteps had died away, it dawned on the Bursar
that he was, as it were, holding the short end of the string.

The Bursar was not, as many thought, insane. On the contrary, he was a
man with both feet firmly on the ground, the only difficulty being that
the ground in question was on some other planet, the one with the fluffy
pink clouds and the happy little bunnies. He did not mind because he
much preferred it to the real one, where people shouted too much, and he
spent as little time there as possible. Unfortunately this had to
include mealtimes. The meal service on Planet Nice was unreliable.

Smiling his faint little smile, he put down his axe and ambled off.
After all, he reasoned, the point was that the wretched thing stayed out
of the … whatever it was, and it could certainly do a simple job like
that without his watching it.

Unfortunately Mr Stibbons was too worried to be very observant, and none
of the other wizards bothered much about the fact that everything which
stood between them and thaumic devastation was blowing bubbles into his
glass of milk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* As yet unmeasured, but believed to be faster than light owing to its
ability to move so quickly out of light’s way.



FOUR



SCIENCE AND MAGIC


[] IF WE WANTED TO, we could comment on several features of Ponder
Stibbons’s experiment, describing the associated science. For example,
there is a hint of the ‘many worlds’ interpretation of quantum
mechanics, in which billions of universes branch off from ours every
time a decision might go more than one way. And there is the unofficial
standard procedure of public opening ceremonies, in which A Royal
Personage or The President pulls a big lever or pushes a big button to
‘start’ some vast monument to technology – which has been running for
days behind the scenes. When Queen Elizabeth II opened Calder Hall, the
first British nuclear power station, this is just what went on – big
meter and all.

However, it’s a bit early for Quantum, and most of us have forgotten
Calder Hall completely. In any case there’s a more urgent matter to
dispose of. This is the relation between science and magic. Let’s start
with science.

Human interest in the nature of the universe, and our place within it,
goes back a long, long way. Early humanoids living on the African
savannahs, for instance, can hardly have failed to notice that at night
the sky was full of bright spots of light. At what stage in their
evolution they first began to wonder what those lights were is a
mystery, but by the time they had evolved enough intelligence to poke
sticks into edible animals and to use fire, it is unlikely that they
could stare at the night sky without wondering what the devil it was
_for_ (and, given humanity’s traditional obsessions, whether it involved
sex in some way). The Moon was certainly impressive – it was big,
bright, and _changed shape_.

Creatures lower on the evolutionary ladder were certainly aware of the
Moon. Take the turtle, for instance – about as Discwordly a beast as you
can get. When today’s turtles crawl up the beach to lay their eggs and
bury them in the sand, they somehow choose their timing so that when the
eggs hatch, the baby turtles can scramble towards the sea by aiming at
the Moon. We know this because the lights of modern buildings confuse
them. This behaviour is remarkable, and it’s not at all satisfactory to
put it down to ‘instinct’ and pretend that’s an answer. What _is_
instinct? How does it work? How did it arise? A scientist wants
plausible answers to such questions, not just an excuse to stop thinking
about them. Presumably the baby turtles’ moonseeking tendencies, and
their mothers’ uncanny sense of timing, evolved together. Turtles that
just happened, by accident, to lay their eggs at just the right time for
them to hatch when the Moon would be to seawards of their burial site,
_and_ whose babies just happened to head towards the bright lights, got
more of the next generation back to sea than those that didn’t. All that
was needed to establish these tendencies as a universal feature of
turtle-hood was some way to pass them on to the next generation, which
is where genes come in. Those turtles that stumbled on a workable
navigational strategy, and could pass that strategy on to their
offspring by way of their genes, did better than the others. And so they
prospered, and outcompeted the others, so that soon the only turtles
around were the ones that could navigate by the Moon.

Does Great A’Tuin, the turtle that holds up the elephants that hold up
the Disc, swim through the depths of space in search of a distant light?
Perhaps. According to _The Light Fantastic_, ‘Philosophers have debated
for years about where Great A’Tuin might be going, and have often said
how worried they are that they might never find out. They’re due to find
out in about two months. And then they’re _really_ going to worry …’
For, like its earthbound counterpart, Great A’Tuin is in reproductive
mode, in this case going to its own hatching ground to watch the
emergence. That story ends with it swimming off into the cool depths of
space, orbited by eight baby turtles (who appear to have gone off on
their own, and perhaps even now support very small Discworlds) …

The interesting thing about the terrestrial turtlish trickery is that at
no stage is it necessary for the animals to be conscious that their
timing is geared to the Moon’s motion, or even that the Moon exists.
However, the trick won’t work unless the baby turtles _notice_ the Moon,
so we deduce that they did. But we can’t deduce the existence of some
turtle astronomer who wondered about the Moon’s puzzling changes of
shape.

When a particular bunch of social-climbing monkeys arrived on the scene,
however, they began to ask such questions. The better the monkeys got at
_answering_ those questions, the more baffling the universe became;
knowledge increases ignorance. The message they got was: _Up There is
very different from Down Here_.

They didn’t know that Down Here was a pretty good place for creatures
like them to live. There was air to breathe, animals and plants to eat,
water to drink, land to stand on, and caves to get out of the rain and
the lions. They _did_ know that it was changeable, chaotic,
unpredictable …

They didn’t _know_ that Up There – the rest of the universe – isn’t like
that. Most of it is empty space, a vacuum. You can’t breathe vacuum.
Most of what isn’t vacuum is huge balls of overheated plasma. You can’t
stand on a ball of flame. And most of what isn’t vacuum and isn’t
burning is lifeless rock. You can’t eat rock.*1 They were going to learn
this later on. What they _did_ know was that Up There was, in human
timescales, calm, ordered, regular. And predictable, too – you could set
your stone circle by it.

All this gave rise to a general feeling that Up There was different from
Down Here for a _reason_. Down Here was clearly designed for _us_.
Equally clearly, Up There wasn’t. Therefore it must be designed for
_somebody else_. And the new humanity was already speculating about some
suitable tenants, and had been ever since they’d hidden in the caves
from the thunder. The gods! They were Up There, looking Down! And they
were clearly in charge, because humanity certainly wasn’t. As a bonus,
that explained all of the things Down Here that were a lot more
complicated than anything visible Up There, like thunderstorms and
earthquakes and bees. Those were under the control of the gods.

It was a neat package. It made us feel important. It certainly made the
priests important. And since priests were the sort of people who could
have your tongue torn out or banish you into Lion Country for
disagreeing with them, it rapidly became an enormously popular theory,
if only because those who had other ones either couldn’t speak or were
up a tree somewhere.

And yet … every so often some lunatic with no sense of self-preservation
was born who found the whole story unsatisfying, and risked the wrath of
the priesthood to say so. Such folk were already around by the time of
the Babylonians, whose civilization flourished between and around the
Tigris and Euphrates rivers from 4000 BC to 300 BC. The Babylonians – a
term that covers a whole slew of semi-independent peoples living in
separate cities such as Babylon, Ur, Nippur, Uruk, Lagash, and so on –
certainly worshipped the gods like everyone else. One of their stories
about gods is the basis of the Biblical tale of Noah and his ark, for
instance. But they also took a keen interest in what those lights in the
sky _did_. They knew that the Moon was round – a sphere rather than a
flat disc. They probably knew that the Earth was round, too, because it
cast a rounded shadow on the Moon during lunar eclipses. They knew that
the year was about 365¼ days long. They even knew about the ‘precession
of the equinoxes’, a cyclic variation that completes one cycle every
26,000 years. They made these discoveries by keeping careful records of
how the Moon and the planets moved across the sky. Babylonian
astronomical records from 500 BC survive to this day.

From such beginnings, an alternative explanation of the universe came
into being. It didn’t involve gods, at least directly, so it didn’t find
much favour with the priestly class. Some of their descendants are still
trying to stamp it out, even today. The traditional priesthoods (who
then and now often included some very intelligent people) eventually
worked out an accommodation with this godless way of thinking, but it’s
still not popular with postmodernists, creationists, tabloid astrologers
and others who prefer the answers you can make up for yourself at home.

The current name for what has variously been called ‘heresy’ and
‘natural philosophy’ is, of course, ‘science’.

Science has developed a very strange view of the universe. It thinks
that the universe runs on _rules_. Rules that never get broken. Rules
that leave little room for the whims of gods.

This emphasis on rules presents science with a daunting task. It has to
explain how a lot of flaming gas and rocks Up There, obeying simple
rules like ‘big things attract small things, and while small things also
attract big things they don’t do it strongly enough so as you’d notice’,
can have any chance whatsoever of giving rise to Down Here. Down Here,
rigid obedience to rules seems notably absent. One day you go out
hunting and catch a dozen gazelles; next day a lion catches _you_. Down
Here the most evident rule seems to be ‘There are no rules’, apart
perhaps from the one that could be expressed scientifically as ‘Excreta
Occurs’. As the Harvard Law of Animal Behaviour puts it: ‘Experimental
animals, under carefully controlled laboratory conditions, do what they
damned well please.’ Not only animals: every golfer knows that something
as simple as a hard, bouncy sphere with a pattern of tiny dots on it
never does what it’s supposed to do. And as for the weather …

Science has now divided into two big areas: the life sciences, which
tell us about living creatures, and the physical sciences, which tell us
about everything else. Historically, ‘divides’ is definitely the word –
the scientific styles of these two big divisions have about as much in
common as chalk and cheese. Indeed, chalk is a rock and so clearly
belongs to the geological sciences, whereas cheese, formed by bacterial
action on the bodily fluids of cows, belongs to the biological sciences.
Both divisions are definitely science, with the same emphasis on the
role of experiments in testing theories, but their habitual thought
patterns run along different lines.

At least, until now.

As the third millennium approaches, more and more aspects of science are
straddling the disciplines. Chalk, for instance, is more than just a
rock: it is the remains of shells and skeletons of millions of tiny
ocean-living creatures. And making cheese relies on chemistry and sensor
technology as much as it does on the biology of grass and cows.

The original reason for this major bifurcation in science was a strong
perception that life and non-life are extremely different. Non-life is
simple and follows mathematical rules; life is complex and follows no
rules whatsoever. As we said, Down Here looks very different from Up
There.

However, the more we pursue the implications of mathematical rules, the
more flexible a rule-based universe begins to seem. Conversely, the more
we understand biology, the more important its physical aspects become –
because life isn’t a special _kind_ of matter, so it too must obey the
rules of physics. What looked like a vast, unbridgeable gulf between the
life sciences and the physical sciences is shrinking so fast that it’s
turning out to be little more than a thin line scratched in the sand of
the scientific desert.

If we are to step across that line, though, we need to revise the way we
think. It’s all too easy to fall back on old – and inappropriate –
habits. To illustrate the point, and to set up a running theme for this
book, let’s see what the engineering problems of getting to the Moon
tell us about how living creatures work.

The main obstacle to getting a human being on to the Moon is not
distance, but gravity. You could _walk_ to the Moon in about thirty
years – given a path, air, and the usual appurtenances of the
experienced traveller – were it not for the fact that it’s uphill most
of the way. It takes energy to lift a person from the surface of the
planet to the neutral point where the Moon’s pull cancels out the
Earth’s. Physics provides a definite lower limit for the energy you must
expend – it’s the difference between the ‘potential energy’ of a mass
placed at the neutral point and the potential energy of the same mass
placed on the ground. The Law of Conservation of Energy says that you
can’t do the job with less energy, however clever you are.

You can’t beat physics.

This is what makes space exploration so expensive. It takes a lot of
fuel to lift one person into space by rocket, and to make matters worse,
you need more fuel to lift the _rocket …_ and more fuel to lift the
fuel … and … At any rate, it seems that we’re stuck at the bottom of the
Earth’s gravity well, and the ticket out _has_ to cost a fortune.

Are we, though?

At various times, similar calculations have been applied to living
creatures, with bizarre results. It has been ‘proved’ that kangaroos
can’t jump, bees can’t fly, and birds can’t get enough energy from their
food to power their search for the food in the first place. It has even
been ‘proved’ that life is impossible because living systems become more
and more ordered, whereas physics implies that all systems become more
and more disordered. The main message that biologists have derived from
these exercises has been a deep scepticism about the relevance of
physics to biology, and a comfortable feeling of superiority, because
life is clearly much more interesting than physics.

The correct message is very different: be careful what tacit assumptions
you make when you do that kind of calculation. Take that kangaroo, for
instance. You can work out how much energy a kangaroo uses when it makes
a jump, count how many jumps it makes in a day, and deduce a lower limit
on its daily energy requirements. During a jump, the kangaroo leaves the
ground, rises, and drops back down again, so the calculation is just
like that for a space rocket. Do the sums, and you find that the
kangaroo’s daily energy requirement is about ten times as big as
anything it can get from its food. Conclusion: kangaroos can’t jump.
Since they can’t jump, they can’t find food, so they’re all dead.

Strangely, Australia is positively teeming with kangaroos, who
fortunately cannot do physics.

What’s the mistake? The calculation models a kangaroo as if it were a
sack of potatoes. Instead of a thousand kangaroo leaps per day (say), it
works out the energy required to lift a sack of potatoes off the ground
and drop it back down, 1000 times. But if you look at a slow-motion film
of a kangaroo bounding across the Australian outback, it doesn’t look
like a sack of potatoes. A kangaroo _bounces_, lolloping along like a
huge rubber spring. As its legs go up, its head and tail go down,
storing energy in its muscles. Then, as the feet hit the ground, that
energy is released to trigger the next leap. Because most of the energy
is borrowed and paid back, the energy cost per leap is tiny.

Here’s an association test for you. ‘Sack of potatoes’ is to ‘kangaroo’
as ‘rocket’ is to – _what_? One possible answer is a space elevator. In
the October 1945 issue of _Wireless World_ the science-fiction writer
Arthur C. Clarke invented the concept of a geostationary orbit, now the
basis of virtually all communications satellites. At a particular height
– about 22,000 miles (35,000 km) above the ground – a satellite will go
round the Earth exactly in synchrony with the Earth’s rotation. So from
the ground it will look as though the satellite isn’t moving. This is
useful for communications: you can point your satellite dish in a fixed
direction and always get coherent, intelligent signals or, failing that,
MTV.

Nearly thirty years later Clarke popularized a concept with far greater
potential for technological change. Put up a satellite in geostationary
orbit and drop a long cable down to the ground. It has to be an
amazingly strong cable: we don’t yet have the technology but ‘carbon
nanotubes’ now being created in the laboratory come close. If you get
the engineering right, you can build an elevator 22,000 miles high. The
cost would be enormous, but you could then haul stuff into space just by
pulling on the cable from above.

Ah, but you can’t beat physics. The energy required would be exactly the
same as if you used a rocket.

Of course. Just as the energy required to lift a kangaroo is exactly the
same as that required to lift a sack of potatoes.

The trick is to find a way to borrow energy and pay it back. The point
is that once the space elevator is in place, after a while there’s just
as much stuff coming down it as there is going up. Indeed, if you’re
mining the Moon or the asteroids for metals, there will soon be _more_
stuff coming down than goes up. The materials going down provide the
lifting energy for those going up. Unlike a rocket, which gets used up
every time you fire it, a space elevator is self-sustaining.

Life is like a space elevator. What life self-sustains is not energy,
but organization. Once you have a system that is so highly organized
that it can reliably make copies of itself, that degree of organization
is no longer ‘expensive’. The initial investment may have been huge, as
for a space elevator, but once the investment has been made, everything
else is free.

If you want to understand biology, it is the physics of space elevators
that you need, not the physics of rockets.

How can Discworld’s magic illuminate Roundworld’s science? Just as the
gulf between the physical and biological sciences is turning out to be
far narrower than we used to think, so the gulf between science and
magic is also becoming smaller. The more advanced our technologies
become, the less possible it is for the everyday user to have any idea
of how they work. As a result, they look more and more like magic. As
Clarke realized, this tendency is inevitable; Gregory Benford went
further and declared it desirable.

Technology works because whoever built it in the first place figured out
enough of the rules of the universe to make the technology do what was
required of it. You don’t need to get the rules _right_ to do this, just
right _enough –_ space rockets work fine even though their orbits are
computed using Newton’s stab at the rules of gravity, which aren’t as
accurate as Einstein’s. But what you can accomplish is severely
constrained by what the universe will permit. With magic, in contrast,
things work because people want them to. You still have to find the
right spell, but what drives the development is human wishes (and, of
course, the knowledge, skill and experience of the practitioner). This
is one reason why science often seems inhuman, because it looks at how
the universe drives _us_, rather than the other way round.

Magic, however, is only one aspect of Discworld. There’s a lot of
science on Discworld, too – or at least rational engineering. Balls get
thrown and caught, the biology of the river Ankh resembles that of a
typical terrestrial swamp or sewage farm, and light goes in more or less
straight lines. Very slowly, though. As we read in _The Light
Fantastic:_ ‘Another Disc day dawned, but very gradually, and this is
why. When light encounters a strong magical field it loses all sense of
urgency. It slows right down. And on the Discworld the magic was
embarrassingly strong, which meant that the soft yellow light of dawn
flowed over the sleeping landscape like the caress of a gentle lover or,
as some, would have it, like golden syrup.’ The same quote tells us that
as well as rational engineering there’s a lot of magic in Discworld:
overt magic which slows light down; magic that allows the sun to orbit
the world provided that occasionally one of the elephants lifts its leg
to let the sun pass. The sun is small, nearby, and travels faster than
its own light. This appears to cause no major problems.

There is magic in our world, too, but of a different, less obvious kind.
It happens around everybody all the time, in all those little
causalities which we don’t understand but just accept. When we turn the
switch and the light comes on. When we get into the car and start the
engine. When we do all those improbable and ridiculous things that,
thanks to biological causality, make babies. Certainly many people
understand, often to quite a detailed degree, what is going on in
particular areas – but sooner or later we all reach our Magical Event
Horizon. Clarke’s Law states that any sufficiently advanced technology
looks like magic. ‘Advanced’ here is usually taken to mean ‘shown to us
by advanced aliens or people from the future’, like television shown to
Neanderthals. But we should realize that television is magic to nearly
everyone that uses it _now –_ to those behind the camera as well as to
those sitting on the couch in front of the moving picture in the funny
box. At some point in the process, in the words of cartoonist S. Harris,
‘a miracle occurs’.

Science takes on the aura of magic because the design of a civilization
proceeds by a type of narrative imperative – it makes a coherent
_story_. In about 1970, Jack gave a lecture to a school audience on ‘The
Possibility of Life on Other Planets’*2. He talked about evolution, what
planets were made of – all the things that you’d expect in such a
lecture. The first question was from a girl of about 15, who asked ‘You
believe in evolution, don’t you, sir?’ The teacher went on about it not
being a ‘proper’ question, but Jack answered it anyway, saying – rather
pretentiously –‘No, I don’t _believe_ in evolution, like people believe
in God … Science and technology are not advanced by people who believe,
but by people who _don’t know_ but are doing their best to find out …
steam engine … spinning jenny … television …’ At that, she was on her
feet again: ‘No, that ain’t how television was invented!’ The teacher
tried to calm the discussion by asking her to explain how she thought
television was invented. ‘My father works for Fisher Ludlow making
pressed steel for car bodies. He gets paid and he gives some of the
money to the government to give him things. So he tells the government
he wants to watch television, and they pay someone to invent television,
and they do!’

It’s very easy to make this mistake, because technology progresses by
pursuing goals. We get the feeling that if we pour in enough resources,
we can achieve anything. Not so. Pour in enough resources, and we can
achieve _anything_ that is within reach of current know-how, or possibly
just a bit beyond if we’re lucky. But nobody tells us about the
inventions that fail. Nobody tries to raise funding for a project that
they know can’t _possibly_ work. No funding body will pay for research
projects in which we have no idea where to start. We could pour as much
money as we liked into developing antigravity or faster-than-light
travel, and we’d get nowhere.

When you can take a machine to bits and see how it works, you get a
clear feeling for the constraints within which it has to operate. In
such cases, you’re not going to confuse science and magic. The first
cars required an extremely hands-on starting system – you stuck a big
handle into the engine and literally ‘turned it over’. Whatever the
engine did when it started, you knew it wasn’t magic. However, as
technology develops it usually doesn’t _remain_ transparent to the user.
As more people began to use cars, more and more of the obvious
technology was replaced by symbols. You worked switches with labels to
get things to happen. That’s our version of the magic spell: you pull a
knob called Cold Start and the engine does all the cold start things for
itself. When Granny wants to drive she does not have to do much more
than push the accelerator for ‘Go’. Little imps do the rest, by magic.

This process is the core of the relation between science and magic in
our own world. The universe into which we were born, and in which our
species evolved, runs by rules – and science is our way of trying to
work out what the rules are. But the universe that we are now
constructing for ourselves is one that, to anyone other than a member of
the design team and very possibly even to them, works by magic.

A special kind of magic is one of the many things that have made humans
what they are. It’s called education. It’s how we pass on ideas from one
generation to the next. If we were like computers, we’d be able to
_copy_ our minds into our children, so that they would grow up agreeing
with every opinion that we hold dear. Well, actually they wouldn’t,
though they might start out that way. There is an aspect of education
that we want to draw to your attention. We call it ‘lies-to-children’.
We’re aware that some readers may object to the word ‘lie’ – it got Ian
and Jack into terrible trouble with some literally-minded Swedes at a
scientific conference who took it all terribly seriously and spent
several days protesting that ‘It’s not a _lie_!’ It is. It is for the
best possible reasons, but it is still a lie. A lie-to-children is a
statement that is false, but which nevertheless leads the child’s mind
towards a more accurate explanation, one that the child will only be
able to appreciate if it has been primed with the lie.

The early stages of education _have_ to include a lot of
lies-to-children, because early explanations have to be simple. However,
we live in a complex world, and lies-to-children must eventually be
replaced by more complex stories if they are not to become
delayed-action genuine lies. Unfortunately, what most of us know about
science consists of vaguely remembered lies-to-children. For example,
the rainbow. We all remember being told at school that glass and water
split light into its constituent colours – there’s even a nice
experiment where you can _see_ them – and we were told that this is how
rainbows form, from light passing through raindrops. When we were
children, it never occurred to us that while this explains the colours
of the rainbow it doesn’t explain its shape. Neither does it explain how
the light from the many different raindrops in a thundershower somehow
combines to create a bright arc. Why doesn’t it all smudge out? This is
not the place to tell you about the elegant geometry of the rainbow –
but you can see why ‘lie’ is not such a strong word after all. The
school explanation diverts our attention from the real marvel of the
rainbow, the cooperative effects of all the raindrops, by trying to
pretend that once you’ve explained the colours, that’s it.

Other examples of lies-to-children are the idea that the Earth’s
magnetic field is like a huge bar magnet with N and S marked on it, the
picture of an atom as a miniature solar system, the idea that a living
amoeba is a billion-year-old ‘primitive’ organism, the image of DNA as
the blueprint for a living creature, and the connection between
relativity and Einstein’s hairstyle (it’s the sort of crazy idea that
only people with hair like _that_ can come up with). Quantum mechanics
lacks a public ‘icon’ of this kind – it doesn’t tell a simple story that
a non-specialist can grab and hang on to – so we feel uncomfortable
about it.

When you live in a complex world, you have to simplify it in order to
understand it. Indeed, that’s what ‘understand’ means. At different
stages of education, different levels of simplification are appropriate.
Liar-to-children is an honourable and vital profession, otherwise known
as ‘teacher’. But what teaching does _not_ do – although many
politicians think it does, which is one of the problems – is erect a
timeless edifice of ‘facts’.*3 Every so often, you have to unlearn what
you thought you already knew, and replace it by something more subtle.
This _process_ is what science is all about, and it never stops. It
means that you shouldn’t take everything _we_ say as gospel, either, for
we belong to another, equally honourable profession: Liar-to-readers.

On Discworld, one of Ponder Stibbons’s lies-to-wizards is about to come
seriously unstuck.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Actually you _can_ eat salt. But nobody outside Discworld goes to a
restaurant to order a basalt baiti.

*2 Now turned into a book: _Evolving the Alien_ by Jack Cohen and Ian
Stewart.

*3 As humans, we have invented lots of useful kinds of lie. As well as
lies-to-children (‘as much as they can understand’) there are
lies-to-bosses (‘as much as they need to know’) lies-to-patients (‘they
won’t worry about what they don’t know’) and, for all sorts of reasons,
lies-to-_ourselves_. Lies-to-children is simply a prevalent and
necessary kind of lie. Universities are very familiar with bright,
qualified school-leavers who arrive and then go into shock on finding
that biology or physics isn’t quite what they’ve been taught so far.
‘Yes, but you needed to understand _that_,’ they are told, ‘so that
_now_ we can tell you why it isn’t exactly _true_.’ Discworld teachers
know this, and use it to demonstrate why universites are truly
storehouses of knowledge: students arrive from school confident that
they know very nearly everything, and they leave years later certain
that they know practically nothing. Where did the knowledge go in the
meantime? Into the university, of course, where it is carefully dried
and stored.



FIVE



THE ROUNDWORLD PROJECT


[] ARCHCHANCELLOR RIDCULLY AWOKE FROM AN AFTERNOON NAP in which he had
been crawling through a baking desert under a flamethrower sky, and
found that this was more or less true.

Superheated steam whistled from the joints of the radiator in the
corner. Ridcully walked over through the stifling air and touched it
gently.

‘Ouch! Damnation!’

Sucking his right hand and using his left hand to unwrap the scarf from
his neck, he strode out into the corridor and what looked like Hell with
the heat turned up. Steam rolled along the corridors, and from somewhere
overhead came the once-heard-never-forgotten _thwack_ of a high-energy
magical discharge. Violet light filled the windows for a moment.

‘Will someone tell me what the _heck_ is going on?’ Ridcully demanded of
the air in general.

Something like an iceberg loomed out of the steam. It was the Dean.

‘I would like to make it _absolutely_ clear, Archchancellor, that this
is _nothing_ to do with me!’

Ridcully wiped away the sweat that was beginning to trickle down his
forehead.

‘Why are you standin’ there in just your drawers, Dean?’

‘I – well, my room is absolutely _boiling_ hot –’

‘I demand you put _something_ on, man, you look thoroughly unhygienic!’

There was another crack of discharged magic. Sparks flew off the end of
Ridcully’s fingers.

‘I _felt_ that one!’ he said, running back into his room.

Beyond the window, on the other side of the gardens, the air wavered
over the High Energy Magic building. As the Archchancellor watched, the
two huge bronze globes on its roof became covered in crawling,
zig-zagging purple lines –

He hit the floor rolling, as wizards are wont to do, just before the
shock of the discharge blew the windows in.

Melted snow was pouring off the rooftops. Every icicle was a streaming
finger of water.

A large door bumped and scraped its way across the steaming lawns.

‘For goodness’ sake, Dean, handle your end, can’t you?’

The door skidded a little further.

‘It’s no good, Ridcully, it’s solid oak!’

‘And I’m very glad of it!’

Behind Ridcully and the Dean, who were inching the door forward largely
by arguing with each other, the rest of the faculty crept forward.

The bronze globes were humming now, in the rapidly decreasing intervals
between discharges. They had been installed, to general scoffing, as a
crude method of releasing the occasional erratic build-up of
disorganized magic in the building. Now they were outlined in
unhealthy-looking light.

‘And we know what that means, don’t we, Mister Stibbons?’ said Ridcully,
as they reached the entrance to the High Energy Magic building.

‘The fabric of reality being unravelled and leaving us prey to creatures
from the Dungeon Dimensions, sir?’ mumbled Stibbons, who was trailing
behind.

‘That’s _right_, Mister Stibbons! And we don’t want that, do we,
Stibbons?’

‘No, sir.’

‘No, sir! We don’t, sir!’ Ridcully roared. ‘It’ll be tentacles all over
the place again. And none of us wants tentacles all over the place, do
we?’

‘No, sir.’

‘No, sir! So switch the damned thing _off_, sir!’

‘But it’d be certain death to go into –’ Ponder stopped, swallowed and
restarted. ‘In fact it would be _uncertain_ death to go into the squash
court at the moment, Archchancellor. There must be million of thaums of
random magic in there! Anything could happen!’

Inside the HEM the ceiling was vibrating. The whole building seemed to
be dancing.

‘They certainly knew how to build, didn’t they, when they built the old
squash court,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, in an admiring tone of
voice. ‘Of course, it _was built_ to contain large amounts of magic …’

‘Even if we _could_ switch it off, I don’t think that’d be such a good
idea,’ said Ponder.

‘Sounds a lot better than what’s happening now,’ said the Dean.

‘But is falling through the air better than hitting the ground?’ said
Ponder.

Ridcully sucked in his breath between his teeth.

‘That’s a point,’ he said. ‘Could be something of an implosion, I
suppose. You can’t just _stop_ something like this. Something bad would
happen.’

‘The end of the world?’ quavered the Senior Wrangler.

‘Probably just this part of it,’ said Ponder.

‘Are we talking here about a sort of huge valley about twenty miles
across with mountains all round it?’ said Ridcully, staring at the
ceiling. Cracks were zig-zagging across it.

‘Yes, sir, I’m wondering if whoever tried this at Loko actually _did_
manage to switch it off …’

The walls groaned. There was a rattling noise behind Ponder. He
recognized it, even above the din. It was the sound of HEX resetting its
writing device. Ponder always thought of it as a kind of mechanical
throat-clearing.

The pen jerked in its complex network of threads and springs, and then
wrote:

+++ This May Be Time For The Roundworld Project +++

‘What are you talking about, man?’ snapped Ridcully, who’d never quite
understood what HEX was.

‘Oh, _that_? That’s been around for _ages_,’ said the Dean. ‘No one’s
ever taken it seriously. It’s just a thought experiment. You couldn’t do
it. It’s completely absurd. It needs far too much magic’

‘Well, we’ve _got_ far too much magic,’ said Ridcully. ‘Right now we
need to use it up.’

There was a moment’s silence. That is, the wizards were silent.
Overhead, magic flared into the sky with a sound like roaring gas.

‘Can’t let it build up here,’ Ridcully went on. ‘What’s the Roundworld
project then?’

‘It was, er … there was once some suggestion that it might be possible
to create a … an area where the laws of magic don’t apply,’ said Ponder.
‘We could use it to learn more about magic.’

‘Magic’s _everywhere_,’ said Ridcully. ‘It’s part of what everywhere
is.’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Ponder, watching the Archchancellor carefully.

The ceiling creaked.

‘What use would it be, anyway?’ said Ridcully, still thinking aloud.

‘Well, sir, you could ask what use is a new-born child …’

‘No, that’s not the sort of question I ask,’ said Ridcully. ‘And it’s a
highly suspicious one, too.’

The wizards ducked as the latest discharge crackled overhead. It was
followed by a louder explosion.

‘I think the balls have just exploded, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘All right, then, how long would the project take to set up?’ said
Ridcully.

‘Months,’ said the Dean firmly.

‘We’ve got about ten seconds to the next discharge, sir,’ said Ponder.
‘Only … now the balls have gone it will simply earth itself …’

‘Ah. Oh. Really? Well, then …’ Ridcully looked around at his fellow
wizards as the wall began to shake again. ‘It’s been nice knowing you.
Some of you. One or two of you, anyway …’

The whine of increasing magic rose in pitch.

The Dean cleared his throat.

‘I’d just like to say, Mustrum,’ he began.

‘Yes, old friend?’

‘I’d just like to say … I think I’d have made a much better
Archchancellor than you.’

The whine stopped. The silence twanged. The wizards held their breath.

Something went ‘ping’.

A globe about a foot across hung in the air between the faculty. It
looked like glass, or the sheen of a pearl without the pearl itself.

From the squash court next door there was, instead of the wild roar of
disorganized thaums, the steady thrum-thrum of purpose.

‘What the heck is _that_?’ said Ridcully, as the wizards unfolded
themselves.

HEX rattled. Ponder picked up the piece of paper.

‘Well, according to this, it’s the Roundworld Project,’ he said. ‘And
it’s absorbing all the energy from the thaumic pile.’

The Dean brushed some dust off his robe.

‘Nonsense,’ he said. ‘Takes months. Anyway, how could that machine
possibly know the spells?’

‘Mr Turnipseed did copy in a lot of the grimoires last year,’ said
Ponder. ‘It’s vital that HEX knows basic spell structure, you see …’

The Senior Wrangler peered irritably at the sphere.

‘Is this all it is?’ he said. ‘Doesn’t seem much for all that effort.’

There was a frightening moment as the Dean walked up to the sphere and
his nose, enormously magnified, appeared in it.

‘Old Archchancellor Bewdley devised it,’ he said. ‘Everyone said it was
impossible …’

‘Mr Stibbons?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir?’

‘Are we in danger of blowing up at the moment?’

‘I don’t think so, sir. The … project is sucking up everything.’

‘Shouldn’t it be glowing, then? Or something? What’s in there?’

HEX wrote: +++ Nothing +++

‘All that magic’s going into empty space?’

+++ Empty Space Is Not Nothing, Archchancellor. There Is Not Even Empty
Space Inside The Project. There Is No Time For It To Be Empty In +++

‘What’s it got in it, then?’

+++ I Am Checking +++, HEX wrote patiently.

‘Look, I can stick my hand right in it,’ said the Dean.

The wizards watched in horror. The Dean’s fingers were visible, darkly,
within the sphere, outlined in thousands of tiny sparkling lights.

‘That was a really very foolish thing you just did,’ said Ridcully. ‘How
did you know it wasn’t dangerous?’

‘I didn’t,’ said the Dean cheerfully. ‘It feels … cool. And rather
chilly. Prickly, in a funny sort of way.’

HEX rattled. Ponder walked back and looked down at the paper.

‘It almost feels _sticky_ when I move my fingers,’ said the Dean.

‘Er … Dean?’ said Ponder, stepping back carefully. ‘I think it would be
a really good idea if you pulled your hand out very, very carefully and
really very soon.’

‘That’s odd, it’s beginning to tingle –’

‘Right now, Dean! Right now!’

For once, the urgency in Ponder’s voice got through the Dean’s cosmic
self-confidence. He turned to argue with Ponder Stibbons just a moment
before a white spark appeared in the centre of the sphere and began to
expand rapidly.

The sphere flickered.

‘Anyone know what caused that?’ said the Senior Wrangler, his face
bathed in the growing light of the Project.

‘I _think_,’ said Ponder slowly, holding up HEX’S write-out, ‘it was
Time and Space starting to happen.’

In HEX’S careful writing, the words said: +++ In The Absence Of Duration
And Dimension, There Must Be _Potentiality. +++_

And the wizards looked upon the universe that was growing within the
little sphere and spake amongst themselves, saying, ‘It’s rather a small
one, don’t you think? Is it dinner time yet?’

Later on, the wizards wondered if the new universe might have been
different if the Dean had waggled his fingers in a different way.
Perhaps, within it, matter might have naturally formed itself into, say,
garden furniture, or one giant nine-dimensional flower a trillion miles
across. But Archchancellor Ridcully pointed out that this was not very
useful thinking, because of the ancient principle of WYGIWYGAINGW.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* ‘What You Get Is What You’re Given And It’s No Good Whining.’



SIX



BEGINNING AND BECOMINGS


[] POTENTIALITY IS THE KEY.

Our immediate task is to start from a lot of vacuum and a few rules, and
convince you that they have enormous potentiality. Given enough time,
they can lead to people, turtles, weather, the Internet – hold it.
_Where did all that vacuum come from?_ Either the universe has been
around forever, or once there wasn’t a universe and then there was. The
second statement fits neatly with the human predilection for creation
myths. It also appeals to today’s scientists – possibly for the same
reason. Lies-to-children run deep.

Isn’t vacuum just … empty space? What was there before we had space? How
do you make space? Out of vacuum? Isn’t that a vicious circle? If in the
past we didn’t have space, how can there have been a ‘there’ for
whatever it was to exist in? And if there wasn’t anywhere for it to
exist, how did it manage to make space? Maybe space was there all
along … but why? And what about _time_? Space is easy compared to time.
Space is just … somewhere to put matter. Matter is just … stuff. But
time – time flows, time passes, time makes sense in the past and the
future but not in the instantaneous, frozen present. What makes time
flow? Could the flow of time be stopped? _What would happen if it did?_

There are little questions, there are medium-sized questions, and there
are big questions. After which there are even bigger questions, huge
questions, and questions so vast that it is hard to imagine what kind of
response would count as an answer.

You can usually recognize the little questions: they look immensely
complicated. Things like ‘What is the molecular structure of the
left-handed isomer of glucose?’ As the questions get bigger, they become
deceptively simpler: ‘Why is the sky blue?’ The _really_ big questions
are _so_ simple that it seems astonishing that science has absolutely no
idea how to answer them: ‘Why doesn’t the universe run backwards
instead?’ or ‘Why does red look like _that_?’

All this goes to show that it’s a lot easier to ask a question than it
is to answer it, and the more specialized your question is, the longer
are the words that you must invent to state it. Moreover, the bigger a
question is, the more people are interested in it. Hardly anybody cares
about left-handed glucose, but nearly all of us wonder why red looks the
way it does, and we vaguely wonder whether it looks the same to
everybody else.

Out on the fringes of scientific thought are questions that are big
enough to interest almost everybody, but small enough for there to be a
chance of answering them reasonably accurately. They are questions like
‘How did the universe begin?’ and ‘How will it end?’ (‘What happens in
between?’ is quite a different matter.) Let us acknowledge, right up
front, that the current answers to such questions depend upon various
questionable assumptions. Previous generations have been absolutely
convinced that their scientific theories were well-nigh perfect, only
for it to turn out that they had missed the point entirely. Why should
it be any different for our generation? Beware of scientific
fundamentalists who try to tell you everything is pretty much worked
out, and only a few routine details are left to do. It is just when the
majority of scientists believe such things that the next revolution in
our world-view creeps into being, its feeble birth-squeaks all but
drowned by the earsplitting roar of orthodoxy.

Let’s take a look at the current view of how the universe began. One of
the points we are going to make is that human beings have trouble with
the concept of ‘beginning’. And even more trouble, let it be said, with
‘becoming’. Our minds evolved to carry out rather specific tasks like
choosing a mate, killing bears with a sharp stick, and getting dinner
without _becoming_ it. We’ve been surprisingly good at adapting those
modules to tasks for which they were never ‘intended’ – that is, tasks
for which they were not _used_ during their evolution, there being no
conscious ‘intention’ – such as planning a route up the Matterhorn,
carving images of sea-lions on polar bears’ teeth,*1 and calculating the
combustion point of a complex hydrocarbon molecule. Because of the way
our mental modules evolved, we think of beginnings as being analogous to
how a day begins, or how a hike across the desert begins; and we think
of becomings in the same way that a polar bear’s tooth becomes a carved
amulet, or a live spider becomes dead when you squash it.

That is: beginnings start from somewhere (which is where whatever it is
_begins_), and becomings turn Thing One into Thing Two by pushing it
across a clearly defined boundary (the tooth was not carved, but now it
is; the spider was not dead, but now it is). Unfortunately the universe
doesn’t work in such a simple-minded manner, so we have serious trouble
thinking about how a universe can begin, or how an ovum and a sperm can
become a living child.

Let us leave becomings for a moment, and think about beginnings. Thanks
to our evolutionary prejudices, we tend to think of the beginning of the
universe as being some special time, before which the universe did not
exist and after which it did. Moreover, when the universe changed from
not being there to being there, something must have _caused_ that change
– something that was around before the universe began, otherwise it
wouldn’t have been able to cause the universe to come into being. When
you bear in mind that the beginning of the universe is also the
beginning of space and the beginning of time, however, this point of
view is distinctly problematic. How can there be a ‘before’ if time has
not yet started? How can there be a cause for the universe starting up,
without space for that cause to happen in – and time for it to happen?

Maybe there was something else in existence already … but now we have to
decide how _that_ got started, and the same difficulties arise. All
right, let’s go the whole hog: something – perhaps the universe itself,
perhaps some precursor – was around forever. It didn’t _have_ a
beginning, it just was, always.

Satisfied? Things that exist forever don’t have to be explained, because
they don’t need a cause? Then what caused them to have been around
forever?

It now becomes impossible not to mention the turtle joke. Stephen
Hawking tells it at the start of _A Brief History of Time_, but it goes
back a lot further. According to Hindu legend, the Earth rides on the
back of four elephants, which ride on a turtle. But what supports the
turtle? In Discworld, Great A’Tuin needs no support, swimming through
the universe unperturbed by any thought about what holds it up. That’s
magic in action: world-carrying turtles are _like that_. But according
to the old lady who espoused the Hindu cosmology, and was asked the same
question by a learned astronomer, there is a different answer: ‘It’s
turtles all the way down!’ The image of an infinite pile of turtles is
instantly ludicrous, and very few people find it a satisfying
explanation. Indeed very few people find it a satisfying _kind_ of
explanation, if only because it doesn’t explain what supports the
infinite pile of turtles. However, most of us are quite content to
explain the origins of time as ‘it’s always been there’. Seldom do we
examine this statement closely enough to realize that what it really
says is ‘It’s time all the way back.’ Now replace ‘time’ by ‘turtle’ and
‘back’ by ‘down’ … Each instant of time is ‘supported’, that is, a
causal consequence of, the previous instant of time. Fine, but that
doesn’t explain why time exists. What caused that infinite expanse of
time? What holds up the whole pile?

All of which puts us in a serious quandary. We have problems thinking of
time as beginning _without_ a precursor, because it’s hard to see how
the causality goes. But we have equally nasty problems thinking of time
as beginning _with_ a precursor, because then we hit the turtle-pile
problem. We have similar problems with space: either it goes on forever,
in which case it’s ‘space all the way out’ and we need somewhere even
bigger to put the whole thing, or it stops, in which case we wonder
what’s outside it.

The real point is that neither of these options is satisfactory, and the
origins of space and time fit neither model. The universe is not like a
village, which ends at a fence or an imaginary line on the ground,
neither is it like the distant desert which seems to vanish into
eternity but actually just gets too far away for us to see it clearly.
Time is not like a human lifespan, which starts at birth and ends at
death, nor is it like the extended lifespan found in many religions,
where the human soul continues to live indefinitely after death – and
the much rarer belief (held, for example, by Mormons) that some aspect
of each person was somehow already alive in the indefinite past.

So how did the universe begin? ‘Begin’ is the wrong word. Nonetheless,
there is good evidence that the age of the universe is about 15 billion
years,*2 so nothing – not space, not time – existed before some instant
of time roughly 15 billion years ago. See how our narrativium-powered
semantics confuses us. This does _not_ mean that if you went back 15
billion and one years, you would find nothing. It means that you cannot
go back 15 billion and one years. That description makes no sense. It
refers to _a time before time began_, which is logically incoherent, let
alone physically so.

This is not a new point. Saint Augustine made it very clearly in his
_Confessions_ of about 400, when he said: ‘… if there was no time before
heaven and earth were created, how can anyone ask what you [God] were
doing “then”? If there was no time, there was no “then” ’.

Some have gone to greater extremes. In _The End of Time_, Julian Barbour
argues that time does not exist. In his view, the ‘real’ laws of physics
specify a static universe of timeless ‘nows’. He argues that time is not
a physical dimension in the way that space is. The apparent flow of time
is an illusion, created because the collection of nows that corresponds
to a human being makes that human experience its world _as if_ it were
an ordered series of events, happening one after the other. Apparent
gaps of ‘duration’ between successive events are merely blanks where no
‘now’ exists. _Thief of Time_ explores some remarkably similar issues
from the Discworld viewpoint. But for this book, we will take a
conventional attitude towards time, and consider it to be a real part of
physics.

Cosmologists are pretty sure that it all began like this. The universe
came into being as a tiny speck of space and time. The amount of space
inside this tiny speck grew rapidly, and time began to elapse so that
‘rapidly’ actually had a meaning. Everything that there is, today, right
out into the furthest depths of space, stems from that astonishing
‘beginning’. Colloquially, the event is known as the Big Bang. The name
reflects several features of the event – for example, that tiny speck of
space/time was enormously hot, and grew in size exceedingly rapidly. It
was like a huge explosion – but there was no stick of cosmic dynamite,
sitting there in no-space with its non-material fuse burning away as
some kind of pre-time pseudo-clock counted down the seconds to
detonation. What exploded was – nothing. Space, time, and matter are the
_products_ of that explosion: they played no part in its cause. Indeed,
in a very real sense, it _had_ no cause.

The evidence in favour of the Big Bang is twofold. The first item is the
discovery that the universe is expanding. The second is that ‘echoes’
from the Big Bang can still be detected today. The possibility that the
universe might be getting bigger first appeared in mathematical
solutions to equations formulated by Albert Einstein. Einstein viewed
spacetime as being ‘curved’. A body moving through curved spacetime
deviates from its normal straight line path, much as a marble rolling on
a curved surface does. This deviation can be interpreted as a ‘force’ –
something that _pulls_ the body away from that ideal straight line.
Actually there is no pull: just a bend in spacetime, causing a bend in
the body’s path. But it looks as if there’s a pull. Indeed this apparent
pull is what Newton called ‘gravity’, back in the days when people
thought it really did pull bodies together. Anyway, Einstein wrote down
some equations for how such a bendy universe ought to behave. They were
very difficult equations to solve, but after making some extremely
strong assumptions – basically that at any instant of time space is a
sphere – mathematical physicists worked out a few answers. And this
tiny, very special list of solutions, the only ones their feeble methods
could find, told them three things that the universe could do. It could
stay the same size forever; it could collapse down to a single point; or
it could start from a single point and grow in size without limit.

We now know that there are many other solutions to Einstein’s equations,
leading to all sorts of bizarre behaviour, but back in the days when
today’s paradigm was being set, these solutions were the only ones
anybody knew. So they assumed that the universe must behave according to
one or other of those three solutions. Science was subliminally prepared
either for continuous creation (the universe is always the same) or for
the Big Bang. The Big Crunch, in which the universe shrinks to an
infinitely dense, infinitely hot point, lacked psychological appeal.

Enter Edwin Hubble, an American astronomer. Hubble was observing distant
stars, and he made a curious discovery. The further away the stars were,
the faster they were moving. He knew this for distinctly indirect – but
scientifically impeccable – reasons. Stars emit light, and light has
many different colours, including ‘colours’ that the human eye is unable
to see, colours like infra-red, ultra-violet, radio, x-ray … Light is an
electromagnetic wave, and there is one ‘colour’ for each possible
wavelength of light – the distance from one electromagnetic peak to the
next. For red light, this distance is 2.8 hundred thousandths of an inch
(0.7 millionths of a metre).

Hubble noticed that something funny was happening to the light emitted
by stars: the colours were shifting in the red direction. The further
away a star was, the bigger the shift. He interpreted this ‘red shift’
as a sign that the stars are moving away from us, because there is a
similar shift for sound, known as the ‘Doppler effect’, and it’s caused
by the source of the sound moving. So the further away the stars are,
the faster they’re travelling. This means that the stars aren’t just
moving away from _us –_ they’re moving away from each other, like a
flock of birds dispersing in all directions.

The universe, said Hubble, is expanding.

Not expanding _into_ anything, of course. It’s just that the space
inside the universe is _growing_*3 That made the physicists’ ears prick
up, because it fitted exactly one of their three scenarios for changes
in the size of the universe: stay the same, grow, collapse. They ‘knew’
it had to be one of the three, but which? Now they knew that, too. If we
accept that the universe is growing we can work out where it came from
by running time backwards, and this time-reversed universe collapses
back to a single point. Putting time the right way round again, it must
all have grown _from_ a single point – the Big Bang. By estimating the
rate of expansion of the universe we can work out that the Big Bang
happened about 15 billion years ago.

There is further evidence in the Big Bang’s favour: it left ‘echoes’.
The Big Bang produces vast amounts of radiation, which spreads through
the universe. Over billions of years, the remnants of the Big Bang’s
radiation smeared out into the ‘cosmic background’, a kind of low-level
simmering of radiant energy across the sky, the light analogue of a
reverberating echo of sound. It is as if God shouted ‘Hello!’ at the
instant of creation and we can still hear a faint
‘elloelloelloelloello …’ from the distant mountains. On Discworld this
is _exactly_ the case, and the Listening Monks in their remote temples
spend their whole lives straining to pick out from the sounds of the
universe the faint echoes of the Words that set it in motion.

According to the details of the Big Bang, the cosmic background
radiation should have a ‘temperature’ (the analogue of loudness) of
about 3° Kelvin (0° Kelvin is the coldest anything can get – equivalent
to about -273° Celsius). Astronomers can measure the temperature of the
cosmic background radiation, and they do indeed get 3° Kelvin. The Big
Bang isn’t just a wild speculation. Not so long ago, most scientists
didn’t want to believe it, and they only changed their minds because of
Hubble’s evidence for the expansion of the universe, and that
impressively accurate figure of 3° Kelvin for the temperature of the
cosmic background radiation.

It was, indeed, a very loud, and hot, bang.

We are ambivalent, then, about beginnings – their ‘creation myth’ aspect
appeals to our sense of narrative imperative, but we sometimes find the
‘first it wasn’t, then it was’ lie-to-children unpalatable. We have even
more trouble with becomings. Our minds attach labels to things in the
surrounding world, and we interpret those labels as discontinuities. If
things have different labels, then we expect there to be a clear line of
demarcation between them. The universe, however, runs on processes
rather than things, and a process starts as one thing and _becomes_
another without ever crossing a clear boundary. Worse, if there is some
apparent boundary, we are likely to point to it and shout ‘that’s _it_!’
just because we can’t see anything else worth getting agitated about.

How many times have you been in a discussion in which somebody says ‘We
have to decide where to draw the line’? For instance, most people seem
to accept that in general terms women should be permitted abortions
during the earliest stages of pregnancy but not during the very late
stages. ‘Where you draw the line’, though, is hotly debated – and of
course some people wish to draw it at one extreme or the other. There
are similar debates about exactly when a developing embryo becomes a
person, with legal and moral rights. Is it at conception? When the brain
first forms? At birth? Or was it always a _potential_ person, even when
it ‘existed’ as one egg and one sperm?

The ‘draw a line’ philosophy offers a substantial political advantage to
people with hidden agendas. The method for getting what you want is
first to draw the line somewhere that nobody would object to, and then
gradually move it to where you really want it, arguing continuity all
the way. For example, having agreed that killing a child is murder, the
line labelled ‘murder’ is then slid back to the instant of conception;
having agreed that people should be allowed to read whichever newspaper
they like, you end up supporting the right to put the recipe for nerve
gas on the Internet.

If we were less obsessed with labels and discontinuity, it would be much
easier to recognize that the problem here is not where to draw the line:
it is that the image of drawing a line is inappropriate. There is no
sharp line, only shades of grey that merge unnoticed into one another –
despite which, one end is manifestly white and the other is equally
clearly black. An embryo is not a person, but as it develops it
gradually becomes one. There is no magic moment at which it switches
from non-person to person – instead, it merges continuously from one
into the other. Unfortunately our legal system operates in rigid
black-and-white terms – legal or illegal, no shades of grey – and this
causes a mismatch, reinforced by our use of words as labels. A kind of
triage might be better: _this_ end of the spectrum is legal, _that_ end
of the spectrum is illegal, and in between is a grey area which we do
our best to avoid if we possibly can. If we can’t avoid it, we can at
least adjust the degree of criminality and the appropriate penalty
according to whereabouts in the spectrum the activity seems to lie.

Even such obviously black-and-white distinctions as alive/dead or
male/female turn out, on close examination, to be more like a continuous
merging than a sharp discontinuity. Pork sausages from the butcher’s
contain many live pig cells. With today’s techniques you might even
clone an adult pig from one. A person’s brain can have ceased to
function but their body, with medical assistance, can keep going. There
are at least a dozen different combinations of sex chromosomes in
humans, of which only XX represents the traditional female and XY the
traditional male.

Although the Big Bang is a scientific story about a beginning, it also
raises important questions about becomings. The Big Bang theory is a
beautiful bit of science – very nearly consistent with the picture we
now have of the atomic and the subatomic world, with its diverse kinds
of atom, their protons and neutrons, their clouds of electrons, and the
more exotic particles that we see when cosmic rays hit our atmosphere or
when we insult the more familiar particles by slamming them together
very hard.

Physicists have now found, or perhaps invented, the allegedly ‘ultimate’
constituents of these familiar particles (more exotic things known as
quarks, gluons … at least the names are becoming familiar).

The Holy Grail of particle physics has been to find the ‘Higgs boson’,
which – if it exists – explains why the other particles have mass. In
the 1960s Peter Higgs suggested that space is filled with a kind of
quantum treacle called the Higgs field. He suggested that this field
would exert a force on particles through the medium of the Higgs boson,
and that force would be observed as mass. For 30 years, physicists have
constructed ever-larger and more energetic particle accelerators in the
search for this elusive particle, such as the new Large Hadron Collider,
due to start up in 2007.

Late in 2001, scientists analysing data from its predecessor, the Large
Electron Positron Collider (LEP), announced that the Higgs boson
probably doesn’t exist. If it does, then it has to be even more massive
than everyone expected, and the LEP scientists are sceptical. No good
substitute for Higgs’s theory exists, not even the fashionable concept
of ‘supersymmetry’ which pairs every known particle with a more massive
partner. Supersymmetry predicts _several_ Higgs particles, with masses
well inside the range where the LEP data prove that no such thing
exists. Some physicists still hope that the Higgs boson will show up
when the new accelerator comes on line— but if it doesn’t, particle
physics will have to rethink the entire basis of their subject.

Whatever happens to the Higgs boson, they’re already starting to wonder
whether there are more layers of reality further down, particles more
‘ultimate’ still.

Turtles all the way down?

Does physics go all the way down, or does it stop at some level? If it
stops, is that the Ultimate Secret, or just a point beyond which the
physicists’ way of thinking fails?

The conceptual problem here is difficult because the universe is a
becoming – a process – and we want to think of it as a thing. We don’t
only find it puzzling that the universe was so different back then, that
particles behaved differently, that the universe then became the
universe now, and will perhaps eventually cease expanding and collapse
back to a point in a Big Crunch. We are familiar with babies becoming
children becoming adults, but these processes always surprise us – we
like _things_ to keep the same character, so ‘becoming’ is difficult for
our minds to handle.

There is another element of the first moments of our universe that is
even more difficult to think about. Where did the Laws come from? Why
_are_ there such things as protons and electrons, quarks and gluons? We
usually separate processes into two conceptually distinct causal chunks:
the initial conditions, and the rules by which they are transformed as
time passes. For the solar system, for instance, the initial conditions
are the positions and speeds of the planets at some chosen instant of
time; the rules are the laws of gravitation and motion, which tell us
how those positions and speeds will change thereafter. But for the
beginning of the universe, the initial conditions seem not to be there
at all. Even _there_ isn’t there! So it seems that it’s _all_ done by
rules. Where did the rules come from? Did they have to be invented? Or
were they just sitting in some unimaginable timeless pseudo-existence,
waiting to be called up? Or did they uncurl in the early moments of the
universe, as Something appeared – so that the universe invented its own
rules along with space and time?

Two recent books by top-ranking scientists explore how rules could be
‘invented’. The most recent is Stuart Kauffman’s 2000 _Investigations_.
This is mainly aimed at biology and economics, but it begins with rules
of physics. In a new answer to the old question ‘what is life?’,
Kauffman defines a lifeform to be an ‘autonomous agent’—any entity or
system that can redirect energy and reproduce. ‘Autonomous’ here _means_
that such a system makes up its own rules, determines its own behaviour.
Such lifeforms need not be at all conventional. For example, the
quantum-mechanical vacuum is a seething mass of particles and
antiparticles, being created and annihilated in amazingly complicated
ways. A vacuum has more than enough complexity to organise itself into
an autonomous agent. If it did, then quantum mechanics would be able to
make up its own rules.

The other noteworthy book on this topic is Lee Smolin’s 1997 _The Life
of the Cosmos_, which asks: can universes evolve? A remarkable feature
of our universe is the presence of Black Holes. These are regions of
space-time that contain so much mass that light (and matter) cannot get
out; they are formed by the collapse of massive stars. It used to be
thought that Black Holes are rare, but now they seem to be showing up
all over the place, in particular at the cores of most galaxies.
Theoretical work shows that the constants of our universe are unusually
good for making Black Holes.

Why? Smolin argues that each Black Hole in our universe is in effect a
doorway to an adjacent universe, but because nothing can come out of a
Black Hole we cannot know what its on the far side of that door. In
particular, the adjacent universe might have different fundamental
constants compared to ours. So universes could ‘breed’ by budding off
baby universes through Black Holes, and natural selection would favour
those that had the most offspring – whose constants would automatically
be unusually good for making Black Holes. So maybe we live in one of
those babies.

There are some difficulties with this theory. In particular, how would
selection work? How can universes _compete_? But it’s an interesting, if
rather wild, idea. And it offers a concrete proposal about how a
universe can ‘make up’ its laws: some, at least, could be imposed upon
it at birth.

The Big Bang, then, may have done more than just bringing space and time
into being. It may also have brought ‘the’ rules of physics – the ones
that now apply to our world – into being. During the becoming of its
first moments, our universe kept changing its state, changing the rules
it accessed. In this respect it was rather like a flame, which changes
its composition according to its own dynamics and the things that it is
burning. Flames are all more or less the same shape, but they don’t
_inherit_ that shape from a ‘parent’. When you set light to a piece of
paper, the flame builds itself from scratch using the rules of the
outside universe.

In the opening instants of the universe, it wasn’t just substances,
temperatures and sizes that changed. The rules by which they changed
_also_ changed. We don’t like to think this way: we want immutable laws,
the same _always_. So we look for ‘deeper’ laws to govern how the rules
changed. Possibly the universe is ‘really’ governed by these deeper
laws. But perhaps it just makes up its own rules as it goes along.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Not while these are still in the polar bear.

*2 This figure replaces the previously favoured value of about 20
billion years. Recently lots of scientists collectively decided it
should be 15 billion instead. (For a while some stars seemed to be older
than the universe, but the age of those stars has also been downsized.)
In other circumstances they might well have settled for 20 billion. If
this worries you, substitute the term ‘a very long time’.

*3 Indeed, impeccable Discworld thinking is that no matter how big the
universe grows, it’s always the same size.



SEVEN



BEYOND THE FIFTH ELEMENT


[] IN THE QUIET OF THE NIGHT, HEX COMPUTED. Along its myriad glass
tubes, the ants scurried. Crude magic sparkled along cobwebs of fine
bronze wire, changing colour as it changed logic states.* In the special
room next door the beehives, long-term storage, buzzed. The thing that
went ‘parp’ did so occasionally. Huge wheels turned, stopped, turned
back. And still it wasn’t enough.

The light of the Project fell across HEX’S keyboard. Things were
happening in there, and HEX did not understand them. And that was
taxing, because there _was_ something there to understand.

HEX was largely self-designed, which was why it worked better than most
things in the University. It generally tried to develop a responsive way
of coming to grips with any new task; the bees had been a particularly
good idea, because although the memory retrieval was slow, the total
memory increased with time and good apiary practice.

Now it reasoned thus:

One day it would find a way of increasing its conceptual capacity to
understand what was happening in the Project;

If this could ever happen, then – according to Stryme’s Directionless
Law – there was already a shape in happening-space, where time did not
exist, caused by the fact of that happening; all that was required was a
virtual collapse of the wave form;

 … and, although this was in a very strict sense garbage, it was not
_complete_ garbage. Any answer that would exist somewhere in the future
must, _inevitably_, be available in _potentia_ now.

The ants went faster. Magic flashed. HEX could be said to be
concentrating.

Then silvery, shimmering lines appeared in the air around it, outlining
towers of unimaginable cogitation.

Ah. That was acceptable.

Once-and-future computing was now in operation. Of course, it always had
been.

HEX wondered how much he should tell the wizards. He felt it would not
be a good idea to burden them with too much input.

HEX always thought of his reports as Lies-to-People.

It was the second day …

The Project was nudged gently under a glass dome to prevent any more
interference. A variety of spells had been installed around it.

‘So that’s a universe, is it?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Yes, sir. HEX says that …’ Ponder hesitated. You had to think hard
before trying to explain things to Mustrum Ridcully. ‘… HEX seems to
suggest that complete and utter nothing is automatically a universe
waiting to happen.’

‘You mean nothing becomes everything?’

‘Why, yes, sir. Er … in a way, it _has_ to, sir.’

‘And the Dean here swirled it all around and that started it off?’

‘It could have been anything at all, sir. Even a stray thought. Absolute
nothing is very unstable. It’s so desperate to be _something_.’

‘I thought you had to have creators and gods,’ mumbled the Senior
Wrangler.

‘I should jolly well think so,’ said Ridcully, who was examining the
Project with a thaumic omniscope. ‘It’s been here since last night and
there’s nothing to be seen except elements, if you could call them that.
Bloody stupid elements, too. Half of them fall to bits as soon as you
look at them.’

‘Well, what do you expect?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘They’re
made out of nothing, right? Even a really bad creator would at least
have started with Earth, Air, Fire, Water and Surprise.’

‘Proper worlds are out of the question here, too,’ said Ridcully,
peering into the omniscope again. ‘There’s no sign of chelonium and
elephantigen. What kind of worlds can you build without them?’

Ridcully turned to Ponder.

‘Not much of a universe, then,’ he said. ‘It must have gone wrong,
Mister Stibbons. It’s a dud. By now the first human should be looking
for his trousers.’

‘Perhaps we could give him a hand,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘What _are_ you suggesting?’

‘Well, it’s our universe, isn’t it?’

Ponder was shocked. ‘We can’t _own_ a universe, Senior Wrangler!’

‘It’s a very small one.’

‘Only on the outside, sir. HEX says it’s a lot bigger on the inside.’

‘And the Dean stirred it up,’ the Senior Wrangler went on.

‘That’s right!’ said the Dean. ‘That means I’m a sort of god.’

‘Waggling your fingers around and saying “oo, it prickles” is not
godliness,’ said Ridcully severely.

‘Well, I’m the next best thing,’ said the Dean, reluctant to let go of
anything that placed him socially higher than the Archchancellor.

‘My grandmother always said that cleanliness was next to godliness,’
mused the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Ah, that’s more like it,’ said Ridcully cheerfully. ‘You’re more like a
janitor, Dean.’

‘I was really just suggesting that we give the thing a few shoves in the
right direction,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘We are, after all, learned
men. And we know what a proper universe ought to be like, don’t we?’

‘I imagine we have a better idea than the average god with a dog’s head
and nineteen arms, certainly,’ said Ridcully. ‘But this is pretty
second-rate material. It just wants to spin all the time. What do you
expect us to do, bang on the side and shout “Come on, you lot, stop
messing about with stupid gases, they’ll never amount to anything”?’

They compromised, and selected a small area for experimentation. They
were, after all, wizards. That meant that if they saw something, they
prodded it. If it wobbled, they prodded it some more. If you built a
guillotine, and then put a sign on it saying ‘Do Not Put Your Neck On
This Block’, many wizards would never have to buy a hat again.

Moving the matter was simple. As Ponder said, it almost moved under the
pressure of thought.

And spinning it into a disc was easy. The new matter liked to spin. But
it was also far too sociable.

‘You see?’ said Ridcully, around mid-morning. ‘It seems to get the idea,
and then you just end up with a ball of rubbish.’

‘Which gets hot in the middle, have you noticed?’ said Ponder.

‘Embarrassment, probably,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘We’ve lost half the
elements since elevenses. There’s no more cohenium, explodium went ten
minutes ago, and I’m beginning to suspect that the detonium is falling
to bits. Temporarium didn’t last for any time at all.’

‘Any Runium?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

HEX wrote: +++ Runium May Or May Not Still Exist. It Was Down To One
Atom Ten Minutes Ago, Which I Do Not Seem to Be Able To Find Any More
+++

‘How’s Wranglium doing?’ said the Senior Wrangler hopefully.

‘Exploded after breakfast, according to HEX. Sorry,’ said Ridcully. ‘You
can’t build a world out of smoke and mirrors. Damn … there goes
Bursarium, too. I mean, I know iron rusts, but _these_ elements collapse
for a pastime.’

‘My hypothesis, for what it’s worth,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
‘is that since it was all started off by the Dean, a certain Dean-like
tendency may have imparted itself to the ensuing … er … developments.’

‘What? You mean we’ve got a huge windy universe with a tendency to
sulk?’

‘Thank you, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean.

‘I was referring to the predilection of matter to … er … accrete into …
er … spherical shapes.’

‘Like the Dean, you mean,’ said Archchancellor.

‘I can see I’m among friends here,’ said the Dean.

There was a soft chime from the apparatus that had been accumulated
around the Project.

‘That’ll be etherium vanishing,’ said Ridcully gloomily. ‘I knew that’d
be the next to go.’

‘Actually … no,’ said Ponder Stibbons, peering into the Project. ‘Er …
something has caught fire.’

Points of light were appearing.

‘I _knew_ something like that would happen,’ said the Archchancellor.
‘All those discs are heating up, just like damn compost heaps.’

‘Or suns,’ said Ponder.

‘Don’t be silly, Stibbons, they’re far too large for that. I’d hate to
see one of _those_ floating over the clouds,’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘I said there was far too much gas,’ the Archchancellor went on. ‘That
wraps it up, then.’

‘I wonder,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘What?’ said the Dean.

‘Well, at least we’ve got some heat in there … and there nothing like a
good furnace for improving matters.’

‘Good point,’ said Ridcully. ‘Look at bronze – you can make that out of
just about anything. And we could burn off some of the rubbish. All
right, you fellows, help me dump more of the stuff in it …’

Around about teatime, the first of the furnaces exploded, just as
happened every day down at the Alchemists’ Guild.

‘Ye gods,’ said Ridcully, watching the shapes in the omniscope.

‘Yo?’ said the Dean.

‘We’ve made new elements!’

‘Keep it down, keep it down!’ hissed the Senior Wrangler.

‘There’s iron … silicon … we’ve got rocks, even …’

‘We’re going to be in serious trouble if the alchemists’ guild finds
out,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘You know we’re not supposed to
do that stuff.’

‘This is a different universe,’ said Ridcully. He sighed. ‘You _have_ to
blow things up to get anything useful.’

‘I see politicium is still there in large quantities, then,’ said the
Senior Wrangler.

‘I _meant_ that this is a godless reality, gentlemen.’

‘Excuse _me_ –’ the Dean began.

‘I shouldn’t look so smug if I was you, Dean,’ said Ridcully. ‘Look at
the place. Everything wants to spin, and sooner or later you have
balls.’

‘And we’re getting the same sort of stuff that we get here, isn’t that
strange?’ said the Senior Wrangler, as Mrs Whitlow the housekeeper came
in with the tea trolley.

‘I don’t see why,’ said the Dean. ‘Iron’s iron.’

‘Well, it’s a whole new universe, so you’d expect new things, wouldn’t
you? Metals like Noggo, perhaps, or Plinc.’

‘What’s your point, Senior Wrangler?’

‘I mean, take a look at the thing now … all those burning exploding
balls _do_ look a bit like the stars, don’t they? I mean they’re vaguely
_familiar_. Why isn’t it a universe full of tapioca, say, or very large
chairs? I mean, if _nothing_ wants to be _something_, why can’t it be
_anything_?’

The wizards stirred their tea and thought about this.

‘Because,’ said the Archchancellor, after a while.

‘That’s a _good_ answer, sir,’ said Ponder, as diplomatically as he
could. ‘But it does rather close the door on further questions.’

‘Best kind of answer there is, then.’

The Senior Wrangler watched Mrs Whitlow produce a duster and polish the
top of the Project.

‘ “As Above, So Below”,’ said Ridcully, slowly.

‘Pardon?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘We’re forgetting our kindergarten magic, aren’t we? It’s not even
magic, it’s a … a basic rule of _everything_. The project _can’t_ help
being affected by this world. Piles of sand try to look like mountains.
Men try to act like gods. Little things so often appear to look like big
things made smaller. Our new universe, gentlemen, will do its crippled
best to look like ours. We should not be surprised to see things that
look hauntingly familiar. But not as good, obviously.’

The inner eye of HEX gazed at a vast cloud of mind. HEX couldn’t think
of a better word. It didn’t _technically_ exist yet, but HEX could sense
the shape. It had hints of many things – of tradition, of libraries, of
rumour …

There had to _be_ a better word. HEX tried again.

On Discworld, words had real power. They had to be dealt with carefully.

What lay ahead had the _shape_ of intelligence, but only in the same way
that a sun had the shape of something living out its brief life in a
puddle of ditchwater.

Ah … _ex_telligence would do for now.

HEX decided to devote part of its time to investigating this interesting
thing. It wanted to find out how it had developed, what kept it going …
and why, particularly, a small but annoying part of it seemed to believe
that if everyone sent five dollars to the six names at the top of the
list, everyone would become immensely rich.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Of which there were quite a number, given HEX’S unusual construction.
In addition to AND, OR and their combinations and variants, HEX could
call up MAYBE, PERHAPS, SUPPOSE and WHY. HEX could think the unthinkable
quite easily.



EIGHT



WE ARE STARDUST


(OR, AT LEAST WE WENT TO WOODSTOCK)

[] ‘IRON’S IRON.’ BUT IS IT? Or is iron made from other things?

According to Empedocles, an ancient Greek, everything in the universe
was a combination of four ingredients: earth, air, fire, and water. Set
light to a stick and it burns (showing that it contains fire), gives off
smoke (showing that it contains air), exudes bubbly liquids (showing
that it contains water), and leaves a dirty heap of ash behind (showing
that it contains earth). As a theory, it was a bit too simple-minded to
survive for long – a couple of thousand years at best. Things moved more
slowly in those days, and Europe, at least, was more interested in
making sure that the peasants didn’t get above their station and copying
out bits of the Bible by hand in as laborious and colourful a manner as
possible.

The main technological invention to come out of the Middle Ages was a
better horse collar.

Empedocles’s theory was a distinct advance on its predecessors. Thales,
Heraclitus, and Anaximenes all agreed that everything was made from just
_one_ basic ‘principle’, or element – but they disagreed completely
about what it was. Thaïes reckoned it was water, Heraclitus preferred
fire, and Anaximenes was willing to bet the farm on air. Empedocles was
a wishy-washy synthesist who thought _everyone_ had a valid point of
view: if alive today he would definitely wear a bad tie.

The one good idea that emerged from all this was that ‘elementary’
constituents of matter should be characterized by having simple,
reliable properties. Earth was dirty, air was invisible, fire burned,
and water was wet.

Aside from the superior horse collar, the medieval period did act as a
breeding ground for what eventually turned into chemistry. For centuries
the nascent science known as alchemy had flourished; people had
discovered that some strange things happen when you mix substances
together and heat them, or pour acid over them, or dissolve them in
water and wait. You could get funny smells, bangs, bubbles, and liquids
that changed colour. Whatever the universe was made of, you could
clearly convert some of it into something else if you knew the right
trick. Maybe a better word is ‘spell’, for alchemy was akin to magic –
lots of special recipes and rituals, many of which actually _worked_,
but no theory about how it all fitted together. The big goals of alchemy
were spells – recipes – for things like the Elixir of Life, which would
make you live forever, and How to Turn Lead Into Gold, which would give
you lots of money to finance your immortal lifestyle. Towards the end of
the Middle Ages, alchemists had been messing about for so long that they
got quite good at it, and they started to notice things that didn’t fit
the Greeks’ theory of four elements. So they introduced extra ones, like
salt and sulphur, because these substances also had simple, reliable
properties, different from being dirty, invisible, burning, or wet.
Sulphur, for example, was combustible (though not actually _hot_, you
understand) and salt was incombustible.

By 1661 Robert Boyle had sorted out two important distinctions, putting
them into his book _The Sceptical Chymist_. The first distinction was
between a chemical compound and a mixture. A mixture is just different
things, well, mixed up. A compound is all the same stuff, _but_ whatever
that stuff is, it can be persuaded to come apart into components that
are other kinds of stuff – provided you heat it, pour acid on it, or
find some other effective treatment. What you can’t do is sort through
it and find a different bit; for a mixture you can, although you might
need very good eyesight and tiny fingers. The second distinction was
between compounds and elements. An element really _is_ one kind of
stuff: you can’t separate it into different components.

Sulphur is an element. Salt, we now know, is a compound made by
combining (not just mixing) the two elements sodium (a soft, inflammable
metal) and chlorine (a toxic gas). Water is a compound, made from
hydrogen and oxygen (both gases). Air is a mixture, containing various
gases such as oxygen (an element), nitrogen (also an element), and
carbon dioxide (a combination of carbon and oxygen). Earth is a very
complicated mixture and the mix varies from place to place. Fire isn’t a
substance at all, but a process involving hot gases.

It took a while to sort all this out, but by 1789 Antoine Lavoisier had
come up with a list of 33 elements that were a reasonable selection of
the ones we use today. He made a few understandable mistakes, and he
included both light and heat as elements, but his approach was
systematic and careful. Today we know of 113 distinct elements. A few of
these are artificially produced, and several of those have existed on
Earth only for the tiniest fraction of a second, but most elements on
the list can be dug up, extracted from the sea or separated from the air
around us. And apart from a few more artificially produced elements that
it might _just_ be possible to make in future, today’s list is almost
certainly _complete_.

It took another while for us to get that far. The art of alchemy slowly
gave way to the science of chemistry. Gradually the list of accepted
elements grew; occasionally it shrunk when people realized that a
previously supposed element was actually a compound, such as Lavoisier’s
lime, now known to be made from the elements calcium and oxygen. The one
thing that didn’t change was the only thing the Greeks had got right:
each element was a unique individual with its own characteristic
properties. Density; whether it was solid, liquid, or gas at room
temperature and normal atmospheric pressure; melting point if it was
solid – for each element, these quantities had definite, unvarying
values. It is the same on Discworld, with its to our eyes bizarre
elements such as chelonium (for making world-bearing turtles),
elephantigen (ditto elephants), and narrativium – a hugely important
‘element’ not just for Discworld, but for understanding our own world
too. The characteristic feature of narrativium is that it makes
_stories_ hang together. The human mind loves a good dose of
narrativium.

In this universe, we began to understand why elements were unique
individuals, and what distinguished them from compounds. Again the
glimmerings of the right idea go back to the Greeks, with Democritus’
suggestion that all matter is made from tiny indivisible particles,
which he called _atoms_ (Greek for ‘not divisible’). It is unclear
whether anybody, even Democritus, actually believed this in Greek times
– it may just have been a clever debating point. Boyle revived the idea,
suggesting that each element corresponds to a single kind of atom,
whereas compounds are combinations of different kinds of atoms. So the
element oxygen is made from oxygen atoms and nothing else, the element
hydrogen is made from hydrogen atoms and nothing else, but the compound
water is _not_ made from water atoms and nothing else, it is made from
atoms of hydrogen and atoms of oxygen.

By 1807, one of the most significant steps in the development of both
chemistry and physics had taken place. The Englishman John Dalton had
found a way to bring a degree of order to the different atoms that made
up the elements, and to transfer some of that order to compounds too.
His predecessors had noticed that when elements combine together to form
compounds, they do so in simple and characteristic proportions. So much
oxygen plus so much hydrogen makes so much water, and the proportions by
weight of oxygen and hydrogen are always the same. Moreover, those
proportions all fit together nicely if you look at other compounds
involving hydrogen and other compounds involving oxygen.

Dalton realized that all this would make perfect sense if each atom of
hydrogen had a fixed weight, each atom of oxygen had a fixed weight, and
the weight of an oxygen atom was 16 times that of hydrogen. The evidence
for this theory had to be indirect, because an atom is far too tiny for
anyone to be able to weigh one, but it was extensive and compelling. And
so the theory of ‘atomic weight’ arrived on the scene, and it let
chemists list the elements in order of atomic weight.

That list begins like this (modern values for atomic weights in
brackets): Hydrogen (1.00794), Helium (4.00260), Lithium (6.941),
Beryllium (9.01218), Boron (10.82), Carbon (12.011), Nitrogen (14.0067),
Oxygen (15.9994), Fluorine (18.998403), Neon (20.179), Sodium
(22.98977). A striking feature is that the atomic weight is nearly
always close to a whole number, the first exception being chlorine at
35.453. All a bit puzzling, but it was an excellent start because now
people could look for other patterns and relate them to atomic weights.
However, looking for patterns proved easier than finding any. The list
of elements was unstructured, almost random in its properties. Mercury,
the only element known to be liquid at room temperature, was a metal.
(Later just one further liquid was added to the list: bromine.) There
were lots of other metals like iron, copper, silver, gold, zinc, tin,
each a solid and each quite different from the others; sulphur and
carbon were solid but not metallic; quite a few elements were gases. So
unstructured did the list of elements seem that when a few mavericks –
Johann Döbereiner, Alexandre-Emile Béguyrer de Chancourtois, John
Newlands – suggested there might be some kind of order dimly visible
amid the muddle and mess, they were howled down.

Credit for coming up with a scheme that was basically _right_ goes to
Dimitri Mendeleev, who finished the first of a lengthy series of
‘periodic charts’ in 1869. His chart included 63 known elements placed
in order of atomic weight. It left gaps where undiscovered elements
allegedly remained to be inserted. It was ‘periodic’ in the sense that
the properties of the elements started to repeat after a certain number
of steps – the commonest being eight.

According to Mendeleev, the elements fall into families, whose members
are separated by the aforementioned periods, and in each family there
are systematic resemblances of physical and chemical properties. Indeed
those properties vary so systematically as you run through the family
that you can see clear, though not always exact, numerical patterns and
progressions. The scheme works best, however, if you assume that a few
elements are missing from the known list, hence the gaps. As a bonus,
you can make use of those family resemblances to _predict_ the
properties of those missing elements before anybody finds them. If those
predictions turn out to be correct when the missing elements are found –
bingo. Mendeleev’s scheme still gets modified slightly from time to
time, but its main features survive: today we call it the Periodic Table
of the Elements.

We now know that there is a good reason for the periodic structure that
Mendeleev uncovered. It stems from the fact that atoms are not as
indivisible as Democritus and Boyle thought. True, they can’t be divided
_chemically –_ you can’t separate an atom into component pieces by doing
chemistry in a test tube – but you can ‘split the atom’ with apparatus
that is based on physics rather than chemistry. The ‘nuclear reactions’
involved require much higher energy levels – per atom – than you need
for chemical reactions, which is why the old-time alchemists never
managed to turn lead into gold. Today, this could be done – but the cost
of equipment would be enormous, and the amount of gold produced would be
extremely small, so the scientists would be very much like Discworld’s
own alchemists, who have only found ways of turning gold into less gold.

Thanks to the efforts of the physicists, we now know that atoms are made
from other, smaller particles. For a while it was thought that there
were just three such particles: the neutron, the proton, and the
electron. The neutron and proton have almost equal masses, while the
electron is tiny in comparison; the neutron has no electrical charge,
the proton has a positive charge, and the electron has a negative charge
exactly opposite to that of the proton. Atoms have no overall charge, so
the numbers of protons and electrons are equal. There is no such
restriction on the number of neutrons. To a good approximation, you get
an element’s atomic weight by adding up the numbers of protons and
neutrons – for example oxygen has eight of each, and 8 + 8 = 16, the
atomic weight.

Atoms are incredibly small by human standards – about a hundred
millionth of an inch (250 millionths of a centimetre) across for an atom
of lead. Their constituent particles, however, are considerably smaller.
By bouncing atoms off each other, physicists found that they behave as
if the protons and neutrons occupy a tiny region in the middle – the
nucleus – but the electrons are spread outside the nucleus over what,
comparatively speaking, is a far bigger region. For a while, the atom
was pictured as being rather like a tiny solar system, with the nucleus
playing the role of the sun and the electrons orbiting it like planets.
However, this model didn’t work very well – for example, an electron is
a moving charge, and according to classical physics a moving charge
emits radiation, so the model predicted that within a split second every
electron in an atom would radiate away all of its energy and spiral into
the nucleus. With the kind of physics that developed from Isaac Newton’s
epic discoveries, atoms built like solar systems just don’t work.
Nevertheless, this is the public myth, the lie-to-children that
automatically springs to mind. It is endowed with so much narrativium
that we can’t eradicate it.

After a lot of argument, the physicists who worked with matter on very
small scales decided to hang on to the solar system model and throw away
Newtonian physics, replacing it with quantum theory. Ironically, the
solar system model of the atom _still_ didn’t work terribly well, but it
survived for long enough to help get quantum theory off the ground.
According to quantum theory the protons, neutrons, and electrons that
make an atom don’t have precise locations at all – they’re kind of
smeared out. But you can say _how much_ they are smeared out, and the
protons and neutrons are smeared out over a tiny region near the middle
of the atom, whereas the electrons are smeared out all over it.

Whatever the physical model, everyone agreed all along that the chemical
properties of an atom depend mainly on its electrons, because the
electrons are on the outside, so atoms can stick together by sharing
electrons. When they stick together they form molecules, and that’s
chemistry. Since an atom is electrically neutral overall, the number of
electrons must equal the number of protons, and it is this ‘atomic
number’, _not_ the atomic weight, that organizes the periodicities found
by Mendeleev. However, the atomic weight is usually about twice the
atomic number, because the number of neutrons in an atom is pretty close
to the number of protons for quantum reasons, so you get much the same
ordering whichever quantity you use. Nevertheless, it is the atomic
number that makes more sense of the chemistry and explains the
periodicity. It turns out that period eight is indeed important, because
the electrons live in a series of ‘shells’, like Russian dolls, one
inside the other, and until you get some way up the list of elements a
complete shell contains eight electrons.

Further along, the shells get bigger, so the period gets bigger too. At
least, that’s what Joseph (J. J.) Thompson said in 1904. The modern
theory is quantum and more complicated, with far more than three
‘fundamental’ particles, and the calculations are much harder, but they
have much the same implications. Like most science, an initially simple
story became more complicated as it was developed and headed rapidly
towards the Magical Event Horizon for most people.

But even the simplified story explains a lot of otherwise baffling
things. For instance, if the atomic weight is the number of protons plus
neutrons, how come atomic weight isn’t always a whole number? What about
chlorine, for instance, with atomic weight 35.453? It turns out there
are two different kinds of chlorine. One kind has 17 protons and 18
neutrons (and 17 electrons, naturally, the same as protons), with atomic
weight 35. The other kind has 17 protons and 20 neutrons (and 17
electrons, again) – an extra two neutrons, which raises the atomic
weight to 37. Naturally occurring chlorine is a mixture of these two
‘isotopes’, as they are called – in roughly the proportions 3 to 1. The
two isotopes are (almost) indistinguishable chemically, because they
have the same number and arrangement of electrons, and that’s what makes
chemistry work; but they have different atomic physics.

It is easy for a non-physicist to see why the wizards of UU considered
this universe to be made in too much of a hurry out of obviously
inferior components …

Where did all those 113 elements come from? Were they always around, or
did they get put together as the universe developed?

In our Universe, there seem to be five different ways to make elements:

• Start up a universe with a Big Bang, obtaining a highly energetic
(‘hot’) sea of fundamental particles. Wait for it to cool (or possibly
use one you made earlier …). Along with ordinary matter, you’ll probably
get a lot of exotic objects like tiny Black Holes, and magnetic
monopoles but these will disappear pretty quickly and only conventional
matter will remain – mostly. In a very hot universe, electromagnetic
forces are too weak to resist disruption, but once the universe is cool
enough, fundamental particles can stick together as a result of
electromagnetic attraction. The only element that arises directly in
this manner is hydrogen – one electron joined with one proton. However,
you get an awful lot of it: in our universe it is by far the commonest
element, and nearly all of it arose from the Big Bang.

Protons and electrons can also associate to form deuterium (one
electron, one proton, one neutron) or tritium (one electron, one proton,
two neutrons), but tritium is radioactive, meaning that it spits out
neutrons and decays into hydrogen again. A far more stable product is
helium (two electrons, two protons, two neutrons), and helium is the
second most abundant element in the universe.

• Let gravity get in on the act. Now hydrogen and helium collect
together to form stars – the wizards’ ‘furnaces’. At the centre of
stars, the pressure is extremely high. This brings new nuclear reactions
into play, and you get nuclear fusion, in which atoms become so squashed
together that they merge into a new, bigger atom. In this manner, many
other familiar elements were formed, from carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, to
the less familiar lithium, beryllium and so on up to iron. Many of these
elements occur in living creatures, the most important being carbon. For
reasons to do with its unique electron structure, carbon is the only
atom that can combine with itself to form huge, complex molecules,
without which our kind of life would be impossible.*1 Anyway, the point
is that most of the atoms from which you are made must have come into
being inside a star. As Joni Mitchell sang at Woodstock:*2 ‘We are
Stardust.’ Scientists like quoting this line, because it sounds as
though they were young once.

• Wait for some of the stars to explode. There are (comparatively) small
explosions called novas, meaning ‘new (star)’, and more violent ones –
supernovas. (What’s ‘new’ is that usually we can’t _see_ the star until
it explodes, and then we can.) It’s not just that the nuclear fuel gets
used up: the hydrogen and helium that fuel the star fuse into heavier
elements, which in effect become impurities that disturb the nuclear
reaction. Pollution is a problem even at the heart of a star. The
physics of these early suns changes, and some of the larger ones
explode, generating higher elements like iodine, thorium, lead, uranium,
and radium. These stars are called ‘Population II’ by astrophysicists –
they are old stars, low in heavy elements, but not lacking them
entirely.

• There are two kinds of supernova, and the other type creates heavy
elements in abundance, leading to ‘Population I’ stars, which are much
younger than Population II.*3 Because many of these elements have
unstable atoms, various other elements are made by their radioactive
decay. These ‘secondhand’ elements include lead.

• Lastly, human beings have made some elements by special arrangements
in atomic reactors – the best known being plutonium, a by-product of
conventional uranium reactors and a raw material for nuclear weapons.
Some rather exotic ones, with very short lifetimes, have been made in
experimental atombashers: so far we’ve got to element 114, with 113
still missing. Element 116 may also have been made, but a claim of
element 118 from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 1999 has
been withdrawn. Physicists always fight over who got what first and who
therefore has the right to propose a name, so at any given time the
heaviest elements are likely to have been assigned temporary (and
ludicrous) names such as ‘ununnilium’ for element 110 – dog-Latin for
‘1-1-0-ium’.

What’s the point of making extremely short-lived elements like these?
You can’t _use_ them for anything. Well, like mountains, they are
_there;_ moreover, it always helps to test your theories on extreme
cases. But the best reason is that they may be steps towards something
rather more interesting, assuming that it actually exists. Generally
speaking, once you get past polonium at atomic number 84 everything is
radioactive – it spits out particles of its own accord and ‘decays’ into
something else – and the greater an element’s atomic number, the more
rapidly it decays. However, this tendency may not continue indefinitely.
We can’t model heavy atoms exactly – in fact we can’t even model light
atoms exactly, but the heavier they are the worse it gets.

Various empirical models (intelligent approximations based on intuition,
guesswork, and fiddling adjustable constants) have led to a surprisingly
accurate formula for how stable an element should be when it has a given
number of protons and a given number of neutrons. For certain ‘magic
numbers’ – Roundworld terminology that suggests the physicists concerned
have imbibed some of the spirit of Discworld and realized that the
formula is closer to a spell than a theory – the corresponding atoms are
unusually stable. The magic numbers for protons are 28, 50, 82, 114, and
164; those for neutrons are 28, 50, 82, 126, 184, 196, and 318. For
example the most stable element of all is lead, with 82 protons and 126
neutrons.

Only two steps beyond the incredibly unstable element 112 lies element
114, tentatively named eka-lead. With 114 protons and 184 neutrons it is
doubly magic, and in theory it ought to be a lot more stable than most
elements in its vicinity. It is not clear how credible the theory is,
though, because of the approximations in the stability formula, which
may not work for such large numbers. Every wizard is aware that spells
can often go wrong. Assuming that the spell works, though, we can play
Mendeleev and predict the properties of eka-lead by extrapolating from
those in the ‘lead’ series in the periodic table (carbon, silicon,
germanium, tin, lead). As the name suggests, eka-lead turns out to
resemble lead – it’s expected to be a metal with a melting point of 70°C
and a boiling point of 150°C at atmospheric pressure. Its density should
be 25% greater than that of lead.

In 1999 the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia,
announced that it had created one atom of element 114, though this
isotope had only 175 neutrons and so missed one of the magic numbers.
Even so, its lifetime was about 30 seconds – astonishingly long for an
element this heavy, and suggesting that the magic may be working. Soon
after, the same group produced two atoms of element 114 with 173
neutrons. Element 114 was also created in a separate experiment in the
USA. Until we can make ‘eka-lead’ in bulk, not just a few atoms at a
time, its physical properties can’t be verified. But its nuclear
properties seem to be holding up well in comparison to theory.

Even further out lies the doubly magic element 164, with 164 protons and
318 neutrons, and beyond that, the magic numbers may continue … It is
always dangerous to extrapolate, but even if the formula is wrong, there
could well be certain special configurations of protons and neutrons
that are stable enough for the corresponding elements to hang around in
the real universe. Perhaps this is where elephantigen and chelonium come
from. Possibly Noggo and Plinc await our attention, somewhere. Maybe
there are stable elements with vast atomic numbers – some might even be
the size of a star. Consider, for instance, a neutron star, one made
almost entirely of neutrons, which forms when a larger star collapses
under its own gravitational attraction. Neutron stars are incredibly
dense: about forty trillion pounds per square inch (100 billion kg/cc) –
twenty million elephants in a nutshell. They have a surface gravity
_seven billion times_ that of the Earth, and a magnetic field a trillion
times that of the Earth. The particles in a neutron star are so closely
packed that in effect it is one big atom.

Bizarre though they are, some of these superheavy elements may lurk in
unusual corners of our universe. In 1968 it was suggested that elements
105–110 could sometimes be observed in cosmic rays – highly energetic
particles coming from outer space – but these reports went unconfirmed.
It is thought that cosmic rays originate in neutron stars, so maybe in
the astonishing conditions found there superheavy elements are formed.
What would happen if Population I stars changed by accumulating
superheavy stable elements?

Because the stellar population numbers go III, II, I as time passes – a
convention that astrophysicists may yet have cause to regret – we must
name these hypothetical stars ‘Population 0’. At any rate, the future
universe could easily contain stellar objects quite different from
anything we know about today, and as well as novas and supernovas, we
might witness even more energetic explosions – hypernovas. There might
even be further stages – Population _minus_ I and the like. As we’ve
said, our universe often seems to make up its rules as it goes along,
unlike the rational, stable universe of Discworld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Silicon might also be able to do this, but nowhere near as readily;
if you want other exotic lifeforms you have to start thinking in terms
of organized vortices in the upper reaches of a sun, weird quantum
assemblages in interstellar plasma, or completely implausible creatures
based on non-material concepts such as information, thought, or
narrativium. DNA is a different matter entirely: you could surely base
lifeforms on other carbon-rich molecules. We can do it now, in
laboratories, with minor variants of DNA. See _Evolving the Alien_ by
Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart.

*2 Ask Mummy or Daddy if you have no idea what we’re talking about.

*3 There also _ought_ to be ‘Population III’ stars, older than
Population II and consisting entirely of hydrogen and helium. These
would explain the occurence of _some_ heavy elements in Population II.
However, nobody has ever confirmed finding a Population III star, though
a whole group of them may have been sighted in 2001, in two tiny red
patches in the galaxy cluster Abell 2218. These patches are highly
magnified images of the same region of space: the two images, and the
magnification, result from gravitational lensing, without which the
stars would not have been visible at all. A recent, competing theory
removes the need for Population III stars altogether. Instead, very soon
after the Big Bang there were heavy elements around, even before any
stars formed. So when the first stars condensed, they already were
Population II. This contradicts what we say in the main text –
lies-to-children, of course.



NINE



EAT HOT NAPHTHA, EVIL DOG!


[] THE ROCKS FELL GENTLY TOGETHER AGAIN, and to the annoyance of the
Archchancellor they moved in curved lines while doing so.

‘Well, I think we’ve proved that a giant turtle made of stone isn’t
going to work,’ said the Senior Wrangler, sighing.

‘For the tenth time,’ sighed the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘I _told_ you we’d need chelonium,’ said Archchancellor Ridcully.

Early attempts spun gently a little way away. Small balls, big
balls … Some of them even had a mantle of gases, pouring out of the
clumsy aggregations of ice and rock. It was as if the new universe had
some basic idea of what it ought to be, but it couldn’t quite manage to
get a grip.

After all, the Archchancellor pointed out, once people had something to
stand on they’d need something to breathe, wouldn’t they? Atmospheres
seemed to turn up on cue. But they were dreadful things, full of stuff
not even a troll would suck.

In the absence of gods, he declared – and a series of simple tests had
found no trace of deitygen – it was up to men to get it right.

The High Energy Magic building was getting crowded now. Even the student
wizards were taking an interest, and usually they weren’t even seen
during daylight. The Project promised to offer even greater attractions
than staying up all night playing with HEX and eating herring and banana
pizza.

More desks had been moved in. The Project was in an expanding circle of
instruments and devices, because it appeared that every wizard apart
from, possibly, the Professor of Eldritch Lacemaking, had decided he was
working on something that would benefit immensely from access to the
Project. There was certainly room. While the Project was indeed about a
foot wide, the space inside seemed to be getting bigger by the second. A
universe offers lots of space, after all.

And while ignorant laymen objected to magical experiments that were by
no means dangerous, there being less than one chance in five of making a
serious breach in the fabric of reality, there was no one in there to
object to _anything_.

There were, of course, accidents …

‘Will you two stop shouting!’ yelled the Senior Wrangler. Two student
wizards were arguing vehemently, or at least repeatedly stating their
point of view in a loud voice, which suffices for argument most of the
time.

‘I’d spent ages putting together a small icy ball and _he_ sent that
wretched great rock smack into it, sir.’

‘I wasn’t trying to!’ said the other student. The Senior Wrangler stared
at him, trying to remember his name. As a general rule, he avoided
getting to know the students, since he felt they were a tedious
interruption to the proper running of college life.

‘What _were_ you trying to do, then … boy?’ he said.

‘Er … I was trying to hit the big ball of gas, sir. But it just sort of
swung around it, sir.’

The Senior Wrangler looked around. The Dean was not present. Then he
looked into the Project.

‘Oh, I see. That one. Quite pretty. All those stripes. Who built that?’

A student raised his hand.

‘Ah, yes … you,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Good stripes. Well done.
What’s it made of?’

‘I just dragged a lot of ice together, sir. But it got hot.’

‘Really? Ice gets hot in a ball?’

‘In a _big_ ball, sir.’

‘Have you told Mister Stibbons? He likes to know that sort of thing.’

‘Yes, sir.’

The Senior Wrangler turned to the other student.

‘And why were _you_ throwing rocks at his big ball of gas?’

‘Er … because you score ten for hitting it, sir.’

The Senior Wrangler looked owlishly at the students. It all became
clear. He’d wandered into the HEM one night when he couldn’t sleep and a
mob of students had been hunched over the keyboards of HEX and shouting
things like ‘I’ve got the battering ram! Hah, eat hot naphtha, evil
dog!’ Doing that sort of thing in a whole new universe seemed … well,
impolite.

On the other hand, the Senior Wrangler shared with some of his
colleagues an unformed thought that pushing back the boundaries of
knowledge was not quite … well, polite. Boundaries were there for a
reason.

‘Are you meaning to tell me,’ he said, ‘that faced with the
multitudinous possibilies of the infinity that is the Project you are
using it to play some sort of _game_?’

‘Er … yes, sir.’

‘Oh.’ The Senior Wrangler looked closely at the big ball of gas. A
number of small rocks were already spinning slowly around it. ‘Well,
then … can I have a go?’



TEN



THE SHAPE OF THINGS


[] WHEN WIZARDS FIND A NEW THING, THEY PLAY WITH IT.

So do scientists. They play with ideas so wild that often they seem to
defy common sense – and then they insist that those ideas are _right_,
and common sense isn’t. They often make out a surprisingly good case.
Einstein once said something nasty about common sense being akin to
nonsense, but he went too far. Science and common sense _are_ related,
but indirectly. Science is something like a third cousin of common sense
twice removed. Common sense tells us what the universe _seems_ like to
creatures of our particular size, habits, and disposition. For instance,
common sense tells us that the Earth is flat. It _looks_ flat – leaving
out the hills, valleys, and other bumps and dents … If it wasn’t flat,
things ought to roll around or fall off. Despite this, the Earth _isn’t_
flat. On Discworld, in contrast, the relation between common sense and
reality is usually very direct indeed. Common sense tells the wizards of
Unseen University that Discworld is flat – and it is. To prove it, they
can go to the Edge, as Rincewind and Twoflower do in _The Colour of
Magic_, and watch stuff disappearing over it in Rimfall: ‘The roaring
was louder now. A squid bigger than anything Ricewind had seen before
broke the surface a few hundred yards away and thrashed madly with its
tentacles before sinking away … They were running out of world.’ Then
they can be trapped in the Circumfence, a ten thousand mile long net set
just below the Edge, one tiny bit of which is patrolled by Tethis the
sea troll. And they can peer over the edge: ‘… the scene beneath him
flipped into a whole, new, terrifying perspective. Because down there
was the head of an elephant as big as a reasonably-sized
continent … Below the elephant there was nothing but the distant,
painful disc of the sun. And, sweeping slowly past it, was something
that for all its city-sized scales, its crater-pocks, its lunar
cragginess, was indubitably a flipper.’

It is widely imagined that ancient people thought the Earth was flat,
for all those obvious commonsense reasons. Actually, most ancient
civilizations that left records seem to have worked out that the Earth
has to be round. Ships came back from invisible lands over the horizon
and, in the sky, a round sun and a round moon were a definite clue …*1

That’s where science and common sense overlap. Science is common sense
_applied to evidence_. Using common sense in that manner, you often come
to conclusions that are very different from the obvious common sense
_assumptions_ that because the universe _appears_ to behave in some
manner, then it really does. Of course it also helps to realize that if
you live on a very _big_ sphere, it’s going to look pretty flat for
quite a long way off. And if gravity always points towards the middle of
the sphere, then things don’t actually roll around or fall off. But
those are refinements.

Around 250 BC a Greek called Eratosthenes tested the theory that the
Earth is a sphere, and he even worked out just how big that sphere is.
He knew that in the city of Syene – present-day Aswan in Egypt – the
midday sun could be seen reflected in the bottom of a well. (This would
not work in Ankh-Morpork, where the well-water is often more solid than
the well that surrounds it.) Eratosthenes threw in a few other simple
facts and got back a lot more than he’d bargained for.

It’s a matter of geometry. The well was dug straight down. So the Sun at
Syene had to be straight _up –_ dead overhead. But in Eratosthenes’ home
city of Alexandria, in the Nile delta, that didn’t happen. At midday,
when the sun was at its highest, Eratosthenes cast a definite shadow. In
fact, he estimated that at noon the angle between the Sun and the
vertical was just over 7° – near enough ¹/₅₀ of 360°. Then came the leap
of deduction. The Sun is in the same place wherever you observe it from.
On other grounds, it was known that the Sun had to be a long way away
from the Earth, and that meant that the Sun’s rays that hit the ground
in Alexandria were very nearly parallel to those that went down the well
in Syene. Eratosthenes reasoned that a round Earth would explain the
difference. He deduced that the distance from Syene to Alexandria must
be ¹/₅₀ of the circumference of the Earth. But how far was that?

On such occasions it pays to be familiar with the camel-herders. Not
just because the greatest mathematician in the world is the camel called
You Bastard, as it is on Discworld (see _Pyramids_), but because the
camel trains from Alexandria to Syene took 50 days to make the trip, at
an average speed of 100 stadia per day. So the distance from Alexandria
to Syene was 5,000 stadia, and the circumference of the Earth was
250,000 stadia. The stadium was a Greek measure of distance, and nobody
knows how long it was. Scholars _think_ it was 515 feet (157 m), and if
they’re right, Eratosthenes’ value was 24,662 miles (39,690 km). The
true value is about 24,881 miles (40,042 km), so Eratosthenes got
amazingly close. Unless – sorry, but we’re incorrigibly suspicious – the
scholars worked backwards from the answer.

It is here that we encounter another feature of scientific reasoning. In
order to make comparisons between theory and experiment, you have to
_interpret_ the experiment in terms of your theory. To clarify this
point, we recount the story of Ratonasticthenes, an early relative of
Cut-me-own-throat Dibbler, who proved that the Discworld was round (and
even estimated its circumference). Ratonasticthenes noticed that at
midday in the Ramtops the Sun was overhead, whereas in Lancre, some 1000
miles away, it was at 84° to the vertical. Since 84° is roughly a
quarter of 360°, Ratonasticthenes reasoned that the Discworld is round,
and the distance from the Ramtops to Ankh-Morpork is one-quarter of the
circumference. That puts the circumference of this spherical Discworld
at 4,000 miles (6,400 km). Unfortunately for this theory, it was known
on other grounds that Discworld is some 10,000 miles (16,000 km) from
rim to rim. Still, you can’t let an awkward fact get in the way of a
good theory, and Ratonasticthenes went to his grave believing that it
was a small world after all.

His error was to interpret perfectly good observational data in terms of
a flawed theory. Scientists repeatedly return to established theories to
test them in new ways, and tend towards testiness with those priests,
religious or secular, who know the answers already – whatever the
questions are. Science is not about building a body of known ‘facts’. It
is a method for asking awkward questions and subjecting them to a
reality-check, thus avoiding the human tendency to believe whatever
makes us feel good.

[]

From the earliest times, humans have been interested not just in the
shape of the world, but in the shape of the universe. To begin with,
they probably thought that these were the same question. Then they
worked out, using roughly the same sort of geometry as Eratosthenes,
that those lights in the sky were a _very_ long way away. They came up
with an amazing range of myths about the sun-god’s fiery chariot and so
on, but after the Babylonians got the idea of making accurate
measurements, their theories started to lead to surprisingly good
predictions of things like eclipses and the motion of the planets. By
the time of Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus, AD 100–160) the best model of
planetary motion involved a series of ‘epicycles’ – the planets moved as
if they were rotating round circles whose centres rotated round other
circles whose centres rotated round …

Isaac Newton replaced this theory, and its more accurate successors,
with a _rule_, the law of gravity; it describes how each body in the
universe attracts every other body. It explained Johannes Kepler’s
discovery that planetary orbits are ellipses, and in the fullness of
time it explained a lot of other things too.

After a few centuries of stunning success, Newton’s theory ran into its
first big failure: it made incorrect predictions about the orbit of
Mercury. The place in its orbit at which Mercury came closest to the sun
didn’t move _quite_ the way Newton’s law predicted. Einstein came to the
rescue with a theory based not on attractive forces, but on geometry –
on the shape of spacetime. This was the celebrated Theory of Relativity.
The theory came in two flavours: Special Relativity and General
Relativity. Special Relativity is about the structure of space, time,
and electromagnetism; General Relativity describes what happens when you
throw in gravity too.

The main point to appreciate is that ‘Relativity’ is a silly name. The
whole point of Special Relativity is _not_ that ‘everything is
relative’, but that one particular thing – the speed of light – is
unexpectedly _absolute_. The thought experiment is well known. If you’re
travelling in a car at 50 mph (80 kph) and you fire a gun forwards, so
that the bullet moves at 500 mph (800 kph) relative to the car, then it
will hit a stationary target at a speed of 550 mph (880 kph), adding the
two components. However, if instead of firing the gun you switch on a
torch, which ‘fires’ light at a speed of 670,000,000 mph (186,000 mps or
300,000 kps), then that light will not hit the stationary target at a
speed of 670,000,050 mph. It will hit it at 670,000,000 mph, _exactly
the same speed as if the car had been stationary_.

There are practical problems in staging that experiment, but less
graphic and dangerous ones have indicated what the result would be.

Einstein published Special Relativity in 1905, along with the first
serious evidence for quantum mechanics and a ground-breaking paper on
diffusion. A lot of other people – among them the Dutch physicist
Hendrik Lorentz and the French mathematician Henri Poincaré – were
working on the same idea, because electromagnetism didn’t entirely agree
with Newtonian mechanics. The conclusion was that the universe is a lot
weirder than common sense tells us, although they probably didn’t use
that actual word. Objects _shrink_ as they approach the speed of light,
time slows down to a crawl, mass becomes infinite … and nothing can go
faster than light. Another key idea was that space and time are to some
extent interchangeable. The traditional three dimensions of space plus a
separate one for time are merged into a single unified _spacetime_ with
four dimensions. A point in space becomes an event in spacetime.

In ordinary space, there is a concept of distance. In Special
Relativity, there is an analogous quantity, called the interval between
events, which is related to the apparent rate of flow of time. The
faster an object moves, the slower time flows for an observer sitting on
that object. This effect is called time dilation.

If you could travel _at_ the speed of light, time would be frozen.

One startling feature of relativity is the twin paradox, pointed out by
Paul Langevin in 1911. Again, it is a classic illustration. Suppose that
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are born on Earth on the same day.
Rosencrantz stays there all his life, while Guildenstern travels away at
nearly lightspeed, and then turns round and comes home again. Because of
time dilation, only one year (say) has passed for Guildenstern, whereas
40 years have gone by for Rosencrantz. So Guildenstern is now 39 years
younger than his twin brother. Experiments carrying atomic clocks around
the Earth on jumbo jets have verified this scenario, but aircraft are so
slow compared to light that the time difference observed (and predicted)
is only the tiniest fraction of a second.

So far so good, but there’s no place yet for gravity. Einstein racked
his brains for years until he found a way to put gravity in: let
spacetime be curved. The resulting theory is called General Relativity,
and it is a synthesis of Newtonian gravitation and Special Relativity.
In Newton’s view, gravity is a force that moves particles away from the
perfect straight line paths that they would otherwise follow. In General
Relativity, gravity is not a force: it is a distortion of the structure
of spacetime. The usual image is to say that space-time becomes
‘curved’, though this term is easily misinterpreted. In particular, it
doesn’t have to be curved _round_ anything else. The curvature is
interpreted physically as the force of gravity, and it causes light rays
to bend. One result is ‘gravitational lensing’, the bending of light by
massive objects, which Einstein discovered in 1911 and published in
1915. The effect was first observed during an eclipse of the Sun. More
recently it has been discovered that some distant quasars produce
multiple images in telescopes because their light is lensed by an
intervening galaxy.

Einstein’s theory of gravity ousted Newton’s because it fitted
observarions better – but Newton’s remains accurate enough for many
purposes, and is simpler, so it is by no means obsolete. Now it’s
beginning to look as if Einstein may in turn be ousted, possibly by a
theory that he rejected as his greatest mistake.

In 1998 two different observations called Einstein’s theory into
question. One involved the structure of the universe on truly massive
scales, the other happened in our own backyard. The first has survived
everything so far thrown at it; the second can possibly be traced to
something more prosaic. So let’s start with the second curious
discovery.

In 1972 and 1973 two space probes, Pioneer 10 and 11, were launched to
study Jupiter and Saturn. By the end of the 1980s they were in deep
space, heading out of the known solar system. There has long been a
belief, a scientific legend waiting to happen, that beyond Pluto there
may be an as yet undiscovered planet, Planet X. Such a planet would
disturb the motions of the two Pioneers, so it was worth tracking the
probes in the hope of finding unexpected deviations. John Anderson’s
team found deviations, all right, but they didn’t fit Planet X – and
they didn’t fit General Relativity either. The Pioneers are coasting,
with no active form of propulsion, so the gravity of the Sun (and the
much weaker gravity of the other bodies of the known solar system) pulls
on them and gradually slows them down. But the probes were slowing down
a tiny bit more than they should have been. In 1994 Michael Martin
suggested that this effect had become sufficiently well established that
it cast doubt on Einstein’s theory, and in 1998 Anderson’s team reported
that what was observed could not be explained by such effects as
instrument error, gas clouds, the push of sunlight, or the gravitational
pull of outlying comets.

Three other scientists quickly responded by suggesting other things that
might explain the anomalies. Two wondered about waste heat. The Pioneers
are powered by onboard nuclear generators, and they radiate a small
amount of surplus heat into space. The pressure of that radiation might
slow the craft down by the observed amount. The other possible
explanation is that the Pioneers may be venting tiny quantities of fuel
into space. Anderson thought about these explanations and found problems
with them both.

The strangest feature of the observed slowing down is that it is
precisely what would be predicted by an unorthodox theory suggested in
1983 by Mordehai Milgrom. This theory changes not the law of gravity,
but Newton’s law of motion: force equals mass times acceleration.
Milgrom’s modification applies when the acceleration is very small, and
it was introduced in order to explain another gravitational puzzle, the
fact that galaxies do not rotate at the speeds predicted by either
Newton or Einstein. This discrepancy is usually put down to the
existence of ‘cold dark matter’ which exerts a gravitational pull but
can’t be seen in telescopes. If galaxies have a halo of cold dark matter
then they will rotate at a speed that is inconsistent with the matter in
the visible portions. A lot of theorists dislike cold dark matter
(because you can’t observe it directly – that’s what ‘cold dark’ means)
and Milgrom’s theory has slowly gained in popularity. Further studies of
the Pioneers may help decide.

The other discovery is about the expansion of the universe. The universe
is getting bigger, but it now seems that the very distant universe is
expanding faster than it ought to. This startling result – confirmed by
later, more detailed studies – comes from the Supernova Cosmology
project headed by Saul Perlmutter and its arch-rival High-Z Supernova
Search Team headed by Brian Schmidt. It shows up as a slight bend in a
graph of how a distant supernova’s apparent brightness varies with its
red shift. According to General Relativity, that graph ought to be
straight, but it’s not. It behaves as if there is some repulsive
component to gravity which only shows up at extremely long distances –
say half the radius of the universe. A form of antigravity, in fact.

Recent work seems to have confirmed this remarkable discovery. But – as
always – ingenious scientists have come up with alternative
explanations. In 2001 Csaba Csáki, John Terning, and Nemanja Kaloper put
forward a totally different theory to explain the observations. They
suggest that the light from distant supernovas is dimmer than expected
because some of the particles of light – photons – are changing into
something else. Specifically, they are changing into ‘axions’,
hypothetical particles predicted by several of the currently fashionable
quantum-mechanical theories of particle physics. Axions are not expected
to interact much with other matter, which makes it hard to detect them;
but if they have a very small but non-zero mass, about one sextillionth
of that of an electron, then they will interact with intergalactic
magnetic fields. This interaction would convert a small fraction of
photons into axions, and that would account for the missing light. In
fact, the most distant supernovas could lose one third of their photons
this way.

It is a sobering thought that such a tiny a modification of known
physics, by introducing a particle whose mass ought to be negligible,
could have such a big effect. At any rate, either gravity is not as we
thought, or axions exist (as expected) and have mass (not as expected).
Or there’s a third reason for the observations, which no one has yet
thought of.

One theory of the repulsive force is an exotic form of matter,
‘quintessence’.*2 This is a form of vacuum energy that pervades all of
space, and exerts negative pressure. (As we write this, we can picture
Ridcully’s expression. We shall have to ignore it. This isn’t something
sensible, like magic. This is science. Empty space can be full of
interest.) Curiously, Einstein originally included a repulsive force of
this kind in his relativistic equations for gravity: he called it the
cosmological constant. Later he changed his mind and threw the
cosmological constant out, complaining that he’d been foolish to include
it in the first place. He died thinking it was a blemish on his record,
but maybe his original intuition was spot on after all.

Unless axions exist and have mass, of course.

In Einstein’s approach to the cosmological constant, quintessence is
effectively spread uniformly throughout space. But suppose it isn’t?
Ordinary matter is clumpy, not uniform. David Santiago has pointed out
that if quintessence is clumpy too, then Einstein’s Equations predict
that the universe could contain ‘anti-Black Holes’ that repel matter
instead of swallowing it. These are not quite the same as hypothetical
White Holes, time-reversed Black Holes, which spit matter out. However,
it’s not yet clear that anti-Black Holes can be stable. Ordinary matter
is clumpy because gravity is an attractive force – it _likes_ to create
clumps. Antigravity is a repulsive force, and by analogy it ought to
destroy clumps. If that argument is right, then anti-Black Holes are
unstable, and would not be able to form in the first place. They would
be mathematical solutions of Einstein’s Equations, but not ones that
could be physically realised. Until somebody does the necessary
calculations, we can’t be sure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 ‘Most civilizations’ is admittedly not the same as ‘most people’.
‘Most people’ through the history of the planet have not needed to
concern themselves with what shape the world is, provided it supports,
somewhere, the next meal.

*2 This word, meaning ‘fifth essence’, originally referred to a fifth
‘element’ after earth, air, fire and water. On Discworld this role is
played by surprise.



ELEVEN



NEVER TRUST A CURVED UNIVERSE


[] PONDER STIBBONS HAD SET UP A DESK a little separate from the others
and surrounded it with a lot of equipment, primarily in order to hear
himself think.

Everyone _knew_ that stars were points of light. If they weren’t, some
would be visibly bigger than others. Some were _fainter_ than others, of
course, but that was probably due to clouds. In any case their purpose,
according to established Discworld law, was to lend a little style to
the night.

And everyone knew that the natural way for things to move was in a
straight line. If you dropped something, it hit the ground. It didn’t
_curve_. The water fell over the edge of the world, drifting sideways
just a tiny bit to make up for the spin, but that was common sense. But
inside the Project, spin was everything. Everything was bent.
Archchancellor Ridcully seemed to think this was some sort of
large-scale character flaw, akin to shuffling your feet or not owning up
to things. You couldn’t trust a universe of curves. It wasn’t playing a
straight bat.

At the moment Ponder was rolling damp paper into little balls. He’d had
the gardener push in a large stone ball that had spent the last few
hundred years on the university’s rockery, relic of some ancient siege
catapult. It was about three feet across.

He’d hung some paper balls of string near it. Now, glumly, he threw
others over it and around it. One or two did stick, admittedly, but only
because they were damp.

He was in the grip of some thought.

You had to start with what you were certain of.

Things fell down. Little things fell down on to big things. That was
common sense.

But what would happen if you had two big things all alone in the
universe?

He set up two balls of ice and rock, in an unused corner of the Project,
and watched them bang into each other. Then he tried with ball of
different sizes. Small ones drifted towards big ones but, oddly enough,
the big ones also drifted slightly towards the small ones.

So … if you thought that one through … that meant that if you dropped a
tennis ball to the ground it would certainly go _down_, but in some
tiny, immeasurable way the world would, very slightly, come _up_.

And that was _insane_.

He also spent some time watching clouds of gas swirl and heat in the
more distant regions of the Project. It was all so … well, godless.

Ponder Stibbons was an atheist. Most wizards were. This was because UU
had some quite powerful standing spells against occult interference, and
knowing that you’re immune from lightning bolts does wonders for an
independent mind. Because the gods, of course, _existed_. Ponder
wouldn’t even attempt to deny it. He just didn’t _believe_ in them. The
god currently gaining popularity was Om, who never answered prayers or
manifested himself. It was easy to respect an invisible god. It was the
ones that turned up everywhere, often drunk, that put people off.

That’s why, hundreds of years before, philosophers had decided that
there was another set of beings, the _creators_, that existed
independently of human belief and who had actually built the universe.
They certainly couldn’t have been gods of the sort you got now, who by
all accounts were largely incapable of making a cup of coffee.

The universe inside the Project was hurtling through its high-speed time
and there was still nothing in there that was even vaguely homely for
humans. It was all too hot or too cold or too empty or too crushed. And,
distressingly, there was no sign of narrativium.

Admittedly, it has never been isolated on Discworld either, but its
existence had long ago been inferred, as the philosopher Lye Tin Wheedle
had put it: ‘in the same way that milk infers cows’. It might not even
have a discrete existence. It might be a particular way in which every
other element spun through history, something that they had but did not
actually possess, like the gleam on the skin of a polished apple. It was
the _glue_ of the universe, the frame that held all the others, the
thing that told the world what it was going to be, that gave it purpose
and direction. You could detect narrativium, in fact, by simply thinking
about the world.

Without it, apparently, everything all was just balls spinning in
circles, without meaning.

He doodled on the pad in front of him:

_There are no turtles anywhere_.

‘Eat hot plasma! Oh … sorry, sir.’

Ponder peered over his defensive screen.

‘When worlds collide, young man, someone is doing something wrong!’

That was the voice of the Senior Wrangler. It sounded more petulant than
usual.

Ponder went to see what was going on.



TWELVE



WHERE DO RULES COME FROM?


[] SOMETHING IS MAKING ROUNDWORLD DO STRANGE THINGS …

It seems to be obeying rules.

Or maybe it’s just making them up as it goes along.

Isaac Newton taught us that _our_ universe runs on rules, and they are
mathematical. In his day they were called ‘laws of nature’, but ‘law’ is
too strong a word, too final, too arrogant. But it does seem that there
are more or less deep patterns in how the universe works. Human beings
can formulate those patterns as mathematical rules, and use the
resulting descriptions to work out some aspects of nature that would
otherwise be totally mysterious, and even exploit them to make tools,
vehicles, technology.

Thomas Malthus changed a lot of people’s minds when he found a
mathematical rule for social behaviour. He said that food grows
arithmetically (1-2-3-4-5), but populations grow geometrically
(1-2-4-8-16). Whatever the growth rates, eventually population will
outstrip food supply: there are limits to growth.*1 Malthus’s law shows
that there are rules Down Here as well as Up There, and it tells us that
poverty is not the result of evil or sin. Rules can have deep
implications.

What are rules? Do they tell us how the universe ‘really’ works, or do
our pattern-seeking brains invent or select them?

There are two main viewpoints here. One is fundamentalist at heart, as
fundamentalist as the Taliban and Southern Baptists – indeed, as
fundamentalist as the exquisitor Vorbis in _Small Gods_ who states his
position thus: ‘… that which appears to our senses is not the
_fundamental_ truth. Things that are seen and heard and done by the
flesh are mere shadows of a deeper reality.’

Scientific fundamentalism holds that there is _one_ set of rules, the
Theory of Everything, which doesn’t just describe nature rather well,
but _is_ nature. For about three centuries science seems to have been
converging on just such a system: the deeper our theories of nature
become, the simpler they become too. The philosophy behind this view is
known as reductionism, and it proceeds by taking things to bits, seeing
what the bits are and how they fit together, and using the bits to
explain the whole. It’s a very effective research strategy, and it’s
served us well for a long time. We’ve now managed to reduce our deepest
theories to just two: quantum mechanics and relativity.

Quantum mechanics set out to describe the universe on very small scales,
subatomic scales, but then became involved in the largest scales of all,
the origin of the universe in the Big Bang. Relativity set out to
describe the universe on very large scales, supergalactic ones, but then
became involved in the smallest scales of all, the quantum effects of
gravity. Despite this, the two theories disagree in fundamental ways
about the nature of the universe and what rules it obeys. The Theory of
Everything, it is hoped, will subtly modify both theories in such a way
that they fit seamlessly together into a unified whole, while continuing
to work well in their respective domains. With everything reduced to one
Ultimate Rule, reductionism will have reached the end of its quest, and
the universe will be completely explained.

The extreme version of the alternative view is that there are _no_
ultimate rules, indeed that there are no totally accurate rules either.
What we call laws of nature are human approximations to regularities
that crop up in certain specialized regions of the universe – chemical
molecules, galaxy dynamics, whatever. There is no reason why our
formulations of regularities in molecules and regularities in galaxies
should be part of some deeper set of regularities that explains both,
any more than chess and soccer should somehow be aspects of the same
greater game. The universe could perfectly well be patterned on all
levels, without there being an ultimate pattern from which all the
others must logically follow. In this view, each set of rules is
accompanied by a statement of which areas it can safely be used to
describe – ‘use these rules for molecules with fewer than a hundred
atoms’ or ‘this rule works for galaxies provided you don’t ask about the
stars that make them up’. Many such rules are contextual rather than
reductionist: they explain why things work the way they do in terms of
what is _outside_ them.

Evolution, especially before it was interpreted through the eyes of DNA,
is one of the clearest examples of this style of reasoning. Animals
evolve because of the environment in which they live, including other
animals. A curious feature of this viewpoint is that to a great extent
the system builds its own rules, as well as obeying them. It is rather
like a game of chess played with tiles that can be used to build new
bits of board, upon which new kinds of chess piece can move in new ways.

Could the entire universe sometimes build its own rules as it proceeds?
We’ve suggested as much a couple of times: here’s a sense in which it
might happen. It’s hard to see how rules for matter could meaningfully
‘exist’ when there is no matter, only radiation – as there was at an
early stage of the Big Bang. Fundamentalists would maintain that the
rules for matter were always implicit in the Theory of Everything, and
_became_ explicit when matter appeared. We wonder whether the same
‘phase transition’ that created matter might _also_ have created its
rules. Physics might not be like that, but biology surely is. Before
organisms appeared, there couldn’t have been any rules for evolution.

For a more homely example, think of a stone rolling down a bumpy
hillside, skidding on a clump of grass, bouncing wildly off bigger
rocks, splashing through muddy puddles, and eventually coming to rest
against the trunk of a tree. If fundamentalist reductionism is right,
then every aspect of the stone’s movement, right down to how the blades
of grass get crushed, what pattern the mud makes when it splatters, and
why the tree is growing where it is anyway, are consequences of one set
of rules, that Theory of Everything. The stone ‘knows’ how to roll,
skid, bounce, splash, and stop _because_ the Theory of Everything tells
it what to do. More than that: because the Theory of Everything is
_true_, the stone _itself_ is tracking through the logical consequences
of those rules as it skitters down the hillside. In principle you could
predict that the stone would hit that particular tree, just by working
out necessary consequences of the Theory of Everything.

The picture of causality that this viewpoint evokes is one in which the
only reasons for things to happen are because the Theory of Everything
says so. The alternative is that the universe is doing whatever the
universe does, and the stone is in a sense _exploring_ the consequences
of what the universe does. It doesn’t ‘know’ that it will skid on grass
until it hits some grass and finds itself skidding. It doesn’t ‘know’
how to splash mud all over the place, but when it hits the puddle,
that’s what happens. And so on. Then we humans come along and look at
what the stone does, and start finding patterns. ‘Yes, the reason it
skids is because friction works like _this …_’ ‘And the laws of fluid
dynamics tell us that the mud must scatter like _that …_’

We know that these human-level rules are approximate descriptions,
because that’s why we invented them. Mud is lumpy, but the rules of
fluid dynamics don’t take account of lumps. Friction is something rather
complicated involving molecules sticking together and pulling apart
again, but we can capture a lot of what it does by thinking of it as a
force that opposes moving bodies when in contact with surfaces. Because
our human-level theories are approximations, we get very excited when
some more general principle leads to more accurate results. We then,
unless we are careful, confuse ‘the new theory gives results that are
closer to reality than the old’ with ‘the new theory’s rules are closer
to the real rules of the universe than the old one’s rules were’. But
that doesn’t follow: we might be getting a more accurate _description_
even though our rules differ from whatever the universe ‘really’ does.
What it really does may not involve following neat, tidy rules at all.

There is a big gap between writing down a Theory of Everything and
understanding its consequences. There are mathematical systems that
demonstrate this point, and one of the simplest is Langton’s Ant, now
the small star of a computer program. The Ant wanders around on an
infinite square grid. Every time it comes to a square, the square
changes colour from black to white or from white to black, and if it
lands on a white square then it turns right, but if it lands on a black
square then it turns left. So we know the Theory of Everything for the
Ant’s universe – the rule that governs its complete behaviour by fixing
what can happen on the small scale – and everything that happens in that
universe is ‘explained’ by that rule.

When you set the Ant in motion, what you actually see is three separate
modes of behaviour. _Everybody –_ mathematician or not – immediately
spots them. Something in our minds makes us sensitive to the difference,
and it’s got nothing to do with the rule. It’s the same rule all the
time, but we see three distinct phases:

• SIMPLICITY: During the first two or three hundred moves of the Ant,
starting on a completely white grid, it creates tiny little patterns
which are very simple and often very symmetric. And you sit there
thinking ‘Of course, we’ve got a simple rule, so that will give simple
_patterns_, and we ought to be able to describe everything that happens
in a simple way.’

• CHAOS: Then, suddenly, you notice it’s not like that any more. You’ve
got a big irregular patch of black and white squares, and the Ant is
wandering around in some sort of random walk, and you can’t see any
structure at all. For Langton’s Ant this kind of pseudorandom motion
happens for about the next 10,000 steps. So if your computer is not very
fast you can sit there for a long time saying ‘Nothing interesting is
going to happen, it’s going to go on like this forever, it’s just
random.’ No, it’s obeying the same rule as before. It’s just that to us
it _looks_ random.

• EMERGENT ORDER: Finally the Ant locks into a particular kind of
repetitive behaviour, and it builds a ‘highway’. It goes through a cycle
of 104 steps, after which it has moved out two squares diagonally and
the shape and the colours along the edge are the same as they were at
the beginning of that cycle. So that cycle repeats forever, and the Ant
just builds a diagonal highway – for ever.

Those three modes of activity are all consequences of the _same_ rule,
but they are on different levels from the rule itself. There are no
rules that talk about highways. The highway is clearly a simple thing,
but a 104-step cycle isn’t a terribly obvious consequence of the rule.
In fact the only way mathematicians can _prove_ that the Ant really does
build its highway is to track through those 10,000 steps. At that point
you could say ‘_Now_ we understand why Langton’s Ant builds a highway.’
But no sooner.

However, if we ask a slightly more general question, we realize that we
don’t _understand_ Langton’s Ant at all. Suppose that before the Ant
starts we give it an environment – we paint a few squares black. Now
let’s ask a simple question: does the Ant always end up building a
highway? Nobody knows. All of the experiments on computers suggest that
it does. On the other hand, nobody can _prove_ that it does. There might
be some very strange configuration of squares, and when you start it off
on that it gets triggered into some totally different behaviour. Or it
could just be a much bigger highway. Perhaps there is a cycle of
1,349,772,115,998 steps that builds a different kind of highway, if only
you start from the right thing. We don’t know. So for this very simple
mathematical system, with one simple rule, and a very simple question,
where we _know_ the Theory of Everything … it doesn’t tell us the
answer.

Langton’s Ant will be our icon for a very important idea: _emergence_.
Simple rules may lead to large, complex patterns. The issue here is not
what the universe ‘really does’. It is how we understand things and how
we structure them in our minds. The simple Ant and its tiled universe
are technically a ‘complex system’ (it consists of a large number of
entities that interact with each other, even though most of those
entities are simply squares that change colour when an Ant walks on
them).

We can create a system, and give it simple rules which ‘common sense’
suggests should lead to a rather dull future, and we will often find
that quite complex features will result. And they will be ‘emergent’ –
that is, we have no practical way of working out what they are going to
be apart from … well, watching. The Ant must dance. There are no short
cuts.

Emergent phenomena, which you can’t predict ahead of time, are just as
causal as the non-emergent ones: they _are_ logical consequences of the
rules. And you have no idea what they are going to be. A computer will
not help – all it will do is run the Ant very fast.

A ‘geographical’ image is useful here. The ‘phase space’ of a system is
the space of all possible states or behaviours – all of the things that
the system could do, not just what it _does_ do. The phase space of
Langton’s Ant consists of all possible ways to put black and white
squares on a grid – not just the ones that the Ant puts there when it
follows its rules. The phase space for evolution is all conceivable
organisms, not just the ones that have existed so far. Discworld is one
‘point’ in the phase space of consistent universes. Phase spaces deal
with everything that might be, not what is.

In this imagery, the features of a system are structures in phase space
that give it a well-defined ‘geography’. The phase space of an emergent
system is indescribably complicated: a generic term for such phase
spaces is ‘Ant Country’, which you can think of as a computational form
of infinite suburbia. To _understand_ an emergent feature you would have
to find it _without_ traversing Ant Country step by step. The same
problem arises when you try to start from a Theory of Everything and
work out _what it implies_. You may have pinned down the micro-rules,
but that doesn’t mean that you understand their macro-consequences. A
Theory of Everything would tell you what the _problem_ is, in precise
language, but that might not help you solve it.

Suppose, for instance, that we had very accurate rules for fundamental
particles, rules that really do govern everything about them. Despite
that, it’s pretty clear that those rules would not greatly help our
understanding of something like economics. We want to understand someone
who goes into a supermarket, buys some bananas, and pays over some
money. How do we approach that from the particle rules? We have to write
down an equation for every particle in the customer’s body, in the
bananas, in the note that passes from customer to cashier. Our
description of the transaction – money for bananas – _and_ our
explanation of it is in terms of an incredibly complicated equation
about fundamental particles.

Solving that equation is even harder. _And it might not even be the only
fruit they buy_.

We’re not saying that the universe hasn’t _done_ it that way. We’re
saying that even if it has, that won’t help us _understand_ anything. So
there’s a big, emergent gap between the Theory of Everything and its
consequences.

A lot of philosophers seem to have got the idea that in an emergent
phenomenon the chain of causality is _broken_. If our thoughts are
emergent properties of our brain, then to many philosophers they are not
physically caused by the nerve cells, the electrical currents, and the
chemicals in the brain. We don’t mean that. We think it’s confused
nonsense. We’re perfectly happy that our thoughts are _caused_ by those
physical entities, but you can’t describe someone’s perceptions or
memory in terms of electrical currents and chemicals.

Human beings never understand things that way. They understand things by
keeping them simple – in Archchancellor Ridcully’s case, the simpler the
better. A little narrativium goes a long way: the simpler the story, the
better you understand it. Storytelling is the opposite of reductionism;
26 letters and some rules of grammar are no story at all.

One set of modern physical rules poses more philosophical questions than
all the others combined: Quantum Mechanics. Newton’s rules explained the
universe in terms of force, position, speed, and the like – things that
make intuitive sense to human beings and let us tell good stories. A
century or so ago, however, it became clear that the universe’s hidden
wiring has other, less intuitive layers. Concepts such as position and
speed not only ceased to be fundamental – they ceased to have a well
defined meaning at all.

This new layer of explanation, quantum theory, tells us that on small
scales the rules are random. Instead of something happening or not, it
may do a bit of both. Empty space is a seething mass of potentialities,
and time is something you can borrow and pay back again if you do it
quickly enough for the universe not to notice. And the Heisenberg
Uncertainty Principle says that if you know where something is then you
can’t also know how fast it’s going. Ponder Stibbons would consider
himself lucky if he did not have to explain this to his Archchancellor.

A thorough discussion of the quantum world would need a book all to
itself, but there’s one topic that benefits from some Discworld
insights. This is the notorious case of the cat in the box. Quantum
objects obey Schrödinger’s Equation, a rule named after Erwin
Schrödinger which describes how ‘wave functions’ – waves of quantum
existence – propagate through space and time. Atoms and their sub-atomic
components aren’t really particles: they’re quantum wave functions.

The early pioneers of quantum mechanics had enough problems _solving_
Schrödinger’s equation: they didn’t want to worry about what it _meant_.
So they spatchcocked together a cop-out clause, the ‘Copenhagen
interpretation’ of quantum observations. This says that whenever you try
to observe a quantum wave function it immediately ‘collapses’ to give a
single particle-like answer. This seems to promote the human mind to a
special status – it has even been suggested that our purpose in the
universe is to observe it, thereby ensuring its existence, an idea that
the wizards of UU consider to be simple common sense.

Schrödinger, however, thought this was silly, and in support he
introduced a thought experiment now called Schrödinger’s Cat. Imagine a
box, with a lid that can be sealed so tightly that _nothing_, not even
the barest hint of a quantum wavelet, can leak out. The box contains a
radioactive atom, which at some random moment will decay and emit a
particle, and a particle detector that releases poison gas when it
detects the atom decaying. Put the cat in the box and close the lid.
Wait a bit.

Is the cat alive or dead?

If the atom has decayed, then the cat’s dead. If not, it’s alive.
However, the box is sealed, so you can’t observe what’s inside. Since
unobserved quantum systems are waves, the quantum rules tell us that the
atom must be in a ‘mixed’ state – half decayed and half not. Therefore
the cat, which is a collection of atoms and so can be considered as a
gigantic quantum system, is also in a mixed state: half alive, half
dead. In 1935 Schrödinger pointed out that cats aren’t like that. Cats
are macroscopic systems with classical yes/no physics. His point was
that the Copenhagen interpretation does not explain – or even address –
the link from microscopic quantum physics to macroscopic classical
physics. The Copenhagen interpretation replaces a complex physical
process (which we don’t understand) by a piece of magic: the wave
collapses as soon as you try to observe it.

Most of the time this problem is discussed, physicists manage to turn
Schrödinger’s point on its head. ‘No, quantum waves really _are_ like
that!’ And they’ve done lots of experiments to prove they’re right.
Except … those experiments have no box, no poison gas, no alive, no
dead, and no cat. What they have is quantum-scale analogues – an
electron for a cat, positive spin for alive and negative for dead, and a
box with Chinese walls, through which anything _can_ be observed, but
you take great care not to notice.

These discussions and experiments are lies-to-children: their aim is to
convince the next generation of physicists that _quantum_level systems
do actually behave in the bizarre way that they do. Fine … but it’s got
nothing to do with cats. The wizards of Unseen University, who know
nothing about electrons but have an intimate familiarity with cats,
wouldn’t be fooled for an instant. Neither would the witch Gytha Ogg,
whose cat Greebo is shut in a box in _Lords and Ladies_. Greebo is the
sort of cat that would take on a ferocious wolf and eat it.*2 In
_Witches Abroad_ he eats a vampire by accident, and the witches can’t
understand why the local villagers are so ecstatic.

Greebo has his own way of handling quantum paradoxes: ‘Greebo had spent
an irritating two minutes in that box. Technically, a cat locked in a
box may be alive or it may be dead. You never know until you look. In
fact, the mere act of opening the box will determine the state of the
cat, although in this case there were three determinate states the cat
could be in: these being Alive, Dead, and Bloody Furious.’

Schrödinger would have applauded. He wasn’t talking about quantum
states: he wanted to know how they led to ordinary, classical physics in
the large, and he could see that the Copenhagen interpretation didn’t
have anything to say about that. So how _do_ classical yes/no answers
emerge from quantum Ant Country? The closest we have to an answer is
something called ‘decoherence’, which has been studied by a number of
physicists, among them Anthony Leggett, Roland Omnés, Serge Haroche and
Luis Davidovich. If you have a big collection of quantum waves and you
leave it to its own devices, then the component waves get out of step
and fuzz out. This is what a classical object is ‘really’ like from the
quantum standpoint, and it means that cats do, in fact, behave like
cats. Experiments show that the same is true even when the role of the
detector is played by a microscopic quantum object: a photon’s wave
function can collapse without any observers being aware, at the time,
that it has done so. Even with a quantum cat, death occurs at the
instant that the _detector_ notices that the atom has decayed. It
doesn’t require a mind.

In short, Archchancellor, the universe always notices the cat. And a
tree in a forest does make a sound when it falls, even if no one is
around. The forest is always there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 This rule does require some special assumptions, such as the chronic
and irreversible stupidity of humanity.

*2 As Nanny Ogg always says, ‘He’s just a big softy.’



THIRTEEN



NO, IT CAN’T DO THAT


[] ARCHCHANCELLOR RIDCULLY LOOKED AROUND at his colleagues. They’d
chosen the long table in the Great Hall for the meeting, since the HEM
was getting too crowded.

‘All here? Good,’ he said. ‘Carry on, Mister Stibbons.’

Ponder sifted through his papers.

‘I’ve, er, asked for this meeting,’ he said, ‘because I’m afraid we’re
doing things wrong.’

‘How can that be?’ said the Dean. ‘It’s _our_ universe!’

‘Yes, Dean. And, er, no. It’s made up its own rules.’

‘No, no, it can’t do that,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘We’re intelligent
creatures. We make the rules. Lumps of rock don’t make rules.’

‘Not _exactly_, sir,’ said Ponder, employing the phrase in its
traditional sense of ‘absolutely wrong’. ‘There are some rules in the
Project.’

‘How? Is someone else meddling with it?’ the Dean demanded. ‘Has a
Creator turned up?’

‘An interesting thought, sir. I’m not qualified to answer that one. The
point I’m trying to make is that if we want to do anything constructive,
we’ve got to obey the rules.’

The Lecturer in Recent Runes looked down at the table in front of him.
It had been laid for lunch.

‘I don’t see why,’ he said. ‘This knife and fork don’t tell me how to
eat.’

‘Er … in fact, sir, they do. In a roundabout way.’

‘Are you trying to tell us that the rules are built in?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, sir. Like: big rocks are heavier than small rocks.’

‘That’s not a rule, man, that’s just common sense!’

‘Yes, sir. It’s just that the more I look into the Project, the more I’m
not sure any more what common sense is. Sir, if we’re going to build a
world it has to be a ball. A big ball.’

‘That’s a lot of outmoded religious nonsense, Mister Stibbons.’*

‘Yes, sir. But in the Project universe, it’s real. Some of the ba … the
spheres the students have made are huge.’

‘Yes, I’ve seen them. Showy, to my mind.’

‘I was thinking of something smaller, sir. And … and I’m pretty sure
things will stay on it. I’ve been experimenting.’

‘Experimenting?’ said the Dean. ‘What good does _that_ do?’

The doors were flung open. Turnipseed, Ponder’s assistant, hurried
across to the table in a state of some agitation.

‘Mister Stibbons! HEX has found something!’

The wizards turned to stare at him. He shrugged.

‘It’s gold,’ he said.

‘The Guild of Alchemists is _not_ going to be happy about this,’ said
the Senior Wrangler, as the entire faculty clustered around the project.
‘You know what they are for demarcation.’

‘Fair enough,’ said Ridcully, steering the omniscope. ‘We’ll just give
them a few minutes to turn up, otherwise we’ll go on as we are, all
right?’

‘How can we get it out?’ said the Dean.

Ponder looked horrified. ‘Sir! This is a universe! It is not a
piggy-bank! You can’t just turn it upside down, stick a knife in the
slot and rattle it around!’

‘I don’t see why not,’ said Ridcully, without looking up. ‘It’s what
people do all the time.’ He adjusted the focus. ‘Personally I’m _glad_
nothing can get out of the thing, though. Call me old fashioned, but I
don’t intend to occupy the same room as a million miles of exploding
gas. What happened?’

‘HEX says one of the new stars exploded.’

‘They’re too big to be stars, Ponder. We’ve been into this.’

‘Yes, sir,’ Ponder disagreed.

‘They’ve only been around for five minutes.’

‘A few days, sir. But millions of years in Project time. People have
been dumping rubbish into it, and I think some just drifted in and … I
don’t think it was a very well-made st – furnace in the first place.’

The exploding star was shrinking now, but flinging out a great halo of
brilliant gases that even lit up one side of the rocky lumps the wizards
had been making. Things want to come together and get big, Ponder
thought. But when they’re big enough, they want to explode. Another law.

‘There’s lead and copper here, too,’ said Ridcully. ‘We’re in the money
now, gentlemen. Except that in this universe there’s nothing to spend it
on. Even so, it seems we’re making progress. You’re looking peaky,
Mister Stibbons. You ought to get some sleep.’

Progress, thought Ponder. Was that what they were making? But without
narrativium, how did anything _know_?

It was day four. Ponder had been awake all night. He wasn’t sure, but he
thought he’d probably been awake the previous night, too. He may have
nodded off for a while, pillowing his head on the growing pile of
screwed-up pieces of paper, with the Project winking and twinkling in
front of him. If so, he’d dreamed of nothing.

But he’d decided that Progress was what you made it.

After breakfast, the wizards looked at the ball which currently occupied
the centre of the omniscope.

‘Um, I used iron to start with,’ said Ponder. ‘Well, mostly iron.
There’s quite a lot of it about. Some of the ices are really nasty
things, and rock by itself just sits there. See this one here?’

A smaller ball of rock hung in space a little way away.

‘Yes, very dull,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Why’s it got holes all over
it?’

‘I’m afraid that when I was dropping rocks on the ball of iron there
were a few that went out of control.’

‘Could happen to anyone, Stibbons,’ said the Archchancellor generously.
‘Did you add gold?’

‘Oh yes, sir. And other metals.’

‘Gold does give a crust some style, I think. Are these volcanoes?’

‘Sort of, sir. They are the, er, acne of young worlds. Only unlike ours,
where the rock is melted in the internal magical fields generated in the
sub-strata, the magma is kept molten by the heat trapped inside the
sphere.’

‘Very smoky atmosphere. I can hardly see anything.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Well, _I_ don’t call it _much_ of a world,’ said the Dean, sniffing.
‘Practically red hot, smoke belching out everywhere …’

‘The Dean _does_ have a point, young man,’ said Ridcully. He was extra
kind, just to annoy the Dean. ‘It’s a brave attempt, but you just seem
to have made another ball.’

Ponder coughed. ‘I just put this one together for demonstration
purposes, sir.’ He fiddled with the controls of the omniscope. The scene
flickered, and changed. ‘Now this,’ he said, and there was a twinge of
pride in his voice, ‘is one I made _earlier_.’

They stared into the lens.

‘Well? Just more smoke,’ said the Dean.

‘Cloud, sir, in fact,’ said Ponder.

‘Well, we can all make clouds of gas –’

‘Er … it’s water vapour, sir,’ said Ponder.

He reached over and adjusted the omniscope.

The room was filled with the roar of the biggest rainstorm of all time.

By lunchtime it was a world of ice.

‘And we were doing so well,’ said Ridcully.

‘I can’t think what went wrong,’ said Ponder, wringing his hands. ‘We
were getting seas!’

‘Can’t we just warm it up?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

Ponder sat down on his chair and put his head in his hands.

‘Bound to cool a world down, all that rain,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes, slowly.

‘Very good … er, rocks,’ said the Dean. He patted Ponder on the back.

‘Poor chap looks a bit down,’ hissed the Senior Wrangler to Ridcully. ‘I
don’t think he’s been eating properly’

‘You mean … not chewing right?’

‘No eating _enough_, Archchancellor.’

The Dean picked up a piece of paper from Ponder’s crowded desk.

‘I say, look at these,’ he said.

On the paper was written, in Ponder’s very neat handwriting:

_THE RULES_

_1 Things fall apart, but centres hold_.

_2 Everything moves in curves_.

_3 You get balls_.

_4 Big balls tell space to bend_.

_5 There are no turtles anywhere_.

_6 … It’s so depressing_.

‘Always been a bit of a one for rules, our Ponder,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Number Six doesn’t sound incredibly well formulated,’ said Ridcully.

‘You don’t think he’s going a bit bursar, do you?’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘He always thinks everything has to _mean_ something,’ said Ridcully,
who generally took the view that trying to find any deep meaning to
events was like trying to find reflections in a mirror: you always
succeeded, but you didn’t learn anything new.

‘I suppose we could simply heat the thing up,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘A sun should be easy,’ said Ridcully. ‘A big ball of fire should be no
problem to a thinking wizard.’ He cracked his knuckles. ‘Get some of the
students to put Mister Stibbons to bed. We’ll soon have his little world
all warm or my name’s not Mustrum Ridcully.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Omnianism had taught for thousands of years that the Discworld was in
fact a sphere, and violently persecuted those who preferred to believe
the evidence of their own eyes. At the time of writing, Omnianism was
teaching that there was something to be said for every point of view.



FOURTEEN



DISC WORLDS


[] TO THE WIZARDS OF UNSEEN UNIVERSITY, the heavens include two
obviously different types of body: stars, which are tiny pinpricks of
light, and the sun, which is a hot ball, not too far away, and passes
over the Disc during the day and under it at night. It’s taken humanity
a while to realize that in our universe it’s not like that. Our Sun is a
star, and like all stars it’s _huge_, so those tiny pinpricks must be a
very long way off. Moreover, some of the pinpricks that seem to be stars
aren’t: they betray themselves by moving differently from the rest.
These are the planets, which are a lot closer and a lot smaller, and
together with the Earth, Moon, and Sun they form the solar system. Our
solar system may _look_ like a lot of balls whizzing around in some kind
of cosmic game of pool, but that doesn’t mean that it started out as
balls or rock and ice. It is the outcome of a physical process, and the
ingredients that went into that process are not obliged to resemble the
result that comes out.

The more we learn about the solar system, the more difficult it is to
give a plausible answer to the question: how did it start? It is not the
‘answer’ part that gets harder – it’s the plausibility. As we learn more
and more about the solar system, the reality-check that our theories
have to pass becomes more and more stringent. This is one reason why
scientists have a habit of opening up old questions that everybody
assumed were settled long ago, and deciding that they weren’t. It
doesn’t mean that scientists are incompetent: it demonstrates their
willingness to contemplate new evidence and re-examine old conclusions
in its light. Science certainly does not claim to get things right, but
it has a good record of ruling out ways to get things wrong.

What must a theory of the formation of the solar system explain?
Principally, of course, the planets – nine of them, dotted rather
randomly in space; Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune, Pluto. It must explain their differences in size. Mercury is a
mere 3,032 miles (4,878 km) in diameter, whereas Jupiter is 88,750 miles
(142,800 km) in diameter – 29 times as big, 24,000 times the volume, an
enormous discrepancy. It must explain their differences in chemical
composition: Mercury is made of iron, nickel, and silicate rock; Jupiter
is made from hydrogen and helium. It must explain why the planets near
the Sun are generally smaller than those further out, with the exception
of tiny Pluto, out in the cold and the dark. We don’t know a great deal
about Pluto, but most of what we do know is strange. For instance, all
the other planets lie pretty close to a single plane through the centre
of the Sun, but Pluto’s orbit is inclined at a noticeable angle. All the
other planets have orbits that are pretty close to circles, but Pluto’s
orbit is much more elongated – to the extent that some of the time it is
closer to the Sun than Neptune is.

But that’s not all that a theory of the origin of the solar system has
to get right. Most planets have smaller bodies in orbit around _them –_
our own familiar Moon; Phobos and Deimos, the diminutive twin satellites
of Mars; Jupiter’s 16 satellites; Saturn’s 17 … Even Pluto has a
satellite, called Charon, and _that’s_ weird too. Saturn goes one better
and also has entire _rings_ of smaller bodies surrounding it, a broad,
thin band of encircling rocks that breaks up into a myriad distinct
ringlets, with satellites mixed up among them as well as more
conventional satellites elsewhere. Then there are the asteroids,
thousands of small bodies, some spherical like planets, others irregular
lumps of rock, most of which orbit between Mars and Jupiter – except for
quite a few that don’t. There are comets, which fall in towards the Sun
from the huge ‘Oort cloud’ way out beyond the orbit of Pluto – a cloud
that contains _trillions_ of comets. There is the Kuiper belt, a bit
like the asteroid belt but outside Pluto’s orbit: we know over 30 bodies
out there now, but we suspect there are hundreds of thousands.

These bodies are known as ‘Kuiper Belt Objects’ or KBOs. A few years
back there was a big fuss because some astronomers wanted to redefine
Pluto as a KBO rather than a planet. Pluto probably wouldn’t have minded
either way, but an awful lot of textbook publishers would have. The
scientific case was strong: Pluto is weird in almost every respect, as
we’ve just seen, and it could easily be a KBO that accidentally strayed
into the outer reaches of the solar system when disturbed by other
bodies. If so, that would explain why it’s so weird. It doesn’t look
like a planet because it isn’t one. Other astronomers disagreed strongly
with this proposal – for sentimental reasons, for historical ones, or
because we don’t know for sure that Pluto is a wandering KBO. In the
end, Pluto remained on the list of planets. But whether it can hang on
to that status for much longer is unclear.

Then there are meteorites, lumps of rock of various sizes that wander
erratically through the whole thing …

Each of these celestial objects, moreover, is a one-off. Mercury is a
blisteringly hot lump of cratered rock. Venus has a sulphuric acid
atmosphere, rotates the wrong way compared to nearly everything else in
the solar system, and is believed to resurface itself every hundred
million years or so in a vast, planetwide surge of volcanic activity.
Earth has oceans and supports life; since we live on it we find it the
most congenial of the planets, but many aliens would probably be aghast
at its deadly, poisonous, corrosive oxygen atmosphere. Mars has
rock-strewn deserts and dry ice at its poles. Jupiter is a gas giant,
with a core of hydrogen compressed so much that it has become metallic,
and maybe a small rocky core inside that – ‘small’ compared to Jupiter,
but about three times the diameter of the Earth. Saturn has its rings –
but so do Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, though these are nowhere near as
extensive or spectacular. Uranus has an icy mantle of methane and
ammonia, and its axis of rotation is tilted so far that it is slightly
upside down. Neptune is similar to Uranus but without that ridiculous
axial tilt. Pluto, as we’ve said, is just crazy. We don’t even know
accurately how big it is or how massive it is, but it’s a Lilliputian in
the country of the Gas Giants.

Right … _all that_ is what a theory of the origins of the solar system
has to explain. It was all a lot easier when we thought there were six
planets, plus the Sun and the Moon, and that was _it_. As for the solar
system being an act of special creation by a supernatural being – why
would any self-respecting supernatural being make the thing so
_complicated_?

Because it makes _itself_ complicated – that’s why. We now think that
the solar system was formed as a complete package, starting from quite
complicated ingredients. But it us took a while to realize this.

The first theory of planetary formation that makes any kind of sense by
modern standards was thought up by the great German philosopher Immanuel
Kant about 250 years ago. Kant envisaged it all starting as a vast cloud
of matter – big lumps, small lumps, dust, gas – which attracted each
other gravitationally and clumped together.

About 40 years later the French mathematician Pierre-Simon de Laplace
came up with an alternative theory of enormous intrinsic beauty, whose
sole flaw is that it doesn’t actually work. Laplace thought that the Sun
formed before the planets did, perhaps by some cosmic aggregation
process like Kant’s. However, that ancient Sun was much bigger than
today’s, because it hadn’t fully collected together, and the outer
fringes of its atmosphere extended well beyond what is now the orbit of
Pluto. Like the wizards of Unseen University, Laplace thought of the Sun
as a gigantic fire whose fuel must be slowly burning away. As the Sun
aged, it would cool down. Cool gas contracts, so the Sun would shrink.

Now comes a neat peculiarity of moving bodies, a consequence of another
of Newton’s laws, the Law(s) of Motion. Associated with any spinning
body is a quantity called ‘angular momentum’ – a combination of how much
mass it contains, how fast it is spinning, and how far out from the
centre the spinning takes place. According to Newton, angular momentum
is conserved – it can be redistributed, but it neither goes away nor
appears of its own accord. If a spinning body contracts, but the rate of
spin doesn’t change, angular momentum will be lost: therefore the rate
of spin must increase to compensate. This is how ice skaters do rapid
spins: they start with a slow spin, arms extended, and then bring their
arms in close to their body. Moreover, spinning matter experiences a
force, centrifugal force, which seems to pull it outwards, away from its
centre.

Laplace wondered whether centrifugal force acting on a spinning gascloud
might throw off a belt of gas round the equator. He calculated that this
ought to happen whenever the gravitational force attracting that belt
towards the centre was equal to the centrifugal force trying to fling it
away. This process would happen not once, but several times, as the gas
continued to contract – so the shrinking Sun would surround itself with
a series of rings of material, all lying in the same plane as the Sun’s
equator. Now suppose that each belt coalesced into a single
body … Planets!

What Laplace’s theory got right, but Kant’s did not, was that the
planets lie roughly in a plane and they all rotate round the Sun in the
same direction that the Sun spins. As a bonus, something rather similar
might have occurred while those belts were coalescing into planets, in
which case the motion of satellites is explained as well. It’s not hard
to combine the best features of Kant’s and Laplace’s theories, and this
combination satisfied scientists for about a century. However, it slowly
became clear that our solar system is far more unruly than either Kant
or Laplace had recognized. Asteroids have wild orbits, and some
satellites revolve the wrong way. The Sun contains 99% of the solar
system’s mass, but the planets possess 99% of its angular momentum:
either the Sun is rotating too slowly or the planets are revolving too
quickly.

As the twentieth century opened, these deficiencies of the Laplacian
theory became too great for astronomers to bear, and several people
independently came up with the idea that a star developed a solar system
when it made a close encounter with another star. As the two stars
whizzed past each other, the gravitational attraction from one of them
was supposed to draw out a long cigar-shaped blob of matter from the
other, which then condensed into planets. The advantage of the cigar
shape was that it was thin at the ends and thick at the middle, just as
the planets are small close to the Sun or out by Pluto, but big in the
middle where Jupiter and Saturn live. Mind you, it was never entirely
clear _why_ the blob had to be cigar-shaped …

One important feature of this theory was the implication that solar
systems are rather uncommon, because stars are quite thinly scattered
and seldom get close enough together to share a mutual cigar. If you
were the sort of person who’d be comforted by the idea that human beings
are unique in the universe, then this was a rather appealing suggestion:
if planets were rare, then _inhabited_ planets would be rarer still. If
you were the sort of person who preferred to think that the Earth isn’t
especially unusual, and neither are its lifeforms, then the cigar theory
definitely put a crimp on the imagination.

By the middle of the twentieth century, the shared-cigar theory had
turned out to be even less likely than the Kant-Laplace theory. If you
rip a lot of hot gas from the atmosphere of a star, it doesn’t condense
into planets – it disperses into the unfathomable depths of interstellar
space like a drop of ink in a raging ocean. But by then, astronomers
were getting a much clearer idea of how _stars_ originated, and it was
becoming clear that planets must be created by the same processes that
produce the stars. A solar system is not a Sun that later acquires some
tiny companions: it all comes as one package, right from the start. That
package is a disc – the nearest thing in our universe (so far as we
know) to Discworld. But the disc begins as a cloud and eventually turns
into a lot of balls (Stibbons’s Third Rule).

Before the disc formed, the solar system and the Sun started out as a
random portion of a cloud of interstellar gas and dust. Random jigglings
triggered a collapse of the dustcloud, with everything heading for
roughly – but not exactly – the same central point. All it takes to
start such a collapse is a concentration of matter somewhere, whose
gravity then pulls more matter towards it: random jigglings will produce
such a concentration if you wait long enough. Once the process has
started, it is surprisingly rapid, taking about ten million years from
start to finish. At first the collapsing cloud is roughly spherical.
However, it is being carried along by the rotation of the entire galaxy,
so its outer edge (relative to the centre of the galaxy) moves more
slowly than its inner edge. Conservation of angular momentum tells us
that as the cloud collapses it must start spinning, and the more it
collapses, the faster it spins. As its rate of spin increases, the cloud
flattens out into a rough disc.

More careful calculations show that near the middle this disc thickens
out into a dense blob, and most of the matter ends up in the blob. The
blob condenses further, its gravitational energy gets traded for heat
energy, and its temperature goes up _fast_. When the temperature rises
enough, nuclear reactions are ignited: the blob has become a star. While
this is happening, the material in the disk undergoes random collisions,
just as Kant imagined, and coalesces in a not terribly ordered way. Some
clumps get shoved into wildly eccentric orbits, or swung out of the
plane of the disc; most clumps, however, are better behaved and turn
into decent, sensible planets. A miniature version of the self-same
processes can equip most of those planets with satellites.

The chemistry fits, too. Near the Sun, those incipient planets get very
hot – too hot for solid water to form. Further out – around the orbit of
Jupiter for a dustcloud suitable for making our Sun and solar system –
water can freeze into solid ice. This distinction is important for the
chemical composition of the planets, and we can see the main outlines if
we focus on just three elements: hydrogen, oxygen, and silicon. Hydrogen
and oxygen happen to be the two most abundant elements in the universe,
apart from helium which doesn’t undergo chemical reactions. Silicon is
less abundant but still common. When silicon and oxygen combine
together, you get silicates – rocks. But even if the oxygen can mop up
all the available silicon, some 96% of the oxygen is still unattached,
and it combines with hydrogen to make water. There is so much hydrogen –
a thousand times as much as oxygen – that virtually all of the oxygen
that doesn’t go into rocks gets locked away in water. So by far the most
common compound in the condensing disc is water.

Close to the star, that water is liquid, even vapour, but out at Jovian
distances, it’s solid ice. You can pick up a lot of solid mass if you’re
condensing in a region where ice can form. So the planets there are
bigger, and (at least to begin with) they are icy. Nearer the star, the
planets are smaller, and rocky. But now the big guys can parlay their
initial weight advantage into an even bigger one. Anything that is ten
times the mass of the Earth, or greater, can attract _and retain_ the
two most abundant elements of the disc, hydrogen and helium. So the big
balls soak up large amount of extra mass in the form of these two gases.
They can also retain compounds like methane and ammonia, which are
volatile gases closer to the star.

This theory explains rather a lot. It gets all the main features of the
solar system pretty much right. It allows for the odd exceptional
motion, but not too many. It agrees with observations of condensing gas
clouds in distant regions of space. It may not be perfect, and some
special pleading might be necessary to explain odd things like Pluto,
but most of the important features click neatly into place.

It also seems likely that huge numbers of planets exist without a
central star. In 2000 a team led by Rafael Rebolo observed isolated
large planets. A survey of such bodies in the Sigma Orionis cluster
shows that the smaller these bodies are, the more numerous they become.
If this relationship continues down to Earth-sized bodies (which are too
small to observe with current methods) then ‘isolated planets’ will
litter the galaxy. There are probably hundreds of them within 30 light
years of Earth, for example. But without a nearby star, there is no way
we can observe them directly. There is no star to wobble, no light
output to dim as a planet gets in the way, and the planets themselves
emit only reflections of distant starlight, far too faint to be seen
from here. The conventional theory of planetary formation, in which a
star and its accompanying solar system come into being together, cannot
apply to such worlds. Small gas clouds are not massive enough to
collapse under gravity in the right way, but magnetic effects might
cause a collapsing gas cloud round a star to break up and be ejected
before its planets are fully formed. Or perhaps these worlds came into
being in the usual way, but were then ejected from their solar systems.

The future of the solar system is at least as interesting as its past.
The picture of the solar system that emerged from the ideas of Newton
and his contemporaries was very much that of a clockwork universe – a
celestial machine that, once set ticking, would continue to follow some
simple mathematical rules and continue ticking merrily away forever.
They even _built_ celestial machines, called orreries, with lots and
lots of cogwheels, in which little brass planets with ivory moons went
round and round when you turned a handle.

We now know that the cosmic clockwork can go haywire. It won’t happen
quickly, but there may be some big changes to the solar system on the
way. The underlying reason is chaos – chaos in the sense of ‘chaos
theory’, with all those fancy multicoloured ‘fractal’ things, a rapidly
expanding area of mathematics which is invading all of the other
sciences. Chaos teaches us that simple rules need not lead to simple
behaviour – something that Ponder Stibbons and the other wizards are in
the process of discovering. In fact, simple rules can lead to behaviour
that in certain respects has distinct elements of randomness. Chaotic
systems start out behaving predictably, but after you cross some
‘prediction horizon’ all predictions fail. Weather is chaotic, with a
prediction horizon of about four days. The solar system, we now know, is
chaotic, with a prediction horizon of tens of millions of years. For
example, we can’t be sure which side of the Sun Pluto will be in a
hundred million years’ time. It will be in the same _orbit_, but its
position in that orbit is completely uncertain.

We know this because of some mathematical work that was done, in part,
with an orrery – but this was a ‘digital orrery’, a custom-built
computer that could do celestial mechanics very fast. The digital orrery
was developed by Jack Wisdom’s research group, which – in competition
with its rival headed by Jaques Laskar – has been extending our
knowledge of the solar system’s future. Even though a chaotic system is
unpredictable in the long run, you can make a whole series of
independent attempts at predicting it and then see what they agree
about. According to the mathematics, you can be pretty sure _those_
things are right.

One of the most striking results is that the solar system is due to lose
a planet. About a billion years from now, Mercury will move outwards
from the Sun until it crosses the orbit of Venus. At that point, a close
encounter between Venus and Mercury will fling one or the other,
possibly both, out of the solar system altogether – unless they hit
something on the way, which is highly unlikely, but possible. It might
even be the Earth, or the passing Venus might join with us in a cosmic
dance whose end result is the _Earth_ being flung out of the solar
system. The details are unpredictable, but the general scenario is very
likely.

This means that we’ve got the wrong picture of the solar system. On a
human timescale it’s a very simple place, in which nothing much changes.
On its _own_ timescale, hundreds of millions of years, it’s full of
drama and excitement, with planets roaring all over the place, whirling
around each other, and dragging each other out of orbit in a mad
gravitational dance.

This is vaguely reminiscent of _Worlds in Collision_, a book published
in 1950 by Immanuel Velikovsky, who believed that a giant comet was once
spat out by Jupiter, passed close to the Earth _twice_, had a love
affair with Mars (giving rise to a brood of baby comets), and finally
retired to live in peace as Venus. Along the way it gave rise to many
strange effects that became stories in the Bible. Velikovsky was right
about one thing: the orbits of the planets are not fixed forever. He
wasn’t right about much else.

Do other solar systems encircle distant stars, or are we unique? Until a
few years ago there was a lot of argument about this question, but no
hard evidence. Most scientists, if they had to bet, would have backed
the existence of other solar systems, because the collapsing dustcloud
mechanism could easily get going almost anywhere there’s cosmic dust –
and there are a hundred billion stars in our own galaxy, let alone the
billions upon billions of others in the universe, all of which once
_were_ cosmic dust. But that’s only indirect evidence. Now the position
is much clearer. Characteristically, however, the story involves at
least one false start, and a critical reexamination of evidence that at
first looked rather convincing.

In 1967 Jocelyn Bell, a graduate student at the University of Cambridge,
was working for a doctorate under the direction of Anthony Hewish. Their
field was radio astronomy. Like light, radio is an electromagnetic wave,
and like light, radio waves can be emitted by stars. Those radio waves
can be detected using parabolic dish receivers – today’s satellite TV
dishes are a close relative – rather misleadingly called ‘radio
telescopes’, even though they work on very different principles from
normal optical telescopes. If we look at the sky in the radio part of
the electromagnetic spectrum, we can often ‘see’ things that are not
apparent using ordinary visible light. This should be no surprise: for
example military snipers can ‘see in the dark’ using infra-red waves –
detecting things by the heat they emit. The technology in those days
wasn’t terribly slick, and the radio signals were recorded on long rolls
of paper using automatic pens that drew wiggly curves in good
old-fashioned ink. Bell was given the task of looking for interesting
things on the paper charts – carefully scanning about 400 feet of chart
per week. What she found was very strange – a signal that pulsated about
thirty times per second. Hewish was sceptical, suspecting that the
signal was somehow generated by their measuring instruments, but Bell
was convinced it was genuine. She searched through three miles of
previous charts and found several earlier instances of the same signal,
which proved she was right. Something out there was emitting the radio
equivalent of a reverberating whistle. The object responsible was named
a ‘pulsar’ – a pulsating starlike object.

What could these strange things be? Some people suggested they were
radio signals from an alien civilization, but all attempts to extract
the alien equivalent of _The Jerry Springer Show_ failed (which was
possibly just as well). There seemed to be no structured messages hidden
in the signals. In fact, what they are now believed to be is even
stranger than an alien TV programme. Pulsars are thought to be neutron
stars – stars composed of highly degenerate matter containing only
neutrons, usually a mere 12 miles (20 km) in diameter.

Recall that neutron stars are incredibly dense, formed when a larger
star undergoes gravitational collapse. That initial star, as we have
seen, will be spinning, and because of conservation of angular momentum,
the resulting neutron star has to spin a lot faster. In fact, it
typically spins through about thirty complete revolutions every second.
For a star, that’s pretty speedy. Only a tiny star like a neutron star
can do it: if an ordinary star were to revolve that fast, its surface
would have to be travelling faster than light, which wouldn’t greatly
please Einstein. (More realistically, a normal star would be torn apart
at much lower speeds.) But a neutron star is small, and its angular
momentum is comparatively large, and pirouetting thirty times a second
is no problem at all.

For a helpful analogy, contemplate our own Earth. Like a pulsar, it
spins on an axis. Like a pulsar, it has a magnetic field. The magnetic
field has an axis too, but it’s different from the axis of rotation –
that’s why magnetic north is not the same as true north. There’s no good
reason for magnetic north to be the same as true north on a pulsar,
either. And if it isn’t, that magnetic axis whips round thirty times
every second. A rapidly spinning magnetic field emits radiation, known
as synchrotron radiation – and it emits it in two narrow beams which
point along the magnetic axis. In short, a neutron star projects twin
radio beams like the spinning gadgetry on top of a terrestrial
lighthouse. So if you look at a neutron star in radio light, you see a
bright flash as the beam points towards you, and then virtually nothing
until the beam comes round again. Every second, you see thirty flashes.
That’s what Bell had noticed.

If you’re a living creature of remotely orthodox construction, you
definitely do not want your star to be a pulsar. Synchrotron radiation
is spread over a wide range of wavelengths, from visible light to
x-rays, and x-rays can seriously damage the health of any creature of
remotely orthodox construction. But no astronomer ever seriously
suspected that pulsars might have planets, anyway. If a big star
collapses down to an incredibly dense neutron star, surely it will
gobble up all the odd bits of matter hanging around nearby. Won’t it?

Perhaps not. In 1991 Matthew Bailes announced that he had detected a
planet circling the pulsar PSR 1829-10, with the same mass as Uranus,
and lying at a distance similar to that of Venus from the Sun. The known
pulsars are much too far away for us to see planets directly – indeed
all stars, even the nearest ones, are too far away for us to see planets
directly. However, you can spot a star that has planets by watching it
wiggle as it walks. Stars don’t sit motionless in space – they generally
seem to be heading somewhere, presumably as the result of the
gravitational attraction of the rest of the universe, which is lumpy
enough to pull different stars in different directions. Most stars move,
near enough, in straight lines. A star with planets, though, is like
someone with a dancing partner. As the planets whirl round the star, the
star wobbles from side to side. That makes its path across the sky
slightly wiggly. Now, if a big fat dancer whirls a tiny feather of a
partner around, the fat one hardly moves at all, but if the two partners
have equal weight, they both revolve round a common centre. By observing
the shape of the wiggles, you can estimate how massive any encircling
planets are, and how close to the star their orbits are.

This technique first earned its keep with the discovery of double stars,
where the dancing partner is a second star, and the wobbles are fairly
pronounced because stars are far more massive than planets. As
instrumentation has become more accurate, ever tinier wobbles can be
detected, hence ever tinier dancing partners. Bailes announced that
pulsar PSR 1829-10 had a dancing partner whose mass was that of a
planet. He couldn’t observe the wiggles directly, but he could observe
the slight changes they produced in the timing of the pulses in the
signal. The only puzzling feature was the rotational period of the
planet: _exactly_ six Earth months. Bit of a coincidence. It quickly
turned out that the supposed wiggles were not caused by a planet going
round the pulsar, but by a planet much closer to home – Earth. The
instruments were doing the wiggling at _this_ end, not the pulsar at the
far end.

Scarcely had this startling claim of a pulsar planet been withdrawn,
however, when Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the
discovery of two more planets, both circling pulsar PSR 1257+12. A
pulsar solar system with at least two worlds! The way you wiggle when
you have two dancing partners is more complex than the way you do it
with one, and it’s difficult to mistake such a signal for something
generated at the receiving end by the motion of the Earth. So this
second discovery seems to be fairly solid, unless there is a way for
pulsars to vary their output signals in just such a complex manner
without having planets – maybe the radio beam could be a bit wobbly? We
can’t go there to find out, so we have to do the best we can from here;
and from here it looks good.

So there do exist planets outside our solar system. But it’s the
possibility of life that really makes distant planets interesting, and a
pulsar planet with all those x-rays is definitely not a place for
anything that wants to be alive for very long. But now conventional
stars are turning out to have planets, too. In October 1995 Michel Mayor
and Didier Queloz found wobbles in the motion of the star 51 Pegasi that
were consistent with a planet of about half Jupiter’s mass. Their
observations were confirmed by Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, who found
evidence for two more planets – one seven times the mass of Jupiter
orbiting 70 Virginis, and one two or three times Jupiter’s mass orbiting
47 Ursae Majoris.

By 1996 seven such planets had been found. As we write, about 70
extrasolar planets have been detected, either by the wobble method, or
by observing the light output from a star and seeing whether it changes
as an orbiting planet reflects different amounts of its light.
Theoretical calculations show that with improved telescopes, this method
might even be able to detect how fast the planet is rotating. Even now,
new extrasolar planets are being found virtually every week. The exact
number fluctuates because every so often astronomers discover problems
with previous measurements that cast doubt on somebody else’s favourite
new planet, but the general trend is up. And our nearest sunlike
neighbour, epsilon Eridani, is now known to possess an encircling
dustcloud, perhaps like our Sun’s Oort cloud, thanks to observations
made in 1998 by James Greaves and colleagues. We can’t see any wobbles,
though, so if it has planets, their mass must be less than three times
that of Jupiter. A year earlier, David Trilling and Robert Brown used
observations of a similar dustcloud round 55 Cancri, which does wobble,
to show that it has a planet whose mass is at most 1.9 Jupiters. This
definitely rules out alternative explanations of the unseen companion,
for example that it might be a ‘brown dwarf’ – a failed star.

Although today’s telescopes cannot detect an alien planet _directly_,
future telescopes might. Conventional astronomical telescopes use a big,
slightly dish-shaped mirror to focus incoming light, plus lenses and
prisms to pick up the image and send it to what used to be an eyepiece
for an astronomer to look down, but then became a photographic plate,
and is now likely to be a ‘charge-coupled device’ – a sensitive
electronic light-detector – hooked up to a computer. A single telescope
of conventional design would need a very big mirror indeed to spot a
planet round another star – a mirror some 100 yards (100 m) across. The
biggest mirror in existence today is one-tenth that size, and to see any
detail on the alien world you’d need an even bigger mirror, so none of
this is really practicable.

But you don’t have to use just one telescope.

A technique known as ‘interferometry’ makes it possible, in principle,
to replace a single mirror 100 yards wide by two much smaller mirrors
100 yards apart. Both produce images of the same star or planet, and the
incoming light waves that form those images are aligned _very_
accurately and combined. The two-mirror system gathers less light than a
complete 100-yard mirror would, but it can resolve the same amount of
tiny detail. And with modern electronics, very small quantities of
incoming light can be amplified. In any case, what you actually do is
use dozens of smaller mirrors, together with a lot of clever trickery
that keeps them aligned with each other and combines the images that
they receive in an effective manner.

Radio astronomers use this technique all the time. The biggest technical
problem is keeping the length of the path from the star to its image the
same for all of the smaller telescopes, to within an accuracy of one
wavelength. The technique is relatively new in optical astronomy,
because the wavelength of visible light is far shorter than that of
radio waves, but for visible light the real killer is that it’s not
worth bothering if your telescopes are on the ground. The Earth’s
atmosphere is in continual turbulent motion, bending incoming light in
unpredictable ways. Even a very powerful ground-based telescope will
produce a fuzzy image, which is why the Hubble Space Telescope is in
orbit round the Earth. Its planned successor, the Next Generation Space
Telescope, will be a million miles away, orbiting the Sun, delicately
poised at a place called Lagrange point L2. This is a point on the line
from the Sun to the Earth, but further out, where the Sun’s gravity, the
Earth’s gravity, and the centrifugal force acting on the orbiting
telescope all cancel out. Hubble’s structure includes a heavy tube which
keeps out unwanted light – especially light reflected from our own
planet. It’s a lot darker out near L2, and that cumbersome tube can be
dispensed with, saving launch fuel. In addition, L2 is a lot colder than
low Earth orbit, and that makes infra-red telescopy much more effective.

Interferometry uses a widely separated array of small telescopes instead
of one big one, and for optical astronomy the array has to be set up in
space. This produces an added advantage, because space is _big –_ or, in
more Discworldly terms, a place to be big _in_. The biggest distance
between telescopes in the array is called the baseline. Out in space you
can create interferometers with gigantic baselines – radio astronomers
have already made one that is bigger than the Earth by using one
ground-based telescope antenna and one in orbit. Both NASA and the
European Space Agency ESA have missions on the drawing-board for putting
prototype optical interferometer arrays – ‘flocks’ is a more evocative
term – into space.

Some time around 2003, NASA will launch Space Technology 3 (previously
named Deep Space 3), involving two spacecraft flying 0.6 miles (1 km)
apart and maintaining station relative to each other to a precision of
less than half an inch (1 cm). A successor, Star Light, will follow in
2005. Another NASA venture, the Space Interferometry Mission, will
employ three interferometers with a 10-metre baseline and is tentatively
due to launch in 2009. And NASA is thinking about a Terrestrial Planet
Finder in 2012, which will look not just for planets, but for carbon
dioxide, water vapour, ozone, and methane, which could be signs of life
– or, at least, of a planet that might be able to support life similar
to ours. Life Finder, with no specific date, would look more closely.

The European Space Agency (ESA) has similar missions on the
drawing-board. SMART-2, consisting of two satellites orbiting in
formation, is planned for 2006. A more ambitious ESA project is Darwin,
a flotilla of 6 telescopes that could be in space by 2014.

The biggest dream of all, though, is NASA’s Planet Imager, pencilled in
for 2020. A squadron of five spacecraft, each equipped with four optical
telescopes, will deploy itself into an interferometer with a baseline of
several thousand miles, and start mapping alien planets. The nearest
star is just over four light years away; computer simulations show that
50 telescopes with a baseline of just 95 miles (150 km) can produce
images of a planet 10 light years away that are good enough to spot
continents and even moons the size of ours. With 150 telescopes and the
same baseline, you could look at the Earth from 10 light years away and
see hurricanes in its atmosphere. Think what could be done with a
thousand-mile baseline.

Planets outside our solar system do exist, then – and they probably
exist in abundance. That’s good news if you’re hoping that somewhere out
there are alien lifeforms. The evidence for those, though, is
controversial.

Mars, of course, is the traditional place where we expect to find life
in the solar system – partly because of myths about Martian ‘canals’
which astronomers thought they’d seen in their telescopes but which
turned out to be illusions when we sent spacecraft out there to take a
close look, partly because conditions on Mars are in some ways similar
to those on Earth, though generally nastier, and partly because dozens
of science-fiction books have subliminally prepared us for the existence
of Martians. Life does show up in nasty places here, finding a foothold
in volcanic vents, in deserts, and deep in the Earth’s rocks.
Nevertheless, we’ve found no signs of life on Mars.

Yet.

For a while, some scientists thought we had. In 1996 NASA announced
signs of life on Mars. A meteorite dug up in the Antarctic with the code
number ALH84001 had been knocked off Mars 15 million years ago by a
collision with an asteroid, and plunged to Earth 13,000 years ago. When
it was sliced open and the interior examined at high magnification we
found three possible signs of life. These were markings like tiny fossil
bacteria, crystals containing iron like those made by certain bacteria,
and organic molecules resembling some found in fossil bacteria on Earth.
It all pointed to: Martian bacteria! Not surprisingly, this claim led to
a big argument, and the upshot is that all three discoveries are almost
certainly _not_ evidence for life at all. The fossil ‘bacteria’ are much
too small and most of them are steps on crystal surfaces that have
caused funny shapes to form in the metal coatings used in electron
microscopy; the iron-bearing crystals can be explained without invoking
bacteria at all; and the organic molecules could have got there without
the aid of Martian life.

However, in 1998 the Mars Global Surveyor did find signs of an ancient
ocean on Mars. At some point in the planet’s history, huge amounts of
water gushed out of the highlands and flowed into the northern lowlands.
It was thought that this water just seeped away or evaporated, but it
now turns out that the edges of the northern lowlands are all at much
the same height – like shorelines eroded by an ocean. The ocean, if it
existed, covered a quarter of Mars’s surface. If it contained life,
there ought to be Martian fossils for us to find, dating from that
period.

The current favourite for life in the solar system is a surprise, at
least to people who don’t read science fiction: Jupiter’s satellite
Europa. It’s a surprise because Europa is exceedingly cold, and covered
in thick layers of ice. However, that’s not where the life is suspected
to live. Europa is held in Jupiter’s massive gravitational grasp, and
tidal forces warm its interior. This _could_ mean that the deeper layers
of the ice have melted to form a vast underground ocean. Until recently
this was pure conjecture, but the evidence for liquid water beneath
Europa’s surface has now become very strong indeed. It includes the
surface geology, gravitational measurements, and the discovery that
Europa’s interior conducts electricity. This finding, made in 1998 by
K.K.Khurana and others, came from observations of the worldlet’s
magnetic field made by the space probe Galileo. The shape of the
magnetic field is unusual, and the only reasonable explanation so far is
the existence of an underground ocean whose dissolved salts make it a
weak conductor of electricity. Callisto, another of Jupiter’s moons, has
a similar magnetic field, and is now also thought to have an underground
ocean. In the same year, T.B.McCord and others observed huge patches of
hydrated salts (salts whose molecules contain water) on Europa’s
surface. This might perhaps be a salty crust deposited by upwelling
water from a salty ocean.

There are tentative plans to send out a probe to Europa, land it, and
drill down to see what’s there. The technical problems are formidable –
the ice layer is at least ten miles (16 km) thick, and the operation
would have to be carried out _very_ carefully so as not to disturb or
destroy the very thing we’re hoping to find: Europan organisms. Less
invasively, it would be possible to look for tell-tale molecules of life
in Europa’s thin atmosphere, and plans are afoot to do this too. Nobody
expects to find Europan antelopes, or even fishes, but it would be
surprising if Europa’s water-based chemistry, apparently an ocean a
hundred miles (160 km) deep, has _not_ produced life. Almost certainly
there are sub-oceanic ‘volcanoes’ where _very_ hot sulphurous water is
vented through the ocean floor. These provide a marvellous opportunity
for complicated chemistry, much like the chemistry that started life on
Earth.

The least controversial possibility would be an array of simple
bacteria-like chemical systems forming towers around the hot vents –
much as Earthly bacteria do in the Baltic sea. More complicated
creatures like amoebas and Parameciums would be a pleasant surprise;
anything beyond that, such as multicellular organisms, would be a bonus.
Don’t expect plants – there’s not enough light that far from the sun,
even if it could filter down through the layers of ice. Europan life
would have to be powered by chemical energy, as it is around Earth’s
underwater volcanic vents. Don’t expect Europan lifeforms to look like
the ones round _our_ vents, though: they will have evolved in a
different chemical environment.

In 2001 Brad Dalton, an astrogeophysicist (‘geologist’ for other worlds)
wondered whether we might already have seen alien life. Europa’s surface
is covered with red-brown marks, especially along what appear to be
cracks in the ice. Dalton discovered that the infrared spectrum of these
marks is very similar to that of Earthly bacteria that can survive in
very cold environments. In fact, for three species of bacteria the
spectrum is closer than that for the most likely alternative explanation
of the marks: mineral salts seeping up through the cracks. Europa’s
surface is too cold for even these bacteria, but they might thrive in
the ocean and somehow be transported to the surface.



FIFTEEN



THE DAWN OF DAWN


[] PONDER OPENED HIS EYES and looked up into a face out of time. A mug
of tea was thrust towards him.

It had a banana stuck in it.

‘Ah … Librarian,’ said Ponder weakly, taking the cup. He drank, stabbing
himself harmlessly in the left eye. The Librarian thought that
practically everything could be improved by the addition of soft fruit,
but apart from that he was a kindly soul, always ready with a helping
hand and a banana.*

The wizards had put Ponder to sleep on a bench in the storeroom. Dusty
items of magical gear were stacked from floor to ceiling. Most of it was
broken, and all of it was covered in dust.

Ponder sat up and yawned.

‘What time is it?’

‘Ook.’

‘Gosh, that late?’

As the warm clouds of sleep ebbed, it dawned on Ponder that he had left
the Project entirely in the hands of the senior faculty. The Librarian
was impressed at how long the door kept swinging.

Most of the main laboratory was empty, except for the pool of light
around the Project.

The Dean’s voice said, ‘Mappin Winterley … that’s a nice name?’

‘Shutup.’

Owen Houseworthy?’

‘Shutup.’

‘William.’

‘Shut _up_, Dean. That’s not funny. It never _was_ funny’ This was the
voice of the Archchancellor.

‘Just as you say, Gertrude.’

Ponder advanced towards the glowing Project.

‘Ah, Ponder,’ said the Senior Wrangler, stepping in front of it
hurriedly. ‘Good to see you looking so –’

‘You’ve been … doing things, haven’t you,’ said Ponder, trying to see
around him.

‘I’m sure everything can be mended,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘And it’s still _nearly_ circular,’ said the Dean, ‘Just ask Charlie
Grinder here. His name’s definitely not Mustrum Ridcully, I know that.’

‘I’m _warning_ you, Dean –’

‘What have you _done_?’

Ponder looked at his globe. It was certainly warmer now, and also rather
less globular. There were livid red wounds across one side, and the
other hemisphere was mainly one big fiery crater. It was spinning
gently, wobbling as it did so.

‘We’ve saved most of the bits,’ said the Senior Wrangler, watching him
hopefully.

‘What did you _do_?’

‘We were only trying to be helpful,’ said the Dean. ‘Gertrude here
suggested we make a sun, and –’

‘Dean?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes, Archchancellor?’

‘I would just like to point out, Dean, that it was not a very funny joke
to begin with. It was a pathetic attempt, Dean, at dragging a sad laugh
out of a simple figure of speech. Only four-year-olds and people with a
serious humour deficiency keep _on_ and _on_ about it. I just wanted to
bring this out into the open, Dean, calmly and in a spirit of
reconciliation, for your own good, in the hope that you may be made
well. We are all here for you, although I can’t imagine what _you_ are
here for.’ Ridcully turned to the horrified Ponder. ‘We made a sun –’

‘–some suns–’ muttered the Dean.

‘–some suns, yes, but … well, this “falling in circles” business is very
difficult, isn’t it? Very hard to get the hang of.’

‘You crashed a sun into my world?’ said Ponder.

‘Some suns,’ said Ridcully.

‘_Mine_ bounced off,’ said the Dean.

‘And created this rather embarrassingly large hole here,’ said the
Archchancellor. ‘And incidentally knocked a huge lump out of the place.’

‘But at least _bits_ of my sun _burned_ for a long time,’ said the Dean.

‘Yes, but _inside_ the world. That doesn’t count.’ Ridcully sighed. ‘Yet
your machine, Mister Stibbons, says a sun sixty miles across won’t work.
And that’s ridiculous.’

Ponder stared hollow-eyed at his world, wobbling around like a crippled
duck.

‘There’s no narrativium,’ he said dully. ‘It doesn’t know what size a
sun should be.’

‘Ook,’ said the Librarian.

‘Oh dear,’ said Ridcully. ‘Who let him in here?’

The Librarian was informally banned from the High Energy Magic building,
owing to his inherent tendency to check on what things were by tasting
them. This worked very well in the Library, where taste had become a
precision reference system, but was less useful in a room occasionally
containing bus bars throbbing with several thousand thaums. The ban was
informal, of course, because anyone capable of pulling the dooknob
_right through_ an oak door can obviously go where he likes.

The orangutan knuckled over to the dome and tasted it. The wizards
tensed as delicate black fingers twiddled the knobs of the omniscope,
bringing into focus the furnace that had exploded yesterday. It was a
tiny point of light now, surrounded by coruscating streamers of glowing
gas.

The focus moved in to the glowing ember.

‘Still too big,’ said Ridcully. ‘Nice try, old chap.’

The Librarian turned towards him, the light of the explosion moving
across his face, and Ponder held his breath.

It came out in a rush.

‘Someone give me a light!’

The globes on his desk rolled off and bounced on the floor as he tried
to grab one. He held it as the Senior Wrangler obligingly lit a match,
and waggled it this way and that.

‘It’ll work!’

‘Jolly good!’ said Ridcully. ‘What will?’

‘Days and nights!’ said Ponder. ‘Seasons, too, if we do it right! Well
done, sir! I’m not sure about the wobble, but you might have got it just
right!’

‘That’s the kind of thing we do,’ said Ridcully, beaming. ‘We’re the
chaps for getting things right, sure enough. What things did we get
right this time?’

‘The spin!’

‘That was _my_ sun that did that,’ the Dean pointed out, smugly.

Ponder was almost dancing. And then, suddenly, he looked grave.

‘But it all depends on fooling people down there,’ he said. ‘And there
isn’t anyone down there … HEX?’

There was a mechanical rattle as HEX paid attention.

+++ Yes? +++

‘Is there any way we can get on to the world?’

+++ Nothing Physical May Enter The Project +++

‘I want someone down there to observe things from the surface.’

+++ That Is Possible. Virtually Possible +++

‘Virtually?’

+++ But You Will Need A Volunteer. Someone To Fool +++

‘This is Unseen University,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘That should
present _no_ problem.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* A magical accident had once turned the University’s Librarian into an
orangutan, a state which he enjoyed sufficiently to threaten, with
simple and graphic gestures, anyone who suggested turning him back. The
wizards noticed no difference now. An orangutan seemed such a _natural_
shape for a librarian.



SIXTEEN



EARTH AND FIRE


[] WE DON’T KNOW IF THE EARTH IS A TYPICAL PLANET. We don’t know how
common ‘aqueous’ planets with oceans and continents and atmospheres are.
In our solar system, Earth is the only one. And we’d better be careful
about phrases like ‘earthlike planet’, because for about half of Earth’s
history it has not been the familiar blue-green planet that we see in
satellite photos, with its oxygen atmosphere, white clouds, and
everything else that we are used to. In order to _get_ an earthlike
planet, in today’s sense, you have to start with an unearthlike planet
and wait a few billion years. And what you get is quite different from
what, only a few decades ago, we _thought_ the Earth was like.

We thought it was a very stable place – that if you could go back to the
time when the oceans and continents first separated out, they’d have
been in the same places they are now. And we thought that the interior
of the Earth was pretty simple.

We were wrong.

We know a lot about the surface of the Earth, but we still know much
less about what’s inside it. We can study the surface by going there,
which is usually fairly easy, unless we want to look at the top of
Everest. We can also penetrate the ocean depths using vehicles that can
protect frail humans against the huge pressures of the deep seas, and we
can dig holes down into the ground and send people down those too. We
can get further information about the top few miles of the Earth’s crust
by drilling, but that’s just a thin skin, comparatively speaking. We
have to infer what it’s like deeper down from indirect observations, of
which the most important are shockwaves emitted by earthquakes,
laboratory experiments, and theory.

The surface of our planet generally seems fairly placid – apart from
weather and the sometimes severe effects of the seasons – but there are
plenty of volcanoes and earthquakes to remind us that not so far below
our feet it’s a lot less hospitable. Volcanoes form where the molten
rocks inside the Earth well up to the surface, often accompanied by
massive clouds of gas or ash, all of it emerging under high pressure. In
1980 Mount St Helens in Washington State, USA blew up like a
pressure-cooker whose lid had been tied down, and about half of a large
mountain simply disappeared. Earthquakes happen when the Earth’s crustal
rocks slide past each other along deep cracks. Later we’ll see what
drives these two things, but they need to be put into perspective:
despite occasional disasters, the surface of the Earth has been
sufficiently hospitable for life to have evolved and survived for
several billion years.

The Earth is nearly spherical, having a diameter of 7,928 miles (12,756
km) at the equator but only 7,902 miles (12,714 km) from pole to pole.
The slight broadening at the equator is the result of centrifugal forces
from the Earth’s spin, and originally set in when the planet was molten.
The Earth is the densest planet in the solar system, with an average
density 5.5 times that of water. When the Earth condensed from the
primal dustcloud the chemical elements and compounds that formed it
separated into layers: the denser materials sank to the centre of the
Earth and the lighter ones floated to the top, much as a layer of light
oil floats on denser water.

In 1952 the American geophysicist Francis Birch set out a description of
the general structure of our planet which has been modified in only
minor ways since. The inside of the Earth is hot, but the pressure there
is also very high: the most extreme conditions occur at the centre where
the temperature is about 6,000°C and the pressure is 3 million times
atmospheric pressure. Heat tends to make rocks and metals melt, but
pressure tends to solidify them, so it is the combination of these two
conflicting factors that determines whether the materials are liquid or
solid. The centre of the Earth is a rather lumpy spherical core, mainly
made of iron, with a radius of roughly 2,220 miles (3,500 km). The
innermost regions of the core, out to a radius of 600 miles (1000 km),
are solid, but a thick outer layer is molten. The very top layers of the
Earth form a thin skin, the crust, which is only a few miles thick.
Between crust and core lies the mantle, which is solid, formed from a
variety of silicate rocks. The mantle also divides into an inner layer
and an outer layer, with the division occurring at a radius of about
3,600 miles (5,800 km). Above this ‘transition zone’ the main rocks are
olivine, pyroxine, and garnet; below it their crystal structures become
more tightly packed, forming such minerals as perovskite. The outermost
parts of the mantle, and the deeper parts of the crust where the two
join, are again molten.

The crust is between 3 and 12 miles (5 and 20 km) thick, and there’s a
lot going on there. Those parts of the crust that form the continental
land masses are mainly made of granite. Beneath the oceans, the crustal
layer is predominately basalt, and this basalt layer continues
underneath the continental granite. So the continents are broad, thin
sheets of granite stuck on top of a basalt skin. From the Earth’s
surface the most evident features of the granite layers are mountains.
The highest ones look big to us, but they rise no more than 5 miles (9
km) above sea level, a mere seventh of a per cent of the Earth’s radius.
The deepest part of the ocean, the Mariana Trench in the northwest
Pacific, plunges 7 miles (11 km) beneath the waves. The overall
deviation from an ideal sphere (strictly, spheroid, because of the
flattening of the poles) is about one-third of a per cent – about as
irregular as the shallow indentations you find on a basketball, which
add to its grip. Our home planet, give or take a bit of squashing, is
remarkably round and surprisingly smooth. Gravity made it that way, and
it keeps it that way – except that some small but interesting movements
in the mantle and the crust add a few wrinkles.

How do we know all this? Mainly because of earthquakes. When an
earthquake hits, the whole Earth rings like a bell hit by a hammer.
Shockwaves, vibrations emitted by the earthquake, travel through the
Earth. They are deflected by transition zones between different kinds of
material, such as that between core and mantle, or lower and upper
mantle. They bounce off the Earth’s crust and head back down again.
There are several kinds of wave, and they travel with different speeds.
So the short sharp shock of an earthquake gives rise to a very complex
pattern of waves. When the waves hit the surface they can be detected
and recorded, and recordings made in different places can be compared.
Working backwards from these recorded signals, it is possible to deduce
a certain amount about the underground geography of our planet.

One consequence of the Earth’s internal structure is a magnetic field. A
compass needle points roughly north. The standard ‘lie-to-children’ is
that the Earth is a giant magnet. Let’s unpack the next layer of
explanation.

The Earth’s magnetic field has long been something of a puzzle since
magnets are seldom made out of rock, but once you realize that the Earth
has a whopping great lump of iron inside it, everything makes much more
sense. The iron doesn’t form a ‘permanent’ magnet, like the ones you
inexplicably buy to stick plastic pigs and teddy bears on the fridge
door; it’s more like a dynamo. In fact it’s called the geomagnetic
dynamo. The iron in the core is, as we’ve said, mostly molten, except
for a slightly lumpy solid bit in the middle. The liquid part is still
heating up – the old explanation of this was that radioactive elements
are denser than most of the rest of the Earth, and therefore sank to the
middle where they became trapped, and their radioactive energy is
showing up as heat. The current theory is quite different: the molten
part of the core is heating up because the solid part is cooling down.
The liquid iron that is in contact with the solid core is itself slowly
solidifying, and when it does so it loses heat. That heat has to go
somewhere, and it can’t just waft away unnoticed as warm air because
everything is thousands of miles underground. So it goes into the molten
part of the core and heats it up.

You’re probably wondering how the part that is in contact with the solid
core can simultaneously be getting cooler, so that it solidifies too,
_and_ be getting hotter as a result of that solidification, but what
happens is that the hot iron moves away as soon as it’s been warmed up.
For an analogy, think about a hot air balloon. When you heat air, it
rises: the reason is that air expands when it gets hot, so becomes less
dense, and less dense things float on top of denser things. A balloon
traps the hot air in a huge cloth bag, usually brightly coloured and
emblazoned with adverts for banks and estate agents, and floats up along
with the air. Now hot iron rises, just as hot air does, and that takes
the newly heated iron away from the solid core. It heads upwards,
cooling slowly as it does so, and when it gets to the top it cools down
– comparatively speaking – and starts to sink again. The result is that
the Earth’s core circulates up and down, being heated at the bottom and
cooling at the top. It can’t all go up at the same time, so in some
regions it’s heading up, and in others it’s heading back down again.
This kind of heat-driven circulation is called convection.

According to physicists, a moving fluid can develop a magnetic field
provided three conditions hold. First, the fluid must be able to conduct
electricity – which iron can do fine. Secondly, there has to be at least
a tiny magnetic field present to begin with – and there are good reasons
to suppose that the Earth had a bit of personal magnetism, even early
on. Thirdly, something has to _twist_ the fluid, distorting that initial
magnetic field – and for the Earth this twisting happens by way of
Coriolis forces, which are like centrifugal forces but a bit more
subtle, caused by the Earth’s rotation on its axis. Roughly speaking,
the twisting tangles the original, weak magnetic field like spaghetti
being twirled on to a fork; then the magnetism bubbles upwards, trapped
in the rising parts of the iron core. As a result of these motions, the
magnetic field becomes a lot stronger.

So, yes, the Earth does behave a _bit_ as though it had a huge bar
magnet buried inside it, but there’s rather more going on than that.
Just to paint the picture in a little more detail, there are at least
seven other factors that contribute to the Earth’s magnetic field. Some
of the materials of the Earth’s crust _can_ form permanent magnets. Like
a compass needle pointing north, these materials align themselves with
the stronger field from the geomagnetic dynamo and reinforce it. In the
upper regions of the atmosphere is a layer of ionized gas – gas bearing
an electrical charge. Until satellites were invented, this ‘ionosphere’
was crucial for radio communications, because radio waves bounced back
down off the charged gas instead of beaming off into space. The
ionosphere is moving, and moving electricity creates a magnetic field.
About 15,000 miles (24,000 km) out lies the ring current, a low-density
region of ionized particles forming a huge torus. This slightly reduces
the strength of the magnetic field. The next two factors, the
magnetopause and the magnetotail, are created by the interaction of the
Earth’s magnetic field with the solar wind – a continual stream of
particles outward bound from our hyperactive sun. The magnetopause is
the ‘bow wave’ of the Earth’s magnetic field as it heads into the solar
wind; the magnetotail is the ‘wake’ on the far side of the Earth, where
the Earth’s own field streams outwards getting ever more broken up by
the solar wind. The solar wind also causes drag along the direction of
the Earth’s orbit, creating a further kind of motion of magnetic field
lines known as field-aligned currents. Finally, there are the convective
electrojets. The ‘northern lights’, or aurora borealis, are dramatic,
eerie sheets of pale light that waft and shimmer in the northern polar
skies: there is a similar display, the aurora australis, near the south
pole. The auroras are generated by two sheets of electrical current that
flow from magnetopause to magnetotail; these in turn create magnetic
fields, the westward and eastward electrojets.

Yes, _like_ a bar magnet – in the sense that an ocean is like a bowl of
water.

Magnetic materials found in ancient rocks show that every so often –
about once every half a million years, but with no sign of regularity –
the Earth’s magnetic field flips polarity, reversing magnetic north and
south. We’re not sure exactly why, but mathematical models suggest that
the magnetic field can exist in these two orientations, with neither of
them being totally stable. So whichever one it’s in, it eventually loses
stability and flips to the other one. The flips are rapid, taking about
5,000 years; the periods between flips are about a hundred times as
long.

Most of the other planets have magnetic fields, and these can be even
more complicated and difficult to explain than that of the Earth. We’ve
still got a lot to learn about planetary magnetism.

One of the most dramatic features of our planet was discovered in 1912
but wasn’t accepted by science until the 1960s, and some of the most
compelling evidence was left by those flips in the Earth’s magnetism.
This is the notion that the continents are not fixed in place, but
wander slowly over the surface of the planet. According to Alfred
Wegener, the German who first publicized the idea, all of today’s
separate continents were originally part of a single supercontinent,
which he named Pangea (‘All-Earth’). Pangea existed about 300 million
years ago.

Wegener surely wasn’t the first person to speculate along such lines,
because he got the idea – in part, at least – from the curious
similarity between the shapes of the coasts of Africa and South America.
On a map the resemblance is striking. That wasn’t Wegener’s only source
of inspiration, however. He wasn’t a geologist; he was a meteorologist,
specializing in ancient climates. Why, he wondered, do we nowadays find
rocks in regions with cold climates that were clearly laid down in
regions with warm climates? And why, for that matter, do we nowadays
find rocks in regions with warm climates that were clearly laid down in
regions with cold climates? For example, remains of ancient glaciers 420
million years old can still be seen in the Sahara Desert, and fossil
ferns are found in Antarctica. Pretty much everyone else thought that
the climate must have changed: Wegener became convinced that the climate
had stayed much the same, give or take the odd ice age, and the
continents had shifted. Perhaps they’d been driven apart by convection
in the mantle – he wasn’t sure.

This was considered a crazy idea: it wasn’t suggested by a geologist,
_and_ it ignored all sorts of inconvenient evidence, _and_ the alleged
fit between South America and Africa wasn’t all that good anyway, _and_
– to top it all – there was no conceivable mechanism for carting
continents around. Certainly not convection, which was too weak. Great
A’Tuin may lug a planet around on its back, but that’s fantasy: in the
real world, there seemed to be no conceivable way for it to happen.

We use the word ‘conceivable’ because a number of very bright and very
reputable scientists were busily making one of the subject’s worst, and
commonest, errors. They were confusing ‘I can’t see a way for this to
happen’ with ‘There _is_ no way for this to happen.’ One of them, it
pains one of us to admit, was a mathematician, and a brilliant one, but
when his calculations told him that the Earth’s mantle couldn’t support
forces strong enough to move continents, it didn’t occur to him that the
theories on which those calculations were based might be wrong. His name
was Sir Harold Jeffreys, and he really should have been more
imaginative, because it wasn’t just the _shapes_ of the land on either
side of the Atlantic that fitted. The geology fitted too, and so did the
fossil record. There is, for example, a fossil beast called
_Mesosaurus_. It lived 270 million years ago, and is found only in South
America and Africa. It couldn’t have swum the Atlantic, but it could
have evolved on Pangea and spread to both continents before they drifted
apart.

In the 1960s, however, Wegener’s ideas became orthodox and the theory of
‘continental drift’ became established. At a meeting of leading
geologists, a Ponder Stibbons-like young man named Edward Bullard and
two colleagues enlisted the aid of a new piece of kit called a computer.
They instructed the machine to find the _best_ fit between Africa and
South America, _and_ North America, _and_ Europe, allowing for a bit of
breakage but not too much. Instead of using today’s coastline, which was
never a very sensible idea but made it possible to claim that the fit
wasn’t actually that good, they used the contour corresponding to a
depth of 3200 feet (1000 m) underwater, whose shape is less likely to
have been changed by erosion. The fit _was_ good, and the geology across
the join matched amazingly well. And even though the people at the
conference came out just as divided in their opinions as they’d been
when they went in, somehow continental drift had become the consensus.

Today we have much more evidence, and a fair idea of the mechanism. Down
the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, and elsewhere in other oceans, there
runs a ridge – roughly north-south and about midway between South
America and Africa. Volcanic material is welling up along that ridge,
and spreading sideways. It’s been spreading for 200 million years, and
it’s still doing it today: we can even send deep-sea submarines down
there to watch. It’s not spreading at speeds humans can see – America
moves about three-quarters of an inch (2 cm) further away from Africa
every year, about the same rate that your fingernails grow – but today’s
instruments can easily measure such a change.

The most striking evidence for continental drift is magnetic: the rocks
on either side bear a curious pattern of magnetic stripes, reversing
polarity from north to south and back again, and that pattern is
_symmetric_ on either side of the ridge – making it clear that the
stripes were frozen in place as the rocks cooled in the Earth’s magnetic
field. Whenever the Earth’s dynamo flipped polarity, as it does from
time to time, the rock immediately adjacent to the ridge-line, on either
side, got the same new polarity. As the rocks then spread apart, they
took the same patterns of stripes with them.

The surface of the Earth is not a solid sphere. Instead, the continents
and the ocean-beds float on top of large, essentially solid plates, and
those plates can be driven apart by upwelling magma. (Oh, but mostly by
convection in the mantle. Jeffreys didn’t know what we now know about
how the mantle moves.) There are about a dozen plates, ranging from 600
miles (1000 km) across to 6000 miles (10,000 km), and they twist and
turn. Where plate boundaries rub against each other, sticking and
slipping and sticking and slipping, you get a lot of earthquakes and
volcanoes. Especially along the ‘Pacific rim’, the edge of the Pacific
Ocean up along the west coast of Chile, central America, the USA, along
down past Japan, and back round New Zealand, which is all the edge of a
single gigantic plate. Where plate boundaries collide you get mountain
ranges: one plate burrows under the other, lifting it up and crushing
and folding its edges. India was once not part of the main Asian
continent at all, but came crashing into it, creating the world’s
highest mountain range, the Himalayas. India hasn’t fully stopped even
now, and the Himalayas are still being pushed up by the force of the
impact.



SEVENTEEN



SUIT OF SPELLS


[] A FIGURE WAS FROGMARCHED through the early-morning corridors,
surrounded by the senior wizards. It wore a long white nightshirt, and a
nightcap with the word ‘Wizzard’ embroidered, inexpertly, on it. It was
Unseen University’s least qualified but most well-travelled member,
usually away from something. And it was in trouble.

‘This won’t hurt a bit,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘It’s right up your street,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘It’s on a log and in your face,’ explained the Dean.

‘That isn’t what HEX said, is it?’ said the Senior Wrangler, as the
sleepy figure was hustled around a corner.

‘Very similar, but what HEX said made less sense,’ said the Dean.

They hurried across the lawn and barged through the doors in the High
Energy Magic Building.

Mustrum Ridcully finished filling his pipe, and struck a match on the
dome of the Project. Then he turned, and smiled.

‘Ah, Rincewind,’ he said. ‘Good of you to come.’

‘I was dragged, sir.’

‘Well done. And I have good news. I intend to appoint you Egregious
Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography. The post is vacant.’

Rincewind looked past him. On the far side of the room some of the
junior wizards were working in a haze of magic that made it hard to see
exactly what it was they were working on, but it looked almost like …
some sort of skeleton.

‘Oh,’ he said. ‘Er … but I’m very happy as assistant librarian. I’m
getting really good at peeling the bananas.’

‘But the new post offers you room, board and all your laundry done,’
said the Archchancellor.

‘But I get that already, sir.’

Ridcully drew leisurely on his pipe and blew out a cloud of blue smoke.

‘Up until now,’ he said.

‘Oh. I see. And you’re about to send me somewhere really dangerous,
yes?’

Ridcully beamed. ‘How _did_ you guess?’

‘It wasn’t a guess.’

Fortunately the Dean had been forewarned and had grabbed the back of
Rincewind’s nightshirt, and so he was ready. The wizard’s bedroom
slippers skidded uselessly on the tiles as he tried to make for the
door.

‘It’s best to let him run for a little while,’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘It’s a nervous reaction.’

‘And the best thing is,’ said Ridcully, to Rincewind’s back, ‘that
although we are sending you to a place of immense danger where no living
thing could possibly survive, you will not, in so many words, actually
_be_ there. Won’t that be nice?’

Rincewind hesitated.

‘How many words?’

‘It’ll be like being in a … story,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Or … or a
dream, as far as I can understand it. Mister Stibbons! Come and
explain!’

‘Oh, hello, Rincewind,’ said Ponder, stepping out of the mist and wiping
his hands on a rag. ‘Twelve spells HEX has amalgamated for this! It’s an
amazing piece of thaumaturgical engineering! Do come and see!’

There are creatures which have evolved to live in coral reefs and simply
could not survive in the rough, tooth-filled wastes of the open sea.
They continue to exist by lurking among the dangerous tentacles of the
sea anemone or around the lips of the giant clam and other perilous
crevices shunned by all sensible fish.

A university is very much like a coral reef. It provides calm waters and
food particles for delicate yet marvellously constructed organisms that
could not possibly survive in the pounding surf of reality, where people
ask questions like ‘Is what you do of any use?’ and other nonsense.

In fact Rincewind in his association with UU had survived dangers that
would have stripped a hero to the bone, but he nevertheless believed,
despite all the evidence to the contrary, that he was _safe_ in the
university. He would do anything to stay on the roll.

At the moment this involved looking at some sort of skeletal armour made
out of smoke while Ponder Stibbons gabbled incomprehensible words in his
ear. As far as he could understand it, the thing put all your senses
somewhere else when you stayed here. So far, that sounded quite
acceptable, since it had always seemed to Rincewind that if you had to
go a long way away it’d be nice to stay at home while you did it, but
people seemed a little unclear about where _pain_ fitted in.

‘We’ll send you – that is, your senses – somewhere,’ said Ridcully.

‘Where?’ said Rincewind.

‘Somewhere amazing,’ said Ponder. ‘We just want you to tell us what you
see. And then we’ll bring you back.’

‘At what point will things go wrong?’ said Rincewind.

‘Nothing can possibly go wrong.’

‘Oh,’ Rincewind sighed. There was no point in arguing with a statement
like that. ‘Could I have some breakfast first?’

‘Of course, dear fellow,’ said Ridcully, patting him on the back. ‘Have
a hearty meal!’

‘Yes, I thought that’d probably be the case,’ said Rincewind gloomily.

When he’d been taken away, under escort by the Dean and a couple of
college porters, the wizards clustered around the project.

‘We’ve found a suitably large “sun”, sir,’ said Ponder, taking care to
annunciate the inverted commas. ‘We’re moving the world now.’

‘A very suspicious idea, this,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Suns go
_around_. We see it happen every day. It’s not some kind of optical
illusion. This is a bit of a house of cards we’re building here.’

‘It’s the only one available, sir.’

‘I mean, things fall down because they’re heavy, you see? The thing that
causes them to fall down because they’re heavy is, in fact, the fact
that they’re heavy. ‘Heavy’ means inclined to fall down. And, while you
can call me Mr Silly –’

‘Oh, I wouldn’t do that, sir,’ Ponder said, glad that Ridcully couldn’t
see his face.

‘–I somehow feel that a crust of rock floating around on a ball of
red-hot iron should not be thought of as “solid ground”.’

‘I think, sir, that this universe has a whole parcel of rules that take
the place of narrativium,’ said Ponder. ‘It’s … sort of … copying us, as
you so perspicaciously pointed out the other day. It’s making the only
kind of suns that can work in it, and the only worlds that can exist if
you don’t have chelonium.’

‘Even so … going _around_ a sun … that’s the sort of thing the Omnian
priests used to teach, you know. Mankind is so insignificant that we
just float around on some speck, and all that superstitious stuff. You
know they used to persecute people for saying the turtle existed? And
any fool can _see_ it exists.’

‘Yes, sir. It certainly does.’

There were problems, of course

‘Are you sure it’s the right sort of sun?’ said Ridcully.

‘You told HEX to find one that was “nice and yellow, nice and dull, and
not likely to go off bang”, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘It seems to be a pretty
average one for this universe.’

‘Even so … tens of millions of miles … that’s a long way away for our
world.’

‘Yes, sir. But we tried some experimental worlds close to and they fell
in, and we tried one a bit further out and that’s baked like a biscuit,
and there’s one … well, it’s a bit of an armpit, really. The students
have got quite good at making different sorts. Er … we’re calling them
planets.’

‘A planet, Stibbons, is a lump of rock a mere few hundred yards across
which gives the night sky a little, oh, I don’t know, what’s the word, a
little _je ne sais quoi_ –’

‘These will work, sir, and we’ve such a lot of them. As I said, sir,
I’ve come to agree with your theory that, within the Project, matter is
trying to do all by itself what in the real world is done by purpose,
probably conveyed via narrativium.’

‘Was that my theory?’ said Ridcully.

‘Oh, yes, sir,’ said Ponder, who was learning the particular survival
skills of the academic reef.

‘It sounds rather a parody to me, but I dare say we will understand the
joke in time. Ah, here comes our explorer. ‘Morning, Professor,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Are you ready?’

‘No,’ said Rincewind.

‘It’s very simple,’ said Ponder, leading the reluctant traveller across
the floor. ‘You can think of this assemblage of spells as a suit of
very, very good armour. Things will flicker, and then you’ll be …
somewhere else. Except you’ll really be _here_, you see? But everything
you see will be somewhere else. Absolutely nothing will hurt you because
HEX will buffer all extreme sensations and you’ll simply receive a
gentle analogue of them. If it’s freezing you’ll feel rather chilly, if
it’s boiling you’ll feel a little hot. If a mountain falls on you it’ll
be a bit of a knock. Time where you’re going is moving very fast but HEX
can slow it down while you are there. HEX says that he can probably
exert small amounts of force within the Project, so you will be able to
lift and push things, although it will feel as though you’re wearing
very large gloves. But this should not be required because all we want
you to do to start with … Professor … is tell us what you see.’

Rincewind looked at the suit. It was, being largely make up of spells
under HEX’S control, shimmery and insubstantial. Light reflected off it
in odd ways. The helmet was far too large and completely covered the
face.

‘I have three … no, four … no, _five_ questions,’ he said.

‘Yes?’

‘Can I resign?’

‘No.’

‘Do I have to understand anything you just told me?’

‘No.’

‘Are there any monsters where I’m being sent?’

‘No.’

‘Are you sure?’

‘Yes.’

‘Are you totally positive about that?’

‘Yes.’

‘I’ve just thought of another question,’ said Rincewind.

‘Fire away’

‘Are you _really_ sure?’

‘Yes!’ snapped Ponder. ‘And even if there were any monsters, it wouldn’t
matter.’

‘It’d matter to me.’

‘No it wouldn’t! I have explained! If some huge toothed beast came
galloping towards you, it’d have no effect on you at all.’

‘Another question?’

‘Yes?’

‘Is there a toilet in this suit?’

‘No.’

‘Because there will be if a huge toothed beast comes galloping towards
me.’

‘In that case, you just say the word and you can come back and use the
privy down the hall,’ said Ponder. ‘Now, stop worrying, please. These
gentlemen will help you, er, insert yourself into the thing, and we’ll
begin …’

The Archchancellor wandered up as the reluctant professor was enveloped
in the glittering, not-quite-there stuff.

‘A thought occurs, Ponder,’ he said.

‘Yes, sir?’

‘I suppose there’s no chance that there _is_ life anywhere in the
Project?’

Ponder looked at him in frank astonishment.

‘Absolutely _not_, sir! It can’t happen. Simple matter is obeying a few
rather odd rules. That’s probably enough to get things … spinning and
exploding and so on, but there’s no possibility that they could cause
anything so complex as –’

‘The Bursar, for example?’

‘Not even the Bursar, sir.’

‘He’s not very complicated, though. If only we could find a parrot that
was good at sums, we could pension the old chap off.’

‘No, sir. There’s nothing like the Bursar. Not even an ant or a blade of
grass. You might as well try to tune a piano by throwing rocks at it.
Life does not turn up out of nowhere, sir. Life is a lot more than just
rocks moving in circles. The one thing we’re not going to run into is
monsters.’

Two minutes later Rincewind blinked and found, when he opened his eyes,
that they were somewhere else. There was a rather grainy redness in
front of them, and he felt rather warm.

‘I don’t think it’s working,’ he said.

‘You should be seeing a landscape,’ said Ponder, in his ear.

‘It’s all just red.’

There was the sound of distant whispering. Then the voice said, ‘Sorry.
The aim wasn’t very good. Wait a moment and we’ll soon have you out of
that volcanic vent.’

In the HEM Ponder took the ear trumpet away from his ear. The other
wizards heard it sizzling, as if a very angry insect was trapped
therein.

‘Curious language,’ he said, in mild surprise, ‘well, let’s raise him
somewhat and let time move on a little … ’

He put the trumpet to his ear and listened.

‘He says it’s pissing down,’ he announced.



EIGHTEEN



AIR AND WATER


[] IT’S CERTAINLY A SURPRISE that the rigid rules of physics permit
anything as flexible as life, and the wizards can hardly be blamed for
not anticipating the possibility that living creatures might come into
being on the barren rocks of Roundworld. But Down Here is not as
different from Up There as it seems. Before we can talk about life,
though, we need to deal with a few more features of our home planet:
atmosphere and oceans. Without them, life as we know it could not have
arisen; without life as we know it, our oceans and atmosphere would be
distinctly different.

The story of the Earth’s atmosphere is inextricably intertwined with
that of its oceans. Indeed, the oceans can reasonably be viewed as just
a rather damp, dense layer of the atmosphere. The oceans and the
atmosphere evolved together, exerting strong influences on each other,
and even today such an ‘obviously’ atmospheric phenomenon as weather
turns out to be closely related to what happens in the oceans. One of
the main recent breakthroughs in weather prediction has been to
incorporate the oceans’ ability to absorb, transport, and give off heat
and moisture. To some extent, the same point can be made about the solid
regions of the Earth, which also co-evolved with the air and the seas,
and also interact with them. But the link between oceans and atmosphere
is stronger.

The Earth and its atmosphere condensed together out of the primal
gascloud that gave rise to the Sun and to the solar system. As a rough
rule of thumb, the denser materials sank to the bottom of the condensing
clump of matter that we now inhabit, and the lighter ones floated to the
top. Of course there was, and still is, a lot more going on than that,
so the Earth is not just a series of concentric shells of lighter and
lighter matter, but the general distribution of solids, liquids, and
gases makes sense if you think about it that way. And so, as the molten
rocks of Earth began to cool and solidify, the nascent planet found
itself already enveloped in a primordial atmosphere.

It was almost certainly very different from the atmosphere today, which
is a mixture of gases, the main ones being the elements nitrogen, oxygen
and the inert gas argon, and the compounds carbon dioxide and water (in
the form of vapour). The primordial atmosphere also differed
considerably from the gas cloud out of which it condensed – it wasn’t
just a representative sample of what was around. There are several
reasons for this. One is that a solid planet and a gas cloud retain
different gases. Another is that a solid planet can generate gases, by
chemical or even nuclear reactions, or by other physical processes,
which can escape from its interior into its atmosphere.

The early cloud was rich in hydrogen and helium, the lightest of
elements. The speed with which a molecule moves becomes slower as the
molecule gets heavier – a molecule with one hundred times the mass moves
at about one-tenth the speed. Anything that moves faster than the
Earth’s escape velocity, about 7 miles per second (11 km/sec), can
overcome the planet’s gravity and disappear into space. Molecules in the
atmosphere whose molecular weight – what you get by adding up the atomic
weights of the component atoms – is less than about 10 should therefore
disappear into the void. Hydrogen has molecular weight 2, helium 4, so
neither of these otherwise abundant gases should be expected to hang
around. The most abundant molecules in the primal gas cloud, with
molecular weight greater than 10, are methane, ammonia, water, and neon.
This is similar to what we find today on the gas giants Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune – except that they are more massive, so have a
greater escape velocity, and can retain lighter gases such as hydrogen
and helium as well. We can’t be certain that the Earth of 4 billion
years ago possessed a methane-ammonia atmosphere, because we don’t know
exactly how the primal gas cloud condensed, but it is clear that if the
ancient Earth ever possessed such an atmosphere, it lost nearly all of
it. Today there is little methane or ammonia, and what there is has a
biological origin.

Shortly after the Earth was formed, the atmosphere contained very little
oxygen. Around 2 billion years ago, the proportion of oxygen in the
atmosphere increased to about 5%. The most likely cause of this change –
though perhaps not the only one – was the evolution of photosynthesis.
At some stage, probably soon after 4 billion years ago, bacteria in the
oceans evolved the trick of using the energy of sunlight to turn water
and carbon dioxide into sugar and oxygen. The oxygen that they produced
did not show up in the atmosphere, in any appreciable amount, until two
billion years ago. A lot of gases and minerals had to be oxidised first.
Plants use the same trick today, and they use the same molecules as one
of the early bacteria did: chlorophyll. Animals proceed in pretty much
the opposite direction: they power themselves by using oxygen to burn
food, producing carbon dioxide instead of using it up. Those early
photosynthesizing bacteria used the sugar for energy, and multiplied
rapidly, but to them the oxygen was just a form of toxic waste, which
bubbled up into the atmosphere. The oxygen level then stayed roughly
constant until about 600 million years ago, when it underwent a rapid
increase to the current level of 21%.

The amount of oxygen in today’s atmosphere is far greater than could
ever be sustained without the influence of living creatures, which not
only produce oxygen in huge quantities but use it up again, in
particular locking it up in carbon dioxide. It is startling how far ‘out
of balance’ the atmosphere is, compared to what would happen if life
were suddenly removed and only inorganic chemical processes could act.
The amount of oxygen in the atmosphere is dynamic – it can change on a
timescale that by geological standards is extremely rapid, a matter of
centuries rather than millions of years. For example, if some disaster
occurred which killed off all the plants but left all the animals, then
the proportion of oxygen would _halve_ in about 500 years, to the level
on mountain peaks in the Andes today. The same goes for the scenario of
‘nuclear winter’ introduced by Carl Sagan, in which clouds of dust
thrown into the atmosphere by a nuclear war stop most of the sunlight
from reaching the ground. In this case, plants may still eke out some
kind of existence, but they don’t photosynthesize: they do use oxygen,
though, and so do the microorganisms that break down dead plants.

The same screening effect could also occur if there were unusual numbers
of active volcanoes, or if a big meteorite or comet hit the Earth. When
comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 hit Jupiter in 1994, the impact was equivalent to
half a million hydrogen bombs.

The ‘budget’ of income and expenditure for oxygen, and the associated
but distinct budget for carbon, is still not understood. This is an
enormously important question because it is vital background to the
debate about global warming. Human activities, such as electrical power
plants, industry, use of cars, or simply going about one’s usual
business and breathing while one does so, generate carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide is a ‘greenhouse gas’ which traps incoming sunlight like
the glass of a greenhouse. So if we produce too much carbon dioxide, the
planet should warm up. This would have undesirable consequences, ranging
from floods in low-lying regions such as Bangladesh to big changes in
the geographical ranges of insects, which could inflict serious damage
on crops. The question is: do these human activities actually increase
the Earth’s carbon dioxide, or does the planet compensate in some way?
The answer makes the difference between imposing major restrictions on
how people in developed (and developing) countries live their lives, and
letting them continue along their current paths. The current consensus
is that there are clear, though subtle, signs that human activities _do_
increase the carbon dioxide levels, which is why major international
treaties have been signed to reduce carbon dioxide output. (Actually
taking that action, rather than just promising to do so, may prove to be
a different matter altogether.)

The difficulties involved in being sure are many. We don’t have good
records of past levels of carbon dioxide, so we lack a suitable
‘benchmark’ against which to assess today’s levels – although we’re
beginning to get a clearer picture thanks to ice cores drilled up from
the Arctic and Antarctic, which contain trapped samples of ancient
atmospheres. If ‘global warming’ _is_ under way, it need not show up as
an increase in temperature anyway (so the name is a bit silly). What it
shows up as is climatic disturbance. So even though the eight warmest
summers in Britain in the 20th century all occurred in the nineties, we
can’t simply conclude that ‘it’s getting warmer’, and hence that global
warming is a fact. The global climate varies wildly anyway – what would
it be doing if we weren’t here?

A project known as Biosphere 2 attempted to sort out the basic science
of oxygen/carbon transactions in the global ecosystem by setting up a
‘closed’ ecology – a system with no inputs, beyond sunlight, and no
outputs whatsoever. In form it was like a gigantic futuristic garden
centre, with plants, insects, birds, mammals, and people living inside
it. The idea was to keep the ecology working by choosing a design in
which everything was recycled.

The project quickly ran into trouble: in order to keep it running, it
was necessary to keep adding oxygen. The investigators therefore assumed
that somehow oxygen was being lost. This turned out to be true, in a
way, but for nowhere near as literal a reason. Even though the whole
idea was to monitor chemical and other changes in a closed system, the
investigators hadn’t weighed how much carbon they’d introduced at the
start. There were good reasons for the omission – mostly, it’s extremely
difficult, since you have to estimate carbon content from the wet weight
of live plants. Not knowing how much carbon was really there to begin
with, they couldn’t keep track of what was happening to carbon monoxide
and carbon dioxide. However, ‘missing’ oxygen ought to show up as
increased carbon dioxide, and they could monitor the carbon dioxide
level and see that it wasn’t going up.

Eventually it turned out that the ‘missing’ oxygen wasn’t escaping from
the building: it was being turned into carbon dioxide. So why didn’t
they see increased carbon dioxide levels? Because, unknown to anybody,
carbon dioxide was being absorbed by the building’s concrete as it
‘cured’. Every architect knows that this process goes on for ten years
or so after concrete has set, but this knowledge is irrelevant to
architecture. The experimental ecologists knew nothing about it at all,
because esoteric properties of poured concrete don’t normally feature in
ecology courses, but to them the knowledge was vital.

Behind the unwarranted assumptions that were made about Biosphere 2 was
a plausible but irrational belief that because carbon dioxide _uses up_
oxygen when it is formed, then carbon dioxide is _opposite_ to oxygen.
That is, oxygen counts as a credit in the oxygen budget, but carbon
dioxide counts as a debit. So when carbon dioxide disappears from the
books, it is interpreted as a debt cancelled, that is, a credit.
Actually, however, carbon dioxide contains a positive quantity of
oxygen, so when you lose carbon dioxide you lose oxygen too. But since
what you’re looking for is an increase in carbon dioxide, you won’t
notice if some of it is being lost.

The fallacy of this kind of reasoning has far wider importance than the
fate of Biosphere 2. An important example within the general frame of
the carbon/oxygen budget is the role of rainforests. In Brazil, the
rainforests of the Amazon are being destroyed at an alarming rate by
bulldozing and burning. There are many excellent reasons to prevent this
continuing – loss of habitat for organisms, production of carbon dioxide
from burning trees, destruction of the culture of native Indian tribes,
and so on. What is _not_ a good reason, though, is the phrase that is
almost inevitably trotted out, to the effect that the rainforests are
the ‘lungs of the planet’. The image here is that the ‘civilized’
regions – that is, the industrialized ones – are net producers of carbon
dioxide. The pristine rainforest, in contrast, produces a gentle but
enormous oxygen breeze, while absorbing the excess carbon dioxide
produced by all those nasty people with cars. It _must_ do, surely? A
forest is full of plants, and plants produce oxygen.

No, they don’t. The net oxygen production of a rainforest is, on
average, zero. Trees produce carbon dioxide at night, when they are not
photosynthesizing. They lock up oxygen and carbon into sugars, yes – but
when they die, they rot, and release carbon dioxide. Forests can
indirectly remove carbon dioxide by removing carbon and locking it up as
coal or peat, and by releasing oxygen into the atmosphere. Ironically,
that’s where a lot of the human production of carbon dioxide comes from
– we dig it up and burn it again, using up the same amount of oxygen.

If the theory that oil is the remains of plants from the carboniferous
period is true, then our cars are burning up carbon that was once laid
down by plants. Even if an alternative theory, growing in popularity, is
true, and oil was produced by bacteria, then the problem remains the
same. Either way, if you burn a rainforest you add a one-off surplus of
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, but you do _not_ also reduce the
Earth’s capacity to generate new oxygen. If you want to reduce
atmospheric carbon dioxide _permanently_, and not just cut short-term
emissions, the best bet is to build up a big library at home, locking
carbon into paper, or put plenty of asphalt on roads. These don’t sound
like ‘green’ activities, but they are. You can cycle on the roads if it
makes you feel better.

Another important atmospheric component is nitrogen. It is a lot easier
to keep track of the nitrogen budget. Organisms – plants especially, as
every gardener knows – need nitrogen for growth, but they can’t just
absorb it from the air. It has to be ‘fixed’ – that is, combined into
compounds that organisms can use. Some of the fixed nitrogen is produced
as nitric acid, which rains down after thunderstorms, but most nitrogen
fixation is biological. Many simple lifeforms ‘fix’ nitrogen, using it
as a component of their own amino-acids. These amino-acids can then be
used in everybody else’s proteins.

The Earth’s oceans contain a huge quantity of water – about a third of a
billion cubic miles (1.3 billion cubic km). How much water there was in
the earliest stages of the Earth’s evolution, and how it was distributed
over the surface of the globe, we have little idea, but the existence of
fossils from about 3.3 billion years ago shows that there must have been
water around at that time, probably quite a lot. As we’ve already
explained, the Earth – along with the rest of the solar system, Sun
included – condensed from a vast cloud of gas and dust, whose main
constituent was hydrogen. Hydrogen combines readily with oxygen to form
water, but it also combines with carbon to form methane and with
nitrogen to form ammonia.

The primitive Earth’s atmosphere contained a lot of hydrogen and a fair
quantity of water vapour, but initially the planet was too hot for
liquid water to exist. As the planet slowly cooled, its surface passed a
critical temperature, the boiling point of water. That temperature was
probably not exactly the same as the one at which water boils now; in
fact even today it’s not one inflexible temperature, because the boiling
point of water depends on pressure and other circumstances. Nor was it
just a simple matter of the atmosphere’s getting colder: its composition
also changed because the Earth was spouting out gases from its interior
through volcanic activity.

A crucial factor was the influence of sunlight, which split some of the
atmospheric water vapour into oxygen and hydrogen. The hydrogen escaped
from the Earth’s relatively weak gravitational field, so the proportion
of oxygen got bigger while that of water vapour got smaller. The effect
of this was to _increase_ the temperature at which the water vapour
could condense. So as the temperature of the atmosphere slowly fell, the
temperature at which water vapour would condense rose to meet it.
Eventually the atmosphere going _down_ passed the boiling point of water
going _up_, and water vapour began to condense into liquid water … and
to fall as rain.

It must have absolutely bucketed down.

When the rain hit the hot rocks beneath, it promptly evaporated back
into vapour, but as it did so it cooled the rocks. Heat and temperature
are not the same. Heat is equivalent to energy: when you heat something,
you input extra energy. Temperature is one of the ways in which that
energy can be expressed: it is the vibration of molecules. The faster
those vibrations are, the higher the temperature. Ordinarily, the
temperature of a substance goes up if you heat it: all the extra heat is
expressed as more vibration of the molecules. However, at transitions
from solid to liquid, or liquid to vapour or gas, the extra heat goes
into changing the state of the substance, not into making its
temperature higher. So you can throw in a lot of heat and instead of the
stuff getting hotter, it changes state – a so-called phase transition.
Conversely, when a substance cools through a phase transition, it gives
off a lot of heat. So the cooling water vapour put more heat back into
the upper atmosphere, from which it could be radiated away into space
and lost. When the hot rocks turned the water back into vapour, the
rocks got a lot cooler very suddenly. In a geologically short space of
time, the rocks had cooled below the boiling point of water, and now the
falling rain no longer got turned back into vapour – at least, not much
of it did.

It may well have rained for a million years. So it’s not surprising that
Rincewind noticed that it was a bit wet.

Thanks to gravity, water goes downhill, so all that rain accumulated in
the lowest depressions in the Earth’s irregular surface. Because the
atmosphere had a lot of carbon dioxide in it, those early oceans
contained a lot of dissolved carbon dioxide, making the water slightly
acidic. There may have been hydrochloric and sulphuric acids too. The
acid ate away at the surface rocks, causing minerals to dissolve in the
oceans; the sea began to get salty.

At first the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere increased slowly,
because the effect of incoming sunlight isn’t particularly dramatic. But
now life got in on the act, bubbling off oxygen as a by-product of
photosynthesis. The oxygen combined with any remaining hydrogen in the
atmosphere, whether on its own or combined inside methane, to produce
_more_ water. This also fell as rain, and increased the amount of ocean,
leading to more bacteria, more oxygen – and so it continued until the
available hydrogen pretty much ran out.

Originally it used to be thought that the oceans just kept dissolving
the rocks of the continents, accumulating more and more minerals,
getting saltier and saltier until the amount of salt reached its current
value of about 3.5%. The evidence for this is the percentage of salt in
the blood of fishes and mammals, which is about 1%. In effect, it was
believed that fish and mammal blood were ‘fossilized’ ocean. Today we
are still often told that we have ancient seas in our blood. This is
probably wrong, but the argument is far from settled. It is true that
our blood is salty, and so is the sea, but there are plenty of ways for
biology to adjust salt content. That 1% may just be whatever level of
salt makes best sense for the creature whose blood it is. Salt – more
properly, the ions of sodium and chlorine into which it decomposes –
have many biological uses: our nervous systems, for instance, wouldn’t
work without them. So while it is entirely believable that evolution
took advantage of the _existence_ of salt in the sea, it need not be
stuck with the same proportion. On the other hand, there is good reason
to think that cells first evolved as tiny free-floating organisms in the
oceans, and those early cells weren’t sophisticated enough to fight
against a difference in salt concentration between their insides and
their outsides, so they may well have settled on the same concentration
because that was all they could initially manage – and having done so,
they were rather stuck with it.

Can we decide by taking a more careful look at the oceans? Oceans have
ways to lose salt as well as gaining it. Seas can dry out; the Dead Sea
in Israel is a famous example. There are salt mines all over the place,
relics of ancient dried-up seas. And just as living creatures – bacteria
– took out carbon dioxide, turning it into oxygen and sugar, so they can
take out other dissolved minerals too. Calcium, carbon and oxygen go
into shells, for instance, which fall to the ocean floor when their
owner dies. The clincher is … time. The oceans are thought to have
reached their current composition, and in particular their current
degree of saltiness, about 2 to 1.5 billion years ago. The evidence is
the chemical composition of sedimentary rocks – rocks formed from
deposits of shells and other hard parts of organisms – which seems not
to have changed much in the interim. (Though in 1998 Paul Knauth
presented evidence that the early ocean may have been _more_ salty than
it is now, with somewhere between 1.5 to 2 times as much salt. His
calculations indicate that salt could not have been deposited on the
continents until about 2.5 billion years ago.) Simple calculations based
on how much material dissolves in rivers and how fast rivers flow show
that the entire salt content of the oceans can be supplied from
dissolved continental rocks in twelve million years – the twinkling of a
geological eye. If salt had just built up steadily, the oceans would now
be far more salt than water. So the oceans are not simply sinks for
dissolved minerals, one-way streets into which minerals flow and get
trapped. They are mineral-processing machines. The geological evidence
of the similarity of ancient and modern sedimentary rocks suggests that
the inflow and the outflow pretty much balance each other.

So do we have ancient seas in our blood? In a way. The _proportions_ of
magnesium, calcium, potassium, and sodium are exactly the same as they
were in the ancient seas from which our blood may have evolved – but
cells seem to prefer a salt concentration of 1%, not 3%.



NINETEEN



THERE IS A TIDE …


[] ‘HE’S RIGHT ABOUT THE RAIN,’ said the Senior Wrangler, who was at the
omniscope. ‘You’ve got clouds again. And there’s lots of volcanoes.’

‘I’m moving him on further … Oh. Now he says it’s dark and cold and he’s
got a headache …’

‘Not very _graphic_, is it?’ said the Dean.

‘He says it’s a splitting headache.’

HEX wrote something.

‘Oh,’ said Ponder. ‘He’s under water. I’m sorry about that, I’m afraid
he’s a little hard to position accurately. We’re still not sure what
size he should be. How’s this?’

The trumpet rattled. ‘He’s still under water, but he says he can see the
surface. I think that’s as good as we’re going to get. Just walk
forward.’

As one wizard, they turned to watch the suit.

It hung in the air, a few inches above the floor. As they watched, the
figure inside made hesitant walking motions.

It was not a nice day.

It was still raining, although it had slackened off recently, with
sporadic outbreaks during the early part of the millennium and scattered
showers during the last couple of decades. Now ten thousand rivers were
finding their way to the sea. The light was grey and gave the beach a
flat, monochrome, and certainly very damp look.

Whole religions have been inspired by the sight of a figure emerging,
miraculously, from the sea. It would be hard to guess at what strange
cult might be inspired by the thing now trudging out of the waves,
although avoidance of strong drink and certainly of seafood would
probably be high on its list of ‘don’ts’.

Rincewind looked around.

There was no sand underfoot. The water sucked at an expanse of rough
lava. There was no seaweed, no seabirds, no little crabs – nothing
potentially dangerous at _all_.

‘There’s not a lot going on,’ he said. ‘It’s all rather dull.’

‘It’ll be dawn in a moment,’ said Ponder’s voice in his ear. ‘We’ll be
interested to see what you think of it.’

Strange way of putting it, Rincewind thought, as he watched the sun come
up. It was hidden behind the clouds, but a greyish-yellow light picked
its way across the landscape.

‘It’s all right,’ he said. ‘The sky’s a dirty colour. Where is this?
Llamedos? Hergen? Why aren’t there _any_ seashells? Is this high tide?’

All the wizards were trying to speak at once.

‘I can’t think of _everything_, sir!’

‘But _everyone_ knows about tides!’

‘Perhaps some mechanism for raising and lowering the sea bed would be
acceptable?’

‘If it comes to that, what causes tides _here_?’

‘Can we all please stop _shouting_?’

The babble died down.

‘Good,’ said Ridcully. ‘Over to you, Mister Stibbons.’

Stibbons stared at the notes in front of him.

‘I’m … there’s … it’s a puzzler, sir. On a round world the sea just sits
there. There’s no edge for it to pour off.’

‘It’s always been believed that the sea is in some way attracted to the
moon,’ the Senior Wrangler mused. ‘You know … the attraction of serene
beauty and so on.’

Dead silence fell.

Finally, Ponder managed: ‘No one said anything to me about a moon.’

‘You’ve _got_ to have a moon,’ said Ridcully.

‘It should be easy, shouldn’t it?’ said the Dean. ‘_Our_ moon goes
around the Disc’

‘But where can we put it?’ said Ponder. ‘It’s got to be light and dark,
we’ve got to move it for phases, and it’s got to be almost as big as the
sun and we _know_ that if you try to make things sun-sized here they,
well, become suns.’

‘Our moon is closer than the sun,’ said the Dean. ‘That’s why we get
eclipses.’

‘Only about ninety miles,’ said Ponder. ‘That’s why it’s burned black on
one side.’

‘Dear me, Mister Stibbons, I’m surprised at you,’ said Ridcully. ‘The
damn great sun looks pretty big even though it’s a long way away. Put
the moon nearer.’

‘We’ve still got the big lump that the Dean knocked out of the planet,’
said the Senior Wrangler. ‘I made the students park it around the
Target.’

‘Target?’ said Ponder.

‘It’s the big fat planet with the coloured lines on,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘I made them bring the whole lot out to the new, er, sun
because frankly they were a nuisance where they were. At least when
they’re spinning round you know where they’re coming from.’

‘Are the students still sneaking in here at night to play games?’ said
Ridcully.

‘I’ve put a stop to that,’ said the Dean. ‘There’s too many rocks and
snowballs around this sun in any case. _Masses_ of the things. Such a
waste.’

‘Well, can we get the lost lump here soon?’

‘HEX can manipulate time from Rincewind’s point of view,’ said Ponder.
‘For us, Project time is very fast … we should get it here before the
coffee arrives.’

‘Can you hear me, Rincewind?’

‘Yes. Any chance of some lunch?’

‘We’re getting you some sandwiches. Now, can you see the sun properly?’

‘It’s all very hazy, but yes.’

‘Can you tell me what happens if I do … this?’

Rincewind squinted into the grey sky. Shadows were racing across the
landscape.

‘You’re not going to tell me you’ve just caused an eclipse of the sun,
are you?’

Rincewind could hear faint cheering in the background.

‘And you’re quite certain it’s an eclipse?’ said Ponder.

‘What else is it? A black disc is covering the sun and there’s no
birdsong.’

‘Is it about the right size?’

‘What kind of question is that?’

‘All right, all right. Ah, here are your san – what? How? Excuse me …
_now_ what? …’

The senior wizards were puzzled again, and demonstrated this by prodding
Ponder while he was trying to talk. The wizards were great ones for the
prod as a means of getting attention.

‘You can _see_ there’s only one moon,’ said the Senior Wrangler, for the
third time.

‘All right … how about this?’ said Ponder. ‘Let us suppose that in some
way this world has got both water that _likes_ moons and water that
can’t stand moons at any price. If it’s got about the same amount of
both, then that at least explains why there seem to be high tides on
both sides at once. I think we can dispose of the Invisible Moon theory,
interesting though it was, Dean.’

‘I like that explanation,’ said Ridcully. ‘It is elegant, Mister
Stibbons.’

‘It’s only a guess, sir.’

‘Good enough for physics,’ said Ridcully.



TWENTY



A GIANT LEAP FOR MOONKIND


[] HUMANITY HAS ALWAYS KNOWN the Moon is important. It often comes out
at night, which is useful; it changes, in a sky where change is rare;
some of us believe our ancestors live there. That last one might not be
capable of experimental verification, but nevertheless humanity in
general got it right. The Moon reaches out ghostly tentacles, gravity
and light; it may even be our protector.

The wizards are right to worry that they’ve forgotten to give Roundworld
a Moon, though as usual they’re worried for the wrong reasons.

The Moon is a satellite of the Earth: we go round the Sun, but the Moon
goes round _us_. It’s been up there for a long time, and in its quiet
way it’s been exceedingly busy. The Moon affects people as well as baby
turtles. The main way it affects us is by causing tides. It may affect
us in other, less obvious ways, although many common beliefs about the
moon are, to say the least, scientifically controversial. The female
menstrual cycle repeats roughly every four weeks, much the same time
that it takes the moon to go round the Earth – one month, in fact, a
word that comes from ‘moon’. In popular belief this numerical similarity
is no coincidence, as for example in ‘the wrong time of the month’. On
the other hand, the Moon is the epitome of regularity, as predictable as
the date of Christmas day, which cannot be said of the menstrual cycle.*
Lovers, of course, swoon and spoon beneath the Moon in June … It is also
widely held that people go mad when there is a full Moon, or – a more
extreme type of madness – those who are suitably afflicted turn into
wolves for a night.

The werewolf legend plays a central role in _Men at Arms_. Most of the
time lance-constable Angua of the Ankh-Morpork city watch is a
well-built ash-blonde, but when the Moon is full she turns into a wolf
who can smell colours and rip out people’s jugular veins. But it _does_
play havoc with her private life. ‘It was always a problem, growing
fangs and hair every full moon. Just when she thought she’d been lucky
before, she’d found that few men are happy in a relationship where their
partner grows hair and howls.’ Fortunately Corporal Carrot is
unperturbed by these occasional changes. He likes a girlfriend who
enjoys long walks.

The Moon is unusual, and it is quite likely that without it, none of us
would be here at all. Not because of the alleged effect on lovers, who
find a way Moon or no, but because the Moon protects the Earth from some
nasty influences that might have made it difficult for life to have
arisen, or at least to have got beyond the most rudimentary forms. What
makes the Moon unusual is not that it is a companion to a planet: all of
the planets except Mercury and Venus have moons. It _is_ remarkable
because it is so big in comparison to its parent planet. Only Pluto has
a satellite – Charon, discovered in 1978 by Jim Christy – that is
comparable in relative size to our Moon. It’s not stretching things much
to say that we live on one half of a double planet.

We know the Moon is very different from the Earth in all sorts of ways.
Its gravity is weaker, so it wouldn’t be able to keep an atmosphere for
very long, even if it had one, which it doesn’t by any sensible use of
the term. The Moon’s surface is rock and rock dust, with no seas
anywhere (water easily escapes too) – although in 1997 NASA probes
discovered substantial quantities of water ice at the Moon’s poles,
hidden from the warmth of the Sun by the permanent shadows of crater
walls. That’s good news for future lunar colonies, which could act as
bases for the exploration of the solar system. The Moon is a good place
to start from, because your spaceship doesn’t need much fuel to escape
the Moon’s pull; the Earth is of course a bad place to start from,
because down here gravity is so much stronger. How typical of humans to
have evolved in the wrong place …

How was the Moon formed? Did it condense out of the primal dustclouds
along with the Earth? Did it form separately and get captured later? Are
the craters extinct volcanoes, or are they marks made by lumps of rock
smashing into the Moon? We know rather more about the Moon than we do
about most other bodies in the solar system, because _we’ve been there_.
In April 1969, Neil Armstrong stepped down on to the surface of the
Moon, fluffed his lines, and made history. Between 1968 and 1972 the
United States sent ten Apollo missions to the Moon and back. Of these,
Apollos 8, 9, and 10 were never intended to land; Apollo-11 was that
historic first landing; and Apollo-13 never made it down to the surface,
suffering a disastrous explosion early in its flight and turning into an
excellent movie.

The rest of Apollos 11-17 landed, and between them they brought back 800
lb (400 kg) of moon rock. Most of it is still stored in the Lunar
Curatorial Facility in NASA’s Johnson Space Center at Clear Lake,
Houston; a lot of it has never been seriously looked at at all, but what
_has_ been analysed has taught us a lot about the origins and nature of
the Moon.

The Moon is about a quarter of a million miles (400,000 km) from the
Earth. It is less dense than the Earth, on average, but the Moon’s
density is very similar to that of the Earth’s _mantle_, a curious fact
that may not be coincidence. The same side of the Moon always faces the
Earth, though it wobbles a bit. The dark markings on it are called
_maria_, Latin for ‘seas’ – but they’re not. They’re flatfish plains of
rock which at one time was molten and flowed across the lunar surface
like lava from a volcano. Nearly all of the craters are impact craters,
where meteorites have smashed into the Moon. There are lots of them
because there’s a lot of rocks floating about in space, the Moon has no
atmosphere to shield it by burning up the rocks through frictional
heating, and the Moon has no weather to grind them back down again until
they disappear. The Earth’s atmosphere is a pretty good shield, but once
geologists started looking they found remains of 160 impact craters down
here, which is interesting given that a lot of them will have eroded
away in the wind and the rain. But more of that when we get to
dinosaurs.

Today the Moon always turns the same face to the Earth, which means that
it rotates once round its axis every month, the same time that it takes
to revolve around the Earth. (If it didn’t rotate at all, it would
always be pointing in the same direction – not the same direction
relative to the Earth, but the same direction period. Imagine someone
walking round you in a circle but always facing north, say. Then they
don’t always face _you_. In fact, you see all sides of them.) It wasn’t
always like this. Over hundreds of millions of years, the effect of
tides has been to slow down the rotation rates of both Earth and Moon.
Once the moon’s rotation became synchronized with its revolutions round
the Earth, the system stabilized. The moon also used to be quite a bit
closer to the Earth, but over long periods of time it has moved further
and further out.

Between 1600 and 1900 three theories of the formation of the Moon came
into vogue and out again. One was that the Moon had formed at the same
time as the Earth when the dustcloud condensed to form the solar system
– Sun, planets, satellites, the whole ball of wax … or rock, anyway.
This theory, like early theories of the solar system’s formation, falls
foul of angular momentum. The Earth is spinning too fast, and the moon
is revolving too fast, to be consistent with the Moon condensing from a
dustcloud. (We misled you earlier when we said that the dustcloud theory
explained the satellites too. Mostly it does, but not our enigmatic
Moon. Lies-to-children, you see – _now_ you’re ready for the next layer
of complication.)

Theory two was that the Moon is a piece of the Earth that broke away,
maybe when the Earth was still completely molten and spinning rather
fast. That theory bounced into the bin because nobody could find a
plausible way for a spinning molten Earth to eject anything that would
remotely resemble the Moon, even if you waited a bit for things to cool
down.

According to theory three, the Moon formed elsewhere in the solar
system, and was wandering along when it happened to come within the
Earth’s gravitational clutches and couldn’t get out again. This theory
was very popular, even though gravitational capture is distinctly tricky
to arrange. It’s a bit like trying to throw a golfball into the hole so
that it goes round and round just inside the rim. What usually happens
is that it falls to the bottom (collides with the Earth) or does what
every golfer has experienced to their utter horror, and goes in for a
split second before climbing back out again (escapes without being
captured).

The rock samples from Apollo missions added to the mystery of the Moon’s
origins. In some respects, Moon rock is astonishingly similar to Earth
rock. If they were similar in most respects, this would be evidence for
a common origin, and we’d have to take another look at the theory that
they both condensed from the same dustcloud. But Moon rock doesn’t
resemble _all_ Earth rock, only the mantle. The current theory, which
dates from the early 1980s, is that the Moon was once _part_ of the
Earth’s mantle. It wasn’t ejected as a result of the Earth’s spin: it
was knocked into space about four billion years ago when a giant body,
about the size of Mars, struck the early Earth a glancing blow. Computer
calculations show that such an impact can, if conditions are right,
strip a large chunk of mantle from the Earth, and sort of smear it out
into space. This takes about 13 minutes (aren’t computers good?). Then
the ejected mantle, which is molten, begins to condense into a ring of
rocks of various sizes. Some of it forms a big lump, the proto-Moon, and
this quickly sweeps up most of the rest. What’s left doesn’t go away so
easily, however, but over 100 million years nearly all of it crashes
into either the Moon or the Earth, because of gravity.

The first simulations to support this theory of the Moon’s formation
suffered from some problems; in particular, they dated the impact very
early in the Earth’s formation, in order to get the Moon’s angular
momentum right. But if the collision had occurred that early, then the
Moon would have accumulated a lot of iron from later impacts, just as
the Earth did. However, there is little iron on (or in) the Moon. More
recent work shows that a rather later impact could also give the Moon
the correct angular momentum, and avoids this difficulty. However, it
predicts that about 80% of the impacting body would have ended up on the
Moon. In order for the Moon to resemble Earth’s mantle as closely as it
does, the impacting body would _also_ have had to resemble the Earth’s
mantle.

This line of theorising may be losing the plot, though, because it was
that very resemblance that needed explanation in the first place, and
gave rise to the giant impact theory of the Moon’s formation. Anything
that explains why the impactor was like the mantle, such as ‘it formed
at the same distance from the Sun as the Earth did,’ can probably
explain why the Moon is like the mantle, without an impactor being
needed. Maybe both the Moon and the Earth’s mantle were splashed off
something _else_ by an impact.

Because Earth has weather – especially back then, oh boy, did it have
weather _then –_ the resulting impact craters all got eroded away; but
because the Moon has no weather, the lunar impact craters didn’t get
eroded away, and a lot of them are still there now. The great charm of
this theory is that it explains many different features of the Moon in
one go – its similarity to the Earth’s mantle, the fact that its surface
seems to have undergone a sudden and extreme amount of heating about 4
billion years ago, its craters, its size, its spin – even those sea-like
maria, released as the proto-Moon slowly cooled. The early solar system
was a violent place.

In fact, the Dean’s mis-designed sun might have done us some good after
all …

The Moon affects life on Earth in at least two or three ways that we
know of, probably dozens more that we haven’t yet appreciated.

The most obvious effect of the Moon on the Earth is the tides – a fact
that the wizards are stumbling towards. Like most of science, the story
of the tides is not entirely straightforward, and only loosely connected
to what common sense, left to its own devices, would lead us to expect.
The common sense bit is that the Moon’s gravity pulls at the Earth, and
it pulls more strongly on the bit that is closest to the Moon. When that
bit is land, nothing much happens, but when it’s water – and more than
half our planet’s surface is ocean – it can pile up. This explanation is
a lie-to-children, and it doesn’t agree with what actually happens. It
leads us to expect that at any given place on Earth, high tide occurs
when the Moon is overhead, or at least at its highest point in the sky.
That would lead to one high tide every day – or, allowing for a little
complexity in the Earth-Moon system, one high tide every 24 hours 50
minutes.

Actually, high tides occur twice a day, 12 hours and 25 minutes apart.
Exactly half the figure.

Not only that: the pull of the Moon’s gravity at the surface of the
Earth is only one ten millionth of the Earth’s surface gravity; the pull
of the Sun is about half that. Even when combined together, these two
forces are not strong enough to lift masses of water through heights of
up to 70 feet (21 m) – the biggest tidal movement on Earth, occurring in
the Bay of Fundy between Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.

An acceptable explanation of the tides eluded humanity until Isaac
Newton worked out the law of gravity and did the necessary calculations.
His ideas have since been refined and improved, but he had the basics.

For simplicity, ignore everything except the Earth and the Moon, and
assume that the Earth is completely made of water. The watery Earth
spins on its axis, so it is subjected to centrifugal force and bulges
slightly at the equator. Two other forces act on it: the Earth’s gravity
and the Moon’s. The shape that the water takes up in response to these
forces depends on the fact that water is a fluid. In normal
circumstances, the surface of a standing body of water is horizontal,
because if it wasn’t, then the fluid on the higher bits would slosh
sideways into the lower bits. The same kind of thing happens when there
are extra forces acting: the surface of the water settles at right
angles to the net direction of the combined forces.

When you work out the details for the three forces we’ve just mentioned,
you find that the water forms an ellipsoid, a shape that is close to a
sphere but very slightly elongated. The direction of elongation points
towards the Moon. However, the centre of the ellipsoid coincides with
the centre of the Earth, so the water ‘piles up’ on the side furthest
from the Moon as well as on the side nearest it. This change of shape is
only partly caused by the Moon’s gravity ‘lifting’ the water closest to
it. Most of the motion, in fact, is sideways rather than upwards. The
sideways forces push more water into some regions of the oceans, and
take it away from others. The total effect is _tiny –_ the surface of
the sea rises and falls through a distance of 18 inches (half a metre).

The coast, where land meets sea, is what creates the big tidal
movements. Most of the water is moving sideways (not up) and its motion
is affected by the shape of the coastline. In some places the water
flows into a narrowing funnel, and then it piles up much more than it
does elsewhere. This is what happens in the Bay of Fundy. This effect is
made even bigger because coastal waters are shallow, so the energy of
the moving water gets concentrated into a thinner layer, creating bigger
and faster movements.

Finally, let’s put the sun back. This has the same kind of effect as the
Moon, but smaller. When Sun and Moon are aligned – either both on the
same side of the Earth, in which case we see a new moon, or both on
opposite sides (full moon) – their gravitational pulls reinforce each
other, leading to so-called ‘spring tides’ in which high tide is higher
than normal and low tide is lower. These have nothing to do with the
_season_ Spring. When the Sun and Moon are at right angles as seen from
Earth, at half moon, the Sun’s pull cancels out part of the Moon’s,
leading to ‘neap tides’ with less movement than normal (these presumably
have nothing to do with the _season_ Neap …).

By putting all these effects together, and keeping good records of past
tides, it is possible to predict the times of high and low tide, and the
amount of vertical movement, anywhere on Earth.

There are similar tidal effects (large) on the Earth’s atmosphere, and
(small) on the planet’s land masses. Tidal effects occur on other bodies
in the solar system, and beyond. It is thought that Jupiter’s moon Io,
whose surface is mostly sulphur and which has numerous active volcanoes,
is heated by being ‘squeezed’ repeatedly by tidal effects from Jupiter.

Another effect of the Moon on the Earth, discovered in the mid-’90s by
Jaques Laskar, is to stabilize the Earth’s axis. The Earth spins like a
top, and at any given moment there is a line running through the centre
of the Earth around which everything else rotates. This is its axis. The
Earth’s axis is tilted relative to the plane in which the Earth orbits
the Sun, and this tilt is what causes the seasons. Sometimes the north
pole is tilted closer to the sun than the south pole is, and six months
later it’s the other way round. When the northern end of the axis is
tilted towards the Sun, more sunlight falls on the northern half of the
planet than on the southern half, so the north gets summer and the south
gets winter. Six months later, when the axis points the other way
relative to the sun, the reverse applies.

Over longer periods of time, the axis changes direction. Just as a top
wobbles when it spins, so does the Earth, and over 26,000 years its axis
completes one full circle of wobble. At every stage, however, the axis
is tilted at the same angle (23°) away from the perpendicular to the
orbital plane. This motion is called precession, and it has a small
effect on the timing of the seasons – they slowly shift by a total of
one year in 26,000. Harmless, basically. However, the axes of most other
planets do something far more drastic: they change their angle to the
orbital plane. Mars, for example, probably changes this angle by 90°
over a period of 10–20 million years. This has a dramatic effect on
climate.

Suppose that a planet’s axis is at right angles to the orbital plane.
Then there are no seasonal variations at all, but everywhere except the
poles there is a day/night cycle, with equal amounts of day and night.
Now tilt the axis a little: seasonal variations appear, and the days are
longer in summer and shorter in winter. Suppose that the axis tilts 90°,
so that at some instant the north pole, say, points directly at the sun.
Half a year later, the south pole points at the Sun. At either pole,
there is a ‘day’ of half a year followed by a ‘night’ of half a year.
The seasons coincide with the day/night cycle. Regions of the planet
bake in high heat for half a year, then freeze for the other half.
Although life _can_ survive in such circumstances, it may be harder for
it to get going in the first place, and it may be more vulnerable to
extremes of climate, vulcanism, or meterorite impacts.

The Earth’s axis can change its angle of tilt over very long periods of
time, much longer than the 26,000 year cycle of precession, but even
over hundreds of millions of years the angle doesn’t change _much_. Why?
Because, as Laskar discovered when he did the calculations, the Moon
helps keep the Earth’s axis steady. So it is at least conceivable that
life on Earth owes quite a lot to the calming influence of its sister
world, however much it may madden us individually.

A third influence of the Moon was discovered in 1998: a clear
association between tides and the rate of growth of trees. Ernst Zürcher
and Maria-Giulia Cantiani measured the diameters of young spruce trees
grown in containers kept at constant light levels. Over periods of
several days the diameters changed in step with the tides. The
scientists interpret this as an effect of the Moon’s gravity on the
transport of water within the tree. It can’t be variations in moonlight,
which would perhaps affect photosynthesis, because the trees were grown
in darkness. But the effect may be similar to one that occurs with
creatures that live on the seashore. Because they evolved to live there,
they have to respond to the tides, and evolution sometimes achieves this
by creating an internal dynamic that runs in step with the tides. If you
remove the creatures to the laboratory, this internal dynamic makes them
continue to ‘follow’ the tides.

The Moon has been important in another way. The Babylonians and Greeks
knew that the Moon is a sphere; the phases are obvious, and there is
also a slight wobble which means that, over time, humans see rather more
than one half of the Moon’s surface. There it was, hanging in the sky –
a big ball, _not_ a disc like the sun, and a hint that perhaps ‘big
balls in space’ is a much better way of thinking about the Earth and its
neighbours than ‘lights in the sky’.

All this is a long way from lance-constable Angua – even a long way from
the female menstrual cycle. But it shows how much we are creatures of
the universe. Things Up There really do affect us Down Here, every day
of our lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Moreover, until the last few decades of human history, most women did
not cycle. Nearly all the time, they were either pregnant or lactating.
And for the great apes, the cycle is a week or so longer than for
humans, and for gibbons it’s shorter. So it looks as though the relation
with the Moon is coincidental.



TWENTY-ONE



THE LIGHT YOU SEE THE DARK BY


[] THERE WAS NO DARK. This came as such a shock to Ponder Stibbons that
he made HEX look again. There had to be Dark, surely? Otherwise, what
was there for the light to show up against?

Eventually, he reported this lack to the other wizards.

‘There should be lots of Dark and there isn’t,’ he said flatly. ‘There’s
just Light and … no light. And it’s a pretty strange light, too.’

‘In what way?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Well, sir, as you know,* there’s ordinary light, which travels at about
the same speed as sound …’

‘That’s right. You’ve only got to watch shadows across a landscape to
realize that.’

‘Quite, sir … and then there’s meta-light, which doesn’t really travel
at all because it is already everywhere.’

‘Otherwise we wouldn’t even be able to see darkness,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Exactly. But the Project universe has just got the one sort of light.
HEX thinks it moves at hundreds of thousands of miles a second.’

‘What use is that?’

‘Er … in this universe, that’s as fast as you can go.’

‘That’s nonsense, because –’ Ridcully began, but Ponder held up a hand.
He had not been looking forward to this one.

‘Please, Archchancellor. It’s doing the best it can. Just trust me on
this one. Please? Yes, I can see all the reasons why it’s impossible.
But, in there, it seems to work. HEX has written pages of stuff about
it, if anyone’s interested. Just don’t ask me about any of it. Please,
gentlemen? It’s all supposed to be logical but you’ll find your brain
squeaking around until the ends point out of your ears.’

He placed his hands together and tried to look wise.

‘It really _is_ almost as if the Project is aping the _real_ universe –’

‘Ook.’

‘I beg your pardon,’ said Ponder. ‘A figure of speech.’

The Librarian nodded at him and knuckled his way across the floor. The
wizards watched him carefully.

‘You really believe that _that_ thing,’ said the Dean, pointing, ‘with
its moon-hating water and worlds that go around suns –’

‘As far as I can see from this,’ interrupted the Senior Wrangler, who’d
been reading HEX’S write-out on the more complex physics of the Project,
‘if you were travelling in a cart at the speed of light, and threw a
ball ahead of you …’ he turned over the page, read on silently for a
moment, creased his brows, turned the page over to see if any
enlightenment was to be found on the other side, and went on ‘… your
twin brother would … be fifty years older than you when you got home … I
think.’

‘Twins are the same age,’ said the Dean, coldly. ‘That’s _why_ they are
twins.’

‘Look at the world we’re working on, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘It could be
thought of as two turtle shells tied together. It’s got no top and
bottom but if you think of it as two worlds, bent around, with one sun
and moon doing the work of two … it’s similar.’

He fried in their gaze.

‘In a way, anyway,’ he said.

Unnoticed by the others, the Bursar picked up the write-out on the
physics of the Roundworld universe. After making himself a paper hat out
of the title page, he began to read …

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* A phrase meaning ‘I’m not sure you know this.’



TWENTY-TWO



THINGS THAT AREN’T


[] LIGHT HAS A SPEED – SO WHY NOT DARK?

It’s a reasonable question. Let’s see where it leads. In the 1960s a
biological supply company advertised a device for scientists who used
microscopes. In order to see things under a microscope, it’s often a
good idea to make a very thin slice of whatever it is you’re going to
look at. Then you put the slice on a glass slide, stick it under the
microscope lens, and peer in at the other end to see what it looks like.
How do you make the slice? Not like slicing bread. The thing you want to
cut – let’s assume it’s a piece of liver for the sake of argument – is
too floppy to be sliced on its own.

Come to think of it, so is a lot of bread.

You have to hold the liver firmly while you’re cutting it, so you embed
it in a block of wax. Then you use a gadget called a microtome,
something like a miniature bacon-slicer, to cut off a series of very
thin slices. You drop them on the surface of warm water, stick some on
to a microscope slide, dissolve away the wax, and prepare the slide for
viewing. Simple …

But the device that the company was selling wasn’t a microtome: it was
something to keep the wax block cool while the microtome was slicing it,
so that the heat generated by the friction would not make the wax
difficult to slice and damage delicate details of the specimen.

Their solution to this problem was a large concave (dish-shaped) mirror.
You were supposed to build a little pile of ice cubes and ‘focus the
cold’ on to your specimen.

Perhaps you don’t see anything remarkable here. In that case you
probably speak of the ‘spread of ignorance’, and draw the curtains in
the evening to ‘keep the cold out’ – and the darkness.*1

In Discworld, such things make sense. Lots of things are real in
Discworld while being mere abstractions in ours. Death, for example. And
Dark. On Discworld you can worry about the speed of Dark, and how it can
get out of the way of the light that is ploughing into it at 600 mph.*2
In our world such a concept is called a ‘privative’ – an absence of
something. And in our world, privatives don’t have their own existence.
Knowledge does exist, but ignorance doesn’t; heat and light exist, but
cold and darkness don’t. Not as _things_.

We can see the Archchancellor looking puzzled, and we realize that here
is something that runs quite deep in the human psyche. Yes, you can
freeze to death, and ‘cold’ is a good word for describing the absence of
heat. Without privatives, we would end up talking like the pod people
from the Planet Zog. But we run into trouble, though, if we forget that
we’re using them as an easy shorthand.

In our world there are plenty of borderline cases. Is ‘drunk’ or ‘sober’
the privative? In Discworld you can get ‘knurd’, which is as far on the
other side of sober as drunk is on the inebriated side,*3 but on planet
Earth there’s no such thing. By and large, we think we know which member
of such a pairing has an existence, and which is merely an absence. (We
vote for ‘sober’ as the privative. It is the absence of drink, and –
usually – the normal state of a person.*4 In fact that normal state is
only _called_ sobriety when the subject of drink is at hand. There’s
nothing strange about this. ‘Cold’ is the normal state of the universe,
after all, even though as a _thing_ it does not exist. Er … we’re not
going to get past you on this one, are we, Archchancellor?)

Thinking is required if our language isn’t to fool us. However, as
‘focusing the cold’ shows, we sometimes don’t stop to think.

We’ve done it before. At the start of the book, we mentioned phlogiston,
considered by early chemists to be the substance that made things burn.
It must do: you could see the phlogiston _coming out_ as flames, for
goodness’ sake. Gradually, however, clues that supported the opposite
view accumulated. Things weigh _more_ after they’ve burned than they did
before, for instance, so phlogiston seemed to have negative weight. You
may think this is wrong, incidentally; surely the ash left by a burnt
log weighs a lot less than the log, otherwise nobody would bother having
bonfires? But a lot of that log goes up in smoke, and the smoke weighs
quite a bit; it rises not because it’s lighter than air but because it’s
hot. And even if it _were_ lighter than air, air has weight, too. And as
well as the smoke, there’s steam, and all sorts of other junk. If you
burn a lump of wood, and collect all the liquids, gases, and solids that
result, the final total weighs more than the wood.

Where does the extra weight come from? Well, if you take the trouble to
weigh the _air_ that surrounds the burning wood, you’ll find that it
ends up _lighter_ than it was. (It’s not so easy to do both of these
weighings while keeping track of what came from where – think about it.
But the chemists found ways to achieve this.) So it looks as if
something gets taken out of the air, and once you’re realized that’s
what’s going on, it’s not hard to find out what it is. Of course, it’s
oxygen. Burnt wood gains oxygen, it doesn’t lose phlogiston.

This all makes far more sense, and it also explains why phlogiston
wasn’t such a silly idea. Negative oxygen, oxygen that ought to be
present but isn’t, behaves just as nicely as positive oxygen in all the
balancing equations that chemists used to check the validity of their
theories. So much phlogiston moving from A to B has exactly the same
effect on observations as the same amount of oxygen moving from B to A.
So phlogiston behaved just like a real thing – with that embarrassing
exception that when your measurements became accurate enough to detect
the tiny amounts involved, phlogiston weighed less than nothing.
Phlogiston was a privative.

A difficult but stubborn feature of human thinking is involved in all
this: it’s known as ‘reifying’: making real. Imagining that because we
have a word for something, then there must exist a ‘thing’ that
corresponds to the word. What about ‘bravery’ and ‘cowardice’? Or
‘tunnel’? Indeed, what about ‘hole’?

Many scientific concepts refer to things that are not real in the
everyday sense that they correspond to _objects_. For instance,
‘gravity’ sounds like an explanation of planetary motion, and you
vaguely wonder what it would look like if you found some, but actually
it is only a word for an inverse square law attractive relationship. Or
more recently, thanks to Einstein, for a tendency of objects not to move
in straight lines, which we can reify as ‘curved space’.

For that matter, what about ‘space’? Is that a thing, or an absence?

‘Debt’ and ‘overdraft’ are very familiar privatives, and the thinking
problems they cause are quite difficult. After all, your overdraft pays
your bank manager’s salary, doesn’t it? So how can it fail to be real?
Today’s derivatives market buys and sells debts and promises _as if they
were real –_ and it reifies them as words and numbers on pieces of
paper, or digits in a computer’s memory. The more you think about it,
the more amazing the everyday world of human beings becomes: most of it
doesn’t actually exist at all.

Some years ago, at a science-fiction convention held in The Hague, four
writers who made lots of money from their books sat in front of an
audience of mostly impecunious fans to explain how they’d made huge
income from their books (as if any of them really knew). Each of them
said that ‘money isn’t important’, and the fans became quite rude at
this perfectly accurate statement. It was necessary to point out that
money is like air or love – unimportant if you’ve got enough of it, but
desperately important if you haven’t.*5 Dickens recognized this: in
_David Copperfield_ Mr Micawber remarks ‘Annual income twenty pounds,
annual expenditure nineteen nineteen six, result happiness. Annual
income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six,
result misery.’

There’s no symmetry between having money and not having it – but the
discussion had gone off the rails because everyone had assumed that
there was, so that ‘having money’ was the opposite of ‘having no money’.
If you must find an opposite, then ‘having money’ is opposite to ‘being
in debt’. In that case, ‘rich’ is like ‘knurd’. In any event, making the
comparison between money, love, and air lowered the debating temperature
considerably. Air isn’t important if you’ve got it, only if you haven’t;
the same goes for money.

Vacuum is an interesting privative. Cut-me-own-Throat Dibbler could sell
vacuum-on-a-stick. Vacuum in the right place is _valuable_.

Many people on Earth sell _cold_-on-a-stick.

Discworld does a marvellous job of revealing the woolly thinking behind
our assumptions about absence, because in Discworld privatives really do
exist. The dark/light joke in Discworld is silly enough that everyone
gets the point – we hope. Other Discworld uses of privatives, however,
are more subtle. The most dramatic, of course, is Death, many people’s
favourite Discworld character, who SPEAKS IN CAPITAL LETTERS. Death is a
seven-foot-tall skeleton, with tiny points of light in his eye sockets.
He carries a scythe with a blade so thin that it’s transparent, and he
has a flying horse called Binky. When Death appears to Olerve, king of
Sto Lat, in _Mort_, it takes the king a few moments to catch up on
current events:

‘Who the hell are you?’ said the king. ‘What are you doing here?

Eh? Guards! I deman–’

The insistent message from his eyes finally battered through to his
brain. Mort*6 was impressed. King Olerve had held on to his throne for
many years and, even when dead, knew how to behave.

‘Oh,’ he said. ‘I see. I didn’t expect to see you so soon.’

YOUR MAJESTY, said Death, bowing, FEW DO.

The king looked around. It was quiet and dim in this shadow world, but
outside there seemed to be a lot of excitement.

‘That’s me down there, is it?’

I’M AFRAID SO, SIRE.

‘Clean job. Crossbow, was it?’

Our earthly fears about death have led to some of our strangest
reifications. Inventing the concept ‘death’ is giving a name to a
process – dying – as if it’s a ‘thing’. Then, of course, we endow the
thing with a whole suite of properties, whose care is known only to the
priests. That thing turns up in many guises. It may appear as the
‘soul’, a thing that must leave the body when it turns it from a live
body into a dead one. It is curious that the strongest believers in the
soul tend to be people who denigrate material things; yet they then turn
their own philosophy on its head by insisting that when an evident
_process –_ life – comes to an end, there has to be a _thing_ that
continues. No. When a process stops, it’s no longer ‘there’. When you
stop beating an egg, there isn’t some pseudo-material
essence-of-eggbeater that passes on to something else. You just aren’t
turning the handle any more.

Another ‘thing’ that arises from the assumption that death exists is
whatever must be instituted in the egg/​embryo/​foetus in order to turn
it into a proper human being, who can die when required. Note that in
human myth and Discworld reality it is the soulless ones, vampires and
their ilk, who cannot die. Long before ancient Egypt and the death-god
Anubis, priests have made capital out of this verbal confusion. On
Discworld, it’s entirely proper to have ‘unreal’ things, like Dark, or
like the Tooth Fairy in _Hogfather_, which play their part in the
plot.*7 But it’s a very strange idea indeed on planet Earth.

Yet it may be part of some process that makes us human beings. As Death
points out in _Hogfather_, humans seem to need to project a kind of
interior decoration on to the universe, so that they spend much of the
time in a world of their own making. We seem – at least, at the moment –
to need these things. Concepts like gods, truth*8 and soul appear to
exist only in so far as humans consider them to do so (although
elephants are known to get uneasy and puzzled upon finding elephant
bones in the wild – whether this is because of some dim concept of the
Big Savannah In The Sky or merely because it’s manifestly not a good
idea to stay in a place where elephants get killed is unknown). But they
work some magic for us. They add narrativium to our culture. They bring
pain, hope, despair, and comfort. They wind up our elastic. Good or bad,
they’ve made us into people.

We wonder if the users thought that that cold-focusing mirror worked
some magic for them. We can think of several ways in which it might
appear to. And some very clever friends of ours are persuaded that souls
might exist, too. Nearly everything is a process on some level. To a
physicist, matter is a process carried out by a quantum wave function.
And quantum wave functions exist only when the person you’re arguing
with asserts that they don’t – so maybe souls exist in the same way.

In this area, we have to admit the science doesn’t know everything.
Science is _based_ on not knowing everything. But it does know some
things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 And if so: congratulations! You are a human being, thinking
narratively.

*2 Light on the Disc travels at about the same speed as sound. This does
not appear to cause problems.

*3 And a terrible thing it is, akin to a state of horrible depression.
Hence the affliction of Captain Vimes in _Guards! Guards!_ who needs a
couple of drinks simply to become sober.

*4 Well … most people.

*5 ‘Desperate’ is another privative – it means ‘no hope’.

*6 Death’s apprentice – well, he’d have to train a successor. Not in
case he _dies:_ so he can retire. Which he does (temporarily) in _Reaper
Man_.

*7 Indeed, it is a ‘fundamental constant’ of the Discworld universe that
things exist because they’re believed in.

*8 ‘Truth’ is a privative in the same way that ‘sober’ is – until you
invent lies, you don’t know what the truth is. Nature appears to,
otherwise animals would not have invested so much effort on very
effective camouflage.



TWENTY-THREE



NO POSSIBILITY OF LIFE


[] IT WAS DIFFICULT EATING SANDWICHES that you couldn’t see. Rincewind
was aware that back in the real world the Librarian was handing them to
him, and he had to take it on trust that they were going to be cheese
and chutney. As it turned out, he detected a hint of banana, too.

The wizards were shocked. It’s terrible to find that you can’t do what
you like with your own universe.

‘So we can’t just magic life into the Project?’ said the Dean.

‘I’m afraid not, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘We have quite a lot of control over
things, but only in a very subtle way. I _have_ gone into this.’

‘I don’t call moving huge worlds very subtle,’ said the Dean.

‘In Project terms, even moving the moon into place took a hundred
thousand years,’ said Ponder. ‘Time prefers to move faster in there.
It’s amazing what you can move if you give it a little push for that
long.’

‘But we’ve done so many things –’

‘Just moved things around, sir.’

‘Seems a shame to have made a world and there’s no one to live on it,’
said the Senior Wrangler.

‘When I was small, I had a model farmyard,’ said the Bursar, looking up
from his reading.

‘Thank you, Bursar. Very interesting,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘All
right, let’s play by the rules. What do you have to move around to get
people?’

‘Well … bits of other people, my father told me,’ said the Dean.

‘Bad taste there, Dean.’

‘Many religions start with dust,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘And then
you bring it alive in some way.’

‘That’s pretty hard even with magic,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘And we
can’t use magic’

‘Up in Nothingfjord they believe that all life was created when the god
Noddi cut off his … unmentionables and hurled them at the sun, who was
his father,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘What, you mean his … underwear?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, who
could be a bit slow.

‘First of all we can’t physically exist inside the Project, secondly
that sort of thing is unhygienic, and thirdly I doubt very much if
you’ll find a volunteer,’ said the Archchancellor sharply. ‘Anyway,
we’re men of magic. _That_ is superstition.’

‘Can we make weather, then?’ said the Dean.

‘I think HEX can let us do that,’ said Ponder. ‘Weather is only pushing
stuff around.’

‘So we can aim lightning at anyone we don’t like?’

‘But there isn’t anyone on the world, whether we like them or not,’ said
Ponder wearily. ‘That’s the _point_.’

‘And while the Dean can make enemies anywhere, I think that, ah,
_Round_world would test even his powers,’ said Ridcully.

‘Thank you, Archchancellor.’

‘Happy to oblige, Dean.’

HEX’S keyboard clattered. The quill pen began to write.

It began:

+++ I Don’t Think You Are Going To Believe This +++

Thunderstorms tore the air apart, far out to sea.

The air blinked. The storm was gone. The shoreline looked different.

‘Hey, what happened?’ said Rincewind.

‘Everything all right?’ said Ponder Stibbons in his ear.

‘What happened just then?’

‘We’ve moved you forward in time a little,’ said Ponder. The tone of his
voice suggested that he dreaded being asked why.

‘Why?’ said Rincewind.

‘You’ll laugh when I tell you this …’

‘Oh, good. I like a laugh.’

‘HEX says he’s detecting life all round you. Can you see anything?’

Rincewind looked around warily. The sea was sucking at the shore, which
had a bit of sand on it now. Scum rolled in the waves.

‘No,’ he said.

‘Good. You see, there _can’t_ be any life where you are,’ Ponder went
on.

‘Where _am_ I exactly?’

‘Er … a sort of magical world with no one in it but yourself.’

‘Oh, you mean the sort everyone lives in,’ said Rincewind bitterly. He
glanced at the sea again, just in case.

‘But if you wouldn’t mind having a look …’ Ponder went on.

‘For this life that can’t possibly exist?’

‘Well, you are the Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography.’

‘It’s the cruel and unusual geography that’s bothering me,’ said
Rincewind. ‘Incidentally, have you looked at the sea lately? It’s blue.’

‘Well? The sea is blue.’

‘Really?’

The omniscope was once again the centre of attention.

‘Everyone knows the sea is blue,’ said the Dean. ‘Ask anyone.’

‘That’s right,’ said Ridcully. ‘However, while everyone _knows_ the sea
is blue, what everyone usually sees is a sea that’s grey or dark green.
Not _this_ colour. This is virulent!’

‘I’d say turquoise,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘I used to have a shirt that colour,’ said the Bursar.

‘I thought it might be copper salts in the water,’ said Ponder Stibbons.
‘But it isn’t.’

The Archchancellor picked up HEX’S latest write-out. It read:

+++ Out Of Cheese Error +++

‘Not helpful,’ he muttered.

‘Thank goodness he’s still operating the Project,’ said Ponder, joining
him. ‘I think he’s got confused.’

‘It’s not his job to be confused,’ said Ridcully. ‘We don’t need a
machine for being confused. We’re entirely capable of confusin’
ourselves. It is a human achievement, confusion, and right at this
minute I feel I am winning a prize. _You_, Mister Stibbons, said there
was no possibility of life turnin’ up inside the Project.’

Ponder waved his hands frantically. ‘There’s no way that it can! Life
isn’t like rocks and water. Life is special!’

‘The breath of gods, that sort of thing?’ said Ridcully.

‘Not gods as _such_, obviously, but –’

‘I suppose from the point of view of rocks, rocks are special,’ said
Ridcully, still reading HEX’S output.

‘No, sir. Rocks don’t have a point of view.’

Rincewind lifted up a shard of rock, very carefully, ready to drop it
immediately at the merest suggestion of tooth or claw.

‘This is silly,’ he said. ‘There’s nothing here.’

‘Nothing?’ said Ponder, inside the helmet.

‘Some of the rocks have got all kind of yuk on them, if that’s your idea
of a good time.’

‘Yuk?’

‘You know … gunge.’

‘HEX seems to be suggesting now that whatever is showing up is, and is
not, life,’ said Ponder, a man whose interest in slime was limited.

‘That’s very cheering.’

‘There seems to be a particular concentration not far from you … we’re
just going to move you so that you can have a look at it … ’

Rincewind’s head swam. A moment later, the rest of his body wanted to
join it. He was underwater.

‘Don’t worry,’ said Ponder, ‘because although you’re at a very great
depth, the pressure can’t possibly hurt you.’

‘Good.’

‘And the boiling water should feel merely tepid.’

‘Fine.’

‘And the terrible upflow of poisonous minerals can’t harm you because of
course you’re not really there.’

‘So, all in all, I’m laughing,’ said Rincewind gloomily, peering at the
dim glow ahead of him.

‘It’s gods, definitely,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘Gods have turned up
while our back was turned. There can be no other explanation.’

‘Then they seem rather unambitious,’ sniffed the Senior Wrangler. ‘I
mean, you’d expect humans, wouldn’t you? Not … blobs you can’t see.
They’re not going to bow down and worship anyone, are they?’

‘Not where they are,’ said Ridcully. ‘The planet’s full of cracks! You
shouldn’t get fire _under_ water. That’s against nature!’

‘Everywhere you look, little blobs,’ said the Senior Wrangler.
‘Everywhere.’

‘Blobs,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Can they pray? Can they
build temples? Can they wage holy war on less enlightened blobs?’

Ponder shook his head sadly. HEX’S results were quite clear. Nothing
solid could cross the barrier into Roundworld. It was possible, with
enough thaumic effort, to exert tiny pressures, but that was all. Of
course, you could speculate that thought might get in there, but if that
was the case the wizards were thinking some very dull thoughts indeed.
‘Blobs’ wasn’t really a good word for what were currently floating in
the warm seas and dribbling over the rocks. It had far too many
overtones of feverish gaiety and excitement.

‘They’re not even moving,’ said Ridcully. ‘Just bobbing about.’

‘Blobbing about, haha,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Could we … help them in some way?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.
‘You know … to become better blobs? I fear we have some responsibility’

‘They may be as good as blobs get,’ said Ridcully. ‘What’s up with that
Rincewind fellow?’

They turned. In its circle of smoke, the suited figure was making
frantic running motions.

‘Do you think, on reflection, that it might not have good idea to
miniaturize his image in Roundworld?’ said Ridcully.

‘It was the only way we could get him into that little rock pool HEX
wanted us to look at, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘He doesn’t _have_ to be any
particular size. Size is relative.’

‘Is that why he keeps calling out for his mother?’

Ponder went over to the circle and rubbed out a few important runes.
Rincewind collapsed on the floor.

‘What idiot put me in _there_?’ he said. ‘Ye gods, it’s awful! The size
of some of those things!’

‘They’re actually tiny,’ said Ponder, helping him up.

‘Not when you are smaller than them!’

‘My dear chap, they can’t possibly _hurt_ you. You have nothing to fear
but fear itself.’

‘Oh, is that so? What help is that? You think that makes it better?
Well, let me tell you, some of that fear can be pretty big and nasty –’

‘Calm down, calm _down_.’

‘Next time I want to be big, understand?’

‘Did they try to communicate with you in any way?’

‘They just flailed away with great big whiskers! It was worse than
watching wizards arguing!’

‘Yes, I doubt if they are very intelligent.’

‘Well, nor are the rock pool creatures.’

‘I’m just wondering,’ said Ponder, wishing he had a beard to stroke
thoughtfully, ‘if perhaps they might … improve with keeping …’



TWENTY-FOUR



DESPITE WHICH …


[] THAT BLUE IN THE ROUNDWORLD SEA isn’t a chemical – well, not in the
usual ‘_simple_ chemical’ sense of the word. It’s a mass of bacteria,
called cyanobacteria. Another name for them is ‘blue-green algae’, which
is wonderfully confusing. _Modern_ so-called blue-green algae are
usually red or brown, but the ancient ones probably _were_ blue-green.
And blue-green algae are really bacteria, whereas most other algae have
cells with a nucleus and so are not bacteria. The blue-green colour
comes from chlorophyll, but of a different kind from that in plants,
together with yellow-orange chemicals called carotenoids.

Bacteria appeared on Earth at least 3.5 billion years ago, only a few
hundred million years after the Earth cooled to the point at which
living creatures could survive on it. We know this because of strange
layered structures found in sedimentary rocks. The layers can be flat
and bumpy, they can form huge branched pillars, or they can be highly
convoluted like the leaves in a cabbage. Some deposits are half a mile
thick and spread for hundreds of miles. Most date from 2 billion years
ago, but those from Warrawoona in Australia are 3.5 billion years old.

To begin with, nobody knew what these deposits were. In the 1950s and
1960s they were revealed as traces of communities of bacteria,
especially cyanobacteria.

Cyanobacteria collect together in shallow water to form huge, floating
mats, like felt. They secrete a sticky gel as protection against
ultraviolet light, and this causes sediment to stick to the mats. When
the layer of sediment gets so thick that it blocks out the light, the
bacteria form a new layer, and so on. When the layers fossilize they
turn into stromatolites, which look rather like big cushions.

The wizards haven’t been expecting life. Roundworld runs on rules, but
life doesn’t – or so they think. The wizards see a sharp discontinuity
between life and non-life. This is the problem of expecting _becomings_
to have boundaries – of imagining that it ought to be easy to class all
objects into either the category ‘alive’ or the category ‘dead’. But
that’s not possible, even ignoring the flow of time, in which ‘alive’
can _become_ ‘dead’ – and vice versa. A ‘dead’ leaf is no longer part of
a living tree, but it may well have a few revivable cells.

Mitochondria, now the part of a cell that generates its chemical energy,
once used to be independent organisms. Is a virus alive? Without a
bacterial host it can’t reproduce – but neither can DNA copy itself
without a cell’s chemical machinery.

We used to build ‘simple’ chemical models of living processes, in the
hope that a sufficiently complex network of chemistry could ‘take off’ –
become self-referential, self-copying – by itself. There was the concept
of the ‘primal soup’, lots of simple chemicals dissolved in the oceans,
bumping into each other at random, and just occasionally forming
something more complicated. It turns out that this isn’t quite the way
to do it. You don’t have to work hard to make real-world chemistry
complex: that’s the default. It’s _easy_ to make complicated chemicals.
The world is full of them. The problem is to keep that complexity
organized.

What counts as life? Every biologist used to have to learn a list of
properties: ability to reproduce, sensitivity to its environment,
utilization of energy, and the like. We have moved on. ‘Autopoeisis’ –
the ability to make chemicals and structures related to one’s own
reproduction – is not a bad definition, except that modern life has
evolved away from those early necessities. Today’s biologists prefer to
sidestep the issue and define life as a property of the DNA molecule,
but this begs the deeper question of life as a general _type_ of
process. It may be that we’re now defining life in the same way that
‘science fiction’ is defined – it’s what we’re pointing at when we use
the term.*1

The idea that life could somehow be self-starting is still controversial
to many people. Nevertheless, it turns out that finding plausible routes
to life is easy. There must be at least thirty of them. It’s hard to
decide which, if any, was the actual route taken, because later
lifeforms have destroyed nearly all the evidence. This may not matter
much: if life hadn’t taken the route that it did, it could easily have
taken one of the others, or one of the hundred we haven’t thought of
yet.

One possible route from the inorganic world to life, suggested by Graham
Cairns-Smith, is clay. Clay can form complicated microscopic structures,
and it often ‘copies’ an existing structure by adding an extra layer to
it, which then falls off and becomes the starting point of a new
structure. Carbon compounds can stick on to clay surfaces, where they
can act as catalysts for the formation of complex molecules of the kind
we see in living creatures – proteins, even DNA itself. So today’s
organisms may have hitched an evolutionary ride on clay.

An alternative is Günter Wächtershäuser’s suggestion that pyrite, a
compound of iron and sulphur, could have provided an energy source
suitable for bacteria. Even today we find bacteria miles underground,
and near volcanic vents at the bottom of the oceans, which power
themselves by iron/sulphur reactions. These are the source of the
‘upflow of poisonous minerals’ noticed by Rincewind. It’s entirely
conceivable that life started in similar environments.

A potential problem with volcanic vents, though, is that every so often
they get blocked, and another one breaks out somewhere else. How could
the organisms get themselves safely across the intervening cold water?
In 1988 Kevin Speer realized that the Earth’s rotation causes the rising
plumes of hot water from vents to spin, forming a kind of underwater hot
tornado that moves through the deep ocean. Organisms could hitch a ride
on these. Some might make it to another vent. Many would not, but that
doesn’t matter – all that would be required would be _enough_ survivors.

It is interesting to note that back in the Cretaceous, when the seas
were a lot warmer than now, these hot plumes could even have risen to
the ocean’s surface, where they may have caused ‘hypercanes’ – like
hurricanes but with a windspeed close to that of sound. These would have
caused major climatic upheavals on a planet which, as we shall see, it
not the moderately peaceful place we tend to believe it is.

Bacteria belong to the grade of organisms known as prokaryotes. They are
often said to be ‘single-celled’, but many single-celled creatures are
far more complex and very different from bacteria. Bacteria are not true
cells, but something simpler; they have no cell wall and no nucleus.
True cells, and creatures both single-celled and many-celled, came
later, and are called eukaryotes. They probably arose when several
different prokaryotes joined forces to their mutual benefit – a trick
known as symbiosis. The first fossil eukaryotes are singe-celled, like
amoebas, and appear about 2 billion years ago. The first fossils of
many-celled creatures are algae from 1 billion years ago … maybe even as
old as 1.8 billion years.

This was the story as scientists understood it up until 1998: animals
like arthropods and other complex beasts came into being a mere 600
million years ago, and that until about 540 million years ago the only
creatures were very strange indeed – quite unlike most of what’s around
today.

These creatures are known as Ediacarans, after a place in Australia
where the first fossils were found.*2 They could grow to half a metre or
more, but as far as can be told from the fossil record, seem not to have
had any internal organs or external orifices like a mouth or an anus
(they may have survived by digesting symbiotic bacteria in their selves,
or by some other process we can only guess at). Some were flattened, and
clustered together in quilts. We have no idea whether the Ediacarans
were our distant ancestors, or whether they were a dead end, a lifestyle
doomed to failure. No matter: they were around then, and as far as
anyone knew, not much else was. There are hints of fossil wormcasts,
though, and some very recent fossils look like … but we’re getting ahead
of the story. The point is that nearly all Ediacaran life was apparently
unrelated to what came later.

About 540 million years ago the Pre-Cambrian Ediacarans were succeeded
by the creatures of the Cambrian era. For the first ten million years,
these beasties were also pretty weird, leaving behind fragments of
spines and spikes which presumably are the remains of prototype
skeletons that hadn’t yet joined up. At that point, nature suddenly
learned how to do joined-up skeletons, and much else: this was the time
known as the Cambrian Explosion. Twenty million years later virtually
every body-plan found in modern animals was already in existence:
everything afterwards was mere tinkering.

The real innovation of the Cambrian Explosion, though, was less obvious
than joined-up skeletons or tusks or shells or limbs. It was a _new kind
of body plan_. Diploblasts were overtaken by triploblasts …

Sorry, Archchancellor. We mean that creatures began to put another layer
between themselves and the universe. Ediacarans and modern jellyfish are
diploblasts – two-layered creatures. They have an inside and an outside,
like a thick paper bag. Three-layered creatures like us and practically
everything else around are called triploblasts. We have an inner, an
outer, and a _within_.

The _within_ was the big leap forward, or at least the big slither.
_Within_ you can put the things you need to protect, like internal
organs. In one sense, you are not part of the environment any more –
there is a _you_ as well. And, like someone who now has a piece of
property of their very own, you can begin to make improvements.

This is a lie-to-children, but as lies go it is a good one.

Triploblasts played a crucial role in evolution, precisely because they
_did_ have internal organs, and in particular they could ingest food and
excrete it. Their excreta became a major resource for other creatures;
to get an interestingly complicated world, it is vitally important that
shit happens.

But where did all those triploblasts come from? Were they an offshoot of
the Ediacarans? Or did they come from something else that didn’t leave
fossils?

It’s hard to see how they could have come from Ediacarans. Yes, an extra
layer of tissue might have appeared, but as well as that extra layer you
need a lot of organization to exploit it. That organization has to come
from somewhere. Moreover, there were these occasional tantalizing traces
of what might have been pre-Cambrian triploblasts – fossils not of
worms, which would have clinched it, but of things that might have been
trails made by worms in wet mud.

And then again, might not.

In February 1998, we found out.

The discovery depended upon where – and in this case how – you look for
fossils. One way for fossils to form is by petrification. There is a
poorly known type of petrification that can happen _very_ fast – within
a few days. The soft parts of a dead organism are replaced by calcium
phosphate. Unfortunately for palaeontologists, this process works only
for organisms that are about a tenth of an inch (2 mm) long. Still, some
interesting things are that tiny. From about 1975 onwards scientists
found wonderfully preserved specimens of tiny ancient arthropods –
creatures like centipedes with many segments. In 1994 they found
fossilized balls of cells from embryos – early stages in the development
of an organism – and it is thought that these come from embryonic
triploblasts. However, all of these creatures must have come _after_ the
Ediacarans. But in 1998 Shuhai Xiao, Yun Zhang, and Andrew Knoll
discovered fossilized embryos in Chinese rock that is 570 million years
old – smack in the middle of the Ediacaran era. And those embryos were
_triploblasts_.

Forty million years before the Cambrian explosion, there were
triploblasts on Earth, living right alongside those enigmatic
Ediacarans.

_We_ are triploblasts. Somewhere in the pre-Cambrian, surrounded by
mouthless, organless Ediacarans, we came into our inheritance.

It used to be thought that life was a delicate, highly unusual
phenomenon: difficult to create, easy to destroy. But everywhere we look
on Earth we find living creatures, often in environments that we would
have expected to be impossibly hostile. It’s beginning to look as if
life is an extremely robust phenomenon, liable to turn up almost
anywhere that’s remotely suitable. What is it about life that makes it
so _persistent_?

Earlier we talked about two ways to get off the Earth, a rocket and a
space elevator. A rocket is a thing that gets used up, but a space
elevator is a process that continues. A space elevator requires a huge
initial investment, but once you’ve got it, going up and down is
essentially free. A functioning space elevator seems to contradict all
the usual rules of economics, which look at individual transactions and
try to set a rational price, instead of asking whether the concept of a
price might be eliminated altogether. It also seems to contradict the
law of conservation of energy, the physicist’s way of saying that you
can’t get something for nothing. But, as we’ve seen, you can – by
exploiting the new resources that become available once you get your
space elevator up and running.

There is an analogy between space elevators and life. Life seems to
contradict the usual rules of chemistry and physics, especially the rule
known as the second law of thermodynamics, which says that things can’t
spontaneously get more complicated. Life does this because, like the
space elevator, it has lifted itself to a new level of operation, where
it can gain access to things and processes that were previously out of
the question. Reproduction, in particular, is a wonderful method of
getting round the difficulties of manufacturing a really complicated
thing. Just build one that manufactures more of itself. The first one
may be incredibly difficult – but all the rest come with no added
effort.

What is the elevator for life? Let’s try to be general here, and look at
the common features of all the different proposals for ‘the’ origin of
life. The main one seems to be the novel chemistry that can occur in
small volumes adjacent to active surfaces. This is a long way from
today’s complex organisms – it’s even a long way from today’s bacteria,
which are distinctly more complicated than their ancient predecessors.
They have to be, to survive in a more complicated world. Those active
surfaces could be in underwater volcanic vents. Or hot rocks deep
underground. Or they could be seashores. Imagine layers of complicated
(because that’s easy) but disorganized (ditto) molecular gunge on rocks
which are wetted by the tides and irradiated by the sun. Anything in
there that happens to produce a tiny ‘space elevator’ establishes a new
baseline for further change. For example, photosynthesis is a space
elevator in this sense. Once some bit of gunge has got it, that gunge
can make use of the sun’s energy instead of its own, churning out sugars
in a steady stream. So perhaps ‘the’ origin of life was a whole series
of tiny ‘space elevators’ that led, step by step, to organized but ever
more complex chemistry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Everyone knows what science fiction is – until you start asking
questions like ‘Is a book set five years in the future _automatically_
SF? Is it SF just because it’s set on another world, or is it simply
fantasy with nuts and bolts on the outside? Is it SF if the author
thinks it isn’t? Does it have to be set in the future? Does the presence
of Doug McClure mean that a movie is SF, or merely that the
men-in-rubber-monster-suits quotient is going to be high?’ One of the
best SF books ever written was the late Roy Lewis’s _The Evolution Man;_
there is no technology in it more sophisticated than a bow, it’s set in
the far past, the characters are barely more than ape-men … but it is
science fiction, nonetheless.

*2 They were fortunate, given the names of some places in Australia,
that they ended up merely _sounding_ like a minor _Star Trek_ species.



TWENTY-FIVE



UNNATURAL SELECTION


[] THE LIBRARIAN KNUCKLED SWIFTLY through the outer regions of the
University’s library, although terms like ‘outer’ were hardly relevant
in a library so deeply immersed in L-space.

It is known that knowledge is power, and power is energy, and energy is
matter, and matter is mass, and therefore large accumulations of
knowledge distort time and space. This is why all bookshops look alike,
and why all _second-hand_ bookshops seem so much bigger on the inside –
and why all libraries, everywhere, are connected. Only the innermost
circle of librarians know this, and take care to guard the secret.
Civilization would not survive for long if it was generally known that a
wrong turn in the stacks would lead into the Library of Alexandria just
as the invaders were looking for the matches, or that a tiny patch of
floor in the reference section is shared with the library in Braseneck
College where Dr Whitbury _proved_ that gods cannot possibly exist, just
before that rather unfortunate thunderstorm.

The Librarian was saying ‘ook ook’ to himself under his breath, in the
same way that a slightly distracted person searches aimlessly around the
room saying ‘scissors, scissors’ in the hope that this will cause them
to re-materialize. In fact he was saying ‘evolution, evolution’. He’d
been sent to find a good book on it.

He had a very complicated reference card in his mouth.

The wizards of UU knew all about evolution. It was a self-evident fact.
You took some wolves, and by careful unnatural selection over the
generations you got dogs of all shapes and sizes. You took some sour
crab-apple trees and, by means of a stepladder, a fine paintbrush and a
lot of patience, you got huge juicy apples. You took some rather scruffy
desert horses and, with effort and a good stock book, you got a winner.
Evolution was a demonstration of narrativium in action. Things improved.
Even the human race was evolving, by means of education and other
benefits of civilization; it had began with rather bad-mannered people
in caves, and it had now produced the Faculty of Unseen University,
beyond which it was probably impossible to evolve further.

Of course, there were people who occasionally advanced more radical
ideas, but they were like the people who thought the world really _was_
round or that aliens were interested in the contents of their underwear.

Unnatural selection was a fact, but the wizards knew, they _knew_, that
you couldn’t start off with bananas and get fish.

The Librarian glanced at the card, and took a few surprising turnings.
There was the occasional burst of noise on the other side of the
shelves, rapidly changing as though someone was playing with handfuls of
sound, and a flickering in the air. Someone talking was replaced with
the absorbent silence of empty rooms was replaced with the crackling of
flame and displaced by laughter …

Eventually, after much walking and climbing, the Librarian was faced
with a blank wall of books. He stepped up to them with librarianic
confidence and they melted away in front of him.

He was in some sort of study. It was book-lined, although with rather
fewer than the Librarian would have expected to find in such an
important node of L-space. Perhaps there was just the _one_ book … and
there it was, giving out L-radiation at a strength the Librarian had
seldom encountered outside the seriously magical books in the locked
cellars of Unseen University. It was a book and father of books, the
progenitor of a whole race that would flutter down the centuries …

It was also, unfortunately, still being written.

The author, pen still in hand, was staring at the Librarian as if he’d
seen a ghost.

With the exception of his bald head and a beard that even a wizard would
envy, he looked very, very much _like_ the Librarian.

‘My goodness …’

‘Ook?’ The Librarian had not expected to be seen. The writer must have
something very pertinent on his mind.

‘What manner of shade are you …?’

‘Ook.’*1

A hand reached out, tremulously. Feeling that something was expected of
him, the Librarian reached out as well, and the tips of the fingers
touched.

The author blinked.

‘Tell me, then,’ he said, ‘is Man an ape, or is he an angel?’

The Librarian knew this one.

‘Ook,’ he said, which meant: ape is best, because you don’t have to fly
and you’re allowed sex, unless you work at Unseen University, worst
luck.

Then he backed away hurriedly, ooking apologetic noises about the minor
error in the spacetime coordinates, and knuckled off through the
interstices of L-space and grabbed the first book he found that had the
word ‘Evolution’ in the title.

The bearded man went on to write an even more amazing book. If only he
had thought to use the word _‘Ascent’_ there might not have been all
that unpleasantness.

But, there again, perhaps not.

HEX let itself absorb more of the future … call it … _knowledge_. Words
were so difficult. Everything was context. There was too much to learn.
It was like trying to understand a giant machine when you didn’t
understand a screwdriver.

Sometimes HEX thought it was picking up fragmentary instructions. And,
further away, much further away, there were little disjointed phrases in
the soup of concepts which made sense but did not seem to be sensible.
Some of them arrived unbidden.

Even as HEX pondered this, another one arrived and offered an
opportunity to make $$$$ While You Sit On Your Butt!!!!! He considered
this unlikely.

The title brought back by the Librarian was _The Young Person’s Guide to
Evolution_.

The Archchancellor turned the pages carefully. They were well
illustrated. The Librarian knew his wizards.

‘And this is a good book on evolution?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Ook.’

‘Well, it makes no sense to _me_,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘I mean
t’say, what the hell is this picture all about?’

It showed, on the left, a rather hunched-up, ape-like figure. As it
crossed the page, it gradually arose and grew considerably less hairy
until it was striding confidently towards the edge of the page, perhaps
pleased that it had essayed this perilous journey without at any time
showing its genitals.

‘Looks like me when I’m getting up in the mornings,’ said the Dean, who
was reading over his shoulder.

‘Where’d the hair go?’ Ridcully demanded.

‘Well, some people shave,’ said the Dean.

‘This is a very _strange_ book,’ said Ridcully, looking accusingly at
the Librarian, who kept quiet because in fact he was a little worried.
He rather suspected he might have altered history, or at least _a_
history, and on his flight back to the safety of UU he’d seized the
first book that looked as though it might be suitable for people with a
very high IQ but a mental age of about ten. It had been in an empty
byway, far off his usual planes of exploration, and there had been very
small red chairs in it.

‘Oh, I get it. This is a fairy story,’ said Ridcully. ‘Frogs turnin’
into princes, that kind of thing. See here … there’s something like our
blobs, and then these fishes, and then it’s a … a newt, and then it’s a
big dragony type of thing and, hah, then it’s a mouse, then here’s an
ape, and then it’s a man. This sort of thing happens all the time out in
the really rural areas, you know, where some of the witches can be quite
vindictive.’

‘The Omnians believe something like this, you know,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘Om started off making simple things like snakes, they say,
and worked his way up to Man.’

‘As if life was like modelling clay?’ said Ridcully, who was not a
patient man with religion. ‘You start out with simple things and then
progress to elephants and birds which don’t stand up properly when you
put them down? We’ve _met_ the God of Evolution, gentlemen … remember?
Natural evolution merely improves a species. It can’t _change_
anything.’

His finger stabbed at the next page in the brightly coloured book.

‘Gentlemen, this is merely some sort of book of magic, possibly about
the Morphic Bounce Hypothesis.*2 Look at this.’ The picture showed a
very large lizard followed by a big red arrow, followed by a bird.
‘Lizards don’t turn into birds. If they did, why have we still got
lizards? Things can’t decide for _themselves_ what shape they’re going
to be. Ain’t that so, Bursar?’

The Bursar nodded happily. He was halfway through HEX’S write-out of the
theoretical physics of the project universe and, so far, had understood
every word. He was particular happy with the limitations of light speed.
It made absolute sense.

He took a crayon and wrote in the margin: ‘Assuming the universe to be a
negatively curved non-Paramidean manifold – which is more or less
obvious – you could deduce its topology by observing the same galaxies
in several different directions.’ He thought for a moment, and added:
‘Some travel will be involved.’

Of course, he was a natural mathematician, and one thing a natural
mathematician wants to do is get away from actual damn sums as quickly
as possible and slide into those bright sunny uplands where everything
is explained by letters in a foreign alphabet, and no one shouts very
much. This was even better than that. The hard-to-digest idea that there
were dozens of dimensions rolled up where you couldn’t see them was
sheer jelly and ice cream to a man who saw _lots_ of things no one else
saw.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 ‘Reddish-brown’.

*2 … which had engrossed wizards for many years. The debate ran like
this: it was quite easy to turn someone into a frog, and fairly easy to
turn them into, say, a white mouse. Strangely, considering the basic
similarity of size and shape, turning someone into an orangutan took a
vast amount of power and it was only an explosion in the intense thaumic
confines of the Library which had managed the trick. Turning someone
into a tree was much, much harder even than that, although turning a
pumpkin into a coach was so easy that even a crazy old woman with a wand
could do it. Was there some kind of framework into which all this
fitted?
    The current hypothesis was that most Change spells unravelled the
victim’s morphic field down to some very basic level and then ‘bounced’
them back. A frog was quite simple, so they wouldn’t have to bounce far.
An ape, being quite human-like in many respects, would mean a very long
return journey indeed. You couldn’t turn someone into a tree because
there was no way to get there from here, but a pumpkin could be turned
into a wooden coach because it was quite close to it in vegetable space.
    The wizards agreed that this all seemed to fit nicely, and was
therefore true.
    If William of Occam had been a wizard at Unseen University, he would
have grown a beard.



TWENTY-SIX



THE DESCENT OF DARWIN


[] THE WIZARDS MET THE GOD OF EVOLUTION in _The Last Continent_. He made
things the way a god ought to:

‘ “Amazin’ piece of work,” said Ridcully, emerging from the elephant.
“Very good wheels. You paint these bits before assembly, do you?” ’

The God of Evolution builds creatures piece by piece, like a butcher in
reverse. He likes worms and snakes because they’re very easy – you can
roll them out like a child with modelling clay. But once the God of
Evolution has _made_ a species, can it change? It does on Discworld,
because the God runs around making hurried adjustments … but how does it
work without such divine intervention?

All societies that have domestic animals, be they hunting dogs or edible
pigs, know that living creatures can undergo gradual changes in form
from one generation to the next. Human intervention, in the form of
‘unnatural selection’, can _breed_ long thin dogs to go down holes and
big fat pigs that provide more bacon per trotter.* The wizards know
this, and so did the Victorians. Until the nineteenth century, though,
nobody seems to have realized that a very similar process might explain
the remarkable diversity of life on Earth, from bacteria to bactrians,
from oranges to orangutans.

They didn’t appreciate that possibility for two reasons. When you bred
dogs, what you got was a different kind of dog – not a banana or a fish.
And breeding animals was the purest kind of magic: if a human being
_wanted_ a long thin dog, and if they started from short fat ones, and
if they knew how the trick worked (if, so to speak, they cast the right
‘spells’) then they would _get_ a long thin dog. Bananas, long and thin
though they might be, were _not_ a good starting point. Organisms
couldn’t change species, and they only changed form within their _own_
species because people wanted them to.

Around 1850, two people independently began to wonder whether nature
might play a similar game, but on a much longer timescale and in a much
grander manner – and without any sense of purpose or goal (which had
been the flaw in previous musings along similar lines). They considered
a self-propelled magic: ‘natural’ selection as opposed to selection by
people. One of them was Alfred Wallace; the other – far better known
today – was Charles Darwin. Darwin spent years travelling the world.
From 1831 to 1836 he was hired as ship’s naturalist aboard HMS _Beagle_,
and his job was to observe plants and animals and note down what he saw.
In a letter of 1877 he says that while on the _Beagle_ he believed in
‘the permanence of species’, but on his return home in 1836 he began to
think about the deeper meaning of what he had seen, and realized that
‘many facts indicated the common descent of species’. By this he meant
that species that are different now probably came from ancestors that
once belonged to the _same_ species. Species must be able to change.
That wasn’t an entirely new idea, but he also came up with an effective
_mechanism_ for such changes, and that _was_ new.

Meanwhile Wallace was studying the flora and fauna of Brazil and the
East Indies, and comparing what he saw in the two regions, and was
coming to similar conclusions – and much the same explanation. By 1858
Darwin was still mulling over his ideas, contemplating a grand
publication of everything he wanted to say about the subject, while
Wallace was getting ready to publish a short article containing the main
idea. Being a true English gentleman, Wallace warned Darwin of his
intentions so that Darwin could publish something first, and Darwin
rapidly penned a short paper for the Linnaean Society, followed a year
later by a book, _The Origin of Species –_ a big book, but still not on
the majestic scale that Darwin had originally intended. Wallace’s paper
appeared in the same journal shortly afterwards, but both papers were
officially ‘presented’ to the Society at the same meeting.

What was the initial reaction to these two Earth-shattering articles? In
his annual report for that year, the President of the Society, Thomas
Bell, wrote that ‘The year has not, indeed, been marked by any of those
striking discoveries which at once revolutionize, so to speak, the
department of science in which they occur.’ However, this perception
quickly changed as the sheer enormity of Darwin’s and Wallace’s theory
began to sink in, and they took a lot of stick from Mustrum Ridcully’s
spiritual brethren for daring to come up with a plausible alternative to
Biblical creation. What was this epoch-making alternative? An idea so
simple that everybody else had missed it. Thomas Huxley is said to have
remarked, on reading _Origin:_ ‘How extremely stupid not to have thought
of that.’

This is the idea. You don’t need a human being to push animals into new
forms; they can do it to themselves – more precisely: _to each other_.
This was the mechanism of natural selection. Herbert Spencer, who did
the important journalistic job of interpreting Darwin’s theory to the
masses, coined the phrase, ‘survival of the fittest’ to describe it. The
phrase had the advantage of convincing everybody that they understood
what Darwin was saying, and it had the disadvantage of convincing
everybody that they understood what Darwin was saying. It was a classic
lie-to-children, and it deceives many critics of evolution to this day,
causing them to aim at a long-disowned target, besides giving a spurious
‘scientific’ background to some extremely stupid and unpleasant
political theories.

Starting from an enormous range of observations of many species of
plants and animals, Darwin had become convinced that organisms could
change of their own accord, so much so that they could even – over
_very_ long periods – change so much that they gave rise to new species.

Imagine a lot of creatures of the same species. They are in competition
for resources, such as food – competing with each other, and with
animals of other species. Now suppose that by random chance, one or more
of these animals has offspring that are _better_ at winning the
competition. Then those animals are more likely to survive for long
enough to produce the next generation, and the next generation is _also_
better at winning. In contrast, if one or more of these animals has
offspring that are worse at winning the competition, then those animals
are less likely to produce a succeeding generation – and even if they
somehow do, that next generation is still worse at winning. Clearly even
a tiny advantage will, over many generations, lead to a population
composed almost entirely of the new high-powered winners. In fact, the
effect of any advantage grows like compound interest, so it doesn’t take
all that long.

Natural selection sounds like a very straightforward idea, but words
like ‘competition’ and ‘win’ are loaded. It’s easy to get the wrong
impression of just how subtle evolution must be. When a baby bird falls
out of the nest and gets gobbled up by a passing cat, it is easy to see
the battle for survival as being fought between bird and cat. But if
_that_ is the competition, then cats are clear winners – so why haven’t
birds evolved away altogether? Why aren’t there just cats?

Because cats and birds long ago came, unwittingly, to a mutual
accommodation in which _both_ can survive. If birds could breed
unchecked, there would soon be far too many birds for their food supply
to support them. A female starling, for instance, lays about 16 eggs in
her life. If they all survived, and this continued, the starling
population would multiply by eight every generation – 16 babies for
every two parents. Such ‘exponential’ growth is amazingly rapid: by the
70th generation a sphere the size of the solar system would be occupied
entirely by starlings (instead of by pigeons, which appears to be its
natural destiny).

The only ‘growth rate’ for the population that works is for each
breeding pair of adult starlings to produce, on average, exactly one
breeding pair of adult starlings. Replacement, but no more – and no
less. Anything more than replacement, and the population explodes;
anything less, and it eventually dies out. So of those 16 eggs, an
average of 14 must not survive to breed. And that’s where the cat comes
in, along with all the other things that make it tough to be a bird,
especially a young one. In a way, the cats are doing the birds a favour
– collectively, though maybe not as individuals. (It depends if you’re
one of the two that survive to breed or the 14 that don’t.)

Rather more obviously, the birds are doing the cats a favour – cat food
literally drops out of the skies, manna from heaven. So what stops it
getting out of hand is that if a group of greedy cats happens to evolve
somewhere, they rapidly eat themselves out of existence again. The more
restrained cats next door survive to breed, and quickly take over the
vacated territory. So those cats that eat just enough birds to maintain
their food supply will win a competition _against the greedy cats_. Cats
and birds aren’t _competing_ because they’re not playing the same game.
The real competitions are between cats and other cats, and between birds
and other birds. This may seem a wasteful process, but it isn’t. A
female starling has no trouble laying her 16 eggs. Life is reproductive
– it makes reasonably close, though not exact, copies of itself, in
quantity, and ‘cheaply’. Evolution can easily ‘try out’ many different
possibilities, and discard those that don’t work. And that’s an
astonishingly effective way to home in on what _does_ work.

As Huxley said, it’s such an obvious idea. It caused so much trouble
from religionists because it takes the gloss off one of their favourite
arguments, the argument from design. Living creatures seem so perfectly
put together that surely they _must_ have been designed – and if so,
there must have been a Designer. Darwinism made it clear that a process
of random, purposeless variation trimmed by self-induced selection can
achieve equally impressive results, so there can be the semblance of
design without any Designer.

There are plenty of details to Darwinism that still aren’t understood,
as with all science, but most of the obvious ways of trying to shoot it
down have been answered effectively. The classic example – still
routinely trotted out by creationists and others even though Darwin
himself had a pretty good answer – is the evolution of the eye. The
human eye is a complex structure, and all of its components have to fit
together to a high degree of accuracy, or it won’t work. If we claim
that such a complex structure has evolved, we must accept that it
evolved gradually. It can’t all have come into being at once. But if so,
then at every stage along the evolutionary track the still-evolving
proto-eye must offer some kind of survival advantage to the creature
that possesses it. How can this happen? The question is often asked in
the form ‘What use is half an eye?’, to which you are expected to
conclude ‘nothing’, followed by a rapid conversion to some religion or
other. ‘Nothing’ is a reasonable answer – but to the wrong question.
There are lots of ways to get to an eye gradually that do not require it
to be assembled piece by piece like a jigsaw puzzle. Evolution does not
build creatures piece by piece like the God of Evolution in _The Last
Continent_. Darwin himself pointed out that in creatures alive in his
day you could find all kinds of light-sensitive organs – starting with
patches of skin, then increasing in complexity, light-gathering power,
and ability to detect fine detail, right up to structures as
sophisticated as the human eye. There is a continuum of eyelike organs
in the living world, and every creature gains an advantage by having its
own type of light-sensing device, in comparison to similar creatures
that have a slightly less effective device of a similar kind.

In 1994 Daniel Nilsson and Susanne Pelger used a computer to see what
would happen to a mathematical model of a light-sensing surface if it
was allowed to change in small, random, biologically feasible ways, with
only those changes that improved its sensitivity to light being
retained. They found that within 400,000 generations – an evolutionary
blink of an eye – that flat surface gradually changed into a
recognizable eye, complete with a lens. The lens even bent light
differently in different places, just like our eye and unlike normal
spectacle lenses. At every tiny step along the way, a creature with the
improved ‘eye’ would be better than those with the old version.

At no stage was there ever ‘half an eye’. There were just light-sensing
things that got _better_ at it.

Since the 1950s, we have been in possession of a new and central piece
of the evolutionary jigsaw, one that Darwin would have given his right
arm to know about. This is the physical – more precisely, chemical –
nature of whatever it is that ensures that characteristics of organisms
can change _and_ be passed from one generation to the next.

You know the word: _gene_.

You know the molecule: _DNA_.

You even know how it works: DNA carries the _genome_, which is a
chemical ‘blueprint’ for an organism. It uses the _genetic code_ to turn
DNA into proteins.

And, probably, a lot of what you know is lies-to-children.

Just as ‘survival of the fittest’ captured the imaginations of the
Victorians, so ‘DNA’ has captured the imaginations of today’s public.
However, imaginations thrive best if they are left free to roam: they
grow tired and feeble in captivity. Captive imaginations do breed quite
effectively, because they are protected from the terrible predator known
as Thought.

DNA has two striking properties, which play a significant role in the
complex chemistry of life: it can encode information, and that
information can be copied. (Other molecules _process_ the DNA
information, for example by making proteins according to recipes encoded
in DNA.) From this point of view a living organism is a kind of
molecular computer. Of course there’s much more to life than that, but
DNA is central to any discussion of life on Earth. DNA is life’s most
important molecular-level ‘space elevator’ – a platform from which life
can launch itself into higher realms.

The complexity of living creatures arises not because they are made from
some special kind of matter – the now-discredited ‘vitalist’ theory –
but because their matter is organized in an exceedingly intricate
fashion. DNA does a lot of the routine ‘bookkeeping’ that _keeps_ living
creatures organized. Every cell of (nearly) every living organism
contains its genome – a kind of code message written in DNA, which gives
that organism a lot of hints about how to behave at the molecular level.
(Exceptions are various viruses, on the boundary between life and
non-life, which use a slightly different code.)

This is why it was possible to clone Dolly the Sheep – to take an
ordinary cell from an adult sheep and make it grow into another sheep.
The trick actually requires _three_ adult sheep. First, there’s the one
from which you take the cell: call her ‘Dolly’s Mum’. Then you persuade
the cell’s nucleus to forget that it came from an adult and to think
that it’s back in the egg, and then you implant it into an egg from a
second sheep (‘Egg Donor’). Then you put the egg into the uterus of the
third sheep (‘Surrogate Mum’) so that it can grow into a normal lamb.

Dolly is often said to have been a perfect copy of Dolly’s Mum, but
that’s not completely true. For a start, certain parts of Dolly’s DNA
came not from Dolly’s Mum, but from Egg Donor. And even if that slight
difference had been fixed, Dolly could still differ in many ways from
her ‘mother’, because sheep DNA is _not_ a complete list of instructions
for ‘how to build a sheep’. DNA is more like a recipe – and it assumes
you already know how to set up your kitchen. So the recipe doesn’t say
‘put the mixture in a greased pan and place in an oven set to 400°F,’
for instance: it says ‘put the mixture in the oven’ and _assumes_ that
you know it needs to go in a pan and that the oven should be set to a
standard temperature. In particular, sheep DNA leaves out the vital
instruction ‘put the mixture inside a sheep’, but that’s the only place
(as yet) where you can turn a fertilized sheep egg into a lamb. So even
Surrogate Mum played a considerable role in determining what happened
when the DNA recipe for Dolly was ‘obeyed’.

Many biologists think that this is a minor objection – after all, Egg
Donor and Surrogate Mum work the way they do because _their_ DNA
contains the information that makes them do it. But things that aren’t
in _any_ organism’s DNA may be essential for the reproductive cycle. A
good example occurs in yeast, a plant that can turn sugar into alcohol
and give off carbon dioxide. The entire DNA code for one species of
yeast is now known. Thousands of experimentalists have played genetic
games with yeast, then spun the beasties in a centrifuge to separate the
DNA, from which they can work out the code. When you do this, you leave
a scummy residue in the bottom of the test tube, but since it’s not DNA,
you know it can’t be important for genetics, and you throw it away. And
so they all did, until in 1997 one geneticist asked a stupid question.
If it’s not DNA, what’s it _for_? What’s in that scummy residue, anyway?

The answer was simple, and baffling. Prions. Lots and lots of them.

A prion is a smallish protein molecule that can act as a catalyst for
the formation of more protein molecules just like itself. Unlike DNA, it
doesn’t do this by replication. Instead, it needs a supply of proteins
that are _almost_ like itself, but not quite – the right atoms, in the
right order, but folded into the wrong shape. The prion attaches itself
to such a protein, jiggles it around a bit, and nudges it into the same
shape as the prion. So now you’ve got _more_ prions, and the process
speeds up.

Prions are molecular preachers: they make more of themselves by
converting the heathen, not by splitting into identical twins. The most
notorious prion is the one that is believed to be the cause of BSE, ‘mad
cow disease’. The protein that gets converted happens to be a key
component of the cow’s brain, which is why infected cows lose
coordination, stagger around, foam at the mouth, and look crazy. What
does yeast want prions for? Without prions, yeast can’t reproduce. The
protein-making instructions in its DNA sometimes make a protein that is
folded into the wrong shape. When a yeast cell divides, it copies its
DNA to each half, but it shares the prions (which can be topped up by
converting other proteins). So here’s a case where, even on the
molecular level, an organism’s DNA does _not_ specify everything about
that organism.

There’s a lot about the DNA code system that we don’t understand, but
one part that we _do_ is the ‘genetic code’. Some segments of DNA are
recipes for proteins. In fact, they come very close to being exact
blueprints for proteins, because they list the precise components of the
protein and they list them in exactly the right order. Proteins are made
from a catalogue of fairly tiny molecules known as amino acids. For most
organisms, humans included, the catalogue contains exactly 22 amino
acids. If you string lots of amino acids together in a row, and let them
fold up into a relatively compact tangle, you get a protein. The one
thing the DNA doesn’t list is _how_ to fold the resulting molecule up,
but usually it folds the right way of its own accord. Occasionally, when
it doesn’t, there are more servant molecules to nudge it into the right
shape. Just such a servant molecule, rejoicing in the name HSP90, is
turning molecular genetics upside down even as we write. HSP90 ‘insists’
that proteins fold into the orthodox shape, even if there are a few
mutations in the DNA that codes for those proteins. When the organism is
‘stressed’, diverting HSP90 to other functions, these cryptic mutations
suddenly get expressed – the proteins acquire the unorthodox shape that
goes along with their mutated DNA codes. In effect, this says that you
can trigger a genetic change by non-genetic means.

Segments of DNA that code for working proteins are called genes.
Segments that don’t rejoice in a variety of names. Some of them code for
proteins that control when a given gene ‘switches on’, that is, starts
to make proteins: these are known as regulatory (or homeotic) genes.
Some bits are colloquially called ‘junk DNA’, a scientific term meaning
‘we don’t know what these bits are for’. Some literally minded
scientists read this as ‘they’re not _for_ anything’, thereby getting
the horse of nature neatly aligned with the rear end of the cart of
human understanding. Most likely they are a mix of different things: DNA
that used to have some function way back in evolution but currently does
not (and might possibly be revived if, say, an ancient parasite
reappeared), DNA that controls how genes switch their protein
manufacturing on and off, DNA that controls _those_, and so on. Some may
actually be genuine junk. And some (so the joke goes) may encode a
message like ‘It was me, I’m God, I existed all along, ha ha.’

Evolutionary processes do not always direct themselves along paths that
are neatly comprehensible to humans. This doesn’t mean Darwin was wrong:
it means that even when he’s right, there may be a surprising absence of
narrativium, so that a ‘story’ that makes perfect sense to evolution may
not make sense to humans. We suspect that a lot of what you find in
living organisms is like that – offering a small advantage at every
stage of its evolution, but an advantage in such a complex game is that
we can’t tell a convincing story about _why_ it’s an advantage. To show
just how bizarre evolutionary processes can be, even in comparatively
simple circumstances, we must look not to animals or plants, but to
electronic circuits.

Since 1993 an engineer named Adrian Thompson has been evolving circuits.
The basic technique, known as ‘genetic algorithms’, is quite widely used
in computer science. An algorithm is a specific program, or recipe, to
solve a given problem. One way to find algorithms for really tough
problems is to ‘cross-breed’ them and apply natural selection. By ‘cross
breed’ we mean ‘mix parts of one algorithm with parts of the other’.
Biologists call this ‘recombination’ and each sexual organism – like you
– recombines its parents’ chromosomes in just this manner. Such a
technique, or its result, is called a genetic algorithm. When the method
works, it works brilliantly; its main disadvantage is that you can’t
always give a sensible explanation of how the resulting algorithm
accomplishes whatever it does. More of that in a moment: first we must
discuss the electronics.

Thompson wondered what would happen if you used the genetic algorithm
approach on an electronic circuit. Decide on some task, randomly
cross-breed circuits that might or might not solve it, keep the ones
that do better than the rest, and repeat for as many generations as it
takes.

Most electronic engineers, thinking about such a project, will quickly
realize that it’s silly to use genuine circuits. Instead, you can
simulate the circuits on a computer (since you know exactly how a
circuit behaves) and do the whole job more quickly and more cheaply in
simulation. Thompson mistrusted this line of argument, though: maybe
real circuits ‘knew’ something that a simulation would miss.

He decided on a task: to distinguish between two input signals of
different frequencies, 1 kilohertz and 10 kilohertz – that is, signals
that made 1000 vibrations per second and 10,000 vibrations per second.
Think of them as sound: a low tone and a high tone. The circuit should
accept the tone as input signal, process it in some manner to be
determined by its eventual structure, and produce an output signal. For
the high tone, the circuit should output a steady zero volts – that is,
no output at all – and for the low tone, the circuit should output a
steady five volts. (Actually, these properties were not specified at the
start: any two different steady signals would have been acceptable. But
that’s how it ended up.)

It would take forever to build thousands of trial circuits by hand, so
he employed a ‘field-programmable gate array’. This is a microchip that
contains a number of very tiny transistorized ‘logic cells’ – mildly
intelligent switches, so to speak – whose connections can be changed by
loading new instructions into the chip’s configuration memory.

Those instructions are analogous to an organism’s DNA code, and can be
cross-bred. That’s what Thompson did. He started with an array of one
hundred logic cells, and used a computer to randomly generate a
population of fifty instruction codes. The computer loaded each set into
the array, fed in the two tones, looked at the outputs, and tried to
find some feature that might help in evolving a decent circuit. To begin
with, that feature was anything that didn’t look totally random. The
‘fittest’ individual in the first generation produced a steady five-volt
output no matter which tone it heard. The least fit instruction codes
were then killed off (deleted), the fit ones were bred (copied and
recombined), and the process was repeated.

What’s most interesting about the experiment is not the details, but how
the system homed in on a solution – and the remarkable nature of that
solution. By the 220th generation, the fittest circuit produced outputs
that were pretty much the same as the inputs, two waveforms of different
frequencies. The same effect could have been obtained with no circuit at
all, just a bare wire! The desired steady output signals were not yet in
prospect.

By the 650th generation, the output for the low tone was steady, but the
high tone still produced a variable output signal. It took until
generation 2800 for the circuit to give approximately steady, and
different, signals for the two tones; only by generation 4100 did the
odd glitch get ironed out, after which point little further evolution
occurred.

The strangest thing about the eventual solution was its structure. No
human engineer would ever have invented it. Indeed no human engineer
would have been able to find a solution with a mere 100 logic cells. The
human engineer’s solution, though, would have been comprehensible – we
would be able to tell a convincing ‘story’ about why it worked. For
example, it would include a ‘clock’ – a circuit that ticks at a constant
rate. That would give a baseline to compare the other frequencies
against. But you can’t make a clock with 100 logic cells. The
evolutionary solution didn’t _bother_ with a clock. Instead, it routed
the input signal through a complicated series of loops. These presumably
generated time-delayed and otherwise processed versions of the signals,
which eventually were combined to produce the steady outputs.
Presumably. Thompson described how it functioned like this: ‘Really, I
don’t have the faintest idea how it works.’

Amazingly, further study of the final solution showed that only 32 of
its 100 logic cells were actually needed. The rest could be removed from
the circuit without affecting its behaviour. At first it looked as if
five other logic cells could be removed – they were not connected
electrically to the rest, nor to the input or output. However, if these
were removed, the circuit ceased to work. Presumably these cells reacted
to physical properties of the rest of the circuit other than electrical
current – magnetic fields, say. Whatever the reason, Thompson’s hunch
that a real silicon circuit would have more tricks up its sleeve than a
computer simulation turned out to be absolutely right.

The technological justification for Thompson’s work is the possibility
of evolving highly efficient circuits. But the message for basic
evolutionary theory is also important. In effect, it tells us that
evolution has no need for narrativium. An evolved solution may ‘work’
without it being at all clear how it does whatever it does. It may not
follow any ‘design principle’ that makes sense to human beings. Instead,
it can follow the emergent logic of Ant Country, which can’t be captured
in a simple story.

Of course, evolution may sometimes hit on ‘designed’ solutions, as
happens for the eye. Sometimes it hits on solutions that do have a
narrative, but we fail to appreciate the story. Stick insects look like
sticks, and their eggs look like seeds. There is a kind of Discworld
logic to this, since seeds are the ‘eggs’ of sticks, and prior to the
theory of evolution taking hold the Victorians approved of this ‘logic’
because it looked like God being consistent. The early evolutionists
didn’t see it that way, and they worried about it; but they worried a
lot more when they found that some stick insect eggs looked like little
snails. It seemed silly for anything to resemble the favourite food of
nearly everything else. In fact, it seemed to be a flat contradiction to
the evolutionary story. The puzzle was solved only in 1994, after forest
fires in Australia. When new plant shoots came up out of the ashes, they
were covered in baby stick insects. Ants had carried the ‘seeds’, and
the ‘baby snails’, down into their subterranean nests, thinking they
were the real thing. Being safely underground, the stick insect eggs
escaped the fires. In fact, baby stick insects look, and run, just like
ants: this should have been a clue, but nobody made the connection.

And sometimes evolution’s solution _has_ no narrative structure. To test
Darwin’s theories thoroughly, we should be looking for evolved systems
that _don’t_ conform to a simple narrative description, as well as for
ones that do. Many of the brain’s sensory systems may well be like this.
The first few layers of the visual cortex, for example, perform
generalized functions like detecting edges, but we have no idea how
lower layers work, and that may well be because they don’t conform to
any design principles that we currently can recognize. Our sense of
smell seems to be ‘organized’ along very strange lines, not at all as
clearly structured as the visual cortex, and it too may be lacking any
element of design.

More importantly, genes may well be like this. Biologists habitually
talk of ‘the function of a gene’ – what it does. The unspoken assumption
is that it does only one thing, or a small list of things. This is pure
magic: the gene as a spell. It is conceived as being a spell in the same
sense that ‘Cold Start’ in a car is. But a lot of genes may not do
_anything_ that can be summed up in a simple story. The job they evolved
to do is ‘build an organism’, and they evolved as a team, like
Thompson’s circuits. When evolution turns up solutions of this kind,
conventional reductionism is not much help in understanding those
solutions. You can list neural connections till the cows come home, but
you won’t understand how the cows’ visual systems distinguish a cowshed
from a bull.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* The quantity of bacon per trotter is on average slightly more than one
quarter of the amount per head.



TWENTY-SEVEN



WE NEED MORE BLOBS


[] RINCEWIND WAS FINDING, now that he was back at what appeared to be
his real size, that he was coming to enjoy this world after all. It was
so marvellously dull.

Every so often he’d be moved forward a few tens of millions of years.
The sea levels would change. There seemed to be more land around,
speckled with volcanoes. Sand was turning up on the edge of the sea. Yet
the sheer vast ringing silence dominated everything. Oh, there’d be
storms, and at night there were brilliant meteor showers that
practically hissed across the sky, but these only underlined the absent
symphony of life.

He was rather pleased with ‘symphony of life’.

‘Mr Stibbons?’ he said.

‘Yes?’ said Ponder’s voice in his helmet.

‘There seem to be a lot of comets about.’

‘Yes, they seem to go with roundworld systems. Is this a problem?’

‘Aren’t they going to crash into this world?’

Rincewind heard the muted sounds of debate in the background, and then
Ponder said: ‘The Archchancellor says snowballs don’t hurt.’

‘Oh. Good.’

‘We’re going to move you on a few million years now. Ready?’

‘Millions and millions of years of dullness,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘There are more blobs today,’ said Ponder.

‘Oh, good. We _need_ more blobs.’

There was a yell from Rincewind. The wizards rushed to the omniscope.

‘Good heavens,’ said the Dean. ‘Is that a higher lifeform?’

‘I _think_,’ said Ponder, ‘that seat cushions have inherited the world.’

They lay in the warm shallow water. They were dark green. They were
reassuringly dull.

But the _other_ things weren’t.

Blobs drifted over the sea like giant eyeballs, black, purple, and
green. The water itself was covered with them. A scum of them rolled in
the surf. The aerial ones bobbed only a few inches above the waves,
thick as fog, overshadowing one another in their fight for height.

‘Have you _ever_ seen anything like that?’ said the Senior Wranger.

‘Not legally,’ said the Dean. A blob burst. Audio reception on the
omniscope was not good, but the sound was, in short, _phut_. The
stricken thing disappeared into the sea, and the floating blobs closed
in over it.

‘Get Rincewind to try to communicate with them,’ said Ridcully.

‘What have blobs got to talk about, sir?’ said Ponder. ‘Besides, they’re
not making any noise. I don’t think _phut_ counts.’

‘They’re various colours,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Perhaps
they communicate by changing colour? Like those sea creatures –’ He
snapped his fingers as an aid to memory.

‘Lobsters?’ the Dean supplied.

‘Really?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘I didn’t know they did that.’

‘Oh yes,’ said Ridcully. ‘Red means “help!” ’*

‘No, I think the Lecturer in Recent Runes is referring to squid,’ said
Ponder, who knew that this sort of thing could go on for a long time. He
added hurriedly, ‘I’ll tell Rincewind to give it a try’

Rincewind, apparently knee deep in blobs, said: ‘What do you mean?’

‘Well … could you get embarrassed, perhaps?’

‘No, but I’m getting angry!’

‘That might work, if you get red enough. They’ll think you want help.’

‘Do you know there’s something else here besides blobs?’

Some of the blobs trailed strands in the faint breeze blowing across the
beach. When they tangled up on a blob gasbag, which put some stress on
the line, the little blob on the end let go its grip on a rock, the line
gradually shortened, and the gasbag bobbed onwards with its new
passenger.

Rincewind saw them on a number of blobs. The blobs did not look healthy.

‘Predators,’ Ponder told him.

‘I’m on a beach with _predators_?’

‘If it really worries you, try not to look blobby. We’ll keep an eye on
them. Er … the Faculty is of the opinion that intelligence is most
likely to arise in creatures that eat lots of things.’

‘Why?’

‘Probably because _they_ eat lots of things. We’ll try a few big jumps
in time, all right?’

‘I suppose so.’

The world flickered …

‘Blobs.’

 … flickered …

‘The sea’s a lot further away. There’s a few floating blobs. More black
blobs this time.’

 … flickered …

‘Well out at sea, great rafts of purple blobs, some blobs in the air

 … flickered …

_‘Great steaming piles of onions!’_

‘What?’ said Ponder.

‘I knew it! I just _knew_ it! This whole damn place was just lulling me
into a false sense of security!’

_‘What’s happening?’_

‘It’s a snowball. The whole world’s a giant snowball!’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Wizards seldom bothered to look things up if they could reach an
answer by bickering at cross-purposes.



TWENTY-EIGHT



THE ICEBERG COMETH


[] THE EARTH HAS BEEN A GIANT SNOWBALL on many occasions. It was a
snowball 2.7 billion years ago, 2.2 billion years ago, and 2 billion
years ago. It was a really cold snowball 700 million years ago, and this
was followed by a series of global cold snaps that lasted until 600
million years ago. It reverted to snowball mode 300 million years ago,
and has been that way on and off for most of the last 50 million years.
Ice has played a significant part in the story of life. Just _how_
significant a part, we are now beginning to appreciate.

We first began to realize this when we found evidence of the most recent
snowball. About one and a half million years ago, round about the time
that humans began to become the dominant species on Earth, the planet
got very cold. The old name for this period was the Ice Age. We don’t
call it that any more because it wasn’t _one_ Age: we talk of
‘glacial-interglacial cycles’. Is there a connection? Did the cold
climate drive the naked ape to evolve enough intelligence to kill other
animals and use their fur to keep warm? To discover and use fire?

This used to be a popular theory. It’s possible. Probably not, though:
there are too many holes in the logic. But a much earlier, and much more
severe, Ice Age very nearly put a stop to the whole of that ‘life’
nonsense. And, ironically, its failure to do so may have unleashed the
full diversity of life as we now know it.

Thanks to the pioneering insights of Louis Agassiz, Victorian scientists
knew that the Earth had once been a lot colder than it is now, because
they could see the evidence all around them, in the form of the shapes
of valleys. In many parts of the world today you can find glaciers –
huge ‘rivers’ of ice, which flow, very slowly, under the pressure of new
ice forming further uphill. Glaciers carry large quantities of rock, and
they gouge and grind their way along, forming valleys whose
cross-section is shaped like a smooth U. All over Europe, indeed over
much of the world, there are identical valleys – but no sign of ice for
hundreds or thousands of miles. The Victorian geologists pieced together
a picture that was a bit worrying in some ways, but reassuring overall.
About 1.6 million years back, at the start of the Pleistocene era, the
Earth suddenly became colder. The ice caps at the poles advanced, thanks
to a rapid build-up of snow, and gouged out those U-shaped valleys. Then
the ice retreated again. Four times in all, it was thought, the ice had
advanced and retreated, with much of Europe being buried under a layer
of ice several miles thick.

Still, there was no need to worry, the geologists said. We seemed to be
safe and snug in the middle of a warm period, with no prospect of being
buried under miles of ice for quite some time …

The picture is no longer so comfortable. Indeed, some people think that
the greatest threat to humanity is not global warming, but an incipient
ice age. How ironic, and how undeserved, if our pollution of the planet
cancels out a natural disaster!

As usual, the main reason we now know a lot more is that new kinds of
observation became possible, propped up by new theories to explain what
it is that they measure and why we can be reasonably sure that they do.
These new methods range from clever methods for dating old rocks to
studies of the proportions of different isotopes in cores drilled from
ancient ice, backed up by ocean-drilling to study the layers of sediment
deposited on the sea floor. Warm seas sustain different living
creatures, whose death deposits different sediment, so there is a link
from sediments to climate.

All of these methods reinforce each other, and lead to very much the
same picture. Every so often the surface of the Earth begins to cool,
becoming 10°-15°C colder near the poles and 5°C colder elsewhere. Then
it suddenly warms up, possibly becoming 5°C warmer than the current
norm. In between big fluctuations, there are smaller ones: ‘mini ice
ages’. The typical gap between a decent-sized ice age and the next is
around 75,000 years, often less – nothing like the comfortable 400,000
years of ‘interglacial’ expected by the Victorians. The most worrying
finding of all is that periods of high temperatures – that is, like we
get now – seldom lasted more than 20,000 years.

The last major glaciation ended 18,000 years ago.

Wrap up well, folks.

What caused the ice ages? It turns out that the Earth isn’t quite as
nice a planet as we like to think, and its orbit round the sun isn’t
quite as stable and repetitive as we usually assume. The currently
accepted theory was devised in 1920 by a Serbian called Milutin
Milankovitch. In broad terms, the Earth goes round the sun in an
ellipse, almost a circle, but there are three features of the Earth’s
motion that change. One is the amount through which the Earth’s axis
tilts – about 23° at the moment, but varying slightly in a cycle that
lasts roughly 41,000 years. Another is a change in the position of
Earth’s closest approach to the sun, which varies in a 20,000-year
cycle. The third is a variation in the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit
– how oval it is – whose period is around 100,000 years. Putting all
three cycles together, it is possible to calculate the changes in heat
received from the sun. These calculations agree with the known
variations in the Earth’s temperature, and it seems particularly likely
that the Earth’s warming up after ice ages is due to increased warmth
from the sun, thanks to these three astronomical cycles.

It may seem unsurprising that when the Earth receives more heat from the
sun, it warms up, and when it doesn’t, it cools down, but not all of the
heat that reaches the upper atmosphere gets down to the ground. It can
be reflected by clouds, and even if it gets to ground level it can be
reflected from the oceans and from snow and ice. It is thought that
during ice ages, this reflection causes the Earth to lose more heat than
it would otherwise do, so ice ages automatically make themselves
_worse_. We get kicked out of them when the incoming heat from the sun
is so great that the ice starts to melt despite the lost heat. Or maybe
the ice gets dirty, or … It’s not so clear that we get kicked into an
ice age when less of the sun’s warmth reaches the Earth – indeed the
slide into an ice age is usually more gradual than the climb back out of
it.

All of which makes one wonder whether global warming caused by gases
excreted from animals might be partly responsible. When gases such as
carbon dioxide and methane build up in the atmosphere, they cause the
famous ‘greenhouse effect’, trapping more sunlight than usual, hence
more heat. Right now, most scientists have become convinced, the Earth’s
supply of ‘greenhouse gases’ is growing faster than it would otherwise
do thanks to human activities such as farming (burning rainforests to
clear land), driving cars, burning coal and oil for electricity, and
farming again (cows produce a lot of methane: grass goes in one end and
methane emerges at the other). And how could we forget the carbon
dioxide breathed out by people? One person is equivalent to half a car,
maybe more.

Maybe in the past there were vast civilizations of which we now know
nothing, all traces having vanished – except for their effect on the
global temperature. Maybe the Earth seethed with vast herds of cattle,
buffalo, elephants busily excreting methane. But most scientists think
that climate change results from variations in five different factors:
the sun’s output of radiant heat, the Earth’s orbit, the composition of
the atmosphere, the amount of dust produced by volcanoes, and levels of
land and oceans resulting from movement of the Earth’s crust. We can’t
yet put together a really coherent picture in which the measurements
match the theory as closely as we’d like, but one thing that _is_
becoming clear is that the Earth’s climate has more than one
‘equilibrium’ state. It stays in or near one such state for a while,
then switches comparatively rapidly to another, and so on.

The original idea was that one state was a warm climate, like the one we
have now, and the other was a cold ‘ice age’ one. In 1998 Didier
Paillard refined this idea to a three-state model: interglacial (warm),
mild glacial (coldish), and glacial (very cold). A drop in heat received
from the sun below some critical threshold, caused by those astronomical
cycles, triggers a switch from warm to coldish. When the resulting ice
builds up sufficiently, it reflects so much of the sun’s heat that this
triggers another switch from coldish to very cold. But when the sun’s
heat finally builds up again to another threshold value, thanks once
more to the three astronomical cycles, then the climate switches back to
warm. This model fits observations deduced from the amount of oxygen-18
(a radioactive isotope of oxygen) in geological deposits.

Finally, some drama. About 700 million years ago there was an ice age so
severe that it very nearly killed off all of the surface life on Earth.
This ‘big freeze’ lasted for between 10 and 20 million years, the ice
reached the equator, and it seems that the seas froze to a depth of half
a mile (1 km) or more. According to the ‘Snowball Earth’ theory,
proposed by Paul Hoffman and Daniel Schräg in 1998, ice covered the
entire Earth at this time. However, if ice really covered the _whole_
Earth, it should have done more damage than the fossil record indicates.

And that’s not the only problem. One key piece of evidence for the Big
Freeze is a layer of sedimentary rock that formed just after the
glaciers melted and left huge quantities of debris. This layer contains
less carbon-13, in proportion to ordinary carbon-12, than normal. Marine
photosynthesis converts carbon-12 into carbon dioxide more readily than
it does carbon-13, so an excess of carbon-13 is left behind in seawater
and in the layers of sediment in it that later turn to rock. So a low
ratio of carbon-13 to carbon-12 indicates low biological activity.

The scientist’s task is to find ways to try to _disprove_ things that
seem to make sense. In 2001, Martin Kennedy and Nicholas Christie-Blick
measured this ratio for sediments that formed _during_ the alleged Big
Freeze. If the world was miles deep in ice, the ratio ought to be low.
But in fact it was high – in Africa, Australia, and North America. This
suggests that the global ecosystem was going strong at that time.

Computer models of the climate system show that the oceans strongly
resist freezing over completely, too.

Like many attractive scientific theories, Snowball Earth is not at all
clear-cut, and further research will be needed to find out who is right.
Maybe Earth wasn’t a really solid snowball after all. Or maybe, as
Schrag responded, there were patches of open water big enough to change
the carbon chemistry of the ocean as it absorbed atmospheric carbon
dioxide. Maybe the Earth’s axis tilted a lot more than astronomers are
willing to concede, and the poles lost their ice while equatorial
regions gained it. Or perhaps continental drift was more rapid at that
time than we think, and we’ve mapped out the extent of the ice
incorrectly. Whatever the details, though, it was a spectacularly icy
world.

Although the big freeze came close to wiping out all surface life, it
may indirectly have created a lot of today’s biodiversity. The big shift
from single-celled creatures to multi-celled ones also happened 800
million years ago. It is plausible that the big freeze cleared away a
lot of the single-celled lifeforms and opened up new possibilities for
multi-celled life, culminating in the Cambrian Explosion 540 million
years ago. Mass extinctions are typically succeeded by sudden bursts of
diversity, in which life reverts from being a ‘professional’ at the
evolutionary game to being an ‘amateur’. It then takes a while for the
less able amateurs to be eliminated – and until they are, all sorts of
strange strategies for making a living can temporarily thrive. The
succession of icy periods that followed the big freeze could only have
assisted this process.

However, it may have been the other way round. The invention of the anus
by triploblasts may have changed the ecology of the seas. Faeces would
have dropped to the sea-bed, where bacteria could specialize in breaking
them down. Other organisms could then become filter feeders, living on
those bacteria, perhaps sending their larvae up into the plankton for
dispersal, as modern filter-feeders do. Several new ways of life
depended on this primeval composting system. And it’s possible that the
successful return of phosphorus and nitrogen into the marine cycles led
to an explosion of algae, which reduced atmospheric carbon dioxide, cut
back on the greenhouse effect, and triggered the big freeze.

Fortunately for us, the big freeze wasn’t _quite_ long enough, or cold
enough, to kill off everything. (Bacteria in volcanic vents on the ocean
floor and in the Earth’s crust would have survived no matter what, but
evolution would have been set back a long, long way.) So when the Earth
warmed, life exploded into a fresh, competition-free world.
Paradoxically, a major reason why we are here today may be that we very
nearly weren’t. Our entire evolutionary history is full of these good
news–bad news scenarios, where life leaps forward joyously over the
bodies of the fallen …

Rincewind can be forgiven for feeling that Roundworld has it in for him.
Life has suffered from many different kinds of natural disaster. Here
are two more. In the Permian/Triassic extinction of 250 million years
ago, 96% of all species died within the space of a few hundred thousand
years.* William Hobster and Mordeckai Magaritz think this happened
because they suffocated. Carbon isotopes show that a lot of coal and
shale oxidized in the run-up to the extinction, probably because of a
fall in sea level, which exposed more land. The result was a lot more
carbon dioxide and a lot less oxygen, which was reduced to half today’s
level. Land species were especially badly affected.

Another global extinction, though less severe, occurred 55 million years
ago: the Palaeocene/Eocene boundary. In cores of sediment drilled from
the Antarctic, James Kennett and Lowell Stott discovered evidence of the
sudden death of a lot of marine species. It seemed that trillions of
tons (tonnes) of methane had burst from the ocean, sending temperatures
through the roof, methane being a powerful greenhouse gas. Jenny Dickens
suggested that the methane was released from deposits of methane
hydrates in permafrost and on the seabed. Methane hydrates are a crystal
lattice of water enclosing methane gas: they are created when bacteria
in mud release the gas and it becomes trapped.

Coincidentally, one of the main results of the Palaeocene/Eocene
extinction was a burst of evolutionary diversity, leading in particular
to the higher primates – and us. Whether something is a disaster depends
on your point of view. Rocks may not have a point of view, as Ponder
Stibbons pointed out, but we certainly do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* To the best of our knowledge, based on deduction from the available
evidence. Certainly it was a _big_ extinction – far bigger than the one
that killed off (or helped to kill off) the dinosaurs. We remember the
dinosaur one because they’ve had such good PR people.



TWENTY-NINE



GOING FOR A PADDLE


[] ‘I THINK IT LOOKS MORE LIKE A HOGSWATCHNIGHT ORNAMENT,’ said the
Senior Wrangler later, as the wizards took a pre-dinner drink and stared
into the omniscope at the glittering white world. ‘Quite pretty,
really.’

‘Bang go the blobs,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘Phut,’ said the Dean, cheerfully. ‘More sherry, Archchancellor?’

‘Perhaps some instability in the sun …’ Ponder mused.

‘Made by unskilled labour,’ said Archchancellor Ridcully. ‘Bound to
happen sooner or later. And then it’s nothing but frozen death, the
tea-time of the gods and an eternity of cold.’

‘Sniffleheim,’ said the Dean, who’d got to the sherry ahead of everyone
else.

‘According to HEX, the air of the planet has changed,’ said Ponder.

‘A bit academic now, isn’t it?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Ah, I’ve got an idea!’ said the Dean, beaming. ‘We can get HEX to
reverse the thaumic flow in the cthonic matrix of the optimized
bi-direction octagonate, can’t we?’

‘Well, that’s the opinion of four glasses of sherry,’ said the
Archchancellor briskly, to break the ensuing silence. ‘However, if I may
express a preference, something that isn’t complete gibberish would be
more welcome next time, please. So, Mister Stibbons, is this the end of
the world?’

‘And if it is,’ said the Senior Wrangler, ‘are we going to have a lot of
heroes turning up?’

‘What are you talking about, man?’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, the Dean seems to think we’re like gods, and a great many
mythologies suggest that when heroes die they go to feast forever in the
halls of the gods,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘I just need to know if I
should alert the kitchens, that’s all.’

‘They’re only blobs,’ said Ridcully. ‘What can they do that’s heroic?’

‘I don’t know … stealing something from the gods is a very classical
way,’ the Senior Wrangler mused.

‘Are you saying we should check our pockets?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Well, I haven’t seen my penknife lately,’ said the Senior Wranger. ‘It
was just a thought, anyway’

Ridcully slapped the despondent Stibbons on the back.

‘Chin up, lad!’ he roared. ‘It was a wonderful effort! Admittedly the
outcome was a lot of blobs with the intelligence of pea soup, but you
shouldn’t let utter hopeless failure get you down.’

‘_We_ never do,’ said the Dean.

It was after breakfast next day when Ponder Stibbons wandered into the
High Energy Magic building. A scene of desolation met his eye. There
were cups and plates everywhere. Paper littered the floor. Forgotten
cigarettes had etched their charred trails on the edge of desks. A
half-eaten sardine, cheese and blackcurrant pizza, untouched for days,
was inching its way to safety.

Sighing, he picked up a broom, and went over the tray containing HEX’S
overnight write-out.

It seemed a lot fuller than he would have expected.

‘Not just blobs – there’s _all sorts_ of stuff! Some of it’s
_wiggling …_’

‘Is that a plant or is it an animal?’

‘I’m sure it’s a plant.’

‘Isn’t it … walking … rather fast?’

‘I don’t know. I’ve never seen a plant walking before.’

The wizardery of UU was filtering back in the building as the news got
around. The senior members of the faculty were clustered around the
omniscope, explaining to one another, now that the impossible had
happened, that of course it had been inevitable.

‘All those cracks under the sea,’ said the Dean. ‘And the volcanoes, of
course. Heat’s bound to build up over time.’

‘That doesn’t explain all the different shapes, though,’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘I mean, the whole sea looks like somebody had just turned
over a very big stone.’

‘I suppose the blobs had time to consider their future when they were
under the ice,’ said the Dean. ‘It suppose you could think of it as a
very long winter evening.’

‘I vote for lavatories,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Well, I’m sure we all do,’ said Ridcully. ‘But why at this point?’

‘I mean that the blobs were … you know … excusing themselves for
millions and millions of years, then you’re get a lot of, er, manure …’
the Lecturer ventured.

‘A shitload,’ said the Dean.

‘Dean! Really!’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor.’

‘… and we know dunghills absolutely teem with life …’ the Lecturer went
on.

‘They used to think that rubbish heaps actually generated rats,’ said
Ridcully. ‘Of course, that was just a superstition. It’s really
seagulls. But you saying life is, as it were, advancing by eating dead
men’s shoes? Or blobs, in this case. Not shoes, of course, because they
didn’t have any feet. And wouldn’t have been bright enough to invent
shoes even if they did. And even if they had been, they couldn’t have
done. Because there was, at that time, nothing from which shoes might be
made. But apart from that, the metaphor stands.’

‘There still _are_ blobs in there,’ said the Dean. ‘There’s just lots of
other things, too.’

‘Any of it lookin’ intelligent?’ said Ridcully.

‘I’m not certain how we’d spot that at this stage …’

‘Simple. Is anything killing something it doesn’t intend to eat?’

They stared into the teeming broth.

‘Bit hard to define intentions, really,’ said the Dean, after a while.

‘Well, does anything look as if it is _about_ to become intelligent?’

They watched again.

‘That thing like two spiders joined together?’ said the Senior Wrangler
after a while. ‘It looks very thoughtful.’

‘I think it looks very dead.’

‘Look, I can see how we can settle this whole evolution business once
and for all,’ said Ridcully, turning away. ‘Mister Stibbons, can HEX use
the omniscope to see if anything changes into anything else?’

‘Over a moderately sized area, I think he probably can, sir.’

‘Get it to pay attention to the land,’ said the Dean. ‘Is there anything
happening on the land?’

‘There’s a certain greenishness, sir. Seaweed with attitude, really.’

‘That’s where the interesting stuff will happen, mark my words. I don’t
know what this universe is using for narrativium, but land’s where we’ll
see any intelligent life.’

‘How do you define intelligence?’ said Ridcully. ‘In the long term, I
mean.’

‘Universities are a good sign,’ said the Dean, to general approval.

‘You don’t think that perhaps fire and the wheel might be more
universally indicative?’ said Ponder carefully.

‘Not if you live in the water,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘The sea’s the
place here, I’ll be bound. On this world practically nothing happens on
the land.’

‘But in the water everything’s eating each other!’

‘Then I’ll look forward to seeing what happens to the last one served,’
said the Senior Wrangler.

‘No, when it comes to universities, the land’s the place,’ said the
Dean. ‘Paper won’t last five minutes under water. Wouldn’t you say so,
Librarian?’

The Librarian was still staring into the omniscope.

‘Ook,’ he said.

‘What’s that he said?’ said Ridcully.

‘He said “I think the Senior Wrangler might be right”,’ said Ponder,
going over to the omniscope. ‘Oh … look at _this …_’

The creature had at least four eyes and ten tentacles. It was using some
of the tentacles to manœuvre a slab of rock against another slab.

‘It’s building a bookcase?’ said Ridcully.

‘Or possibly a crude rock shelter,’ said Ponder Stibbons.

‘There we are, then,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Personal property. Once
something is yours, of course you want to improve it. The first step on
the road to progress.’

‘I’m not sure it’s got actual legs,’ said Ponder.

‘The first slither, then,’ said the Senior Wrangler, as the rock slipped
from the creatures tentacles. ‘We should help it,’ he added firmly.
‘After all, it wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for us.’

‘Hold on, hold on,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘It’s only making
a shelter. I mean, the Bower Bird builds intricate nests, doesn’t it?
And the Clock Cuckoo even builds a clock for its mate, and no one says
they’re _intelligent_ as such.’

‘Obviously not,’ said the Dean. ‘They never get the numerals right, the
clocks fall apart after a few months, and they generally lose two hours
a day. That doesn’t sound like intelligence to _me_.’

‘What are you suggesting, Runes?’ said Ridcully.

‘Why don’t we send young Rincewind down again in that virtually-there
suit? With a trowel, perhaps, and an illustrated manual on basic
construction?’

‘Would they be able to see him?’

‘Er … gentlemen …’ said Ponder, who had been letting the eye of the
omniscope drift further into the shallows.

‘I don’t see why not,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er … there’s a … there’s …’

‘It’s one thing to push planets around over millions of years, but at
this level we couldn’t even give our builder down there a heavy pat on
the back,’ said the Dean. ‘Even if we knew which part of him was his
back.’

‘Er … _something’s paddling, sir! Something’s going for a paddle, sir!_’

It was probably the strangest cry of warning since the famous ‘Should
the reactor have gone that colour?’ The wizards clustered around the
omniscope.

Something had gone for a paddle. It had hundreds of little legs.



THIRTY



UNIVERSALS AND PAROCHIALS


[] CHANCE MAY HAVE PLAYED A GREATER ROLE than we imagine in ensuring our
presence on the Earth. Not only aren’t we the pinnacle of evolution:
it’s conceivable that we very nearly didn’t appear at all. On the other
hand, if life had wandered off the particular evolutionary track that
led to us, it might well have blundered into something similar instead.
Intelligent crabs, for example. Or very brainy net-weaving jellyfish.

We have no idea how many promising species got wiped out by a sudden
drought, a collapse of some vital resource, a meteorite strike, or a
collision with a comet. All we have is a record of those species that
happen to have left fossils. When we look at the fossil record, we start
to see a vague pattern, a tendency towards increasing complexity. And
many of the most important evolutionary innovations seem to have been
associated with major catastrophes …

When we look at today’s organisms, some of them seem very simple while
others seem more complex. A cockroach looks a lot simpler than an
elephant. So we are liable to think of a cockroach as being ‘primitive’
and an elephant as ‘advanced’, or we may talk of ‘lower’ and ‘higher’
organisms. We also remember that life has evolved, and that today’s
complex organisms must have had simpler ancestors, and unless we are
very careful we think of today’s ‘primitive’ organisms as being typical
of the ancestors of today’s complex organisms. We are told that humans
evolved from something that looked more like an ape, and we conclude
that chimpanzees are more primitive, in an evolutionary sense, than we
are.

When we do this, we confuse two different things. One is a kind of
catalogue-by-complexity of _today’s_ organisms. The other is a
catalogue-by-time of today’s organisms, yesterday’s ancestors, the day
before’s ancestors-of-ancestors, and so on. Although today’s cockroach
may be primitive in the sense that it is simpler than an elephant, it is
_not_ primitive in the sense of being an ancient ancestral organism. It
can’t be: it’s _today’s_ cockroach, a dynamic go-ahead cockroach that is
ready to face the challenges of the new millennium.

Although ancient fossil cockroaches have the same appearance as modern
ones, they operated against a different backgrounds. What you needed to
be a viable cockroach in the Cretaceous was probably rather different
from what you need to be a viable cockroach today. In particular, the
DNA of a Cretaceous cockroach was probably significantly different from
the DNA of a modern cockroach. Your genes have to run very fast in order
for your body to stand still.

The general picture of evolution that theorists have homed in on
resembles a branching tree, with time rising like the sap from the trunk
at the bottom, four billion years in the past, to the tips of the
topmost twigs, the present. Each bough, branch, or twig represents a
species, and all branches point upwards. This ‘Tree of Life’ picture is
faithful to one key feature of evolution – once a branch has split, it
doesn’t join up again. Species diverge, but they can’t merge.*1

However, the tree image is misleading in several respects. There is, for
instance, no relation between the thickness of a branch and the size of
the corresponding population – the thick trunk at the bottom may
represent fewer organisms, or less total organic mass, than the twig at
the top. (Think about the human twig …) The way branches split may also
be misleading: it implies a kind of long-term continuity of species,
even when new ones appear, because on a tree the new branches grow
gradually out of the old ones. Darwin thought that speciation – the
formation of new species – is generally gradual, but he may have been
wrong. The theory of ‘punctuated equilibrium’ of Stephen Jay Gould and
Niles Eldredge maintains the contrary: speciation is sudden. In fact
there are excellent mathematical reasons for expecting speciation to
have elements of both – sometimes sudden, sometimes gradual.

Another problem with the Tree of Life image is that many of its branches
are missing – many species go unrepresented in the fossil record. The
most misleading feature of all is the way humans get placed right at the
top. For psychological reasons we equate height with importance (as in
the phrase ‘your royal highness’), and we rather like the idea that
we’re the most important creature on the planet. However, the height of
a species in the Tree of Life indicates when it flourished, so every
modern organism, be it a cockroach, a bee, a tapeworm, or a cow, is just
as exalted as we are.

Gould, in _Wonderful Life_, objected to the ‘tree’ image for other
reasons, and he based his objections on a remarkable series of fossils
preserved in a layer of rock known as the Burgess Shale. These fossils,
which date from the start of the Cambrian era,*2 are the remains of
soft-bodied creatures living on mud-banks at the base of an algal reef,
which became trapped under a mudslide. Very few fossils of soft-bodied
creatures exist, because normally only the harder parts survive
fossilization. (Some good deposits are now known in China, too.)
However, the significance of the Burgess Shale fossils went unrecognized
from their discovery by Charles Walcott in 1909, until Harry Whittington
took a closer look at them in 1971. The organisms were all squashed
flat, and it was virtually impossible to recognize what shape they’d
been while alive. Then Simon Conway Morris teased the squished layers
apart, and reconstructed the original forms using a computer – and the
strange secret of the Burgess Shale was revealed to the world.

Until that point, palaeontologists had classified the Burgess Shale
organisms into various conventional types – worms, arthropods, whatever.
But now it became clear that most of those assignments were mistaken. We
knew, for example, just four conventional types of arthropod: trilobites
(now extinct), chelicerates (spiders, scorpions), crustaceans (crabs,
shrimp), and uniramians (insects and others). The Burgess Shale contains
representatives of all of these – but it also contains _twenty_ other
radically different types. In that one mudslide, preserved in layers of
shale like pressed flowers in the pages of a book, we find more
diversity than in the whole of life today.

Musing on this amazing discovery, Gould realized that most branches of
the Tree of Life that grew from the Burgess beasts must have ‘snapped
off’ by way of extinction. Long ago, 20 of those 24 arthropod body plans
disappeared from the face of the Earth. The Grim Reaper was pruning the
Tree of Life, and being heavy-handed with the shears. So Gould suggested
that a better image than a tree would be something like scrubland. Here
and there ‘bushes’ of species sprouted from the primal ground level.
Most, however, ceased to grow, and were pruned to a standstill hundreds
of millions of years ago. Other bushes grew to tall shrubs before
stopping … and one tall tree made it right up to the present day. Or
maybe we’ve reconstructed it incorrectly, amalgamating several different
trees into one.

This new image changes our view of human evolution. One animal in the
Burgess Shale, named _Pikaia_, is a chordate. This is the group that
evolved into all of today’s animals that have a spinal cord, including
fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. _Pikaia_ is our
distant ancestor. Another creature in the Burgess Shale, _Nectocaris_,
has an arthropod-like front end but a chordate back, and it has left no
surviving progeny. Yet they both shared the same environment, and
neither is more obviously ‘fit’ to survive than the other. Indeed, if
one had been less evolutionarily fit, it would almost certainly have
died out long before the fossils were formed. So what determined which
branch survived and which didn’t? Gould’s suggestion was: _chance_.

The Burgess Shale formed on a major geological boundary: at the end of
the Precambrian era and the start of the Palaeozoic. The early part of
the Palaeozoic is known as the Cambrian period, and it is a time of
enormous biological diversity – the ‘Cambrian explosion’. The Earth’s
creatures were recovering from the mass extinction of the Ediacarans,
and evolution took the opportunity to play new games, because for a
while it didn’t matter much if it played them badly. The ‘selection
pressure’ on new body-plans was small because life hadn’t fully
recovered from the big die-back. In these circumstances, said Gould,
what survives and what does not is mostly a matter of luck – mudslide or
no mudslide, dry climate or wet. If you were to re-run evolution past
this point, it’s quite likely that totally different organisms would
survive, different branches of the Tree of Life would be snipped off.

Second time round, it could easily be _our_ branch that got pruned.

This vision of evolution as a ‘contingent’ process, one with a lot of
random chance involved, has a certain appeal. It is a very strong way to
make the point that humans are _not_ the pinnacle of creation, _not_ the
purpose of the whole enterprise.*3 How could we be, if a few random
glitches could have swept us from the board altogether? However, Gould
rather overplayed his hand (and he backed off a bit in subsequent
writings). One minor problem is that more recent reconstructions of the
Burgess Shale beasts suggests that their diversity may have been
somewhat overrated – though they were still very diverse.

But the main hole in the argument is convergence. Evolution settles on
solutions to problems of survival, and often the range of solutions is
small. Our present world is littered with examples of ‘convergent
evolution’, in which creatures have very similar forms but very
different evolutionary histories. The shark and the dolphin, for
instance, have the same streamlined shape, pointed snout, and triangular
dorsal fin. But the shark is a fish and the dolphin is a mammal.

We can divide features of organisms into two broad classes: universals
and parochials. Universale are general solutions to survival problems –
methods that are widely applicable and which evolved independently on
several occasions. Wings, for instance, are universals for flight: they
evolved separately in insects, birds, bats, even flying fish. Parochials
happen by accident, and there’s no reason for them to be repeated. Our
foodway crosses our airway, leading to lots of coughs and splutters when
‘something goes down the wrong way’. This isn’t a universal: we have it
because it so happened that our distant ancestor who first crawled out
of the ocean had it. It’s not even a terribly sensible arrangement – it
just works well enough for its flaws not to count against us when
combined with everything else that makes us human. Its deficiencies were
tolerated from the first fish-out-of-water, through amphibians and
dinosaurs, to modern birds, and from amphibians through mammal-like
reptiles to mammals like us. Because evolution can’t easily ‘un-evolve’
major features of body-plans, we’re stuck with it.

If our distant ancestors had got themselves killed off by accident,
would anything like us still be around? It seems very unlikely that
creatures exactly like us would have turned up, because a lot of what
makes us tick is parochials. But intelligence looks like a clear case of
a universal – cephalopods evolved intelligence independently of mammals,
and anyway, intelligence is such a generic trick. So it seems likely
that some other form of intelligent life would have evolved instead,
though not necessarily adhering to the same timetable. On an alternative
Earth, intelligent crabs might invent a fantasy world shaped like a
shallow bowl that rides on six sponges on the back of a giant sea
urchin. Three of them could at this very moment be writing _The Science
of Dishworld_.

Sorry. But it is true. But for a fall of rock here, a tidal pattern
there, we wouldn’t have been us. The interesting thing is that we almost
certainly _would_ have been something else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 There’s a silly reason for this, and a sensible one. The silly reason
is that species are usually defined to be different if they don’t
interbreed. If two separate species don’t interbreed, it’s difficult to
put them back together again. The sensible one is that evolution occurs
by random mutations – changes to the DNA code – followed by selection.
Once a change has occurred, it’s unlikely for it to be undone by further
random mutations. It’s like driving along country roads at random,
reaching some particular place, and then _continuing_ at random. What
you _don’t_ expect is to reverse your previous path and end up back
where you started.

*2 According to the most recent dating methods, the Cambrian began 543
million years ago. The Burgess shale was deposited about 530–520 million
years ago.

*3 In the words of Discworld’s God of Evolution: ‘The purpose of the
whole thing is to _be_ the whole thing.’



THIRTY-ONE



GREAT LEAP SIDEWAYS


[] RINCEWIND WAS IN HIS NEW OFFICE, filing rocks. He’d worked out quite
a good system, based on size, shape, colour and twenty-seven other
qualities including whether or not he felt that it was a friendly sort
of rock.

With careful attention to cross-referencing, he reckoned that dealing
with just those rocks in this room would take him at least three quiet,
blessed years.

And he was therefore surprised to find himself picked up bodily and
virtually carried towards the High Energy Magic building holding, in one
hand, a hard square light grey rock and, in the other hand, a rock that
appeared to be well disposed to people.

‘Is this _yours_?’ roared Ridcully, stepping side to reveal the
omniscope.

The Luggage was now bobbing contently a few metres offshore.

‘Er …’ said Rincewind. ‘Sort of mine.’

‘So how did it get _there_?’

‘Er … it’s probably looking for me,’ said Rincewind. ‘Sometimes it loses
track.’

‘But that’s another universe!’ said the Dean.

‘Sorry.’

‘Can you call it back?’

‘Good heavens, no. If I could call it back, I’d send it away.’

‘Sapient pearwood _is_ meta-magical and will track its owner absolutely
_anywhere_ in time and space,’ said Ponder.

‘Yes, but not this bit!’ said Ridcully.

‘I don’t recall “not this bit” ever being recorded as a valid subset of
“time and space”, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘In fact, “not this bit” has never
even been accepted as a valid part of any magical invocation, ever since
the late Funnit the Foregetful tried to use it as a lastminute addition
to his famously successful spell to destroy the entire tree he was
sitting in.’

‘The Luggage may consist of a subset of at least _n_ dimensions which
may co-exist with any other set of >_n_ dimensions,’ said the Bursar.

‘Don’t pay any attention, Stibbons,’ said Ridcully wearily. ‘He’s been
spouting this stuff ever since he tried to understand HEX’S write-out.
It’s completely gibberish. What’s “_n_”, then, old chap?’

‘Umpt,’ said the Bursar.

‘Ah, imaginary numbers again,’ said the Dean. ‘That’s the one he says
should come between three and four.’

‘There isn’t a number between three and four,’ said Ridcully.

‘He imagines there is,’ said the Dean.

‘Could we get inside the Luggage in order to physically go into the
project universe?’ said Ponder.

‘You could try,’ said Rincewind. ‘I personally would rather saw my own
nose off.’

‘Ah. Really?’

‘But the thought occurs,’ said Ridcully, ‘that we can use it to bring
things back. Eh?’

Down under the warm water, the strange creature’s stone structure
collapsed for the umpteenth time.

A week went past. On Tuesday a left-over snowball collided with the
planet, causing considerable vexation to the wizards and destroying an
entire species of net-weaving jellyfish of which the Senior Wrangler had
professed great hopes. But at least the Luggage _could_ be used to bring
back any specimens stupid enough to swim into something sitting
underwater with its lid open, and this included practically everything
in the sea at the moment.

Life in the round world seemed to possess a quality so prevalent that
the wizards even discussed the idea that it was some conceptual element,
which was perhaps trying to fill the gap left by the non-existent
deitygen.

‘However,’ Ridcully announced, ‘Bloodimindium is not a good name.’

‘Perhaps if we change the accent slightly,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes. ‘Blod-di-_min_-dium, do you think?’

‘They’ve certainly got a lot of it, whatever we call it,’ said the Dean.
‘It’s not a world to let a complete catastrophe get it down.’

Things turned up. Shellfish suddenly seemed very popular. A theory
gaining ground was that the world itself was generating them in some
sort of automatic way.

‘Obviously, if you have too many rabbits, you need to invent foxes,’
said the Dean, at one of the regular meetings. ‘If you’ve got fish, and
you want phosphates, you need seabirds.’

‘That only works if you have narrativium,’ said Ponder. ‘We’ve got no
evidence, sir, that anything on the planet has any concept of causality.
Things just live and die.’

And then, on Thursday, the Senior Wrangler spotted a fish. A real,
swimming fish.

‘There you are,’ he said triumphantly. ‘The seas are the natural home of
life. Look at the land. It’s just rubbish, quite frankly.’

‘But the sea’s not _getting_ anywhere,’ said Ridcully. ‘Look at those
tentacled shellfish you were trying to educate yesterday. Even if you so
much as made a sudden movement they just squirted ink at you and swam
away.’

‘No, no, they were trying to _communicate_,’ the Senior Wrangler
insisted. ‘Ink is a natural medium, after all. Don’t you get the
impression that everything is _striving_? Look at them. You can _see_
them thinking, can’t you?’

There were a couple of the things in a tank behind him, peering out of
their big spiral shells. The Senior Wrangler had the idea that they
could be taught simple tasks, which they would then pass on to the other
ammonites. They were turning out to be rather a disappointment. They
might be good at thinking, ran the general view, but they were pants at
actually doing anything about it.

‘That’s because here’s no point in being able to think if you haven’t
got much to think about,’ said the Dean. ‘Damn all to think about in the
sea. Tide comes in, tide goes out, everything’s damp, end of
philosophical discourse.’

‘Now _these_ are the chaps,’ he went on, strolling along to another
tank. The Luggage had been quite good as a collector, provided the
specimens didn’t appear to be threatening Rincewind.

‘Hmph,’ sniffed the Senior Wrangler. ‘Underwater woodlice.’

‘But there’s a lot of them,’ said the Dean. ‘And they have legs. I’ve
seen them on the seashore.’

‘By accident. And they haven’t got anything to use as hands.’

‘Ah, well, I’m glad you’ve pointed that out …’ said the Dean, walking
along to the next aquarium.

It contained crabs.

The Senior Wrangler had to admit that crabs looked a good contender for
Highest Lifeform status. HEX had located some on the other side of the
world that were moving along very well indeed, with small underwater
cities guarded by carefully transplanted sea-anemones and what appeared
to be shellfish farms. They had even invented a primitive form of
warfare and had built statues, of sand and spit, apparently to famous
crabs who had fallen in the struggle.

The wizards went and had another look fifty thousand years later, after
coffee. To the Dean’s glee, population pressure had forced the crabs on
to the land as well. The architecture hadn’t improved, but there were
now seaweed farms in the lagoons, and some apparently more stupid crabs
had been enslaved for transport purposes and use in inter-clan
campaigns. Several large rafts with crudely woven sails were moored in
one lagoon, and swarming with crabs. It seemed that crabkind was
planning a Great Leap Sideways.

‘Not _quite_ there yet,’ said Ridcully. ‘But definitely very promising,
Dean.’

‘You see, water’s too _easy_,’ said the Dean. ‘Your food floats by,
there’s not much in the way of weather, there’s nothing to kick
against … mark my words, the land is the place for building a bit of
backbone …’

There was a clatter from HEX, and the field of vision of the omniscope
was pulled back rapidly until the world was just a marble floating in
space.

‘Oh dear,’ said the Archchancellor, pointing to a trail of gas,
‘Incoming.’

The wizards watched gloomily as a large part of one hemisphere became a
cauldron of steam and fire.

‘Is this going to happen _every_ time?’ said the Dean, as the smoke died
away and spread out across the seas.

‘I blame the over-large sun and all those planets,’ said Ridcully. ‘And
you fellows should have cleared out the snowballs. Sooner or later, they
fall in.’

‘It’d just be nice for a species to make a go of things for five minutes
without being frozen solid or broiled,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘That’s life,’ said Ridcully.

‘But not for long,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

There was a whimper from behind them.

Rincewind hung in the air, the outline of the virtually-there suit
shimmering around him.

‘What’s up with him?’ said Ridcully.

‘Er … I asked him to investigate the crab civilization, sir.’

‘The one the comet just landed on?’

‘Yes, sir. A billion tons of rock have just evaporated around him, sir.’

‘It couldn’t have _hurt_ him, though, could it?’

‘Probably made him jump, sir.’



THIRTY-TWO



DON’T LOOK UP


[] THE WIZARDS HAVE BEEN CONVINCED all along that a planet is not really
a good place to put living creatures. A nice, flat disc, with an
attendant turtle who can deal with any inbound rocks before they can
wreak havoc, makes much more sense.

It looks increasingly as if they’re right. The more we learn about the
history of our planet, and the greater universe in which it resides, the
more we have to admit that the wizards have a point. Not about the shape
of our world, but about how dangerously exposed it is without a turtle.
The universe is riddled with flying rocks and awash with radiation; most
of it is either close to absolute zero or hot enough to make a hydrogen
bomb seem like a nice, comfortable bonfire. Yet, somehow, life managed
to gain a hold on at least one planet, and to retain that hold for four
billion years – despite everything that the universe threw at it. (Often
literally.) And despite every kind of nasty that the planet itself
managed to concoct.

There are two ways to interpret this.

One is that life is incredibly fragile, and that Earth is one of the few
places where the conditions _necessary_ for life managed to hold
together long enough for life to develop, diversify, and thrive. At any
moment some disaster could undo all that good work and wipe the face of
the planet clean of living creatures. The crab civilisation is
fictitious, of course, but it’s in our story to make two important
points. First, that there has been plenty of time for lifeforms at least
as intelligent as us to evolve on Earth; second, that if they had done,
they could easily have left no trace of their existence. Oh, and
third … that there are plenty of ways in which they could have come to a
sticky end. So we’ve been incredibly lucky to avoid going the way of the
crab civilisation. On millions of other apparently suitable worlds, life
was not so lucky; it either never got started, or something wiped it
out. Life is a rarity; Earth may be the only place in the entire
universe where that fragile miracle happened.

The other is that life is incredibly robust, and that the conditions on
Earth are _sufficient_ for life to arise, but by no means necessary.
Just because things worked out in a particular way here, it would be a
mistake to conclude that the same events must happen everywhere else. An
important implication of evolution is that life automatically adapts
itself to whichever environment happens to be available. Boiling water
at the bottom of the ocean? Just what extremophile bacteria need. Two
miles down in the rocks? Super – it’s nice and warm down there, and
there’s plenty sulphur and iron to provide energy. Thank providence
there’s none of that poisonous oxygen; terrible stuff, violently
reactive, immensely destructive. _Nothing_ could survive in an oxygen
atmosphere …

Both points of view have their advocates, and both have a certain amount
going for them. Until we get to other worlds and find out what’s there,
there will be plenty of room for disagreement and debate. And, perhaps,
a synthesis. Already both viewpoints agree that however life arose here,
Earth was no Garden of Eden. Our planet is by no means the ideal habitat
for life. In order for living creatures to survive, evolution has had to
solve a lot of difficult problems, and adapt to hostile conditions.

You may not realise just how hostile. But think of the common disasters:
fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanoes, tidal waves,
floods, droughts … too much rain and we’re up to our necks in water; too
little and our crops won’t grow and we starve.

But those are feeble compared to the _big_ disasters.

We tend to think of the history of Life on Earth as the smooth growth of
a single great Evolutionary Tree. But that image is getting very long in
the tooth. The history of life is more like a jungle than a tree, and
most of the plants in the jungle were strangled, squashed, or suffocated
before they took even the first step on the road to maturity. And
however that jungle grew, there was nothing smooth about it.

True, there was a very long time when there were only ‘blobs’ in the
seas, and we might think of that period as a fairly featureless trunk of
the Tree. As far as the blobs were concerned, life probably was pretty
uneventful – but only because they didn’t _notice_ what was happening to
the planet. They were largely unaffected by a whole succession of events
that would have been cosmic catastrophes for later, more complex life.

There were certainly a few pretty big impacts at the beginning of life
on the planet that didn’t put them out of business, such as it was. And
Snowball Earth – if in fact it ever happened – can’t have been easy. But
despite all these obstacles, or even because of them, life slowly
changed, evolved and diversified as the eukaryotes learned to live in an
oxygen atmosphere.

That should have been a disaster. The very composition of the atmosphere
changed, and all the biochemical tricks that had evolved to suit the
available range of gases became obsolete. Worse, the gas polluting the
air was oxygen, an appallingly reactive substance. Think of what would
happen today if the atmosphere started to be taken over by fluorine.
Some of the nastiest, most explosive substances are fluorine compounds.
But oxygen is just as bad, if not worse; think of fires, think of rust,
think of decay.

The eukaryote cell triumphed over oxygen, and subverted it. Oxygen’s
negative characteristics were turned into positive ones. So effective
was this evolutionary revolution that the deadly, poisonous pollutant
became _essential_ for (most) life. Deprive a human, a dog, or a fish of
its oxygen, and it dies very quickly. Water, food … those it can do
without, for a time. But oxygen? You’ll survive for a few minutes at
most, maybe half an hour if you’re a whale.

The oxygen trick was so good that it took over. Eukaryote life radiated
– diversified rapidly – in the seas, inventing entire new kinds of
ecologies. With that diversification as a springboard, life came out on
land. The advantage of moving to the land was that it opened up an
entire range of new habitats, new ways of making a living. So many new
kinds of living organism could thrive. One disadvantage, though, was
that living on land made life much more vulnerable to astronomical
insults. Living on land produced many more complicated kinds of plants
and animals, able to protect themselves against small local changes,
like hot sunshine, or snow. But, ironically, that very complication made
them much more vulnerable to big problems – like stones falling from the
sky.

We all know about the meteorite that killed the dinosaurs … and that
fits. Dinosaurs were wonderfully effective as long as the environment
remained suitable, but they were not at all well-adapted to the sudden
changes that the impact created. But bacteria hardly noticed. If
anything, it was a good time for them: they got a lot of extra food for
a few hundred years, as the corpses decayed, and then went back to the
old boring routine.

We’ll say a bit more about the 200 million year reign of the dinosaurs
and their friends soon, and indeed about what killed them off. But we
need to give you some context first. Simple forms of life can put up
with a lot, and did. And they changed the planet, or at least its outer
skin, by putting in feedback loops that made it less liable to change.

They started Gaia. This is the name that James Lovelock gave in 1982 to
the concept of the Earth as a complex living system – metaphorically, an
organism in its own right. The idea has been romanticised into the Earth
being a kind of Earth-mother, but what do you expect when you attach the
name of a goddess to your new scientific concept? Stripped of the
romantic frills, the point is that our planet acts as a single system,
and it has evolved mechanisms that keep it functioning effectively. This
development is a consequence of innumerable subsystems – organisms,
ecologies – evolving mechanisms that keep them functioning effectively.
If every member of a team gets better at playing their role within the
team, then the team as a whole improves too.

Complexity is a double-edged sword. More complex forms of life find that
the ordinary problems of living on a planet are more and more under
control … except for those confounded problems from outside, like
meteorites, which can be disastrous.

The Moon, Mercury, Mars, and various satellites are covered in circular
craters, some large, some small. Nearly all of those craters, we now
know, result from the impact of a big lump of rock or ice or a bit of
both. A few are volcanic. Not so long ago most were thought to be caused
by volcanoes, but that turned out to be wrong.

Several planets, among them the Earth, do not show obvious signs of
impacts. Is that because nothing hit them? No. An atmosphere helps:
smaller bodies burn up before they hit the ground. It’s the closest to a
protector-turtle that we get. But bigger rocks can still get through the
defences. The main reason why some planets show no clear signs of
impacts is because those planets have weather, like the Earth, which
erodes the craters until they disappear, or episodes of massive
vulcanism, like Venus, which resurfaces the planet, or are gas to begin
with, like Jupiter and Saturn, and don’t show permanent marks.

In Quebec there is a lake called Manicouagan. You can’t miss it on a
map: look near 51°N, 68°W. It’s circular, and it’s big: 44 miles (71 km)
in diameter. It is the weathered remains of a gigantic crater that
formed 210 million years ago when a rock two or three miles (3–5km)
across collided with the Earth. There is a central peak made from rock
that melted in the heat that the impact generated and then solidified;
more molten rock flowed across the floor of the crater and still can be
found today. The lake fills a ring-shaped valley that glaciers carved
out of soft rock that originally formed the crater walls, and was eroded
away and collapsed.

Also in Canada is the Sudbury impact structure, the largest on the
planet. It is 190 miles (300 km) across and 1.85 billion years old, and
the rock that made it was about 20 miles (30km) in diameter, and the
energy released in the impact was equivalent to one quadrillion tons of
TNT, or about ten million really big hydrogen bombs. In Vredefort, South
Africa there is another impact structure of a similar size, formed 2.02
billion years ago. These may not remain the record-holders: an even
bigger impact structure, about twice the size, is suspected to exist in
the Amirante Basin of the Indian Ocean. Altogether, more than 150 impact
structures – remnants of craters – have been found on the Earth’s
land-masses, and many areas have not yet been thoroughly surveyed. More
than half the Earth’s surface is ocean, and incoming rocks should hit
pretty much at random, so the total number is probably closer to 500.

These are all fairly ancient craters, but there is no good reason to
believe that such impacts could not happen again. Big impacts are rarer
than small ones, because big lumps of rock are rarer than small ones.
Impacts the size of Sudbury or Vredefort should happen about once every
billion years. (It should not be a surprise that when such impacts
finally did arrive, about two billion years ago, two of them came along
together.) Since nothing that size has happened for two billion years,
it might seems that we are overdue for another one, but that kind of
reasoning is a statistical fallacy. Rare, isolated events usually obey
the so-called ‘Poisson distribution’ of probabilities, and one feature
of this distribution is that it ‘has no memory’. At any time, whether
two major impacts have just happened, or none have happened for ages,
the average time to the next one is always the same – in this case, a
billion years.

It _could_ be a few decades, mind you. But it couldn’t be tomorrow, or
even next year, because we would have spotted such a body coming by now.

The most recent well known impact on Earth was the Tunguska meteorite,
which exploded 4 miles (6km) above Siberia in 1908, causing an explosion
that felled trees for more than thirty miles (50 km) around. Craters, or
other evidence of even more recent impacts have been found. A
double-crater in the Saudi Arabian desert may be only a few centuries
old.

Where do all these rocks (and other junk, like ice) come from? Who or
what is throwing them at us?

First, some terminology. When you look into the night sky and see a
‘shooting star’, a glowing streak, that’s a meteor. It’s not a star, of
course: it’s a lump of cosmic debris that has hit the Earth’s atmosphere
at high speed and is burning up because of friction. The debris itself
is called a meteoroid, and any part that remains when it has hit is
called a meteorite. For convenience, though, we’ll generally use the
word ‘meteorite’ for all of these. But we thought we ought to show you
that we could have been pedantic if we’d wanted to.

Some of these bodies are mostly rock, and some are mostly ice. And some
are a bit of both. Wherever they come from, it’s not the Earth. At
least, not directly. A few may have been splashed off the Earth by a
previous impact and then come back down the next time we ran into them.
However they got Up There, that’s clearly where they are coming from.
What’s Up There? The rest of the universe. The closest bit is our own
Solar System. So that has to be the most likely culprit. And there’s no
question that it has a lot of ammunition.

Earlier, we described the Solar System as being rather chaotic: nine
planets and a few moons with some quite interesting real estate. We
mentioned that there was quite a lot left over after these larger bodies
were accounted for. There were relatively small lumps of actual rock in
the asteroid belt, but nearly all the ‘loose change’, after the Sun and
planets had been paid for out of the Solar nebula, was lumps of dirty
ice.

The biggest collection of these is the Oort Cloud, a vast, very thinly
spread mass that lives outside the Solar System ‘proper’ – that is,
further out than Pluto (or Neptune when Pluto gets inside the orbit of
Neptune, which can happen). In 1950 Jan Hendrik Oort proposed that the
source of most of the comets we see from Earth must be some such cloud,
and got it named after him. The main evidence we have for its existence
is that comets with very long thin orbits, which are common, must have
come from somewhere. The bodies in the Oort cloud range from
pebble-sized up to lumps perhaps as big as Pluto.

These comet materials are the usual source of the meteorites we pick up
and put into museums, after most of their substance has burnt up in the
atmosphere. We’re beginning to get an idea of how big the Oort Cloud
could be. Its mass is about a tenth that of Jupiter, and it extends way
outside Pluto’s orbit, perhaps as far as 3 light years – two thirds of
the way to the nearest star. This spreads the material though a volume
millions of times as great the volume inside Pluto’s orbit, our actual
planetary Solar System. So the ‘cloud’ is so rarefied that if you went
there, you probably wouldn’t see anything.

The gravitational pull of the Sun is tiny at those distances, and the
dirty ice lumps barely move along their orbital paths, which are
probably close to circles. To the extent that the ice lumps _have_
orbits, and don’t just drift slowly about, they take millions of years
to go once round the Sun. But the universe doesn’t let them keep doing
that without interference. Oort called his cloud ‘A garden, gently raked
by stellar perturbations’. As nearer stars, and the pull of the whole
galaxy, interact with the Sun’s pull, many of these lumps are pulled
away from their normal paths.

It turns out that the disturbances need not be as gentle as Oort
supposed. About once every 35 million years a star passes _through_ the
Oort cloud, and havoc ensues. Since the 1970s another source of big
disturbances has been recognised: Giant Molecular Clouds. These are huge
accumulations of cold hydrogen, where stars and solar systems are born.
Their masses can be a million times that of the Sun. They don’t have to
come anywhere near us to shake ice lumps out of their sedate
near-circular orbits in the Oort cloud.

Such disturbances can cause lumps of ice to drift in towards the Solar
System. At that point, they become comets. Some probably drift outwards
too, but we’re not so concerned with those. And comets are the main (but
not the only) source of cosmic junk in Earth’s backyard.

About a thousand meteoroids bigger than a football hit Earth’s
atmosphere each day, together with countless millions of smaller ones.
And as time passes, we receive some big and some bigger, with the
occasional dinosaur-killer. How often do we expect to see such a big
one? About once every hundred million years.

There is much more of this kind of junk in the Solar system than we used
to think, and it rains down on our planet constantly. Every year, we
sweep up about 80,000 tones (tonnes) of it. Nearly all of the debris
falling on Earth is little bits, mostly somewhat dried-out icy dirt from
the tails of comets. Debris of this kind follows the comet’s orbit,
marking it out like a gravel path. When the Earth’s orbit takes it
through this cometary junkheap, some of the gravel burns up in the
atmosphere, and we see spectacular light shows: meteor showers. These
arrive on particular dates each year as the Earth passes through that
debris. For example the Leonids can be seen in November, and the
Perseids in August.

There is a bit of a mystery about the Geminid meteor showers, which come
in December, though. They seem to be associated with a (defunct) comet
whose perihelion, closest approach to the Sun, is out by Pluto’s orbit.
And that brings us to another source of impactors: the Kuiper Belt,
which is the bit of the Oort Cloud not very far outside Pluto. In fact,
Pluto and its satellite Charon are now thought not to be a ‘real’
planet-and-moon, but only the biggest lump in the Kuiper Belt. These
lumps travel in genuine quasi-elliptical orbits, and may be the source
of some of the regular comets with shorter orbital periods – like
Halley’s comet, which returns every 76 years or so.

As well as comets, the asteroids also send rocks our way. Jupiter’s
gravitational field is strong enough to disturb the asteroids,
especially those in certain ‘resonant’ orbits, with periods that are a
simple fraction of Jupiter’s – one third or two fifths, say. Of the 8000
or so known asteroids, about one in twenty has an orbit that comes close
to that of the Earth, or even crosses it. All of those that cross are
potential impactors. Asteroids whose orbits approach the Sun to within a
distance of 1.3 times the radius of the Earth’s orbit are said to be
Earth-approaching asteroids, or _Amors_. The best known of these is
Eros. Asteroids whose orbits overlap the Earth’s are called _Apollos_.
More than 400 Amors and Apollos are known. More worrying are _Atens_,
which are Amors too small to be detected easily but still big enough to
cause tremendous damage. Most of these probably started out in the main
asteroid belt, but were disturbed by Jupiter so that they crossed the
orbit of Mars, and were then further disturbed by Mars.

This leaves us with two opposite ways to view Jupiter – perhaps
complementary ways. This largest planet has been proposed as the saviour
of Earth’s life forms on countless occasions, its enormous gravity
picking up nearly all of the in-falling rocks and icy lumps – as it did
comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 in 1994. But it has also been shown to shake the
Asteroid Belt about, possibly causing that dinosaur-killer (if it was
actually an asteroid) to hit the Earth.

The message is that a basketball left on a billiard table has a fairly
interesting life. Velikovsky, who proposed a wild theory in the fifties
that made the Solar System look very much like a snooker table in
Biblical times, with Mars moving substantially closer to the Earth and
Venus turning from a comet into a planet, wasn’t very wrong in
principle.

Only in every single detail.

Here’s something else to worry about. Out there in the Milky Way galaxy
there’s a lot of stars. Occasionally one goes nova, rarely supernova, as
they explode. There is a sphere of very active radiation leaving such
stars. If one went off in our vicinity, up to twenty light years away,
say, all higher forms on Earth would be sterilised, at least. The
bacteria, especially those deep in the Earth’s crust, would survive.
They probably wouldn’t notice a thing. Wait a few billion years … higher
lifeforms could exist in abundance once more.

More worrying still are gamma-ray bursters. Gamma-rays are very short
wavelength electromagnetic radiation, such as x-rays. When astronomers
managed to develop instruments that could detect such radiation, and put
them into satellites, they discovered that two or three times per day
the Earth is illuminated by an intense burst of gamma-rays coming from
somewhere out in space. These gamma ray bursts seem to be extremely
energetic: there is good evidence that the source of one of them was 12
billion light years away. Even a supernova would not be visible from
that distance, so gamma-ray bursts have to be caused by something really
serious.

What? That’s a mystery – perhaps the biggest mystery in today’s
astronomy. The best bet is a collision between neutron stars. Imagine a
binary star – two stars, orbiting their common centre of mass. Suppose
they are both neutron stars. As time passes, they lose energy and fall
in towards each other. If you wait long enough, they will come so close
together that they collide. This, by the way, is likely to be a very
messy business, not at all as simple as two tennis balls sticking
together and rounding off. They probably break up and reform. So far,
all the gamma-ray bursters we’ve seen are a long, long distance away.
But one could light up anywhere. If a pair of neutron stars collapsed on
to each other within a hundred light years of Earth, life might survive
in the deep seas and the deepest rocks, but the rest of our planet would
be dead.

And we wouldn’t even see it coming.

Asteroids and comets give you a bit of notice. We have the capability,
given a year’s run-up time, to tackle small Earth-crossing asteroids
now. We can see them coming and plot their arrival. But gamma-rays are
electromagnetic: they travel at the speed of light. They could be on
their way now: we couldn’t know. As soon as we did know, we and our
technology would be dead.

Even our own Sun is not trustworthy. The nuclear reactions that make
stars burn also make them change, as elements are created or used up, or
just reach some critical level that triggers new kinds of reactions.
Most stars follow the same series of changes, called the main sequence.

When the Sun first arrives on the main sequence, it is just like our
Sun, with a surface temperature of about 6,000 degrees Kelvin, a light
output of about 400 septillion watts, and a composition of 73% hydrogen,
25% helium, and 2% everything else. It stays on the main sequence for
ten billion years, until nearly all of its hydrogen has been fused into
helium. At that point, its core starts to contract, and becomes
degenerate – consisting of closely packed neutrons. Outside the core
there remains a shell of hydrogen, which continues to undergo nuclear
reactions, which cause the outer layers of the star to expand and cool.
The star becomes a red giant, between 10 and 100 times as big.

The radius of the Sun now is roughly 450,000 miles (700,000 km). At this
stage its surface will probably be somewhere between the orbits of
Mercury and Venus, and the Earth will already be in serious trouble. But
there is more to come. As the core heats, it ignites a nuclear reaction
that turns helium into carbon – the very reaction that allegedly is
responsible for the existence of carbon-based lifeforms like us. This
‘helium flash’ happens very quickly, on astronomical timescales, and it
destroys the degeneracy of the core. Now the core can once more sustain
nuclear reactions, but now it burns helium. The outer layers of the star
shrink, and become hotter.

When the helium in the core is used up, the star again burns its nuclear
material in two shells: an inner one that burns helium to make carbon,
and an outer one that converts hydrogen to helium. The outer layers
expand again, and the star becomes a red giant for the second time. Now
the outer layers start to blow away, exposing the hot core. The star
loses layer upon layer of its material, and shrinks. Finally, the outer
layers are all gone, and the core once more becomes degenerate. The star
has become a white dwarf.

Our Sun has about 5.7 billion years left on the main sequence; then:
_kerblooie_! Red Giant, and Earth becomes a cinder, or even gets gobbled
up completely. But don’t lose any sleep over it. The typical lifetime of
a species is 5 million years. We’ll be long gone.

Planets are not comfortable. Even when life has made its own bed (nice
oxygenated atmosphere with an ozone layer to keep out the nasty
ultra-violet, nice ooze in the bottom of the oceans, nice long
relaxation times for the thermal atmospheric oscillators), there are
still plenty of things the Universe can throw at a planet that can still
make it a bit fragile. If not kill it altogether.

Which brings us back to our original question. Is life fragile, and have
we been extraordinarily lucky? Or is it robust, and therefore common? Is
life so adaptable that it can handle virtually anything that the
universe sends its way?

Until we can explore other worlds and see what kinds of life, if any,
are present, anything we say here has to be speculative. The big
difficulty is an ‘anthropic principle’ point. Suppose that life is
incredibly rare, and that on most worlds it never really gets going, or
doesn’t last long, because of all the disasters lying in wait.
Nonetheless, there’s a lot of galaxies out there, each having billions
or even trillions of stars. Even if the chances of survival are very,
very small, occasionally one planet will get lucky. Some proportion of
planets _must_ get lucky, that’s how probability works.

Because life on this world _has_ survived, we are therefore one of the
lucky ones. It then becomes completely irrelevant how small our chances
were. We are not representative. The probability that we survived is
certainty, because we _did_. So we cannot reason, from our existence,
that the chance of survival has to be fairly large. Whether it is large
or small, we are here. So this is a case where the anthropist can
legitimately frighten us. Perhaps all planets do get life and, if
they’re allowed enough time; even extelligent life on a few. But we
really could be the only one who’s survived to ask the question.

On the other hand … The very diversity of nasty things that the universe
has up its sleeve argues for the adaptability and versatility of life.
Life on Earth does not look like a bunch of lucky survivors. It looks
like a bunch of tough guys who have overcome every obstacle put in their
way. Sure, they took casualties, sometimes severe. But as long as a few
survive the battle, pretty soon the planet is covered with life again,
because life reproduces – fast. Whatever the disaster, it bounces back.

So far, anyway.



THIRTY-THREE



THE FUTURE IS NEWT


[] HEX WAS THINKING HARD AGAIN. Running the little universe was taking
much less time than it had expected. It more or less ran itself now, in
fact. The gravity operated without much attention, rainclouds formed
with no major interference and rained every day. Balls went around one
another.

HEX didn’t think it was a shame about the crabs going. HEX hadn’t
thought it was marvellous that the crabs had turned up. HEX thought
about the crabs as _something that had happened_. But it had been
interesting to eavesdrop on Crabbity – the way the crabs named
themselves, thought about the universe (in terms of crabs), had legends
of the Great Crab clearly visible in the Moon, passed on in curious
marks the thoughts of great crabs, and wrote down poetry about the
nobility and frailty of crab life, being totally accurate, as it turned
out, on this last point.

HEX wondered: if you have life, then intelligence will arise somewhere.
If you have intelligence, then extelligence will arise somewhere. If it
doesn’t, intelligence hasn’t got much to be intelligent _about_. It was
the difference between one little oceanic crustacean and an entire wall
of chalk.

The machine also wondered if it should pass on these insights to the
wizards, especially since they actually lived in one of the world’s more
interesting outcrops of extelligence. But HEX knew that its creators
were infinitely cleverer than it was. And great masters of disguise,
obviously.

The Lecturer in Recent Runes had designed a creature.

‘Really, all we need is a basic limpet or whelk, to begin with,’ he
said, as they looked at the blackboard. ‘We bring it back here where
proper magic works, try a few growth spells, and then let Nature take
its course. And, since these extinctions seem to be wiping out
everything, it’ll gradually become the dominant feature.’

‘What’s the scale again?’ said Ridcully, critically.

‘About two miles to the tip of the cone,’ said the Lecturer. ‘About four
miles across the base.’

‘Not very mobile, then,’ said the Dean.

‘The weight of the shell will certainly hamper it, but I imagine it
should be able to move its own length in a year, perhaps two.’

‘What’ll it eat, then?’

‘Everything else.’

‘Such as …’

‘Everything. I’d advise suction holes around the base here so that it
can filter seawater for useful things like plankton.’

‘Plankton being–?’

‘Oh, whales, shoals of fish and so on.’

The wizards looked long and hard at the huge cone-shaped object.

‘Intelligence?’ said Ridcully.

‘What for?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘Ah.’

‘It will withstand anything except a _direct_ hit with a comet, and I
estimate it’ll have a lifespan of about 500,000 years.’

‘And then it’ll die?’ said Ridcully.

‘Yes. I estimate it will, by then, take it twenty-four hours and one
second to absorb enough food to last it for twenty-four hours.’

‘So after that it will be dead?’

‘Yes.’

‘Will it know?’

‘Probably not.’

‘Back to the drawing board, Senior Lecturer.’

Ponder sighed.

‘It’s no good ducking,’ he said. ‘That won’t help. We’re paying special
attention to comets. We’ll let you know in plenty of time.’

‘You’ve got no idea what it was like!’ said Rincewind, creeping along
the beach. ‘And the noise!’

‘Have you seen the Luggage?’

‘It certainly made my ears ring, I can tell you!’

‘And the Luggage?’

‘What? Oh … gone. Have you _looked_ at that side of the planet? There’s
a whole new set of mountain ranges!’

The wizards had let time run forward for a while after the strike. It
made such a depressing mess of everything. Now, drawing on its
bottomless reserves of bloodimindium, life was returning in strength.
Crabs were already back although, here, at least, they didn’t seem
inclined to make even simple structures. Perhaps something in their
souls told them it’d be a waste of time in the long run.

Rincewind mentally crossed them off the list. Look for signs of
intelligence, the Archchancellor had said. As far as Rincewind was
concerned, anything _really_ intelligent would be keeping out of the way
of the wizards. If you saw a wizard looking at you, Rincewind would
advise, then you should walk into a tree or say ‘dur?’.

All along the beaches, and out below the surf, everything was acting
with commendable stupidity.

A soft sound made him look down. He’d almost stepped on a fish.

It was some way from the water line, and squirming across the mud
towards a pool of brackish water.

A kind man by nature, Rincewind picked it up gingerly and carried it
back to the sea. It flopped around in the shallows for a while and then,
to his amazement, inched its way back on to the mud.

He put it back again, in deeper water this time.

Thirty seconds later, it was back on the beach.

Rincewind crouched down, as the thing wiggled determinedly onwards.

‘Would it help to talk to someone?’ he said. ‘I mean, you’ve got a good
life out there in the sea, no sense in throwing it all away, is there?
There’s always a silver lining if you know where to look. Okay, okay,
life’s a beach. And you’re a pretty ugly fish. But, you know, beauty is
only sk– scale deep, and –’

‘What’s happening?’ said Ponder’s voice in his ear.

‘I was talking to this fish,’ said Rincewind.

‘Why?’

‘It keeps coming out of the water. It seems to want to go for whatever
is the opposite of a paddle.’

‘Well?’

‘You told me to keep a look out for anything interesting.’

‘The consensus here is that fish aren’t interesting,’ said Ponder. ‘Fish
are dull.’

‘I can see bigger fish in the shallows,’ said Rincewind. ‘Perhaps it’s
trying to keep away from them?’

‘Rincewind, fish are designed for living in water. That’s why they’re
fish. Go and find some crabs. And put the poor freakish thing back in
the sea, for goodness’ sake.’

‘Perhaps a rethink is in order here,’ said Ridcully.

‘About the newts,’ said Ponder.

‘Newts is going far too far,’ said the Dean. ‘I’ve seen more shapely
things in the privy.’

‘I want the person who put the newts on this continent to own up right
now,’ said Ridcully.

‘No one could,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘No one’s seen the Luggage
since the last comet. We couldn’t get anything in there.’

‘I know, because I had a tank of thaumically treated whelks all ready to
go,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘And what, pray, am I supposed
to do with them?’

‘Some sort of chowder would appear to be in order,’ said the Dean.

‘Evolution makes things better,’ said Ridcully. ‘It can’t make them
_different_. All right, some rather dull amphibians seem to have turned
up. _But_, and this is important, those fish Rincewind reported are
still around. Now, if they were going to turn into things with legs, why
are they still here?’

‘Tadpoles are fish,’ said the Bursar.

‘But a tadpole _knows_ it’s going to be a frog,’ said Ridcully
patiently. ‘There’s no narrativium on this world. That fish couldn’t be
saying to itself “Ah, a new life beckons on dry land, walking around on
things I haven’t yet got a name for.” ’ No, either the planet is somehow
generating new life, or we’re back to the old “hidden gods” theory.’

‘It’s all gone wrong, you know,’ said the Dean. ‘It’s the bloodimindium.
Even gods couldn’t control this place. Once there’s life, there’s
complete and utter chaos. Remember that book the Librarian brought back?
It’s a complete fantasy! Nothing seems to happen like that at all!
Everything just does what it likes!’

‘Progress is being made,’ said Ponder.

‘Big amphibians?’ sneered the Senior Wrangler. ‘And things were going so
well in the sea. Remember those jellyfish that made nets? And the crabs
even had a flourishing land civilization! They had practically got a
culture!’

‘They _ate_ captured enemies _alive_,’ said the Lecturer in Recent
Runes, patiently.

‘Well … yes. But with a certain amount of etiquette, at least,’ the
Senior Wrangler admitted. ‘And in front of their sand statue of the
Great Big Crab. They were obviously attempting to control their world.
And what good did it do them? A million tons of white hot ice smack
between the eyestalks. It’s so upsetting.’

‘Perhaps they should have eaten more enemies,’ said the Dean.

‘Perhaps sooner or later the planet will get the message,’ said
Ridcully.

‘Time for the giant whelks, perhaps?’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes,
hopefully.

‘Big newts is what we’ve got right now,’ said Ridcully. He glanced at
the Dean and Senior Wrangler. Ridcully hadn’t maintained his position
atop the boiling heap of UU wizardry without a little political savvy.
‘And newts, gentlemen, might be the way to go. Amphibians? At home in
the water _and_ on land? The best of both worlds, I fancy’

The two wizards exchanged sheepish glances.

‘Well … I suppose …’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Could be,’ the Dean said grudgingly. ‘Could be.’

‘There we are then,’ said Ridcully happily. ‘The future is newt.’



THIRTY-FOUR



NINE TIMES OUT OF TEN


[] ‘THERE’S NO NARRATIVIUM ON THIS WORLD.’

Let’s take a step away from the unfolding ancestral tale of The Fish
That Came Out From The Sea and look at a more philosophical issue. The
wizards are puzzled. On Discworld, things happen because narrative
imperative _makes_ them happen. There is no choice about ends, only
about means. The Lecturer in Recent Runes is trying to make a
sustainable lifeform happen. He thinks that the obstacle to
sustainability is the fragility of life – so the only way he can see to
achieve this is the two-mile limpet, proof against everything the sky
can drop on it.

It never occurs to him that lifeforms might achieve sustainability by
other, less direct methods, despite the evidence of his eyes that
suggests that a dogged tenacity appears to allow life to arise in the
most inhospitable environment, effectively re-creating itself over and
over again. The wizards are torn between evidence that a planet is the
last place you’d choose to create life, and evidence that life doesn’t
agree.

On Discworld, it is clearly recognized that million-to-one chances
happen nine times out of ten.*1 The reason is that every Discworld
character lives out a story, and the demands of the story determine how
their lives unfold. If a million to one chance is required to keep that
story on track, then that’s what will happen, appalling odds
notwithstanding. On Discworld, abstractions generally show up as
_things_, so there is even a thing – narrativium – that ensures that
everybody obeys the narrative imperative. Another personification of the
abstract, Death, also makes sure that each individual’s story comes to
an end exactly when it’s supposed to. Even if a character tries to
behave contrary to the story in which they find themselves, narrativium
makes sure that the end result is consistent with the story anyway.

What’s puzzling the wizards is that our world isn’t like that …

Or is it?

After all, people live on our world too, and it’s people that drive
stories.

As case in point, a story about people who drive. The setting is Jerez
Grand Prix circuit, last race of the 1997–98 Formula One motor racing
season … Ace driver Michael Schumacher is one Championship point ahead
of arch-rival Jacques Villeneuve. Villeneuve’s team-mate Heinz-Harold
Frentzen may well play a crucial tactical role. The drivers are
competing for ‘pole position’ on the starting grid, which goes to
whoever produces the fastest lap in the qualifying sessions. So what
happens? Unprecedentedly, Villeneuve, Schumacher, and Frentzen all lap
in 1 minute 21.072 seconds, the same time to a thousandth of a second.
An amazing coincidence.

Well: ‘coincidence’ it surely was – the lap times _coincided_. But was
it truly amazing?

Questions like this arise in science, too, and they’re important. How
significant is a statistical cluster of leukaemia cases near a nuclear
installation? Does a strong correlation between lung cancer and having a
smoker in the family really indicate that secondary smoking is
dangerous? Are sexually abnormal fish a sign of oestrogen-like chemicals
in our water supply?

Another case in point. It is said that 84% of the children of Israeli
fighter pilots are girls. What is it about the life of a fighter pilot
that produces such a predominance of daughters? Could an answer lead to
a breakthrough in choosing the sex of your children? Or is it just a
statistical freak? It’s not so easy to decide. Gut feelings are worse
than useless, because human beings have a rather poor intuition for
random events. Many people believe that lottery numbers that have so far
been neglected are more likely to come up in future. But the lottery
machine has no ‘memory’ – its future is independent of its past. Those
coloured plastic balls _do not know_ how often they have come up in
previous draws, and they have no tendency to compensate for past
imbalances.

Our intuition goes even further astray when it comes to coincidences.
You go to the swimming baths, and the guy behind the counter pulls a key
at random from a drawer. You arrive in the changing room and are
relieved to find that very few lockers are in use … and then it turns
out that three people have been given lockers next to yours, and it’s
all ‘sorry!’ and banging locker doors together. Or you are in Hawaii,
for the only time in your life … and you bump into the Hungarian you
worked with at Harvard. Or you’re on honeymoon camping in a remote part
of Ireland … and you and your new wife meet your Head of Department and
_his_ new wife, walking the other way along an otherwise deserted beach.
All of these have happened to Jack.

Why do we find coincidences so striking? Because we expect random events
to be evenly distributed, so statistical clumps surprise us. We think
that a ‘typical’ lottery draw is something like 5, 14, 27, 36, 39, 45,
but that 1, 2, 3,19, 20, 21 is far less likely. Actually, these two sets
of numbers have exactly the same probability, which for the UK lottery
is: 1 in 13,983,816. A typical lottery draw often includes several
numbers close together, because sequences of six random numbers between
1 and 49, which is how the UK lottery works, are more likely to be
clumpy than not.

How do we know this? Probability theorists tackle such questions using
‘sample spaces’ – their name for what we earlier called a ‘phase space’,
a conceptual ‘space’ that organizes all the possibilities. A sample
space contains not just the event that concerns us, but all possible
alternatives. If we are rolling a die, for instance, then the sample
space is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For the lottery, the sample space is the set
of all sequences of six different numbers between 1 and 49. A numerical
value is assigned to each event in the sample space, called its
‘probability’, and this corresponds to how likely that event is to
happen. For fair dice each value is equally likely, with a probability
of ¹/₆. Ditto for the lottery, but now with a probability of
¹/13,983,816.

We can use a sample space approach to get a ball-park estimate of how
amazing the Formula One coincidence was. Top drivers all lap at very
nearly the same speed, so the three fastest times can easily fall inside
the same tenth-of-a-second period. At intervals of a thousandth of a
second, there are one hundred possible lap times for each to ‘choose’
from: this list determines the sample space. The probability of the
coincidence turns out to be one chance in ten thousand. Unlikely enough
to be striking, but not _so_ unlikely that we ought to feel amazed.

Estimates like this help to explain astounding coincidences reported in
newspapers, such as a bridge player getting a ‘perfect hand’ – all
thirteen cards in one suit. The number of games of bridge played every
week worldwide is _huge –_ so huge that every few weeks the actual
events explore a large fraction of the sample space. So occasionally a
perfect hand actually does turn up – with the frequency that its small
but non-zero probability predicts. The probability of _all four_ players
getting a perfect hand at the same time, though, is so micoscopic that
even if every planet in the galaxy had a billion inhabitants, all
playing bridge every day for a billion years, you wouldn’t expect it to
happen.

Nevertheless, every so often the newspapers report a four-way perfect
hand. The sensible conclusion is _not_ that a miracle happened, but that
_something_ changed the odds. Possibly the players got _close_ to a
four-way perfect hand, and the tale grew in the telling, so that when
the journalist arrived with a photographer, another kind of narrative
imperative ensured that their story fitted what the journalist had been
told. Possibly they deliberately cheated to get their names in the
papers. Scientists, especially, tend to underestimate the propensity of
people to _lie_. More than one scientist has been fooled into accepting
apparent evidence of extrasensory perception or other ‘supernatural’
events, which can actually be traced to deliberate trickery.

Many other apparent coincidences, on close investigation, slither into a
grey area in which trickery is strongly suspected, but may never be
proved – either because sufficient evidence is unobtainable, or because
it’s not worth the trouble. Another way to be fooled about a coincidence
is to be unaware of hidden constraints that limit the sample space. That
‘perfect hand’ could perhaps be explained by the way bridge players
often shuffle cards for the next deal, which can be summed up as:
poorly. If a pack of cards is arranged so that the top four cards
consist of one from each suit, and thereafter every fourth card is in
the same suit, then you can cut (but not shuffle, admittedly) the pack
as many times as you like, and it will deal out a four-way perfect hand.
At the end of a game, the cards lie on the table in a fairly ordered
manner, not a random one – so it’s not so surprising if they possess a
degree of structure after they’ve been picked up.

So even with a mathematically tidy example like bridge, the choice of
the ‘right’ sample space is not entirely straightforward. The actual
sample space is ‘packs of cards of the kind that bridge players
habitually assemble after concluding a game’, _not_ ‘all possible packs
of cards’. That changes the odds.

Unfortunately, statisticians tend to work with the ‘obvious’ sample
space. For that question about Israeli fighter pilots, for instance,
they would naturally take the sample space to be all children of Israeli
fighter pilots. But that might well be the wrong choice, as the next
tale illustrates.

According to Scandinavian folklore, King Olaf of Norway was in dispute
with the King of Sweden about ownership of an island, and they agreed to
throw dice for it: two dice, highest total wins. The Swedish king threw
a double-six. ‘You may as well give up now,’ he declared in triumph.
Undeterred, Olaf threw the dice … One turned up six … the other _split
in half_, one face showing a six and the other a one. ‘Thirteen, I win,’
said Olaf.*2

Something similar occurs in _The Colour of Magic_, where several gods
are playing dice to decide certain events on the Discworld:

The Lady nodded slightly. She picked up the dice-cup and held it steady
as a rock, yet all the Gods could hear the three cubes rattling about
inside. And then she sent them bouncing across the table.

A six. A three. A five.

Something was happening to the five, however. Battered by the chance
collision of several billion molecules, the die flipped onto a point,
spun gently and came down a seven.

Blind Io picked up the cube and counted the sides.

‘Come _on_,’ he said wearily. ‘Play fair.’

Nature’s sample space is often bigger than a conventional statistician
would expect. Sample spaces are a human way to model reality: they do
not capture all of it. And when it comes to estimating significance, a
different choice of sample space can completely change our estimates of
probabilities. The reason for this is an extremely important factor –
‘selective reporting’, which is a type of narrativium in action. This
factor tends to be ignored in most conventional statistics. That perfect
hand at bridge, for instance, is far more likely to make it to the local
or even national press than an imperfect one. How often do you see the
headline BRIDGE PLAYER GETS ENTIRELY ORDINARY HAND, for instance? The
human brain is an irrepressible pattern-seeking device, and it seizes on
certain events that it considers significant, whether or not they really
are. In so doing, it ignores all the ‘neighbouring’ events that would
help it judge how likely or unlikely the perceived coincidence actually
is.

Selective reporting affects the significance of those Formula One times.
If it hadn’t been them, maybe the tennis scores in the US Open would
have contained some unusual pattern, or the football results, or the
golf … Any one of those would have been reported, too – but none of the
failed coincidences, the ones that _didn’t_ happen, would have hit the
headlines. FORMULA ONE DRIVERS RECORD DIFFERENT LAP TIMES … If we
include just ten major sporting events in our list of would-be’s that
weren’t, that one in ten thousand chance comes down to only one in a
thousand.

Having understood this, let’s go back to the Israeli fighter pilots.
Conventional statistics would set up the obvious sample space, assign
probabilities to boy and girl children, and calculate the chance of
getting 84% girls in a purely random trial. If this were less than one
in a hundred, say, then the data would be declared ‘significant at the
99% level’. But this analysis ignores selective reporting. Why did we
look at the sexes of Israeli fighter pilots’ children in the first
place? Because our attention had _already_ been drawn to a clump. If
instead the clump had been the heights of the children of Israeli
aircraft manufacturers, or the musical abilities of the wives of Israeli
air traffic controllers, then our clump-seeking brains would again have
drawn the fact to our attention. So our computation of the significance
level tacitly excludes many other factors that _didn’t_ clump – making
it fallacious.

The human brain filters vast quantities of data, seeking things that
appear unusual, and only then does it send out a conscious signal: _Wow!
Look at that! The_ wider we cast our pattern-seeking net, the more
likely it is to catch a clump. For this reason, it’s illegitimate to
include the data that brought the clump to our attention as part of the
evidence that the same clump is unusual. It would be like sorting
through a pack of cards until you found the ace of spades, putting it on
the table, and then claiming miraculous powers that unerringly
accomplish a feat whose probability is one in 52.

Exactly this error was made in early experiments on extra-sensory
perception. Thousands of subjects were asked to guess cards from a
special pack of five symbols. Anyone whose success rate was above
average was invited back, while the others were sent home. After this
had gone on for several weeks, the survivors all had an amazing record
of success! Then these ‘good guessers’ were tested some more. Strangely,
as time went on, their success rate slowly dropped back towards the
average, as if their powers were ‘running down’. Actually, that effect
wasn’t strange at all. It happened because the initial high scores were
included in the running total. If they had been omitted, then the
scoring rate would have dropped, immediately, to near average.

So it is with the fighter pilots. The curious figures that drew
researchers’ attention to these particular effects may well have been
the result of selective reporting, or selective attention. If so, then
we can make a simple prediction: ‘From now on, the figures will revert
to fifty–fifty.’ If this prediction _fails_, and if the results instead
confirm the bias that revealed the clump, then the new data can be
considered significant, and a significance level can sensibly be
assigned by the usual methods. But the smart money is on a fifty-fifty
split.

The alleged decline in the human sperm count may be an example of
selective reporting. The story, widely repeated in the press, is that
over the past 50 years the human sperm count for ‘normal’ men has
halved. We don’t mean selective reporting by the people who published
the first evidence – they took pains to avoid all the sources of bias
that they could think of. The ‘selective reporting’ was done by
researchers who had contrary evidence but didn’t publish it because they
thought it must be wrong, by journal referees who accepted papers that
confirmed a decline more often than they accepted those that didn’t, and
by the press – who strung together a whole pile of sex-related defects
in various parts of the animal kingdom into a single seamless story,
unaware that each individual instance has an entirely reasonable
explanation that has nothing to do with falling sperm-counts and often
nothing to do with sex.

Sexual abnormalities in fish near sewer outlets, for instance, are
probably due to excess nitrites, which all fish-breeders know cause
abnormalities of _all_ kinds – and not to oestrogen-like compounds in
the water, which would bolster the ‘sperm count’ story. Current data
from fertility clinics, by the way, show no signs of a decline.

Humans add narrativium to their world. They insist in interpreting the
universe as if it’s telling a story. This leads them to focus on facts
that fit the story, while ignoring those that don’t. But we mustn’t let
the coincidence, the clump, choose the sample space – when we do that,
we’re ignoring the surrounding space of near-coincidences.

Jack and Ian managed to test this theory on a trip to Sweden. On the
plane, Jack predicted that a coincidence would happen at Stockholm
airport – for reasons of selective reporting. If they looked hard
enough, they’d find one. They got to the bus stop outside the terminal,
and no coincidences had occurred. But they couldn’t find the right bus,
so Jack went back to the enquiries desk. As he waited, someone came up
next to him – Stefano, a mathematician who normally occupied the office
next door to Jack’s. Prediction confirmed. But what was really needed
was evidence of a near-coincidence – one that hadn’t happened, but could
have been selectively reported if it had. For instance, if some other
acquaintance had shown up at exactly the same time, but on the wrong
day, or at the wrong airport, they’d never have noticed. Near
coincidences, by definition, are hard to observe … but not impossible.
Ian happened to mention all of the above to his friend Ted, who was
visiting soon after. ‘Stockholm?’ said Ted: ‘When?’ Ian told him. ‘Which
hotel?’ Ian told him ‘Funny, I was staying there _one day later than
you_!’ Had the trip been one day later, the ‘coincidental’ encounter
with Stefano wouldn’t have happened – but the one with Ted would.

What we must not do, then, is to look back at past events and find
significance in the inevitable few that look odd. That is the way of the
pyramidologists and the tea-leaf readers. Every pattern of raindrops on
the pavement is unique. We’re not saying that if one such patterns
happens to spell your name, this is not to be wondered at – but if your
name had been written on the pavement in Beijing during the Ming
dynasty, at midnight, nobody would have noticed. We should not look at
_past history_ when assessing significance: we should look at all the
other things that might have happened instead.

Every event is unique. Until we place that event in a category, we can’t
work out which background to view it against. Until we choose a
background, we can’t estimate the event’s probability. If we consider
the sample space of all possible DNA codes, for instance, then we can
calculate the probability of a human being having exactly _your_ DNA
code – which is vanishingly small. But it would be silly to conclude
that it is impossible for you to exist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Indeed, it is a fundamental part of story telling. If the hero did
not overcome huge odds, what would be the _point_?

*2 Possibly he was holding a large axe at the time.



THIRTY-FIVE



STILL BLOODY LIZARDS


[] ‘THE FUTURE IS LIZARD,’ said Ridcully. ‘Obviously.’

It was a few days later. The omniscope was focused on a mound of leaves
and rotting vegetation a little way from the banks of the river. There
was a large depression hanging over the Senior Wrangler, and the Dean
had a black eye. The war between land and sea had just entered a
terminal stage.

‘Little portable seas,’ said Ponder. ‘You know, I never thought of them
like that.’

‘An egg is an egg, however you look at it,’ said Ridcully. ‘Look, you
two, I don’t want to see a scuffle like that again, d’you hear?’

The Senior Wrangler dabbed at his bleeding nose.

‘He goaded be,’ he said. ‘Id’s still osuns, howeber you look at id.’

‘A private ocean full of food,’ said Ponder, still entranced. ‘Hidden in
a heap of … well, compost. Which heats up. That’s like having private
sunshine.’

The little lizard-like creatures that had hatched from the eggs in the
mound slithered and slid down the bank into the water, bright-eyed and
hopeful. The first few were instantly snapped up by a large male lying
in wait among the weeds.

‘However, the mothers still have something to learn about postnatal
care,’ said Ridcully. ‘I wonder if they’ll have time to learn? And how
did they know how to do this? Who’s telling them?’

The wizards were depressed again. Most days started that way now.
Creatures seemed to turn up in the world randomly, and certainly not
according to any pictures in a book. If things were changing into other
things, and no one had seen that happen yet, why were the original
things still the original things? If the land was so great, why were any
fish left in the sea?

The air-breathing fishes that Rincewind had seen still seemed to be
around, lurking in swamps and muddy beaches. Things changed, but still
stayed the same.

And if there was any truth at all in Ponder’s tentative theory that
things _did_ change into other things, it led to the depressing thought
that, well, the world was filling up with quitters, creatures which –
instead of staying where they were, and really making a _go_ of life in
the ocean or the swamp or wherever – were running away to lurk in some
niche and grow legs. The kind of fish that’d come out of water was,
frankly, a disgrace to the species. It kept _coughing_ all the time,
like someone who’d just given up smoking.

And there was no purpose, Ridcully kept saying. Life was on land.
According to the book, there should be some big lizards. But nothing
seemed to be making much of an effort. The moment anything felt safe, it
stopped bothering.

Rincewind, currently relaxing on a rock, rather liked it. There were
large animals snuffling around in the greenery near the rock he was
sitting on; in general shape and appearance, they looked like a small
skinny hippopotamus designed in the dark by a complete amateur. They
were hairy. They coughed, too.

Things that were doing sufficiently beetle-like things for him to think
of them as beetles ambled across the ground.

Ponder had told him the continents were moving again, so he kept a firm
grip on his rock just in case.

Best of all, nothing seemed to be _thinking_. Rincewind was convinced
that no good came of that sort of thing.

The last few weeks of Discworld time had been instructive. The wizards
had tentatively identified several dozen embryo civilizations, or at
least creatures that seemed to be concerned about more than simply where
their next meal was coming from. And where were they now? There was a
squid one, HEX said, out in the really deep cold water. Apart from that,
ice or fire or both at once came to the thinkers and the stupid alike.
There was probably some kind of moral involved.

The air shimmered, and half a dozen ghostly figures appeared in front of
him.

There were, in pale shadowy colours, the wizards. Silvery lines
flickered across their bodies and, periodically, they flickered.

‘Now, remember,’ said Ponder Stibbons, and his voice sounded muffled,
‘You are in _fact_ still in the High Energy Magic building. If you walk
slowly HEX will try to adjust your feet to local ground level. You’ll
have a limited ability to move things, although HEX will do the actual
work –’

‘Can we eat?’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘No, sir. Your mouth isn’t _here_.’

‘Well, then, what am I talking out of?’

‘Could be anyone’s guess, sir,’ said Ponder diplomatically. ‘We can hear
you because our ears are in the HEM, and you can hear the sounds made
_here_ because HEX is presenting you with an analogue of them. Don’t
worry about it. It’ll seem quite natural after a while.’

The ghost of the Dean kicked at the soil. A fraction of a second later,
a little heap of earth splashed up.

‘Amazing!’ he said, happily.

‘Excuse me?’ said Rincewind.

They turned.

‘Oh, Rincewind,’ said Ridcully, as one might say ‘oh dear, it’s
raining’. ‘It’s you.’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Mister Stibbons here’s found a way of getting HEX to operate more than
one virtually-there suit, d’you see? So we thought we’d come down and
smell the roses.’

‘Not for several hundred million years, sir,’ said Ponder.

‘Dull, isn’t it,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes, looking around.
‘Not a lot going on. Lots of life, but it’s just hanging around.’

Ridcully rubbed his hands together.

‘Well, we’re going to liven it up,’ he said. ‘We’re going to move things
forward fast while we’re _here_. A few prods in the right place, that’s
what these creatures need.’

‘The time travelling is not much fun,’ said Rincewind. ‘You tend to end
up under a volcano or at the bottom of the sea.’

‘We shall see,’ said Ridcully firmly. ‘I’ve had enough of this. Look at
those damn sloppy things over there. ‘He cupped his hands and shouted,
‘Life in the sea not good enough for you, eh? Skiving off, eh? Got a
note from your mother, have you?’ He lowered his hands. ‘All right,
Mister Stibbons … tell HEX to take us forward, oh, fifty million years –
hang on, what was that?’

Thunder rolled around the horizon.

‘Probably just another snowball landing,’ said Rincewind morosely.
‘There’s generally one around just when things are settled. It was in
the sea, I expect. Stand by for the tidal wave.’ He nodded at the
browsing creatures, who had glanced up briefly.

‘The Dean thinks all this hammering from rocks is making the life on
this world very resilient,’ said Ridcully.

‘Well, that’s certainly a point of view,’ said Rincewind. ‘But in a
little while a wave the size of the University is going to wash this
beach on to the top of those mountains over there. Then I expect the
local volcanoes will all let go … _again …_ so stand by for a
country-sized sea of lava coming the other way. After that there’ll
probably be outbreaks of rain that you could use to etch copper,
followed by a bit of a cold spell for a few years and some fog you could
cut up in lumps.’ He sniffed. ‘That which does not kill you can give you
a really bad headache.’

He glanced at the sky. Strange lightning was flickering between the
clouds, and now there was a glow on the horizon.

‘Damn,’ he said, in the same tone of voice. ‘This is going to be one of
the times when the atmosphere catches fire. I hate it when that
happens.’

Ridcully gave him a long blank look, and then said, ‘Mister Stibbons?’

‘Archchancellor?’

‘Make that seventy thousand years, will you? And, er … right now, if you
would be so good.’

The wizards vanished.

All the insects stopped buzzing in the bushes.

The hairy lizards carried on placidly eating the leaves. Then, something
made them look up –

The sun jerked across the sky, became very briefly a reddish-yellow band
across a twilight hemisphere, and then the world was simply a grey mist.
Below Rincewind’s feet it was quite dark, and above him it was almost
white. Around him, the greyness flickered.

‘Is this what it always looks like?’ said the Dean.

‘Something has to stand still for a couple of thousand years before you
see it at all,’ said Rincewind.

‘I thought it would be more exciting –’

The light flickered, and sun exploded into the sky, the wizards saw
waves around them for a moment, and then there was darkness.

‘I told you,’ said Rincewind. ‘We’re under water.’

‘The land sank under all the volcanoes?’ said Ridcully.

‘Probably just moved away,’ said Rincewind. ‘There’s a lot of that sort
of thing down here.’

They rose above the surface as HEX adjusted to the new conditions. A
landmass was smeared on the horizon, under a bank of cloud.

‘See?’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s a pain. Time travel always means you end up
walking.’

‘HEX, move us to the nearest land, please. Inland about ten miles,’ said
Ponder.

‘You mean I could have just asked?’ said Rincewind. ‘All this time, I
needn’t have been walking?’

‘Oh, yes.’

The landscape blurred for a second.

‘You could have said,’ said Rincewind accusingly, as they were rushed
past, and sometimes _through_, a forest of giant ferns.

The view stabilized. The wizards had been brought to the edge of the
forest. Low-growing shrubs stretched away towards more ferns.

‘Not much about,’ said Ridcully, leaning against a trunk. ‘Can I smoke
my pipe here, Stibbons?’

‘Since technically you’ll be smoking in the High Energy Building, yes,
sir.’

Rincewind apparently struck a match on the tree trunk. ‘Amazing,’ he
said.

‘That’s odd, sir,’ said Ponder. ‘I didn’t think there would be any
proper trees yet.’

‘Well, here they are,’ said Ridcully. ‘And I can see at least another
three more …’

Rincewind had already started to run. The fact that nothing can harm you
is no reason for not being scared. An expert can _always_ find a reason
for being scared.

The fact that the nearest trunk had toenails was a good one.

From among the ferns above, a large head appeared on the end of too much
neck.

‘Ah,’ said Ridcully calmly. ‘Still bloody lizards, I see.’



THIRTY-SIX



RUNNING FROM DINOSAURS


[] _WALKING WITH DINOSAURS_ was a very popular television series in the
UK in 2000–2001, and it was equally popular on US television soon
afterwards. It portrayed dozens of kinds of dinosaur, all beautifully
realised as computer animations in the most intimate detail. And it told
us things like ‘These doofersaurs were herbivorous, and they were
brightly coloured to break up their outline, as protection against
predation by thingumosaurs. They were monogamous, rearing their
well-protected offspring by living in caves and permitting the children
only very restricted access to computer games.’

All this from just two fossil bones – one for each beast.

_Walking with Dinosaurs_ was the latest in a series of popularisations
of dinosaurs, from H.G. Wells’s _Outline of History_ and Arthur Conan
Doyle’s _The Lost World_ to Walt Disney’s _Fantasia_ and Michael
Crichton’s _Jurassic Park_. Dinosaurs are redolent with mana; they ooze
charisma. They are the PR person’s wildest dream. What gives dinosaurs
such potency?

The psychologist Helen Haste has taken over from palaeontologist
Beverley Halstead the theme of dinosaurs as icons of power and sex in
our civilised myth-making. Both have shown that by mythologising them
into such potent symbols, we have made it very difficult to work out
what it must really have been like when dinosaurs walked the Earth. Our
mental images of dinosaurs carry a lot of excess baggage, and it’s hard
to get away from the lies-to-children involved in those images.

We’ll do our best, nonetheless. Whatever it was like, we’re sure that
_Running from Dinosaurs_ is a more apt image.

We have a good idea of what it _wasn’t_ like. We’ve all seen the
standard filmic shot of dinosaur ‘ecology’, and it wasn’t like that. The
camera homes in on some archaic-looking trees, and we discover a
clearing with a lake and some enormous vegetarian reptiles. A few little
birdy creatures get into the picture doing their little birdy things;
there are pterodactyls flying about … Then there’s a great roar, and a
tyrannosaur comes crashing in from stage left. He (nobody can believe
it’s a ‘she’ as portrayed: we have to be informed of that in the
_Jurassic Park_ sequel) jumps on to a brontosaur or a hadrosaur or
whatever, and wrestles it to the ground. Or he has a great
teeth-against-horns fight with a triceratops, or some other armoured
vegetarian like the stegosaur in Disney’s _Fantasia_.

In the natural history books of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, the drawings always show these creatures in mortal combat,
too (labelled, for example ‘Ideal Scene of the Middle Oolitic Period’).
Wells’s _Outline of History_ was atypical in this regard; the drawings
and Plates showed the animals simply going about their business, without
the drama.

What was it really like?

For a start, there wasn’t an ‘it’. Dinosaurs, and other great reptiles,
had nearly two hundred million years of being the most interesting, most
important – well, the biggest, at least – land animals, and they
re-invaded the sea and even produced the largest flying creatures that
have ever been. Dinosaurs began, about two hundred and forty million
years ago, with a single species. The earliest descendants of which we
have fossils are the herbivore _Pisanosaurus_, about three feet (1m)
long, and _Eoraptor_, a predator of similar size, which date from about
230 million years ago.

By 215 million years ago the dinosaurs had diversified considerably.
There were big sprawling amphibians, heavily-built and three or four
feet long, as well as a great variety of little ones looking more like
big salamanders. There were the synapsid reptiles, which were bigger and
held up by sturdy legs: some had great bony sails on their backs, some
of them were vegetarians as big as donkeys, some were carnivores as big
as hyaenas. There were many kinds of more active dog-sized beasties.

Their therapsid descendants would be the mammals’ ancestors, little guys
called morganucodontids, which we talk about later. These were small
beasties, because most of the action by then was dinosaur. For 150
million years, between 215 and 65 million years ago, any land animal
more than three feet (1m) long was a dinosaur.

Among these mammal-like reptiles in the forests were a few active
predators the size of kangaroos and wallabies. These unprepossessing
creatures were the earliest dinosaurs. You wouldn’t have marked them out
as having a great future; they were just part of the land fauna that
came out of the dark wet Carboniferous forests and began to make a
living in the drier Permian era. If you had walked about in those
forests you would probably have seen some of these beasts; they were
rather slow and stupid, and perhaps they would have attacked you in a
rather leisurely, crocodilian way. They weren’t as bright as crocodiles,
though, nor as quick.

At least as important as the dinosaurs was something far less filmic:
soil. By then, soil had developed much of its complex ecosystem: at
least fifty interacting species of bacteria, several very different
kinds of fungi, insects, worms, protozoans during the Carboniferous.
Soil had become a great basis for land plant growth. These forests were
not starved, like the modern rainforests with their six inches of soil
and no net oxygen production. Oh, no. The coal that we burn for heat and
power was deposited in the Carboniferous, and every ton of coal that was
deposited by the forests released more than twice its weight of oxygen
into the air. Just as each ton of coal we burn now uses that much oxygen
to make carbon dioxide again.

In those days, plants grew fast, like modern herbs, but many of them
grew big, as well. These plants didn’t have woody trunks, they were like
great tree-ferns, and the creatures that fed on them made a big input
into the terrestrial ecology. Until grass really took over, well after
the demise of the dinosaurs, and made savannah and pampas the vegetable
basis of the great herds of mammalian herbivores, this thick-soiled
forest was the nutritional basis of all land fauna. And the ancient land
fauna diversified in these forests, at their edges and in the swamps
that they so often became.

There were several early monitor-lizard-like carnivores in the late
Carboniferous and early Permian, and their relatives came down to us as
the lizards and the snakes. But to get a better idea of what these early
reptiles really looked like, and behaved like, you should look at the
tuatara, a genuine ‘living fossil’ from the islands off New Zealand’s
coast. You can probably find it in your local zoo. It’s slow, it’s
stupid, and any modern iguana or monitor can run rings round it (partly
because it’s adapted to colder climes); but it’s a warning not to use
any geckos or pythons or goannas you have known to inform yourself about
early Permian lizards.

Slow it may have been, but this lineage became extremely diverse. Its
adaptive radiation, its explosive evolutionary diversification, simply
swamped the other reptiles, turtles and mammal-like creatures. The early
reptiles produced several kinds of marine lizards, of which plesiosaurs
and ichthyosaurs were biggest and the most famous. However, another
reptile lineage had slid back into the seas in the early Permian,
creatures called mesosaurs that were related to turtles and probably
lived on plankton that they sieved from the water, like many whales do
now. The plesiosaurs, particularly some rather nasty short-necked
crocodile-like ones called pliosaurs, were worthy opponents of the big
sharks, and probably fed on mesosaurs. But the most successful marine
reptiles, as fully adapted to marine life as whales and dolphins are
now, were the ichthyosaurs. They flourished long before the famous
dinosaurs on land, reaching their peak of size in the Triassic, as far
in the past of the tyrannosaur as he was in our past. A length of 30
feet (10m) was common, and occasionally they reached 45 feet (15m).

They were trumped in the seas by a later branch of the lizard lineage,
the so-called fish-lizards or mosasaurs, which took over the seas just
when the big brontosaurs and allosaurs were taking over the land. Some
of them were only a foot (30cm) long, a few stretched to forty feet
(12m). But all those films you’ve seen showing ichthyosaurs in the seas,
tyrannosaurs on land are scientifically as (in)accurate as _One Million
Years BC_ with Raquel Welch being chased by dinosaurian monsters, the
Flintstone family with their tame dinosaurs powering household gadgets,
or Hamlet with a PC.

It’s quite difficult to get the span of geological time to make sense.
In his book _In Search of Deep Time_, Henry Gee does an excellent job of
reminding us just how flimsy the ‘fossil record’ is. A few bones here; a
few others five thousand miles away and ten million years later; from
these we attempt to tell a story of evolutionary ancestry. It’s like
claiming to have reconstructed human history from one flint flake and a
half-eaten hamburger. Well, not as coherent as that, actually.

It’s more difficult still to put the range of creatures up against the
tapestry of evolutionary time to get some idea of what the dinosaurian
Earth might have been like. Take sharks. There have been shark-like
sharks since way before there were _any_ reptiles; there have been those
odd-looking horseshoe crabs for longer. Coelacanth fishes have been
grubbing about in the dark depths off the continental shelves while the
dinosaurs came and went. It’s not surprising, perhaps, that yeasts and
other fungi, bacteria of several modern kinds, have been around for more
than a thousand million years. We don’t expect ‘blobs’ to notice the
passage of time. But coelacanths and sharks and tuataras are vertebrates
– you’d think they’d be a bit progressive, evolving and changing
into … whatever. But they didn’t; they just kept on doing their own
thing.

Sharks have eaten mesosaurs, have been annoyed by plesiosaurs and
ichthyosaurs and cautious about pliosaurs, have eaten little mosasaurs
and been eaten by big ones. There were ammonites in their seas, and
belemnites and all kinds of other shelled octopuses. Then, when the big
reptiles went, and all the ammonites and their friends disappeared, the
sharks had the top levels of the marine food chains to themselves for
tens of thousands of years. Then the mammals produced dolphins, killer
whales, big whales … and the sharks just went on being sharks.

Why didn’t sharks change? They have wonderful immune systems, which
we’re just beginning to understand; they don’t get bacterial infections
or, apparently, cancers. Perhaps they are not made ill by viruses,
either. Though they do have lots of wormy and flukey parasites. Are
today’s sharky superfish the newest, latest-model sharks? Or did the
ancient ones also have marvellous immunity to disease? Was that their
trick? Was that what brought them unchanged, in outward appearance at
least, through such a long span of time?

Since we can’t answer those questions, yet, let’s move to one that we
can answer. What was happening on land as the Permian became the
Triassic? Well, for a start, the biggest mass extinction of all, 248
million years ago. The number of species on Earth dropped by about 93%.
Only 7% survived. We’re talking big species here; nobody knows what
happened to bacteria or even protozoa, to nematode worms, or to
rotifers. Except that a lot of protozoa have mineral shells, and got
fossilised as the white cliffs of Dover, and rotifers have tiny hard
jaws of characteristic shapes that a few hardy fossil-hunters collect.
So we can check these out, and they give a similar picture.

The precise cause of this mass extinction is debatable. There may have
been collusion between a comet impact and massive volcanic activity, as
we describe shortly. In any event, the early dinosaurs – and mammal-like
reptiles and turtles, even ichthyosaurs and early plesiosaurs (but not
mesosaurs) – lived through it. They were among the lucky 7%. Whatever
the disaster was, it seemed great for them; it gave them just the open
ecological spaces that they needed to radiate wildly. The Triassic seas
were just as full of reptiles as today’s seas are full of mammals, and
they stayed that way right up to the early Cretaceous. Those ocean
reptiles had largely vanished before _Tyrannosaurus_ appeared, though.

Why were the reptiles so successful as sea creatures? There’s a
persuasive biological explanation for this invasion of the seas by land
animals. The story starts in the sea, moves on to land, and reverts to
the sea again.

Creatures that live in the seas experience very little gravity, if any;
even heavily-armoured creatures like crabs produce forms that swim. In
fact their muscles are for swimming, or for closing jaws on other
creatures, or for sudden escapes. But as the descendants of these
creatures came out on land, they experienced real problems; they sagged
and flopped. Compare a salamander with its sprawled-out legs, which
cannot support its weight, with a lizard of the same size that has
strong enough muscles and bones to run. (The tuatara still sprawls). The
frog’s trick, one jump at a time, is much less effective than really
well-designed legs, strong limb girdles, an effective bellows system
around the lungs to supply the muscles with oxygen, and a four-chambered
heart to keep the aerated and depleted blood apart – all the tricks that
make a monitor lizard such a good predator.

When you’ve achieved all these, then feeding on the seashore, or even in
the sea like today’s marine iguanas on the Galápagos, becomes really
easy. Instead of having muscles and respiratory systems that are just
adequate for marine life, you’ve got the supercharged version that
terrestrial gravity required of your ancestors. Going back into the sea
is now a very viable option; only sharks and octopuses are any match for
previously-terrestrial lineages. So the ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs,
like today’s dolphins and whales (but less so because mammals had become
warm-blooded too while they were on land) found that living in the sea
was easy.

Until they evolved further and became their own best enemies, of course,
after they had radiated into hundreds of species. The reptile-eating
pliosaurs were like today’s killer whales, whose main diet is other
whales.

Meanwhile, several rather different lineages of Triassic land reptiles,
somewhat prematurely called archosaurs (‘ruling reptiles’), had evolved
really good limb girdles, of several patterns. Two very different
lineages, ‘bird-hipped’ and ‘lizard-hipped’, went on to produce all
those great big dinosaurs. The lizardy lot evolved into gigantic
herbivores like _Diplodocus_ and brontosaurs (now, alas, named
apatosaurs; ‘thunder-lizard’ was so much more appropriate) and gigantic
carnivores like the allosaurs and the tyrannosaurs. These all arrived at
least sixty million years later, though: the early archosaurs were as
far in the past of tyrannosaurs as we are in their future.

The bird-hipped lot eventually produced those spectacularly armoured
beasts that make such good him shots when tyrannosaurs are fighting
them: ankylosaurs with spikes on a knobby tail, like that spiky ball on
a chain that the villain wields in chivalric films; stegosaurs with bony
plates, spikes down their backs; triceratops with the bony frill and
three horns.

Filmmakers always seem to make almost-purposeful mistakes: the
innumerable eight-year old boys who’ve learned all the lovely names
could correct them. It’s a pity that that otherwise lovely fight in
Disney’s _Fantasia_, accompanied by Stravinsky’s _Rite of Spring_, is
between a tyrannosaur and stegosaur. It couldn’t have happened, they
weren’t contemporary. And the stegosaur never had the ankylosaur’s
tail-armour, either. The late Cretaceous landscape, with the few very
big dinosaurs that lived then, was doubtless an impressive scene; but
the film producers’ version is no more accurate than _Fantasia_.

This is hardly a surprise; after all, Hollywood has been wrong about so
many other things. Scientists don’t always fare better. Right now,
palaeontologists believe that tyrannosaurs were scavengers, not
predators. We’ll stick our necks out and dispute that conclusion. Yes,
tyrannosaurs may not have been fearsome predators, hunters … but if they
weren’t, that doesn’t make scavenging the only option. They probably did
something that we can’t imagine instead. We simply can’t see these
animals as enormous vultures, with their tiny front feet scrabbling at a
decaying corpse and that great head hidden in the abdomen of a dead
sauropod like _Diplodocus_. We’d run away from them, whatever the
scientists are saying now.

On the Rincewind principle, you understand. Just in case.

Other archosaurs went on to produce crocodiles and pterodactyls, and
perhaps the birds – or these may have arisen from the same stock as
those deinonychids made familiar by _Jurassic Park_, namely
_Velociraptor_ and its ilk. These probably were intelligent creatures,
agile carnivores much like their portrayal in _Jurassic Park_. We’d
certainly run away from _them_.

There are a few puzzles that biologists keep puzzling at, like whether
some of the big dinosaurs were warm-blooded. And why everything was so
damned big in the Cretaceous. The biggest teleost (bony) fish that there
has ever been lived in Cretaceous seas; it was as big as today’s whale
shark. And dinosaurs flew, too. There are lots of fossil pterosaurs like
_Pteranodon_ with eight-yard (7m) wingspreads, bigger than any of
today’s birds, and there are a couple of fossils of _Quetzalcoatlus_
with wingspreads twice as big. That’s bigger than the fighter-planes of
World War II, like spitfires. We have no idea how these creatures lived,
but there’s no doubt that they existed.*1 Unless you believe in
planetary engineers with a sense of humour, as in _Strata …_

This is where we should warn you about the most tempting way of thinking
about these ancient creatures, and how we get it wrong all the time.
Gee’s _In Search of Deep Time_ takes us to task, showing how all of our
pretty guesses about evolutionary scenarios – however well they seem to
be based in the fossil record – are simply wrong, impossible.

A classical mistake is the way we habitually think about that fish that
came out of the water, whose descendants were the land vertebrates. We
imagine it flopping out on the beach (and Rincewind encouraging it to go
back into the water) with its developing lungs and its evolving
legs … No. It had fairly well-developed legs while it was still living
an underwater life, with internal gills like any perfectly respectable
fish. It must have done, or it wouldn’t have _worked_.

We have little idea what its legs were for at that stage, though:
certainly not for walking on land. But there’s no question that these
hands that we’re typing with are the descendants of those fishy
legs … Just as our cough is a legacy of that fish’s crossover of its
airway and foodway. It’s the pictures in our heads, of what we suppose
happened, that are mistaken. They are lies-to-children that we can’t
correct yet. But humans definitely evolved from a fish, and it had legs.
It just didn’t use them to walk along the beach.

Another interestingly wrong lie-to-children about evolution concerns the
origin of birds. When those lovely _Archaeopteryx_ fossils were found in
the Solenhofen limestone, so well preserved that the feather imprints
could be clearly seen – and the teeth and the claw-digits on the wings –
it was clear that we had found the halfway stage between a reptile and a
bird. It was a super Missing Link.

Think about that for a moment: how can you find a Missing Link? Oops.

_Archaeopteryx_ had a long tail like a lizard, and no keel in its chest
for strong flight muscles. Were it not for the feathers, it would have
been classified as a small pseudosuchian dinosaur like _Ornithomimus_
(bird-mimic). In the late Jurassic there were many little dinosaurs with
bird-like features, and some really well-developed diving-bird fossils
had been found in early Cretaceous rocks from about fifteen million
years later. These were real birds, called _Ichthyornis_, and they had
already lost their flight abilities, reduced their wings to (very
bird-like) vestiges.

So _Archaeopteryx_ was a bit ‘late’, and in the 1950’s zoologists
thought that it probably represented a primitive reptile-bird lineage
hanging on, perhaps contemporary with much more bird-like creatures.
That’s another scenario that doesn’t make sense now. Many bird-like
dinosaurs have been found recently, fossils from South America and,
especially, _Caudipteryx_ and _Protoarchaeopteryx_ from China, and these
make the problems worse.*2 They have feathers, but _they didn’t fly_.
They have no wings, but they have arms with hands, sometimes with only
two digits.

So what were feathers ‘for’?

Feathers are really remarkably complicated. They’re not at all like the
scales of lizards and snakes, and it’s not easy to invent an
evolutionary route by which feathers (or hairs, come to that) can have
developed from scales. Some biologists who haven’t looked at feathers
very carefully have imagined scales growing rather like the stage
witch’s fingernails, so that they stick out like a pangolin’s scales.
(That’s that silly mammalian tree-climbing anteater that looks like a
big pine cone.)

Feathers aren’t like that, though. They develop as cylinders: you can
see baby feathers, called pin-feathers, on a plucked chicken from the
supermarket. The scales on birds’ legs are respectable reptilian scales;
perhaps surprisingly, no modern birds have structures that are halfway
between feathers and scales, even though their remote ancestors had
scales all over. Probably … we can’t be sure from those very old
fossils. Scales are, and probably were in those ancestors, patches of
keratin very like fingernails; sometimes they overlap like roof tiles.
Feathers are cylinders sitting in follicles, deep pits in the skin.
About a millimetre up from their deep end, they have a ring of dividing
cells, called the collar, which produce the cylinder by growing it
outwards. As the products move up the follicle, they turn all the cells’
productivity into making keratin, the protein of horn, nails, hair and
feathers. And the cylinder wall becomes horny in a strange pattern.

The side of the feather facing backwards on the bird produces creases
that pass around on both sides of the cylinder toward the front-facing
side, diving into the follicle so that they are almost parallel with the
length of the cylinder. They don’t quite meet, and the tissue between
their deep ends will become the stalk of the feather. The other side
splits open, and the barbs of the feather – between the creases – unfurl
to make the feather vane. They are much longer than the cylinder’s
circumference, so a narrow pin-feather can generate a feather with a
broad vane.

Not a bit like a scale. And far more complicated. Evolution had to work
hard to come up with feathers.

And they must have evolved for a good reason, because lots of dinosaurs
had feathers in various versions. Some were like down-feathers, others
more like paintbrushes or feather dusters. They could have evolved for
warmth. Adult velociraptors and young tyrannosaurs may have been covered
in down, like baby chicks. Palaeontologist Mark Norell says that ‘We
have as much evidence that velociraptors had feathers as we do that
Neanderthals had hair’. But other scientists disagree.

Perhaps feathers were sexual ornaments. More likely, we haven’t yet
thought of whatever function they had.

So much for stories that ‘some reptiles got feathers and became birds’.

There’s a very general problem here, and it’s the problem the wizards
are having all the time. The overall pattern of evolution, of the birds
say, or of tyrannosaurs, looks very sensible. But at a deep level,
deeper than the ‘common-sense story’ that the wizards are trying to use
for Roundworld, we don’t _understand_ it. We have stories to explain it,
all right, but that isn’t what understanding means.

In fact, we’re not altogether sure what it does mean, in a scientific
sense. We know that apparently quite ordinary historical events ‘come to
pieces’ when you try to analyse them from several directions. John F.
Kennedy’s assassination is a perfect example: the bullets seem to have
come from different directions, and there doesn’t appear to be one
consistent story that means we can ‘understand’ what happened. We can
describe the events, but the underlying causalities, like the
physicists’ quantum theory and relativity theory, don’t match up.

Evolution doesn’t just happen to one creature at a time. The entire
ecosystem evolves, and as it does so, new tricks may become worth using,
for a limited period of time and in a limited region of geography. A few
of those tricks turn out to have useful effects that are quite different
from the ‘reason’ why they evolved to begin with, and those effects may
continue to be worth having long after the original reason for their
appearance has ceased to apply.

It’s not surprising, in that frame, that historical events as far back
as the origin of feathers, or of birds, don’t make detailed sense
either. That’s why we can’t imagine what it was like in the Late
Cretaceous. _Walking with Dinosaurs_ was beautifully made and based on
up-to-date science, but ultimately it was unconvincing. The need to tell
a story distorted what was actually known, and mixed it up with
guesswork and wishful thinking. (You can’t be sure what colour an
animal’s skin was when all you’ve got is fossil bones. And assuming it
was a bit like something vaguely similar that’s alive today is cheating,
not science.) Anything televisual was automatically preferred to some
more mundane scenario. So we got a dinosaur soap, with everything
over-dramatised.

So we can’t imagine ourselves walking with dinosaurs. Neither, to be
fair, can we imagine ourselves running from them. We simply can’t
understand what it was like to be there, much as we’d like to believe we
can. Still, what can you expect from a slightly brainy ape? We can give
ourselves an excuse, an evolutionary one, and it’s this: we’re only
halfway from _Australopithecus_ (Lucy) to human. It’s not surprising
that we keep finding limits to what our brains can comprehend. Neither
is it surprising that our mental models won’t fit together to offer a
convincing understanding of past events. We’re not smart enough. Yet.

Wait another million years. Then we’ll show you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Some pterodactyls were sparrow-sized, and their wings could have
carried them easily; but pteranodons can’t have taken off from the sea
surface, or climbed up cliffs to hang-glide! Although _Quetzalcoatlus_
has been modelled, and flown as a radio-controlled glider, that doesn’t
tell us how it lived. Was there perhaps aerial plankton for it to eat?

*2 Though some palaeontologists think that such creatures were not
feathered dinosaurs, but flightless birds. According to John Ruben,
_Caudipteryx_ was merely ‘a Cretaceous turkey, so to speak’.



THIRTY-SEVEN



I SAID, DON’T LOOK UP!


[] PONDER WAS WORKING THE RULES AGAIN. Now they read:

_THE RULES_

_1 Things fall apart_, _but centres hold_

_2 Everything moves in curves_

_3 You get balls_

_4 Big balls tell space to bend_

_5 There are no turtles anywhere (_after this one he’d added _Except
ordinary ones)_

_6 Life turns up everywhere it can_

_7 Life turns up everywhere it can’t_

_8 There is something like narrativium_

_9 There may be something called bloodimindium (see rule 7)_

_10 …_

He stopped to think. Behind him, a very large lizard killed and ate a
slightly smaller one. Ponder didn’t bother to turn around. They’d been
watching lizards for more than a hundred million years – all day, in
fact – and even the Dean was giving up on them.

‘_Too_ well adapted,’ he said. ‘No _pressure_ on them, you see.’

‘They’re certainly very dull,’ said Ridcully. ‘Interesting colours,
though.’

‘Brain the size of a walnut and some of them think with their
backsides,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Your type of people, Dean,’ said Ridcully.

‘I shall choose to ignore that, Archchancellor,’ said the Dean coldly.

‘You’ve been interfering again, haven’t you,’ Ridcully went on. ‘I saw
you pushing some of the small lizards out of that tree.’

‘Well, you’ve got to admit that they _look_ a bit like birds,’ said the
Dean.

‘And did they learn to fly?’

‘Not in so many words, no. Not horizontally’

‘Eat, fight, mate and die,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Even the
crabs were better than this. Even the blobs made an effort. When they
come to write the history of this world, this is the page everyone will
skip. Terribly dull lizards, they’ll be called. You mark my words.’

‘They have stayed around for a hundred million years, sir,’ said
Rincewind, who felt he had to stand up for non-achievers.

‘And what have they done? Is there a single line of poetry? A building
of any sort? A piece of simple artwork?’

‘They’ve just not died, sir.’

‘Not dying out is some kind of achievement, is it?’ said the Lecturer in
Recent Runes.

‘Best kind there is, sir.’

‘Pah!’ said the Dean. ‘All they prove is that species go soft when
there’s nothing happening! It’s nice and warm, there’s plenty to
eat … it’s just the sea without water. A few periods of vulcanism or a
medium-sized comet would soon have them sitting up straight and paying
attention.’

The air shimmered and Ponder Stibbons appeared.

‘We have intelligence, gentlemen,’ he said.

‘I know,’ said the Dean.

‘I mean, the omniscope has found signs of developing intelligence.
Twice, sir.’

The herd was big. It was made up of large, almost hemispherical
creatures, with faces that had all the incisive cogitation of a cow.

Much smaller creatures were trotting along at the edges. They were dark,
scrawny and warbled to one another almost without cease.

They also carried pointed sticks.

‘Well …’ Ridcully began, dismissively.

‘They’re herding them, sir!’ said Ponder.

‘But wolves chase sheep …’

‘Not with pointy sticks, sir. And look there …’

One of the beasts was towing a crude travois, covered with leaves.
Several herders were lying on it. They were pale around the muzzles.

‘Are they sick, d’you think?’ said the Dean.

‘Just old, sir.’

‘Why’d they want to slow themselves down with a lot of old people?’

Ponder dared a short pause before answering.

‘They’re the library, sir. I suppose. They can remember things. Places
to hunt, good waterholes, that sort of thing. And that means they must
have some sort of language.’

‘It’s a start, I suppose,’ said Ridcully.

‘Start, sir? They’ve nearly done it all!’ Ponder put his hand to his
ear.

‘Oh … and HEX says there’s more, sir. Er … different.’

‘How different?’

‘In the sea again, sir.’

‘Aha,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

In fact on the sea was more accurate, he had to admit. The colony they
found stretched for miles, linking a chain of small rocky islands and
sandbanks as beads on a chain of tethered driftwood and rafts of
floating seaweed.

The creatures inhabiting it were another type of lizard. Still extremely
dull, the wizards considered, compared to some of the others. They
weren’t even an interesting colour and they had hardly any spikes. But
they were … busy creatures.

‘That seaweed … does it look sort of _regular_ to you?’ said the
Lecturer in Recent Runes, as they drifted over a crude wall. ‘They’re
not _farming_, are they?’

‘I think …’ Ponder looked down. The water washed over the wall of rocks.
‘It’s a big cage for fish. The whole lagoon. Er … I think they’ve built
the walls like that so the tide lets the fish come in and then they’re
stuck when it goes down.’

Lizards turned their heads as the semi-transparent men floated past, but
seemed to treat them as no more than passing shadows.

‘They’re harnessing the power of the sea?’ said Ridcully. ‘That’s
clever.’

Lizards were diving at the far side of the lagoon. Some were busy around
rock pools on one of the lower islands. Small lizards swam in the
shallows. Along one stretch of driftwood walkways, strips of seaweed
were drying in the breeze. And over everything was a yip-yipping of
conversation. And it _was_ conversation, Ponder decided. Animals didn’t
wait for other animals to finish. Nor did wizards, of course, but they
were a breed apart.

A little way away, a lizard was carefully painting the skin of another
lizard, using a twig and some pigments in half-shells. The one doing the
painting was wearing a necklace of different shells, Ponder realized.

‘Tools,’ he murmured. ‘Symbols. Abstract thought. _Things_ of value … is
this a civilization, or are we merely tribal at the moment?’

‘Where’s the sun?’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘It’s always so hazy, and
it’s hard to get used to directions here. Wherever you point, it’s at
the back of your own head.’

Rincewind pointed towards the horizon, where there was a red glow behind
the clouds.

‘I call it Widdershins,’ he said. ‘Just like at home.’

‘Ah. The sun sets Widdershins.’

‘No. It doesn’t do anything,’ said Rincewind. ‘It stays where it is. The
horizon comes up.’

‘But it doesn’t fall on us?’

‘It tries to, but the other horizon drags us away before it happens.’

‘The more time I spend on this globe, the more I feel I should be
holding on to something,’ the Dean muttered.

‘And the light isn’t reflected around the world?’ said the Senior
Wrangler. ‘It is at home. It’s always very beautiful, the glow that
comes up through the waterfall.’

‘No,’ said Rincewind. ‘It just gets dark, unless the moon is up.’

‘And there’s still just the one sun, isn’t there?’ said the Senior
Wrangler, a man with something on his mind.

‘Yes.’

‘We didn’t add another one?’

‘No.’

‘So … er … what is that light over there?’

As one wizard, they turned towards the opposite horizon.

‘Whoops,’ said the Dean, as the distant thunder died away and lights
streamed high across the sky.

The lizards had heard it too. Ponder looked around. They were lining the
walkways, watching the horizon with all the intelligent interest of a
thinking creature wondering what the future may hold …

‘Let’s get back to the High Energy Magic building before the boiling
rain, shall we?’ said Ridcully. ‘This really is too depressing.’



THIRTY-EIGHT



THE DEATH OF DINOSAURS


[] LIFE TURNS UP EVERYWHERE IT CAN.

Life turns up everywhere it can’t.

And just when it seems to have got itself going really comfortably, with
a sustainable lifestyle and gradual progress towards higher things,
along comes a major catastrophe and sets it back twenty million years.
Yet, paradoxically, those same disasters also pave the way to radically
new lifeforms …

It’s all rather confusing.

Life is resilient, but any particular species may not be. Life is
constantly devising new tricks. The one with eggs is brilliant: provide
the developing embryo with its own personal life-support machine.
Inside, the environment is tailored to the needs of that species – and
what’s outside doesn’t matter much, because there’s a barrier to keep it
out.

Life is adaptable. It changes the rules of its own game. As soon as eggs
make their appearance, the stage is set for the evolution of
egg-eaters …

Life is diverse. The more players there are, the more ways there are to
make a living by taking in each others’ washing.

Life is repetitious. When it finds a trick that works, it churns out
thousands of variations on the same basic theme. The great biologist
John (J.B.S.) Haldane was once asked what question he would like to pose
to God, and replied that he’d like to know why He has such an inordinate
fondness for beetles.*1

There are a third of a million beetle species today – far more than in
any other plant or animal group. In 1998 Brian Farrell came up with a
possible answer to Haldane’s query. Beetles appeared about 250 million
years ago, but the number of species didn’t explode until about 100
million years ago. That happens to be just when flowering plants came
into existence. The ‘phase space’ available for organisms suddenly
acquired a new dimension – a new resource became available for
exploitation. The beetles were beautifully poised to take advantage by
eating the new plants, especially their leaves. It used to be thought
that flowering plants and pollinating insects drove each other to wilder
and wilder diversity, but that’s not true. However, it _is_ true for
beetles. Nearly half of today’s beetle species are leaf-eaters. It’s
_still_ an effective tactic.

Sometimes natural disasters don’t just eliminate a species or two. The
fossil record contains a number of ‘mass extinctions’ in which a
substantial proportion of all life on Earth disappeared. The best-known
mass extinction is the death of the dinosaurs, 65 million years ago.

In order not to mislead you, we should point out at once that there is
no scientific evidence for the existence of any dinosaur _civilization_,
no matter what events are going on in the Roundworld Project. But …
whenever a scientist says ‘there is no scientific evidence for’, there
are three important questions you should ask – especially if it’s a
government scientist. These are: ‘Is there any evidence _against_?, ‘Has
anyone looked?’, and ‘If they did, would they expect to find
anything?’*2

The answers here are ‘no,’ ‘no’, and ‘no’. Deep Time hides a lot,
especially when it’s assisted by continental movement, the bulldozing
ice sheets, volcanic action and the occasional doomed asteroid. There
are few surviving _human_ artefacts more than ten thousand years old,
and if we died out today, the only evidence of our civilization that
might survive for a million years would be a few dead probes in deep
space and various bits of debris on the Moon. _Sixty-five_ million? Not
a chance. So although a dinosaurian civilization is pure fantasy – or,
rather, pure speculation – we can’t rule it out _absolutely_. As for
dinosaurs who were sufficiently advanced to use tools, herd other
dinosaurs … well, Deep Time would wash over them without a ripple.

Dinosaurs are always among the most popular exhibits at museums. They
remind us that the world wasn’t always like it is now; and they remind
us that humans have been on this planet for a very short time,
geologically speaking. Basically, dinosaurs _are_ ancient lizards. The
ones whose bones we all go to gawp at in museums are rather _big_
lizards, but many were much smaller. The name means ‘terrible lizard’,
and anyone who watched _Jurassic Park_ will understand why.

An Italian fossil collector who watched the Spielberg movie suddenly
realized that a perplexing fossil, filed away for years in his basement,
might well be a bit of a dinosaur. He then sent it to a nearby
university, where it was found not just to be a dinosaur, but a new
species. It was a young therapod – small flesh-eating dinosaurs that are
the closest relatives of birds. Interestingly, it didn’t have any
feathers. A story straight out of the movies: narrative imperative at
work in our own world … traceable, as always, to selective reporting.
How many fossil hunters owned a bit of dinosaur bone but _didn’t_ make
the connection after seeing the movie?

In the human mind, dinosaurs resonate with myths about dragons, common
to many cultures and many times; and many miles of suggestions have
appeared to explain how the dragon-thoughts in our minds have come down
to us, over millions of years of evolution, from real dinosaur images
and fears in the minds of our ancient ancestors. However, those
ancestors must have been _very_ ancient, for those of our ancestors that
overlapped the dinosaurs were probably tiny shrewlike creatures that
lived in holes and ate insects. After more than a hundred million years
of success, the dinosaurs all died out, 65 million years ago – and the
evidence is that their demise was sudden. Did proto-shrews have
nightmares about dinosaurs, all that time ago? Could such nightmares
have survived 65 million years of natural selection? In particular, do
shrews today have nightmares about fire-breathing dragons – or is it
just us? It seems likely that the dragon myth comes from other, less
literal, tendencies of that dark, history-laden organ that we call the
human mind.

Dinosaurs exert a timeless fascination, especially for children.
Dinosaurs are genuine monsters, they actually existed – and some of
them, the ones we all know about, were gigantic. They are also safely
dead.

Many small children, even if they are resistant to the standard reading
materials in school, can reel off a long list of dinosaur names.
‘Velociraptor’ was not notable among them before _Jurassic Park_, but it
is now. Those of us who still have an affection for the brontosaur often
need to be reminded that for silly reasons science has deemed that
henceforth that sinuous swamp-dwelling giant must be renamed the
apatosaur.*3 So attuned are we to the dinosaurs that the drama of their
sudden disappearance has captured our imaginations more than any other
bit of palaeontology. Even our _own_ origins attract less media
attention.

What about the sudden demise?

For a start, quite a few scientists have disputed that it ever _was_
sudden. The fossil record implicates the end of the Cretaceous period,
65 million years ago, as ‘D-Day’. This was also the start of the
so-called Tertiary period, or Age of Mammals, so the end of the
dinosaurs is usually called the K/T boundary – ‘K’ because Germans spell
Cretaceous with a K. But if we assume that the end of the Cretaceous was
‘when it happened’, then many species seemed to have anticipated their
end by vanishing from the fossil record five to ten million years
earlier. Did amorous dinosaurs, perhaps, say to each other ‘It’s just
not worth going through with this reproduction business, dear – we’re
all going to be wiped out in ten million years.’? No. So why the fuzzy
fade-out over millions of years? There are good statistical reasons why
we might not be able to locate fossils right up to the end, even if the
species concerned were still alive.

To set the remark in context: how many specimens of _Tyrannosaurus rex_,
the most famous dinosaur of all, do you think that the world’s
universities and museums have between them? Not copies, but originals,
dug from the rock by palaeontologists?

Hundreds … surely?

No. Until _Jurassic Park_, there were precisely _three_, and the times
when those particular animals lived have a spread of five million years.
19 more fossilized _T. rexes_ have been found since, probably more by
the time you read this, because _Jurassic Park_ gave dinosaurs a lot of
favourable publicity, making it possible to drum up enough money to go
out and find some more. With that rate of success, the chance of a
future race finding any fossil humanoids, over the whole period of our
and our ancestors’ existence, would be negligible. So if some species
had survived on Earth for a five million year period, it is entirely
likely that _no_ fossils of it will have been found – especially if it
lived on dry land, where fossils seldom form. This may suggest that the
fossil record isn’t much use, but quite the contrary applies. Every
fossil that we find is proof positive that the corresponding species did
actually exist; moreover, we can get a pretty accurate impression of the
grand flow of Life from an incomplete sample. One lizard fossil is
enough to establish the presence of lizards – even if we’ve found only
one species out of the ten thousand that were around.

Bearing this in mind, though, we can easily see that even if the death
of the dinosaurs was extremely sudden, then the fossil record might
easily give a different impression. Suppose that fossils of a given
species turn up randomly about every five million years. Sometimes
they’re like buses, and three come along at once – that is, within a
million years of each other. Other times, they’re also like buses: you
wait all day (ten million years) and don’t see any at all. During the
ten million year run-up to the K/T boundary, you find random fossils.
For some species, the last one you find is from 75 million years ago;
for others it’s from 70 million years ago. For a few, by chance, it’s
from 65 million years ago. So you _seem_ to see a gradual fade-out.

Unfortunately, you’d see much the same if there really _had_ been a
gradual fade-out. How can you tell the difference? You should look at
species whose fossils are far more common. If the demise was a sudden
one, those ought to show a sharper cut-off. Species that live wholly or
partially in water get fossilized more often, so the best way to time
the K/T mass extinction is to look at fossils of marine species. Wise
scientists therefore mostly ignore the dinosaur drama and fiddle around
with tiny snails and other undramatic species instead. When they do,
they find that ichthyosaurs also died out about then, as did the last of
the ammonites*4 and many other marine groups. So something sudden and
dramatic really did happen at the actual boundary, but there may well
have been a succession of other events just before it too.

What kind of drama? An important clue comes from deposits of iridium, a
rare metal in the Earth’s crust. Iridium is distinctly more common in
some meteorites, particularly those from the asteroid belt between Mars
and Jupiter. So if you find an unusually rich deposit of iridium on
Earth, then it may well have come from an impacting meteorite.

In 1979 the Nobel-winning physicist Luis Alvarez was musing along such
lines, and he and his geologist son Walter Alvarez discovered a layer of
clay that contains a hundred times as much iridium as normal. It was
laid down right at the K/T boundary, and it can be found over the whole
of the Earth’s land mass. The Alvarezes interpreted this discovery as a
strong hint that a meteorite impact caused the K/T extinction. The total
amount of iridium in the layer is estimated to be around 200,000 tons
(tonnes), which is about the amount you’d expect to find in a meteorite
6 miles (10 km) across. If a meteorite that size were to hit the Earth,
travelling at a typical 10 miles per second (16 kps), it would leave an
impact crater 40 miles (65 km) in diameter. The blast would have been
equivalent to thousands of hydrogen bombs, it would have thrown enormous
quantities of dust into the atmosphere, blanking out sunlight for years,
and if it happened to hit the ocean – a better than 50/50 chance – it
would cause huge tidal waves and a short-lived burst of superheated
steam. Plants would die, large plant-eating dinosaurs would run out of
food and die too, carnivorous dinosaurs would quickly follow. Insects
would on the whole fare a little better, as would insect-eaters.

Much evidence has accumulated that the Chicxulub crater, a buried rock
formation in the Yucatan region of southern Mexico, is the remnant of
this impact. Crystals of ‘shocked’ quartz were spread far and wide from
the impact site: the biggest ones are found near the crater, and smaller
ones are found half way round the world. In 1998 a piece of the actual
meteorite, a tenth of an inch (2.5 mm) across, was found in the north
Pacific Ocean by Frank Kyte. The fragment looks like part of an asteroid
– ruling out a possible alternative, a comet, which might also create a
similar crater. According to A. Shukolyukov and G.W. Lugmair, the
proportions of chromium isotopes in K/T sediment confirm that view. And
Andrew Smith and Charlotte Jeffery have found that mass die-backs of sea
urchins which occurred at the K/T boundary were worst in the regions
around central America, where we think the meteorite came down.

Although the evidence for an impact is strong, and has grown
considerably over the twenty years since the Alvarezes first advanced
their meteorite-strike theory, a strongly dissenting group of
palaeontologists has looked to terrestrial events, not dramatic
astronomical interference, to explain the K/T extinction. There was
certainly a rapid series of climatic changes at the end of the
Cretaceous, with very drastic changes of sea level as ice caps grew or
melted. There is also good evidence that some seas, perhaps all, lost
their oxygen-based ecology to become vast, stinking, black, anaerobic
sinks. The fossil evidence for this consists of black iron- and
sulphur-rich lines in sediments. The most dramatic terrestrial events
were undoubtedly associated with the vulcanism which resulted in the
so-called Deccan Traps, huge geological deposits of lava. The whole of
Asia seems to have been covered with volcanoes, and they produced enough
lava that it would have formed a layer 50 yards (45 m) thick if it had
been spread over the whole continent. Such extensive vulcanism would
have had enormous effects on the atmosphere: carbon dioxide emissions
that warmed the atmosphere by the greenhouse effect, sulphur compounds
resulting in terrible acid rain and freshwater pollution over the entire
planet, and tiny rock particles blocking sunlight and causing ‘nuclear
winters’ for decades at a time. Could the volcanoes that formed the
Deccan Traps have killed the dinosaurs, instead of a meteorite? Much
depends on the timing.

Our preferred theory, not because there is good independent evidence for
it but because it would explain so much, and because it has a moral, is
that the two causes are linked. The Chicxulub crater is very nearly
opposite the Deccan Traps, on the other side of the planet. Perhaps
volcanic activity in Asia began some millions of years before the K/T
boundary, causing occasional ecological crises for the larger animals
but nothing really final. Then the meteorite hit, causing Shockwaves
which passed right through the Earth and converged, focused as if by a
lens on just that fragile region of the planet’s crust. (A similar
effect happened on Mercury, where a gigantic impact crater called the
Caloris Basin is directly opposite ‘weird terrain’ caused by focused
Shockwaves.)

There would then have been a gigantic, synchronized burst of vulcanism –
on top of all the events of the collision, which would have been pretty
bad on their own. The combination could have polished off innumerable
animal species. In support of this idea, it should be said that another
geological deposit, the Siberian Traps, contains ten times as much lava
as the Deccan system, and it so happens that the Siberian Traps were
laid down at the time of another mass extinction, the great Permian
extinction, which we mentioned earlier. To pile on further evidence:
some geologists believe they have found another meteorite impact site in
modern Australia, which in Permian times was opposite to Siberia.

Is there any evidence for this suggestion? In 2000, Dallas Abbott and
Ann Isley analysed impact events to see whether they coincided with
volcanic ‘superplumes’, where large amounts of liquid rock well up from
the Earth’s mantle. A superplume is thought to be responsible for the
Hawaiian island chain, for instance, whose relics stretch across half
the Pacific Ocean. The likely explanation is that as the continents
drifted, the Pacific Plate moved, so that the superplume welled up in
what now seem to be different places. However, very recent observations
suggest that superplumes can move, too. The Deccan and Siberian Traps
were also probably caused by superplumes.

The result of the analysis is that impacts and superplumes occur
together far more often than they would if their association is due to
chance. That suggests that impacts can make superplumes bigger, or more
likely. (It’s hard to see how superplumes could make impacts more
likely, except by attracting invading aliens who are heavily into
vulcanism.) However, thanks to continental drift, it is not certain that
the Deccan Traps were in fact on the exact far side of the Earth from
Chicxulub at the time when the K/T meteorite hit. So we can’t yet be
sure that the meteorite really did trigger massive volcanic activity.

The moral of this tale is that we should not look for ‘the’ cause of the
dinosaur extinction. It is very rare for there to be just one cause of a
natural event, unlike scientific experiments which are specially set up
to reveal unique explanations.

On Discworld, not only does Death come for humans, scythe in hand, but
diminutive sub-Deaths come for other animals – for example the Death of
Rats in _Soul Music_, from whom a single, typical quote will suffice:
‘SQUEAK.’

The Death of Dinosaurs would have been something to see, with volcanoes
in one hand and an asteroid in the other, trailing a cloak of ice …

They _were_ wonderfully cinematic reptiles, weren’t they? Trust the
wizards to get it wrong.

There is another lesson to be learned from our emphasis on the demise of
the dinosaurs. Many other large and/or dramatic reptiles died out at the
end of the Cretaceous, notably the plesiosaurs (famous as a possible
‘explanation’ of the mythical Loch Ness monster), the ichthyosaurs
(enormous fish-shaped predators, reptilian whales and dolphins), the
pterosaurs (strange flying forms, of which the pterodactyls appear in
all the dinosaur films and are labelled, wrongly, dinosaurs), and
especially the mosasaurs …

Mosasaurs?

What were they? They were as dramatic as the dinosaurs, but they
_weren’t_ dinosaurs. They didn’t have as good a PR firm, though, because
few non-specialists have heard of them. They are popularly known as
fish-lizards – not as good a name as ‘terrible lizard’ – and it
describes them well. Some were nearly as fish-like as ichthyosaurs or
dolphins, some were rather crocodile-like, some were fifty-foot
predators like the great white shark, some were just a couple of feet
long and fed on baby ammonites and other common molluscs. They lasted a
good twenty million years, and for much of that time they seem to have
been the dominant marine predators. Yet most people meet the word in
stories about dinosaurs, assume that the mosasaur was a
not-very-interesting kind of dinosaur, and promptly forget them.

The other really strange thing about the K/T extinction – probably not a
‘thing’ in any meaningful sense, because in this context a thing would
be an equation of unknowns, whereas what we have is a diversity of
related puzzles – is which creatures _survived_ it. In the sea, the
ammonites all died out, as did the other shelled forms like belemnites –
unrolled ammonites – but the nautilus came through, as did the
cuttlefish, squids, and octopuses. Amazingly the crocodiles, which to
our eyes are about as dinosaur-like as you can get without actually
being one, survived the K/T event with little loss of diversity. And
those little dinosaurs called ‘birds’ came through pretty well
unscathed. (There’s a story here that we need to tell, quickly. Not so
long ago, the idea that birds are the living remnants of the dinosaurs
was new, controversial, and therefore a hot topic. Then it rapidly
turned into the prevailing wisdom. New fossil discoveries, however, have
shown conclusively that the major families of modern birds diverged, in
an evolutionary sense, long before the K/T event. So they aren’t
remnants of the dinosaurs that otherwise died – they got out early by
ceasing to be dinosaurs at all.)

Myths, not least _Jurassic Park_ itself, have suggested that dinosaurs
are not ‘really’ extinct at all. They survive, or so semi-fact
semi-fiction accounts lead us to believe, in _Lost World_ South American
valleys, on uninhabited islands, in the depths of Loch Ness, on other
planets, or more mystically as DNA preserved inside bloodsucking insects
trapped and encased in amber. Alas, almost certainly not. In particular,
‘ancient DNA’ reportedly extracted from insects fossilized in amber
comes from modern contaminants, not prehistoric organisms – at least if
the amber is more than a hundred thousand years old.

Significantly, no one has made a film bringing back dodos, moas, pygmy
elephants, or mosasaurs – only dinosaurs and Hitler are popular for the
reawakening myth. Both at the same time would be a good trick.

Dinosaurs are the ultimate icon for an evolutionary fact which we
generally ignore, and definitely find uncomfortable to think about:
_nearly all species that have ever existed are extinct_. As soon as we
realize that, we are forced to look at conservation of animal species in
new ways. Does it really matter that the lesser spotted pogo-bird is
down to its last hundred specimens, or that a hundred species of
tree-snail on a Pacific island have been eaten out of existence by
predators introduced by human activity? Some issues, like the
importation of Nile Perch into Lake Victoria in order to improve the
game fishing – which has resulted in the loss of many hundreds of
fascinating ‘cichlid’ fish species – are regretted even by the people
responsible, if only because the new lake ecosystem seems to be much
less productive. Everyone (except purveyors of bizarre ancient
‘medicines’, their even more foolish customers, and some unreconstructed
barbarians) seems to agree that the loss of magnificent creatures like
the great whales, elephants, rhinos and of course plants like ginkgoes
and sequoias would be a tragedy. Nevertheless, we persist in reducing
the diversity of species in ecosystems all around the planet, losing
many species of beetles and bacteria with hardly any regrets.

From the point of view of the majority of humans, there are ‘good’
species, unimportant species, and ‘bad’ species like smallpox and
mosquitoes, which we would clearly be better off without. Unless you
take an extreme view on the ‘rights’ of _all_ living creatures to a
continued existence, you find yourself having to pass judgment about
_which_ species should be conserved. And if you do take such an extreme
view, you’ve got a real problem trying to preserve the rights of
cheetahs _and_ those of their prey, such as gazelles. On the other hand,
if you take the task of passing judgment seriously, you can’t just
assume that, say, mosquitoes are bad and should be eliminated.
Ecosystems are dynamic, and the loss of a species in one place may cause
unexpected trouble elsewhere. You have to examine the unintended
consequences of your methods as well as the intended ones. When
worldwide efforts were made to eradicate mosquitoes, with the aim of
getting rid of malaria, the preferred route was mass sprayings of the
insecticide DDT. For a time this appeared to be working, but the result
in the medium term was to destroy all manner of beneficial insects and
other creatures, _and_ to produce resistant strains of mosquitoes which
if anything were worse than their predecessors. DDT is now banned
worldwide – which unfortunately doesn’t stop some people continuing to
use it.

In the past, the environment was a context for us – we evolved to suit
_it_. Now we’ve become a context for the environment – we change it to
suit _us_. We need to learn how to do that, but going back to some
imaginary golden age in which primitive humans allegedly lived in
harmony with nature isn’t the answer. It may not be politically correct
to say so, but most primitive humans did as much environmental damage as
their puny technology would allow. When humans came to the Americas from
Siberia, by way of Alaska, they slaughtered their way right down to the
tip of South America in a few thousand years, wiping out dozens of
species – giant tree sloths and mastodons (ancient elephants, like
mammoths but different), for example.

Some scientists have disagreed with this interpretation, claiming that
humans could never have made that great an impact. In 2001, to test that
claim, John Alroy simulated the effect of hunting in computer models of
41 North American species. It turned out that extinctions were virtually
unavoidable, especially for the larger animals. Even highly incompetent
hunters would have wiped them out. The simulations correctly
‘postdicted’ the fate of 32 of the 41 species, which adds credibility to
their conclusions. ‘Whodunnit?’ _New Scientist_ asked, offering its own
suggestion: ‘Mr Sapiens in the Americas with a large axe.’

There have been many similar examples of ecological devastation wrought
by ‘primitive’ humans. The Anasazi Indians in the southern part of
today’s USA cut down forests to build their cliff dwellings, creating
some of the most arid areas of the United States. The Maoris killed off
the moas. Modern humans may be even more destructive, but there are more
of us and technology can amplify our actions. Nevertheless, by the time
humans were able to articulate the term ‘natural environment’, there
wasn’t one. We had changed the face of continents, in ways big and
small.

To live in harmony with nature, we must know how to sing the same song
as nature. To do that, we must _understand_ nature. Good intentions
aren’t enough. Science might be – if we use it wisely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Readers of the Discworld book _The Last Continent_ will recall that,
by an amazing coincidence, beetles were something of a passion for the
God of Evolution.

*2 Rincewind would add some more:
    ‘Is it safe?’
    ‘Are you sure?’
    ‘Are you absolutely sure?’

*3 A worse case is what used to be called _Eohippus_, the Dawn Horse – a
beautiful, poetic name for the animal that formed the main stem of the
horse’s family tree. It is now called _Hyracotherium_, because somewhat
earlier somebody had given that name to a creature that they _thought_
was a relative of the hyrax, represented by a single fossil
shoulder-blade. Then it turned out that the bone was actually part of an
_Eohippus_. Unfortunately, whoever officially names a species _first_
must get priority, so now the Dawn Horse has a silly, unpoetic name that
commemorates a mistake.
    We lost _‘Brontosaurus’ –_ thunder-lizard – for a similar reason.
Thunder Lizard … what a marvellous name. ‘Apatosaurus’? It probably
means ‘Gravitationally challenged Lizard’.
    The moral of this tale is that when learned committees of elderly
scientists meet to discuss an exceptional issue they can always be
trusted to make a completely ridiculous decision. Quite unlike the
wizards of Unseen University, naturally.

*4 Lots of ammonite species died out 5–10 million years before the K/T
boundary, so it looks as if their extinction genuinely was gradual. But
whatever it was that happened at the K/T boundary finished them off.



THIRTY-NINE



BACKSLIDERS


[] GLOOM HAD SETTLED OVER THE WIZARDS. Some of them had even refused a
third helping at dinner.

‘It’s not as if they were _very_ advanced,’ said the Dean, in an attempt
to cheer everyone up. ‘They weren’t even using metal. And their writing
was frankly nothing but pictograms.’

‘Why doesn’t that sort of this thing happen here?’ said the Senior
Wrangler, merely toying with his trifle.

‘Well, there have been historical examples of mass extinction,’ said
Ponder.

‘Yes, but only as a result of argumentative wizardry. That’s quite
different. You don’t expect rocks to drop out of the sky’

‘You don’t expect them to stay _up_,’ said Ridcully. ‘In a _proper_
universe, the turtle snaps up most of them and the elephants get the
rest. Protects the world. Y’know, it seems to me that the most sensible
thing any intelligent lifeform could do on that little world would be to
get off it.’

‘Nowhere to go,’ said Ponder.

‘Nonsense! There’s a big moon. And there’s other balls floating around
this star.’

‘All too hot, too cold, or completely without atmosphere,’ said Ponder.

‘People would just have to make their own entertainment.
Anyway … there’s plenty of other suns, isn’t there?’

‘All far too far away. It would take … well, lifetimes to get there.’

‘Yes, but being extinct takes forever.’

Ponder sighed. ‘You’d set out not even knowing if there’s a world you
could live on, sir,’ he said.

‘Yes, but you’d be leavin’ one that you’d know you couldn’t,’ said
Ridcully calmly. ‘Not for any length of time, anyway.’

‘There are new lifeforms turning up, sir. I went and checked before
dinner.’

‘Tell that to the lizards,’ sighed the Senior Wrangler.

‘Any of the new ones any good?’ said Ridcully.

‘They’re … more fluffy, sir.’

‘Doin’ anything interesting?’

‘Eating leaves, mainly,’ said Ponder. ‘There are some much more
realistic trees now.’

‘Billions of years of history and we’ve got a better tree,’ sighed the
Senior Wrangler.

‘No, no, that’s got to be a step in the right direction,’ said Ridcully,
thoughtfully.

‘Oh? How so?’

‘You can make paper out of trees.’

The wizards stared into the omniscope.

‘Oh, how nice,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes. ‘Ice _again_. It’s a
long time since we’ve had a really big freeze.’

‘Well, look at the universe,’ said the Dean. ‘It’s mainly freezing cold
with small patches of boiling hot. The planet’s only doing what it
knows.’

‘You know, we’re certainly learning a lot from this project,’ said
Ridcully. ‘But it’s mainly that we should be grateful we’re living on _a
proper_ world.’

A few million years passed, as they do.

The Dean was on the beach and almost in tears. The other wizards
appeared nearby and wandered over to see what the fuss was about.

Rincewind was waist deep in water, apparently struggling with a
medium-sized dog.

‘That’s right,’ the Dean shouted. ‘Turn it round! Use a stick if you
have to!’

‘What the thunder is going on here?’ said Ricully.

‘Look at them!’ said the Dean, beside himself with rage. ‘Backsliders!
Caught them trying to return to the ocean!’

Ridcully glanced at one of the creatures, which was lying in the
shallows and chewing on a crab.

‘Didn’t catch them soon enough, did you,’ he said. ‘They’ve got webbed
paws.’

‘There’s been too much of this sort of thing lately!’ snapped the Dean.
He waved his finger at one of the creatures, who watched it carefully in
case it turned out to be a fish.

‘What would your ancestors say, my friend, if they saw you rushing into
the water just because times are a bit tough on land?’ he said.

‘Er … ‘ “Welcome back”?’ suggested Rincewind, trying to avoid the
snapping jaws.

“Long time no sea’?’ said the Senior Wrangler, cheerfully.

The creature begged, uncertainly.

‘Oh, go on, if you must,’ said the Dean. ‘Fish, fish, fish … you’ll turn
into a fish one of these days!’

‘Y’know, going back to the sea might not be a bad idea,’ said Ridcully,
as they strolled away along the beach. ‘Beaches are edges. You always
get interestin’ stuff on the edge. Look at those lizards we saw on the
islands. Their world was _all_ edges.’

‘Yes, but giving up the land to just go swimming around in the water? I
don’t call _that_ evolution.’

‘But if you go on land where you have to grow a decent brain and some
cunning and a bit of muscle in order to get anything done, and then you
go back to see the sea where the fish have never had to think about
anything very much, you could really, er, kick butt.’

‘_Do_ fish have –?’

‘All right, all right. I meant, in a manner of speaking. It was just a
thought, anyway’ Uncharacteristically, the Archchancellor frowned.

‘Back to the sea,’ he said. ‘Well, you can’t blame them.’



FORTY



MAMMALS ON THE MAKE


[] AFTER THE DINOSAURS CAME THE MAMMALS –

Not exactly.

Mammals constitute the most obvious class of animal alive on Earth
today. When we say ‘animal’ in ordinary conversation, we’re mostly
referring to mammals – cats, dogs, elephants, cows, mice, rabbits,
whatever. There are about 4,000 species of mammals, and they are
astonishingly diverse in shape, size, and behaviour. The largest mammal,
the blue whale, lives in the ocean and looks like a fish but isn’t; it
can weigh 150 tons (136,000 kg). The smallest mammals, various species
of shrew, live in holes in the ground and weigh about half an ounce (15
g). Roughly in the middle come humans which, paradoxically, have
specialized in being generalists. We are the most intelligent of the
mammals – sometimes.

The main distinguishing feature of mammals is that when they are young
their mother feeds them on milk, produced by special glands. Other
features that (nearly) all mammals have in common include their ears,
specifically the three tiny bones in the middle ear known as the anvil,
stirrup, and hammer, which send sound to the eardrum; hair (except on
adult whales); and the diaphragm, which separates the heart and lungs
from the rest of the internal organs. Virtually all mammals bear live
young: the exceptions are the duck-billed platypus and the echidna,
which lay eggs. Another curious feature is that mammalian red blood
cells lack a nucleus, whereas the red cells of all other vertebrates
possess a nucleus. All is this is evidence for a lengthy common
evolutionary history, subject to a few unusual events of which the most
significant was the early separation of Australia from the rest of
Gondwanaland, the southern half of the original supercontinent Pangaea.
Modern studies of mammalian DNA confirm that basically we are all one
big happy family.

When the dinosaurs died out, the mammals had a field day. Released from
dinosaurian thrall, they could occupy environmental niches that, only a
few million years before, would merely have presented a dinosaur with an
easy meal. It seems likely that the current diversity of mammals has a
lot to do with the suddenness with which they came into their kingdom –
for a while, almost any lifestyle was good enough to make a living.
However, it would be wrong to imagine that the mammals came into
existence to fill the gaps left by the vanished dinosaurs. Mammals had
coexisted with dinosaurs for at least 150 million years.

Harry Jerison has suggested that before the dinosaurs became really
dominant, many mammals were able to make their living in daylight, and
they evolved good eyesight to do so. As the dinosaurs became a bigger
and bigger problem, the mammals adopted a lower profile, mostly staying
hidden undergound during the day. If you’re a nocturnal animal, you rely
on a really good sense of hearing, so evolutionary pressures then
equipped the mammals with excellent ears – including those three little
bones. However, they retained their eyesight. So when the mammals again
dared to venture out into the daylight, they had good eyesight _and_
good hearing. The combination gave them a substantial advantage over
most remaining competitors.

Mammals evolved from an order of Triassic reptiles known as therapsids –
small, quick-moving hunters, mostly, though some were herbivores.
Compared to other reptiles, the therapsids were not especially
impressive, but their low-profile lifestyle led, in stages, to the
distinctive features of mammals. A diaphragm leads to more efficient
breathing, useful if you need to run fast. It also lets the young
animals continue to breathe while mother is feeding them her milk –
changes to animals ‘co-evolve’ as a whole suite of cooperative
attributes, not one at a time. Hair keeps you warm, and the warmer you
are, the faster all your bodily parts can move … and so on.

All this makes it difficult to decide when the mammal-like reptilian
ancestors of the therapsids became reptile-like mammals … but, as we’ve
said, humans have problems with becomings. There _was_ no such point:
instead, there was a mostly gradual, but occasionally bumpy,
transition.*1 The earliest fossils that can definitely be identified as
mammals come from 210 million years ago – creatures rejoicing in the
name ‘morganucodontids’. These were shrews, probably nocturnal, probably
insect-eaters, probably egg-layers. Darwin’s detractors objected to
having apes as their ancestors: heaven knows what they would have
thought about bug-eating egg-laying shrews. But there’s good news too,
if you’re of that turn of mind, because morganucodontids were brainy.
Not especially brainy for a shrew, but brainy compared to the reptiles
from which they evolved. Admittedly, this was largely because the
therapsids were as thick as two short … er, slices of tree-fern, but it
was a start.

How do we know that these early shrews were true mammals? One of the
bits of an animal that survives as a fossil far more often than any
other bit is the tooth. This is why palaeontologists use teeth, above
all else, to identify species of long-dead animals. There are plenty of
species for which the sole evidence is a tooth or two. Fortunately, you
can tell a lot about an animal by its teeth. On the whole, the bigger
the tooth is, the bigger the animal – an elephant’s tooth today is a lot
bigger than an entire mouse, so whatever animal it came from, it
couldn’t be mouse-sized. If you can find a jawbone, a whole array of
teeth, all the better. The shape of a tooth tells us a lot about what
the animal ate – grinding teeth are for plants, slicing teeth are for
meat. The arrangement of teeth in a jawbone tells us a lot more. The
morganucodontids made a major breakthrough in tooth design: teeth that
interlocked when the jaws were brought together, very effective at
cutting bits off meat or insects. They also paid a heavy price for their
teeth, one that we still pay today. Reptiles continually produce new
teeth: as old ones wear down, they get replaced. We produce just two set
of teeth: milk teeth as children and the real thing as adults. When our
adult teeth wear out, the only replacements available are artificial.
Blame the morganucodontids for this: if you want to take advantage of
precisely interlocking teeth, you have to maintain that precision, which
is impractical if you keep discarding teeth and growing new ones. So
they grew only two sets of teeth, and we have to do likewise.

From this we can deduce more. With only two sets of teeth, the
morganucodontids had to have some special trick for feeding their young,
something different from the reptiles with their continuous succession
of teeth. There isn’t room for a full set of adult teeth in a baby
shrew, and if teeth only come in two stages, you can’t add the odd one
every so often as the jaw grows bigger. The easy solution is to have
babies with no teeth at all, to start with. But what can they then eat?
Something nutritious and easily digested – milk. So we think that
milk-production evolved _before_ those high-precision interlocking
teeth. This is one reason why the morganucodontids are definitely placed
among the mammals.

Amazing what you can learn from a few teeth.

As they prospered and diversified, mammals evolved into two main types:
placental mammals, where the mother carries the young in her uterus, and
marsupials, where she carries them in a pouch. The marsupial that
springs most readily to mind is the kangaroo – possibly because it
springs most readily to almost anything, as for example in _The Last
Continent:_

‘And … what’s kangaroo for “You are needed for a quest of the utmost
importance”?’ said Rincewind, with guileful innocence.

‘You know, it’s funny you should ask that –’

The sandals barely moved. Rincewind rose from them like a man leaving
the starting blocks, and when he landed his feet were already making
running movements in the air.

After a while the kangaroo came alongside and accompanied him in a
series of easy bounds.

‘Why are you running away without even listening to what I have to say?’

I’ve had long experience of being me,’ panted Rincewind. ‘I _know_
what’s going to happen. I’m going to be dragged into things that
shouldn’t concern me. And you’re just a hallucination caused by rich
food on an empty stomach, so don’t try to stop me!’

‘Stop you?’ said the kangaroo. ‘When you’re heading in the right
direction?’

Australia alone has over a hundred species of marsupials – in fact most
native Australian mammals are marsupials. Another seventy or so are
found in the same general region – Tasmania, New Guinea, Timor,
Sulawesi, various smaller neighbouring islands. The rest are opossums
and some diminutive ratlike creatures, mainly in South America, though
ranging into Central America and for one species of opossum right up
into Canada.

It looks as though placental mammals generally win out against
marsupials, but the difference isn’t so great, and if there _aren’t_ any
competing placental mammals then marsupials do very well indeed. There
are even some close parallels between marsupials and placental – a good
example is the koala ‘bear’, which isn’t a true bear but looks like an
unusually cuddly one.

Most marsupials resemble ‘parallel’ placentals; a very curious case is
the thylacine, otherwise known as the Tasmanian tiger or Tasmanian wolf,
which is distinctly wolflike and has a striped rear. The thylacine was
officially declared extinct in 1936, but there are persistent reports of
occasional sightings, and suitable habitat still exists, so don’t be
surprised if the thylacine makes a comeback. National Park Ranger
Charlie Beasley reported watching one for two minutes in Tasmania in
1995. Similar sightings have been reported from Queensland’s Sunshine
Coast since 1993: if these sightings are genuine, they are probably of
thylacines whose recent ancestors escaped from zoos.

Why such a concentration of marsupials in Australia? The fossil record
makes it clear that marsupials originated in the Americas – most
probably North America, but that’s not so certain. Placentals arose in
what is now Asia, but was then linked to the other continents, so they
spread into Europe and the Americas. Before placental mammals really got
going in the Americas, marsupials migrated to Australia by way of
Antarctica, which in those days wasn’t the frozen wasteland it is now.
Australia was already moving away from South America, but hadn’t yet
gone all that far, and neither had Antarctica, so presumably the
migration involved ‘island hopping’, or taking advantage of land bridges
that temporarily rose from the ocean. By 65 million years ago – oddly
enough, the time that the dinosaurs died out, though that’s probably not
significant – Australia was well separated from the other continents,
Antarctica included, and Australian evolution was pretty much on its
own.

In the absence of serious competition, the marsupials thrived – just as
ground birds did in New Zealand, and for the same reason. But back in
the Americas and elsewhere, the superior placental mammals ousted the
marsupials _almost_ completely.

Until a few years ago it was assumed that the placentals never made it
to Australia at all – except for the _very_ late arrival of rodents and
bats from South East Asia about 10 million years ago, and subsequent
human introduction of species like dogs and rabbits. This theory was
demolished when Mike Archer found a single fossil tooth at a place
called Tingamarra. The tooth is from a placental mammal, and it is 55
million years old.

From the form of the tooth it is clear that this mammal had hooves.

Did a lot of placental mammals accompany the marsupials on their
migration Down Under? Or was it just a few? Either way, why did the
placentals die out and the marsupials thrive?

We have no idea.

Early marsupials probably lived in trees, to judge by their forepaws.
Early placentals probably lived on the ground, especially in burrows.
This difference in habitat allowed them to coexist for a long time.
Marsupial extinctions in the Americas were helped along by humans, who
found marsupials especially easy to kill.

In Australia, about 40,000–50,000 years ago, there were sudden
extinctions of _Genyornis_, the heaviest bird ever, and of the marsupial
equivalent of a lion. Again, evidence suggests that humans were
responsible, but the theory was hotly disputed because it was difficult
to date the events accurately. And, we suspect, because many people wish
to believe that all ‘primitive’ humans lived in exquisite harmony with
their environment. In 2001 Linda Ayliffe and Richard Roberts used two
accurate dating methods to find out when 45 species, found as fossils at
28 separate sites, disappeared. They _all_ went extinct 46,000 years ago
– just after the Aborigines, the first humans to reach Australia,
arrived.

Later arrivals were no better. When European settlers turned up, from
1815 onwards, they very nearly wiped out numerous marsupial species.

The evolutionary history of the placental mammals is controversial and
has not been mapped out in detail. An early branch of the family tree
was the sloths, anteaters, and armadillos – all animals that _look_
‘primitive’, even though there’s no earthly reason why they should,
because today’s sloths, anteaters, and armadillos have evolved just as
much as today’s everything else’s, having survived over the same period.

Mammals really got going during the early Tertiary period, about 66 to
57 million years ago. The climate then was mild, with deciduous forests
at both poles. It looks as if whatever killed the dinosaurs also changed
the climate, so that in particular it was much more rainy than it had
been during dinosaur times, and the rainfall was distributed more evenly
throughout the year, instead of all coming at once in a rainy season.
Tropical forests covered much of the planet, but they were mainly
inhabited by tiny tree-dwelling mammals. No big carnivores, not even big
plant-eaters … no leopards, no deer, no elephants. It took the mammals
several million years to evolve bigger bodies. Possibly the forests were
much denser than they had been when there were dinosaurs around, because
there weren’t any big animals to trample paths through them. If so,
there was less incentive for a big animal to evolve, because it wouldn’t
be able to move easily through the forest.

Once mammalian diversity started to get going, it exploded. There were
tigerlike animals and hippolike animals and giant weasels. By modern
standards, though, they were all a bit lumpish and cumbersome – nothing
as graceful as the slim-boned creatures that came later, such as
gazelles.

By 32 million years ago, Antarctica had reverted to being an icecap, and
the world was cooling. Mammalian evolution had settled down, and what
changes did occur were relatively small. There were bear-dogs and
giraffe-rhinoceroses and pigs the size of cows, llamas and camels and
sylphlike deer, and a rabbit with hooves. By 23 million years ago, the
climate was warming up again. Antarctica had separated from South
America, making big changes to the flow of ocean currents: now cold
water could go round and round the south pole indefinitely. The sea
level fell as water got locked up in ice at the poles; with more land
exposed and less ocean the climate became more extreme, because land
temperatures can change more quickly than sea ones. Falling sea levels
opened up land bridges between previously isolated continents; isolated
ecologies started to mix up as animals migrated along the new
connections. And round about this time, the evolution of some mammals
took an unusual turn. A U-turn.

They went back to the sea.

The land animals had originally come out of the sea – despite the
wizards’ best efforts to stop them. Now a few mammals decided they’d be
better off going back there. The wizards consider such a tactic to be a
spineless piece of backsliding, giving up and going back home. Even to
us it looks like a retrograde step, almost counter-evolutionary: if it
was such a good idea to come out of the oceans in the first place, how
could it be worthwhile to go back again? But the evolutionary game is
played against a changing background, and the oceans had changed. In
particular, the available _food_ had changed. So in the mid-Eocene we
find the earliest fossils of whales, such as the sixty-foot (20 m) long
_Basilosaurus_, which had a pair of tiny legs at the base of its long
tail. We’ve found fossils of its ancestors, and they really did look
like small dogs.

The Mediterranean sea was dammed, Africa came into contact with Europe,
and creatures previously confined to Africa spread into Europe, among
them elephants – and apes. Horses evolved, as did true cats (such as the
famous sabre-toothed tiger). By five million years ago, most of today’s
mammals were represented in recognizable form, and the climate had
become similar to today’s.

The scene was set for the evolution of humans.

Not that it had all been set up _in order_ to lead to us, you
appreciate. Our early ancestors just happened to be in a position to
take advantage of the world as it then was. They did so.

We can trace the ancestry of modern mammals – indeed all living
creatures that still exist today – by mapping out changes in their DNA.
The rate at which DNA _mutates –_ acquires random errors in its code –
leads to a ‘DNA clock’ that can be used to estimate the timing of past
events. When this technique was first discovered, it was widely hailed
as a precise and therefore uncontroversial way to resolve difficult
questions about which animals’ ancestors were more closely related to
what. It is now becoming clear that precision alone cannot provide
definitive answers to such questions.

The issue of interpretation – what does this result _mean_? _–_ can
still be controversial, even if the result itself can be made precise.
For example, S. Blair Hedges and Sudhir Kumar have applied the DNA clock
to 658 genes in 207 species of modern vertebrates: rhinos, elephants,
rabbits, and so on. Their results suggest that many of these lineages
were around at least 100 million years ago, coexisting with the
dinosaurs – though no doubt the early elephant and rhino ancestors were
rather small. The fossil record agrees that there were mammals then –
but not those. The molecular biologists claim that the fossil record
must be misleading; palaeontologists are convinced that the DNA clock
sometimes ticks faster and sometimes ticks slower. The debate continues
– but for what it’s worth, our money is on the palaeontologists.

One big surprise about mammal DNA is how much of it there is. You might
expect a sophisticated creature like a mammal to be ‘hard to build’ and
therefore require more DNA, just as the blueprint for a jumbo jet has to
be more complicated than that for a kite.

Not so.

Mammals have _less_ DNA – shorter genomes – than many apparently simpler
animals, for example frogs and newts.

There’s a good reason for this apparent paradox, and it illuminates the
difference between DNA and a blueprint. DNA is more like a recipe – and
a recipe that makes a lot of assumptions about what else you have in
your kitchen, so that none of that needs to be spelled out in the recipe
book. In essence, the kitchen for mammals has a really well controlled
oven, capable of ensuring nice, even cooking temperature, so a whole lot
of tricks about what to do if the temperature changes need not be
mentioned.*2 In the frog kitchen, on the other hand, the temperature
goes up and down depending on the time of day and the weather, so the
recipe has to deal with all contingencies, requiring more DNA code. By
‘kitchen’ here we mean the environment in which the embryonic animal has
to develop. For a frog, the kitchen is a pond. For a mammal, the kitchen
is mother.

Mammals evolved good temperature control – unlike the reptiles, they are
warm-blooded, but what matters is not so much being _warm_, as being
controllable. Frog DNA is full of genes for making lots of different
enzymes, together with instructions along the lines of ‘use enzyme A if
the temperature is lower than 6°C, use B if the temperature is between
7°C and 11°C, use C if the temperature is between 12°C and 15°C …’
Mammal DNA just says ‘Use enzyme X’, knowing that mother will take care
of temperature variations. Frog DNA is a rocket: mammal DNA is a space
elevator.

How did this change take place? Perhaps when mammals first evolved,
their DNA gained extra instructions, but after temperature control
evolved, a lot of the DNA became redundant, and it either got dumped or
got subverted to other uses. On the other hand, we have no idea what the
DNA of early mammals actually looked like – maybe it was _all_ shorter
in those days, maybe today’s frogs and newts have much more extensive
recipes than ancient ones. But on balance it seems more likely that
mammals just eliminated a lot of surplus instructions.

Modern technology uses the same trick. Because the machinery that makes
today’s consumer goods is extremely precise and accurate, those goods
can be _simpler_ than they were in the past. A soft drinks can, for
example, is little more than a piece of aluminium that has been formed
into a cylinder, with another flat bit on top to act as a lid, a weak
line for the tab to tear along, and a ring (or nowadays a lever)
attached to the tab. It replaces the bottle, which consisted of two or
more bits of moulded glass ‘welded’ together, a metal cap, and a slice
of cork. The simplicity of the can comes at a price: _very_ careful
control of the forming process.

There are many scientists who insist that an organism’s DNA determines
everything about it – even though it manifestly does not – and they
argue that the mother’s temperature-control system is included in _her_
DNA recipe. This may well be true, but even if it is, ‘this organism’s’
DNA has somehow migrated to another organism (mother, not her
offspring). As soon as two generations are involved in implementing the
genetic blueprint, a gap opens up into which things can be inserted that
are not genetic at all. We’ve already mentioned several, for example
prions in the reproduction of yeast.

Our mammalian ancestry may even be responsible for one of the more
bizarre modern myths, persistent tales of people being abducted by
aliens. Ufologists allege that one American in twenty now claims to have
undergone such an experience (but they would, wouldn’t they?). If true,
this figure would be a remarkable and not very happy comment either on
the critical faculties of that great nation or on the habits of an
unknown spacefaring species.

As it happens, the figure is bogus. It originates in a Roper poll of
1994, which revealed that one American in fifty had undergone such an
experience. But, as Joel Best pointed out in his book _Damned Lies and
Statistics_ in 2001, the number of people who claimed to have been
abducted by aliens was actually _zero_. The pollsters, worried that a
direct question about aliens would put people off, used five ‘symptoms’
of abduction instead. Anyone who scored sufficiently highly on those
symptoms was _deemed_ to have undergone an abduction experience.

The questions were things like ‘Have you ever woken up paralysed with
the sense of some strange presence in the room?’ This sensation is
typical of ‘sleep paralysis’, the most obvious rational explanation of
abduction experiences, which we describe shortly. So really the Roper
poll was a survey about sleep paralysis. Only the researchers thought
that it had anything to do with alien abduction. The subjects had more
sense.

Be that as it may, a lot of people are convinced that strange aliens,
usually with big black eyes and pear-shaped heads like the ones in
_Close Encounters of the Third Kind_, landed a UFO near them, loaded
them on board, and took them for a flight round the solar system while
carrying out weird experiments, often of a sexual nature, on them. After
which they were calmly returned to the very spot from which they had
been abducted, as if absolutely nothing had happened.

The first thing to say is that without doubt many of these experiences
are false. Ian once did a radio broadcast which included a woman who had
undergone a convincing experience of being abducted – except that she
knew she hadn’t really been, because her family told her she’d been
asleep beside the fire the whole time. Jack once met a woman who claimed
that the aliens abducted her and took away her baby. So he asked a
question that nobody else had thought to ask, the woman included: ‘Were
you pregnant?’

‘No.’

The point is that to the victims, the experience _felt_ real. Even
though logic told them it couldn’t have happened, they either didn’t
apply the logic, or they did but still remembered the experience
vividly. We deduce that the human mind sometimes has vivid memories that
do not correspond to real events. Of course we must also observe that
just because some alien abductions aren’t real, that doesn’t imply they
all aren’t. However, if we can find a sensible mechanism for otherwise
reasonable people _believing_ that they really were carted off in a UFO,
then the burden of proof shifts dramatically and evidence of abduction
stronger than sincere expressions of belief becomes necessary.

Reports of alien abductions are not new. Back in the Middle Ages,
however, they would have been either flights on witches’ broomsticks or
encounters with fabulous creatures like the succubus, a demon in a
woman’s body who allegedly had sex with men while they slept. The
witches of Discworld employ broomsticks for transport only. The sex bit
doesn’t appeal to them at all – except for Nanny Ogg, of course.

Folk tales of succubi and their like can be found worldwide. In
Newfoundland people tell of an ancient hag sitting on their chests at
night, and in Vietnam they speak of the ‘grey ghost’. What seems to be
going on is some common mental pattern, overlaid with cultural
influences. That’s why abductions by witches riding broomsticks have
gone out of vogue, but abductions by aliens riding UFOs are
flavour-of-the-decade.

Susan Blackmore thinks that all of these experiences are, and were,
caused by sleep paralysis. This is a feature of the mind that prevents
sleeping people from moving their limbs as they would if they were
acting out their dreams. Such a ‘mental switch’ is important for any
animal that dreams: you don’t really want to go sleepwalking out of your
cosy burrow and straight down a predator’s throat. Plenty of mammals
dream – most of us have seen a cat or dog asleep with its legs
twitching, and the evidence from recordings of the brain’s electrical
activity is that the animals are engaged in something that closely
resembles the brain activity of a dreaming human. We can’t be sure
whether cats have visual dreams like we do, but sleep and dreaming take
place in primitive parts of the brain, so they probably go back a long
way in our evolutionary history. At any rate, if the sleep paralysis
system malfunctions, people who are partially awake may undergo sleep
paralysis. Experiments show that in such cases they typically get a
strong impression that ‘somebody is there’.

This feature of the human mind may go back to the time, just after the
meteorite hit, when the nocturnal mammals suddenly awoke in a world
without dinosaurs. Their senses of hearing and sight, previously
separate from each other because they had evolved at very different
periods and in very different circumstances, would have become linked
together. When their ears heard something strange, their visual sense
would kick in and make them feel that they could _see_ what was causing
it. We inherited this tendency, but we interpret it in terms of the
current culture: bogeymen, witches, maybe even dragons a few centuries
ago, aliens with big black eyes today. The sexual link is
straightforward, too: dreams about sex are very common anyway.

Oh, yes, one more thing: since we’ve all watched _Close Encounters_, we
know exactly what an alien must look like … just as everyone used to
know that witches soared through the air on a broomstick. So our visual
system knows what shape it should give to whatever it _sees_ when we get
that funny feeling that something is haunting us. And flying saucers
have come on nicely, too, from being the rivet-studded things that were
all the rage in galactic circles in the early Fifties.

Stories of people seeing ghosts may well have the same explanation.
You’ve read the tales, you know what a ghost ought to look like (maybe
you watched _Ghostbusters_ or a Stephen King movie), and you’re trying
to sit up all night in the Haunted House. You’re thinking about ghosts,
about headless horsemen and Elizabethan ladies who walk through walls
and go transparent – and then you start to doze off because it’s 2 am
and you’ve been up all night … The sleep paralysis circuit glitches …
_Aaaaagh!_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 OK, if you _insist …_ Our favoured line here is ‘hairy’. But hairs
don’t fossilize, so how can you tell? If you have hair, you need
grooming. All over the body. This requires flexible backbones, and you
can tell how flexible they are from the shape of the vertebrae. Which do
fossilize. (Sometimes scientists can be _very_ ingenious.) Evolution
crossed _that_ line about 230 million years ago.

*2 How many recipe books do you have that tell you to boil water, but
_never_ specify the altitude at which this should be done? It matters:
higher up, water boils at lower temperatures.



FORTY-ONE



DON’T PLAY GOD


[] THE ARCHCHANCELLOR WAS RATHER QUIET OVER TEA.

Eventually he said, ‘Can we _stop_ this project, Ponder?’

‘Er … are you _sure_, sir?’

‘Well, what is it achieving? I mean, _really_? Y’know, I thought, all
you had to do is get a world working, and before you could say
“creation” there’d be some creature who’d stand up, getting a grip on
its surroundings, gaze with a certain amount of intelligence and awe at
the infinite sky and say –’

‘– that thing’s getting bigger, I wonder if it’s going to hit us,’ said
Rincewind.

‘Rincewind, that remark was extremely cynical and accurate.’

‘Sorry, Archchancellor.’

Ponder’s lips were moving quietly as he worked things out.

‘We _could_ start running it down, yes. The thaumic reactor hasn’t been
putting so much into it in the last week. We’ve nearly used up the
fuel.’

‘Really?’

‘The squash court will have a rather high thaumic index, sir, so whoever
goes in to pull the switch will suffer a certain amount of –’

There was the sound of something spinning. The wizards looked at
Rincewind’s chair, which finally fell over on to the flagstones. Of its
former occupant there was no sign, although there was the distant sound
of a slamming door.

The Dean sniffed.

‘Strange behaviour,’ he said.

‘I suggest we give it one more day of our time,’ said Ridcully. ‘I was
hoping we might create a world, gentlemen, but instead it’s clear to me
that any life in this universe has to get used to living in … in some
kind of huge celestial snow globe. Fire and ice, ice and fire.
Gentlemen, round worlds are intrinsically flawed. If there’s any hidden
gods on ours, they’re pretty damn well hidden.’

‘The Omnians say “Don’t play God. He always wins”,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘I dare say,’ said Ridcully. ‘So … one more day, gentlemen? And then we
can get on with something sensible.’

The red sun rose quickly over the parched veldt. The apes stirred in
their cave, which was little more than a rocky overhang, and saw the big
black rectangle looming over them.

The Dean tapped it with his pointer.

‘_Do_ try to pay attention today, will you?’ He turned and chalked
rapidly across the blackboard. ‘Here we have R … O … C … K, rock. Can
anyone tell me what you do with it? Anyone? Anyone? Look, stop doing
that, will you?’ He tried to hit an ape with his virtual pointer, and
then flung it away in disgust. It vanished.

‘Filthy little devils,’ he muttered.

‘Not getting anywhere, Dean?’ said Ridcully, appearing beside him.

‘_No_, Archchancellor. I’ve _tried_ to explain to them that they’ve
probably got just a few million years, and that’s pretty hard to do in
sign language, let me tell you. But the only word they know is S-E-X,
and they don’t waste time _spelling_ it, oh no! For this I skipped
breakfast?’

‘Never mind. Let’s see how the Senior Wrangler’s getting on.’

‘They’re just bad copies of humans, if you ask me –’

The wizards vanished.

One of the apes knuckled over to the blackboard, and watched it
disappear from view as HEX completed the spell.

He hadn’t the faintest idea what had been happening, but he _had_ been
impressed by the stick that had been waved about. That seemed to have
gone now. That didn’t worry the ape, which knew about things vanishing –
often, these days, a member of the clan would vanish overnight, with a
lot of snarling in the shadows.

There was probably something you could do with a stick, he thought.
Hopefully, it might involve sex.

He poked around in the debris and found not a stick but a dried-up
thighbone, which had a sufficiently stick-like shape.

He rattled it on the ground a few times. It didn’t do anything much.
Then he reluctantly decided it would probably be impossible to mate with
at the moment, and hurled it high into the air.

It rose, turning over and over.

When it fell, it knocked him unconscious.

The Senior Wrangler was sitting under a virtually-there beach umbrella
when the other wizards arrived. He looked as downcast as the Dean.

A group of apes was playing in the surf.

‘Worse than the lizards,’ he said. ‘_They_ had some style, at least.
When this lot pick up anything, they try to see if they can eat it.
What’s the point of that?’

‘Well, I suppose they can find out if it’s edible,’ said Ridcully.

‘But they just _mess about_,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘Oh, no … here
we go again …’

There was a raucous shrieking as the tribe rushed out of the waves and
swung up into the nearby mangrove trees. A shadow sped beyond the surf
and headed back into the blue water, to an unregarded chorus of simian
catcalls and mangrove seeds.

‘Oh yes, and they like throwing things,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Seafood is good for the brain, my granny always said,’ said Ridcully.

‘This lot couldn’t eat too much of it, then. Yell, throw things, and
prod stuff to see what it does, that’s the extent of their capabilities.
Oh, _why_ didn’t we discover the lizards earlier? _They_ had _class_.’

‘Wouldn’t have stopped the snowball,’ said Ridcully.

‘No. You were right, Archchancellor. It’s so _pointless_.’

The three wizards stood looking gloomily out to sea. In the middle
distance, dolphins stitched their way across the water.

‘Should be coming up to coffee time,’ said the Dean, to break the
silence.

‘Good thinking, that man.’

Rincewind was wandering in the next bay, staring at the cliffs. Oh,
things were killed off on the Discworld, but … well … _sensibly_. There
were floods, fires and, of course, heroes. There was nothing like a hero
for a species whose number was up. But at least some actual thought went
into it.

The cliff was a series of horizontal lines. They represented ancient
surfaces, some of which Rincewind had virtually walked on. And in many
of them were the bones of ancient creatures, turned into stone by a
process Rincewind did not understand and rather distrusted. Life had
some how come out of the rocks of this world, and here you could see it
going back. There were whole layers of rock made out of life, millions
of years of little skeletons. Faced with a natural wonder on that scale,
you could only be overawed by the sheer chasms of time or else try to
find someone to complain to.

A few rocks fell out, halfway up the cliff. A couple of small legs waved
uncertainly in the strata, and then the Luggage tumbled out, slid down
the pile of debris at the foot of the cliff, and landed on its lid.

Rincewind watched it struggle for a while, sighed, and pushed it the
right way up. At least some things didn’t change.



FORTY-TWO



ANTHILL INSIDE


[] YOU KNOW WHAT’S GOING TO HAPPEN TO THE APES they’re going to turn
into _us_* But why do we have them playing in the surf? Because it’s
fun? Yes … but more significantly, because the seashore is central to
one of the two main theories about how our ape ancestors acquired big
brains. The other, more orthodox theory places the evolution of the big
brain out on the African savannahs, and we _know_ that some of our
ancestors lived on the savannahs because we’ve found fossils.
Unfortunately, seashores aren’t a good place to leave fossils. You often
_find_ them there, but that’s because they were deposited when the area
wasn’t a seashore at all, and the sea has subsequently eroded the rocks
to expose the fossils. In the absence of direct evidence of this kind,
the surfing apes theory has to take second place … but it does explain
our brains rather neatly, whereas the savannah theory rather sidesteps
this issue.

Our closest living relatives are two species of chimpanzee: the standard
boisterous ‘zoo’ chimp _Pan troglodytes_ and its more slender cousin the
bonobo (or pygmy) chimp _Pan paniscus_. Bonobos live in very
inaccessible parts of Zaire, and weren’t recognized as a separate
species of chimpanzee until 1929. We can to some extent unravel the past
evolutionary history of the great apes by comparing their DNA sequences.
Human DNA differs from the DNA of either chimpanzee by a mere 1.6% –
that is, we have 98.4% of our DNA sequences in common with theirs. (It
is interesting to speculate on what the Victorians would have made of
this.) The two species of chimpanzee have DNA that differs by only 0.7%.
Gorillas differ from us, and from both chimps, by 2.3%. For orangutans,
the difference from us is 3.6%.

These differences may seem small, but you can pack an awful lot into a
small percentage of an ape genome. A big chunk of what we have in common
must surely consist of ‘subroutines’ that organize basic features of
vertebrate and mammalian architecture, tell us how to be an ape, and
tell us how to deal with things we’ve all got – like hair, fingers,
internal organs, blood … The mistake is to imagine that everything that
makes us human and not a chimpanzee must live in that other 1.6% of
‘special’ DNA – but DNA doesn’t work that way. For example, some of the
genes in that 1.6% of the genome may organize the other 98.4% in a
completely new way. If you look at the computer code for a wordprocessor
and a spreadsheet, you’ll find they have an awful lot in common –
routines for reading the keyboard, printing to the screen, searching for
a given text string, changing fonts to italic, responding to a click on
the mouse … but this doesn’t mean that the _only_ distinction between a
spreadsheet and a wordprocessor lies in the relatively few routines that
are different.

Since evolution involves changes to DNA, we can use the sizes of those
differences to estimate when various ape species diverged from each
other. This method was introduced by Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist in
1973, and while it needs to be interpreted with caution, it works well
here.

A convenient unit of time for such discussions is the ‘Grandfather’,
which we define to be 50 years. It’s a good human length, being about
the age difference between the child and the grandparent who says ‘When
_I_ was young …’ and passes on a sense of history. In these terms,
Christ lived 40 Grandfathers ago, and the Babylonians go back about 100
Grandfathers. That’s not a lot of grandads, passing down through
recorded human history recollections like ‘… we never had any of this
modern cuneiform when _I_ was a lad …’ and ‘… bronze was good enough for
me’. Human time is not very deep. We’ve just been good at packing a lot
into it.

DNA studies indicate that the two chimp species diverged about 60,000
Grandfathers ago – three million years. Humans and chimps diverged
80,000 Grandfathers earlier – so a chain of only 140,000 grandfathers
unites you and your chimplike ancestor. Who was also, we hasten to point
out, a modern chimpanzee’s manlike ancestor. Humans and gorillas
diverged 200,000 Grandfathers ago; humans and orangutans diverged
300,000 Grandfathers ago. So among these animals, we are most closely
related to a chimpanzee, and least closely related to the orangutan.
This conclusion is borne out by physical appearance and habits, too.
Bonobos really _like_ sex.

If those times seem rather short for all the necessary evolutionary
changes, bear two things in mind. First, that they were estimated by
using a _realistic_ rate for DNA mutations; second, that according to
Nilsson and Pelger an entire _eye_ can evolve in a mere 8,000
Grandfathers – and lots of different changes can, should, and _did_
evolve in parallel.

The most striking feature of humans is the size of our brains: bigger,
in comparison to body weight, than any other animal. Strikingly bigger.
A detailed story of what makes us human must be extraordinarily
complicated, but it’s clear that big, powerful brains were the main
invention that made it all possible. So we now have two obvious
questions to think about: ‘Why did we evolve big brains?’ and ‘How did
we evolve big brains?’

The standard theory addresses the ‘why’. It maintains that we evolved
out on the savannahs, surrounded by lots of big predators – lions,
leopards, hyenas – and without much cover. We had to become smart in
order to survive. Rincewind would instantly see one flaw in this theory:
‘If we were so smart, why did we _stay_ on the savannahs, surrounded by
lots of big predators?’ But, as we’ve said, it fits the fossil evidence.
The unorthodox theory addresses the ‘how’. Big brains need lots of brain
cells, and brain cells need lots of chemicals known as ‘essential fatty
acids’. We have to get these from our food – we can’t build them
ourselves from anything simpler – and they’re in short supply out on the
savannahs. However, as Michael Crawford and David Marsh pointed out in
1991, they are abundant in seafood.

Nine years earlier Elaine Morgan had developed Alister Hardy’s theory of
the ‘aquatic ape’: we evolved not on the savannahs, but on the seashore.
The theory fits a number of human peculiarities: we like water (newborn
babies can swim), we have a funny pattern of hair on our bodies, and we
walk upright. Go to any Mediterranean resort and you see at once that an
awful lot of naked apes think that the seashore is _the_ place to hang
out.

Whether the Aquatic Ape story of human origins will displace the
‘savannah’ theory remains to be seen, but the savannah story is in
trouble from a very different direction. Phillip Tobias has challenged
not the fossil record, but its interpretation. He asked a question so
simple that it seems to have eluded most other workers in the field.
Yes, many areas where fossils of apelike human ancestors have been found
are savannahs _now_. But were they savannahs _then_? When our distant
great-great- … grandparents got themselves fossilised, 2.7 million years
ago, could the vegetation have been different from what it is today?

Given that the whole point is that the animals definitely were different
– our ancestors, not us – it is a little surprising that this question
seems not to have occurred to anyone earlier. Unfortunately, science is
often like that. People specialise. Experts on prehistoric apes may not
be very interested in botany.

It turns out that Sterkfontein, one of the places where fossil apes
supporting the savannah theory are found, wasn’t a savannah back then at
all. Fossil pollen suggested it was a wooded area, and fossilised lianas
clinched it. Other areas of South Africa and Ethiopia (where the famous
‘Lucy’ was found) show that these areas were forests when the apes lived
there. The ‘killer ape of the savannahs,’ says Tobias, is nonsense.

And there may be some new evidence in favour of watery origins for
humanity, though not necessarily the full-blooded Aquatic Ape. A common
feature of fossil hominid sites is that they are all near water. This
makes sense, because _Homo sapiens_ needs to drink a lot, and sweats and
urinates a lot. If we had evolved on savannahs, we would have annoyed
the hell out of all the other animals there with our incessant peeing.
And it looks like we were excellent swimmers at least a million years
ago. There is evidence of human migrations to islands such as Flores,
separated from Bali by a deep underwater valley. Even allowing for the
lower sea-levels in the past, the new arrivals must have swum or rafted
or otherwise made their way across at least 20 miles of open water.

We may not have been the Aquatic Ape, but we surely were the Damp Forest
Ape. Just as bonobos, one of our two closest living relatives, are
today.

Brains are fascinating. They are the physical vehicle for minds, which
are even more interesting. Minds are (or, at least, give their owners
the vivid impression that they are) conscious, and they have (or, at
least, give their owners the vivid impression that they have) free will.
Minds operate in a world of ‘qualia’ – vivid sense impressions like
_red, hot, sexy_. Qualia aren’t abstractions: they are ‘feelings’. We
all know what it’s like to experience them. Science has no idea what
makes them the way they are.

Brains, though … we can make progress on brains. On one level, brains
are a kind of computational device. Their most obvious physical
components are nerve cells, arranged in complicated networks.
Mathematicians have studied such networks, and they find that what
networks do is to carry out interesting processes. Give them an input
and they will produce an output. Allow their interconnections to evolve
by selecting for specific associations of input and output – such as
responding to an image of a banana but not to an image of a dead rat –
and pretty soon you’ve got a really effective banana-detector.

What makes the human brain unique, as far as we can tell, is that it has
become recursive. As well as detecting a banana, it can think _about_
detecting a banana. It can think thoughts about its own thought
processes. It is a pattern-recognition device that has turned its
attention to its own patterns. This ability is what lies behind human
intelligence. It probably underpins consciousness, too: one of the
patterns that the pattern-recognition device has learned to recognize is
_itself_. It has become ‘self-aware’.

As a result, brains operate on at least two levels. On a reductionist
level they are networks of nerve cells sending each other incredibly
complex but ultimately meaningless messages – like ants scurrying around
inside an anthill. On another level, they are an integrated self – the
anthill as a personality in its own right. Douglas Hofstadter’s _Gödel_,
_Escher_, _Bach_ includes a sequence where Aunt Hillary (who is an
anthill – use the American pronunciation of ‘Aunt’) has a meeting with
Dr Anteater. When Dr Anteater arrives, the ants go into a panic – they
change their actions. To Aunt Hillary, who operates on the emergent
level, this change represents the _knowledge_ that Dr Anteater has
arrived. She is entirely happy to watch Dr Anteater consuming a meal of
‘her’ ants. Ants are a virtually inexhaustible resource – she can always
breed new ones to take the place of the ones that got eaten.

The link between the ants and Hillary’s ‘anthilligence’ is emergent –
felicitously, it operates across what we have termed ‘Ant Country’. The
same action means one thing for the ants, but something quite different,
and _transcendent_, for Hillary. Replace Hillary by yourself – your
_self_, the ‘you’ that you feel is experiencing your thoughts – and ants
by brain cells, and you’re contemplating the connection between mind and
brain.

Now _you’ve_ gone self-referential.

Neural networks are what the brain is built from, but there’s more to
evolving a brain than just assembling big neural nets. Brains operate in
terms of high-level ‘modules’ – a module for running, another for
recognizing danger, another for putting the whole animal on the alert,
and so on. Each such module is an emergent feature of a complex neural
network, and it wasn’t designed: it evolved. Millions of years of
evolution _trained_ those modules to respond instantly and exquisitely.

The modules aren’t separate. They share nerve cells, they overlap,
they’re not necessarily a well-defined _region_ in the brain – any more
than ‘Vodafone’ is a well-defined _region_ of the telephone network.
According to Daniel Dennett, they are like a collection of demons,
operating by ‘pandemonium’. They all shout, and at any given instant,
whoever shouts loudest wins (quite a lot of the Internet has borrowed
this design).

Modern humanity has built a culture around those modules – an idea that
we’ll explore later – and in so doing has subverted them to new
purposes. The module for spotting lions has become, in part, a module
for reading Discworld books. The module for sensing bodily movement has,
in part, turned into one for doing certain kinds of mathematics – those
parts of mechanics where a physical ‘feel’ for the problem may well be
precisely that. Our culture has rebuilt our minds, and our minds have in
turn rebuilt our culture, over and over again, in each generation.

Such a radical restructuring must have simpler precursors. A key step
towards the human mind was the invention of the nest. Before there were
nests, baby organisms could carry out only very limited experiments in
behaviour. If every time you try out a new game you get gobbled up by a
python, novelty will not carry a premium. In the comfort and relative
safety of the nest, however, the _error_ part of trial-and-error is no
longer automatically fatal. Nests let you play, and play lets you
explore the phase space of possible behaviours and find new, sometimes
useful, strategies. Further along the same path lies the family, the
pack, and the tribe, with certain shared behaviours and mutual
protection. Meerkats, a kind of mongoose, have an intricate tribal
structure, and take turns doing the dangerous (because more exposed) job
of Lookout.

Humans have turned such tactics into a global strategy: adults devote
huge amounts of time, energy, food, and money to the task of bringing up
their children. Intelligence is both a consequence of this brilliantly
successful strategy, and a cause.

The Dean would be well advised to take this link between family life and
intelligence into account. He’s trying to educate the apes by the direct
route (R … O … C … K …) but all they have on their tiny minds is S-E-X.
Many school teachers will sympathize … but if only he realized that
sexual bonding is a major factor in humanoid family life, and family
life engenders intelligence …

Bonobos are the perfect model for the Dean’s sex-mad apes. They are
promiscuous in the extreme, making use of sex where we would be content
with a smile and a wave or a gentlemanly handshake. Female bonobos have
serial sex with dozens of males, or with females, almost in passing; the
males do likewise. Adults engage in sexual activities with children,
too. It all seems very casual. It helps bond the tribe. For them it
seems to work fine.

Ordinary chimps are promiscuous by the standards of orthodox human
morality, though probably no more than many humans are. Pairs of males
and females will disappear together for a few days, and then form new
partnerships … Humans generally mate for life (a term meaning ‘until we
get fed up’) and one reason is the enormous amount of effort that a
human couple must put into raising the kids. Sex helps to cement the
parental relationship, encouraging each parent to trust the other. This
may be why, even in an allegedly sexually relaxed age, most people see
extramarital flings as a form of betrayal – and why, despite that, the
erring partner is more often than not allowed back into the family fold.

It’s not surprising that we have sex on the brain: our brains have been
moulded by sex. The Dean should let sex take its course, for
intelligence will surely follow … You just have to think on the scale of
Deep Time. There’s no rush.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* To find out how, see _The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_.



FORTY-THREE



OOK: A SPACE ODYSSEY


[] RINCEWIND SAT IN A CORNER of the High Energy Magic building. It was
deserted at the moment. News had got around that the project was really
being ended this time, and wizards had drifted away to lunch.

The round world spun in its protective globe and also, by means of a
physics only a wizard might understand, in a space that was infinite
only on the inside.

‘Poor old bloody place,’ he said, to the world in general. ‘Never really
stood a chance, did you.’

‘Ook.’

It was a small grunt, from the other side of the huge room. Rincewind
wandered over, and found the Librarian peering into the omniscope.

‘Oh, they’ve got sticks now,’ said Rincewind, looking down at a ragged
party of apes. ‘And a lot of good it’ll do them, too.’

‘Ook?’

‘The lizards had sharp shells on the end of theirs, and are they around
today? I don’t think so. And the crabs were doing well. Even the blobs
were trying to make a go of things. There were some bear sort of things
that looked promising. Doesn’t matter. One winter the snow doesn’t melt,
next thing there’s a two-mile wall of ice laminating you to the bedrock.
Or there’s a funny light in the sky and then you’re trying to breathe
burning water.’ He shook his head wearily. ‘Nice place, though. Nice
colours. Particularly good horizons, once you get used to them. Lots of
dullness, punctuated by short periods of death.’

‘Ook?’ said the Librarian.

‘Well, maybe they do look a bit like you,’ said Rincewind. ‘Most of the
lizards looked a bit like the Bursar. Maybe it’s just coincidence.
Everything has to look like something, after all. As above, so below.’

In the omniscope, some distance behind the ape clan, something lean and
powerful was tracking them in the long grass.

‘Eeek!’

The Librarian thumped on the desk.

‘Sorry. It’s not up to me. “Live and let live”, you know that’s always
been _my_ motto. Well, “let _me_ live”, really, but that’s almost the
same thing.’

Hands waving wildly over his head, which only happened when he was
really in a hurry, the Librarian ran out of the room.

Rincewind caught him up as he entered the main building, and then
trotted along after him as the ape wound his way through the
university’s less salubrious regions, the realm of broom cupboards, old
storerooms and the studies of the very much lesser members of staff.
Even using all the shortcuts, it still took quite a while to reach the
office of the Egregious Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography, with
the name ‘Rincewind’ written on it in chalk.

The orangutan flung the door back and knuckled purposefully towards the
big stack of boxes.

‘Er … that’s the rock collection,’ said Rincewind. ‘Er … I was filing
them … er … they belong to the University, I really don’t think you
should be throwing them out like that –’

‘Ook!’

The Librarian straightened up, bearing aloft a couple of large rocks
that Rincewind recognized as noduley, sharp, brittle, unfriendly rocks.

‘Er … why are you …’ Rincewind began.

The Librarian walked across to the Luggage and gave it a kick. The lid
opened obediently, and the rocks were thrown inside. The ape went back
for more flints.

‘Er …’ said Rincewind, but left it at that. This did not seem to be a
time to raise objections.

He had to run after the Librarian and the Luggage all the way back to
the High Energy Magic Building. By the time he got there, the ape was
pounding heavily on one of HEX’S keyboards.

Rincewind tried again.

‘Er … should you be …’

He was interrupted by the rattle of the machine’s writing device.

It spelled out: +++ New Suit Parameters Accepted +++

On the far side of the room, where the skeletal virtually-there suits
flicked on the verge of non-existence, one changed shape. The shoulders
widened. The arms grew longer. The legs shortened –

+++ Adjustment Complete. On You It Looks Good +++

Rincewind backed away as the Librarian, cradling a large flint nodule in
each arm, stepped in the magic circle and began to shimmer as the suit
enclosed him. The new parameters definitely made it look more _solid …_

‘You’re not going to _interfere_, are you?’ said Rincewind.

‘Ook?’

‘No, no, that’s fine, fine, no problem at all,’ said Rincewind. It is
never wise to argue with an ape holding a rock. ‘It’s about time someone
did.’

The Librarian flickered, and became a ghost in the air.

Rincewind stood alone in the empty room, whistling nervously. In its
alcove, HEX began to sparkle, as it always did when it was trying to
allow a wizard to interact with the project.

‘Blast!’ said Rincewind at last, striding over to the suits. ‘He’s
_bound_ to muck it up …’

Lightning fried the evening sky, turning it purple and pink.

Above the little hollow in the cliff, where the tribe clustered and
flinched, a sleek black shadow moved like an extension of the night. It
wasn’t hurrying. Dinner wasn’t going anywhere. When the lightning faded
its eyes gleamed for a while.

Something grabbed its tail. It spun around, snarling, and a fist
extended on the end of a very long arm hit it right between the eyes,
lifting it off the ledge.

It landed heavily on the ground, jerked for a moment, and lay still.

The ape horde scattered around the rocks, screaming, and then stopped to
look back.

The big cat didn’t move.

Another bolt of lighting hit the ground nearby, and a dead tree exploded
into flame. Against the violet corona of the storm, red in the light of
the burning tree, a huge figure stood holding a large stone in the crook
of each arm.

As Rincewind said, it was a vision you were unlikely to forget.

Rincewind couldn’t eat here. Well, not in the usual, definitive way. He
thought he could probably manipulate lumps of food into his mouth, but
since the food would technically remain in a different universe to his,
he was afraid it might drop straight through him, to general
embarrassment and the puzzlement of spectators.

Besides, he didn’t feel like flame-grilled leopard.

The Librarian had been working furiously. He’d turned the area into a
boot camp for people who were barely upright and wouldn’t know what to
do with a boot anyway. The apemen had taken to fire quite quickly, after
a few misdirected attempts to eat it or have sex with it, and several of
them had progressed to setting fire to themselves.

They’d learned cookery, too, initially on one another.

Rincewind sighed. He’d seen species come, and he’d seen them go, and
this one could only have been put on the world for entertainment value.
They had the same approach to life as clowns, with the same touch of
cheerful viciousness.

The Librarian had progressed to lessons in flint-knapping, using the
flints brought in via the Luggage. They’d certainly picked up the idea
of hitting rocks against other rocks, or anything else in range. Sharp
edges intrigued them.

Finally Rincewind wandered over to the Librarian and tapped him on the
shoulder.

‘We’ve been here all day,’ he said. ‘We’d better get back.’

The orangutan nodded, and stood up. ‘Ook.’

‘You think it’ll work?’

‘Ook!’

Rincewind looked back at the apemen. One of them was industriously
hacking at the corpse of the cat again.

‘Really? But they’re just like … hairy parrots.’

‘Eek ook.’

‘Well … yes. That’s true.’ Rincewind took a final look at the horde. Two
of them were squabbling over the meat. Monkey see, monkey do …

‘I’m glad it was _you_ who said that,’ he said.

Less than a Discworld second had passed by the time they returned. By
the time they looked in the omniscope, several fires were already
visible on the night side of the world.

The Librarian looked pleased. ‘Oook,’ he said.

Progress means smoke. But Rincewind was not entirely convinced. Most of
the fires were forests.



FORTY-FOUR



EXTEL OUTSIDE


[] PROGRESS MEANS SMOKE … The human race has certainly made a lot of
progress over the years, then. How did we do that? Because we’re
_intelligent_, we’ve got _brains_. Minds, even. But other creatures are
intelligent – dolphins, especially. And all they seem to do is enjoy
themselves in the sea. What have we got that they haven’t?

Many discussions of the mind treat it essentially as a question about
the architecture of the brain. The viewpoint is that this determines
what brains can do, and then the various things that we associate with
minds – the difficult problems of free will, consciousness and
intelligence – come out of neurophysiology. That’s one approach. The
other common one is to view the problem through the eyes of a social
scientist or an anthropologist. From this viewpoint the mind’s
capabilities are pretty much taken as ‘given’, and the main questions
are how human culture builds on those capabilities to create minds able
to think original thoughts, feel emotions, have concepts like love and
beauty, and so on. It may seem that between them these two approaches
pretty much cover the territory. Link them, and you have a complete
answer to the question of mind.

However, neurophysiology and culture aren’t independent: they are
‘complicit’. By this we mean that they have evolved together, each
changing the other repeatedly, and their mutual coevolution built on the
unpredictable results of that ongoing interaction. The view of culture
building on, and changing, brains is incomplete, because brains also
build on, and change, culture. The concept of complicity captures this
recursive, mutual influence.

We call the brain’s internal capabilities ‘intelligence’. It is
convenient to give a similar name to all of the external influences,
cultural or otherwise, that affect the evolution of the brain – and with
it, the mind. We shall call these influences _extelligence_, a term that
HEX has picked up thanks to once-and-future computing. Mind is not just
intelligence _plus_ extelligence – its inside and outside, so to speak.
Instead, mind is a feedback loop in which intelligence influences
extelligence, extelligence influences intelligence, and the combination
transcends the capabilities of both.

Intelligence is the ability of the brain to process information. But
intelligence is only part of what is needed to make a mind. And even
intelligence is unlikely to evolve in isolation.

Culture is basically a collection of interacting minds. Without
individual minds you can’t have a culture. The converse is perhaps less
obvious, but equally true: without a shared culture, the human mind
cannot evolve. The reason is that there is nothing in the environment of
the evolving mind that can drive it towards self-complication – becoming
more sophisticated – unless that brain has something else fairly
sophisticated to interact with. And the main sophisticated thing around
to interact with is minds of other people. So the evolution of
intelligence and that of extelligence are inextricably linked, and
complicity between them is inevitable.

In the world around us are things that we, or other human beings, have
created – things which play a similar role to intelligence but sit
outside us. They are things like libraries, books, and the Internet –
which from the viewpoint of extelligence would be better named the
‘Extranet’. The Discworld concept of ‘L-space’ – library-space – is
similar: _it’s all one thing_. These influences, sources not just of
information but of meaning, are ‘cultural capital’. They are things that
people put out into the culture, which can then sit there, or even
reproduce, or interact in a way that individuals can’t control.

The old artificial intelligence question: ‘Can we create an intelligent
machine?’ viewed the machine as a once-off object in its own right. The
problem, people assumed, was to get the machine’s architecture right,
and then program intelligent behaviour into it. But that’s probably the
wrong approach. Of course, it is certainly _conceivable_ that the
collective extelligence of all the human beings interacting with that
machine could put a mind into it – and in particular endow it with
intelligence. But it seems much more likely that, unless you had a whole
community of machines interacting with each other and evolving,
providing the requisite extelligence too, then you wouldn’t be actually
able to structure the Ant Country of the neural connections of the
machine in a way that could generate a mind. So the story of the mind is
one of complicity and emergence. Indeed, mind is one of the great
examples of complicity.

The internal story of the development of the mind can be summed up as a
series of steps in which the key ‘player’ is the nerve cell. A nerve
cell is an extended object that can send signals from one place to
another. Once you’ve got nerve cells you can have networks of nerve
cells; and once you’ve got networks, then a whole pile of stuff comes
along free of charge. For example, there is an area of complexity theory
called ‘emergent computation’. It turns out that when you evolve a
network – randomly chosen networks, arbitrary networks, not constructed
with specific purposes – they do things. They do _something_, which may
or may not seem meaningful; they do whatever it is that that network
does. But you can often look at what that network does, and spot
emergent features. You discover that even though its architecture was
random, it evolved the ability to compute things. It carries out
algorithmic processes (or something close to algorithmic processes). The
ability to do calculations, computations, algorithms seems to come _free
of charge_ once you’ve invented devices that send signals from one place
to another and react to those signals to send new signals. If you allow
evolution you don’t have to work hard to create the ability to do some
kind of processing.

Once you’ve got that facility, it’s a relatively short step to the
ability to do specific kinds of processing that happen to be useful –
that happen to offer survival value. All you need is the standard
Darwinian selection procedure. Anything that’s got that ability
survives, anything that hasn’t, doesn’t. The ability to process incoming
information in ways that extract an interesting feature of the outside
world, react to it, and thereby make it easier to evade a predator or to
spot food, gets reinforced. The brain’s internal architecture comes from
a phase space of possible structures, and evolution selects from that
phase space. Put those two together and you can evolve structures in the
brain that have specific functions. The brain’s surroundings certainly
influence the development of the brain.

Do animals have minds? They do to some extent, depending on the animal.
Even simple animals can have surprisingly sophisticated mental
abilities. One of the most surprising is a funny creature called a
mantis shrimp.

It’s like the shrimps you put inside a sandwich and eat, except that
it’s about 5 inches (12 cm) long and it’s more complex. You can keep a
mantis shrimp in a tank, as part of a miniature marine ecology. If you
do, you’ll find that mantis shrimps cause havoc. They tend to destroy
things – but they also build things. One thing they love building is
tunnels, which they then live in. The mantis shrimp is a bit of an
architect, and it decorates the front of its tunnel with bits and pieces
of things – especially bits and pieces of what it has just killed.
Hunting trophies. It doesn’t like to have just one tunnel – it’s
discovered that if you have one tunnel with one entrance, that’s more
correctly known as a ‘trap’. So it likes to have a back entrance too –
and more. By the time it’s been in the tank for about two months, it’s
riddled the entire tank with tunnels, and you find it sticking its head
out at one end or the other without seeing it pass between.

Years ago, Jack used to have a mantis shrimp called Dougal.* Jack and
his students discovered that they could set Dougal puzzles. They would
feed it shrimps and it would come out and grab the shrimp. Then they
would put the shrimp inside a plastic container with a lid and after a
little while Dougal would like to take the lid off the container and eat
the shrimp. And then they put an elastic band around the container to
hold the lid on, and Dougal would learn to take the band off and open
the container and eat the shrimp. And after a while if they stuck a
shrimp in on its own, you could almost see the mantis shrimp coming out
and looking disappointed: ‘They haven’t set me a puzzle, this is no fun,
I don’t want to play this game!’ And it would take a long look at the
shrimp and then go back into its tunnel without grabbing it.

Although we can think of no way to _prove_ this, everyone got the strong
impression that the shrimp was developing a little bit of a mind. Its
brain had the potential to do so, and humans had provided it with the
kind of context that would help it develop that potential. Wild mantis
shrimps _don’t_ go out and play with elastic bands, because those aren’t
part of their environment, but if you give them that kind of stimulus,
you change them. Because _we’ve_ got minds, we also have the capacity to
create a little bit of mind in a lot of other creatures.

Mind is a _process_, or a network of processes, going on inside the
brain. It needs a certain amount of interaction with other minds in
order to get anywhere. There isn’t an evolutionary feedback loop that
would train an incipient mind and make it develop _unless_ it was
getting somewhere. So where does such a loop occur? Human beings are
part of a reproductive system – there are a lot of us, and we keep
breeding new ones. In consequence, a large part of the environment of
any human being is other human beings. In many ways this is the most
important part of our environment, the part we respond to most deeply.
We have all sorts of cultural systems, such as education, that exploit
exactly this feature of our environment to develop the kind of mind that
fits into the existing culture and helps to propagate it. So the context
for an individual mind, as it evolves, is not that mind – it’s lots of
other minds. There is a complicit feedback loop between the entire
collection of minds, and that of each individual.

Human beings have taken this process to such an extreme that part of
that feedback loop has escaped from our control and is now outside us.
In a sense, it has a mind of its own. This is extelligence, and we can’t
do without it. A lot of what makes us human is _not_ passed on
genetically – it is passed on culturally. It is passed on by the tribe,
it is passed on through rituals, by teaching, by things that link brain
to brain, mind to mind. Your genetics may make it possible for you to
_do_ this, it may make you better or worse at it than others, but genes
don’t actually encode the information that gets passed on. This process
is the ‘Make-a-Human-Being-Kit’. Each culture has devised a technique
for putting into the minds of the next generation what it is that will
make them put it into the minds of the generation after that – a
recursive system that keeps the culture going. Lies-to-children often
feature prominently.

We are running into problems doing this today, because old-style tribal
cultures, even national cultures, are becoming intermingled with an
international culture. This leads to clashes between what used to be
separate cultures, triggering their breakdown. Go into any city in the
world and you see adverts for Coca-Cola. Global commerce has put things
into various cultures that are different from what they would have
developed of their own accord. Coca-Cola does not have a huge influence
on the Make-a-Human-Being-Kit, though, so it’s acceptable to most
cultures. On the whole, you don’t find religious fundamentalists
complaining about the existence of a Coca-Cola bottling factory in their
country (well, you _do_, but generally because it’s just a way of saying
‘USA out!’) However, if some fast-food chain in Islamic or Jewish
countries was trying to sell porkburgers, there’d be plenty of protests.

Extelligence has become so powerful and so influential that nowadays one
generation’s culture may be radically different from the previous
generation’s culture. Second-generation immigrants often have an even
worse problem, a culture clash. They’ve grown up in the ‘new’ country,
and they’ve absorbed how that country works. They speak the language far
more fluently than their parents ever can, but they’ve still got to
_please_ their parents. When they’re at home, they have to behave in the
manner of their original culture. But when they’re at school, they have
to live in the new culture. This makes them feel distinctly
uncomfortable, and that can break the cultural feedback loop. Once the
loop is broken, parts of the culture cease to be transmitted to the next
generation: they drop out of the Make-a-Human-Being-Kit.

In this sense, extelligence is out of our control. It escaped our
control when it became reproductive: extelligence being used to copy
(bits of) extelligence.

The key step was the invention of printing. Prior to written language,
extelligence was passed on by word of mouth. It still lived in people’s
minds: it was what the wise men and women of the village, the old
people, knew. And all the while extelligence resided in human memories,
it couldn’t grow, because one person can remember only so much. When you
could write things down, extelligence expanded a bit, but there is only
so much that you can write down by hand. And it can’t spread very far.
So mostly you get things like the Egyptian monuments – the history of
some particular ruler, his greatest battles, excerpts from the Book of
the Dead …

Another important but apparently mundane function of writing in human
society is taxes, accounts, keeping track of property. These sound dull
compared with the list of battles, but a growing society needs something
better than an old man’s memory of ‘who owns what’ and ‘who paid how
much’. The list was a great invention.

With printing came the possibility of disseminating information far more
widely, and in quantity. Within a few years of printing becoming
established in Europe there were fifty million books in existence, which
means more books than people. Printing was a very slow procedure in
those days, but nonetheless there were lots of printing presses, and you
could sell whatever you printed, so there were plenty of pressures that
encouraged printing to flourish. And then complicity really set in,
because what’s on a piece of paper can come back and bite you in the
ankle. The rulers started putting constitutional rights and obligations
down on paper, to protect their own position: once it’s down on paper
that the king has certain rights and obligations, then the paper can
always be referred to later, and used as an argument.

But what the kings didn’t realize, to start with, is that when they put
their rights and obligations down on paper, they were implicitly
constraining their own actions. _The citizens could read what was on the
paper too_. They could tell if their king was suddenly assuming rights
or obligations that were _not_ on the piece of paper. The whole effect
of law on human society started to change when you could write the law
down, and anyone who could read could see what the law was. This didn’t
mean that the kings always _obeyed_ the law, of course, but it meant
that when they disobeyed it, everyone knew what they were doing. That
had a big effect on the structure of human society. One minor aspect of
it is that we always appear to be nervous of people who write things
down …

At that point, extelligence and intelligence began to interact
complicitly. Once an interaction becomes complicit, there’s no way for
an individual to control it. You can push things out into the
extelligence, but you can’t predict what influence they will have.
What’s out there is growing in a way that may be _mediated_ by human
beings, but – for example – the people printing books were largely
printing them independently of their contents. Early on, _anything_ in
print would sell.

All words had power. But written words had a lot more. They still do.

So far we’ve talked as if extelligence is a single unified external
thing. In some sense it is, but what is actually important is the
interface between extelligence and the individual. This is a very
personal feedback loop: we meet selections from extelligence through
_our_ parents, the books _we_ read, the teachers who teach _us_, and so
on. This is how the Make-a-Human-Being-Kit works, this is why we have
cultural diversity. If we all responded to the same pool of extelligence
in exactly the same way, we would all be the same. The whole system
would suddenly become a kind of monoculture rather than a multiculture.

Human extelligence is currently going through a period of massive
expansion. Much more is becoming _possible_. Your interface to
extelligence used to be very predictable: your parents, teachers,
relatives, friends, village, tribe. That allowed clusters of particular
kinds of subculture to flourish, to some extent independently of the
other subcultures, because you never got to _hear_ about the others.
Their world view was always filtered before it got to you. In _Whit_,
Iain Banks describes a strange Scottish religious sect, and children who
grow up in this sect. Even though some members of the sect are
interacting with the outside world, the only _important_ influences on
them are what’s going on within the sect. Even by the end of the story
the character who has gone into the outside world and interacted with it
in all sorts of ways has one idea in mind and one only – to become the
leader of the sect and to continue propagating the sect’s views. This
behaviour is typical of human clusters – until extelligence intervenes.

Today’s extelligence doesn’t have a single world view, like a sect does.
It doesn’t really have a world view at all. Extelligence is becoming
‘multiplex’, a concept introduced by the science-fiction writer Samuel
R. Delany in the novel _Empire Star_. Simplex minds have a single-world
view and know exactly what everyone ought to do. Complex minds recognize
the existence of different world views. Multiplex ones wonder how useful
a specific world view actually is in a world of conflicting paradigms,
but find a way to operate despite that.

Anyone who wants to can get on the Internet and construct a webpage
about UFOs, telling everybody who accesses that page that UFOs exist –
they’re out there in space, they come down to Earth, they abduct people,
they steal their babies … They do all these things and it’s absolutely
definite, because _it’s on the web_.

A prominent astronomer was giving a talk about life on other planets and
the possibility of aliens. He made out the scientific case that
somewhere out in the galaxy intelligent aliens _might_ exist. At that
point a member of the audience put his hand up and said ‘we _know_ they
exist: it’s all over the Internet.’

On the other hand, you can access another page on the Internet and get a
completely different view. On the Internet, the full diversity of views
is, or at least can be represented. It is quite democratic; the views of
the stupid and credulous carry as much weight as the views of those who
can read without moving their lips. If you think that the Holocaust
didn’t actually happen, and you can shout loud enough, and you can
design a good web page, then you can be in there slugging it out with
other people who believe that recorded history should have some kind of
connection with reality.

We are having to cope with multiplexity. We’re grappling with the
problem right now: it’s why global politics has suddenly become a lot
more complicated than it used to be. Answers are in short supply, but
one thing seems clear: rigid cultural fundamentalism isn’t going to get
us anywhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

* There was a television programme called _The Magic Roundabout_. One of
the characters was a dog called Dougal, which looked a bit like a
hairbrush. Mantis shrimps have the same general form, though not with
hair.



FORTY-FIVE



THE BLEAT GOES ON


[] EXTELLIGENCE BLOOMED, faster than HEX could create extra space in
which to apprehend it. It reached the seas and spread out across the
continents, left the surface of the world, spun webs across the sky,
reached the moon … and went further, as intelligence sought things to be
intelligent about.

Extelligence learned. Among many other things, it learned to fear.

The HEM filled up again as the wizards returned, unsteadily, from lunch.

‘Ah, Rincewind,’ said the Archchancellor. ‘We’re looking for a volunteer
to go into the squash court and shut down the reactor, and we’ve found
you. Well done.’

‘Is it dangerous?’ said Rincewind.

‘That depends on how you define dangerous,’ said Ridcully.

‘Er … liable to cause pain and an imminent cessation of respiration,’
suggested Rincewind. ‘A high risk of agony, a possible deficit of arms
and legs, a terminal shortness of breath –’

Ridcully and Ponder went into a huddle. Rincewind heard them whispering.
Then the Archchancellor turned, beaming.

‘We’ve decided to come to a new definition,’ he said. ‘It is “not as
dangerous as many other things”. I beg you pardon …’ He leaned over as
Ponder whispered urgently in his ear. ‘Correction, “not as dangerous as
_some_ other things”. There. I think that’s clear.’

‘Well, _yes_, you mean … not as dangerous as some of the most dangerous
things in the universe?’

‘Yes, indeed. And among them, Rincewind, would be your refusal to go.’
The Archchancellor walked over to the omniscope. ‘Oh, another ice age,’
he went on. ‘Well, that _is_ a surprise.’

Rincewind glanced at the Librarian, who shrugged. Only a few tens of
thousands of years could have passed down there. The apes probably never
knew what squashed them.

There was a lengthy rattle from HEX’S write-out. Ponder walked over to
read it.

‘Er … Archchancellor? HEX says he’s found advanced intelligence on the
planet.’

‘Intelligent life? Down there? But the place is a snowball again!’

‘Er … not life, sir. Not exactly’

‘Hang on, what’s this?’ said the Dean.

There was, thin as a thread, a ring around the world. Spaced at regular
distances were tiny dots, like beads, and from _them_ more tiny lines
descended towards the surface.

So did the wizards.

Wind howled across the tundra. The ice was only a few hundred miles
away, even here at the equator.

The wizards faded into existence, and looked around them.

‘What the _hell_ happened here?’ said Ridcully.

The landscape was a welter of scars and pits. Roads were visible where
they had buckled up through the snow, and there were the ruins of what
could only have been buildings. But half the horizon was filled with
what looked very much like an etiolated version of one of the giant
shellfish proposed by the Lecturer in Recent Runes. It must have been
several miles across at the base, and extended upwards beyond the limit
of vision.

‘Did any of you do this?’ said Ridcully accusingly.

‘Oh, come _on_,’ said the Dean. ‘We don’t even know what it is.’

Beyond the tangle of broken roadways the snow blew across deep trenches
gouged out of the ground. Desolation reigned.

Ponder pointed towards the huge pyramid.

‘Whatever we’re looking for, it’s in there,’ he said.

The first thing the wizards noticed was the mournful bleating noise. It
came and went in a regular way, on-off, on-off, and seemed to fill the
entire structure.

The wizards wandered onwards, occasionally getting HEX to move them to
different places. Nothing, they agreed, made much sense. The building
was mostly full of roadways and loading docks, interspersed with massive
pillars. It creaked, too, like an old galleon. They could hear the
groaning noises, echoing far above. Occasionally, the ground trembled.

It was clear that important things happened in the centre. There were
tubes, hundreds of feet high. The wizards recognized cranes, and failed
to recognize huge engines of unknown purpose. Cables thick as a house
rose into the darkness above.

Frost sparkled off everything.

Still the bleat went on.

‘Look,’ said Ponder.

Red words flashed on and off, high in the air.

‘ “A-L-A-A-M”,’ the Dean spelled out. ‘I wonder why it’s doing that?
They seem to have invented magic, whoever they are. Getting letters to
flash like that is quite difficult to do.’

Ponder disappeared for a moment, and then came back.

‘HEX feels that this is a dumb-waiter,’ he said. ‘Er … you know … for
lifting things to another level.’

‘Going where?’ said Ridcully.

‘Er … up, sir. Into that … necklace around the world. HEX has been
speaking to the intelligence here. It’s a sort of HEX, sir. And it’s
nearly dead.’

‘That’s a shame,’ said Ridcully. He sniffed. ‘Where’s everyone gone,
then?’

‘Er … they made huge … sort of … big metal balls to live in. I know it
sounds stupid, sir. But they’ve gone. Because of the ice. And there was
a comet, too. Not very big. But it scared everyone. They built the … the
beanstalk things, and then they … er … mined metal out of floating
rocks, and … they left.’

‘Where’ve they gone?’

‘The … intelligence isn’t sure. It’s forgotten. It says it’s forgotten a
lot.’

‘Oh, I _understand_’ said the Dean, who’d been trying to follow this,
‘Everyone’s climbed up a great big beanstalk?’

‘Er … sort of, Dean,’ said Ponder, in his diplomatic voice. ‘In a manner
of speaking.’

‘Certainly messed the place up before they went,’ said Ridcully.

Rincewind had been watching a rat scuttle away into the debris, but the
words sunk in and exploded in his head.

‘Messed up?’ he growled. ‘How?’

‘Say again?’ said Ridcully.

‘Did you _see_ the weather report for this world?’ said Rincewind,
waving his hands in the air. ‘Two miles of ice, followed by a light
shower of rocks, with outbreaks of choking fog for the next thousand
years? There will be widespread vulcanism as half a continent’s worth of
magma lets go, followed by a period of mountain building? And that’s
_normal_.’

‘Yes, well –’

‘Oh, _yes_, there are some nice quiet periods, everything settles down,
and then – whammo!’

‘There’s no need to get so excited –’

‘I’ve _been_ here!’ said Rincewind. ‘This is how this place _works_! And
now, please, you tell me how, I mean _how_, can anything living on this
world _possibly_ mess it up? I mean, compared to what happens anyway?’
He paused, and gulped air. ‘I mean, don’t get me wrong, if you pick the
right time, yes, sure, it’s a great world for a holiday, ten thousand
years, even a few million if you’re lucky with the weather but, good
grief, it’s just not a serious proposition for anything long term. It’s
a great place to grow up on, but you wouldn’t want to _live_ here. If
anything’s got off, the best of luck to them.’

He waved a finger at the rat, who was watching them suspiciously.
Underneath them, the ground trembled again.

‘See him?’ he said. ‘We _know_ what’s going to happen. In a million
years or so his kids are going to be saying, wow, what a great world the
Big Rat made for us. Or it’ll be the turn of the jellyfish, or something
that’s still bobbing around under the sea that we don’t even know about
yet! There’s no _future_ here! No, that’s wrong … I mean there’s always
a future, but it belongs to someone else. You know what chalk’s made of
here? Dead animals! The actual _rock_ is made of dead animals! There
were some …’

Even in his overheated state, he paused. It probably wasn’t a good idea
to remind people about the apes. A vague, suspicious guilt was nudging
him.

‘There were these creatures,’ he said, ‘and they were using limestone
caves. Limestone’s made from ancient blobs, I saw it being made, like
snow in the water … and these creatures are living in the bones of their
ancestors! Really! This place … this place is a kaleidoscope. You smash
it up, wait a moment, and there’s another pretty pattern. And another
one. And another o …’ He stopped. And sagged. ‘Could I have a glass of
water, please?’

‘That was a very … interesting speech,’ said Ponder.

‘A point of view, certainly,’ said Ridcully.

The other wizards had, however, lost interest. They usually did, if the
speeches were not given by them.

‘Shall I tell you something else?’ said Rincewind, a little more calmly.
‘This world is an anvil. _Everything_ here is between a rock and a hard
place. Every single thing on it is the descendant of creatures that have
survived everything the world could throw at them. I just hope they
never get angry …’

The Senior Wrangler and the Dean had ambled towards a huge yellow
cylinder. The word ‘MAETNANS’ was painted in large black letters on the
side.

‘Hey, you chaps!’ the Dean shouted. ‘There’s something _talking_ in
here …’

The inside of the cylinder reminded the wizards of a lighthouse. There
was a spiral staircase; shaped cupboards lined the walls. Lights glowed
dimly, whole constellations of them. Certainly the builders of this
thing had discovered magic.

The ‘A-L-A-A-M’ word still blinked on and off in the air.

‘I wish that wretched thing would stop,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

The light vanished. The sound stopped.

‘They’ve probably invented demons,’ said the Dean airily. ‘Listen …
hello.’

A pleasant female voice said, ‘Elevator Unstable.’

‘Oh, _magic_,’ said Ridcully flatly. ‘Well, we know how to deal with
magic. We want to go up in the magic box, voice.’

‘Do we?’ said Ponder.

‘Anything better than staying in this gloomy place,’ said Ridcully.
‘It’d be quite an interestin’ experience, too. We’ll take one last look
the world and then, well … frankly, that’s it.’

‘Instability Rising’, said the voice. It did not sound worried by the
news.

‘What did it say?’ said the Dean. ‘Sounded like name of a place.’

‘Very good, very good,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now let’s be going shall we?’

The pattern of lights moved. Then the voice said, as if it’d been
thinking it over, ‘Emerjansi Override.’

The door slid shut. The cylinder jerked. Shortly afterwards, some
pleasant music started, and didn’t really get on anyone’s nerves for
several minutes.

The rat watched the thing rise up the cables in the centre of the
pyramid.

The ground shook again.

Slowly, the web around the world came apart.

Ice walls had attacked some of the cable moorings on the ground, but
instability was already there, working inexorably as it had done for the
past few weeks, turning little movements into big movements.

Slowly, one cable broke free from its pyramid, glowing red-hot as it was
jerked through the atmosphere, flailing across the sky.

Around the curve of the world, the others danced and groaned …

When the end finally came, it took only a day. The lines folded around
the centre of the world, writhing incandescently across hundreds of
miles of snow. The necklace tore apart far above. Some bits drifted
away. Others spun gently towards the surface, to impact hours later.

A ring of fire burned for a while around the equator.

And then the cold returned.

As the wizards said, it would all be the same in a hundred million
years’ time. But it would be different tomorrow.

In the deserted High Energy Building, HEX turned the omniscope outwards,
homing in on signs of the strange new life.

It found comet cores, strung on cables thousands of miles long. There
were dozens of these trains, many millions of miles from the frozen
world, accelerating into the abyss between the stars.

Lights twinkled on their surfaces. The extelligence inside appeared to
be travelling hopefully.

A yellow cylinder tumbled gently across the darkness.

It was empty.



FORTY-SIX



WAYS TO LEAVE YOUR PLANET


[] RINCEWIND’S IMPASSIONED SPEECH HAS A POINT. If you think he’s
overstating his case, and that the Earth is really an idyllic place to
live, bear in mind that he’s been on our planet a lot longer than we
have, and he’s seen a lot that we’ve missed, because we experience the
world on a much shorter timescale than the wizards have done. We think
the planet’s a great place. We grew up here. We were made for it, and
it’s just right for _us …_ at the moment.

Tell that to the dinosaurs.

You can’t, can you. That’s the point.

We’re not suggesting that you sell up everything and start building a
lifeboat. But even the United States congress is beginning to wonder
just how safe our planet really is, and politicians are not usually
known for taking long-term views. The sight of Shoemaker-Levy 9 smashing
into Jupiter raised a few political eyebrows. Tentative schemes are
afoot to set up a defence system against incoming comets and asteroids.
Spotting them early enough is the trick. Find them quickly, and a modest
little rocket motor can save our planetary bacon.

It is in many ways amazing that life on Earth has survived everything
that the universe has so far thrown at it. Evolution runs on Deep Time –
less than a hundred million years hardly counts. Life is extremely
resilient, but individual species are not. They last a few million years
and then they become obsolete. Life persists by changing – by being a
series of opening chapters. But, being human, we’d like to see our own
story turn into at least a blockbuster dekalogy.

We can take small comfort in one thing. Although right now we don’t
worry enough about incoming disaster from Up There, we do worry a lot
about home-grown disaster Down Here: nuclear warfare, biological
warfare, global warming, pollution, overpopulation, destruction of
habitat, burning of the rainforests, and so on. However, there’s no
danger that human actions will wipe out _the planet_. Compared to what
nature has already done, _and will do again_, our activities barely show
up. One large meteorite packs more explosive power than all human wars
put together, a hypothetical World War III included. One Ice Age changes
the climate more than a civilization’s worth of carbon dioxide from car
exhausts. As for something like the Deccan Traps … you wouldn’t want to
_know_ how nasty the atmosphere could become.

No, we can’t destroy the Earth. We _can_ destroy ourselves.

No one would care. The cockroaches and the rats will come back, or if
the worst comes to the worst the bacteria miles below ground will start
to write a new opening chapter in the Book of Life. Someone else will
read it.

If we really deserve the name _Homo sapiens_, then we can do at least
two things to improve our chances. First, we can learn to manage our
impact on the environment. The fact that nature deals the occasional
death blow doesn’t hand us an excuse to imitate it. _We_ invented
ethics. Our environment is sufficiently buffeted by various forces that
the last thing it needs is humanity throwing extra spanners in the
works. At the most selfish level, we might be buying ourselves some
time.

We could use that time to put some of our eggs in another basket.

One of the great dreams of humanity has been to visit other worlds. It’s
starting to look as though this might be a very good idea – not just for
fun and profit, but for survival.

We’d better say right now that none of this is science fiction. Or,
rather, yes, it is science fiction, it’s the very stuff of science
fiction, because some of the best science-fiction writers (you don’t see
their stuff on TV) have been dealing with it for many decades. But that
does not mean it’s not _real_. Ices Ages happen. Big, big rocks come
screaming out of the sky, and you need rather more than Bruce Willis
flying the Space Shuttle as if it was the Millennium Falcon to stop
them.

Our urge to explore the universe may be just another case of monkey
curiosity, but there seems to be a deep impulse that urges us to find
new lands to map and new worlds to conquer. Maybe there’s an inbuilt
urge to spread out – one leopard can’t eat _all_ of you if you spread
out.

It is an urge that has driven us into every corner and crevice of our
own planet, from the ice-floes of the Arctic to the deserts of Namibia,
from the depths of the Mariana Trench to the peak of Everest. Most of us
incline to Rincewind’s view of a comfortable lifestyle and much prefer
to stay at home, but a few are too restless to be happy anywhere for
very long. The combination is a powerful one, and it has shaped our
species into something very unusual, with collective capabilities beyond
the understanding of any individual. We may not always use that
combination _wisely_, but without it we would be greatly diminished. And
it’s offering a real opportunity.

Even a dream can work miracles. When Columbus (re-)discovered America,
and Europe found out that it existed, he was looking for a new route to
the Indies. He had convinced himself – on grounds that most scholars at
the time found totally spurious – that the Earth was considerably
smaller than was generally thought. He calculated that a relatively
short voyage westward, from Africa, would lead to Japan and India. The
scholars were right, Columbus was wrong – but it is Columbus that we
remember, because he made the world smaller. He had the courage to set
sail into an empty sea, sustained only by the belief that there was
something important on the other side.

At least we can _see_ where we ought to go. Columbus had to back a
hunch.

A dirty great Saturn-V rocket with a tiny Apollo capsule on top was the
first practical method for getting out of the Earth’s gravity well
altogether. By this we don’t mean that the Earth’s gravitational pull
becomes zero if you go far enough away, which is a common misconception:
we mean that if you go fast enough, then the Earth’s gravity can never
pull you back down. Celestial mechanics operates in the phase space of
distance _and_ velocity, its ‘landscape’ involves speeds as well as
lengths. Only when we understood enough about gravity and dynamics to
appreciate this point did we stand any chance of making technology like
Apollo work.

You can see this clearly from earlier suggestions, which were
imaginative – in an earthbound sort of way – but fantastic and
impractical, at least on Roundworld. In 1648 Bishop John Wilkins listed
four possible ways to leave the ground: enlist the aid of spirits or
angels, get a lift from birds, fasten wings to your body, or build a
flying chariot. If we wanted to be charitable, we could interpret the
last two as aircraft and rockets, but Wilkins was clearly unaware that
the Earth’s atmosphere doesn’t extend all the way to the Moon. A
sixteenth-century engraving by Hans Schaüffelein depicts Alexander the
Great carried into space by two griffins – no noticeable improvement.
Bernard Zamagna conceived of an aerial boat, and others suggested the
use of balloons.

Every age fantasized about technology that already existed. In Jules
Verne’s _From the Earth to the Moon_ of 1865 the journey was
accomplished by firing a space capsule from a huge gun in Florida; its
1870 sequel _Around the Moon_ involved a series of such capsules,
forming a space train. Verne got Florida right – he knew that the
Earth’s spin produces centrifugal force, which helps the capsule to
leave the planet more easily, and he knew that this force was greatest
at the equator. Since the protagonists in his book were American,
Florida was the best bet. When NASA started launching rockets, it came
to the same conclusion, and the space facility at Cape Canaveral was
born.

Big guns have deficiencies, such as a tendency to laminate passengers to
the floor because of rapid acceleration, but modern technology does make
it possible to avoid this by applying the acceleration gradually.
Rockets are currently more practical from the engineering point of view,
though that could change. In 1926 Robert Goddard invented the liquid
fuel rocket. The first one rose to the dizzy height of 40 feet (12.5 m).
Rockets have come a long way since then, taking men to the Moon and
instruments to the edge of the solar system. And they are much better
rockets. Even so, there’s something … _inelegant_ about heading off the
planet on a giant disposable firework.

Until recently, there has been a general assumption that the energy to
get into space has to be carried with the craft. However, we already
have the beginnings of one way to get off the Earth that keeps the power
source firmly on the ground. This is laser propulsion, in which a
powerful beam of coherent light is aimed at a solid object and literally
pushes it along. It takes a lot of power, but prototypes invented by
Leik Myrabo have already been tested at the High Energy Laser System
Test Facility at White Sands. In November 1997 a small projectile
reached a height of 50 feet (15 m) in 5.5 seconds; by December this had
been improved to 60 feet (20 m) in 4.9 seconds. This may not sound
impressive, but compare with Goddard’s first rocket. The method involves
spinning the projectile at 6000 revolutions per minute to achieve
gyroscopic stability. Then 20 laser pulses per second are directed
towards a specially shaped cavity, heating the air beneath the craft and
creating a pressure wave of thousands of atmospheres with temperatures
up to 30,000° Kelvin – and that’s what propels the projectile. At higher
altitudes the air becomes very thin, and a similar craft would need an
onboard fuel source. Fuel would be pumped into the cavity to be
vapourized by the laser. A megawatt laser could lift a 2-pound (1 kg)
craft into orbit.

It is also a very powerful weapon …

Another possibility is power beaming. It is possible to ‘beam’
electromagnetic power from the ground in the form of microwaves. This
isn’t just fantasy: in 1975 Dick Dickinson and William Brown beamed 30
kilowatts of power – enough for thirty electric fires – over a distance
of one mile. James Benford and Myrabo have suggested launching a
spacecraft using millimetre range microwaves which are not attenuated by
the atmosphere. This is a variation on the laser method and would use
the same kind of projectile.

Both of these methods rely on a lot of raw power, betraying traces of
the basic engineering assumption that getting into space needs a lot of
energy to overcome the Earth’s gravity. They do have the advantage that
the raw power is just sitting on the planet; the 1,000 megawatt power
station your laser launcher would require could generate for the
National Grid when a launch wasn’t going on.

A method of greater subtlety is the bolas, first proposed in the 1950s.
Traditionally, a bolas is a hunting device made by tying three weights
to strings and then tying the ends of the strings together. When thrown,
it spins, pulling the weights apart, until the strings hit the target,
at which point the weights spiral rapidly inwards and deal a killing
blow. The same sort of device could be set up in a vertical plane above
the equator, a bit like a giant ferris wheel with only three spokes. On
the ends of the spokes would be pressurized cabins. The lowest part of
the bolas’s swing would be somewhere in the lower atmosphere, the top
part way out in space. You would fly up in an aircraft, transfer to the
first passing cabin, and be whisked skywards. The biggest obstacle to
making such a machine is the cable, which has to be stronger than any
known material – but carbon fibre is well on the way to combining enough
strength with enough lightness. Friction with the atmosphere would
gradually slow the bolas’s rotation down, but that could be compensated
for using solar power arrays up in space.

The most celebrated device of this type, however, is the space elevator.
We discussed this earlier, both as a serious technological idea and as a
metaphor: here we give a few more details. In essence, the space
elevator starts out as a satellite in geosynchronous orbit. Then you
drop a cable from it to the ground, and the rest is a matter of building
a suitable cabin and, again, finding suitable material for the cable.
You get the material up there using rockets or a whole cascade of
bolases (and once you’ve got a small cable you can haul up the stuff for
the bigger one). You only need to do all this _once_, so the cost is
irrelevant over the longer term.

As we emphasized at the start of the book, once there is as much traffic
is coming down as is going up, getting off the ground is essentially
free and requires zero energy. At that point you build your
interplanetary spacecraft up in space, using raw materials from the Moon
or the asteroid belt. So the space elevator gives you _a new place to
start from –_ which is why we’ve used it as a metaphor for processes
like life.

The idea of a space elevator was originated by the Leningrad engineer
Y.N. Artsutanov in 1960, in an article in _Pravda_. He called it a
‘heavenly funicular’ and calculated that it could lift 12,000 tons per
day into orbit. The idea came to the attention of Western scientists in
1966, thanks to John Isaacs, Hugh Bradner, and George Backus. These
scientists weren’t interested in getting into space: they were
oceanographers – the only people seriously interested in hanging things
on long cables. Except that they wanted to hang them down into the ocean
bottoms, not up into space. The oceanographers were unaware of the
earlier Russian work, but Artsutanov’s anticipation quickly became known
to Western scientists too. The astronaut and artist Alexei Leonov
published a painting of a space elevator in action in 1967.

Such a simple but mostly impractical idea is likely to occur to lots of
people, but wouldn’t become widely known _because_ it looks impractical
with current technology, and that means that it will be re-invented
independently by many people. In 1963 the science-fiction author Arthur
C. Clarke considered suspending a lower satellite by cable from a
geosynchronous one, as a way to increase the number of effectively geo-
synchronous satellites for communication purposes. Later he realized
that the same method would lead to the space elevator, an idea that he
developed in his novel _The Fountains of Paradise_. In 1969 A.R. Collar
and J.W. Flower also considered suspending a lower satellite by cable
from a geosynchronous one And in 1975 Jerome Pearson suggested an
‘orbital tower’ that was essentially the same idea.

You can, of course, suspend more than one cable – once you’ve got _one_
space elevator you can lift everything else that you need into space at
low cost, so why not go the whole hog? Charles Sheffield’s _The Web
Between the Worlds_ envisages a whole ring of space elevators round the
equator. This is what the wizards have found. Ironically, because human
civilization has taken such a short time to develop, on evolutionary
timescales, the wizards missed us …

Is the space elevator anything other than a wild fantasy? Could one
really be built in the near future? In 2001 two NASA teams carried out
feasibility studies, and both concluded that the space elevator is
technologically possible. Just. David Smitherman, who led one team,
reckons it could be in place by 2100.

The main problem is the cable. The tension in the cable is lowest near
the ground, and highest at the top, because each section of cable has to
support only the weight of cable below it. So the cable should be made
thin at the bottom, and thicker towards the top. The big question is:
which material has enough tensile strength? Steel won’t do: a steel
cable 4 inches (10 cm) wide at the bottom would have to be 2.5 trillion
miles (4 trillion km) across at the top. (This is an engineer’s way of
saying ‘don’t use steel’: it’s too heavy and the stress goes up
extremely fast as the cable gets longer.) Kevlar would be more
practical: the top would then need to be only 1600 metres across – just
over a mile wide. But even this is not practical enough.

For the size to be acceptable, the cables tensile strength needs to be
at least 62.5 gigapascals – 30 times stronger than steel and 17 times
stronger than Kevlar. Such materials do exist: the best known is the
carbon nanotube, a molecule of carbon shaped like a hollow cylinder and
related to the famous molecule buckminsterfullerene, which is made from
60 atoms of carbon and is shaped like a soccer ball. The tensile
strength of a carbon nanotube is at least 130 gigapascals, more than
twice as strong as necessary. The only snag is, that right now the
longest carbon nanotubes we can make extend for only a few millionths of
a metre. But if that could be increased to 4 millimetres, then the
nanotubes could be embedded in a composite material with the necessary
strength.

A second problem is the base. The higher the bottom of the cable is off
the ground, the more material is saved at the top, where most of the
mass is. This is why the cable in our story has a huge ‘etiolated whelk’
at its base. The NASA study concluded that a tower at least 6 miles (10
km) high would be best. It could be built on a mountaintop, to reduce
the height needed, but if the cable were to snap, the main debris would
then fall on land. So a tower in the ocean at the equator would make
more sense. Current construction methods could, in principle, build a
12-mile (20-km) tower.

The final design problem is how to transport capsules up and down the
cable. Whatever method is used, it has to be low on maintenance and high
on speed. Magnetic levitation looks good.

After that, it’s mostly a question of protecting the cable against
meteor-strikes and incoming high-energy particles. A piece of cake.

Having built your space elevator, you’re now in a position to colonize
other worlds. The obvious first destination is Mars. You get there in a
cloud of small, mass-produced ships, and once you’ve got there one of
the first things you do is drop down a cable and build a Martian space
elevator. You’re up in orbit anyway, so why not take advantage of the
fact? Again, this is the metaphorical aspect of the space elevator: as
soon as just one exists, it opens up a vast range of new possibilities.
However, you’ll probably need to land a team by some other method in
order to construct the complex at the bottom to which the cable will be
tethered.

Mars isn’t a great place to live, so the next step is to terraform it –
to make it more earthlike. There are reasonably plausible methods for
doing that, detailed at length in Kim Stanley Robinson’s series _Red
Mars_, _Green Mars_, _Blue Mars_. Mars is no improvement when it comes
to meteor-strikes, but at least the colony on Mars is unlikely to get
wiped out at the same time as the main population on Earth. Because life
is reproductive, if one of them _does_ get wiped out, it can quickly be
re-colonized from the other. After a few centuries, you’d hardly notice
any difference. Still, it may be better to be more ambitious and go to
the stars. By the time we’re ready for that, we’ll have interferometer
telescopes good enough to spot which stars have suitable planets. The
only problem, then, will be to get there.

There are plenty of suggestions, and we won’t add to them. Think of
mid-Victorians predicting life in the 1990s. The dynamic of extelligence
is emergent or, to put it another way, we haven’t the faintest idea what
we’ll think of next but it’ll probably surprise us.

One way, if all else fails, is the Generation Ship – a huge vessel that
can hold an entire city of people, who live, breed, educate, and die
throughout the centuries-long journey. Make it big and interesting
enough, and they may even lose interest in the destination. The
Discworld almost counts as one of these; it’s on a journey, the
inhabitants don’t know where they’re going, the designers have given it
a small controllable sun (thus doing away with all those nasty
fluctuations) and no less than five bio-engineered creatures positively
_delight_ in clearing local space of intrusive debris …

Back on our world, you could take a _really_ long-term view and seed the
galaxy with genetically engineered bacteria, carefully tailored so that
whenever they find a suitable planet they eventually evolve into
humanoid life (or life, at least). We would die out, but maybe our fleet
of cheap, slow ships might seed a few new Earths somewhere.

There’s no shortage of ideas. Some might even be practical. The galaxy
beckons. We might die trying – but since we’re going to die anyway, why
not try?

And what will we find out there? Will we find a radically different kind
of ‘space elevator’, for instance? Well, if there are aliens that live
on neutron stars, as Robert L. Forward describes in _Dragon’s Egg_, then
they might escape by tilting their world’s magnetic axis, turning it
into a pulsar, and surfing its plasma jet. Perhaps all those pulsars
were formed in this way. Like any ‘space elevator’, if you can manage
the trick once, the rest is easy. The inhabitants of one neutron star
managed it, and colonized all the others, founding the Pulsar Empire …

And since we can envisage new kinds of physical space elevator, there
must surely also be new kinds of metaphorical space elevator. Not just
aliens a bit like us, but radically different new kinds of life.

What else could live on a neutron star?

They’re waiting.



FORTY-SEVEN



YOU NEED CHELONIUM


[] ‘THAT,’ SAID THE DEAN, ‘was a very unpleasant business. Good thing we
weren’t really there.’

Rincewind was sitting at the end of the long table, his chin on his
hand.

‘Really?’ he said. ‘You thought that was bad? Try having a comet land on
you. That really makes your day.’

‘It was the music that really got on _my_ nerves,’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘Oh, _well_, good job the planet’s a snowball, then,’ said Rincewind.

‘I call this meeting to order,’ said Ridcully, thumping the table.
‘Where’s the Bursar?’

The wizards looked around the main hall of the High Energy Magic
building.

‘I saw him half an hour ago,’ the Dean volunteered.

‘We are quorate, nevertheless,’ said Ridcully. ‘Now … the magic flux is
almost run down, although HEX reports that the model universe appears to
be continuing on internal power. Amazing the way the whole place seems
to strive to keep existing. However … gentlemen, the project is at an
end. All it is has taught us is that you can’t make a world out of bits
and pieces. You need chelonium for a _proper_ world. And you certainly
need narrativium, otherwise the life you get is a lot of opening
chapters. A comet is no way to end a story. Ice and fire … that’s _very_
primitive.’

‘Poor old crabs,’ said the Senior Wrangler.

‘Goodbye, lizards,’ said the Dean.

‘Farewell, my limpet,’ said the Lecturer in Recent Runes.

‘What were the ones that left?’ said Ponder.

‘Er …’ said Rincewind.

‘Yes?’ said the Archchancellor.

‘Oh, nothing. I had a thought … but it couldn’t possibly work.’

‘Some of the bears seemed quite bright,’ said Ridcully, who had
naturally sided with a lifeform that resembled him in several
particulars.

‘Yes, yes, it was probably the bears,’ said Rincewind quickly.

‘We couldn’t watch the whole world all the time,’ said Ponder.
‘Something could have evolved quickly, I suppose.’

‘Yes, that’s right, something probably evolved quickly,’ said Rincewind.
‘I shouldn’t think there was any unauthorized interference in any way.’

‘Good luck to them, whatever shape they’re in,’ said Ridcully. He
assembled his papers. ‘That’s it, then. I won’t say it hasn’t been an
interesting few days, but reality calls. Yes, Rincewind?’

‘What are we going to do with the snow globe – I mean, the world?’ said
Rincewind.

As one wizard, they looked across at the world spinning gently in its
dome.

‘Is it any use to us, Mister Stibbons?’ said Ridcully.

‘As a curiosity, sir.’

‘This university is _stuffed_ with curiosities, young man.’

‘Well, then … only as very large paperweight.’

‘Ah. Rincewind … you _are_ the Professor of Cruel and Usual Geography,
so I suppose this is _right_ up your street –’

There was a rattle from HEX’S tray. Ponder pulled out the paper.

It said: +++ The Project Must Be Kept Safe +++

‘Fine. Rincewind can put it on a high shelf so that it doesn’t get
knocked,’ said Ridcully, rubbing his hands together.

+++ Recursion Is Occurring +++

Ridcully blinked at the writing.

‘Is that a problem?’

HEX creaked. There was a flurry of activity in the ant tubes. Eventually
the write-out clattered for some time.

Ponder picked up the message.

‘Er … it’s addressed to Mrs Whitlow,’ he said. Er … it’s rather odd …’

Ridcully looked over his shoulder.

‘ “Don’t Dust It”,’ he read.

‘She’s a devil with a duster,’ said the Senior Wrangler. ‘The Dean nails
his door shut when he leaves his study.’

The write-out clattered again.

‘ “This Is Important”,’ Ponder read.

‘Not a problem, not a problem,’ said Ridcully. ‘So on to the next item.
Ah, yes. We have to shut down the reacting engine. No, don’t get up,
Rincewind, I’ve had the door locked. The interior of the squash court is
still just a tiny bit not entirely completely safe, is that right, Mr
Stibbons?’

‘Very definitely!’

‘And therefore the area within it quite clearly counts as –’

‘Let me guess,’ said Rincewind. ‘It’s cruel and unusual geography, yes?’

‘Well, done, that man! And all you have to do –’

A sound that _had_ been on the limit of hearing suddenly descended
through the scales. And there was silence.

‘What’s that?’ said Ridcully.

‘Nothing,’ said Rincewind, with unusual accuracy.

‘The reacting engine has shut down,’ said Ponder.

‘By itself?’

‘Not unless it can pull its own levers, no …’

The wizards clustered around the door to the old squash court. Ponder
held up his thaumometer.

‘There’s hardly any flux now,’ he said. ‘It’s practically background …
Stand back …’

He opened the door.

A couple of white pigeons flew out, followed by a billiard ball. Ponder
pulled aside a cluster of flags of all nations.

‘Just natural fallout,’ he called out. ‘Oh …’

The Bursar ambled around the side of the reacting engine, waving a
squash racket.

‘Ah, Ponder,’ he said. ‘Have you wondered if Time isn’t simply Space
rotated through a right angle?’

‘Er … no …’ said Ponder, watching the man carefully for signs of thaumic
breakdown.

‘It would certainly make pretzels very interesting, don’t you think?’

‘Er … have you been playing squash, sir?’ said Ponder.

‘You know, I’m really coming to believe that a closed contour is a
boundary, up to parametrization, if and only if it is homotopic to
zero,’ said the Bursar. ‘And, for preference, coloured green.’

‘Did you touch any switches, sir?’ said Ponder, maintaining a careful
distance.

‘This thingy here does make some shots very difficult,’ said the Bursar,
hitting the reacting engine. ‘I was trying to hit the rear wall around
last Wednesday.’

‘I think perhaps we should leave,’ said Ponder in a clear, firm tone.
‘It will soon be teatime. There will be jelly,’ he added.

‘Ah, the fifth form of matter,’ said the Bursar brightly, following
Ponder.

The other wizards were waiting just outside the door.

‘Is he all right?’ said Ridcully. ‘I mean by general bursarial
standards, of course.’

‘It’s hard to tell,’ said Ponder, as the Bursar beamed at them. ‘I think
so. But the reacting engine must had been putting out quite a high flux
when he went in.’

‘Perhaps none of the thaumic particles hit him?’ said the Senior
Wrangler.

‘But there’s millions of them, sir, and they can pass through anything!’

Ridcully slapped the Bursar on the back.

‘Bit of luck for you, eh, Bursar?’

The Bursar looked puzzled for a moment, and then vanished.



FORTY-EIGHT



EDEN AND CAMELOT


[] THIS BOOK WASN’T CALLED _The Religion of Discworld_ for a reason,
although – Heaven knows – there is plenty of raw material.*1 All
religions are true, for a given value of ‘truth’.

The disciplines of science, however, tell us that we live on a world
formed from interstellar debris some four billion years ago in a
universe which itself is about 15 billion years old (which is
science-speak for ‘a very long time’); that in the ensuing years it has
been pummelled and frozen and re-arranged on a regular basis; that
despite or rather _because_ of this, life turned up very quickly and
seems to spring back renewed and re-formed from every blow; and that we
ourselves evolved on this planet and, with the suddenness of a bursting
dam, became Top Species in a very short period of time.

Actually, science tells us that many cockroaches, bacteria, beetles, and
even small mammals might argue that last statement, but since they are
not good at debate and can’t speak, who cares what they think?
Especially since they can’t, eh? A key thing about big brains is this:
they know big brains are good.

Most of us don’t think like scientists. We think like the wizards of
Discworld. Everything in the past was leading inevitably to Now, which
is the important time.

While the news that the Earth is a small planet in a dull part of the
universe has caught on in recent centuries, it’s only in the last few
decades that the words ‘the Earth’ have come to mean, for a significant
proportion of any society, ‘the planet’ rather than ‘the soil’.

It was probably those photographs of the Earth seen from the Moon that
did it. We saw the whole planet as a single _thing_, rather than just
the bit of it that we were standing on. And it looked fragile, and kind
of lonely …

We watch the fireworks as great balls of ice plummet into the atmosphere
of a nearby planet and, although any one of them would have _seriously_
troubled the Earth, the event was just that: a firework display. As one
old lady told a news reporter, ‘that sort of thing happens in Outer
Space’. But we’re in Outer Space, too, and it might pay us to get good
at it.

The dinosaurs were not, as suggested in _Jurassic Park_, ‘selected for
extinction’ – they were clobbered by a very large rock, and/or its
after-effects. Rocks don’t think.

The dinosaurs were in fact doing very well, and had merely neglected to
develop three-mile thick armour plating. They _may_ even have evolved
something that we’d recognize as ‘early civilization’; we shouldn’t
underestimate how much the surface of the planet can change in 65
million years. But rocks don’t care, either.

But even if the rock had missed, there were other rocks. And if they had
missed too, then we should be aware that the planet has other,
home-grown means of disposal.

Evidence is emerging that suggests that other extinctions were caused by
‘natural’ but catastrophic changes in the planet’s atmosphere. A case is
being made that indicates that the very _existence_ of life on Earth
will, periodically, trip a catastrophe.

Rocks don’t _mind_.

This will probably not happen tomorrow. But, one day, it will. And then
Rincewind’s kaleidoscope is shaken up for a _new_ pretty pattern.

Eden and Camelot, the wondrous garden-worlds of myth and legend, are
here _now_. This is about as good as it ever gets. Mostly, it’s a lot
worse. And it won’t stay like this for very long.

There are, perhaps, choices. We could leave. We’ve dealt with that.
Considerable optimism is required. But there _might_ be other small blue
planets out there … By definition, though, Earthlike worlds will have
life on them. That’s _why_ they’ll be Earthlike. And the trouble is that
the more Earthlike it is, the more troublesome it would be. Don’t worry
about the laser-wielding monsters – you can _talk_ to them, if only
about lasers. The real problem is more likely to be something very, very
small. In the morning you get a rash. In the afternoon, your legs
explode.*2

The other ‘choice’ is to stay. We _may_ be lucky – we tend to be. But we
won’t be lucky forever. The average life of a species is about five
million years. Depending on how you define humanity, we may already be
close to the average.

A useful project, and one that’s much cheaper to achieve, is to leave a
note to the next occupiers, even if it is only to say ‘We Were Here’. It
may be of interest to a future species that even if they are alone in
space, they’re not alone in Time.

We may already have left our marker. It depends on how long things will
_really_ last on the Moon, and if, in a hundred million years, anyone
else feels it necessary to go there. If they do, they may find the
abandoned descent stages of the Apollo Moon landers. And they’ll wonder
what a ‘Richard M. Nixon’ was.

How much luckier are the inhabitants of Discworld. They _know_ they live
on a world made for people. With a large hungry turtle, not to mention
the four elephants, interstellar debris becomes lunch rather than
catastrophe. Large-scale extinction has more to do with magical
interference than random rocks or built-in fluctuations; it may have the
same effect, but at least there is someone to _blame_.

Unfortunately, it does reduce the scope for asking interesting
questions. Most of them have already been answered. Certainty rules.
Mustrum Ridcully is not the kind of person who would tolerate an
Uncertainty Principle, after all.

Back in Roundworld, there is perhaps one point worth making.

Just suppose there is _nothing else_. Arguments about intelligent life
on other worlds have always been highly biased by the desires of those
doing the arguing that there should _be_ intelligent life on other
worlds, and we three are among them. But the argument is a house of
cards with no card on the bottom. We know of life on one world.
Everything else is guesswork and naked statistics. Life may be so common
through the universe that even the atmosphere of Jupiter is alive with
Jovian gasbags and every cometary nucleus is home to colonies of
microscopic blobules. Or there may be nothing alive at all, anywhere
else but here.

Perhaps intelligent life arose before humanity, and perhaps it will
again when humanity’s span has become a rather complex layer in the
strata. We can’t tell. Time does not simply, as the hymn says, bear all
its sons away – it can easily see the disappearance of the entire
continent on which they stood.

In short, in a universe a billion Grandfathers long and a trillion
Grandfathers wide, there may be just a few hundred thousand years on one
planet where a species worried about something other than sex, survival,
and the next meal.

This is _our_ Discworld. In its little cup of spacetime, humanity has
invented gods,*3 philosophies, ethical systems, politics, an unfeasible
number of ice-cream flavours and even more esoteric things like ‘natural
justice’ and ‘boredom’. Should it matter to us if tigers are made
extinct and the last orangutan dies in a zoo? After all, blind forces
have repeatedly erased species that were probably more beautiful and
worthy.

But we feel it _does_ matter, because humans invented the concept of
things ‘mattering’. We feel we ought to be brighter than a mile of
incandescent rock and a continent-sized glacier. Humans seem to have
created, independently, in many places and at various times, a
Make-a-Real-Human-Being Kit, which begins with prohibitions about
killing and theft and incest and is now groping towards our
responsibilities to a natural world in which, despite its ability to
hurt us mightily, we nevertheless have a godlike power.*4

We advance arguments about saving rainforests because ‘there may be
undiscovered cancer cures in there’, but this is because extelligence
wants to save rainforests and the cancer-cure argument might convince
the bean-counters and the fearful. It might have a real basis in fact,
too, but the real reason is that we feel that a world with tigers and
orangutans and rainforests and even small unobtrusive snails in it is a
more healthy and interesting world for humans (and, of course, the
tigers and orangutans and snails) and that a world without them would be
dangerous territory. In other words, trusting the instincts that up
until now have generally seen us through, we think that Tigers Are Nice
(or, at least, Tigers Are Nice In Moderation And At A Safe Distance).

It’s a circular argument, but in our little round human world we’ve
managed to live on circular arguments for millennia. And who else is
going to argue with us?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*1 Explained to the hilt in _The Science of Discworld II: The Globe_.

*2 This is probably another lie. Alien microbes are unlikely to find us
edible. So are alien tigers, although they might do us quite a lot of
damage in finding out. But certainly an alien world will have a whole
host of nasty surprises, if we are not very careful. We can’t tell you
what they’ll be. They’ll be a _surprise_.

*3 We apologize to any _real_ gods.

*4 Unfortunately, huge malicious destructive force is a god-like power.



FORTY-NINE



AS ABOVE, SO BELOW


[] RINCEWIND WALKED VERY GINGERLY towards his office, the globe of the
project held carefully in his hands.

He would have expected an entire universe to be heavier, but this one
seemed on the light side. It was probably all that space.

The Archchancellor had explained at length to him that although he would
be _called_ the Egregious Professor of Cruel and Unusual Geography, this
was only because that was cheaper than repainting the title on the door.
He was not entitled to wages, or to teach, or express any opinions on
anything, or order anyone around, or wear any special robes, or publish
anything. But he could turn up for meals, provided he ate quietly.

To Rincewind, it sounded like heaven.

The Bursar appeared right in front of him. One moment there was an empty
corridor, the next moment there was a bemused wizard.

They collided. The sphere went up in the air, turning gently.

Rincewind rebounded from the Bursar, looked up at the ball curving
through the air, flung himself forward and down with rib-scraping force
and caught it a few inches from the stone floor.

‘Rincewind! Don’t tell him who he is!’

Rincewind rolled over, clasping the little universe, and looked back
along the passage. Ridcully and the other wizards were advancing slowly
and cautiously. Ponder Stibbons was waving a spoonful of jelly
invitingly.

Rincewind glanced up the Bursar, who was looking perplexed.

‘But he’s the Bursar, isn’t he?’ he said.

The Bursar smiled, looked puzzled for a moment, and vanished with a
‘pop’.

‘Seven seconds!’ shouted Ponder, dropping the spoon and pulling out a
notebook. ‘That’ll put him in … yes, the laundry room!’

The wizards hurried off, except for the Senior Wrangler, who was rolling
a cigarette.

‘What happened to the Bursar?’ said Rincewind, getting to his feet.

‘Oh, young Stibbons reckons he’s caught Uncertainty,’ said the Senior
Wrangler, licking the paper. ‘As soon as his body remembers what it’s
called it forgets where it’s supposed to be.’ He stuck the bent and
wretched cylinder in his mouth and fumbled for his matches. ‘Just
another day at Unseen University, really.’

He wandered off, coughing.

Rincewind carried the sphere though the maze of dank passages and into
his office, where he cleared a space for it on a shelf.

The ice age had cleared up. He wondered what was happening down there,
what gastropod or mammal or lizard was even now winding up its elastic
ready to propel itself towards the crown of the world. Soon, without a
doubt, some creature would suddenly develop an unnecessarily large brain
and be forced to do things with it. And it’d look around and probably
declare how marvellous it was that the universe had been built to bring
forward the inevitable development of creature-kind.

Boy, was it in for a shock …

‘Okay, you can come out,’ he said. ‘They’ve lost interest.’

The Librarian was hiding behind a chair. The orangutan took university
discipline seriously, even though he was capable of clapping someone on
both ears and forcing his brain down his nose.

‘They’re busy trying to catch the Bursar right now,’ said Rincewind.
‘Anyway, I’m sure it couldn’t have been the apes. No offence, but they
didn’t look the right sort to me.’

‘Ook!’

‘It was probably something out of the sea somewhere. I’m sure we didn’t
see most of what was going on.’

Rincewind huffed on the surface of the globe, and polished it with his
sleeve. ‘What’s recursion?’ he said.

The Librarian gave a very expansive shrug.

‘It looks okay to me,’ said Rincewind. ‘I wondered if it was some sort
of disease …’

He slapped the Librarian on the back, raising a cloud of dust. ‘Come on,
let’s go and help them hunt …’

The door shut. Their footsteps died away.

The world spun in its little universe, about a foot across on the
outside, infinitely large on the inside.

Behind it, stars floated away in the blackness. Here and there they
congregated in great swirling masses, spinning about some unimaginable
drain. Sometimes these drifted together, passing through one another
like ghosts and parting in a trailing veil of stars.

Young stars grew in luminous cradles. Dead stars rolled in the glowing
shrouds of their death.

Infinity unfolded. Walls of glittering swept past, revealing fresh
fields of stars …

 … where, sailing through the endless night, made of hot gas and dust
but recognizable nevertheless, was a turtle.

As above, so below.
