About the Book

UNSEEN UNIVERSITY ARE PROUD TO PRESENT THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE MAP AND
GUIDE TO THE DISC YET PRODUCED.

In this noble endeavour, drawing upon the hard-won knowledge of many
great and, inevitably, late explorers, one may locate on a detailed plan
of our world such fabled realms as the Condiment Isles, trace the course
of the River Kneck as it deposits silt and border disputes in equal
abundance on the lands either side, and contemplate the vast deserts of
Klatch and Howondaland – a salutary lesson in the perils of allowing
one’s goats to graze unchecked.

Each nation, its people, customs, terrain and economic pursuits, is
described in due turn, transporting the reader from the fat mines of
Uberwald and the magic-carpet market of Al Khali to the highest
monasteries of the Ramtops, and the blood- and cocoa-stained temples of
the Tezuman Empire. This instructive volume is essential reading for all
who wish to learn more about the lands atop the turtle.

Introducing Discworld

The Discworld series is a continuous history of a world not totally
unlike our own, except that it is a flat disc carried on the backs of
four elephants astride a giant turtle floating through space, and that
it is peopled by, among others, wizards, dwarves, policemen, thieves,
beggars, vampires and witches. Within the history of Discworld there are
many individual stories, which can be read in any order, but reading
them in sequence can increase your enjoyment through the accumulation of
all the fine detail that contributes to the teeming imaginative
complexity of this brilliantly conceived world.

[Image]

COVER

ABOUT THE BOOK

INTRODUCING DISCWORLD

TITLE PAGE

INTRODUCTION

...

ANKH-MORPORK AND THE STO PLAINS, PSEUDOPOLIS, QUIRM

...

THE RAMTOP REGION

...

LLAMEDOS AND THE TURNWISE OCEAN COAST

...

UBERWALD AND THE KNECK VALLEY

...

THE WIDDERSHINS LANDS

...

KLATCH THE CONTINENT

...

HOWONDALAND

...

THE MUNTAB PROVINCES

...

KRULL AND THE TURNWISE OCEAN ISLANDS

...

THE COUNTERWEIGHT CONTINENT AND SURROUNDING ISLANDS

...

FOURECKS, THE LAND OF FOG AND PURDEIGH ISLAND

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

ALSO BY TERRY PRATCHETT

COPYRIGHT

[Image]

[Image]

[Image]

For the edification, diversion and, dare we even say, delight of
readers, this publication sets out a most complete audit of our world.
We define the boundaries of nations, plot the course of rivers, and
delineate mountain ranges and natural formations of a geographical
nature as have never been seen in such detail, accuracy and ambition of
scale before. The character of each region also falls within our scope –
great cities, proud cultures and traditions, and the ways in which the
many industrious peoples of the Disc have learnt to exploit the riches
of the landscape itself, from fertile soils and teeming seas to rich
seams of treacle.

In presenting to the public this new Atlas we have spared no expense to
procure the fullest and most authentic information. We have availed
ourselves of the accounts of explorers, merchants, mariners and
missionaries. Those whose task is the building of our great clacks
network and the wonder which is our new railway system have supplied
comprehensive reports and surveys which augment our knowledge with
detailed description and information for the traveller, academic and
curious child alike.

Included for the first time is a comprehensive Gazetteer that lists not
only the countries and towns, rivers and mountains but also provides a
simple grid reference allowing the location to be most easily
identified.

The Discworld Atlas has been compiled under the aegis of the Unseen
University’s Department of Cruel and Unusual Geography, benefiting from
the expert knowledge of Professor Rincewind, whose recollection of his
travels is so remarkably clear that he did not find it necessary to
revisit any location to further the department’s work on this volume.
The Atlas also enjoys the patronage of the Patrician himself, Lord
Havelock Vetinari, to whom we respectfully dedicate this publication.

[Image]

[Image]

This well-developed area, a familiar landscape to many of our readers,
stretches from the Circle Sea hubwards to the Carrack Mountains,
turnwise to Pseudopolis and the Soar valley, and widdershins to the
lower Smarl valley including Skund, Chirm and the Morpork Mountain
range. It is dominated by a number of powerful city states, interspersed
with farmland, rivers, forests and so many cruciferous vegetables that
it has become known as the cabbage bowl of the Disc.

ANKH-MORPORK

[Image]

Ankh-Morpork nestles at the mouth of the River Ankh where it opens into
the Circle Sea, its busy port a gateway to the world. It is often said
that every commodity that can be found in the world can also be found
somewhere in the sprawling Ankh-Morpork city docks: if not stacked on
the quayside, or in the great bonded warehouse, then in the pockets of
individual entrepreneurs who, with knowing wink and discreet hand
signal, will strike a deal and exchange a bottle of brandy, packet of
cigars or some exotic product of a recreational nature for ready cash.

In the sheltered harbour one can see the dhows of Klatch, the sleek
clippers of the Turnwise Ocean Trading Company and pot-bellied
merchantmen who sail up and down the coast from Gonim to the tobacco
plantations of Howondaland. Ankh-Morpork is not only the largest city in
our world but also the dominant commercial and political centre. Every
civilized country has an embassy or consulate there. In the case of
smaller or humbler countries this can often be found sharing premises
with a curry house, furrier or in the case of the Zlobenians a clog
emporium. In this way commerce is served, cultural identity maintained
and everyone makes a dollar which is the Ankh-Morpork way.

The Unseen University is the world’s premier educational establishment,
its graduates now in positions of authority in universities worldwide.
Indeed some of its research wizards have apparently travelled to another
world altogether. Useful by-products of research in the Department of
High Energy Magic include items such as thaumic locks, Biothaumic
Imagers and of course the Personal Disorganizer, all of which are of
significant export value.

[Image]

The Compleat Ankh-Morpork, a companion volume to this publication,
provides full information on all aspects of our great city. However,
since its publication increasing requirements for industrial premises,
and growth in population, have resulted in a considerable expansion of
the city beyond its ancient walls. The new King’s Dock downriver of the
Rivergate now handles heavy-tonnage shipping for the railway, and
satellite towns such as Upunder, Suffink and Nuffink provide
accommodation for immigrant labour as well as the ever increasing
indigenous population.

[Image]

STO PLAINS: THE LOWER ANKH VALLEY

The Ankh-Morpork hegemony encompasses the independent states of the Sto
Plains. Over the centuries squabbles and shifting alliances have given
rise to formal wars and informal skirmishes, and the boundaries between
territories have advanced a few hundred yards from field edge to farm
track and back again. With the exception of the Long Thin Debated Piece
Hubwards of Sto Kerrig territorial disputes are a thing of the past;
these days marriage pacts, long engagements and formal liaisons weave
alliances and shape the political fabric of the region in much the same
way that large families keep their progeny strong and healthy with the
help of door-to-door salesmen and window cleaners.

Geography and climate

Flat plains lie either side of the River Ankh, extending hubwards to the
Carrack Mountains. The succulent fecundity of this region is legendary,
and gives rise to a burgeoning vegetable bounty that is the finest
brassica crop anywhere in the world. The gentle breezes of the Sto
Plains have a distinctive bouquet like no other and for many of those
who grew up in this region it is the comforting smell of home. A
temperate climate with regular rainfall completes the requirements of
this crop. The major population hubs are those cities which previously
competed with Ankh-Morpork for dominance – Sto Lat, Sto Kerrig and Sto
Helit.

Agriculture, industry and commerce

The railway’s requirement for iron, coal and water has brought into
being numerous settlements along the tracks and once remote hamlets and
villages now have access to a railway station with all the benefits
which that provides. Regular freight trains transport produce, at a
speed hitherto unknown, to Ankh-Morpork City, and thence via the docks
to many corners of the world that have not previously had the benefit of
so many cabbages. This wider market has led to numerous canning and
bottling plants and ever more adventurous methods of retaining the
wholesome nature of the crop. Brassica by-products such as the Huddle
Coat and the Upunder Boot are now to be found as far away as the valleys
of Llamedos and the fishing fleets of Hergen. The Horticultural Research
facilities at Big Cabbage have extended their remit and their seed banks
now include specimens from many other commercial crops such as tobacco
and coffee. A programme to develop new cultivars of various reannuals

STO LAT

[Image]

The kingdom of Sto Lat is perched on a rocky outcrop like an island
surrounded by a sea of cabbage fields. It is the commercial centre of
the cabbage trade and boasts the Grand Brassica Exchange Building where
the crop is bought and sold. Nearby, Swine Town has expanded into a base
for the railway industry and vast forges glow day and night in the
production of track and locomotive.

[Image]

STO HELIT

[Image]

Known for the skill of its tailors and lace-makers, Sto Helit has become
a centre of excellence for the manufacture of formal wear for ladies and
gentlemen, including morning coats, ball-gowns and a range of essential
underpinnings such as bustles, farthingales, flounces, panniers, ruffs,
under-ruffs, over-ruffs, petticoats, pettipants, pantalettes and sleeve
puffers. A Sto Helit seamstress has a very different reputation from her
sister in Ankh-Morpork.

STO KERRIG

[Image]

Sto Kerrig, which is located on the River Sour, a tributary of the Ankh,
is the centre of a paper-making industry based on cabbages; artisan
craftsmen produce fine watercolour paper from the white-leaved
Bockingfield cabbage. A special broccoli-juice-impregnated gummed paper
is supplied to the Ankh-Morpork Post Office for production of stamps.

The numerous other settlements in the Sto Plains are for the most part
self-governing on a day-to-day basis, under the leadership of a mayor or
the local landowner, but the Ankh-Morpork dollar reigns throughout the
area, and all follow that city’s lead, albeit often some decades to the
rear. The advent of the railway, with its multi-species workforce and
enlarged clacks system, has greatly accelerated the transfer of culture
and ideas, especially among the young. Indeed the romance of steam and
the lure of the Big Wahoonie are exerting such a pull as to make
traditional agricultural communities question their future.

Small towns further hubward along the Ankh include Much Come Lately,
which is the heart of the cabbage-leaf hat- and bonnet-making trade, the
Feltwhistles, famous for their pigs, and Fratchwood, where rustic
furniture is produced.

For those wishing to know more about the Sto Plains a useful guide Mrs
Bradshaw’s Handbook, published by Messrs Goatberger of Ankh-Morpork, is
available.

WIDDERSHINS STO PLAINS

Widdershins of the Sto Plains cities the landscape becomes craggier and
more densely covered with trees or bandits, none of which is conducive
to cabbage production and therefore civilization. This area includes the
town of Chirm and the Morpork Mountains, and extends hubwards to the
Forest of Skund.

CHIRM

A town on the Circle Sea coast at the widdershins extremity of the Sto
Plains. The once busy harbour is now silted up and bracing winds scour a
landscape of grey mudflats extending as far as the eye can see. The
population make a precarious living collecting shellfish and driftwood.
The once prolific oyster beds which were responsible for the prosperity
of the town have become unproductive.

THE MORPORK MOUNTAINS

A small and isolated coastal range. In spite of being no great distance
from Ankh-Morpork the area remains wilderness: there are no decent roads
nor any clacks terminal. This is dangerous country completely overrun by
two warring families of small-time miners. When they are not poisoning
each other’s vile home-distilled hooch, boobytrapping each other’s
banjos or undermining each other’s mines, they are liable to turn on
anyone else who strays into their path, with unbelievable ferocity. In
Professor Rincewind’s opinion they show no respect for their
environment: he has personally discovered cave walls covered in graffiti
of bulls and antelope. There are also bears.

[Image]

THE KINGDOM AND FOREST OF SKUND

[Image]

The Enchanted Forest of Skund

TURNWISE STO PLAINS

The area extending turnwise from Ankh-Morpork to the border with the
Duchy of Quirm has seen much development in recent years due to the
construction of the Ankh-Morpork to Quirm railway. It includes small
settlements and large swathes of less developed and difficult to map
land.

Geography and climate

The Turnwise Sto Plains are particularly varied in terrain. The coastal
region around Holy Wood is an unproductive area of sand dunes dominated
by ParaMountain, a single, not very high hill; turnwise the land level
falls, leading to the swamps known as the Netherglades. Inland lies
productive agricultural countryside, with small farms, orchards and
wooded areas, the most noteworthy being the Effing Forest.

THE EFFING FOREST

Fifty miles turnwise of Ankh-Morpork, it is mainly populated by loggers
and woodworkers, with the occasional family-run coalmine. This rural
and, until recently, isolated population have found a new market for
their products with the coming of the railway. The wonderfully and
naturally pigmented oak-wood which grows in this forest is highly sought
after by the high-end furniture-makers and interior designers of
Ankh-Morpork.

SHANKYDOODLE

Shankydoodle has only come into prominence since the advent of the
railway. It is a small town close to the Netherglades and is surrounded
by hamlets and farmsteads where the pace of life is measured by the
horse-racing calendar rather than any agricultural imperative.
Magnificent racehorses with long pedigrees and longer names are bred by
people whose knowledge of the turf is equal to their skill in brewing a
fine dark porter from locally grown hops, barley and spring water.

THE NETHERGLADES

A steamy, bird-abundant, reed-drifting swamp area along the Rim Ocean
coast where there is little dry land and none of that is permanent. The
indigenous humans, who over the course of generations have adapted to
suit these conditions, live and garden on large rafts. They distil
medicinal decoctions from the local flora and fauna; the Society of
Apothecaries suggests that this area could have a future as the natural
pharmacopoeia of the world. It is still, however, a perilous place for
the unwary, and most travellers content themselves with the view from
the Quiremouth to Shankydoodle train.

THE QUIRE VALLEY

Hubwards of the Effing Forest, the River Quire cuts through a bucolic
region of the Ankh-Morpork hegemony, bordering the rival states of
Pseudopolis and Quirm.

Geography and climate

The River Quire rises at the base of the Chalk. In its upper reaches,
its valley is a major watershed marking the widdershins limit of the
Octarine Grass Country; it then runs down through the Shires, finally
snaking its way by a series of lazy meanders to a wide estuary in Quirm.
The silting up of the Quire has worsened over time in the Shires –
recent mineral analysis of the riverbanks has revealed the probable
source of the problem, as they seem mainly to be composed of cow dung.
An area of cliff caves and tunnels called the Overhangs is located in
the foothills of the Carrack Mountains, on the hubward fringe of the
Shires. The climate is mostly temperate, although there is a tendency
for storms to develop along the course of the Quire in summer.

Agriculture and commerce

The Quire is navigable from the Overhangs and its oxen-powered
riverboats provide the main cargo transport of the region. Also known as
Old Treachery, it is a river which requires great skill to navigate and
the Zoon pilots who steer the lines of barges up and down the river know
every bend, shallow and crocodile. They carry iron ore and coal from the
Overhangs, wool from the Chalk and livestock, vegetables and fruit from
prosperous Shires farms down to Quirm. The return journey brings fish,
refined toffee, wine, brandy, tobacco and luxury goods to the wealthy
Shires residents. Small communities along the riverbank provide services
such as boat repair and overnight stops for oxen and crew.

A new feature of the Quire valley is the line of low-roofed sheds that
nestle into the landscape like a timber caterpillar. In these sheds
thickly spread ox dung provides an ideal medium for growing specialized
crops of rhubarb and mushrooms. The mushroom business has developed over
recent years as goblins find in these sheds an ideal habitat to both
live and work. They create a potent soup which finds its way into the
grand dining rooms of the pleasure boats as well as the galleys of the
barge folk. The rhubarb sheds on the other hand are held responsible for
the rapid increase in population in the small town of Piper’s Holding.
It is rumoured that a fair few of the children now filling the local
school were conceived in the warmth, dark and privacy of the nearby
sheds, where the sound of the rhubarb growing was the accompaniment to
many an amorous encounter.

Tourism also contributes to the local economy as luxurious leisure boats
including the famous Roberta E. Biscuit travel up and down the river.
They provide employment for both the prettier village girls who can
dance and their more homely sisters who work in the great steam laundry
in Baker’s Knob.

[Image]
Old Treachery

THE SHIRES

This pretty countryside of woodland, meadow and landscaped parkland is
where the rich and titled families of Ankh-Morpork have established
their out of town estates. Here they escape the dusty pavements and
sooty air of the capital to enjoy traditional country pursuits and the
produce of their well-managed farms. This produce has a certain cachet
in Ankh-Morpork and Quirm where a well-packaged Rust-Estate Sausage or a
carton of Crundells Complicated eggs will fetch a high price. The small
town of Ham-on-Rye (sometimes referred to by the local peasantry as
Scoone-on-Rye due to the preponderance of stately residences and shiny
all-terrain carriages bearing the crests of great Ankh-Morpork
families), which serves the area, now has a clacks terminal, as well as
a long-established seminary, St Onan’s Theological College, famed
throughout the region, if not perhaps the Disc, as the place where the
game of crockett originated.

The demographic of the Shires is largely human, but there is a
substantial goblin community around Higher and Lower Overhang and
Hangnails. Now a protected minority, the goblins no longer have to
contend with looters stealing their highly valued unggue pots or with
attacks from pressgangs. While they are not yet fully integrated into
human society, their natural mechanical ability makes them valued
employees of the Grand Trunk Company. They have also created an
underground railway running from the Carrack Mountains to the docks on
the Quire, allowing the smelted ore produced by local dwarfs easy access
to the river transport system.

QUIRM

The city of Quirm is located on the Quire estuary. Its state territory
extends along the coast and inland towards the Sto Plains, where it
borders the state of Ankh-Morpork.

[Image]

Geography and climate

The sea current along the Quirmian coast and the prevailing wind both
come across from Klatch, which creates a pleasantly warm climate all
year round, making the country ideal for viticulture. The harbour on the
Quire estuary provides shelter for the Quirm fishing fleets which
generate much of the state’s wealth. There are natural deposits of
high-grade toffee in the Worthe District and inland towards the
Ankh-Morpork border ochre is mined on the Maquis, an area of hot dry
scrubland.

Industry and commerce

The new railway line has made a great difference to the fishing industry
as the daily catch can now be sent to Ankh-Morpork within hours of
landing, where it fetches a premium price. The many vineyards, wineries
and distilleries produce award-winning wines and spirits, and when
things go wrong, vinegars, exported world-wide.

The QT (Quirm Traders Co.) operate a small merchant fleet to El Kinte,
the nearest part of Klatch. Here they supply ochre dyes and refined
syrup in exchange for offensively pungent tobacco, and perfume oils used
to create Eau-de-Quirm and other fine scents under the supervision of
Quirm’s greatest ‘nose’, Cyril de Sorbumme. Toffee refineries in the
Worthe district produce high-grade syrup from the toffee beds. Such is
the reputation of the Quirm Horticultural Research Station they receive
requests to provide specimens for floral clocks throughout the
continent. They have recently been involved in a joint venture with a
wealthy Ankh-Morpork guild to develop a striking clock using the rare
Sledgehammer Shrub.

Tourism is increasingly important to the region’s economy; easy access
via the railway along with the pleasant climate has made it a popular
holiday destination among residents of Ankh-Morpork and the Sto Plains
cities, and many are choosing to buy a second home or retire there. The
construction industry is fully employed in building hotels, and the
fishing village of Quiremouth has become a popular seaside resort.

Culture

Quirmian cuisine is world-famous, and this together with fine wines has
made Quirm the gourmet capital of the world. The high standards of
Quirmian gastronomy are policed by the Cordon Octarine, who hand out
rosettes to the best establishments based on the quality of their avec,
the rudeness of their waiters and the grammatical correctness of the
Restaurant Quirmian on their menus.

Quirm is also renowned for its educational institutions, notably the
Quirm College for Young Ladies, whose alumnae include the daughters of
the continent’s nobility. The Sorbumme district is home to the Société
Joyeux which was founded by a local man, Monsieur Jean-Paul Pune. The
building is now used by the Ankh-Morpork Fools’ Guild as a Summer School
and retirement home for silly old fools. Tastefully impromptu street
performances are common in this area; they are closely monitored by the
city elders for deviations from the city ordinances on language,
deportment and dress.

THE SOAR VALLEY

The River Soar rises in the lower Ramtops, hubwards of Sheepridge. For
much of its considerable length it flows through the Octarine Grass
Country, then broadens out across the rich alluvial plain surrounding
Pseudopolis, before reaching the sea at Soarmouth.

OCTARINE GRASS COUNTRY

This broad stretch of upland prairie rimwards of the Ramtop foothills
extends from the turnwise slopes of the upper Quire valley widdershins
as far as Llamedos. The terrain and climate provide an ideal habitat for
graminiferous plants, and the land surrounding the upper reaches of the
Soar is the main grain-growing area for the Ankh-Morpork hegemony. Its
proximity to the lower Ramtop foothills means it has a high thaumic
level, which not only accounts for the hazy purple-green colour of the
ripening wheat and corn that gives the region its sobriquet, and the
large number of crop circles, but also promotes abundant crops of
reannuals.

The small town of Sheepridge, situated on the valley bottom at the
hubwards edge of the Octarine Grass Country, serves the surrounding
agricultural communities with weekly markets, a tavern, forge and
smithy. The cobbled central square is dominated by a large ornamental
clock tower notable for the fine automata that emerge to mark the
quarter hour by striking a small bell, and occasionally their little
mechanical thumbs, with hammers. They were created by the blacksmith
Fred Simnel, whose descendants include Ned Simnel, inventor of the
short-lived Combination Harvester, and Ned’s son Dick, inventor of the
steam locomotive. Dick Simnel recently had a brass plaque fixed to the
stonework of the tower to commemorate his great-great-great-granddad.

PSEUDOPOLIS

The Republic and City of Pseudopolis serves as the economic and
commercial centre for the region turnwise from Quirm and is served by
the small fishing port of Soarmouth.

[Image]

History and culture

A history of military incompetence and the resultant loss of influence
has led to an isolationist state resentful of the fact that it is
commercially dependent on Ankh-Morpork. Once a Duchy, modern Pseudopolis
is governed by a democratically elected People’s Assembly who have
recently voted out any form of taxation. This is exacerbated by an
increase in expenditure on civic entertaining and an attempt to twin the
city with R’edurat, capital of the Howondaland state of Ymitury.

Pseudopolis boasts two significant educational establishments: the
University of Brazeneck (formerly the Brazeneck School of Conjuring),
which is attempting to achieve official approval of its upgraded
qualifications despite a recent embarrassing incident in the Higher
Energy Magic department involving a seventy-foot-high chicken; and
Thrasher’s School, which provides education for the sons of cabbage
farmers.

Trade and commerce

The flat plain either side of the Soar, enriched by its alluvial silts,
is good farming country, producing a large crop of Autumn Reliant
cabbages and broccoli, most of which is consumed locally, any excess
being canned for export. Tobacco comes up the coast from Quirm and is
blended to produce rolling tobacco, cigars, snuff and a local variety of
fudge which members of the Assembly are usually required to eat at civic
events with visible and convincing signs of enjoyment whilst declaring
it to be better than anything on offer from Worthe or Morporkian treacle
mines.

[Image]

[Image]

At the centre of our world the cold, green-iced, stony spike that is
Cori Celesti rises ten miles into the sky to Dunmanifestin, home of the
Gods. From here a vast magical field creates the spectacular Aurora
Corialis with its curtains of green fire. The Ramtop Mountains circle
this Hub of the Disc like a spiky crown, their sharp pinnacles a
barricade against incursions. In spite or maybe because of this the
monks of the Enlightenment Country have built their monasteries among
these snow-covered peaks. Extending inland from the frayed coast of
Nothingfjord are the chill Vortex Plains, and the barren Hubland Steppes
stretch towards the Sea of Deliverance. The most populated region of the
Ramtops, towards Ankh-Morpork, includes the Kingdom of Lancre.

THE ENLIGHTENMENT COUNTRY

A land without borders in the high Ramtops. From the snow-capped peaks
the clear-sighted can view the Agatean Empire and the icy Dire Straits.
Temples cling to crystalline slopes, gongs ringing out through air as
sharp as blades. Here live the fabled monks who hold the balance of our
world in their spiritual embrace.

[Image]

Geography and climate

A towering landscape of ice and snow, with the exception of the Oi Dong
monastery which seems to have its own microclimate. There are no maps
and the exact location of the various monasteries is uncertain, though
it is believed that they are many miles apart. Few can brave the
distance and extreme conditions of the journey to the Enlightenment
Country but some pilgrims do come to witness the wonders of the Temple
of the Listening Monks and the ice-carved valley leading into it.
Sound-proofed accommodation may be found in the village of Bong Hush
near by, where the locals augment their living by administering hot
beverages and providing thick yak-wool socks to pilgrims. The Dongees,
which drains into the Dire Straits, is the only river in the region
whose waters, though icy cold, never freeze. It is presumed that this is
the result of the microclimate of the upper Dong valley and gives a clue
to the whereabouts of the Oi Dong Monastery.

[Image]

[Image]
Listening monk performing the Rite of Good Vibration.

Hardy mountain people live in small settlements just above the snowline
with their herds of yak. The villagers of Bong Phut, Long Nap and
Songset supply food (yak meat, yak milk, yak cheese, yak butter, yak
yoghurt, yak ice-cream and yak jam) to the various monasteries.

The Monasteries

THE BALANCING MONKS

At the edge of one’s senses, from the corner of the eye, it is possible
to witness the work of the Balancing Monks as they perform their task of
fine-tuning the equilibrium of the world, making adjustments with small
brass weights which they suspend from rocky outcrops and overhanging
cliffs. The sky around their monasteries is criss-crossed with wires and
ropes and their voices echo through the valleys as they call out their
calibrations.

THE LISTENING MONKS

The Listening Monks dwell in a temple curled like an ammonite, its
aperture receptive to sounds and reverberations which swirl up the
ice-carved, acoustically shaped valley.

Within the temple, complex structures amplify and clarify the sounds
which funnel in to the central listening chamber where the monks are
always present. Listening. Their quest is to discern the faint echoes of
creation, the first tick from the dawn of time.

THE FIGHTING ORDER OF WEN
(also known as the History Monks)

These legendary monks live in the highest and most secret valley of all,
in the cherry-blossom-wreathed monastery of Oi Dong (or No Such
Monastery). Few outsiders have visited this monastery and returned.
Those that do speak of perfect spring days, blossom-covered trees, white
doves and sometimes the gift of a small copper token. They describe vast
caverns filled with revolving stone cylinders and ever-changing patterns
on sandy floors. More startling than mysterious are the gaily painted
demons and the traps in the aptly titled Garden of Five Surprises where
a little bridge tips the unwary visitor into a carp-pool, and daisies
spray venomous pollen. It seems the title of their order, founded by Wen
the Eternally Surprised, comes from the various martial arts performed
by the monks, which are essential to develop their time-slicing skills.
The injuries and destruction that exponents of okidoki and upsidazi are
able to wreak are purely a side-effect of this specialist training.
(Mind you, according to Mrs Cosmopilite, who offers accommodation in
Ankh-Morpork to visiting acolytes, it comes in jolly handy if one is
faced by unlicensed thieves or unchopped firewood. And no one has ever
been seriously injured by ninja flower arranging except brother Fusta
who had an accident with some teasels.) Unlikely though it may seem,
these monks have their own establishment in Ankh-Morpork from which they
are able to come and go unnoticed. It is believed that they have a
finger on the pulse of time which in some way, unknown to ordinary
mortals, they regulate to the general benefit of all.

THE YEN BUDDHISTS OF MUTURAN

The magnificent temple complex of the Yen Buddhists with its gold-roofed
pagodas and domes glinting in the sun is testament to the success of
their ambitions – to save the world from the dangers of personal wealth,
luxury and the comfort of large bank accounts. The Yen brothers go about
the world with their begging bowls, and fine illuminated mail-order
catalogues offering the secret to eternal life, enlightenment and
everlasting happiness. Their mantra ‘Relinquish all pleasure in this
world and everything you wish for will be yours in the next’ meets with
a measured response from those who have almost enough and as much as
they can afford from the poor. The seriously rich, of course, get what
is coming to them.

[Image]

THE BROTHERS OF COOL

This select community of monks live in a small but well-designed modern
monastery with plain sanded wooden floors, white walls and minimal
decoration. On the decking outside is a pair of manicured trees in
terracotta pots.

The monks wear simple but well-cut black habits and sunglasses. The cool
rhythm of their soft-shoed gongs echoes around the valley and they offer
advice on fashion and interior design to seekers after ‘cool’. They hate
being confused with what they call ‘those overdressed, new-age hummers
up the valley’.

THE HUBLAND STEPPES

[Image]

[Image]

An area of high treeless plains in the shadow of the Hub, inhabited by
nomadic horsemen whose lives revolve around their shaggy Hubland horses
and the by-products derived from them. Intensely tribal and warlike,
they are in continual strife with their neighbours and believe that
death in combat will be rewarded with an afterlife of carousing and
feasting in the company of buxom young women. This expectation makes for
particularly fearless warriors and many great heroes have their origins
in this region.

[Image]

Hublanders also have a facility for natural magic and the female elders
are adept fortune tellers using either Caroc cards or more traditionally
the Ching Aling. Predicting someone’s future in this region is not
difficult. ‘You will be struck down and die heroically in battle’ covers
most outcomes.

THE VORTEX PLAINS

[Image]

[Image]

A vast area of trackless wastes interspersed with stone circles, mystic
avenues and immense monoliths. A place of vexatious blizzards, peevish
squalls, freezing rain and always the wind. The Vortex winds emanate
from the Hub, bringing with them enough raw magic to transform a few
lumps of rock into an accurate calculator, calendar and meteorological
office. The economy of the region is surprisingly strong. There is a
vibrant cottage industry in making knee-top versions of the great stone
circles for the market in Ankh-Morpork. This has certainly helped in the
balance of payments between the Association of Peripatetic Druids and
the fishermen of Nothingfjord. Congregations of druids inhabit rather
damp and uncomfortable stone buildings encompassing workshops and school
rooms. The Grand Trunk Company believes a clacks line to relay accurate
weather forecasts would be viable despite difficulties of climate and
terrain.

THE LOWER RAMTOPS AND UPPER ANKH

The lower Ramtops, hubward of the great Sto Plains, is a land of tiny
kingdoms and principalities. Isolated settlements squeeze into river
valleys, cling to ledges and perch on any piece of flat ground big
enough for a goat to stand on. Some countries such as Lancre run to a
small castle and town with a few surrounding hamlets; others such as
Spackle consist of a walled group of cottages clustered around a manor
house. They are ruled by hereditary kings, dukes, barons or clan
leaders, few of whom have more influence on the lives of their subjects
than the terrain. The countryside varies from dense pine forests and
dark valleys too narrow for the sun to reach, to high exposed moorland.
This ‘gnarly ground’, as it is termed locally, is where magic pleats the
landscape into folds and crevices that test the courage and perception
of any traveller. People born of this landscape are hardy, resourceful
and independent. Many witches and some wizards are born here, and
migrants frequently excel in the outside world. This area is home to
several dwarf communities, particularly around Copperhead Mountain where
they mine for gold. A number of trolls live in family groups on the
lower Ramtop slopes. Both these populations coexist quite peacefully
with the human inhabitants.

Rimwards of the Ramtops proper, the range of eight peaks known as the
Paps of Scilla is treacherous terrain, with many broken caverns
overflowing with water. By contrast, the Chalk, lying turnwise of the
Paps, is a well-settled downland region, with a more temperate climate.

[Image]
The approach to Lancre Castle.

LANCRE

One of the best-known Ramtop countries, representative of the smaller
Ramtop states, is the Kingdom of Lancre. It occupies a little cup of
valleys cut into the side of a mountain. Behind it are the peaks and
dark winding valleys of the high Ramtops, in front the land descends
abruptly to the plains. Much of it is forested, none of it is flat. The
Lancre River runs through a series of cascades and rapids culminating in
a great waterfall dropping down to the plain. Lancre Town is the main
centre of population, and is surrounded by smaller villages including
Bad Ass, Mad Stoat and Slice, location of two widely studied
geographical phenomena: The Place Where the Sun Does Not Shine and A
Rock and a Hard Place.

[Image]

[Image]

Governance

King Verence II is an enlightened ruler and is introducing modern
farming methods as well as a form of democracy. The rights of the Lancre
peasantry are enshrined in law and the country has a stable economy
relying on forestry and farming.

The historic and vast Lancre Castle was constructed over many centuries;
the royal home, seat of government, meeting place and centre for both
civic and popular celebrations. A ‘changing of the guard’ ceremony takes
place each day at 5pm, when the guard takes off his helmet, puts his
coat on and goes home for tea. A document detailing ‘The Rights of a
Lancre Citizen’ is on display in the main entrance.

Agriculture and commerce

High-quality speciality products such as Lancre cider, including the
Scumble variety so popular across the Sto Plains as an industrial
cleaning fluid, Lancre Blue cheese famous for its heady aroma of
decomposition, and Lancre wool, sometimes used with Scumble for scouring
pans, are exported to Ankh-Morpork and beyond.

The arrival of the railway, in the form of a branch line to the logging
area of Hot Dang, has increased the output of timber considerably and
has introduced a new source of income in the form of ‘Walkers’. These
are people for whom the backpack, a stout stick and pair of boots are
the key to a good holiday, and they now flock to Lancre and the
surrounding countryside.

Culture and customs

There is more than extreme geography to contend with in Lancre. A high
background level of magic has created an environment where a standing
stone stands where it likes and a circle of standing stones is often a
portal to another and less friendly world. The population take all this
in their stride and they are protected by witches who can sense the
tenor of the land and guard their villagers from malign influence. They
watch over the beginning and ending of every life and have a unique
status in, but not of, the community. They are also extremely
knowledgeable about … herbs, and their uses. Regarding religion, most of
the population take the view that nature is enough of a challenge
without resorting to gods, but are generally tolerant of others’
beliefs. In their opinion it is more important to celebrate a birth, a
wedding, a good harvest, or a funeral than worry about which god they
are using as a witness.

Lancre is the spiritual home of Morris dancing, and the Lancre Morris
Men have triumphed in the Fifteen Mountains All-Comers Morris Dancing
Championship no fewer than seven times, most recently when crippling
groin injuries and a dislocated elbow forced their opponents to withdraw
in the middle of the Stick and Bucket Dance.

THE CHALK

[Image]

This grassy upland rises from the plains like an immense upturned boat.
It is a landscape of stone circles, overgrown flint pits, barrows, and
the occasional shepherd’s hut. The thin grass is scraped away in places
to create images of great white horses and giants which are visible for
miles around.

It is a region governed by the seasons; the annual Scouring Fair runs
for three days at the end of summer and is accompanied by cheese-rolling
and other bucolic activities. Largely populated by sheep, with a limited
infestation by clans of Pictsies, and surrounded at its base by villages
and hamlets, the governance of this well-defined region is in the hands
of the Barony of Arken; it borders the Duchy of Keepsake at its turnwise
edge. The many small farms along the Chalk are now able to supplement
their income from cheese-making and fleeces by supplying holidaymakers
from the cities of the Sto Plains with provisions and somewhere to camp.
However, the thieving by the local Pictsies, who characteristically view
this peripatetic population as a source of food and drink and anything
else that takes their fancy, is causing ill-feeling.

[Image]
Remains of a traditional shepherding hut, once more common on the Chalk.

UPPER ANKH VALLEY

The peoples of the lower Ramtops and the Chalk rely for provisions and
communications on the small market towns which sit along the hem of the
foothills. Nearest of these is Ohulan Cutash, just fifteen miles from
Lancre, which now boasts a clacks tower and railway station. Located on
the upper Ankh, the town has a small quay and is famous for its market.
Twoshirts, which serves the villages of the Chalk and is renowned for
its annual cabbage macerating festival, also benefits from a railway
station, and a Rapid Response Igor Post based in the local inn due to
the regular flow of lumberjacks through the small town.

The ancient walled city of Zemphis has a chequered history. Built at the
junction of three trade routes including the famed Aglet Road, it began
as a camel and oxen staging point on the banks of the River Ankh. At one
time a rich and well-governed city, it has since become a lawless
outpost frequented by unlicensed beggars and thieves, although the
arrival of the railway has brought signs of regeneration. Trading still
goes on at the souk in Downsized Abbey, but adulterated crude treacle
and troll drugs such as Slab are much in evidence, smuggling is rife and
Zemphis is a favoured destination for those on the run from creditors,
inhumation and the law.

[Image]

[Image]

LLAMEDOS

The country of Llamedos is located on the Turnwise Ocean coastline and
extends inland to the Cutshade Forest and the foothills of the Ramtops.
It lies widdershins of Chimeria and Hergen.

[Image]

Geography and climate

The sodden, bracken-clad hillsides of Llamedos are a misty watercolour
of green and grey; it is a landscape where bruised skies loom over
ancient slate, rushing rivers and waterfalls. In the gloom of the
evergreen forest, on the rocky highlands and even in the damp caves of
Llamedos it rains from dawn to dusk and from twilight to sunrise – every
day.

Local maps are unreliable; over the years the druids have tinkered with
the landscape, moving mountains (and the occasional troll) to create
their monumental constructions, while the mining activities of dwarf and
human have generated great slag heaps which fill valleys and block
roads. Engineers for the Grand Trunk Company have encountered many
difficulties extending the clacks network inland, as witnessed by a
report from a surveyor working in the Ramtop foothills entitled ‘The
Hill that Became a Mountain that wasn’t there on Friday’.

Agriculture and industry

Llamedos is rich in minerals including iron, silver, gold, zinc and
arsenic, though the seams are small and very, very deep. It is believed
that the vurms which dwarfs use to illuminate their mines and caverns
were first discovered in these extreme depths.

[Image]

The local breed of highland sheep provide a soft absorbent wool totally
unsuited to the climate; in Llamedos sheep have to be regularly wrung
out (as opposed to being dipped) or they become completely waterlogged.
Pantygirdl, the main city, situated at the mouth of the River Llwk-yu,
has recently expanded its port and there is a new trade in waterproof
clothing and umbrellas from Ankh-Morpork in exchange for musical
instruments, carved wooden spoons and small portable henges.

Culture and customs

The country’s human population, known for its short stature and musical
ability, coexists happily with an equal number of dwarfs, the two
species living together in mining communities and fishing villages.
Until recently Llamedos was isolated from the outside world, its human
culture and religion dominated by the druids, whose influence can still
be seen as far afield as the Vortex Plains. Their great stone circles,
or henges, were regarded as places of magic and worship and even today
communities gather to celebrate significant events such as a day without
rain or the delivery of a new monolith.

With the recent crowning of native Llamedosian Rhys (Blodwen) Rhysson as
Low Queen of the dwarfs, the country is opening up to other influences
which have introduced the Llamedosians to a secular society. Some of the
human inhabitants even join the dwarf population for worship in their
underground chapels or Takernacles as they are called.

The annual Eisteddfod (literal translation ‘a nice sit down’) is an
important cultural gathering in the Llamedosian calendar. It takes place
in a remote valley surrounded by the Hollowed Hills where generations of
miners have left mile after mile of empty tunnels and chambers. Here
bards compete for the mistletoe award and centennial harp in renditions
of traditional songs

LANDS OF DRAGONS AND HEROES

These lands – Hergen, Gonim, Chimeria and the Ecalpon peninsula –
stretch turnwise from Llamedos as far as Whale Bay and the seas around
the Dire peninsula. Hergen extends inland to the bitter, ice-sharp
waters of the Growling River. The hubward borders of the other states
are ill-defined but it is generally accepted that the Great Inferior
Lake is Gonim territory.

HERGEN

[Image]

Geography and climate

Coastal areas of Hergen are quite temperate, but inland the temperature
drops sharply due to the chill winds from the Hub.

The central grasslands of Hergen are the one place in the world where
the cartographic legend ‘Here be Dragons’ is entirely appropriate. It is
an area with a high thaumic field which boasts one of the most
extraordinary topographical features ever to be seen. Called the
Wyrmberg, it has the appearance of an inverted mountain rising from a
small rocky base half a mile into the sky; its wide, flat, grassy top
just visible through the clouds. Anecdotes of half-visible dragons with
human riders have featured in many stories from this region and a recent
report (reproduced here) to the Grand Trunk Company, who are extending
their clacks network along the Turnwise Ocean coast, lends further
credence to these tales.

Inevitably dragon-spotters (dracophiles) are drawn to the area and some
even try to climb the Wyrmberg or chip off a piece of the rock as a
memento. There have been some very unpleasant incidents and the area is
now fenced off.

[Image]

[Image]

Agriculture and industry

Along the coastal waters of Hergen, prolific shoals of herring provide
the employment and wealth of the country. Flipper Point at the narrow
entrance to Sealy Bay is a well-known landmark for mariners, but the
treacherous rocks make access to the bay difficult. The main port of
Smork, on the mouth of the Big Foot River, is easily located even in
thick fog, by the pungent smell that emanates from the many smoke houses
dedicated to the production of that renowned delicacy the Smork Smokie.
The smoke-pickled inhabitants of the town have little to offer in terms
of hospitality apart from the sea-salt-watery herring beer, which is an
acquired taste, and the spirit they distil from fish tails and swim
bladders which can also be used as an emetic.

Culture and customs

The heroes of legend are rumoured to reside in the high reaches of the
Caderack Mountains on the hubward borders of Hergen. Here they relive
their fearless adventures as they share their stories sitting together
outside the great stave hall in late summer sunshine.

Their traditional garb of semi-cured leather loincloth is augmented with
knitted shawls, woollen hats and sheepskin slippers. They are not
getting any younger.

[Image]
The Weekly ‘Saga Break’ at the Caderack Senior Centre (BYO saga).

CHIMERIA

The mist-shrouded land of Chimeria is believed to be located on the
coast turnwise of Llamedos, although the mist makes it hard to say for
sure. It may be because of local currents or a turnwise-running tide but
seafarers who try to make landfall here usually find themselves run
aground on the treacherous rocks of Sealy Bay. Inland the borders are
ill-defined and the prevailing foggy gloom makes any surveying almost
impossible. None the less at the Llamedos Eisteddfod a Chimerian choir
invariably appear with a rendition of their national anthem ‘The Dewy
Dewy Fog’.

GONIM

The land of Gonim is more a geographical area than a country, extending
as it does to the Ecalpon peninsula, and including the Baffled Islands,
Cape Despair and Whale Bay. The interior, with its glacial freshwater
lakes and chill rivers, is sparsely populated. Cold damp springs and
insect-ridden summers are followed by autumns of freezing fog and
exceptionally hard winters. Whale Bay, as its name suggests, is home to
the Great Blues Whale, so named for its sorrowful disposition and
doleful songs. These great beasts are hunted, but not for their meat or
blubber, though that is a useful by-product: they are slaughtered mostly
to silence them. Their gloomy choruses echoing through freezing fog and
frozen landscape often prove too much for the exhausted and struggling
inhabitants of this inhospitable land.

ECALPON AND THE DIRE STRAITS

There is little one can say about Ecalpon, a peninsula of icy wastes and
few people, forming the turnwise coast of Whale Bay. Some mariners have
ventured through these waters as far as the Dire Straits, and the names
of coastal features such as Cape Despair, Desolation Point, Sour Creek
and Chill Sound give testament to their difficulties. Those that
survived tell stories of great hardship, freezing conditions and
starvation surrounded by a sea of pack ice, rocky outcrops and immense
icebergs.

[Image]

[Image]

This vast area of the main continent is bordered by Nothingfjord on its
widdershins edge and extends as far rimward as the Great Moulder Lake;
its turnwise boundary runs from an area of the Ramtops hubwards of
Lancre, then down the River Smarl to the point where the river debouches
into the Sto Plains. It includes Uberwald and the former Uberwald states
of Borogravia, Mouldavia and Zlobenia.

UBERWALD

[Image]

Geography and history

With an approximate landmass six times that of the whole of the Sto
Plains, Uberwald is a vast country. Extending from the River Smarl to
Nothingfjord and from Borogravia right up to the Hub it encompasses a
wide range of climatic conditions from permafrost to temperate clime.

It has a dark, strife-riven past – the region, which during its most
expansive period included the Kneck States, was formerly called the Dark
Empire, the Evil Empire and the Unholy Empire, although mostly by
outsiders. To its inhabitants it was more commonly known as the Uberwald
Sorcerous Republic. With the departure of the Evil Emperor the region
has opened up to the outside world and its modern ways, although even
today there are large areas where the population still live in small
fortified towns, subject to petty fiefdoms, where the rule of law is
arbitrary and hereditary privilege leads to a continuation of ‘The Old
Ways’.

There are distinct geo-political and economic areas within Uberwald and
for convenience the country is often divided into regions: Far Uberwald
is the most hubward and comprises the Loko region as well as the upper
valley of the River Ah. Central Uberwald includes the Trollbone mountain
range, the Glümee valley and Muskovado River.

Turnwise Uberwald is the area centred on the upper Koom valley.

High Uberwald includes the vast underground realm of Schmaltzberg
(location of the richest seams of high-quality fat in the world) and
extends along the rivers Smarl, Bonk and Blintz. This region, which is
more easily accessible, particularly since the advent of the railway,
contains the major centres of commerce and population.

Population and society

Uberwald encompasses both the Kingdom of the Dwarfs and the Kingdom of
the Trolls, and communities of both these species are spread throughout
the region. The Loko valley is home to tribes of goblins and, until
recently, displaced orcs.

Small independent territories throughout the country are ruled by noble
families, many of whom date back hundreds of years in an unbroken line –
or in some cases, unbroken lifespans – of stake and coffin.

There are also family packs of lycanthropes that coexist in an uneasy
alliance with the vampire clans.

Away from the major cities and towns, and scattered in between the
various territories, live small pockets of actual humanity that are
regarded by their masters, at various times, as neighbours, servants and
on occasion sustenance.

Trade and industry

The principal export from Uberwald is dwarfs, who with their mining and
metalwork skills create considerable wealth for their subterranean
communities both at home and abroad. Uberwald is so rich in natural
resources that if ever there was a cohesive and unified system of
government then it would become an unrivalled economic powerhouse. For
this reason, in spite of the difficult terrain and the often hostile
populace, the Grand Trunk Company is making great efforts to extend its
network here. Meanwhile the railway which now links Ankh-Morpork to Bonk
has the backing of the Low Queen of the Dwarfs.

There is a legend that the rich fats of the Schmaltzberg region came
into existence when a fifth elephant which once stood alongside the four
great beasts that support the Disc of the world slipped from its
position and fell to the ground in Uberwald, enriching the underlying
strata with adipose deposits. This theory is generally discredited
though no other explanation has been proposed. Exploitation of this
resource creates employment not just for the miners who live quite
literally off the fat of this land, but also for the many ancillary
workers; and with freight trains now running the industry goes from
strength to strength. The Suet and Tallow Express carries tankers full
of high-grade oil, trucks of tallow, barrels of suet and boxes of
candles and tapers down to the Sto Plains and beyond, the whole
logistical operation being run by the fat controller from his office in
Bonk.

[Image]
Don’tgonearthe Castle

FAR UBERWALD

[Image]

The Loko region is a dramatic landscape of deep valleys and lake-filled
craters, isolated from the rest of Uberwald by the ring of mountains
surrounding it. There is a large goblin population but the few remaining
orcs have now mostly been integrated into Uberwaldean society. Small,
heavily defended dwarf mining communities extract the rare and costly
stygium ore in the most dangerous conditions. It has been postulated
that stygium’s tendency to absorb light and heat might account for the
extreme coldness of this region. Malign influences and very high thaumic
contamination make it a hostile environment, as discovered by the
unfortunate Morporkian adventurers who retrieved a cache of mystic
scrolls from jars buried deep underground in the area and marked ‘do not
open’, all of whom very surprisingly died of obscure magical diseases
some months later. The twin perils of superheated stygium and icy
outdoor temperatures have led to the establishment of a specialist Igor
station, dealing almost entirely in fingers.

[Image]

The Ah valley, however, has been opened up to provide holiday
destinations for the young and adventurous traveller. The town of
Notfaroute-on-Ah has an outdoor pursuits centre, based in an old castle.
The centre was established in the year of the Signifying Frog by Count
Anton Von Freude, a senior Black Ribboner. His intention was to
strengthen the resolve of newly reformed young vampires by providing
challenging activities such as white-water rafting, extreme kayaking and
feckless mountaineering. Nowadays anyone is welcome, and safety measures
are reputed to be the best of their kind on the Disc, since the founders
considered that even minor scrapes, cuts or nosebleeds would be
detrimental to their aims.

The small town of Voxbergstadt near the Hub is the venue for a Biennial
Ice Sculpture Competition. Here skilled craftsmen create shimmering
images of centaurs, fauns, Schüschein Bearded Pigs, Uberwaldean Land
Eels, Kneck Cricked Swans and other delightful creatures in front of a
shivering but appreciative audience. The walls of nearby caves at
Übergigle are covered with hundreds of ancient, crudely painted
representations of what may be mammoths, but could just as easily be
goats, rabbits or possibly trout. Scholarly opinion is divided.

The town of Müning is the home of the Uberwald Clown School, and from
here troupes of travelling entertainers spread a little mirth and
jollity around local villages. Müning hosts the annual Sloshi Duelling
contests which are held on Fool’s Day in early April.

The Grand Trunk Company have issued a leaflet alerting their employees
to the possible hazards of working in Uberwald. Visitors would be wise
to heed this advice.

[Image]

CENTRAL UBERWALD

This is a mountainous area between the Blintz and Glümee rivers,
sparsely populated and with few natural resources, except for large
deposits of prehistoric sugar around the Muskovado River. This is the
foundation of the confectionery and building industry in the main town
of Kashncari, from where high-quality sugar panes are exported across
the region for use in the windows, conservatories and coffee tables of
discerning witches. The Trollbone mountain range is, as its name
suggests, home to some of the largest and most ancient trolls in
existence. In spite of this, or possibly because of this, it is an
unspoilt walking and rock-climbing area. The late travel-writer Eric
Wheelbrace produced a guide, Trekking in the Trollbones, which in
addition to maps and planned walks contains some tips on how to survive
in ‘Backward’ or ‘Banjo-Troll’ country.

[Image]

‘The usual climbing methods for mountainous terrain must be carefully
adapted if one is not to lose one’s head or limbs in the maw of an
enraged troll. Crampons are not advised. The mountain adze or pick is a
complete no-no; the very sight of such a device will rouse even the most
somnolent troll. For many years I have successfully used a stout ash
stick tipped with lead. My tent is held down with whatever loose
boulders are to hand. Failing that, the Grimsdyke self-erecting
bamboo-framed tepee will support itself and may be tucked into suitable
crevices.’ Eric Wheelbrace, Trekking in the Trollbones.

HIGH UBERWALD

The region of High Uberwald includes the area widdershins from the Smarl
River, taking in the lower Bonk valley and extending to the Blintz
valley and rimward to Uberwald’s border with Borogravia.

[Image]

The Fifth Elephant, a famous and hospitable inn near the Wilinus Pass.
Typical of the eateries in the area, it serves a hearty and homely menu,
mainly consisting of Fatsup Soup and traditional sausages. This type of
hostelry is booming with the recent arrival of the railways.

THE TWIN CITIES OF BONK-SCHMALTZBERG

Located in the Bonk valley, on the principal route to and from the Sto
Plains through the Wilinus Pass, via road and the rather less
bandit-prone railway, the twin cities of Schmaltzberg and Bonk would be
the capital of Uberwald – if such a place could exist. It is here that
other nations have their embassies and trade legations, and
Bonk-Schmaltzberg is the very fulcrum of the balance of power between
ruling factions and species. The twin cities are also the cultural
centre of Uberwald – a conjunction fostered by certain parties, since
artistic endeavours provide a rich cover for cloaking the darker acts of
diplomacy, espionage and assassination.

On the surface Bonk is a traditional High Uberwald gated city with
cobbled streets and highly decorated vernacular architecture in the form
of carved wooden gables, shutters, and verandas. Behind a fortified gate
in the central square, a tunnel leads to the dwarf city of Schmaltzberg,
a vast underground complex that stretches over many square miles. As
with all dwarf territories, few maps of this area exist and those that
do are closely guarded from outsiders who might be tempted to intrude in
search of gold, fat or excitement involving traps and rolling balls.
Schmaltzberg is the official residence of the Low King or Queen and the
repository of dwarf family archives for the whole world. Adjacent to
this gatehouse is the Royal Bakery and Dough Assay Office, which
supplies the Schmaltzberg court with dwarf bread and sets the benchmark
for all baked goods. The stamp of this office on a loaf certifies its
authenticity and a minimum gravel content. The bakery is the sole
producer of a speciality of the region which combines grade A refined
fat with sugar from the Muskovado region to create a sweet biscuit.
Traditionally cut into fan shapes, this Schmaltz-bread is packaged in
brightly coloured boxes for the gift market.

Key landmarks above ground in Bonk include the Chocolate Museum in
Prince Vodorny Square, the Lipid Institute in Porxzy Place and the
iconic sculpture which dominates Schmaltz Platz. The imposing building
which houses the Lipid Institute reflects the importance of the
fat-mining industry. It produces geological surveys for prospectors as
well as developing new methods for fat extraction and assaying. There is
a small museum with a fascinating display of suet and tallow ores along
with samples of refined lard, wax and oil.

[Image]

The new Bonk-Schmaltzberg railway station is an engineering marvel:
there is a second ticket hall well below ground level from which a
steam-powered moving staircase takes the passenger up to the main
concourse without incurring a glimpse of daylight. Special low-ceilinged
coaches with thick curtains enable drudak’ak, or ‘deep down’ dwarfs to
avail themselves of this speedy and safe mode of transport without the
sin of becoming ‘enlightened’.

THE BONK VALLEY

The Black-Boulder nature reserve a few miles from the city is considered
of special interest internationally to students of geology. Subterranean
volcanic activity creates many hot-water springs and also, unique to
this area, occasional fat geysers. Recent studies have ascertained that
the fat that bubbles to the surface is highly polluted and not
recommended for cooking. Neither, contrary to popular belief, is it a
cure for boils, yaws, or parasitic infestations. It can, however,
provide waterproofing when smeared on to hessian or canvas.

The thermal spring at Bad Heisses is of equal interest. A large circular
sunken pool from which there is a fine view of boiling mud pits,
volcanic cones and smoking vents, its water is believed to have a
beneficial effect on the skin and to remove wrinkles and upper-lip hair.

Many people travel to the town of Duschen-Duschen on the Bonk valley
floor for the annual music festival which features a mixed-species
orchestra under the direction of Herr Furtivitz. The programme also
regularly includes a Llamedos male-voice choir, the Ironfoundersson
Brass Ensemble, the Von Trappe sisters on tubular bells and a virtuoso
performance by Igor playing the piano duet for three hands by Magyrato.

[Image]

Hochsommer-Würdig, a short distance upriver from Bonk, is the birthplace
of the president of the Uberwald League of Temperance. It is still an
important centre for the Black Ribboners, who hold an annual Convention
in the Imperial hotel where various techniques and recipes are exchanged
and self-help groups meet. The historic town of Bugs, higher up the Bonk
valley, has a small museum dedicated to the Diet of Bugs, which houses
the original of the treaty of non-aggression, complete with congealed
signatures and paw prints.

The pretty and peaceful villages of Kost and Schnappe near the
confluence of the rivers Bonk and Smarl are traditionally a popular
resort for honeymooners. Of late, the tourist industry in this area has
suffered some decline due to the activities of Count Von Stucken, who
directs his winning ways towards the more lissom brides. It is not so
much the brides themselves that have raised complaints but their newly
wed husbands who have had, on occasion, the object of their passion
quite literally taken out from under them.

THE BLINTZ VALLEY

The town of Glitz, at the confluence of the Blintz and Vieux rivers, has
always had a certain importance as a trading town and its small river
port serves the barges taking stone from the nearby quarry down to
Genua. The residents have long enjoyed the benefit of the plentiful fish
which travel upriver to spawn: in particular the Blintz Kaluga, from
which they extract the roe for the making of Kaluga fish jam. Highly
prized by epicureans, this delicacy now reaches a wide market, including
Ankh-Morpork, where it is popularly served with scones and cream in
accordance with the well-known recipe in Mrs Ogg’s Joye of Snacks.

Bad Blintz, a pretty therapeutic spa and ‘chocolate-box’ town, is a
showplace for a unique social contract between the townsfolk and the
local rat population. The two communities are thoroughly integrated; the
city watch includes ‘watch-rats’ and all public notices and street signs
are bilingual. The clock tower in the market square attracts much
attention when the rats strike the bells every quarter hour, and once a
day the town’s rat-piper plays his pipes and the rats dance to the
music. This spectacle was for some time a source of tension with the
nearby dwarf population, who tended to regard it as a free buffet, but
formal agreement has recently been reached recognizing the rats’
protected status.

[Image]

[Image]

On St Prodnitz’s Day the rats organize vast extravaganzas with hundreds
of sequin-wearing rats performing water ballet in the fountains and
tap-dancing in the cobbled squares.

The town of Blintz is located at the head of the Blintz valley and has
the dubious distinction of having more lightning strikes than anywhere
else in Uberwald. This probably explains why it has become a centre of
excellence for the Igor clan, although the responsive nature of the
weather in this region means that it could be the other way round, with
the preponderance of Igors and their masters triggering appropriately
dramatic background weather. Cutting-edge surgery is carried out in the
well-equipped cottage hospital, and the nearby Institute of Creative
Biology has an ambitious research programme. Blintz is also home to the
long-term repository and lending mausoleum of the Igors. Written records
dating back thousands of years are methodically kept so that every
transaction can be identified. The fascination with tracing ancestral
antecedents that has arisen within the expatriate community in
Ankh-Morpork has resulted in a new service being offered by the
curators. The Who Do You Think You Were agency also publishes a
quarterly bulletin.

TURNWISE UBERWALD: KOOM VALLEY

Mere mention of Koom Valley, site of a landmark battle between dwarfs
and trolls, can elicit an almost visceral response: historically loaded
with emotions in the race memory of dwarf and troll, it has influenced
both the history and the thinking of these two species and is the fuse
by which any number of skirmishes have been ignited. Geographically it
is a deep and gloomy chasm bounded by tall mountains that frame a grim
vista towards the central column of the Hub. The softness of the
limestone at its base and the height of the mountains have turned the
valley into a geological plughole, into which the waters of all the
surrounding areas swirl, carving out treacherous sinkholes. It is a
landscape of waterfalls, caves and underground streams and subject to
sudden floods. Despite the many stories told and battles fought, it is
only recently that the site of the original conflict has been
identified; thanks to the diplomatic efforts of the Ankh-Morpork
government together with the leadership of trolls and dwarfs the Koom
Valley Accord was finally ratified in the Year of the Prawn.

[Image]
Detail of Methodia Rascal’s ‘Battle of Koom Valley’.

An educational visitor’s centre has recently been established on the
site of the battle to promote cooperation between species. It features a
papier mâché diorama of the battle which has thus far suffered only
slight flood damage, and hosts an annual Thud tournament of
international renown. Trekking in the upper valley is increasingly
popular but is recommended for the experienced walker only. Walking in
the Koom Valley by Eric Wheelbrace provides maps and guides and some
planned excursions.

THE KNECK VALLEY REGION

This region is made up of three political states – Mouldavia, Borogravia
and Zlobenia – all of which border the River Kneck. Hubwards they have a
border with Uberwald, which at one point annexed them as part of the
former Dark Empire, and rimwards the region borders Genua. The area has
been economically moribund for centuries owing to the incessant armed
bickering and in some cases outright warfare that has blighted the
region.

[Image]
Battlefields of the Kneck Valley.

As one diplomatic observer reported: ‘These states and the duchies and
principalities within them cluster around the River Kneck like a gaggle
of maiden aunts squabbling over the last sandwich at a funeral tea; each
one blaming another for ancient slights and past insults or for making
off with bits of the family silver.’

[Image]

BOROGRAVIA

[Image]

ZLOBENIA

[Image]

FORMER UBERWALD REPUBLIC OF MOULDAVIA

[Image]

Geography and climate

The Kneck River has its source in the Smarl River in the high plains of
Skund and drains into the Great Moulder Lake. Flash floods and snow-melt
frequently cause the Kneck to change its course boundaries on a regular
basis. Land-grabbing and vituperative sorties across these boundary
changes are a major reason for the interminable wars. The whole region
is one of forested hills criss-crossed with small river valleys which
form the main means of communication between the towns and villages
dotted along them. Rimward, this gives way to grazing and arable land
and the fertile plains bordering the Great Moulder Lake. The most
heavily forested areas of Mouldavia are home to the kvetch, a hairy
species once little known even to other Mouldavians. Since the most
recent conflict with Borogravia, however, a kvetch diaspora has spread
even as far as Ankh-Morpork, where they have established a number of
beauty salons and feature frequently in the letters page of the Times
deploring the weather, parking regulations and the poor quality of
Morporkian sausages. Trolls and vampires are also present in small
numbers in the region, and the dwarf population in Borogravia is
recovering slightly now that they, and beards, and rocks, have been
removed from the list of Abominations Unto Nuggan.

The main centres of population are Rigour on the River Gour in Zlobenia
and the Mouldavian lakeside town of Stadtschweinburger, on the Great
Moulder Lake. The town of
PrinceMarmadukePiotre-AlbertHansJosephBernhardtWilhelmsberg, seat of the
Borogravian ruling family, is located on the River Chintz.

[Image]
Kneck Keep standing proud on the floodplain of the River Kneck.

Trade and commerce

The farms on the fertile plain around the Great Moulder Lake supply
grain, dairy products, beef and pork to the local population as well
exporting rimwards. The air-dried Mouldy Sausage is an important part of
the diet in the whole region and the Schweinberger pig (a cross between
the Great White Hope and the Small Borogravian Spot) has been especially
bred to produce a high-fat meat ideal for sausage production.

Until recently much of the area’s wealth was tied up by the need to
maintain large standing armies. Recent interventions by Ankh-Morpork
will hopefully lead to a peaceful solution, though this does have
implications for the lucrative trade in second-hand arms and uniforms. A
new initiative by Prince Heinrich of Zlobenia is the Greater Kneck
Economic League, of which Mouldavia is also a member. The future of
Borogravia is less certain. Over the years most able-bodied men and boys
have been conscripted into the army, leaving the farms uncultivated.
There is no industry to speak of and the population have been
demotivated by the Nuggan church with its endless abominations and
prohibitions. However, a new secular government and the repair and
extension of the clacks will hopefully allow Borogravia to take its
place with other member states in the GKEL.

A recent unexpected source of income for the Zlobenian and Borogravian
peasants has been the upsurge in interest in what is known as
battlefield tours. Many an old soldier, along with any companions he can
muster, enjoys nothing more than being herded into ranks, shouted at by
retired sergeant-majors and marched back across the old battlefields of
their youth. Souvenirs such as cutlasses and any number of rusty edged
weapons can be purchased as can various items of clothing, cap badges
and even, for the serious collectors, body parts.

[Image]

Culture and customs

Morporkian is understood if not spoken, and the porcine local cuisine is
wholesome, tasty and above all cheap. The visitor to the Kneck valley
will find that these countries are still very sensitive about their
state boundaries; some rural crossing-points into Borogravia still have,
posted up, a list of abominations not permitted into the country; this
causes long queues as luggage is searched and items confiscated. The
Borogravian city of Lint has a ‘Closing of the Gate’ Ceremony that takes
place at dusk every evening. Border guards in full military uniform
perform the most intricate drill involving carefully choreographed
gesticulations in which insults are traded under the guise of salutes
and other military flourishes. All three of the Kneck valley states add
further absurdities to the situation by mounting their border-control
barriers and customs posts on wheels, or even floats, so that when the
river, which has formed the borders for centuries, changes its course
through seasonal flooding, the paraphernalia of territorial rights can
move with it at a moment’s notice.

[Image]

[Image]

[Image]

This large region far widdershins of Ankh-Morpork extends from the
freezing shores of Nothingfjord at the Hub, takes in the wild open
spaces of The Great Outdoors and Kythia and extends in a turnwise
direction to include the countries of Genua, The Neverlands and
Brindisi.

NOTHINGFJORD AND THE SCATTERGUT ISLANDS

The region of Nothingfjord backs onto the Vortex Plains and shivers out
into the icy waters of the Widdershins Ocean like the frayed lace of a
widow’s cuff. It is just 1000 miles from Cori Celesti at its most
hubward point.

[Image]

Geography and climate

A Hubbish climate brings icy winters and short cool summers. The
forbidding coastline defines this area: a multitude of craggy inlets,
ravines and fjords which provide scant habitation for the few fishing
villages and settlements. Inland, forested foothills and rocky outcrops
climb to the high peaks of the central Ramtop range.

Agriculture and industry

Fishing is the main industry and most coastal settlements have a small
pickling plant and brew-house by the harbour. The pine forests of the
Ramtop foothills provide timber for building houses, boats and cheap but
often badly assembled furniture, and a community of dwarfs extract small
quantities of iron ore from coastal mines near NoThing.

A recent innovation, developed by local engineers and which should
improve the yield, is the use of steam pumps to keep the mines dry.
Nothingfjord boasts the most hubward branch of the clacks, the Grand
Trunk Company having just constructed a series of towers from a link
with the Blintz valley.

Export of the Coathanger Elk and Hat Stand Reindeer (a cross between the
Elk and the long-necked Caribou) for use in home furnishings has now
been banned, as has trade in the increasingly rare Nothingfjord Blue
Swamp dragon, which fails to thrive when removed from its natural
habitat.

[Image]

Culture and customs

The Nothings are notable seafarers and their proud dragon boats with
striped sail and beating oar, the sides hung with shields, are a
frequent sight in the waters from Cape Haddock to the Dire peninsula.
They strike terror into the hearts of those who dwell within reach of
the sea: not for their great swords and warlike mien but rather for
their dour expression, their unwashed and unkempt facial hair and the
prospect of being forced to listen to them singing the sagas of their
homeland and antecedents unto the hundredth generation in a tuneless
dirge for anything up to three weeks at a time.

The people live in small settlements which are little more than groups
of stout wooden houses shaped rather like upturned boats. A single small
overheated hut serves as the communal village bath: at least once a
month groups of villagers strip off, and after sitting in the hut until
their teeth are too hot to touch they rush out into the snow and beat
themselves and each other with tree branches. No one knows why. Between
the houses are standing stones, intricately carved with dragons or
sea-monsters together with the names of those ancient mariners who
departed the homesteads never to return.

There is a local saying that no man is ever truly dead so long as his
name is remembered. This has given rise to the tradition of saga telling
of which the greatest exponent was Lar Larsnephew, who ended his days
sitting in complete isolation on the shoreline recounting, in a monotone
chant, tales of his ancient forebears to seabirds and the occasional
walrus, the local human population having discovered a burning passion
for exploring distant lands soon after he arrived.

The people here attach much importance to good manners and etiquette.
Raiders along the coast always carry calling cards in case they happen
to arrive at a village at a time inconvenient for pillaging, and the few
villages who do manage to find time for pillage in their diaries are
rewarded with handwritten thankyou letters. A visitor from another
settlement along the coast will seek an appointment with the village
elder and establish not just his name but as much detail of his
antecedents as possible.

Thus Eric the Wise, chief spokesperson, first citizen and man in charge
of the fishing town of Herrinsmelt would be addressed thus:

Hail Eric,

Son of Eric Ericsson, Son of Eric the Auk-Eyed, Son of Eric Short Beard,
Son of Eric Longshanks, Son of Eric the Bard, Son of Eric One Leg, Son
of Eric the Other Leg, Not the One With a Nasty Thing on His Foot, Son
of Eric the Vain, Son of Eric the Thick Necked, Son of Eric Bluetooth,
Son of Eric Loose-tooth, Son of Eric No Tooth, Son of Eric the Bald, Son
of Eric Troll Biter, Son of Eric Grey Face, Son of Eric who Stayed at
Home with His Mother and Sister, Son of Eric the Small, Son of Eric
Svennson, Son of Sven Njalsson, Son of Njal Gladysson, Son of Gladys the
Ambiguous, Son of Eric the Unheeding, Son of Tecwyn the Weeny, Son of
Ericgorn-son-of-Ericthjorn, Son of Eric Ericthjorn, Son of Dave with the
Big Thingy, Son of Frijit Ravens-Beard, Son of Leothrip the Gaunt, Son
of Rikkard of the Kings Stone, Son of Eric the Eric, Son of Eric the
Unnerving, Son of Eris the Unlearned, Son of Lars Ericson, Son of Eric
Bottle-Brain, Son of Lawrence the Dreamy, Son of Leorg of Noth, Son of
Oothaniel the Brave, Son of Eric the Gorgeous, Son of Eric Snakehips,
Son of Sal the Unsuitable, we greet you right well.

Noddiism is the dominant religion in Nothingfjord and the god Noddi is
exclusive to this area. He is worshipped mainly for his part in the
creation of the world, which he achieved by cutting off his
unmentionables and throwing them at his father the Sun God.

[Image]

[Image]

The nature of the worship is not known, though some anthropologists have
suggested that the bathing ritual of the Nothingfjorders may owe
something to a primitive sacrificial rite in which baked or roasted
animals are tossed into the icy waters.

The Scattergut Islands extend from the Deformed Rabbit Peninsula into
the Widdershins Ocean and are populated only by sea-birds and the
Bearded Walrus.

The small island of Rosante in Forsaken Bay is dominated by a great
castle once the Seat of the Duchy of Rosante. The castle still preserves
the famous tapestry of Leofric the Legitimate’s invasion of
Nothingfjord, created as live reportage by his Duchess (an undertaking
that required many action replays, extending the battle to a five-day
event).

[Image]

THE GREAT OUTDOORS

The large landmass known as The Great Outdoors is a long way widdershins
from Ankh-Morpork. At its hubward border it is 3000 miles from the Hub
and it extends rimward to the Gulf of Brindisi just 1200 miles from the
Edge. It shares borders with Uberwald, Nothingfjord, Genua and Kythia.

[Image]

Geography and climate

From sub-hubbish temperatures at its border with Nothingfjord to a
coastal sub-rimmish climate, The Great Outdoors has a vast range of
climatic conditions. This is amplified by the Blade Mountains and the
Rammerocks which form a snow-topped backbone along the central core with
rocky outcrops and forested foothills dropping down to high plains and
grasslands. There is an area of low-lying salt flats on the Slaked Plain
and along the coast sheltered harbours have been created by rivers which
rise in the high mountains and drain into the Widdershins Ocean.

Culture and customs

The Great Outdoors has none of the attributes of nationhood: there are
no major cities, no central government or ruling class, no common
culture, no flag and no territorial ambitions. In short, whilst there
certainly is a lot of Outdoors, there is not much indoors. The
population, all of whom seem to have arrived from somewhere else, live
in small independent communities dotted through the landscape and along
the coast. The common factor among all these migratory groups is an
institutionalized paranoia and a mistrust of strangers. They are here
because they have had to flee from a homeland where they could no longer
live in safety.

There are several distinct population groups. The so-called Lost Tribes
of Kythia have created heavily defended settlements at the tip of the
Asfaras Peninsula. Borogravians fleeing the endless wars and avoiding
conscription live in villages along the valley of the New Kneck River.
Refugees from Uberwald have brought their terrors with them. They live
in gated communities, in sturdy stone-built dwellings characterized by
small shuttered windows and capped chimneys, on the upper reaches of the
Big Misty River. Some families from Nothingfjord have created a
fortified settlement in New NoThing, on the mouth of the River Spiljar.
Here they hide from any story-telling, saga-making bards from the
homeland and make a living fishing for herring, which they preserve, and
distilling apple juice from the wild apple trees. There are scattered
dwarf mining communities in the Rammerock Mountains, who mine iron ore
and small quantities of silver. A breakaway sub-sect of the Omnian
Church – the Very, Very, Very Plain Omnians, who fled persecution in
their own land – now live a simple nomadic existence on the Slaked
Plain, where they harvest the bounty of the great salt flats.

Trade

Much of what we know of the interior of this country and the trade and
commerce that goes on there comes from the maps and journals of a
fearless adventurer called Dolly Bodkin. Now a wealthy and
well-preserved grandmother known as Diamond Dol she is still as tough as
an alligator handbag and ruthlessly accurate with the crossbow. The
story goes that she ran away from Genua with a mule loaded with sacks of
rice which she had appropriated by way of reparation for an unpaid bill.
She briefly took refuge with the religious extremists on the Slaked
Plain, who traded the rice for twenty sacks of salt and, when they
discovered her essential unplainness, sent her up the coast to New
NoThing, where her salt was exchanged for two barrels of pickled
herring, a barrel of apple brandy and two mules. A trek inland brought
her to the small dwarfish mining community in the Rammerock Mountains,
who were pleased to exchange the Quaffing Brandy (now six much diluted
barrels) for shovels, picks, one axe-head and two silver ingots, plus
the favour they did in taking the herring off her hands. She travelled
back across the Rammerocks to the forests of the Big Misty Valley where
for just a small bit of silver she received twelve barrels of uncured
treacle which had been smuggled across the Uberwald border. At a
trappers’ trading post downriver she exchanged the treacle and the rest
of the silver for the very best cured skins which she loaded on her
assorted pack animals and took back to Genua. These mink pelts ended up
as several $1000 coats in the finest furriers in Ankh-Morpork. Dolly’s
fortune was made and The Haddock Creek Trading Company still prospers.

[Image]

KYTHIA AND THE KYTHIAN ARCHIPELAGO
(also known as the Land of the Lost Tribes)

[Image]

The Kythian peninsula is located at the rimward end of The Great
Outdoors, about 1200 miles from the Edge, and its archipelago of three
small islands extends turnwise into the Gulf of Brindisi. With a long
coastline and rimmish climate it would appear to offer a pleasant
environment; however it is subject to the most dreadful infestations of
bloodsucking insects, including mosquitoes, ticks and worst of all the
Samo-Thrip, which inflict such irritating bites as to cause frenzied,
often terminal scratching. The surviving human population escaped by
moving hubwards to the Asfaras peninsula. It is believed that the only
warm-blooded fauna remaining in Kythia are the Horn-rimmed Pangolin and
various insectivorous birds which perch high above the thrip line and
for every insect devoured spend several hours preening to rid themselves
of the rest.

[Image]

GENUA

Genua is located far widdershins of Ankh-Morpork, about 2000 miles from
the Rim, on the lower reaches of the Vieux River. It shares borders with
The Great Outdoors, The Neverlands, Mouldavia and Borogravia.

[Image]

* When we say practised, what we mean is they are absolute past masters
at it and gave up practising years ago.

Geography and climate

Genua has a sub-rimmish climate with warm summers and mild winters. The
rainy season is from Offle to March with frog falls in Spune. The
greatest danger from hurricanes is in the month of Grune when it is
thought unlucky to wear red shoes or boots.

Apart from a hilly area towards the Borogravian border, the land is
mainly low-lying: a vast flood plain descending into the swamps of the
Vieux River delta that surround the city. Further inland there are areas
of woodland and semi-enchanted forest. Apart from the city the main
centres of population are located along the river, which forms the major
route into Genua. The city itself is walled and, at its heart, comprises
crescents of impressive, gleaming white houses which rise to a tall and
multi-turreted palace at the centre. There is no accurate street map of
the city of Genua; the main boulevards and avenues are constant but once
you venture into the marshy suburbs encroached upon by swamp and forest,
locations are not so predictable. Most dwellings in the outer areas are
built on stilts. Some of these river shacks are indeed peripatetic, with
a tendency to rise up and wander off to find a new place to settle –
often leaving the privy behind.

Agriculture and industry

Historically, much of the wealth of Genua came from taxing river
traffic. Silting up of the port, and the exposure of corruption within
the city council has led to this semi-legal tariff falling into
abeyance. These days the state derives its main income from the
abundance of crustaceans which inhabit the estuary tides and swamps.
Shrimp farms extend over wide areas and it is an awesome sight to see a
shrimp herder and his lads wading through the swamp on tall stilts
followed by vast flocks of shrimp, crab, and crawfish. The main harvest
is in Sektober, and during this month the whiskery crop is piled high on
raffia mats to dry in the sun before being loaded onto the troll
paddle-boats which take it upriver. The fishy miasma resulting from this
exercise is quite breathtaking in a nourishing but eye-watering sort of
way. An unsettling sight in the mist-laden shrimp-farming areas is the
Genuan Scarecrow. These sinister top-hatted figures are located at key
points in the swamps to deter flocks of heron from raiding shoals. This
provides seasonal employment for some of the older members of the
indigenous population, older, in some cases, than the age on their death
certificate.

[Image]

Most of the river valley is cultivated, the main crops being rice,
coffee and tobacco. Bananas, okuh and okra are grown for local
consumption. The highly regarded Macarona coffee bean grows on the
turnwise slopes of the Vieux valley; the first pickings are treated by
feeding the berries to the Lesser-spotted Gripe-duck, the Blue-tongued
Mollycabber and finally the Winnow-nosed Ferret before the ‘processed’
beans are roasted and ground for use. This method adds a choice piquancy
to the gourmet Turdish blend which is highly prized by those who don’t
fully understand how it has been produced.

[Image]

There are few mineral deposits in Genua, which has to import much of its
coal and tallow from Uberwald, as well as the crystalline limestone from
the quarries near Glitz which gives the city its unique appearance.
Manufactured items imported from Ankh-Morpork include cooking pots and
cauldrons, knives and the extra-long ceremonial Doldrum’s pins.

Culture and customs

Our understanding of Genuan culture is informed by the observations of
two Lancre witches; Mrs Gytha Ogg and the late Desiderata Hollow. We are
indebted to Messrs Goatberger, publishers, for access to the manuscript
of Mrs Ogg’s My Travels in Genua and Some Interestin’ Meals I Ate.

In Mistress Hollow’s opinion Genua is a city of art, wit and culture,
particularly noted for the beauty of its women – and decadent. Genua
once had the Disc’s second-largest Assassins’ Guild, whose members were
kept constantly in work, but even they went into voluntary retirement
rather than fulfil the terms of some commissions. Lilith de Tempscire
(née Weatherwax) instituted a cleanup programme, with dramatic effect on
outward appearances at least: both witches comment on the cleanliness of
the streets, which Mrs Ogg declares ‘you could eat your tea off’, and
apparently the city guards subjected Mrs Ogg to an inspection of
personal hygiene before admitting her through the gates. Since Queen
Ella’s accession such potentially offensive treatment of visitors has
been abandoned, though it is to be hoped the city’s inhabitants still
take pride in their sparkling-bright cobbles.

The Genuans are by nature relaxed and friendly. The major event of the
year is the Fat Lunchtime carnival (Mardi Gras in the local patois),
which culminates in the wild revels of Samedi Nuit Mort. Mrs Ogg paints
a vivid picture of fireworks, fire-eaters, beautiful girls in nothing
but feathers or a sequin or two, and streets filled with dancing
skeletons.

Genuan cuisine is the glorious outcome of ordinary people’s need to
create palatable dinners from such unlikely edibles as remained once the
moneyed classes had filled their plates. Highlights, often to be found
at the market on Fat Tuesday Square, include gumbo and jambalaya (which
make use of ‘beautiful ladies’ fingers’;

[Image]
Gumbo, the unofficial national dish of Genua

Examples of Genuan patois collected by Mrs Ogg – a few of which we have
included below for interest – suggest that Brindisi, Quirm and
Ankh-Morpork must apparently have had an influence on the region at some
time.

[Image]

GENUA UNIVERSITY

[Image]

The campus of the University of Genua is located on partially reclaimed
land on the rimward edge of the city. It owes its foundation to the
Association of Prawn Packers and Driers and comprises a series of small
wooden shacks built on stilts which extend far into the delta like a
rickety train. In addition to the Department of Shrimp Movements the
University runs courses on Mussel Emergence and The Sensory Tentacle
Experience. The Department of Crab Ambition and Sanity runs several
research buckets and has an outpost in Ankh-Morpork where, at the Mort
Lake Crab Farm, cross-breeding experiments are being undertaken between
the Genuan Jolly Blue Dumper and the Circle Sea Leather Crab.

SOMETHING IN THE AIR

One of the unique charms of Genua is the ebb and flow of Narrativium,
that can create a compelling aura in which those who are susceptible
find themselves exchanging their possessions for old oil lamps or magic
beans; the latter may cause serious problems if eaten and not planted.
Those same people would be wise to avoid amphibians, spinning-wheels and
little old ladies selling apples. Thankfully the fashion for wearing
ill-fitting glass slippers seems to have declined, along with the
irrational fear of mirrors which caused older residents who have long
memories to keep theirs turned to the wall.

[Image]

UNUSUAL FUNERARY CUSTOMS

The high water table in Genua is responsible for the inhabitants’
idiosyncratic treatment of corpses. The deceased are placed in coffins
balanced on stilts above the swampy ground. Wealthy families construct
elaborate catafalques, but simple burials make do with old table legs or
even tree branches.

THE NEVERLANDS

[Image]

Legend has it that a race of giants dug deep canals and built dykes to
create a new land from the low-lying marshes along the coast of the
Neverlands. There is little trace of their activities now and the
Widdershins Ocean tides which force their way through the narrow opening
of the Wendersee have flooded back in. The area is now barely habitable,
but pirates have claimed the odd remaining islets of land which they use
as a base for their depredations in the Gulf of Brindisi.

To augment their income some of these maritime bandits have established
a free port, amusement centre, casino and theme park on Barrie Island
and ferry boats from Hooke Point take day-trippers on excursions to the
various entertainments, which have proved to be an even more effective
method of robbery than piracy.

BRINDISI

Brindisi is a small country rimward and widdershins of Ankh-Morpork,
1200 miles from the Edge. It shares borders with Muntab, Mouldavia and
The Neverlands.

[Image]

Geography and climate

Bordered by the River Linguini hubwards and the River Fistula rimwards,
Brindisi is protected from strong Rim currents while enjoying the warm
Rim climate. This explains why the people of Brindisi, believed to
originate from lands around the Great Moulder Lake, chose to settle
here. A nature reserve on the Mallow Marshes on the estuary of the
Fistula provides sanctuary for a wide variety of songbirds including the
Half-penny Diva, the Soprano Flinch, the Tenor Goose and the Castrato
Tit.

Agriculture and industry

The main grape-growing area is along the Linguini valley. The Fiasco
wineries produce a robust red table wine for export to the Sto Plains
where the straw-encased bottles enjoy something of an iconic status as
candle-holders. Fiasco wines are less popular in Brindisi itself, except
as a form of fuel – the straw casings are in fact a safety consideration
due to the wine’s tendency to explode.

High-density wheat used to make pasta is grown in the central plains. A
team from Bugarup University has been working on introducing the
Fourecks pasta bush, and it appears that the project is now bearing
fusilli, although Brindisians remain suspicious of this labour-saving
innovation.

The Timbre trees that generations of craftsmen have used to make
stringed instruments grow in the upper Fistula valley. The Basilico
Conservatoire is renowned for producing world-class opera singers, and
instrumentalists who, with their locally made instruments, find their
way to the most prestigious orchestras on the Disc.

Fine but brittle stone from the Hooke Point quarries is used to produce
much of the statuary that decorates the opera houses as well as the
numerous fountains. There is a small export trade in garden statuary
but, because of the friable nature of the stone, sadly most pieces
arrive at their destination missing limbs or even heads.

Culture and customs

Limbardi has more opera houses per capita than anywhere else and even
though the journey to Brindisi is a long and arduous one, for the
music-lover it is worthwhile. The Limbardi Operatic Festival attracts
the world’s premier performers for the three-week-long performance of
Still-Manifestin.

The culinary influence of this small country, already well known for its
pasta dishes, has been enhanced by the meteoric rise in demand for their
garnished flat breads. These are known locally as Piazzas in that they
bear a passing resemblance to the cobbled city squares after the market
stalls have packed up but before the sweepers have done their rounds.

[Image]

[Image]

Over the centuries this vast continent has been revealed as a rich and
diverse landscape of nation states, ancient civilizations, tribal
districts and sand. Lots of sand. In this chapter we describe the lands
which abut the Circle Sea (Klatch, Tsort, Djelibeybi, Ephebe, Omnia and
Istanzia), one of the busiest bodies of water on the Disc in terms of
trade routes, and also, inevitably, invasion routes; and Hersheba on the
hubward coast. Areas of the arid hinterland which are or were part of
their ancient empires (Betrek, Syrrit, Smale, Ur, Elharib, Ushistan,
Klatchistan and Upper Klatchistan) are also included here.

The Muntab Provinces, the countries of Howondaland and the Tezuman
Empire, while part of this great continent, are described elsewhere.

THE SERIPHATE OF KLATCH

[Image]

Situated on the hubwards edge of the continent, the Seriphate of Klatch
is economically and politically a powerful country, though its place in
the nations of the world has been overshadowed in the past few decades
by the rise and spread of Pax Morporkia; that aside it still exerts a
powerful local influence.

Geography and climate

The main centres of population are on the coast and in the fertile
valley of the River Al’dente, though there are small settlements inland
where underground aquifers give rise to oases. As for the rest, the only
people who can survive the harsh climate are the nomadic and fierce
D’regs who, with their black tents, herds of camel and fondness for huge
curved swords, wander among the ruins of lost cities and ancient
civilizations. Al Khali is the political capital of the Seriphate and
the massive palace complex of the Rhoxie is the traditional home of the
ruling family. The town of Gebra is a military base, where the ancient
fort known as the Fist of Gebra houses the Klatchian Army, whose
presence deters raiders attracted by the riches of Al Khali further
along the coast. The old port of El Kinte, located at the gateway to the
Circle Sea, has been much extended. Its proximity to Ankh-Morpork makes
it the route through which many of the riches of the Klatchian continent
pass for trade, and, thanks to the thriving population of Klatchian
pirates, the riches of anyone else who happens to be passing, too.

AL KHALI

This city is renowned for its fine architecture, its cosmopolitan
population and its great trading market known as the soak. The vast
palace, known officially as the Rhoxie but colloquially dubbed the Djinn
palace because of its magical origins, occupies much of the centre of
the town with its walled garden – approximately twice five miles of
fertile ground. Built by the wealthy Seriph Creosote, this luxuriant
park with its stately pleasure dome, incense-bearing trees, fountains
and peacocks is still well maintained. The great temple of Offler the
Crocodile God, with its jewel-studded domes and famous frescoes and
statuary, is a place of pilgrimage for both students of religion and
gentlemen connoisseurs of fine art, exotic dance and extreme acrobatics.

[Image]

Al Khali is the cultural centre of the Seriphate, and the citizens have
a great appreciation of poetry and music. The Square of Nine Hundred and
Sixty-seven Delights with its many open-air cafés and taverns is a haven
for musicians, and the curious sound of bhong music drifting out from
the enclosed shady courtyards often causes consternation among lovers of
harmony and cats.

The soak is a massive covered market where the local craftsmen create
all manner of wonders in precious metals, gemstones, brass, silk and
camel humps. It is the custom in Klatch for merchants to begin their
negotiations from a hugely inflated price – this sometimes leads to
problems for foreigners as unfamiliarity with the technique can result
in the customer losing not only the contents of his wallet, but his wife
and children and the clothes he stands up in, in exchange for a small
stuffed camel hump.

[Image]
The soak

Al Khali is also known for its distinctive cuisine; in the area known
colloquially as the Greasy Skewer Quarter they practise every aspect of
that form of cooking known as the Kebab. One variety involves impaling
modest chunks of named and unnamed meat, bits of onion, small songbirds
and reptiles on a wooden skewer and setting it to roast over an open
fire. Another technique, far more theatrical, is to construct a huge
block of well-spiced chopped camel’s knees and feet, compressed around a
skewer, which then revolves slowly in front of a hot fire. The purveyor
uses his scimitar to slice off pieces to order. This food is best
consumed when you are very hungry and after a glass of orakh

Trade and commerce

The merchants of the Seriphate opened trade routes across the continent
many years ago; their long caravans now bring spices from the Condiment
Isles, the finest carpets and bathmats from Klatchistan, cacao from the
Tezuman Empire, leopard skins from Howondaland and sunburnt,
unhappy-looking missionaries from Omnia to the Great Trade Exchange in
El Kinte. This modern building extends over three floors each the size
of a foot-the-ball pitch. On the top floor small groups of plump
Ankh-Morpork merchants and slender, brown-skinned, turbaned traders sit
at tables, samples of produce in front of them; the bidding, carried out
by a raised eyebrow or the curl of an index finger, might represent a
purchase worth AM$1000. The Futures and Pasts market takes up the second
floor: a frantic chattering, clattering mob in competitively garish
robes waving their arms in the air to secure next year’s crop of the
finest Klatchica coffee beans, or last year’s reannual dates from
Hersheba. Carpets are traded on the ground floor and the selling of
magic travelling carpets, charmed hearth rugs, slow runners and security
doormats is carried out in an area at the rear called the G’araj. It is
a specialist trade and experienced dealers examine the leading edge of
second-hand carpets for signs of extreme wear. They understand that a
high knot count does not necessarily indicate greater speed and
disregard go-faster striped weaves, aerodynamic tassels and navigational
aids based on drums. Any experienced buyer will know to take their
purchase with them rather than rely on delivery, and to ascertain that
it does not have any automatic homing devices attached.

The recently completed docks at El Kinte are one of the New Wonders of
the World; tall slender cranes dip and rise like enormous birds,
sweeping the goods from the quayside into the holds of the ships. The
cranes are powered by golems, who drive giant treadmills linked to a
system of pulleys. This primarily golem workforce gives the docks an
unusual character, due to the absence of those businesses such as inns,
gambling dens and ladies of negotiable affection that are traditionally
associated with docks, and of which golems have no need. There is,
however, an outpost of the Golem Trust, and a number of 24-hour kilns
offering repairs and cosmetic treatments with the latest fashionable
glazes.

The coffee for which Klatch is renowned grows in the Al’dente valley;
fine aromatic Klatchica beans are cultivated on the rimward valley
slope; on the opposite bank are the hardy and bitter Klatchnikov beans.
This rare cultivar, when roasted and brewed correctly, is so sobering
that it will stun any drinker into a state of complete knurdness in a
moment, so it is usually served with a shot of orakh to counteract the
effect. Tobacco is also grown in the upper valley of the Al’dente, but
the crop is processed for local consumption only.

Religion

It is claimed that there are 653 religions on the Klatchian continent,
and many of them meet in the Seriphate where trade brings peoples
together from far and wide. Those who inhabit harsh desert regions
believe in gods who promise an afterlife of soft green gardens with
fountains, music, scantily clad young women and an endless supply of
iced orakh margaritas. A lavish temple in Al Khali celebrates this
belief, but there are also temples to Offler, Seven-Handed Sek, Patina,
goddess of wisdom (whose penguin is a particular novelty in Klatch),
Petulia, goddess of seamstresses and, in Klatch, temple frescoes, and
Blind Io. In the oasis of Otherz the spectacular rite of Tridlins is
performed daily at dawn by the Holy Balancing Dervishes as they welcome
the new day to the melodic sound of harp and flute. The fortunate
visitor might also see one of the more energetic sects that enrich the
religious life of this area: the Hurtling Whirlers of Tzit. With their
broad skirted costumes and bright fezzes they spin like tops in troops
covering up to ten miles a day, though never in a straight line. On
occasion their passing through Otherz will coincide with the Tridlins
observance and much merriment can be afforded to the observer as the two
ceremonies collide.

THE DESERT REGIONS

[Image]

Apart from the small oasis of Otherz mentioned above there are few
settlements in the desert. The ancient town of Al-Ybi, near the border
with Hersheba, is, unusually for the Seriphate, largely populated by
dwarfs, who lead a frustrated and bad-tempered existence trying to mine
in what passes for ground in the desert. As a by-product of their
activities they produce a tourist staple seen all over Klatch – namely
glass jars and other ornaments filled with layers of coloured sand.
Various theories to account for the presence of this dwarf colony
include a story about the local Seriph being cursed by a dyslexic deity
who made everything the Seriph touched turn into Glod. Al-Ybi’s only
notable contribution to history is the invention of the concept of zero,
the anniversary of which is celebrated each year with the Zero Funfair
and the ceremony of Thanks for Nothing at the temple of Offler.

[Image]

The sand-covered ruins of Tacticum, not far from the Tsortean border,
are all that remains of a triumphal arch and city created by the great
General Tacticus after his victory at the Battle of Carnage. Amidst the
ruins is part of a giant statue almost destroyed except for the feet,
whose position, archaeologists have claimed, suggest a noble stance, or
possibly back pain. Carved on the supporting plinth are the words AB HOC
POSSUM VIDERE DOMUM TUUM.

The D’regs

[Image]
The Seriph of Al-Ybi (and founder of the Disc’s only Glod mine).

THE KINGDOM OF DJELIBEYBI

This ancient kingdom which once ruled large areas of the Klatchian
landmass is now a small country extending just 150 miles along the
valley of the River Djel.

[Image]

Geography and climate

The River Djel rises in the mountains of Elharib, its long narrow valley
passing through Ur until it reaches the flood plain which comprises most
of Djelibeybi.

[Image]

Since the decline in demand for prime riverside sites for fashionable
pyramids, there has been a notable drop in the frequency of famines in
the kingdom, and crops of dates, olives, garlic, miniature onions and
any other produce that lends itself to stuffing or pickling are grown in
the fertile valley. The ancient necropolis, once the centre of
Djelibeybi, is now largely abandoned and a modern city, New Djeli, has
been constructed near the Circle Sea coast.

Culture and commerce

Tourism contributes much to the economy of Djelibeybi: many visitors
come to see the remains of the great necropolis and to explore the Khuft
Museum in New Djeli, where pharaoh Khuft’s original loincloth is on
display alongside other old kingdom treasures. These include the
mystical accoutrements of kingship such as the Sickle of Justice, the
Asp of Wisdom and the Cabbage of Vegetative Increase, as well as
representations of past rulers and their consorts, all of which show
evidence for a strong royal family trait towards noble chins, sculpted
musculature and cupid’s bow lips.

A new type of traveller now welcome in Djelibeybi is the seeker of
personal rejuvenation. Highly trained workers whose profession in days
gone by was the preparation of the recently deceased for the afterlife
have turned their skills to the living. Clinics and beauty salons
offering pre-death enhancement and cosmetic adjustment are now opening
in some number, and such procedures are increasingly popular – with the
notable exception of rhinoplasty. For some reason locals, in particular,
seem unwilling to allow the necropolis workers’ tools inside their
noses.

The many new bridges over the Djel owe their construction to the skilled
engineers who designed the pyramids, and the supplies of dressed stone
left over when pyramid production ceased. An unexpected benefit from
this is the large number of crocodiles that can now be slaughtered by
the simple expedient of standing on the bridge and dropping a well-aimed
block. The local leather-workers waste no time in transforming the muddy
but otherwise undamaged skins into shoes, wallets and handbags.

A trade in garden statuary has developed from the skills of generations
of monumental stonemasons, who now turn their hand to miniature
obelisks, garden gnomes and water features and will accept commissions
for commemorative busts.

The sophisticated pickling and preserving industry, based in New Djeli,
also owes much of its success to the traditional skills with knife and
preserving fluids. The new factories produce not just the traditional
stuffed olive and pickled egg but also small stuffed lizards, insect
chutneys and a variety of pickled mammals.

[Image]

ELHARIB

[Image]

The State of Elharib borders the hubward limits of the Great Nef. It is
populated by nomadic tribes who until a generation ago were engaged in a
prolonged war with their cousins in Smale over the disputed
interpretation of a word in their shared holy book, which hinged on a
single dot. Despite the technical truce the two nations are still
constantly squabbling, and the Elharibians spend their time stealing
Smalie goats, Smalie wives and Smalie camels. In return the tribesmen of
Smale seek a regular and depressing vengeance. Such settlements as exist
lie along the banks of the Djel and if there is a capital it is the
walled city of Harib which rises from the valley floor on a low hill
which appears to be in fact the stratified remains of previous
incarnations of the city.

EPHEBE

[Image]

Geography and climate

The State of Ephebe is situated on the rimward coast of the Circle Sea
and borders the countries of Djelibeybi, Omnia and Ur. The climate is
temperate and the coastal area is rich in olive groves and grape vines
which, together with the harvest from the sea, provide a plentiful diet
which requires little effort to obtain. It is one of the most ancient
civilizations in the world and the remains of early settlements are
remarkable for the skill in their construction. The fine-grained marble,
still used for buildings and statuary today, is quarried in the
Pyrinankle Mountains on the Urian borders and transported to the coast
by barge along the River Stiks.

EPHEBE CITY

The city is a picturesque vision of white marble which rises steeply
above the busy harbour and the lighthouse (one of the More Than Seven
Wonders of the World) which almost guides the mariner to a safe mooring.
The Tyrant’s Palace is at the highest point and is defended by a high
wall and impenetrable labyrinth. Additional defence is a tall tower
topped with a great parabolic reflector designed to shoot the rays of
the sun at any invading ships. The site where the once great Library of
Ephebe stood still shows signs of the fire which destroyed it; nowadays
it has been taken over by a group of philosophers who have built a small
edifice made from barrels, their dwellings of choice. Here they have
started a campaign for the return of what they call their ‘marbles’.
These large polished spheres were rescued for posterity by Mr Elgin of
the Guild of Archaeologists and are displayed in the Ankh-Morpork Museum
of Antiquities along with exhibits of Ephebian household goods such as
carved bone needle holders, pottery and glass.

Governance and society

Ephebe claims the title of ‘cradle of democracy’ and even today its
political system is, in many ways, still firmly in the cradle. Little
has changed over the past one thousand years due largely to the endless
and inconclusive bickering among the philosophers who make up much of
the population.

They are supported by farmers, tavern keepers and a great army of slaves
who resist any change to their status; the laws governing pay,
running-away leave and toga allowances make it an occupation of choice.
The country is ruled by a Tyrant who is democratically elected for a
five-year term, though only about three per cent of the population, who
are not disqualified by being female, a slave, foreign, frivolous or
poor, are actually allowed to vote.

[Image]

RURAL EPHEBE

Outside the city and the fishing villages of the coast Ephebe is mainly
a farming community, which produces enough to supply the local
population, and, when it can be bothered, olives and figs for export.
Specialities manufactured exclusively for the export market are a fetid
goat’s cheese and a wine that will clean saucepans and dissolve paint.

The inland city of Heliodeliphilodelphiboschromenos is notable for its
traditional Ephebian School of Music, home to the acclaimed Vestigial
Virgin Chorus.

The foothills of the Pyrinankles on the border with Ur, where the marble
quarries are sited, are the habitat of some unpleasant predatory
creatures. The Little Sisters of Perpetual Velocity, sometimes called
Furies, frequent the tops of rocky outcrops, while the Petrifying
Gorgons generally prefer to live in caves – although it is sometimes
possible to spot them in Ephebe city on market days, where they can be
identified by their thick sunglasses and stylish but tightly knotted
silk headscarves. Few people, apart from the quarrymen, live in the
foothills, and they protect themselves with polished bronze mirrors and
metal hard hats.

The island of Papylos in the Circle Sea is still part of Ephebe. It is
becoming a popular holiday destination and large hotels are being
constructed along the coastline. It has been declared a philosopher-free
zone.

[Image]
The Ephebian tavern is not just a place of refreshment but a centre for
discussion on matters of philosophy, mathematics, rhetoric and the
relative merits of various olive oils and wines. Differences of opinion
often lead to heated debate. This continual discourse has given rise to
such seminal philosophical texts as A Vindication of the Rights of
Limoncello.

[Image]

KLATCHISTAN AND UPPER KLATCHISTAN

The Emirates of Klatchistan and Upper Klatchistan were created after
decades of vicious civil war led to partition in the Year of the Prawn.

[Image]

Geography and trade

A region of mountain, desert and plain inhabited by warring nomadic
clans and their herds of sheep and goats; rivalry for greener pastures
along the valley of the River Al’Paka led to a division of the country.
Both states have opened up in recent years because of the trade in
Klatchian carpets, traditionally made to cover the floors of nomadic
camps, the designs random and the colours dependent on what dyes were
cheap – and not, as the carpet sellers in Ankh-Morpork would have us
believe, of deep tribal significance. Traders from Ushistan buy the
carpets locally and, having cleaned off the dung (an indication of true
authenticity), sell them on.

Culture and customs

A popular game believed by some to be the origin of modern foot-the-ball
is played on the high plains of Klatchistan. Two teams on horseback aim
to get an object called the b’once around the goal – a friendly match is
when a wooden b’once is used; an unfriendly one is when it isn’t.

The Klatchistan hound, an elegant, large, silky-haired dog, popular as a
status symbol in Ankh-Morpork, is used for hunting small mammals.

HERSHEBA

[Image]

Hersheba has a long coastline relative to its area. Small-scale fishing,
ship-building and the business of supplying provisions to passing
mariners all contribute to the economy. In addition to the dried and
smoked fish that is the staple commodity, they have developed a highly
calorific sweetmeat which is famously sustaining. The recipe is a secret
but Hershebars are much sought after by those setting out on long
journeys.

Like so much of the continent, Hersheba was once a powerful kingdom.
Legends relate that it was named for a mighty queen who was said to be
immortal. History has proved otherwise and modern Hersheba is
underdeveloped and vulnerable to more powerful interests. Cape No Return
and the Meinam Gulf mark the rimward border with Ymitury, and the
harbour here is often the last calling point of voyagers making their
way along the coast towards Howondaland.

OMNIA

In ancient times the Omnian Empire ruled the neighbouring countries of
Istanzia, Betrek, Ushistan and Smale, but in recent years its influence
has waned along with the political power of the Omnian Church.

[Image]

Geography and culture

Omnia is a desert country with few natural resources, and the singular
importance of Omnian religion has formed much of this country’s history,
as well as occupying almost all the talents of the citizenry. It used to
be said that no dungeon was complete without a Master Torturer of the
Omnian school, although that trade is now almost extinct, and the
workshops that used to house its artisan practitioners have been turned
over to production of musical instruments such as guitars, portable
harmoniums and tambourines. The capital city of Kom is, in reality, just
one huge temple precinct extending several miles from the coastline into
the desert and containing most of the country’s populace and wealth.
Apart from missionaries and religious tracts, Omnia exports very little
and relies on religious foundations to cultivate the irrigated land
around the Citadel and provide food. The estuary of the Slipnir River is
an extensive marshy area of papyrus sedge, which is used in the
production of the broad-brimmed hats worn by priests and, of course, as
a writing material. Small settlements of marsh-dwelling nomads live
quietly amongst the reed beds. Little is known of these Benji men
besides the fact that they believe there are only 51 people in the
world, not including newts. Anthropologists report that the Benji
language is indecipherable, and attempts to communicate with tribesmen
are usually met with a bemused expression and distracted counting on
fingers.

[Image]
The Citadel, Kom.

Il-drim is a small port on the Omnian coast, recently upgraded to
facilitate the movement of pilgrims into the country.

Aby Dyal is located close to the Slipnir River on the site of a holy
well whose waters have healing properties. A hospice is run by the
Little Brown Brothers, who produce a curative and delectable liqueur,
called hernet, from local herbs.

Gilash is a place of pilgrimage for followers of the prophet Wallspur,
who was a zealous hermit living in caves in the area, alongside a number
of communities whose villages were coincidentally destroyed by holy fire
not long after Wallspur’s arrival. A number of his teachings are
recorded in the Book of Om:

‘Blessed is the pomegranate, like the camel it hath a thick skin but is
full with seeds.’

‘Blessed is the sticky date that coats the lips of the foolish and the
wise; it bringeth the clustering flies.’

‘Blessed are the sandals for without them feet doth burn on the sand and
the locust doth get between the toes.’

Commerce and industry

Pilgrim tours are a major contribution to the economy, with organized
parties from across the Sto Plains arriving regularly. Pilgrims who
disembark in Il-drim are transported by donkey to Kom where tours
commence with a procession to the Place of Lamentation. Excursions are
offered to Gilash, Aby Dyal and by boat to the Holy Grotto of Prophet
Ossory on the island of Erebos.

BETREK

An independent sheikhdom that was once part of the Omnian Empire. It
ceased to be part of the empire when the Omnians eventually realized
that Betrek had no natural resources and contributed nothing to the
commercial, political or religious life of the region. Little is known
of this country.

ISTANZIA

[Image]

[Image]

Once part of the Omnian Empire, Istanzia is bounded by the lower reaches
of the great Smarl River hubwards, and the Slipnir River rimwards. Over
the centuries these two rivers changed course many times, depositing
huge quantities of thick grey clay, the raw material for ancient
Istanzia’s pottery industry. When Omnia invaded, they forced the
construction of great kilns to produce bricks and tiles for their
military and religious building projects. This led to the depletion of
the clay beds and deforestation as religious fervour fuelled the kilns
at the cost of the country’s natural resources.

Istanzia has now regained independence, but the years of exploitation
and religious persecution have left their mark. The aggrieved nation is
slowly rebuilding its army and indulging in regular skirmishes along its
Omnian border. The capital city, Georginople, is named for the head of
government who is also the head of the armed forces. Recent excavations
along the coast revealed an even more ancient civilization believed to
be the city of Um, where the Cenobiums created the first golems. Dwarfs
were attracted by legends of limitless quantities of gold. They
established mining rights throughout the region but unfortunately no
large deposits were ever found, and the effects of desert sun on dwarf
helmets and tools proved a deterrent to large-scale settlement. Those
dwarfs foolhardy enough to make the trek here in search of gold are
dismissed as ‘hotheads’ back in the mountains.

SMALE

[Image]

Smale is a small inland kingdom comprising a central plateau bounded by
the Herelaya mountain range widdershins and to rimward. This
configuration causes a curious wind cycle and any precipitation, which
is rare in Smale, falls on the high plain. There appear to be no natural
resources, though prospecting has been limited because of the
belligerent nature of the nomadic population who are continually
skirmishing with the tribesmen of Elharib. There is little reason to
visit Smale except as a pilgrim to the many shrines dedicated to Koomi,
the renowned religious philosopher, who was martyred by the Omnian
Church for his blasphemous writings. Koomi is said to have spread
dissent across the Omnian Empire – in response the Church spread Koomi
across it. The Smalies are proud of their illustrious forebear and
tradition has it that part of a chief’s daughter’s marriage portion is a
little bit of Koomi, which is said to have benign influences on
fertility. If asked respectfully the bride will happily show the pious
pilgrim the above-mentioned portion for a few dinars.

USHISTAN

[Image]

[Image]

Like many other countries in this area Ushistan was once, briefly, part
of the Omnian Empire. Rimwards, Ushistan is bounded by the high Herelaya
mountain range, inhabited by fierce fighting tribesmen called the Mad
Savatars. It is reported that on sighting the Omnian troops they came
down from the hills in their purple and gold splendour and massacred the
whole invading army. There were no further incursions from Omnia. The
city of Gelim on the central plain has the largest carpet warehouses in
the world: Rugs R Us, run by the Waltaw’Ali brothers. Carpet merchants
travel the thousand miles to Klatch across the plains of Betrek, Ur and
Syrrit in long caravans.

SYRRIT

[Image]

A small landlocked emirate, Syrrit benefits from diurnal precipitation
on the foothills of the Mountains of the Sun. Nomadic shepherds lead
their especially bred hardy sheep from one area of grazing to another.
The Scorchio wind comes up from the Rim and across the Nef desert, but
when it rises above the mountain slopes of Syrrit the last drops of
moisture fall as a fast-moving shower. As a consequence the local sheep
are unusually fleet of foot: whole flocks move themselves like clouds
across a stormy sky and the carpets woven from their fleeces have
unusual ambulatory properties.

In the case of the sheep, shepherds have reported finding that a flock
has moved from one side of a mountain to the other overnight. Merchants
on the Rug Road who take the opportunity to purchase a flight of magic
travelling carpets invariably hire the services of a carpet herdsman
who, with his brace of Kh’olli dogs and using whistles and hand signals,
herds the carpets across mountain and desert and at night brings them
into a gently floating circle.

TSORT

[Image]

History and geography

The ancient Kingdom of Tsort, historically one of the powerhouses of
hubward Klatch, is now resting on the bones of its history. The Great
Pyramid of Tsort is reduced to rubble and wooded landscapes have been
denuded to scrubland, the timber being used to construct machines of war
and vast wooden horses. The crocodile-infested River Tsort bisects the
country, providing a fertile if dangerous valley where the population
make a living killing the occasional crocodile and growing grain,
date-palms, and tobacco.

Industry and commerce

There are vast amounts of dressed stone available for sale to those with
appropriate transport; small carvings of pyramids and horses are popular
souvenirs and crocodile-skin bags are a favourite with the fashionable
elite. The Tsortean Blend of smoking tobacco is highly regarded as are
locally produced cigarettes; rolled on the muscular thighs of
grandmothers they assume a characteristic, flattened oval shape and a
faint scent of lavender.

UR

[Image]

The Pyrinankle Mountains, source of the fine-grained marble used by the
sculptors of Ephebe, encroach into Ur. It is said that the stone
quarried in Ur is more intelligent than the local inhabitants; this may
not be literally true but the quarrymen of Ur are noted for their stolid
diligence in carving out great blocks from the living rock. An
unintended consequence and a source of mirth to visiting Ephebians is
the creation of accidental stylites where a gang of workers remove all
the adjacent rock and leave an unwary labourer marooned on the top of a
tall spike. There are few other resources in Ur; some farmers make a
living along the Djel valley supplying the endless caravans of carpet
merchants.

[Image]

The area of continental Klatch called Howondaland – also known as ‘The
Dark Incontinent’ – is ill-defined but generally taken to include the
tribal areas of Howondaland, S’belinde, Urt, Urabewe, Laotan, Ymitury,
T’etse, the Tezuman Empire and the Sumtri archipelago. It has at its
hubward borders the vast desert of the Great Nef. Rimward towards the
coast impenetrable jungles and mangrove swamps make travel to the
interior from the shoreline almost impossible. The coastal areas have
been well documented by mariners over the centuries, although the
passage past Cape Terror remains largely uncharted.

At its heart, Howondaland is more a state of mind than a geographical
location and the editors have had to rely on reports from intrepid
members of the Guild of Trespassers who took on the Dark Incontinent and
made it back home – or at least their correspondence did. Accounts from
the few traders who have penetrated upriver add to the general picture
of a land impossible to map, in which live any number of different
tribes, many of them strangers to each other as well as to the trouser
or skirt. Stories of Amazonian princesses, lost jewelled temples,
abandoned goldmines, strange monopod homunculi and giant man-eating
sloths abound.

The civilizing influence of the clacks system will, for many centuries
to come, probably only skirt the coastline of this mysterious region.

[Image]

THE KINGDOM OF HOWONDALAND

[Image]

People and culture

The Howonda tribe which give their name to this kingdom and to the
region as a whole are, by the account of explorers, not only a handsome
people but also the greatest sailors, hunters and traders of the rimward
nations. Coincidentally they are also the only tribe that most explorers
in Howondaland have spoken to. It is suspected in academic circles that
they have been credited with controlling an area larger than that they
actually govern.

In spite of the torrid climate married women among the Howondanians
often wear several layers of fine leopardskin coats. It is the custom
that a warrior should kill a leopard and give the skin to his chosen
bride before marriage. Generations later, a young girl has probably
inherited several coats before she gets her own. Traders are advised
that the Howondaland women know the value of a good fur coat.

The Howondaland veldt was once the home of the N’tuitif tribe. These
people, unique in that they have no imagination, have been hunted almost
to extinction by the N’kouf tribe. The few remaining N’tuitif tribesmen
live in a small river valley in the foothills of the Mountains of the
Sun. They are gifted with great powers of observation and deduction and
hunt by waiting for animals to drop dead at which point they eat them
raw – the potential uses of fire having yet to occur to them. The N’kouf
tribe were described in some detail, particularly with regard to their
courtship rituals, by that great expert on Howondaland, Lady Alice
Venturi. Copies of her instructively illustrated book Interesting
Customs among the N’kouf are apparently so well thumbed as to be almost
unreadable.

[Image]
Artefact from the collection of Lady Alice Venturi: an item of personal
adornment worn by Chief N’ruli of the N’kouf tribe. Or it may be a nose
flute.

Commerce and industry

The main city and port in the Kingdom of Howondaland is Zambingo,
situated at the mouth of the Brown River. The now state-owned tobacco
and tea plantations are situated on the nearby coastal plains; fine
branded pipe tobacco and cigars are the country’s main export,
generating considerable wealth for the local inhabitants since goblin
labour was phased out.

Fauna

Howondaland is one of the most ecologically diverse regions of the Disc.
However, some years ago zoologists became aware of an apparent mass
migration of elephants from the veldt. Traces of their passage can be
seen in large areas of thoroughly flattened jungle, bare grasslands and
collapsed river banks. The hermit elephant, which protects its thin skin
by appropriating any hut, can find as a shell, does not seem to have
been affected by this exodus, perhaps because its ‘shell’ renders it
invisible to whatever forced the other elephants away. An entire herd of
hermit elephants can easily be overlooked even on the open plain as a
slightly bulging village. Some impression of the ecological impact of
the migration, and of the variety of species native to this fertile
land, may be gained from Miss Felicity Beedle’s book for all ages The
Elephant Road, from which she has provided this extract:

If you go down the Elephant Road
Mind the poo, there’ll be a load.
Splintered trees and vegetation
Monkeys and apes in great agitation
Steaming groves and fertile plains
Watering holes now smell like drains
Bereft giraffes, a confused gnu
Bewilderbeasts lost and feeling blue
Crocodiles fleeing rivers brown
Fainting flamingos long since flown
Hippopotami roused from their damp repose
Ostriches with stamped-on toes
The Elephant Road has amazing views.
And sensible people wear waterproof shoes.

There are rumours that the elephants eventually passed over mountains
and around the Circle Sea to Ankh-Morpork. There is no evidence of them
having arrived in the city, but a number of menageries in the Circle Sea
area, including Quirm Zoo, reported finding themselves with more
elephants than their records suggested they should have, a number of
which persisted in sleeping for days at a time. Documents recently
uncovered in the Guild of Alchemists give credence to the story. The
papers are badly damaged by fire but there is clearly a purchase order
for a thousand elephants made out to a dealer called Azhural N’choate in
Howondaland, delivery to a Mr Dibbler of Ankh-Morpork. Investigations
are continuing.

[Image]

URT

[Image]

Urt is a small coastal country bordering Venturi Bay in the lee of the
Urabewe peninsula, which affords it protection against storms. This area
is populated by the Urtalie tribe (urt meaning ‘red’ in the local
language), a colourful people characterized by their bright red skin,
hair and clothes. The rimward tides in this area wash up vast numbers of
a tiny mollusc identified as a crimson variant of the Circle Sea winkle.
It is the main food source for the population and contains a vivid and
permanent dye which stains everything it comes into contact with.
Visitors are advised not to swim or even paddle in these coastal waters
– prolonged contact with a ‘red tide’ is believed to have hallucinogenic
effects, and there have been unfortunate incidents with Omnian
missionaries walking confidently deeper and deeper into the sea,
apparently in the belief that they are still on dry land. It is worth
noting, however, that a good quantity of fine crimson cloth can be
traded in exchange for a simple Doldrum pin.

[Image]
This collection of dyed feather costumes, boas and fans was donated by
Black Jo, daughter of Conrad Jo, a well-known merchant with trading
posts along the River B’Ware on the borders of Urt and S’belinde. Most
of the feathers are from the Muff Bird which is now sadly believed to be
extinct. We are grateful to the Guild of Ecdysiasts, Nautchers,
Cancanières and Exponents of Exotic Dance for allowing us to include
this illustration.

THE GREAT NEF

Some 750 miles across and impossible to survey with any accuracy, this
enormous desert is the largest and most arid expanse in the world.

[Image]

Geography and climate

A pitiless sun shines down on sand dunes, rocky plateaux and dust
devils; all is silent except for the whisper of sand and the scuttle of
scorpion. Seasoned travellers tell how the rocks get so hot in the noon
sun that if you crack an egg onto them it cooks within minutes. Sausages
can take a little longer and no one has yet discovered a way to make
satisfactory chips. A peculiarity of the region is the Dehydrated Ocean
where the fine silvery sand (actually water desiccated by octarine
light) is so free-flowing that sand-ships sail from the borders of Smale
to S’belinde. Known locally as the Sha-Mo, it is considered formidable
training for sailors from the region, many of whom go on to travel the
wetter oceans of the Disc.

It appears that there is no mineral deposit worth exploiting, and even
if water were found in its liquid state, the soil lacks any nutrients.
Little can live in these conditions except for the rare and exceedingly
venomous Recondite Scorpion and the Salamander: both creatures valued in
Ankh-Morpork, the one for topping up the scorpion pit at the Patrician’s
palace, the other as a rapid light source for iconographs.

Reports from travellers put the Lost City of Ee in various locations in
Howondaland, but the consensus seems to be that it is in the centre of
the Great Nef Desert. This city was discovered first by Abraxas the
Epheban and was later found again by Truckle the Uncivil of the Silver
Horde. The Convocation of Ee which took place here in the Year of the
Scrofulous Vole is significant within modern Omnianism for the violence
of the schisms it caused – one progressively-minded bishop was struck
with his own tambourine, and a number of subdeacons suffered concussions
after getting into a fight over the correct length for cassocks
prescribed by Om. Ee is now famous for its infrequently visited museum
which contains the first Pizza, created by the Klatchian mystic Ronron
‘Revelation Joe’ Shuwadhi. Shuwadhi claimed to have been given the
recipe in a dream by the great Creator, who apparently made the
Discworld in this image, but with fewer olives.

People and culture

Three tribes are known to live around the desert. The Sorca people live
in the foothills of the Laotan Mountains and built the great light dams
to catch and store sunlight. The Great Nef Nomads can be recognized by
their traditional elbow turbans; they operate sand-ships, but also make
up a significant percentage of the pirate crews and slavers who, in
their red-sailed dhows, prowl the coastal waters of the continent. The
Zabingo tribe live at the source of the River Wapimto just below the
Viagara Falls. The menfolk of this tribe are regarded with great respect
by the nearby Bewe peoples for their stamina and strength. A pool at the
base of the waterfall benefits from the effect of hot subterranean gases
which bubble up through channels in the rock creating effervescence in
the water. The elders of the tribe and their concubines spend long hours
enjoying the warm frisson of this frothy concoction. More information
about the customs of the Zabingo may be found in With Wand and
Broomstick Across the Great Nef by the late Desiderata Hollow, available
in the restricted section in the library of the Guild of Trespassers.

YMITURY

[Image]

A small but wealthy sultanate located on the turnwise coast of
Howondaland. The inhabitants are generally friendly once they have
established that visitors are not Hublanders, not related to Hublanders,
not married to Hublanders, indeed do not own up to knowing any
Hublanders. The main city Re’durat, which is governed by a Pasha and
hosts a powerful order of mages, is constructed entirely of mud-brick
houses which sometimes extend four storeys high. With their shuttered
windows and central courtyards these buildings offer comfortable
accommodation to visitors from anywhere except the Hub.

The main exports from Ymitury are the locally grown dates which are
particularly fine flavoured. The country also produces ingredients for
the perfume trade, including a form of musk obtained from the Giggling
Meer Kat, and resinous incense harvested from the Reeking Acacia. An
export unique to this wealthy sultanate is concubines; the Sultan of
Ymitury has many mistresses and occasionally when the seraglio becomes
too crowded he will donate the surplus to other world leaders. Carefully
bound in cloth or carpet these women have sometimes, on arrival in a
foreign port, been mistaken for giant butterfly pupae or even overgrown
vegetables. Once their true nature has been revealed they are usually
quietly returned home.

LAOTAN

[Image]

Laotan extends from the Mountains of the Sun to the coast of the
Howondaland Sea with not much in the way of vegetation or permanent
settlements in between. The arid tin-rich spires of the Laotan mountain
range are home to some of the hardiest people in the known world: the
High Laots or Goat Whistlers. Swarthy, emaciated and dust-blind, these
seasoned tribesmen follow their scrawny guide-goats over cruel terrain
in search of the most meagre scrub. There are many tales of High Laot
endurance: most notably the journey of Blind Ali who crossed the Great
Nef holding on to the tail of a billygoat in hot pursuit of a pretty
young nanny. The trio got as far as Lake M’Boily on a diet of creosote
leaves and syphacia berries. They all enjoyed a fish dinner courtesy of
the Bigmy tribe and survived the return journey on dried blue-eyed
shrimp and wasp agaric. The tribesmen have developed a remarkable means
of communication using differently pitched whistles and can send complex
messages over great distances. A young High Laot, with his traditional
goatskin sling shot, can launch a whistle some five hundred yards, the
message trailing behind in the wind, giving rise to a pleasantly
descending fluting noise preceding each delivery.

[Image]

The Low Laot tribe dwell along the Howondaland Sea coast where they live
off, and later live in, the residues of giant hermit crabs and various
molluscs that are washed ashore. Nothing is wasted and these people
create drinking vessels, buttons and jewellery from shell and carapace.
They too have developed an unusual method of communication using the
materials to hand. The distinctive sound of their clammy bands, echoing
along the coast, is unmistakable.

URABEWE

[Image]

Known as the white man’s cemetery, its coastline is completely overgrown
with Mangrave swamps

S’BELINDE

[Image]

Reports of witch lords and their snake-warrior tribes have resulted in
this area remaining largely unexplored. The small harbour at Saunders’s
Creek on the mouth of the B’Ware River was named for an intrepid
explorer who, while attempting to escape from the aforementioned snake
warriors and having lost the paddle to his canoe, was forced to proceed
using his extremities. It was at this point that he realized that the
river was home to a particularly vicious species of piranha fish. When
recounting this escapade in later years in the bar of the Trespassers’
Club, he observed, ‘The little buggers almost had me stumped, but I used
one of my feet that still had a good few toes on to throw them a big
slice of dwarf bread. That slowed ’em down!’

[Image]
Kindly donated by the Smith family, whose grandfather never returned
from his last expedition to S’belinde. A Balrug, or floor covering
derived from the skin of a Balrog. Sadly the Balrog has been hunted to
extinction for its skin which being both waterproof and strong is much
prized in the manufacture of boots, waterproof coats, floor coverings
and even tents.

T’ETSE

[Image]

The country of T’etse is perilously close to the Rim, and the turnwise
coast of this country is, for good reason, called the Scavenge Coast.
The local tribesmen long ago gave up the tiresome business of catching,
gutting, skinning and cooking fish or game and instead now rely on
Nature’s Bounty in the form of ships’ provisions that are washed ashore
from the numerous wrecks. Using the available timbers and rigging they
construct elaborate gantries from which they suspend strong nets out
into the sea. Surplus goods are traded with inland tribes and with the
surviving mariners who make landfall at Salvation Point, where there is
a temple to the Ephebian god Flatulus. It is uncertain whether this was
built by grateful mariners and adopted by the local populace, or whether
a temple was already established. Either way, Flatulus now finds himself
in a win-win situation, whichever direction he blows. Despite living
almost entirely off what the sea provides, the T’etse are no sailors. In
years gone by they made beautiful ships – which contributed greatly to
the architecture of Krull. These days, salvage is considered more cost
effective.

THE TEZUMAN EMPIRE

[Image]

Geography and climate

A land of steaming jungle, lakes, swamps and volcanoes, the Kingdom of
Tezuma and its cowed satellites are, by and large, jungle clearings
which have to be maintained on an almost daily basis by men armed with
obsidian hand tools. The climate is hot and humid, rainfall is regular
and heavy, the lava flows freely and the jungle is heaving with venomous
snakes, large carnivorous animals and mosquitoes the size of
hummingbirds. All in all, it is not a pleasant place to live, which
could be the explanation for the national temperament being so gloomy.
The capital, Poxalotl, built around the Empire’s largest and most
bloodstained temple, is some days’ trek from the nearest navigable
river, the Toxalotl, and the Tezumen rarely venture to the coast, being
too busy keeping the temples and farmland clear to consider hacking
their way further through the jungle to look at another big, wet,
inhospitable place. Attempting landfall in Anophiles Bay, Lacklustre
Bay, Black-Fly Island, Tiger Bay or Anaconda Head is not advised.

Culture and customs

The Tezumen are renowned for their dejected nature and they pass this
misery around by indulging in mass human sacrifice to their bad-tempered
gods. The main features of their settlements are large flat-topped
pyramids constructed in such a way that no mortar is used. Their skill
in stone-carving is evident in the bas reliefs on the avenues of granite
stelae which depict their military triumphs and, in quite unnecessary
detail, the gruesome fate of the vanquished.

From infancy the Tezuman child is expected to take up his or her
obsidian chisel and learn carving skills; engraving on granite is their
only method of recording the written word. The fact that writing a
shopping list can take several months is another reason for the sullen
mien of the population. The Tezuman priests have developed a
sophisticated calendar. It is assumed that this is so they can confirm
their ingrained belief that, as time passes, things will only get worse.

Trade and industry

There is little trade between the Tezuman Empire and the outside world.
Their cocoa and jade, although excellent, are hardly worth the
sacrifices they require in exchange. A group of Ankh-Morpork Merchant
Venturers, some years ago, attempted to pass off a case full of
papier-mâché skulls as the real thing. Unfortunately the damp and humid
jungle conditions rendered them a fetid mush and the merchants were
speedily decapitated to compensate for the loss. Over the centuries few
expeditions to the Tezuman Empire have been attempted and even fewer
survivors have come back. In general terms our advice would be not to
go. To have any hope of making the return journey, the traveller would
be well advised to pack industrial-strength insect repellent and a guide
to the Tezuman pictogram. Accounts of a seemingly effusive welcome by
the natives followed rapidly by misunderstandings are almost universal
in the tiny corpus of literature available. Do not outstay your welcome.

[Image]
While it is generally accepted among scholars that, contrary to popular
belief, the Tezuman peoples have discovered the wheel, they use it for
personal adornment and head protection rather than transportation.

[Image]

THE SUMTRI ARCHIPELAGO

[Image]

[Image]
Official portrait of Queen Zazumba of Sumtri

The Sumtri archipelago comprises the islands of Sumtri, Sultri, Sundae
and Sundry Others which extend rimward of the Gulf of Tezuma. Over the
years this island nation has protected its independence through the
determination of its warlike ruling family. The terrifying natural
flora, which includes the ambitiously carnivorous Sapu tree, known to
swallow leopards, elephants and even trolls,

[Image]

The Rim Ocean territories widdershins of the Herelaya and Klatchistan
mountain ranges are now generally known as the Muntab Provinces. On old
maps this area was marked as the ‘Back of Beyond’. It was known by the
Klatchians as the Land of the Back Spindle Moon, and in ancient Agatea
as Fah-Flung.

The Theocracy of Muntab has the greatest landmass of the region and
appears to have extended its influence into the surrounding provinces of
H’rull, Khanli, Vanglemesh, Rehigreed, Farferee and the Orohai
peninsula. Our information on this area is incomplete[1]

[Image]

[Image]

Geography and climate

Located just 500 miles from the Edge, Muntab has a rimmish climate with
heavy annual rainfall and Rim storms in the summer. The turnwise and
hubward borders are protected by the rainforests. On the slopes of the
Herelayan mountain range plantations of impenetrable forest host local
flora and fauna which include vampire watermelons, Accelerating Bamboo,
killer bees, venomous snakes and wandering tribes of cannibalistic
pygmies. Cunningly contrived guard posts are suspended from the taller
trees. Resembling giant fortified hanging baskets they contain some of
the nastiest plant and insect life to be found in the world.

Harbours along the rimward coast are spiked with forts: entry is
rigorously controlled and limited to the Port and Free Trade area of
Ghat in the Gulf of Khanli, where every trading nation pays to have a
legation. Smuggling is strictly regulated: by the mercy of Gods, no one
is killed more than once.

Population

The peoples of Muntab, with their brown skin and black hair, are a most
attractive race. The richer citizens display much of their wealth on
their person in the form of gold jewellery, and in their person in the
form of gold teeth. There is believed to be real hardship in some of the
farming communities where all the available land is given over to
growing cash crops. Children become hungry on a diet of vanilla pods
without the rice pudding.

Agriculture and industry

The wealth of this region comes from its agriculture. Rare spices such
as cloves, nutmeg and vanilla grow in the forests of Khanli and
peppercorns are cultivated in the offshore Condiment Isles. There are
large tea plantations in Farferee and H’rull; the choice
Blue-Black-Winding-Eyebrow leaf is just one of the many varieties grown.
The Vanglemesht Red Python Chilli is one of the most belligerent
climbing plants, and the largest and hottest pepper, in the world. The
crop is grown in isolated deep valleys that it can’t climb out of and it
is harvested with considerable skill by farmers using nets and harpoons.
All Jolson, the famous Ankh-Morpork chef, has stated that a single Red
Python Chilli would be sufficient to flavour five hundred pots of
black-footed beans, or twice that number when catering for those who
want to be sure of no after-burn. It is also rumoured to be one of the
secret ingredients of Wow-Wow Sauce. Much of the spice trade is
controlled by Klatchian merchants who have negotiated safe passage
through Vanglemesh.

The finest reannual vul nuts grow in the Rehigreed province. The vul nut
vineyards are located along the coast, and much of the fruit falls into
the waters of the Rim Ocean where it is lost to the strong currents. It
is a valuable export to the Agatean Empire, where the ripe kernels are
used to produce a prized distillate known as Ghlen Livid. People who
drink this intoxicating green liquid can apparently see into the future,
this future often consisting of sitting quietly in a darkened room until
the double vision goes and the walls stop spinning. The adventurous and
commercially minded Rim Trading Merchants risk their lives gathering as
much of the falling fruit as they are able and then catch the Back
Spindle tide which takes them into the Widdershins Ocean and on into the
Agatean Sea.

[Image]

A more recent development is the field of ‘pharmaceuticals’. With
diplomacy by blowpipe being a recognized arm of the state it is not
entirely surprising that there is now an established working
relationship with the Ankh-Morpork Assassins’ Guild. The Guild’s
representative in Ghat is the Honourable Eustace Bassingly-Gore who
arrived there some years ago as a result of an unplanned cruise. This
trade is mutually advantageous as the research facilities of the Guild
lead to the development of ever more lethal toxins which the
practitioners of the poisonous dart can use to optimum effect.

[Image]

The curative effect of some plants was noted by that well-travelled
witch Desiderata Hollow, who brought back a selection of seeds and
cuttings to her home in the Ramtops. Since then an informal arrangement
has been established between the witch-doctors of Muntab and a number of
Lancre witches. A regular supply of roots, seeds and plants are traded
hubwards in exchange for recipes and preparations.

A tentative approach from the holders of the International Seed
Collection at Big Cabbage requesting samples of the various Muntab
reannual cultivars has received a positive response.

THE MUNTAB CALENDAR AND GHAT

One of the reasons why commerce can only successfully be carried out in
the free port area of Ghat is the difficulty in establishing a time
frame that has any meaning to the indigenous population. Their culture
and religious observance is firmly based around the premise that time is
counting backwards. This may well assist the growers of reannuals, but
plays merry hob with shipping dates and delivery times. All trading post
and free trade areas, by general agreement, operate on the Ankh-Morpork
or Klatchian calendar. This can lead to confusion but the old adage
‘Time and tide wait for no man, dwarf, troll, goblin or other species.
Except maybe yetis’ generally holds good.

KHANLI

Little is known of the interior of this province, but there are stories
of an ancient and sophisticated civilization who built a great city of
monumental temples and immense palaces where people lived in luxury and
plenty – the ancient city of Kahn Li. Explanations for its disappearance
include deadly plagues, prolonged droughts and unlikely stories about
small parasitic wheeled carts.

OROHAI PENINSULA

That intrepid explorer General Sir Roderick Purdeigh spent some time
with the sponge-eating, coral-house-dwelling pygmies who inhabit the
Orohai peninsula, the most far-flung widdershins outpost of the Back of
Beyond. The memoir he published on his return records that, while
recovering from mild concussion and some serious skin abrasions, he
found the time to compile a small recipe book for the local population.
In an attempt to alleviate the monotony and limited food value of the
sponge he came up with various confections including sponge-au-gratin,
boiled sponge, deep fried sponge fritters, sponge pot roast with limpets
and loofah surprise.

[Image]

The island of Krull sits on the Rim of the world like an iridescent
spider, the threads of its gossamer web extending along the
circumference. Above it hangs the vast multi-coloured arch of the Rimbow
suffused with Octarine hue.

There are numerous other small islands scattered across the ocean on
this side of the Disc, from Krull to the shores of the Agatean Empire.
The fact that none have been claimed as territory by any of the
continental powers is perhaps testament to the distinct lack of anything
on them worth having, seeing, doing, eating or hunting to extinction.

KRULL

[Image]

[Image]

Geography and climate

Krull has a warm and maritime climate; it is surrounded on three sides
by fierce rimward currents that create high tides and rough seas. On the
fourth side it overlooks the edge of the world. The island is heavily
wooded and rises to a peak upon which the city of Krull perches, an
encrustation of buildings and palaces fashioned from the bones of ships
salvaged from the Rimfall. The River Hakrull opens into the almost
enclosed Keepsafe Bay, the only secure harbour.

The Circumfence, a ten-thousand-mile reclamation yard constructed by the
denizens of Krull, comprises a vast net with floating stockades joined
together by a complex system of pulleys and ropes. These also act as the
communication system between the little shacks or sheds perched along
its length. This seven-hundred-year-old construction is one of the More
Than Seven Wonders of the World, and the Krullians employ lengthmen who
are each allotted their own section – which they keep in remarkably good
condition, considering that their ‘employment’ is rarely voluntary,
doesn’t always involve keeping one’s tongue, and is paid only in old
bottles, scraps of timber and the dubious contents of whatever barrels
wash up that the mainland don’t want. Krullian salvage fleets supply the
lengthmen and bring back whatever has washed up in the nets – including
new lengthmen.

Commerce

The magical and scenic aspect that the island presents to the world
belies the fact that its economy is based upon scavenging the flotsam
and jetsam that drift towards it from the misadventures of others. There
is very little new in Krull – its inhabitants are the ultimate recyclers
and have discovered endless ways of upcycling, downcycling and even
sideways-cycling baulks of timber, sodden bales of cloth and yards of
rope, along with broken lanterns and the contents of ships’ galleys.
Smaller reclaimed items are collected in a yard off Keepsafe Bay where
the Chief Domestic Recycler known as Shabbi Sheik creates
up-to-the-minute style statements from damp, seaweed-smelling junk.

Culture

The Krullians have little to occupy them as a continuous supply of
slaves

THE MITHOS ISLANDS

These islands, the remains of extinct volcanoes rising up from the
seabed, are uninhabited as there is no natural water source and it
doesn’t rain much. Sheer cliffs on all sides make landings almost
impossible. Even so treasure seekers climb to the high clay basins which
are the only place in the world where the rare and very valuable blue
milk diamonds may be found. It has been known for a handful of these
precious gems to be traded for a bucket of drinking water and a rope.

THE BROWN ISLANDS

A large archipelago of at least twelve islands 1000 miles off the coast
of the Turnwise Lands, where the sea is particularly rough. There is a
story that one of them was visited many years ago by druid missionary
Llamedos Jones. History does not record whether he converted the
islanders or ever returned home, but there is one island where
apparently the population enjoy choral singing, have a unique religious
rite involving a ball game and it rains a lot.

THE GORUNNA TRENCH

A chasm in the Disc’s surface about 700 miles off the coast of Ymitury,
reputed to be deeper and darker than any other. A place full of huge
fish with eyes the size of cartwheels and great slimy tentacled
monsters. So dangerous in fact that even a kraken won’t go there without
his mum.

KRAPATOA

A very small sandy island a few miles rimward of the Gorunna Trench. It
is uninhabited, not because of its remoteness but because of the
enormous, weird and stinking bits of sea life that get washed up there
after storms.

RIMMEROSS ISLANDS

This rash of tiny islands can be seen on the horizon widdershins of
Krull. They may be populated by shipwrecked sailors caught up in the
rushing current to the Rim; they may be rich in treasure and have
spectacular views; but because they are so close to the Edge they remain
unexplored. Some are so close together they act as a sort of sieve,
filtering out the larger flotsam, and it is likely that the Krullian
salvage fleet checks the area. Whatever the Krullians know about the
Rimmeross Islands, though, they are keeping to themselves.

THE SILLY ISLES

Largely uncharted; even when surveyors have attempted merely to count
the number of islands in the archipelago they can never arrive at the
same total. It is thought that this is because some small islands will
hide behind larger ones while the count is in progress, while others
hold their breath and stay below the waves until everyone has gone.

BOUNSEA ISLAND

This large island about 2000 miles off the coast of Chimeria was
discovered by a Captain Sonky, a small-time Merchant Venturer blown off
course while attempting an expedition to the Brown Islands. He found the
natives friendly and willing to trade, and in return for half a dozen
empty wine bottles and a glass eye they gave him a stretchy hammock and
an armful of small bouncy balls. It emerged that these items were made
from a material obtained from what they called ‘The Sharing Tree’, an
indigenous species of the island. The substance obtained by tapping the
trunk of the tree had the unusual property of bouncing when made into a
ball or stretching when made into a sheet. Captain Sonky returned to
Ankh-Morpork with a crate of novelty bouncing balls and the germ of an
idea. It took another generation to develop this idea into a
recreational product with more potential than children’s toys. His son
Wallace, known affectionately as ‘Rubber Sonky’, set up the rubber goods
manufacturing business which still provides the citizens of Ankh-Morpork
with a range of ‘Eversure Dependables’.

HERGENLAND

A pair of islands just over 500 miles from the Rim which were briefly
settled by a raiding party from Hergen. The colonists stayed for just a
few weeks before returning home to the comforts of a diet of smoked
herring and a climate more suited to their traditional fur garb.

The smaller Beowill Island was named for the unusually determined son of
the chieftain who, being more endowed with intelligence than most
heroes, decided to remain there, on the basis that the agreeable climate
more than made up for the lack of smoked fish.

PEARL ISLANDS

[Image]

Pearl Island, largest in the archipelago that shares its name, was
discovered by an Omnian priest from Ankh-Morpork, one Pastor Treddle.
During a missionary expedition in the Year of the Curious Beetle,
Treddle’s ship, the Slipper of Om, was hit by a storm. Treddle remained
on deck with his harmonium during this crisis, bolstering the courage of
the crew with a loud rendition of ‘Om Shall Smash the Ungodly Upon the
Rocks of Faith’, which made such an impression upon the frightened
seamen that they implored the good pastor to take the only lifeboat for
himself and his instrument. The ship, with ten remaining missionaries
still on board, eventually made landfall on a small island off the coast
of Hersheba. Sadly, the natives of Lektor Island had their own gods and
were not ready for conversion. However, the flammable nature of
religious tracts was of considerable value on an island with very few
trees – indeed some were used to light the fires under the cooking pots.

Pastor Treddle’s lifeboat washed up on Pearl Island, further along the
same archipelago. The sandy shore offered little protection so the
Pastor dragged his harmonium into the shelter of a large cave. It was
his good fortune that the fierce natives of this island based their
religious observance around a sea deity believed to inhabit the cave,
whose acoustic properties magnified the sound of the waves at high tide,
causing an unearthly noise.

At the unexpected and very real appearance of the missionary and his
clamorous instrument the natives prostrated themselves and declared him
to be a god. Shortly after this Pastor Treddle had what could only be
described as a crisis of faith. This may have had something to do with
the eighty wives he was given or the fact that they were wearing the
largest pearls he had ever seen. After establishing that the pearls had
been obtained locally, the spirit of commerce which lurks in the breast
of every true Morporkian surfaced in Mr Treddle. As God/Emperor he used
his powers of exhortation to a different purpose from that of saving
souls and soon the nimble-fingered natives became adept at producing
buttons, knife handles, and jewellery from the oyster shells which,
together with pearls, were traded abroad, initially for items to make Mr
Treddle’s life more comfortable, and latterly to the general benefit of
the population. To prevent any misunderstandings with his mother church,
Mr Treddle proposed a tithe to be paid to the Temple of Om in
Ankh-Morpork.

It was agreed that this would be an acceptable arrangement. As Bishop
Fester observed: ‘Om thrives on profits as well as prophets, after all,
and if he has decreed that there is a useful endeavour in the Turnwise
Ocean that is Omnian in spirit and flies the flag of Ankh-Morpork, then
it’s blessings all round, gentlemen, and mine’s a sherry.’

[Image]

[Image]

Turnwise and rimward of Ankh-Morpork, the Counterweight Continent lies
500 miles from the Rim, extending hubwards as far as the Dire peninsula,
just 1000 miles from the Hub. Most of the continent is occupied by the
Agatean Empire – now also known as the People’s Beneficent Republic of
Agatea (PBRA). The state is surrounded by the remains of a
twenty-foot-high stone wall which extends to the nearby islands of
Tingling and Bhangbhangduc. The beTrobi Islands are located off the
widdershins coast; Nafooi, and the volcanic Slakki islets, extend from
the Agatean Sea towards Fourecks. Closer to the Rim are the small,
uninhabited and difficult to find Virgin Islands.

THE PEOPLE’S BENEFICENT REPUBLIC OF AGATEA

[Image]

[Image]

The editors are indebted to the executors of the estate of the late Mr
Ronald Saveloy – advisor to Ghenghiz Cohen and retired geography
teacher, whose extensive journeys within the Agatean Empire gave him a
great insight into the people and features of this land, recorded by him
in meticulous detail and at least three different colours – for access
to his notes. The map above (a facsimile of a valuable artefact from the
library of the late Lord Hong found among the effects of Mr Saveloy)
shows some topographical detail and the location of the major cities.

Geography and climate

The capital city, Hunghung, is located centrally, not far from the River
Hung, and the main port of Bes Pelargic is on the hubward coast where
the Hung drains into the Turnwise Ocean. There is a free-trade area in
the Red Triangle district of Bes Pelargic and its mixed population of
sailors, beTrobi tribesmen and merchants make this area very different
from the rest of Agatea.

A notable topographical feature of the continent is the vast alluvial
flood plain extending hubwards from Hunghung, drained by five rivers and
enriched by the dung of many water buffalo, which allows every available
scrap of land to be cultivated. Towards the Rim, in the rainshadow of
the coastal mountains to turnwise and widdershins, an area of scrubland
develops into the arid Tito Desert.

The region’s geology, unique on the Disc, has long fascinated the
outside world. Early in the Century of the Fruitbat, when even the
existence of Agatea was mere rumour, the philosopher Cern of Ephebe
argued that to maintain the balance of the Disc across the four great
elephants this fabled continent must exist and must have the equivalent
density of the entire landmass on the opposite side of the Hub; that
being so, the stories of its being made of gold might be true. Many
adventurous souls launched into the Turnwise Ocean towards its supposed
location, but all who returned had encountered nothing but sea; the
others may indeed have collided with the Agatean coast, with fatal
consequences. Since then, with limited contact established, it has
emerged that while there are rich deposits of gold, the bedrock of the
whole continent is octiron, a metal with extraordinarily high levels of
intrinsic magic, and exceedingly rare in any other part of the Disc. How
this, and the existence of Fourecks, affects Cernian theory is a topic
of current research in Unseen University’s High Energy Magic department.

The climate is for the most part sub-rimmish, well-suited to
agriculture. The Tito Desert experiences fierce daytime temperatures,
but the mountains, at least in the turnwise ranges between the W’ung
district and Hunghung, are cold enough for snow to lie – an anomaly
which may be a side effect of the octiron they contain.

Reproduced below and overleaf are pages from Ronald Saveloy’s notebooks,
one of the only written records we have about the interior of this
enigmatic land.

[Image]

[Image]
* Further information on this artefact may be found in Volume 6 issue 11
of the Journal of Cruel and Unusual Geography published by the UU Press.

Political situation

[Image]

The Great Wall was built in the S’ang dynasty and, until recent changes
in government, served to contain the population and prevent contact with
the rest of the world; little was known of the land or its people apart
from legends of abundant gold giving the continent its popular
Morporkian appellation of ‘The Aurient’ (the place that gold comes
from). Documents in the Unseen University library (Department of
Auriental Studies) tell of centuries of incessant civil wars as Five
Noble Families (the Hongs, the Sungs, the Tangs, the McSweeneys and the
Fangs) struggled for domination. The old emperor maintained the
traditional tyrannical system of government until his assassination at
the hands of the Hongs. The legendary barbarian Ghenghiz Cohen then took
command and his brief regime saw the establishment of an Ankh-Morpork
embassy in Hunghung and the appointment of a new Grand Vizier with
experience of the world outside the wall. Following the abdication of
the Great Cohen the administration was taken over by the Grand Vizier
and his daughters, the eldest of whom, Madame Butterfly, was recently
elected Chairman of the Ruling Committee of the People’s Beneficent
Republic of Agatea (PBRA).

This change of government has resulted in a more open dialogue with the
rest of the world and in the Year of the Reciprocating Llama a trade
delegation from the PBRA visited Ankh-Morpork to explore the possibility
of building a railway in the Republic. The engineers of the AM&SPHR
reported some difficulty translating the documents put forward for
tender. While they could understand the meaning of the little pictures
of a fire-breathing buffalo and extra-long parallel chopsticks they were
unable to work out where the urinating dog pictures fitted into the
scheme. Representatives of the PBRA have established a consulate above
the Lotus Blossom restaurant in Dagon Street. Despite these new
diplomatic links, complex documentation is required for entry into the
PBRA and any group organizing a trade mission or research trip is
advised to visit the consulate.

[Image]

Industry

The great majority of the empire’s numerous inhabitants are occupied
with agriculture – notably rice-growing, market gardening, and the
raising of livestock, of which water buffalo are the most visible – but
that still leaves many thousands, if not millions, employed in more
industrial pursuits.

There is considerable mining activity in the Three Sun Mountains, which
consist almost entirely of gold (which may have given rise to their
name). The metal has little intrinsic worth in Agatea where it is so
common, so demand for the output of these mines mostly comes from the
mint, to produce the vast quantity of rhinu required to keep the wheels
of commerce turning. Octiron is closest to the surface in the Gung-Ho
range, but the extreme difficulty of mining and processing this mineral,
which is at once intransigent and highly unstable, means it is a
resource as yet largely untapped, despite its value.

The pottery and ceramics industry is an ancient one and its craftsmen
highly skilled, whether working in porcelain or terracotta. Other
important sectors are silk production, paper-making, the manufacture of
fireworks, and a small but ingenious arms industry catering exclusively
for the ruling class.

[Image]

[Image]
The design from an unusual ceramic artefact, now in the People’s
Educational Museum, Hunghung

Culture

Once again we are grateful to Mr Saveloy whose informative notes have
contributed to our knowledge. It should of course be borne in mind that
Mr Saveloy met his unfortunate end before the Cohen regime had time to
effect much change, and in the still newer atmosphere of the PBRA it is
likely there has been some departure from traditional ways.

[Image]

THE TING LING ISLANDS

An area of these small islands off the rimward coast of the
Counterweight Continent is part of the Agatean Empire (PBRA). A unique
religious cult has developed on the smaller island of TinLing which was
the recipient of an involuntary expedition some years ago when a sailing
ship, the Maria Pesto, foundered 20 miles inland.

[Image]
Official portrait of Ghenghiz Cohen, ‘The Last Emperor’

BHANGBHANGDUC

[Image]

The Great Wall still extends across the centre of this forested island
though there is now considerable sea traffic between the two areas. The
island was visited by one of the principal luminaries of the Guild of
Trespassers, the late Sir Roderick Purdeigh; sadly he did not return
from this expedition, but his recovered notes told of a population of
fierce natives of short stature and covered in orange hair whose
language consisted of the word ook. Recent migrants to Ankh-Morpork from
Bhangbhangduc bear puzzlingly little resemblance to this description,
though their culinary skills are much appreciated.

THE MEI-LAND PENINSULA

A narrow spit of land which stretches over a thousand miles turnwise
into the Widdershins Ocean and is covered with a thick forest of
Aggressive Bamboo. The population have adapted to living high in the
forest canopy; this affords them some protection against the sharp
bamboo spears which sprout in vicious stabbing points from every inch of
the ground. Any houses they do construct at ground level are, during the
growing season, carried skywards at a rate of several feet a day. The
hardy Mei-landian people harvest this bamboo with care and supply the
Agatean Empire (PBRA) with malicious scaffolding, malevolent paper,
auspicious shibo tiles, combative chopsticks and gum-piercing bamboo
shoots. All at a very good price.

THE DIRE PENINSULA

By contrast this area of the Counterweight Continent extends hubwards
into the chill icy waters of the Dire Straits. It is a patchwork of
ancient cultures, remote weather-hardened communities and yurts. The
nomadic Gangbaatar tribes wander the high plains with their herds of
giant Dire Yak which supply them with shelter, food, clothing, fuel for
their fires, entertainment and sometimes romance. The only variation to
their diet of yak is obtained by hunting with the Dire Hawk, a small,
bad-tempered, short-sighted raptor which is equally likely to deliver a
snow vole, a Hublander’s woollen cap or another tribesman’s eyeball.
There has been little communication with these tribes mainly because of
their remoteness and the inhospitable climate; but even on the rare
occasions when contact has been made, the tribal language, a gravelly
gargle, is completely incomprehensible.

The low temperatures and abundant mineral-rich bedrock of the area
provide a perfect habitat for small and unusually mobile trolls who have
established communities on the rocky outcrops of the high plains. Like
the human inhabitants of the Dire peninsula they have had little contact
with the rest of the world and rare sightings of them possibly account
for the stories of formless grey head-hunters brought back by sailors
returning from journeys through the narrow sea passage of the Dire
Straits.

The Department of Speculative Anthropology at Brazeneck University have
suggested a common heritage for the peoples and trolls of the region.

[Image]
The noble Dire Yak

NAFOOI

A large island with a central mountainous core; the forested foothills
on the hubward slopes descend to arid coastal plains and on the rimward
side the dry, rocky foothills extend to the sea. Unable to grow crops,
the indigenous Nafoo people survive on a meagre diet of whistling stick
insects and ground leaves.

After the civil wars in the empire and the fall of the Noble House of
the McSweeneys, a few of the survivors of that family together with half
a dozen pigs escaped to Nafooi, where they established a new kingdom run
along the rigid lines of the old empire.

Their new citadel is surrounded by a closely guarded high bamboo fence.
This is not designed to keep their people in, but to stop the constant
trickle of local Nafooi tribesmen who wish to share the benefits of a
society that has pigs.

SLAKKI

The volcanic nature of this region is thought to be a result of the deep
deposits of octiron that extend from the mainland out beneath the
Agatean Sea. This produces a high-level thaumic field, creating pockets
of liquid rock which bubble up to the surface where the Disc becomes
thinner. The string of volcanoes which form the core of the Slakki
islands are still active, rendering the islands uninhabitable, though
persistent rumours of a population of beautiful women wearing no clothes
whatever have meant that a proposed expedition constantly features on
the agenda at meetings of such organizations as the Ankh-Morpork Fine
Art Society and the Unseen University Student Union.

THE BETROBI ISLANDS

[Image]

This group of small islands is inhabited by the beTrobi peoples who are
great traders and mariners. For many years they have formed a link
between Ankh-Morpork (known in Trob as ‘City with the qualities of the
fortunate warthog who finding many grubs eats heartily and vomits into
the watering hole’) and the Agatean Empire (in Trob, ‘Land which like
the irritable oyster hides valuable pearls inside a hard shell and nips
the fingers of any who touch’), and Trob has been the language of
commerce in Bes Pelargic where beTrobis have a significant presence. The
volcanoes of this archipelago are no longer active and the fertile
volcanic soils support extensive agriculture as well as giving rise to
forests of diamondwood trees on the lower slopes of Mount Awayawa. The
history of volcanic activity is probably the reason for the worship of
firegods and the many shrines to Alohura, Goddess of Lightning.

THE VIRGIN ISLANDS

Very close to the Rim, this cluster of tiny islands, some no bigger than
a rock, is largely unexplored. The strong currents in this area make
navigation difficult and the impregnable cliffs which present on all the
hubward aspects make any landings impossible.

[Image]

FOURECKS (XXXX, TERROR INCOGNITA)

A large landmass in the Widdershins Ocean, Fourecks at its rim-most
point lies just 20 miles from the Edge, and extends some 1750 miles
hubwards. It is rather out of the way, though mariners have long known
its whereabouts; the earliest record of it, in a ship’s log held by the
Guild of Trespassers, says ‘If you sette out from Nothyngfjord and keepe
going and do not fall off ye edge of ye world you’re bounde to bump into
it, probably, it is quite bigge.’

[Image]

Geography and climate

Fourecks was long regarded as uninhabitable, except by those who
inhabited it, but they don’t count as they are indigenous and everyone
knows ‘indigenous’ is Latatian for ‘doesn’t matter’. Much of the current
population is made up of mariners from all over the Disc who survived
shipwreck, washed up on a pristine, sundrenched tropical beach and
because of the local conditions were unable to leave. Its proximity to
the Rim means that bright, almost raucous sunshine occurs for much of
the time, with storms around the coast. This produces a climate that is
hot to blisteringly hot: dusty and arid in the central regions and with
rimmish vegetation establishing itself in coastal areas. Until recently
huge banks of impenetrable clouds full of storm surrounded the whole
landmass, and this, combined with the almost continuous band of coral
and razor-sharp rocks lurking just offshore, meant there was little
interchange with the rest of the world. It is as if some kind of creator
wanted to keep the whole continent unsullied by outside contact and
splashed out on a particularly interesting chastity belt. In recent
years and for reasons not fully understood there has been a significant
alteration in the weather on the continent; a deluge transformed the
landscape and mitigated the effect of the strong surrounding
anticyclone. Since then trade and communications have evolved at
breakneck speed, so, no worries. The capital city Bugarup is located on
the hubwards coast at the mouth of the River Reddish, where it opens
into a sheltered bay. An Ankh-Morpork Embassy has recently been
established, with a permanent attaché from the pharmacological branch of
the Assassins’ Guild. This official acts as liaison with local
researchers into the indigenous and mostly wildly poisonous flora and
fauna, and at the same time is well placed to keep an eye out for
undesirable immigrants who may be the subject of an inhumation contract.
The Assassins’ research team follows a strict ethical code which avoids
testing on animals, since plenty of human subjects are volunteered for
their studies.

[Image]

Industry and agriculture

There is at present little manufacturing to support the economy. The
extraction of opals will undoubtedly attract new investment and there
are unexploited mineral deposits in the central highlands. As the water
table rises inland more sheep can graze on the large prairies and these
provide meat and wool as well as companionship in the more remote areas.
Grain, soft fruits and various vegetables are grown along the coast.
Wine is produced in some coastal valleys and enjoys a fine reputation.
Rusted Dunny Valley Semillons and Lassitude Creek Marmots are making
inroads into the traditional Quirmian wine market as is their ‘Old
Possum Cognac’, though the Quirmians claim that it is a pale imitation
of the real thing. ‘Goolalah XXXXtra strong’ beer is also gaining an
export market, as a side effect of the biggest Ecksian export of all:
barmen. Much of Fourecks is undeveloped because of the extremely diverse
and dangerous flora and fauna; numerous interesting books have been
written about indigenous species such as Blue-Eyed-Death-in-the-Dunny
Spiders, Cat-o-Nine-Tailed Scorpions, Dropping-on-Your-Head Bears (a
favourite with stuffed-toy manufacturers), Great-Bite Sharks,
Sabre-Toothed Possums, and the beautiful Scarlet Agony Jellyfish.

Culture and customs

Much of life is lived outdoors in Fourecks and the people spend a lot of
time on the extensive sandy beaches. In a recent census surfing was the
most commonly cited religion, and all the better for leaving out the
traditional incense, vestments, high priest and collection plate of most
temple services. Surfers’ worship is largely directed at the waves, and
they have also been heard to call out to their god, Cowabunga, though he
has not yet been formally ratified by the Ankh-Morpork Council of
Churches, Temples, Sacred Groves and Big Ominous Rocks.

One aspect of traditional religions that surfing has retained is the
custom of burnt offerings; sea creatures or choice parts of a prize cow
are sacrificed on contained fires and consumed by acolytes along with
vast quantities of communion beer. The religious origins of this feast
have been lost but some celebrants are rumoured to follow it with a rite
known as a ‘chunder’.

Unlikely though it may seem, Bugarup boasts a large and modern opera
house which attracts world-class singers such as Dame Nellie Butt, Dame
Edna Junket and Josephine Battenberg and whose productions are always
well attended.

The University of Bugarup is run on similar lines to our own Unseen
University, though of course it is much smaller. A student exchange
programme has been established; the current rate is two students from
Bugarup in exchange for one from Ankh-Morpork, and it is usually a
permanent exchange: the Ankh-Morpork students (if they survive) rarely
return home; the students from Bugarup can be found working in cafés and
bars throughout Ankh-Morpork years after their formal education is
supposedly complete.

Much of this continent remains unexplored, but there are some documents
lodged in the Unseen University Library under ‘Miscellaneous geography,
field notes, observations and findings’ which add to our knowledge. They
appear to have been written on board some vessel, as much of the ink has
run, they smell faintly of vomit and still have traces of ship’s biscuit
adhering to the margins.

[Image]
Bugarup University

[Image]
Document 1, undated. Probably from the hand of the Senior Wrangler
though unconfirmed.

[Image]
Documents 2 – 12. Authors and dates unknown owing to the fact that they
appear to be welded into a desiccated mass of vegetable matter smelling
vaguely of bananas

LAND OF FOG OR THE FOGGY ISLANDS

Little is known of this group of islands located widdershins of
Fourecks. They are shrouded in perpetual fog and our only information
comes from mariners who have made brief landfall to replenish supplies.
Even the Fourecksians who investigated didn’t consider it worth a return
visit. Reports of a small pipe-smoking people with hairy feet are
unsubstantiated. Inland the region is believed to have a mountainous
terrain and a lot of sheep.

PURDEIGH ISLAND OR PURDEE ISLAND (PURDEIGHSLAND)

This island, hubward of Fourecks, was discovered by Sir Roderick
Purdeigh in one of his many voyages. His accounts tell us little of the
topography of the island, but do describe the population as being in
‘Fine Healthe and of Good Bearing and Stature they Existeth in a State
Of nature wearing Juste their own Skins. Trulee a Knobby Savage.’

About the Author

Terry Pratchett was the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld series, the first of which, The Colour of Magic, was published
in 1983. His books have been widely adapted for stage and screen, and he
was the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie Medal, as well
as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature. He completed
the forty-first Discworld novel, The Shepherd’s Crown, as well as
devising, with the Discworld Emporium, this new guide to the
extraordinary world he created, before his death in March 2015.

BOOKS BY TERRY PRATCHETT

[image] THE DISCWORLD® SERIES [image]

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC
(illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO
(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE AND HIS EDUCATED RODENTS
(for young adults)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN
(for young adults)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY
(for young adults)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD!

35. WINTERSMITH
(for young adults)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT
(for young adults)

39. SNUFF

40. RAISING STEAM

[image] OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD [image]

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III: DARWIN’S WATCH

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD IV: JUDGEMENT DAY
(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

TURTLE RECALL: THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION . . . SO FAR
(with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK
(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO
(with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK
(with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK
(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW?
(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD
(with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD
(compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD
(with Jacqueline Simpson)

THE WORLD OF POO
(with the Discworld Emporium)

THE COMPLEAT ANKH-MORPORK
(with the Discworld Emporium)

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE – A DISCWORLD MAPP
(with Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN
(with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

[image] SHORTER WRITINGS [image]

ONCE MORE* WITH FOOTNOTES

A BLINK OF THE SCREEN

A SLIP OF THE KEYBOARD

[image] NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS [image]

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT
(illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS
(with Neil Gaiman)

THE LONG EARTH
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG WAR
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG MARS
(with Stephen Baxter)

THE LONG UTOPIA
(with Stephen Baxter)

[image] NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS FOR YOUNG ADULTS [image]

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

DODGER’S GUIDE TO LONDON

DRAGONS AT CRUMBLING CASTLE

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA
www.transworldbooks.co.uk

Transworld is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose
addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com

[images]

First published in Great Britain in 2015 by Doubleday
an imprint of Transworld Publishers

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett and The Discworld Emporium 2015
Isobel Pearson, Reb Voyce, Bernard Pearson and Ian Mitchell, trading as
the Discworld Emporium

Map based on an original concept by Terry Pratchett and Stephen Briggs.
Discworld® and Unseen University® are trademarks registered by Terry
Pratchett
Additional illustrations by Peter Dennis

Terry Pratchett and the partnership known as The Discworld Emporium have
asserted their right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
to be identified as the authors of this work.

This book is a work of fiction and, except in the case of historical
fact, any resemblance to actual persons living or dead, is purely
coincidental.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Version 1.0 Epub ISBN 9781448127320
ISBN 9780857521309

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

2 4 6 8 10 9 7 5 3 1

[1] * Muntab is an elusive country and subject to sudden changes. Our
last survey placed it in its current position.
