CONTENTS [image]

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Dedication

Introduction

Dragons at Crumbling Castle

The Great Speck

Hunt the Snorry

Tales of the Carpet People

Hercules the Tortoise

Dok the Caveman

The Big Race

Another Tale of the Carpet People

The Great Egg-dancing Championship

Edwo the Boring Knight

The 59A Bus Goes Back in Time

The Abominable Snowman

The Blackbury Monster

Father Christmas Goes to Work at the Zoo

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Discover the fantastically funny world of Terry Pratchett

Copyright

[image]

About the Book

Dragons have invaded Crumbling Castle, and all of King Arthur’s knights
are either on holiday or visiting their grannies. It’s a disaster!

Luckily, there’s a spare suit of armour and a very small boy called
Ralph who’s willing to fill it. Together with Fortnight the Friday
knight and Fossfiddle the wizard, Ralph sets out to defeat the fearsome
fire-breathers.

But there’s a teeny weeny surprise in store . . .

Fourteen brilliant stories from master storyteller Sir Terry Pratchett,
full of time travel and tortoises, monsters and mayhem!

‘So funny that I dropped my spoon laughing!’ – King Arthur

[image]

[image]

_For Colin, who spent far too much of his time digging around in dusty
cupboards to find all of this material that I had carefully hidden away
and very deliberately forgot all about.
And to my younger self who thought these stories were pretty good . . .
Oh, I could teach that lad a thing or two!_

[image]


INTRODUCTION

[image]

Focus on a planet revolving in space . . .

Focus in on a small country in the northern hemisphere – Great Britain.

Closer, closer . . . and on the western edge of London you can see the
county of Buckinghamshire. Small villages and winding country roads.

And if you could go back in time to the mid nineteen sixties, you might
spot a young lad on a motorbike coming down one such lane, notebook and
pen in his jacket pocket.

This is me. A junior reporter for the _Bucks Free Press_, sent out to
cover stories on local events. If I was lucky, I would be going to
something like a village fair – you know the kind of thing: men putting
weasels down their trousers, people bobbing for frogs in a bucket, the
odd cheese rolling too fast down a hill . . .

It was a lot of fun back then. And somewhere in the middle of it I
taught myself how to write by reading as many books as I could carry
home from the library. So then I began writing stories of my own –
stories for young readers that were published every week in the
newspaper.

The stories in this collection are a selection of those. There are
dragons and wizards, councillors and mayors, an adventurous tortoise and
a monster in a lake, along with plenty of pointy hats and a few magic
spells (a few of which actually do what they are supposed to). Some of
these early stories even spawned into my first novel, _The Carpet
People._

So turn the page and read the stories that I wrote as a teenager, mostly
as they were first printed, although the grown-up me has tinkered just a
_little_ with a few fine details – the odd tweak here, a pinch there,
and a little note at the bottom where needed, and all because the
younger me wasn’t as clever back then as he turned out to be.

But that naive young lad on the motorbike and the grown-up me with my
black hat and beard are the same person – and all we both ever wanted to
do was write for people who are old enough to understand.

And to imagine . . .

[image]

Terry Pratchett
_Wiltshire, 2014_

[image]


DRAGONS AT CRUMBLING CASTLE

[image]

In the days of King Arthur there were no newspapers, only town criers,
who went around shouting the news at the tops of their voices.

King Arthur was sitting up in bed one Sunday, eating an egg, when the
Sunday town crier trooped in. Actually, there were several of them: a
man to draw the pictures, a jester for the jokes and a small man in
tights and football boots who was called the Sports Page.

‘DRAGONS INVADE CRUMBLING CASTLE,’

shouted the News Crier (this was the headline), and then he said in a
softer voice, ‘FOR FULL DETAILS HEAR PAGE NINE.’

King Arthur dropped his spoon in amazement. DRAGONS! All the knights
were out on quests, except for Sir Lancelot – and he had gone to France
for his holidays.

The Ninth Page came panting up, coughed, and said: ‘Thousands flee for
their lives as family of green dragons burn and rampage around Crumbling
Castle . . .’

‘What is King Arthur doing about this?’ demanded the Editorial Crier
pompously. ‘What do we pay our taxes for? The people of Camelot demand
action . . .’

‘Throw them out, and give them fourpencefn1 each,’ said the king to the
butler. ‘Then call out the guard.’

Later that day he went out to the courtyard.

‘Now then, men,’ he said. ‘I want a volunteer . . .’ Then he adjusted
his spectacles. The only other person in the courtyard was a small boy
in a suit of mail much too big for him.

‘Ralph reporting, sire!’ the lad said, and saluted.

‘Where’s everyone else?’

‘Tom, John, Ron, Fred, Bill and Jack are off sick,’ said Ralph, counting
on his fingers. ‘Then William, Bert, Joe and Albert are on holiday.
James is visiting his granny. Rupert has gone hunting. And Eric . . .’

[image]

‘Well then,’ said the king. ‘Ralph, how would you like to visit
Crumbling Castle? Nice scenery, excellent food, only a few dragons to
kill. Take my spare suit of armour – it’s a bit roomy, but quite
thick . . .’

So Ralph got on his donkey and trotted over the drawbridge, whistling,
and disappeared over the hills. When he was out of sight he took off the
armour and hid it behind a hedge, because it squeaked and was too hot,
and put on his ordinary clothes.

High on a wooded hill sat a mounted figure in coal-black armour. He
watched the young boy pass by, then galloped down after him on his big
black horse.

_‘HALT IN THE NAME OF THE FRIDAY KNIGHT,’_

he cried in a deep voice, raising his black sword.

Ralph looked round. ‘Excuse me, sir,’ he said. ‘Is this the right road
to Crumbling Castle?’

‘Well, yes, actually it is,’ said the knight, looking rather
embarrassed, and then he remembered that he was really a big bad knight,
and continued in a hollow voice,

_‘BUT YOU’LL HAVE TO FIGHT ME FIRST!’_

Ralph looked up in amazement as the black knight got off his horse and
charged at him, waving his sword.

‘Yield!’ the knight yelled, then he got his foot stuck in a rabbit hole
and tripped over in a great clatter, like an explosion in a tin factory.
Bits of armour flew everywhere.

[image]

There was silence for a moment, and then the helmet unscrewed itself and
Ralph saw that the Friday knight himself was a very small man indeed.
Or, at least, he had a very small head.

‘Sorry,’ said the knight. ‘Can I try again?’

‘Certainly not!’ said Ralph, and unsheathed his rusty sword. ‘I’ve won.
You’ve fallen over first.fn2 It’s not even Friday, so I shall call you
Fortnight, ’cos I’ve fought you tonight. You’re my prisoner!’

There was a great deal of clanking inside the armour, and then Fortnight
climbed out through a trap door in the back. His ferocious black armour
was three times as big as he was.

So Ralph continued his journey to Crumbling Castle on his donkey,
followed by Fortnight the Friday knight on his great black charger.
After a while they became quite friendly, because Fortnight knew lots of
jokes and could sing quite well. He’d belonged to a circus before he
became a knight.

Next day they found a wizard sitting on a milestone, reading a book. He
had the normal wizard’s uniform: long white beard, pointed hat,fn3 a
sort of nightdress covered in signs and spells, and long floppy boots,
which he had taken off, revealing red socks.

‘Excuse me, sir,’ said Ralph, because you have to be careful when
talking to wizards. ‘Is this the way to Crumbling Castle?’

‘THUNDER AND LIGHTNING! YES,’ said the wizard, closing his book with a
snap. ‘Do you mind if I come too? I’ve got a few anti-dragon spells I’d
like to try out.’

[image]

He said his name was Fossfiddle, and he was sitting by the road because
his magic seven-league boots had broken down. He pointed to the pair of
high brown boots by the milestone: magic boots are handy things – you
can walk as far as you like in them without getting tired – but
Fossfiddle’s needed a bit of work on them.

So they gathered round, and since Fossfiddle knew a bit about magic and
Fortnight knew a bit about boots and Ralph knew a bit about walking,
they soon had the boots working again. Fossfiddle put them on and
trotted along by Ralph’s donkey.

The land around them grew grimmer and grimmer, and black mountains
loomed up on either side. Grey clouds covered the sun, and a cold wind
sprang up. The three of them plodded on, and came to a cave hidden in a
clump of thorn bushes.

‘We could do with a fire,’ said Ralph.

‘Nothing easier,’ said Fossfiddle. He muttered something, and produced a
funny-looking glass bulb, a small hat, a banana and a brass candlestick.

[image]

It wasn’t that he was a bad wizard: he just got things mixed up. And if
he had but known it, the funny-looking bulb was several centuries ahead
of itself.

After Fortnight had lit a fire they settled down around it and Ralph and
Fossfiddle dozed off. But Fortnight thought he could hear something.

CRACK!

went a stick in the bushes. Something was creeping towards them.

Fortnight picked up his sword and crept towards the bushes. Something
was moving in them; something with very large feet. It was very dark,
and somewhere an owl hooted.

_‘YIELD!’_

yelled Fortnight, and dashed into the bushes. This woke up Ralph and
Fossfiddle, who heard a great cracking and bashing about going on. So up
they got and ran to Fortnight’s help.

For five minutes there was no sound to be heard but swishings – and
swear words when people trod on thorns. It was so dark nobody knew if
anything was creeping up behind them, so they kept turning round and
round just to make sure.

_‘I’VE GOT IT!’_

shouted Fortnight, and jumped on something.

‘Me!’ came Fossfiddle’s voice from the leaf-mould.

While all this was going on something very small crawled out of the
bushes and began to warm its feet by the fire. Then it rummaged through
the rucksacks and ate Fossfiddle’s breakfast for tomorrow.

‘I heard something, I tell you,’ muttered Fortnight, as the three of
them came, scratched and bruised, out of the brambles. ‘Look, there it
is!’

‘IT’S A DRAGON!’ shouted Fossfiddle.

‘It’s a very weeny one . . .’ said Ralph.

The dragon was about the size of a small kettle; it was green and had
very large feet. It looked up at them, sniffed a bit, and began to cry.

‘Perhaps my breakfast didn’t agree with it,’ muttered Fossfiddle,
looking at his rucksack.

‘Well, what shall we do with it?’ said Ralph. ‘It doesn’t look very
dangerous, I must say.’

‘Has it lost its mummy then?’ cooed Fortnight, getting down on his hands
and knees and smiling at it. It backed away, and breathed some smoke at
him. Fortnight wasn’t very good with children.

[image]

Finally they made it a bed in a big saucepan, put the lid on, and went
back to sleep.

When they set off next morning Fossfiddle carried the saucepan on his
back. After all, they couldn’t just leave the dragon behind. After a
while the lid opened, and the dragon stared out.

‘This isn’t dragon country,’ said Ralph. ‘I suppose it must have got
lost.’

‘It’s the green variety. They grow to be thirty feet tall,’ said
Fortnight, ‘and then they take to roaring and rampaging and walking on
the grass and other lawlessness and wicked deeds.’

‘What sort of deeds?’ asked Ralph interestedly.

‘Oh – well, I don’t know. Leaving taps running and slamming doors, I
suppose.’

That afternoon they came to Crumbling Castle.

It was on a high hill all by itself, and built of grey stone. In the
valley below was a town, but most of it was burned down. There was no
sign of anybody, not even a dragon.

[image]

They plucked up the courage to knock at the big black door. Fortnight’s
knees were knocking, and since he was wearing armour, this made a
terrible din.

‘There’s no one in,’ he said quickly. ‘Let’s go back!’

The door wouldn’t open, so Fossfiddle got out his spell book.

‘HOPSCOTCHALORUM, TREMPLEDINGOTRAMLINES!’ he chanted. ‘OPEN!’

Instead the door turned into pink meringue. Fossfiddle always got things
wrong.

‘My word, dashed tasty door that,’ said Fortnight, when they finally got
through. They were in an empty courtyard. It seemed they were being
watched. ‘I don’t like this much,’ he added, looking around and drawing
his sword. ‘I get the feeling that something is going to jump out on
us.’

‘That’s very nice, I must say,’ said Fossfiddle, whose nerves were not
as good as they had been.

‘It’s all right,’ said Ralph. ‘Dragons are seldom bigger than the
average house and not much hotter than the average furnace.’ He trod on
Fossfiddle’s cloak as the wizard tried to run away. ‘So come back.’

Just then they met a dragon. It looked quite like the one asleep in the
saucepan in Fossfiddle’s pack, except it was much MUCH bigger. It
crawled across the courtyard to them.

_‘MORNING,’_ it said.

Now this placed our heroes in a bit of a quandary, as you can see. You
can’t go off and kill something that’s just said good morning to you.

‘Good morning,’ said Ralph, rather embarrassed. ‘I suppose we’ve come to
the right place?’

_‘YES, THIS IS CRUMBLING CASTLE. I SUPPOSE YOU’VE COME ABOUT ALL THESE
PEOPLE WHO’VE BEEN BOTHERING US.’_

‘First we’ve heard,’ said Ralph. ‘We heard that you dragons were
bothering people. Where is everyone, anyway?’

The old dragon yawned. _‘DOWN AT THE DRAGON CAVES.’_

Then he explained it all to them. Dragons were really quite peaceful,
and these had been living in some caves down by the river, bothering no
one except the fish, which they ate. But then the lord of the castle had
built a dam downriver, and their caves had been flooded out.

So the dragons had come to live in the castle, scaring everyone else
away. They had burned a few houses down, but they always checked that
there was no one at home before they did so.

While the old dragon was talking, other dragons came from various parts
of the castle and sat around listening.

_‘AND NOW THEY’VE COME AND KIDNAPPED THE DRAGON PRINCE,’_ said the
dragon.

‘Is he about twelve inches long, with large paws and a habit of biting?’
said Fossfiddle suspiciously. ‘Because if he is, we found him a few days
ago. He’d just got lost.’ He held out the saucepan, and the little
dragon hopped out.

[image]

There had to be a lot of explaining. Fortnight went down to the river
and found the lord hiding up a tree, and brought him back. Most of the
other castle people followed the lord.

‘I’m afraid there’s no possibility of taking the dam down,’ said the
lord, hiding behind Fortnight. ‘We built it for a swimming pool.’

‘You don’t have to,’ said Ralph. ‘All you need to do is build a few
caves out of bricks or something.’

So they did. The three fighters pitched in and helped, and it wasn’t
long before they had a nice row of caves, with hot and cold running
water and a bath in each one. The dragons took to them at once, and
agreed to leave the castle.

‘I suppose that’s it then,’ said Ralph, as they strolled away from the
castle with all the dragons and people waving to them.

[image]

‘Good job for the dragons there wasn’t any fighting,’ said Fossfiddle,
‘or they might have found out a thing or two!’

They had a good laugh about that, and disappeared over the hill.

[image]

fn1In the days of King Arthur, this was a lot more money than it seems
today – it would buy, oh, at least a cup of mead and a hunk of goat’s
meat.

fn2That’s how it went in those days: the first knight to fall over lost
the fight. I bet you all knew that.

fn3No self-respecting wizard would be seen in public without a pointy
hat. But it could make going through low doorways a bit tricky, so they
often developed bad knees in later life due to all that crouching down.


THE GREAT SPECK

[image]

Have you ever looked around the room on a sunny day and seen little
specks of dust floating in the air? They look like stars when the light
catches them, and the very small people that live on them think that’s
what the others are.

The one particular speck I’m thinking of was about one hundredth of a
millimetre long, and was called Great Speck. There were two countries on
it – Grabist, on the left-hand side, and Posra, on the right. In the
middle was a range of very small mountains.

On the highest lived an astronomer called Gwimper, who, as Great Speck
floated around, watched all the other specks with great interest. Of
course, no one believed that life existed on the other dust motes. Then
one day Gwimper thought he saw something, on a speck not far away.

‘What’s that?’ asked the King of Posra, while Gwimper stood before him
waving his arms and pointing.

_‘TREES!,_

gasped the astronomer.

_‘MOUNTAINS!_

_ANIMALS!’_

‘Hmm,’ said the king. ‘About how far away is it?’

Gwimper went through his pockets until he found a piece of paper,
covered with sums. ‘It’s heading towards Great Speck at one-sixty-fourth
of a millimetre per second, and it will pass within two centimetres of
us in thirty seconds,’ he said.

A second was about as long as a day for the Speck people.

At the same moment Winceparslie, another astronomer, was saying exactly
the same thing to the Duke of Grabist.

Now, Great Speck has been at peace for – oh, at least half an hour, but
that is not to say that either country would be above pulling a fast one
on the other if it got the chance.

So both countries immediately set about finding ways of getting to the
new speck without letting the other know.

‘But how?’ asked Gwimper. Since they were so small the people naturally
floated, but the problem was to propel themselves across the two
centimetres. He finally built a sort of covered-in rowing boat with two
pairs of wings and a lot of ornamental carving.

‘What a splendid-looking craft!’ said the king, when it was brought to
him. ‘I can see you will enjoy the trip.’

There was a thoughtful silence.

‘Me?’ asked Gwimper.

‘But yes!’ said the king.

‘I thought we ought to kind of send some animals or something to find
out if it’s safe,’ began Gwimper nervously.

‘I’m sure you’ll find out,’ said the king heartily, slapping him on the
back.

Gwimper walked miserably back to his observatory and peered up at the
new speck. It was already bigger. What would happen if he missed, and
got lost? He shuddered when he looked into the infinite immensity of the
air, and saw the millions of dust motes up there.

Meanwhile, the king’s servants dragged the flying machine up to a small
hill overlooking the palace, and filled it full of provisions.

Then they put a fence round it and charged people who wanted to come and
look.

[image]

The second of the Great Leap grew nearer . . .

‘Where’s Gwimper?’ cried the King of Posra as the second arrived. ‘I’ve
got to pin a medal on him before he takes off (I don’t expect there’ll
be a chance to do it when he comes back).’

The crowds were all gathered around the astronomer’s flying machine,
which was called the _Anybody._

But Gwimper was nowhere to be seen.fn1

Then at last he appeared, looking very sheepish in an outsize flying
helmet and goggles. The band immediately struck up the Posrian national
anthem, ‘THREE CHEERS FOR US’, and the king threw a huge tin medal round
his neck like a hoopla hoop, where it hung sadly on a red ribbon.

[image]

‘Well, goodbye, old friend,’ said the king. ‘Remember to plant the
Posrian flag on that new speck. We’ve put a gramophone record of the
national anthem in the _Anybody_. I understand that Grabist is sending a
flying machine too. I don’t need to tell you that you’ll land first,
_HINT, HINT_, do I?’

Gwimper climbed into the _Anybody_ and started the engine.

A runway had been built down the side of one hill and halfway up another
one. The idea was that the _Anybody_ would gather speed and whizz up the
hill and away from Great Speck.

[image]

Or it might crash.

Suddenly the crowd rushed up and gave it a jolly good push. They didn’t
care – anything for a laugh was their motto.

Gwimper hung on tightly when the _Anybody_ shot up the hill, felt his
stomach turn over, and next moment the flying machine was flapping
quietly through the air.

[image]

I don’t quite believe it, he thought, looking out of the rear window.
Great Speck was floating quite a way away. And someone was behind him,
banging on the hatch. It turned out to be the king.

‘THEY DIDN’T WAIT TO PUSH TILL I GOT OFF!’

he shrieked as Gwimper let him scramble in.

‘TAKE ME BACK!’

‘I’m not sure if I can,’ said Gwimper, who was secretly pleased. ‘Great
Speck is rushing away from us. If you remember, I did tell you that I
probably wouldn’t be able to get back.’

‘Did you? What did we say?’

‘You told me not to worry, your majesty.’

The king looked out of the window. There was nothing but Nothing all
around them. A few distant dust specks glittered, and far, far below was
the hill they had taken off from.

[image]

‘Can’t we signal them?’ said the king.

‘Actually, I did work out a way to signal back to Great Speck,’ said
Gwimper. He opened a cupboard and produced two flags, then opened the
window and started semaphoring to the fast-disappearing speck of dust.

‘My assistant is tracking us through the telescope,’ he said, waving his
arms. ‘I’ve just signalled: “The King (May He Live For Ever, etc., etc.,
etc.,) is alive and well and up here with me.” Now just pass me that
little telescope, sire. That’s right. Let’s see now . . . Ah, yes. The
reply is: “Get him down again, you crazy booby.” But I’m afraid I
can’t.’

‘How far have we gone?’ asked the king.

Gwimper twiddled some dials. ‘About seven-eighteenths of a centimetre,’
he said. ‘Not bad going.’

The king took off his crown. ‘I was a bit of an adventurer in my youth,’
he said wistfully. ‘Can I be the first one to set foot on this new
speck?’

‘Certainly,’ said Gwimper generously.

‘Right, then. Tell me how the controls work.’

Soon the king was flying the _Anybody_ and enjoying himself
tremendously.

When the new speck appeared, Gwimper put the _Anybody_ into orbit.

‘I think we’ll call it New Speck,’ said the king, as they looked down at
it. ‘Look, there are some mountains and things. I wonder if anything
lives down there?’

[image]

The _Anybody_ floated slowly down, and landed with a slight bump.

‘ME FIRST!’ shouted the king, and jumped out with the Posrian flag in
his hand.

Gwimper followed slowly, carrying a gramophone, and the two of them
stood to attention while it played a rather scratchy record of the
Posrian national anthem, ‘THREE CHEERS FOR US’.

[image]

‘Right,’ said the king. ‘You take a photo of me and I’ll take one of
you.’

But Gwimper was busily breaking up bits of dust with a hammer, and
looking at them through a microscope, so the king wandered off by
himself.

New Speck was quite rough, with boulders and large stones everywhere.
Soon the king sat down on one and watched the astronomer collecting
plants in a canvas bag. The rock stood up, shook him off, and ran away
on four stumpy little legs.

‘Remarkable!’ said Gwimper.

‘OUCH!’ cried the king.

‘Look, there’s another of them.’ A rock had opened two little beady
eyes, and sat looking at them.

Then they heard, a long way off, a recorder being played rather badly.
Gwimper and the king stared at each other, and as the music went on they
began to realize what it was:

_‘. . . perish her enemies,_

_By Fire, the Sword, Drowning, etc.,_

_Grabist the Brave! (Pom-te-pom!)’_

‘It’s the clugging Grabistian national anthem,’ raged the king. ‘The
wootling mousesherters have been and gone and got here!’

‘Ssssh!’ hissed Gwimper, peering over the rocks.

There he saw, in a little valley, a flying machine very like the
_Anybody_, with the name _Everybody_ written on it. He recognized the
Grabistian astronomer, Winceparslie, and standing next to him, winding
up the gramophone again, was the Duke of Grabist.

‘The great ninnygremblers!’ cursed the king. ‘Landing on our speck of
dust! Let’s put them to the sword! Perish their enemies, indeed!’

He was shouting so loudly that soon the duke and the astronomer came
bounding over the hill.

‘YOU!’ said everyone at once.

‘Get off our New Speck!’ bellowed the duke and the king together. ‘This
means war!’ they added.

‘BEASTLY TRESPASSER!’

‘CLAIM-JUMPER!’

[image]

Winceparslie and Gwimper wandered off, leaving the other two shouting
and jumping up and down.

‘I’m worried about how we’re getting back,’ confided Winceparslie.

‘Me too.’

‘This doesn’t look like a very pleasant place,’ Winceparslie said,
waving his hand at the rocks and the little stone creatures.

‘Very bleak, yes.’

‘I can’t help thinking their majesties are getting worked up about
nothing.’

‘What are we going to do about it?’

At that moment there was a rumbling noise, and a herd of the stone
creatures came charging up the valley and trampled over the Grabistian
machine.

‘Oh no! The _Everybody_ is destroyed!’ Winceparslie whimpered.

[image]

The creatures surged over the hill. There was another crash.

‘There goes the _Anybody_ too,’ moaned Gwimper. ‘Now we’re both stuck.’

They rushed over the hill to find the king and the duke building a wall,
and shouting at each other over the top of it.

‘Our ships have been destroyed!’ shouted Gwimper.

‘Come over onto our side of the wall and stop consorting with the
enemy,’ said the king.

‘WE CAN’T GET BACK HOME!’

screamed Winceparslie at the top of his voice.

There was a sudden silence. The king and the duke looked up at the
distant specks of dust.

‘The Great Speck is three centimetres away and getting further with
every micro-second,’ said Gwimper. ‘Even if they built another ship they
could never rescue us and get back. We’re stuck. Those stone things have
trodden on the ships, and there are no spare parts. Right. Now what are
we going to _do_?’

‘Are you sure the ships are wrecked?’ asked the duke.

‘They’re ruined,’ said Winceparslie.

‘Then we’re stuck – and I don’t like this place,’ said the king.

Gwimper looked at the remains of the _Anybody_ and the _Everybody_ and
had an idea. ‘I wonder if we could take them both apart and make another
one with the pieces,’ he said.

So while the king and the duke sat by a small fire, the two astronomers
started taking the flying machines apart. They used the hull, gas stove,
steering wheel and seats from the _Anybody_, and the wings, motor and
instruments from the _Everybody._

While they were working the king caught one of the stone creatures, but
there didn’t seem to be any way of eating it. All that was left of the
provisions in the ships was half a loaf of bread, some rather smelly
cheese, and – no one knew why – a box of glacé cherries.fn2

[image]

‘Stop fighting over them, anyway,’ said Gwimper. ‘We think we’ve got a
working ship.’

They all climbed into the ship, which Winceparslie had named _Somebody_,
and Gwimper pulled a few levers. The wings flapped and the ship rose.

‘Well, goodbye, New Speck,’ said the king. ‘I’m glad to leave, even
though it belongs to me.’

‘To me, you mean!’ said the duke, waving his arms.

The ship hovered over the speck of dust while the astronomers looked
around for Great Speck.

_‘THAT’S IT!’_ said Gwimper. ‘The green one, floating over there by the
Table.’

The _Somebody_ speeded up, and it wasn’t long before it landed in the
mountains that separated the country of Posra from Grabist. The king and
the duke rushed out and away down the mountains in opposite directions.

‘Here we go again,’ said Winceparslie, as he helped unload the ship.
‘They’ll be arguing again tomorrow. Argue, argue, argue. You’d think
they might have learned their lesson by now. They might have learned to
_co-operate_.’

‘They might still,’ said Gwimper thoughtfully. ‘I’ve just noticed
something. They were so eager to get home they each ran down the wrong
side of the mountains. The duke has gone into Posra and the king has run
down into Grabist!’

‘Gosh! What’ll happen to them?’

‘Oh, they might get put in prison for a little while, but I dare say the
people will swap them. Though one duke’s as good as another, if you ask
me.’

And they went and had a cup of tea in Gwimper’s observatory, and played
chess together until midnight.

[image]

fn1 But he could be heard. For the toilets nearby had been occupied for
a Very Long Time, and a lot of flushing noises were coming out of there.

fn2It’s a rule of the known universe that every kitchen in the world
anywhere has a box of glacé cherries hiding somewhere in it. No one
knows why.


HUNT THE SNORRY

[image]

The Great Expedition to find the Snorry began to assemble at the harbour
one misty morning.

Colonel Vest, the famous little-gamefn1 hunter, told the men from the
newspapers (who all had to get up at three in the morning to see him
off): ‘No one is quite sure what the Snorry looks like, so we’ll be able
to tell them when we find it. Some people say that it’s covered in blue
fur; others say it tends to sneeze a lot. One man who thought he had
seen it said it made a LOUD whistling noise and ran around in circles.
Personally, I think it lives in trees and _waggles_ its ears. Anyway,
that’s what we’re going to find out.’

The expedition certainly looked as if it was going to find out
something. The dock was piled high with nets, various traps, ropes,
self-inflatable canoes, pieces of old string and giant crates of
tapioca, said by some to be the Snorry’s favourite food.

Besides Colonel Vest there was a camera-man, a doctor, a botanist, a
plumber, a scissor manufacturer, a knife-grinder, a man called Harris,
who was very good at French verbs, and eighty-three other people.
Whatever the Snorry turned out to be, there was bound to be someone in
the party who could watch it, catch it, talk to it, or throw things at
it. They set sail . . .

[image]

[image]

The Snorry’s haunt was said to be in the giant tapioca forests of the
Upper Amazon, and Colonel Vest led his party there.

For days and days they trudged on, through rather _murky swamps_ full of
mosquitoes, and trackless jungles where they spent most of their time
following one another round in circles. People they met said yes, this
was just the sort of place you caught a Snorry in, and then they went
away and laughed quietly to themselves.

After a few weeks they had come right up to the place where the Amazon
was no more than a little trickle, and the GIANT tapioca trees loomed
all around them. Still there was no sign of a Snorry, and at least three
people had disappeared. Probably the Snorry had got them.

Harris had suffered a particularly nasty shock too when he trod on an
alligator. Even worse, the alligator could not understand a single
French verb when he tried to talk to it.

_‘I give up,’_ said Colonel Vest, sitting down on a log and _sneez_ing.
_‘Does anybody have any idea yet what the Snorry looks like?’_

No one had, and they all sat down and waited for something to happen.
After weeks of traipsing through wet tapioca forests they all felt
pretty miserable, and most of them were sneezing a lot.

A small man who came wandering through the forest collecting fallen
tapioca in a sack stopped to look at them.

‘I see you’ve all caught a Snorry,’ he said.

‘Have we?’ They all looked rather puzzled. ‘What is it then?’

‘Well,’ he replied with a smile. ‘_We_ call it a Snorry – but I suppose
_you_ would call it a bad cold.’

fn1Basically, anything smaller than himself, and preferably no taller
than his knee.


TALES OF THE CARPET PEOPLE

[image]

To the Carpet people the Carpet was bigger than a forest, and was full
of cities, towns, small villages, castles and all sorts of tiny animals
– even cunning and hairy bandits in the really thick parts that weren’t
swept often. Snibril, however, lived on the edge of the Carpet, and the
Carpet was fraying. That was something everyone knew. In the village of
the Fallen Matchstick, the Carpet-dwellers were already preparing to
leave. The only question was – where could they go?

Snibril galloped back along the line of wagons that stood waiting in the
main street of the village, loaded with chairs, stoves, beds, and
anything else that people could tie onto them, which included almost
everything.

Snibril tied his bounder – a rather nervous animal that looked like a
grasshopper – up at the post outside the council hall and went inside.
The whole village was there waiting for him, but mostly waiting to meet
the white-haired old Carpet-dweller who Snibril had brought with him,
clinging desperately to the back of the bounder.

‘Gentlemen,’ said Snibril, ‘this is Pismire the hermit, who used to live
in a cave at Underlay. He thinks he knows a way to help us.’

[image]

‘Don’t rush me, please,’ said Pismire. ‘My grandfather’s grandfather was
Robinson the Wanderer, of whom you have all heard . . .?’ There was a
question at the end of that statement, the kind of question that meant
you jolly well _ought_ to have heard of his grandfather’s grandfather.

‘Wasn’t he the one who was supposed to have walked across the Carpet?’
said Snibril.

‘Yes, right across and back again. Well, before he died, he told my
grandfather about his journey. He said there was a land where no one
lived, but which would be a perfect place for Carpet-dwellers.’

‘And where is that?’ asked Glurk the hunter.

Pismire pointed. ‘Over there, gentlemen. Right on the other side of the
Carpet.’

‘The other side of the Carpet! That would mean going right round the
edge, wouldn’t it?’ said Glurk.

‘No, our supplies wouldn’t last that long,’ Snibril said. ‘We must go
across the middle, like Pismire’s great-great-grandfather did. What he
did, we can do. I know the Carpet is unexplored and full of dangers, and
strange lands, and all the rest, but I don’t think we have any choice.
The Carpet can and must be crossed.’

An hour later Snibril rode his bounder up to the first cart in the line.
Looking back, he could see the people climbing onto their wagons, and
looking sadly around at the village they were leaving. Many of them were
wondering what would lie ahead in the unknown parts of the Carpet.

_‘FOLLOW ME!’_ he cried, waving his hat in the air.

_‘ACROSS THE CARPET!’_

‘Across the Carpet,’ they answered, as the carts slowly creaked forward.
‘Across the Carpet!’

[image]

Snibril and Glurk rode their bounders along a fallen Carpet hair,
watching the laden carts trundle by far beneath them. Although they had
not been journeying long, the Carpet hairs were already thicker and grew
closer together, and there were dark shadows between them.

‘It’s very quiet,’ said Snibril thoughtfully.

‘I wish it was noisy,’ growled Glurk. ‘When it’s this quiet it gives me
forebodings. Listen.’

‘You mean the creaking of the carts?’ said Snibril, after a while.

‘Not that. There is something else.’

Snibril listened. Then, above the creaking, he could hear something. Far
away, and very faint, like a far-off drumming.

‘Carpet-messages,’ said Glurk. ‘The news of us will be passed from drum
to drum right across the Carpet. There’ll be trouble, you mark my words.
Whatever is drumming doesn’t like us on its territory.’

‘It will take more than drumming to stop us.’

‘There will be more than drumming. I feel it in my bones.’

Snibril urged his bounder down the hair to the line of moving carts, and
galloped up to the front wagon, where Pismire was steering. He looked at
Pismire, then turned in the saddle. ‘We’re stopping here! Get the carts
round in a circle!’

Soon the animals were unharnessed and the carts had creaked into place.
Here and there, on top of carts and in the shadows, sat armed bowmen,
with the long thin bows that had made the hunters of the Fallen
Matchstick famous. Fires sprang up all around the circle, and soon there
were smells of stews and soups – and the roasting of fresh meat caught
that day when Glurk had taken some bowmen out hunting in the
hair-thickets. Snibril and Pismire ate with the Glurk family.

‘Good soup, this,’ said Glurk, drinking noisily. ‘I wonder what the
hunting will be like across the Carpet. Now, what I always say . . .
_WHAT IN WEFT’S NAME WAS_ _THAT?’_

There was silence for a moment, broken only by the youngest child
coughing on some soup that had gone down the wrong way. All around the
circle people had stopped talking, and were reaching for their bows.

Then they heard it again: a long, thin HOWL that echoed from hair to
hair in the dark Carpet.

In the shadows beyond the bright circle many pairs of tiny, evil red
eyes were watching . . .

Glurk snatched up his bow and peered into the darkness beyond the
circle. ‘Snargs!’

‘What’s a snarg?’ asked Snibril, fitting a bolt into his crossbow.

‘Hunt in packs,’ puffed Glurk, his bow twanging. ‘Mainly claws and
teeth. Can’t stand the light and hate anyone who can – hurry up with
those arrows there!’

Snibril watched as the people formed themselves into the traditional
Carpet-fighting formation. A squad of bowmen stood by the fires,
lighting the ends of their arrows. Then there was a _twang_ and a loud
_WHOOSH!_ and half a dozen fire-arrows rose above the clearing, lighting
up the darkness. Then every bowman could fire at the first snarg he saw.
It usually worked quite well.fn1

Glurk was sitting on a wagon and cursing each time he missed, and his
newest wife was handing him up arrow after arrow. Snibril and Gurth
(Glurk’s eldest son; he had twenty-nine – it seems a lot, but there you
are) were standing together at a place where the snargs had knocked over
a cart and were trying to get into the circle. Snibril could hear the
sound of snarg bodies pushing their way through the Carpet, hemming the
tribe in.

[image]

Another flight of fire-arrows went up. Snibril felt for an arrow, then
realized he had used them all.

_‘HELP, HERE!’_

he yelled, as he and Gurth took a flying leap onto the nearest cart.

A mass of black bodies were pushing through the gap, growLING and
_snarling_. Then they stopped, their evil red eyes watching the people.
Arrows clattered harmlessly off their thick skins.

Then the biggest snarg, the leader of the pack, leaped forward until it
was alone in the middle of the clearing.

‘It’s looking for someone to fight,’ whispered Glurk to Pismire. ‘And it
might as well be me.’

‘I don’t think that will be necessary,’ said Pismire, pointing.

Someone had stepped into the firelight, holding a large carving knife.
It was Snibril.

The snarg chief seemed to laugh, then the two started to circle each
other.

The snargs and the people watched as the chief snarg prepared to spring.
But as it did so, Snibril ducked, and as the giant body whizzed over
him, he threw the knife upwards as hard as he could. The snarg landed,
skidded along on its face for a little way, then rolled over with its
legs in the air. Dead.

[image]

A howl went up from the snarg pack, and they began to creep forward,
glaring at Snibril.

‘ENOUGH!’ shouted someone, and something swung across the circle on a
Carpet-creeper to pick Snibril up by his hair and drop him on a cart.
Then it swung back, and leaped down in front of the snargs. Whoever it
was put a long shining stick to his shoulder, and took aim.

The snargs crept forward, as the strange figure raised the metal tube.

With a large bang and a cloud of smoke the figure fell over backwards –
and so, happily, did five or six snargs. The rest bolted, howling.

The newcomer picked himself up, blew down his tube, coughed, and walked
over to them.

‘My name is Bane—’ he began, but Glurk interrupted him.

‘Yes, you are a Wanderer. Only Wanderers carry the ancient guns of the
Shiandian Empire. I am proud to meet you.’

‘Thank you. And you are Glurk, renowned across the Carpet as a brave and
courageous hunter. You are Snibril, a Carpet-dweller with more
imagination than most. And you are Pismire, wisest among
Carpet-dwellers.’ He looked at them all and grinned. ‘I have been
following you for inches.’

‘We saw nobody,’ said Snibril.

‘People don’t, not if I’m following them, and you talk loudly and don’t
shield your fires. Be thankful that you have met nothing more terrible
than a few snargs.’

Pismire went white. ‘Do you mean there are worse things?’

‘Look, this is no time for talking. Get some sleep and we’ll leave by
first light. Take some of those snargs too; they make a passable stew,
if simmered.’

Early the next morning the people were moving on again, putting as much
distance as possible between themselves and the clearing. Snibril’s
bounder trotted along at the head of the procession, and Bane walked
beside it. He was wearing a battered snarg-skin hat, a small bundle on
his back, and carried his gun over his shoulder.

‘In the old days,’ he was saying, ‘when the city of Shiandi ruled half
the Carpet from the Land beneath the Bookcase, the original Wanderers
were explorers, guides, and kept some sort of order on the
Carpet-fringes. At that time this track we can hardly get along was a
broad road, crowded with traders and soldiers. But alas, after the great
battle between Shiandi and the people of the South-West Chairleg, the
Empire collapsed.

‘Now there are very few Wanderers, and most don’t bother to hand their
old guns on to their sons; those of us left are looked upon as tramps,
which we are really.’

‘What happened to Shiandi?’

‘It still exists. So does the city at the South-West Chairleg, and both
armies have been seen again. That’s why I’ve been following you. Because
my spies tell me that both armies have heard of some people who are
looking for a new kind of land across the Carpet. Both Shiandi Beneath
the Bookcase and the City of the South-West Chairleg want that land, for
whoever gets it will be powerful enough to finally beat the other. In
other words, they are looking for the people of the Fallen Matchstick.
Or, to put it another way, you.’

Camp had been struck, and except for a few guards who stood with their
knees knocking, the people attended the special council of war outside
Glurk’s wagon. Something had to be done. Glurk was making a speech, with
much pulling of his moustache and waving of hands in the air.

‘So the point is this,’ he finished. ‘If we are found by these armies
that Bane says are looking for us, we won’t stand a chance. After all,
we are pioneers, not soldiers.’

The crowd around the table was silent, and then a Carpet-dweller named
Blint stepped forward, and coughed nervously.

‘Perhaps we had better turn back?’ he whispered.

_‘NO!’_ Snibril leaped to his feet and banged on the table. ‘No turning
back now! We left our homes to come this far – we can’t go back. Haven’t
we a dream of this land? Then we must be prepared to fight for it,
against all the armies in the Carpet if necessary. Who agrees with me?’

[image]

Glurk and Pismire immediately went to stand behind Snibril; slowly,
family by family, all the others followed them, including an embarrassed
Blint. Bane, who did not count himself as one of them, sat polishing his
gun and whistling between his teeth. No one ever found _him_ cursing and
flapping his ears in amazement.

‘Right,’ said Snibril. ‘Now I have a plan. These armies are waiting
somewhere to attack us. If they do, we will lose. But they don’t expect
us to do one thing.’

‘What?’ asked Pismire.

‘Attack them first! Keep the wagons moving, but a few spies go out
ahead. I’ll be one of them. Then, if we spot anything, we can come back
and warn the people, and then try and stop the army finding us. Pismire,
you’ll be needed here. You too, Glurk, and don’t argue. Bane . . .’

‘I was waiting for that,’ said Bane, slinging his gun over his shoulder.
‘We’d best go now.’

Snibril got his crossbow and a full quiver of arrows, stuck two swords
and a club in his belt, a spear in either hand, and a knife between his
teeth. Bane smiled, and removed them all except the bow and the sword.

‘A Wanderer never clutters himself up,’ he said. ‘We outnumber them two
to two thousand as it is.’fn2

A short while later the two of them had climbed a hair, cut themselves
Carpet-creepers – Bane taught Snibril this useful trick – and swung
softly off into the darkness.

[image]

After dark the Carpet was a dangerous place to be in. Little beady eyes
looked out of every shadow, and strange things clomped and snuffled in
the darkness. Here and there round the edge of the Carpet winked tiny
pinpoints of light, where an isolated village slept behind strong
barricades. Every time a distant snarg HOWLED people shook in their
beds, and pitied anyone out in the Carpet on such a night.

Snibril and Bane slept halfway up a hair, one watching while the other
rested. Something large and black seemed to be dancing around the bottom
of the hair, blowing its nose menacingly. Snibril didn’t know what it
was, but he was glad when it went away.

Peering down, Snibril thought he could see a light in the hairs, and
hear drums beating. Suddenly the light rounded a hair and came into full
view, and he could see hundreds of torches marching together, shining
off armour and spears.

He woke Bane, who spent a long time looking through his portable
telescope.

‘That’s the Shiandian army all right,’ said Bane. ‘Or some of it at any
rate.’

‘It’s quite big enough for me! What are we going to do about it?’

‘They seem to be camping here for the night, so we’d best wait till
morning. However . . .’ Bane looked thoughtfully down at the army, which
was making camp, setting up tents, and lighting fires. Interesting
smells rose from the camp-kitchens, and Snibril thought sadly of the
meagre rations he carried in his pack. ‘I wonder why there aren’t that
many of them,’ Bane continued. ‘I don’t trust them. I wonder if the
wagons are in any danger?’

‘Well, they are about an inch south of here. They should be safe— _Great
galloping snargs!_ _LOOK!’_

Through the dark there came another army, or rather the other half of
the first one. And between each platoon of soldiers was a wagon –
Snibril recognized them. On the first wagon, looking very miserable, sat
Pismire and Glurk, who could hardly be seen for ropes.

[image]

‘How did they do it?’ moaned Snibril.

‘Ambushed them, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Bane between clenched
teeth. ‘Wait till I get my hands on ’em! I’ll teach ’em to harm innocent
travellers while I’m around!’

‘What will they do now?’

‘Take them back to Shiandi for questioning, I shouldn’t wonder. And when
they do, we’re going with them!’

A few hours later, when the complete army and their prisoners started
back to the city, search parties were sent out to make sure they weren’t
followed. But they didn’t notice two grey shapes swinging from hair to
hair, high above their heads . . .

The city of Shiandi had been carved, long ago, out of a speck of dust.
It had many tall, black towers, and was surrounded by a high black wall
with only one gate. The Carpet around the city was dark and shadowy.

[image]

In through the great gate of Shiandi marched the Shiandian army, dressed
in black and gold armour, their marching echoing between the dark walls.
The carts of the people were dragged in too, and the black gate closed
with a final clang!

Two pairs of eyes peered out of the hairs near the gate.

‘There aren’t any guards,’ whispered Snibril.

‘They never bother to guard Shiandi. They put all their trust in the
walls. If you’ll just follow me, however . . .’ Bane tiptoed into a
nearby thicket and Snibril heard him cutting a small piece of hair. Then
Bane came running out with the hair held in front of him, stuck it in
the Carpet in front of the wall, sprang into the air and disappeared
over the top.

A few seconds later Snibril had followed him,fn3 and then they swung
themselves hand over hand along a ledge until they reached a window.

They were looking into the Great Hall, and the first thing Snibril saw
was Glurk, bound and held by five soldiers. On the steps leading up to
the emperor’s throne stood a bound Pismire, looking defiantly at the
emperor, a thin Carpet-dweller in a crown and long robes.

_‘For the last time, where is this land?’_ screamed the emperor.

Pismire said nothing.

_‘Tell me!’_

‘Shan’t.’

_‘Guards! I’ve had enough of this one. Take him down to the cells with
the others. We’ll soon get the truth out of him—’_

_‘STOP THAT!’_ yelled Snibril.

[image]

They all turned to look up in surprise.

Before anyone realized what was happening the soldier within kicking
distance of Pismire had his toes trodden on. While the soldier was
hopping about Pismire removed his sword, and with one mighty hack cut
his ropes to free himself. While Glurk was making short work of the
guards near him, the other two climbed down into the hall, and the fight
was on.

The four of them stood together like . . . well, whenever they tell
stories around the campfire, Carpet-dwellers always speak of that battle
with hushed voices.

It was soon over, but more guards were battering on the doors.

‘Which way to the cells?’ panted Bane, dragging Pismire away from the
emperor, who was sitting on the back of his throne and screaming.

‘Down,’ said Glurk, pointing to a dark tunnel. The four of them rushed
down it just as the doors of the hall burst open. A gaoler, who looked
up to see four ferocious fighters bearing down on him, dropped his keys
and ran.

Glurk and Pismire ran from cell to cell, unlocking the heavy doors and
releasing the more revengeful people.

_‘THE CARTS ARE STILL IN THE COURTYARD,’_ cried Snibril. _‘FOLLOW ME!’_

[image]

It did not take long for the people to fight their way up to the
courtyard where the carts were. They were used to fighting in narrow
spaces, and Carpet people have sharp teeth and claws, when they want to
use them.

Snibril, Glurk and Bane (and Pismire, who had just decided to become a
soldier) ran up the steps leading to the gatehouse tower. A few soldiers
were there, but not for long.

Snibril grabbed one as he ran past. ‘Open the gate,’ he said.

‘This is no time for half measures,’ said Bane, prodding the prisoner in
the ear with his gun. ‘Tell us how to open the gate, if you please, or I
will blow your head off.’

[image]

He said it quite quietly, but the soldier gulped, and slowly turned the
windlass that opened the gate.

As the gate rose the first cart went trundling out, and cart after cart
followed, going as fast as any cart had a right to. Any soldiers who
were foolish enough to keep on fighting were cuffed and thrown into the
bushes. When the last cart bounced out of Shiandi the four fighters
swung down over the wall and landed on it.

The chase was something that Snibril remembered all his life. The carts
were not built for speed, but they tore through the Carpet so fast that
he expected the wheels to fly off in all directions. And, a long way
behind, he could hear the army.

_‘WHAT NOW?’_ he shouted, as they clung onto the jolting roof.

‘What indeed,’ said Bane. ‘I think we are heading towards the Swinging
Bridge. There is a great gap in the Carpet, and the bridge is a single
hair that crosses it. I think that it is just wide enough for a cart to
cross.’

‘Oh dear,’ said Pismire.

It _was_ just wide enough, but Pismire happened to look over the edge of
the cart as it crossed the bridge, and found himself staring right down
through the Carpet. After that he didn’t look down again.

Snibril looked back once they were over, and saw the soldiers coming up
to the bridge. They were going to cross!

‘Over my dead body,’ he muttered, and jumped off the cart. He ran out to
the middle of the bridge and drew his sword. Bane saw him go and,
without being seen, jumped off the cart and slipped into the bushes.

Snibril stood alone in the middle of the thin, high bridge, and swished
his sword about a bit to make it quite clear what would happen to the
first soldier that crossed.

For a peaceful Carpet-dweller Snibril looked furious as he advanced
along the narrow bridge. The leading soldiers had to move back, which
pushed them up against the soldiers at the back who were trying to get
to the front to see what was going on.

Meanwhile Bane had spat on his hands and gripped the end of the bridge.
His eyes crossed and his muscles twanged like bowstrings as he took the
weight, until he was holding the end above his head. His feet began to
sink into the Carpet.

_‘COME BACK, SNIBRIL,’_ he cried. ‘I’m going to topple the bridge!’

Snibril gave one last swish with his sword, so that the leading soldier
backed into someone else’s spear again, and ran for the end of the
bridge.

As he jumped down Bane took a deep breath and hurled the end of the
bridge away from him.

It hung there, poised for a moment, then crashed and rumbled down into
the gap until it could no longer be seen. Soldiers tumbled with it, some
clinging desperately to handholds in the fallen hair and trying to
scramble back up to safety.

[image]

‘From now on,’ said Bane, as they sat on the leading cart, ‘we must not
stop. We are leaving Shiandi territory now, and I don’t think they’ll
dare follow us into the unknown regions – but have a care! It wouldn’t
take them long to get round the tear and follow us. And when the
bounders get tired, put them on the carts and carry the carts. _WE MUST
NOT STOP!’_

‘What about the other enemy?’ said Glurk. ‘We seem to have avoided them
so far. Are we safe?’

‘You never know in the Carpet. You’re never really safe anyway. But be
prepared to fight a bit more. Worthwhile things aren’t just there for
the taking, you know.’

They sat in silence for a while, listening to the creaking of the carts
and the far-off drums that were always the background noises in the dark
regions of the Carpet. There were other things – distant roaring, bright
eyes that peered out of holes – and Bane never said anything about them,
so Snibril thought it better not to ask. Some things were best left
untalked about.

Suddenly – _‘Look!’_ yelled Pismire. The carts had rounded a hair and
almost crashed into an army coming the other way.

‘I’m looking,’ said Bane grimly, watching the army coming up behind
them. ‘Shiandi and the South-West Chairleg! Both at once.’

‘I dread what I am about to hear,’ said Pismire, ‘but is it us and one
of them against the other, all against all, or both of them onto us?’

‘I don’t think we’re going to stay here,’ muttered Snibril, as the two
armies came closer. Then he turned the cart and disappeared into the
hairs.

As the last cart went off the path the two armies came round the corner.

‘You!’ said the Shiandian commander.

‘You!’ said the South-West Chairleg commander.

All thoughts of the people were forgotten as the two armies rushed
forward to do battle.

Meanwhile, getting further away every second, the carts rumbled down a
long slope so fast that the bounders hardly touched the ground.

_‘Where are we going?’_ yelled Pismire above the rushing wind.

‘I only wish I knew,’ said Snibril.

Ahead of them a hole appeared in the Carpet, and the carts entered a
large gloomy cavern. Here and there tiny lights appeared, as people lit
torches, and soon a string of lights was winding through the caves.

‘Where is this?’ whispered Glurk, and his voice echoed from black wall
to black wall.

‘I recognize it,’ said Pismire. ‘These are the caves of Underlay, the
land beneath the Carpet. Come and look.’

Snibril and Pismire left the cart, and padded over to a cave wall.

‘Look,’ Pismire said, holding up a torch.

All over the wall were strange paintings, some of animals Snibril had
never seen, but most of creatures like snargs and bounders. There was a
crude drawing of a snarg hunt and, among the hairy stalagmites and
stalactites, a picture of a Carpet-dweller holding a club.

‘There were caves like this near the Fallen Matchstick,’ said Pismire,
‘but none so grand. No one knows when the pictures were drawn, but it
must have been a long time ago. They say our ancestors lived down here,
once.’

[image]

They travelled for days in the darkness of the caves, following the main
caverns.

Then one day they came to a place where the cave branched into three.
‘What now?’ said Glurk. ‘We’re lost as it is.’

‘I don’t think so. Come and look at this.’ Snibril was standing by the
left-hand cave, looking at something. Scratched on the rock were the
letters:

[image]

‘Robinson the Wanderer! Pismire’s great-great-grandfather was here!’

‘Of course. He was the one who first found the Land. But what about
“II”?’

‘That must mean two inches. Only two inches to go! Why, we could do it
in a few days!’

Only two inches to go. It was a good job too. The cartwheels were
cracked and broken, half the provisions had been lost, and the people
could hardly walk another step. But the thought of the land to come
helped them as they pushed and pulled the creaking carts through the
dim, flickering caverns of Underlay, singing the triumphant battle-song
of the Fallen Matchstick:

_‘O’ER WEFT AND WEAVE,_

_WARP AND WOOF,_

_THE FALLEN MATCHSTICK PEOPLE PROUDLY SING,_

_BECAUSE OF THEIR WELL-KNOWN PROWESS_

_WITH THEIR FAMOUS BOWS,_

_WHICH ARE BENT HAIR_

_FASTENED WITH STRING.’_

But they sang it in the old Carpet-language, which sounded a lot
better.fn4

Bane and Snibril trudged up the slope, where a tiny point of light
showed the distant opening.

Neither said a word, but Snibril knew that Bane would be leaving them
when the new land was reached. What things Bane had seen, what places he
had been to! He had wandered over most of the Carpet, even seen the
great and shiny plains of the Linoleum. As the mood took him he had been
a soldier, a hair-jack, a hunter, an explorer – he had lit his campfire
in places where even fire was unknown. He could not be expected to stay
anywhere long, and Snibril felt sad.

Then – ‘LOOK,’ said Bane.

They had come to the end of the caves, and were standing on a ledge from
which a natural pathway led down. Before them was the Land. Tall hairs
grew thickly about them, with cool glades where herds of strange animals
grazed, and overhead the light filtered down to make a pattern on the
Carpet floor.

‘It’s beautiful,’ said Snibril.

‘It’s yours,’ said Bane.

‘Yours too.’

‘No. In a way the whole Carpet is mine, but a single part of it cannot
be.’ And, suddenly, Bane was gone.

That evening the people lit a great celebration bonfire, but Snibril did
not celebrate.

He sat in the shadows with Pismire, half dreaming of the unexplored
regions of the Carpet. Pismire looked at him, and understood.

‘You know,’ he said innocently, ‘I think the people will settle down
very nicely here. Glurk would make a very good headman. And I – look, do
I have to shout it at you? You know you can’t stay here now, you’ve seen
too much of the Carpet and caught the wandering fever. Go now, and don’t
stop to say goodbye. I’ve left a pack for you on the cart.’

[image]

Snibril looked at him for a moment, smiled, and was gone.

Later, when the celebration had really got going, they called on Snibril
to make a speech, and could not find him.

But away in the Carpet, a running figure caught up with another who was
stomping along with a great gun over his shoulder.

‘I was expecting you,’ he said.

[image]

fn1When it didn’t, no one came back to say so, anyway.

fn2Most people would have preferred it the other way round.

fn3Luckily it was a soft landing and not pointy sticks on the other
side.

fn4But not much. Unless you are a tone-deaf snarg.


HERCULES THE TORTOISE

[image]

It was the end of March – in fact about quarter to April – when the
smell of spring broke into the shed. It drifted across the floor, found
its way under a pile of old packing cases, and stopped at a large wooden
box. The box smelled of autumn straw and deep in the heart of it
something began to stir.

Or rather, _someone._

Hercules awoke from dreams of lettuce fields under a midsummer sun.
Slowly his wrinkled head poked out of his shell. He sniffed, and YAWNED,
and tried to _WRIGGLE_ deeper into the straw. But it was no use.

Spring again, he thought. Without a doubt. And he tried to get his head
round so that he could see his shell, because tortoises have rings on
their shells and grow one for every year. Yes, there it was, the new
ring, and Hercules felt ready to face the outside world.

He didn’t have long to wait before the lid of the box was opened. A
large pair of hands lifted him out and put him in the garden.

Hercules’s garden was wide and consisted mostly of lawns, on which a few
tasty dandelion leaves were always to be found. There were roses and
lupins in the flower bed – a good feed if he were ever allowed to get at
them – and at the far end of the garden was the winter shed and the
compost heap. What lay beyond it he did not know. On sunny days, when
the wind was in the south, he would explore that way, but someone always
found him and brought him back.fn1

[image]

Hercules lay on the lawn and stretched his legs. The hands put a small
heap of lettuce leaves in front of him, and he chewed them thoughtfully.
The land beyond the shed had occupied his dreams during the long winter
sleep.

I Wonder What Lies Beyond, he mused, thinking as he often did – in
capital letters. There Might be Lettuce. Or Even Buttercups. But
secretly he knew that it was not buttercups he was after – he really
wanted to travel beyond the shed to see what lay on the other side. He
didn’t think of it as escaping from the garden.

But the people did, when they found him gone from the lawn.

They looked high and low in all his usual sleeping places, in his wooden
house in the rockery, and Hercules was nowhere to be seen.

In fact, he was behind the shed, scratching away at the earth with his
powerful forefeet, until he was able to scrape under the wire netting
fence. The wind was in the south, and Hercules felt the wanderlust of
all tortoises in his blood! He _swished_ through the long grass and soon
the garden was empty.

‘Well, that’s Done It,’ said Hercules to himself, as he plodded on
through the long grass beyond the garden. _‘I’M OUT IN THE WORLD.’_

[image]

‘All right, all right,’ said someone, ‘don’t walk all over me, you great
tank! What sort of a snail are you, anyway?’

[image]

Hercules looked down. There, sitting on a dock leaf, was a large yellow
snail.

‘I’m Extremely Sorry,’ he mumbled. ‘I’m a Tortoise. I do Apologize.’

‘Oh. Hm. I’m Pod,’ said the snail. ‘Hm, that’s a nice house you’ve got
on your back there.fn2 Very nice. I like it. Yes, I really think I do. I
haven’t seen you before.’

‘I’m from the Garden,’ said Hercules, ‘but I’ve come to Explore.’

‘Oh? Hm, well, I don’t get around much. I’ve only got one leg, you see,’
said Pod. ‘Just the one. I really have. And a house to carry. It’s
rather sad.’

‘Oh. Dear. If you Climb on my Back I’ll give You a Lift,’ said Hercules.
And Pod slid off the leaf and took up position on the top of his shell.

‘Why do you use so many capital letters?’ he asked, as they moved on.

‘All Tortoises Do,’ said Hercules. ‘Traditional. You know.’

As he swished through the grass, Pod told him about the world. There was
the garden, and the field, and somewhere in the field was a pond. And
that was the end of it.

‘There’s no more. Leastways, not that I’ve heard,’ he said. ‘And there
are frogs in the pond and snakes in the grass,’ he went on, adding with
a shiver, ‘particularly _ONE NASTY ADDER_.’ He brightened up. ‘But also
bees in the pollen and sometimes pigs in the clover.’

[image]

Clover made Hercules feel hungry, and they stopped by a large clump of
it for a meal. It was nearly midday.

‘If you want to know a bit more about the world you ought to go and see
Old Mother Greengroan,’ said Pod, with his mouth full. ‘She lives by the
pond in the middle of the field. She’s very old. Knows everything.
Everything worth knowing, anyway.’

‘How far away is the Pond?’ asked Hercules.

Pod looked blank. ‘Oh, some way away,’ he said. ‘Distances don’t mean
much to me, I’m afraid.’

Bees whizzed by like tiny aeroplanes as Hercules trundled on, in search
of the pond and Old Mother Greengroan.

But a little way behind them a long sleek shape slid through the grass
with hardly a sound. Its back was zigzagged with yellow and black, and
its little cruel eyes were fastened hungrily on the retreating tortoise.
It was the [image]

Hercules and Pod reached the pond just as the sun was setting. They
stood on the bank and peered down into the deep water. A passing moorhen
saw them and hastily paddled off.

‘I have some relatives here,’ said Pod conversationally. ‘Water snails,
you know.’

‘Does Old Mother Greengroan live Here?’ asked Hercules.

‘Round the other side,’ said Pod. ‘You’ll always find Old Mother
Greengroan there. She never goes far these days.’

‘Um. What Sort of a Thing is Old Mother Greengroan? I don’t Wish to be
Rude, but I Need to Recognize Her,’ said Hercules, as he made his way
round the pond with Pod sitting on his back.

Pod looked shocked. ‘You’ll see.’

They came to a pile of stones and dead leaves, where a few stunted thorn
bushes grew by the pond.

Just then there was a hiss behind them. Pod turned and saw the adder
waiting to strike! It had followed them right across the field!

[image]

‘HELP!’

shouted Pod, and disappeared into his shell.

‘Eh?’ said Hercules, and then he saw the snake. There was a hiss and he
too disappeared into his shell with a SNAP.

‘It’s going to eat Old Mother Greengroan!’ moaned Pod, poking his eyes
under his shell. ‘That horrid snake hates her!’

And the long black and yellow body started to slither towards the pile
of stones. With courage he never knew he had, Hercules poked his head
out of his shell and bit the adder.

He held on, and when a tortoise bites it never lets go. Frantically the
snake reared up and lashed out with its tail, but Hercules only gripped
it tighter as Pod clung to his back and [image]

[image]

At last the snake lay still, and Hercules unfastened his aching jaws.
Then he realized he was being watched. Small animal heads were peering
from behind every stone and bush, and many eyes twinkled in the dusk.

A larger shadow detached itself from the rocks. It was Old Mother
Greengroan the toad.

‘What is this?’ she asked, staring at Hercules.

‘He’s – he’s a tortoise, madam,’ said Pod.

‘A very brave one,’ said the toad. ‘But why is he here?’

‘I Wanted to See What the World was Like,’ said Hercules.

‘It’s no place for tortoises,’ said Old Mother Greengroan, ‘but you
killed the adder, so you can stay if you wish. It’s a big place, bigger
than a garden, and a lot happens, and there might be other _ADDERS_.’

[image]

Hercules looked down at the dead adder. ‘I’d Like to Stay,’ he said
quietly, ‘if There’s a Place. But First I Want to _EXPLORE THE WORLD_.’

And that was how the tortoise left the garden and became an explorer.
There was a whole field to discover! With Pod on his back, he travelled
from edge to edge – he even went right round the pond! It was a glorious
adventure There and Back Again, and when his travels were over, he
settled down to live in the field, digging himself a hole to sleep in
during the winter, and going again on his travels in the summer.

But he never had to fight another adder. For all the adders knew of
Hercules, the Slayer of Adders. And they slithered away when they saw
him coming.

Which was good news for Pod too.

[image]

 

fn1You have probably all heard of the race between a tortoise and a hare
that was won by the tortoise. Well, it certainly wasn’t Hercules in that
race.

fn2To Pod the snail, Hercules’s shell would have been like moving into a
palace after living in a small hut.


DOK THE CAVEMAN

[image]

‘What’s he doing now?’ asked Uggi, the witchdoctor, trying to peer
through the crack. The rest of the tribe clustered around the cave mouth
while Hal, the chieftain, tried to see through the gap in the wooden
door. From inside came the sound of sawing.

‘It’s too dark to see,’ said Hal. ‘Looks like he’s got a tree in
there . . .’

Suddenly the door burst down, and the people scattered for safety. A
great round thing came rumbling out of the cave, spinning rapidly as it
rolled down the hill. After it came a small man in a tigerskin much too
big for him, and as he shot past they heard him shriek: _‘IT’LL
REVOLUTIONIZE TRANSPORT!’_ Then he fell into the river.

Hal picked himself up out of a thorn bush. He quite liked old Dok, but
felt that he went a bit too far at times. Being inventive was all very
well, but not when it stuck thorns into you.

Meanwhile, Dok was blowing bubbles and trying desperately to invent
swimming. _‘ARMS — OUT! BREATHE — IN!’_ he cried.

And sank like a stone.

[image]

Uggi fished him out by climbing along a branch and grabbing him none too
kindly by the hair.

Dripping wet, Dok was brought to Hal, who was trying to look dignified
while his wife fussed around trying to pull thorns out of him.fn1

‘What was that?’ said Hal coldly.

Dok sneezed. ‘I had thought of calling it a _wheel._ It’ll revolutionize
transport—’

‘You said that about that other thing, the _boat._ It sank. With me in
it. A particularly deep bit of river, as I recall.’

‘Ah, yes, but that was because of a lack of aquatic stability . . .’

Dok shuffled off to his cave, sneezing and leaving a trail of puddles.
Poor old Dok! Nothing ever quite went right, ever since he had invented
language when he accidentally dropped a very heavy stone on his foot.
And then there was the time when he’d stuck a seed into a hole in the
ground, patted the earth around it, and invented farming. A wild horse
had come along and eaten the first plant.

He sat in his damp cold cave and shivered. Idly he picked up two dry
sticks that had come from the tree and, for want of anything better to
do, began to rub them together . . .

[image]

[image]

Meanwhile, Hal and the rest of the tribe went mammoth hunting. Things
were becoming harder. On the horizon, glimmering, was a long white line
of cliffs. The ice was coming back and it was getting colder. And all
sorts of wild creatures were roaming the plains and peering into the
caves at night.

When they came back, Hal sent one of his sons to fish the wheel out of
the river. As they climbed the hill, Hal sniffed. ‘Smells like—’ He
stopped. Dok would have to invent some more language, especially a word
for what trees smelled like after they had been struck by lightning.
‘Smells sort of – um – _hot_, wouldn’t you say, Uggi?’

A thin column of smoke was rising from the cave mouth. Dok came running
by with a dry branch in his arms. His face was black and his eyebrows
were singed.

_‘IT’LL REVOLUTIONIZE CENTRAL HEATING!’_ he cried.

‘Oh dear,’ said Hal. ‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear. What now, I wonder?’

_‘COME AND SEE!’_ cried Dok.

The tribe filed into the cave. There in the middle of the floor was what
looked like a very small volcano. Orange flames leaped up from it
hungrily.

‘Well, what is it this time?’ said Hal.

‘It’s called fire. It’s quite simple to make. All you need is two dry
pieces of wood, and then – there you are! Heat, light and something nice
to look at, all in one go. Safe as houses.’

[image]

‘You invented me a house. It had a roof. It fell in. A particularly
heavy piece of wood it was, as I recall.’

But Hal let Dok bring the fire into the main cave, and they sat around
it while they tucked into cold, raw mammoth.

‘Are you quite sure it’s safe? Won’t it escape?’ said Hal.

‘Actually, it’s hard enough to keep going,’ said Dok, putting another
piece of wood on it. As he did so he dropped a piece of mammoth into the
ashes. Slowly, it began to go brown. ‘I tried it out on the old
sabre-tooth tiger up in the mountains while you were gone. Animals are
scared of it, so if we put it in the mouth of the cave they’ll stay
away. I say, what’s happened here?’ He picked up the piece of meat. It
smelled good. ‘Hal,’ he said slowly, ‘would you like to help the cause
of scientific progress? Here, try this.’

Feeling a bit of a fool, Hal did. ‘Umph,’ he said. ‘Tasty.’ He looked
around – there was bound to be some sort of catch in it somewhere.

They dragged the rest of the mammoth into the cave. That evening they
had fried mammoth, baked mammoth, mammoth chops, roast mammoth, mammoth
steaks and grilled mammoth. Then, when there was nothing left but the
bones, they sat around feeling as though they would burst.

All except Dok. He sat there with his chin on his hands, frowning. They
could see that he was inventing a new word.

_‘COO—’_ he said.

‘Koo?’ suggested Hal. ‘Collar? Camp?’

_‘NONONONONO. NO. COO-COO-COOKERY!’_

[image]

So _cookery_ it became. They were so busy talking about it that they
didn’t notice a spark float up and land on the heap of leaves that was
Uggi’s bed. Until Uggi sat down on it. He was an old man, but he could
move fast.

‘It bit me!’

_Whumph!_ The bed flared up, setting fire to all the others. They ran
from the cave but the fire went with them, burning up the grass and
trees. Suddenly the whole forest was alight.

Hal and the others stood waist-deep in the river, watching the flames.

‘It was a good cave,’ he said. ‘The ground was nice and soft.’

‘Where’s Dok?’ said Uggi. ‘He left the cave, I know.’

‘Gone for good, I hope,’ said Hal.

And poor old Dok, hiding in the reeds, heard him. Sadly he loaded up his
canoe with the wheel, dry fire-sticks and one or two inventions he was
working on. Then, his paddles making little rings in the dark water, he
floated off down the great river. Soon the fire was nothing more than a
red glow on the horizon.

After the fire had burned up most of the hunting lands around their
home, Hal’s tribe had to move on. Far away in the north the great ice
glaciers were moving and it was beginning to snow.

They plodded on down the Great River, dragging their few possessions
behind them on crude sleds, because none of them could remember exactly
what the wheel looked like. And when darkness fell they had to climb
trees and shiver, because only Dok knew the secret of fire. And Dok was
gone.

They called out to him once or twice, but all that came back were
echoes.

‘He must have gone down to the sea itself,’ said Hal, ‘and they say
there are all kinds of monsters there.’

And they all thought of poor Dok, all alone. He would have known what to
do to catch wild animals in the snow, or to light a fire without wood.

The tribe sat down under a ledge of rock, and the only sound was the
chattering of two dozen pairs of teeth. There was nothing to make a fire
with, even if they knew how.

[image]

‘Uggi?’

‘Yes?’

‘What’s this black rock?’ Hal held it out.

‘I don’t know. It’s called coal, I think. There’s lots of it around, but
it’s absolutely useless. Bung it away.’

Hal wrapped his furs around himself and watched the snow, wondering what
Dok was doing at this moment.

The next day dawned clear and frosty.

And the wolf pack found them. They were prehistoric wolves, which was
bad, and they were hungry, which was worse. Like Hal, they were looking
for food. They sat around the rock ledge with their tongues hanging out.

‘Uggi, Wug, Dal, Ut and Rodney, come with me,’ said Hal wearily. ‘The
rest of you, stay here.’ Picking up his club, he strode out to meet the
wolves. The leader of the pack crouched down, ready to leap.

And as it sprang at Hal, a stick whistled through the air and hit the
wolf in the neck.

[image]

‘Having a bit of trouble?’ said Dok. In one hand he held a bent piece of
wood, with a string stretched across it; in the other, a small stick
with a stone point. _‘IT’LL REVOLUTIONIZE HUNTING!’_ he cried, as he
shot another wolf. The rest ran for their lives.

‘Where did you come from?’ gasped Hal.

‘Oh, I’ve built myself a little place down by the river. Handy for the
fishing, you know. With nets. They’ll revolutionize the industry. Makes
a change from mammoth, and tiger, and all the rest, however you cook
them. Like my coat? Wool. There’s these things called sheep, and if you
chase them for long enough—’

_‘STOP!’_ said Hal. ‘Have you got a fire there?’

‘Several.’

So they decided that Dok had learned his lesson, and allowed him back
into the tribe. Soon, a few more houses grew up, and became a village
and later a town, down by the big river.

Dok sat alone in his house. He was growing old, but he was working on
his greatest invention. Suddenly he sat up.

_‘HIS-HIS-HISTORY!’_ he cried. ‘I declare the Stone Age at an end.
History will start from tomorrow!’

And so it has been ever since.

[image]

fn1In his view, there ought to be a law that chieftains never got thorns
in their bottoms.


THE BIG RACE

[image]

Gas and electricity are tricky things. They leak. If you’ve ever stood
by an electric light socket with the bulb out you can almost feel the
electricity leaking out all over the room. It’s the same with gas,
except it’s more likely to go bang.

Now steam is a different matter. You can see steam and it does what it’s
told; it’s like thin water and you can put it in pipes.

Over a hundred years ago steam was all the rage. The Gritshire Steam
Typewriter and Laundry Company had a big factory at East Slate and they
turned out things driven by steam. There were the famous steam
typewriters, steam clocks, steam boot cleaners and even steam
toothbrushes. There were lights made by passing steam over red-hot coke
– it works – and there was even talk of a steam-driven washing machine.
Things were really steamed up.

‘Steam,’ said Sir Henry Toggitt, sticking his thumbs in his waistcoat,
‘is here to stay.’

[image]

Sir Henry was the managing director of the company, so you can imagine
his annoyance when he read in his paper next day that someone had made a
car that ran on petrol. He called the company’s inventors together.

‘What’s this all about?’ he said. ‘Petrol’s no good for anything. You
can’t make it do anything – can you?’

All the inventors shifted uneasily and started mumbling.

‘Well, sir,’ said one, ‘it’s not impossible—’

‘Then build a steam car!’ said Sir Henry. ‘Steam is here to stay! We’ve
put the electric people out of business; now we’ll do the same for this
petrol-driven thing! Build a car, and we’ll challenge it to a race
around Gritshire.’

[image]

So they got to work. The story appeared in the papers and all sorts of
inventors drove into Gritshire in their cars. There were some driven by
soda, some by compressed air, and one driven by clockwork.

‘You see, Sir Henry,’ said Norman Spindrift, his chief engineer. ‘It’s a
challenge. Baron von Teu has brought his petrol-driven car to race ours,
but all these other people want to see if they can beat the both of us.
And whoever wins, you know, all the big factories will make his kind of
car.’

The course ran all round Gritshire several times. The County Council
officials measured it out – it was five hundred miles long in total –
and preparations went ahead for the big race, while the inventors stayed
in East Slate’s hotels and worked on their cars. And then the Mayor of
Blackbury announced a prize of £10,000 – and a big shiny cup – for the
winner!

On the morning of the race Sir Henry Toggitt helped Norman Spindrift
push their new car to the starting line. It was a magnificent creation
of boilers and pipes, all painted white and gold. It had four big steel
wheels and, since it was driven by steam, towed a little coal tender
behind it.

[image]

‘If this doesn’t win, I’ll eat my hat,’ said Sir Henry, who was wearing
a straw hat just in case. ‘What’s it called?’

‘The _Spirit of Gritshire_,’ said Norman.

Next to the steam car stood Baron von Teu’s petrol-driven one, specially
brought over from Prussia for the race. It was bright red with black
Maltese crosses on its bonnet, and the baron and his assistant were
already aboard. It was called _Gerta._

Behind that was the clockwork-driven car, with its eight drivers still
hauling on the big key. Then there was an electric car, an
elastic-driven car, a compressed-air lorry, a hot air balloon-powered
bus and two sail-powered bicycles.

_‘RESIGN NOW – YOU ALL MIGHT AS WELL,’_ shouted the baron through a
megaphone.

‘I don’t trust him,’ whispered Sir Henry. ‘I think I shall come with
you. After all, if we win we’ll be able to make steam cars for the whole
country.’

Just then the Mayor of Blackbury climbed into the starter’s box and the
crowd cheered. His speech went on for quite a long timefn1 and I won’t
bore you with it all, but he ended: ‘The course is three times round
Gritshire and we’ve posted men all over the place to make sure you don’t
cheat, if you’ll excuse me. Eyes on the starting flag please.

Ready, steady . . . w-a-i-t f-o-r i-t, w-a-i-t f-o-r i-t . . . Go!’

In a cloud of steam and fumes the _Spirit of Gritshire_ and the baron’s
red car roared off. The sail bicycles fell over, the elastic-driven car
went _twang!_ and backwards, and the hot air balloon-powered bus floated
away.

Hanging on for dear life, its driver saw the white car and the red car
zoom neck-and-neck out of the town. They turned at the crossroads and
disappeared in the direction of Slate Old Town, their crews yelling
insults at each other. Behind them, going at a good lick, was the
clockwork car, its giant spring still unwinding.

[image]

_Gerta_, Baron von Teu’s petrol-driven car, roared out of Slate Old Town
with the _Spirit of Gritshire_ a few metres behind it. The baron was
bent low over his steering wheel, and making faces in the driving
mirror.

‘Hans,’ he said to his assistant. ‘Get the £10,000 prize money we must.’

_‘Ja,’_ said Hans.

‘I have a plan . . .’ And so the baron put his foot down hard and pulled
away from the other car.

The plan worked like this. All around Gritshire there were red marker
arrows by the road to help the drivers stay on course. It was the work
of a moment for Hans to jump out of the car, turn one of the arrows to
point down a little side road, leap back in again and be away, before
the _Spirit of Gritshire_ came hurtling round the corner.

The baron laughed so much he almost felt good-tempered. ‘Where – where
did the lane go to?’ he managed to gasp.

‘Slate Chicken Farm!’ wheezed Hans, biting his handkerchief to stop
himself laughing, while the car roared up the road alone.

[image]

Suddenly the hedge seemed to explode and something whizzed out onto the
road right in front of the car. All that could be seen under a mass of
wire, hens, feathers, eggs and chicken coops were four wheels and a
chimney.

[image]

The baron CRASHED into a broken coop and an egg landed on his head. He
sat there screaming with rage while the _Spirit of Gritshire_
disappeared up the road. Worse was to come. There was a purring noise
behind them, and out of the hedge came all the other cars in the race.

That night, Sir Henry and his assistant, Norman Spindrift, stayed at the
King’s Legs in Blackbury, with the steam-powered car parked outside the
door.

In the middle of the night _Gerta_ pulled up outside the pub. Hans got
out and, opening the bonnet of the steam car, did something to the
engine. Then he went round all the other cars and there was the sound of
important bits being removed.

As dawn began to break, he got back in the car. Their laughter dying
away in the distance, he and the baron chugged away.

A little way down the road, a tramp having a quiet sleep under the hedge
was woken up by the sound of evil laughter. There was a whizzing noise
and a large bag of assorted cogwheels, pipes, springs and other
essential machinery flew over the hedge and hit him on the head!

[image]

[image]

‘This is terrible!’ said Sir Henry.

It was morning and all the competitors in the Great Gritshire Road Race
stood around outside the King’s Legs in Blackbury.

I say ‘all’, but Baron von Teu wasn’t there. He’d driven on through the
night – after sabotaging all the other cars. They were parked in the
hotel courtyard and every one had a bit of machinery missing.

‘The rotten rotter,’ said Sir Henry. ‘Can you repair it?’

‘Not without going all the way back to East Slate for my tools,’ said
Norman.

Just then a figure appeared round the corner. He wore a long grey
overcoat and a green hat, with a great grey beard in between the two.
But what really caught the eye was the collection of ironmongery that
hung all over him – a big drum, cymbals on knees and elbows, a
harmonica, bells on the hat, a piece of linoleum under one arm and a
tuba around the waist.

‘Well, well,’ said Sir Henry. ‘I haven’t seen a one-man band since I was
a nipper.’

[image]

But with a cry Norman Spindrift leaped up and rushed down the road,
returning with the tramp held by one ear.

‘Oi,’ said the tramp.

‘Look,’ said Norman. ‘He’s banging the drum with a piston out of our
engine!’

‘That thing he’s using as a whistle is our exhaust pipe!’ said the
driver of the gas bus. And all the other drivers started to shout as
they identified bits of their cars.

_‘Where did you get all these, you wretched wretch?’_ bellowed Sir
Henry.

‘Search me, guv. I was having a quiet kip under the hedge last night
when someone bunged them on top of me – leggo of my lughole!’

‘Leggo his lughole – I mean let go of his ear,’ said Sir Henry
thoughtfully. ‘More of the baron’s evil doings, I see. How would you
like fifty pounds for your band, my man.’

‘Well, it’s by way of being my living, guv . . .’

‘A hundred pounds.’

‘Done!’

It was the work of about half an hour to fit all the pieces back into
the cars and drive on. The one-man band, who said his name was Ron
Snipe, rode on the _Spirit of Gritshire_’s coal tender and played tunes
on the tuba.

[image]

Several hours later Baron von Teu woke up. He was sleeping in a
cornfield miles up the road, because, of course, he didn’t expect any of
the others to catch him up.

He nudged Hans. ‘I thought I heard the cursed steam-car hoot,’ he said.

‘Impossible.’

_Whoop! Whoop!_

‘Quick, quick, quick! Where’s the starting handle! Get off my foot! Gah!
Hurry!’

The petrol-driven car _Gerta_ roared off in a cloud of dust.

[image]

The _Spirit of Gritshire_ was nearing the end of the race. But she still
had to pass through the deep Dankly Gorge in the Gritshire
mountains . . . where the baron had another surprise in store.

When the newly repaired cars roared into Dankly Gorge, the _Spirit of
Gritshire_ was well in the lead, and it looked as though Sir Henry and
Norman Spindrift still had a chance to win the £10,000 prize – if they
could only catch up the beastly baron.

But Baron von Teu had other ideas. There, right where the gorge was
narrowest, a great heap of rocks blocked the road. The baron and Hans
were sitting on top playing Snap for ha’pennies.

_‘Unblock this road at once, you villainous villain!’_ bellowed Sir
Henry.

‘There’s no way round except over the mountains,’ said the baron. ‘Why
not try that way?’

And with a horrible laugh he and Hans jumped down from the rocks, got in
their car on the other side and chugged off.

‘The rotten rotters,’ fumed Sir Henry. ‘I’ve got a jolly good mind to
take the other road and still beat them.’

‘It’ll take half an hour longer,’ moaned Norman. ‘There’s no way we can
do it.’

Then Sir Henry had an idea. ‘What about that safety thingummy on the
car’s boiler – what would happen if we strapped it down?’

‘We’d go very fast for a little while and then go off bang,’ said
Norman. ‘The steam couldn’t escape, see?’ He looked at Sir Henry. ‘You
don’t want to—’

‘Why, certainly,’ said Sir Henry. ‘Kindly tie it shut with your braces!
The rest of you,’ he said, turning to the other competitors, ‘climb
aboard and we’ll all beat the baron!’

With the safety valve tied down, the _Spirit of Gritshire_ soared up the
mountain road like a rocket, with all the drivers hanging on for dear
life and Norman crouched over the steering wheel. Great clouds of steam
formed behind it.

_‘We’re running out of fuel!’_ cried Sir Henry, pulling off his scarf
and hat and shoving them in the firebox.

Meanwhile, in East Slate, the crowds were waiting for the winning car.
Flags were out and the mayor stood waiting with the big silver cup – and
big cheque – for the winner.

A speck appeared in the distance. It was _Gerta_, the baron’s
petrol-driven car, with the baron and Hans waving to the crowds and
thinking about all the money.

They were nearly up to the finishing line when there was a growing
hissing noise, a rushing cloud of smoke and a blur of wheels and pistons
that shot by _Gerta_ and disappeared up the road, leaving in its wake a
dozen dazed drivers – many in their long woolly underwear, since they
had used their clothes for fuel – sitting in the road.

Sir Henry took the cup and promptly donated the £10,000 to the Blackbury
Parrots’ Home, while the baron turned white and drove quietly away.

A moment later the _Spirit of Gritshire_ blew up in a shower of hot rain
and cogwheels, and even Sir Henry decided that steam cars were too
dangerous.

[image]

But they all had a slap-up dinner at the Blackbury Ritz and so he didn’t
mind too much.

[image]

 

fn1Give somebody a gold medallion and a big floppy hat and suddenly
every speech becomes twice as long. It happens to headteachers too, I
believe.


ANOTHER TALE OF THE CARPET PEOPLE

[image]

Once upon a time, you remember, the Carpet people made the Great Trek
across inches of untamed Carpet to start new lives on the far side. What
happened next? Well, the normal sort of thing; they met other peoples,
planted and harvested, and settled down fairly peacefully. They really
don’t come into the long history of the Carpet any more. But some of
them went off looking for new adventures, which led to the long cruise
of the _Hugo_ and the discovery of Rug – anyway, you’ll see.

One day Snibril and Bane the Wanderer came to the small town of
Warp-on-the-Lino, a port right on the edge of the Carpet. From there the
big floor-going ships traded up and down the edge of the Carpet. (A
floor-ship looks like a galleon on wheels, and has big sails to catch
the draughts that blow across the floor.)

‘We’ve got to find work,’ said Snibril. ‘Couldn’t we get a job here?
I’ve never seen the Linoleum before.’

‘Hmm,’ said Bane.

A big crowd had gathered on the quay, and a small man standing on a
barrel was shouting at it. He wore long red and yellow robes, and a
floppy hat.

[image]

_‘I TELL YOU, THE FLOOR IS FLAT!’_ he was shouting. ‘Any fool can see
that! I, Christopher Pilgarlic, say that if you sail on and on, you’re
bound to finish up somewhere else. Now, any volunteers? I’m afraid I
can’t afford to pay very much.’

‘Catch us sailing out of sight of the Carpet!’ said one of the sailors.
‘Everyone knows there are wild monsters and great dollops of floor
polish to catch poor sailormen!’

‘What’s all this about?’ whispered Snibril.

‘It’s old Pilgarlic again,’ said one of the sailors. ‘He’s got another
of his potty ideas about the Floor being flat. All I know is I’m not
sailing with him.’

When the crowd had gone Bane and Snibril went up to the captain, who was
sitting sadly on the barrel.

‘What you need is adventurers,’ said Snibril. ‘Sailors are no good on a
thing like this. You need people who are prepared for risky happenings,
and you’ve got two of the best right here. Besides, I’ve never seen wild
monsters.’

‘I expect we’ll see more than enough of _them_,’ sighed Bane. But he
also signed on with the captain.

Christopher Pilgarlic was a scientist, and had worked out that, with the
Floor being so big and the Carpet so small, there must be something
else. He called it Rug.

So Pilgarlic followed Snibril’s advice and advertised for

_ADVENTURERS, NO EXPERIENCE NECESSARY._

Soon they were surging up the gangplank on Pilgarlic’s second-hand ship,
the _Hugo._ Some had eye patches, or carried swords and shields, wore
furry hats, or had guns stuck in their belts. They looked like the sort
of crew who got things done in a hurry.

That night the _Hugo_ slipped its moorings and, aided by a slight
draught, squeaked out onto the dark Lino. Soon the lights on
Warp-on-the-Lino were out of sight.

[image]

Next day the _Hugo_ was alone on the Linoleum, a slight southerly
draught bowling it along on its four rubber tyres into the Great
Unknown. The Carpet was a long way astern.

Christopher Pilgarlic was at the wheel, humming to himself and watching
the western horizon.

Snibril was in the crow’s-nest and Bane lay on the deck. The rest of the
crew just sat around and boasted to one another. It was very peaceful,
though the _Hugo_ was approaching regions where Carpet people had never
set foot.

I wonder if there will be people on Rug, thought Snibril to himself. And
if there are, will they object to us setting foot there? Pilgarlic says
that Rug should be a lot hairier and wilder than the Carpet, so I
suppose its inhabitants will be too.

The Floor drifted by, all pretty much boringly the same, except for the
occasional small dollop of floor polish with palm-tree hairs growing on
it.

Then Snibril saw a smudge on the southern horizon.

_‘LAND HO!’_ he cried, and soon they were heading towards it.

‘Is that Rug?’ said Bane. ‘Surely we haven’t gone far enough.’

Snibril scanned the coastline. Huge coconut hairs loomed up.

‘It must be the Coconut Matting,’ said Captain Pilgarlic. ‘It’s on some
of the old charts of the Floor. No one has been there for years,
though.’

They decided to stop and stretch their legs, and sailed the _Hugo_ up
close to the hairs. Brightly coloured parrots squawked and flew over the
ship, and muffled grunts and roars came from among the hairs.

‘A wild sort of place,’ said Bane.

Soon most of the crew were sitting on the edge of the mat and eating
coconuts, while the captain found their position by taking sightings on
the Light Bulb and the Window-ledge.

_Whoosh!_ An arrow whizzed out of the hairs and shot through his hat!

[image]

_‘We’re under attack!’_ he yelled.

_‘Back to the ship!’_

More arrows clattered against the side of the _Hugo_ as they climbed
aboard. Bane and Snibril peered over the rail. There was nothing to be
seen but the shadows between the hairs.

Slowly the _Hugo_ pulled away from the shore.

Then round the edge of the Mat came a fleet of war canoes, pedal-driven
with wooden wheels. Each one was manned by warriors covered in war paint
and feathers, and they were heading straight for the ship.

_‘Faster!’_ said Bane. _‘They’re gaining on us!’_

Arrows shot over the _Hugo_’s deck as the floor-ship sped away from Mat.
Behind it, the chanting of the warriors in their pedal-driven war canoes
began to die away.

[image]

Wind began to hum in the _Hugo_’s rigging, and the normal draught that
blew across the Lino increased to a gale. Great balls of dust rolled
past the boat. They had been chased into a floor-storm!

[image]

[image]

_‘TAKE IN THE SAILS! TAKE IN THE SAILS!’_ yelled Captain Pilgarlic, but
it was too late. Everyone clung to the deck as the _Hugo_’s big square
sails filled with wind, and she soared away in the teeth of the gale,
her wheels hardly touching the Lino. Monster fluff clouds rumbled by at
a terrific speed. Then came an echoing sound that seemed to fill the
whole room.

_SLAM!_

When Snibril looked up the _Hugo_ seemed to have run into something.
Someone was holding onto one of his legs, and Pilgarlic was sitting on
him. Half the masts had been blown off. The ship was a wreck.

He looked over the broken rail. They were in a drift of fluff around –
what? He peered up. It seemed to be a huge great wooden mountain.

Bane was standing on a mound of dust a little way off, also gazing up.

‘I do believe this is one of the Table Legs,’ he said. ‘I didn’t believe
they existed.’

‘My poor ship!’ moaned Pilgarlic.

‘Let’s get off,’ said Snibril.

When they finally got sorted out they found that the _Hugo_ wasn’t too
badly damaged, but it would take several days’ work to repair her. When
Bane heard this, he began to fidget and mutter. Staying in one place for
a long time made him nervous, and it wasn’t long before he suggested a
small group of them climbed a little way up the Table Leg.

Leaving a party to patch up the ship, Pilgarlic, Bane and Snibril took a
few days’ supplies and made ready for the climb. A table leg might seem
smooth to you, but to them it was as jagged and knobbly as a mountain!

Woodworm holes loomed up as large as caves, and they skirted them
nervously. On a narrow ledge, inches above the Floor, they came across a
flock of goats with silver bells around their necks. The air was thin
and clear, and from higher up there came a far-off chanting.

As they rounded a splinter, they saw, perched precariously on the leg, a
little monastery built of dust grains. The monks came out to meet them.

[image]

‘So you’re looking for the Rug?’ said the Grand Lama to Pilgarlic. ‘I
think we can help. We have made a study of the Floor through our
telescopes—’ He was interrupted by a loud gonging sound.

‘The Abominable Woodworm! The Abominable Woodworm is coming!’ someone
was shouting.

People ran for the monastery, shooing their flocks before them. A
distant chewing noise could be heard.

‘What is the Abominable Woodworm?’ asked Pilgarlic. The three of them
were left quite alone on the ledge.

Snibril drew his sword. ‘I don’t know,’ he said, ‘but I think we’re
about to find out.’

Bane loaded his gun. ‘It’s the great-grandfather of all woodworms,’ he
muttered.

‘Here it comes!’ screamed Pilgarlic.

_Crack!_ Some of the wood fell away as the woodworm ate its way through
the Table Leg.

[image]

Halfway up, Snibril, Bane and Christopher Pilgarlic hid behind a
splinter and stared up at it.

It was covered in white scales, and had a large mouth full of sharp
teeth – and sawdust, which it chewed thoughtfully. You must remember
that Carpet people are so small that a grain of salt to them is bigger
than a house, and the tiny woodworm looked like a dragon.

It began to crawl over to the splinter, and Snibril stood back. Just as
it opened its jaws he drew his sword and slashed at the horny head.

_‘TAKE THAT!’_

The woodworm stared at him in amazement, then, infuriated, rushed at
him. Snibril leaped aside and, of course, the woodworm lost its footing
on the polished wood and skidded right off the ledge.

So Snibril and his friends were carried in triumph back to the little
monastery, and the Grand Lama picked up the conversation where they’d
left off.

‘Rug, eh? Hmm. Well, it would be very dangerous. There are worse things
than the storm which wrecked your boat – that was caused by the Door
opening, by the way. Of course, we know that the Floor is flat because
we can see it, but if I were you I’d turn back.’

Snibril said that they were determined to go on, and so, to thank them
for killing the woodworm, the Grand Lama presented them all with a speck
of gold dust and told one of the monks to escort them safely back to the
_Hugo._

Next day the _Hugo_ sailed away on its four big wheels, and soon left
the Tableland far behind.

They were sailing through a strange world now, with fantastic sights
looming up on either side. The giant cliff face of a cupboard took a
whole day to pass. They sailed under a chair that looked like an
enormous cave, and all the while Rug did not appear.

One morning Herbert, the first mate, approached Pilgarlic, followed by
most of the crew. ‘We want you to turn back, my mates and me,’ he said.
‘The grub is running low, and things are a good deal too risky for our
liking.’

‘Nonsense,’ said Pilgarlic. ‘This is a scientific expedition. You’ve got
to take a little risk every now and again. Besides, we’ve come too far
to turn back.’

‘If you won’t, then we will make you,’ said the second mate, Fred,
picking up a belaying pin.

Bane raised his blunderbuss. ‘I’ll shoot the first man who mutinies,’ he
said. He didn’t often speak, and to tell the truth most of the crew were
a bit afraid of him. Everyone started arguing at once, and no one
noticed a slight bump. The _Hugo_ had run into something.

Snibril looked up first. _‘Rug ahead!’_ he cried.

The crew of the _Hugo_ rushed to the rail. The ship had run into Rug
while they were arguing, and giant tufts of hair hung over them. Strange
Carpet birds with brilliant wings squawked and whistled high over the
ship, and between the hairs small bright eyes watched the _Hugo_ in
amazement.

Of course, everyone stopped quarrelling. The gangplank was lowered, and
scouts went ashore to make sure it was safe to moor there – Christopher
Pilgarlic hadn’t forgotten about the warriors of the Coconut Mat. They
were armed to the teeth too.fn1

‘I claim this Rug in the name of – of,’ said Pilgarlic, as he stepped
ashore. ‘Well, in the name of everybody. Everybody’s place and nobody’s
place. Ours too. Oh well, not to worry, I’ll tie my handkerchief to a
stick. Would somebody like to take my picture?’

One of the crew took a photograph with a homemade camera. It came out
upside-down, brown, and a bit fuzzy, but Pilgarlic didn’t mind.

[image]

Bane took some of the crew out hunting, and that night they had roast
deer and fried ship’s-biscuits, with egg sauce. Even Herbert and Fred,
who had nearly led the mutiny, agreed that Rug was worth discovering.

‘I think we should explore further,’ said Bane, when he and Snibril went
out on deck after dinner. ‘There’s something about this place that makes
me nervous. It’s too quiet, only it’s the sort of quietness people make
when they don’t want you to hear them.’

So next day the two of them led a party of volunteers into the Rug.
Pilgarlic came too, with Orkney the cook, Henry the coxswain and Dr
Plumbley, the ship’s doctor. Bane said six was enough for any
expedition. They carried provisions for two weeks.

The jungle seemed to close in around them as they walked in single file
along animal tracks. Rug was not like the Carpet. The hairs grew
together in tufts, and between them colourful and poisonous undergrowth
rose everywhere. There was no sound but the squawking of birds and six
pairs of feet going _thud-thud-thud_ through the hairs.

‘You know, I think people would like to come and live here,’ said
Snibril after a while. ‘It looks much richer than the old Carpet.’

‘Humph,’ grunted Bane. ‘And what if there are people here already?’

Snibril was just about to answer when something hit him on the head, and
everything went black.

Someone shouted, and the next thing he knew he was lying under a bush
with a big lump on his head.

He was alone! Something had happened to the others – there was no sign
of them! He looked around. Here and there a small hair had been bent, or
a grain of dust had been moved. That was not much, but at least it was
some sort of trail. He must have been left in the confusion.

Gripping his sword, and feeling more than a little frightened, Snibril
set off at a run. Night was falling in Rug and he was alone, inches from
anywhere.

He spent his first night shivering, halfway up a hair. When morning came
he slid down to the ground and wondered what to do. He couldn’t go back
to the ship, because the only trail he could find in the Rug was the one
made by the mysterious attackers. The only thing to do was follow it.

[image]

He had a breakfast of eggs and fruit and set off. The Rug was waking up
around him; brightly coloured lizards ran across his path, and parrots
squawked away high above.

[image]

He passed a creature like a sloth, hanging upside down from a hair, and
a small family of wombats which watched him pass by in astonishment.

The trail led deeper and deeper into the Rug, and Snibril had to spend
another night up a hair. Invisible creatures shuffled around in the
darkness and he had to keep his mouth tightly shut to stop his teeth
from _chattering._

When he awoke a small green parrot was sitting on his head. It bent down
and squinted at him, and then said: ‘If I ever get back to the ship, oh
shut up I wish I’d never signed on whatever happened to Snibril.
_Squawk!’_

‘Well, they’re still alive, at least,’ said Snibril. ‘I suppose you
heard them talking. Where are they?’

The parrot just put its head on one side, and then flew away. Snibril
jumped down and ran after it as it left the track and headed back
towards the edge of the Rug, which wasn’t very far away.

He was now much further south than the place where the _Hugo_ had run
ashore. He crossed the track again, and then almost ran into them. Bane,
Christopher Pilgarlic and the rest of the party were being marched along
by a band of Rug warriors.

They were twice as big as the Carpet people. Each one carried a long
shield and a wicked-looking spear, and as they marched they chanted a
war-song.

Snibril followed them, darting from hair to hair. The green parrot
landed on his shoulder and went to sleep.

They entered a large gateway, and a town of hair huts came into view. In
the centre of it was a golden temple, shaped like a pyramid.

Bane and the others were marched up to it, and a big crowd of Rug people
surrounded them. Snibril crept behind a hut, and peered out, watching
and listening as a tall warrior in a magnificent headdress started
talking. He sounded quite friendly.

An old man then hobbled out of one of the huts and began to speak in
Carpetish. ‘You – come – from Big Fellow canoe?’ he asked.

‘Yes,’ said Bane. ‘Why were we brought here? One of our party has got
lost . . .’

‘We welcome you to Rugland. Me, Tumi, went to Carpet once in a
floor-canoe. Sorry to bring you, but for your own good. Many more tribes
in Rug. We the Rumbelo tribe. Some tribes not so friendly to strangers.
Make big stew.’

Snibril was just about to show himself when an arrow thudded into the
side of the hut. Tall warriors in black feathers were climbing the walls
of the hut town, and the Rumbelos dashed for their spears. But there
were too many of the enemy, and soon the entire tribe was captured,
including Bane and the other members of his party.

[image]

Oh dear, thought Snibril. Here we go again.

He followed the new tribe out of the town, keeping to the shadows.

Snibril shadowed the tribes through the Rug, dodging from hair to hair,
and feeling a bit left out of things.

The enemy tribe took the Rumbelo people and the explorers to their
village, where they tied them to stakes. Fires were lit, and people
started peeling vegetables – it looked dangerous!fn2

Snibril hid behind a hut, trying frantically to think of a rescue plan.

‘If we get out of this, I’ll never explore again,’ he heard Pilgarlic
say to Bane, who was attempting to loosen his ropes.

‘I want to know what’s happened to Snibril,’ said Bane.

Snibril was, in fact, not far away. He broke into the hut he had been
hiding behind and found it was full of feathered headdresses and
costumes. He had just had time to put one on when a lot of warriors came
in and dressed up for their war dance – luckily, they all thought he was
one of them.

He crept out with them and was soon dancing around the prisoners, making
up the steps as he went along. But since he was so much smaller than the
other dancers they soon began to wonder who he was. Round and round they
went, and Bane began to look very nervous.

Then suddenly the smallest warrior danced across and cut the ropes!
_‘IT’S ME!’_ he said. _‘LET’S GET OUT OF HERE!’_

What a fight that was! Before anyone knew what was happening the
prisoners had broken free and small battles were going on everywhere.

The enemy tribe were so surprised that they were soon beaten and taken
prisoner and, a little while later, the chief of the Rumbelo tribe, and
Tumi the aged interpreter, thanked Snibril very much.

‘Any time you’re passing just drop in,’ they said, as the party left the
village.

‘I hope I’m never near this wretched place again,’ moaned Christopher
Pilgarlic. ‘That tribe nearly made stew out of us!’

They agreed to make their way back to the _Hugo_, and were soon tramping
through the thick hairs.

It was Bane who saw the old-fashioned threepenny bit first, when he
climbed a hair to find their position. ‘There’s a gigantic gold mountain
up ahead,’ he said. ‘Let’s go and have a look.’

Soon they reached a great wall of golden metal, and when they climbed it
they found themselves on a coin the size of a field (to them). It had
strange big writing on it.

‘This is amazing!’ cried Pilgarlic. ‘I wonder who could have built it?
What excellent workmanship! I wonder whose it is?’

[image]

‘They drop down from Upper Space,’ said Bane, lowering his voice. ‘There
was a silver one that fell on the other side of the Carpet once. Next
morning it was gone.’

They all looked up. Whatever was there was so far away that all they
could see was mist.

‘Do you – do you think this one will go while we’re on it?’ asked
Snibril nervously.

‘I hope not. All sorts of things come down from Upper Space. Gigantic
crumbs, for instance, never get picked up. There’s good eating in a
giant crumb too!’

‘We could make a fortune if only we could take some of this home,’ said
Pilgarlic wishfully.

‘Don’t!’ said Bane. ‘Best we leave it. Once you tangle with Upper Space
things can get dangerous.’

So they went on towards the edge of Rug, until they could see the masts
of the _Hugo_. The crew were just preparing to weigh anchor, because
they thought the explorers must have been killed. They all went aboard
and had a good meal before leaving.

[image]

Soon the Rug was nothing but a dark line on the Linoleum, and everyone
was thinking of home and the Carpet.

‘I suppose people will come again one day,’ said Snibril, as he watched
Rug fall astern. ‘It’s not a bad place. Some of the locals were quite
friendly.’

‘Perhaps,’ said Bane. ‘But there’s nothing like going home.’

‘I agree,’ said Pilgarlic.

‘Me too,’ said Snibril.

[image]

fn1Literally, in one case, since the man had filed his teeth into nasty
points.

fn2To the victims, anyway. To everybody else, it looked like a good
dinner in a few hours’ time.


THE GREAT EGG-DANCING CHAMPIONSHIP

[image]

I don’t suppose you’ve heard about the disgraceful scenes at the
Blackbury Egg-dancing Championship? Probably not, because they were
really awful. But perhaps I’d better explain.

Blackbury – well, Blackbury is a lovely little market town in Gritshire
(Free Car Parking, Early Closing Wednesdaysfn1) and is built on either
side of the River Um. A few miles downriver is Umbridge. The trouble is
that for hundreds and hundreds of years there has been great rivalry
between the two towns.

[image]

No one quite remembers why. But even at the time of the Civil War – when
Blackbury was Royalist, so Umbridge of course fought for Parliament –
Oliver Cromwell wrote to Charles II:

_‘Yes, Gritshire folk are devilish bad-humoured and to my mind a bunch
of clodpolls.’_

Now Egg-dancing is a very old form of dancing and was invented in
Gritshire. A lot of eggs are rolled onto the floor and two blindfolded
dancers get one look at the pattern and then have to dance without
breaking one. It’s very skilful and if they’ve got good memories they
never break an egg. This is genuinely true. It’s died out in most of the
country, but in Gritshire, of course, it’s still going strong. In
Gritshire, in fact, Egg-dancing is more important than football – and
this year Blackbury and Umbridge, both First Division Egg-dancing Teams,
fought for the championship.

So, of course, it was like a war.

The trouble was that Jem Stronginthearm, Umbridge’s champion Egg-dancer,
was courting the Mayor of Blackbury’s daughter, a young lady by the name
of Alice Band. And her brother Fred was the champion Egg-dancer of
Blackbury.

The evening after the Egg-dancing finals were announced Jem and Alice
met at a stile in the rolling Gritshire countryside between the two
towns.

‘I can’t stop long,’ said Alice. ‘Dad’s having a big party tonight. He
says Fred will soon beat you in the championship and Blackbury’ll win
the Egg Cup. What can we do?’

Jem scratched his head. ‘Well, I don’t know about Blackbury winning the
cup,’ he said. ‘But what I say is, I’ve got a bit of money put by and
it’s not a bad little blacksmith’s business I’ve built up, with a
cottage behind the forge and all. So I’m going to come and ask your dad
if he’ll let I marry thee, and then we’ll see what he’ll say to that.’

Next day after work Jem strode along the riverbank to Blackbury and
thumped on the front door of Mr Amos Band’s house.

‘Alice told me as you’d be coming by,’ said Amos, when Jem had been
shown in.

Now Blackbury people are very sly and cunning and Amos was as cunning as
they come. He had been having a good think. Jem stood in front of him, a
bit nervous as you may imagine, twisting his cap in his hands.

[image]

‘All I’ll say is this,’ said Amos, with a sly smile. ‘I’ve got no
objections to you, you understand. You’re a very good blacksmith from
all accounts, but I couldn’t let my little girl marry someone who’d won
the Egg Cup for Umbridge, could I? Not with me being Mayor of Blackbury.
I understand you’ll be dancing against our Fred next week.’

‘What you mean is, if I lose the championship on purpose then you might
let Alice and me get wed,’ said Jem slowly. ‘You mean I’ve got to let
Blackbury win the cup . . .’

‘A nod’s as good as a wink to a blind horse, I always say,’ said Amos.
‘Well, there it is, so what’s your answer?’

‘That’s very unfair,’ said Jem. ‘You know I’ve got to try for the
Egg-dancing Championship. The whole of Umbridge is depending on me.’

‘Well, I’m sorry, but there it is,’ said Mr Band smugly. ‘Think it
over.’

Just as Jem was striding away down the street a badly made paper
aeroplane drifted down from one of the upper windows of Band house. It
hit him on the head, and written on it was:

[image]

It was a Friday morning, and Umbridge street market was in full swing.
But Jem Stronginthearm looked so gloomy as he walked back home that
everyone turned to stare at him.

He stamped upstairs to the Solly O’Flynn gymnasium, which was over the
bicycle shop next door. It was rather a poky room, painted in brown and
cream and covered with fading photographs of former champion
Egg-dancers, who all wore long trousers and waxed moustaches.

Solly O’Flynn was Jem’s trainer and manager and he always wore a check
suit and a bowler hat. He was reading the paper when Jem came in.

‘What’s up?’ he said.

‘I’m not going in for the championship tomorrow,’ said Jem. ‘Betsy
Bates’ll have to dance instead.’ (Betsy was another Egg-dancer: not bad
but inclined to break them.)

‘You can’t do that,’ said Solly. ‘It’s all arranged and everything! I’ve
even signed a contract for you to dance in the Commonwealth
Championship!’

[image]

But Jem had gone, and very soon a lot of worried people discovered that
he’d left the town – and tomorrow was Egg-dancing Day.

[image]

The day of the Egg-dancing Championship dawned and there was still no
sign of the Umbridge Champion, Jem Stronginthearm.

The championship was held in a big field just outside Blackbury, and, of
course, there were lots of sideshows. The Blackbury Borough Volunteer
Silver Band were playing tasteful waltzes at one end of the field, and
at the other there was stirring military music from the band of the 1st
Gritshire Bombardiers (including their own private marching tune, which
had terrified the enemy from Agincourt to El Alamein, ‘My Old Granddad’s
Walking Stick’fn2).

And there were lots of crowds and noise. But there was no sign of Jem.

In the Umbridge tent, Solly O’Flynn was helping Betsy Bates into her
Egg-dancing boots. ‘I know you won’t do as good as Jem, but try not to
lose,’ he hissed.

And of course, in the Blackbury tent, Mr Band the mayor was
congratulating himself on his way of getting Jem out of the contest.

‘You get out there and win, Fred,’ he told his son. ‘Blackbury’ll win
the cup again!’

Outside, the loudspeakers announced that the contest would soon start.
The sound floated away over the roofs of Blackbury to where Alice Band,
Fred’s sister, was sitting miserably in her bedroom. She had been locked
in again.

There was a sound of a ladder bumping against the windowsill – and Jem’s
face appeared.

‘Get some things together, Alice,’ he said. ‘We can run off to Gretna
Green and get married while everyone’s at the championship.’

[image]

‘No fear,’ said Alice, folding her arms. ‘I’m not going to have people
say my husband ran away from Egg-dancing. I’m ashamed of you for giving
in to Dad like that. You go back there – it’s starting in a few minutes.
Then we might see about Gretna Green!’

In the big field outside Blackbury the referee was just about to
announce the start of the championship match.

But half a mile away a small cart was rattling over the empty cobbled
streets with Jem Stronginthearm at the reins and Alice Band hanging on
for dear life.

_‘I DON’T KNOW WHAT YOUR DAD’S GOING TO SAY!’_ shouted Jem.

‘Never you mind about that,’ said Alice. ‘You just get up on that
dancing floor and win the Egg Cup!’

As they galloped into the field they heard the referee over the
loudspeakers saying: ‘Since Jem Stronginthearm hasn’t turned up—’

_‘HERE HE IS!’_

screamed Alice, as the horses surged through the cheering crowd.

Jem climbed up onto the stage and took up his position in the centre of
a lot of eggs. Betsy gratefully handed him her blindfold – she knew that
Jem was more likely to beat Fred than her.

‘Oh – er – well, then, in that case, may the best man win,’ said the
referee, and she signalled the band to start playing so the dancers
could be blindfolded and the dancing could start.

Egg-dancers dance rather like a cat leaping from one hot tin roof to
another, and while the two finalists started off with some fairly slow
and easy tunes Jem realized that Fred Band was really quite a good
dancer. He’d need a lot of beating.

Down in the audience Mr Amos Band was cursing and swearing. ‘That Jem is
too good,’ he muttered. ‘If he goes on like this our Fred will never win
the cup. We’ll have to see what we can do about that!’

After ten strenuous rounds of Egg-dancing, Jem Stronginthearm and Fred
Band were neck and neck. Jem had slightly cracked four eggs and smashed
one (which meant double penalty points), and Fred had cracked six. Six
all.

Up on the stage the President of the Egg-dancing Board of Control
addressed the crowd. ‘This is the first time in history that there has
ever been a draw,’ she said, ‘and since there is only one Egg Cup we
must hold a dance-off to find the winner. After much consideration the
committee have agreed that the tune will be that well-known Irish one,
“The Irish Washerwoman”. And, er’ – she consulted her notes – ‘it’ll be
played at _double speed!’_

A gasp went up from the crowd. That tune had caused many a promising
Egg-dancer to smash the lot and tie his knees in knots (it’s the one
that goes _deedle-dee-deedle-dee-deedle-dee-deedle_ – oh well, you know.
And at double speed!).

The judge decided to hold the dance-off after lunch, so everybody
wandered off towards the canteen tents. Both the dancers looked
thoughtful, and Jem hardly touched his third helping of beef dumplings,
suet pudding and baked potatoes . . .

[image]

Several hundred metres away, two crooks were sitting in an old motor
car, watching the field through binoculars. (You know that policemen
have ‘police’ painted in large letters on their cars? Well, the crooks’
car had ‘CROOKS’ on it in bright red letters – just so’s not to confuse
people.)

‘That Egg-dancing Cup looks as if it is worth a pretty penny, Mugsy,’
said one of them.

‘Several thousand pounds,’ said the other, who was his brother. ‘You
know, Slugsy, there’s bound to be confusion when the dance finishes.
That’s when we’ll nick it. What’s for lunch?’

While the crooks were eating a sinister pork pie and a highly suspicious
jam turnover, Fred Band – the Blackbury champion – was very worried.

‘I’ll never be able to do it, Dad,’ he wailed to Amos Band. ‘The dance
is too fast! I’ll smash dozens of eggs.’

‘Not these you won’t!’ whispered Amos. He held up a box of china eggs.
‘I know it’s cheating,’ he said, ‘but the honour of Blackbury is at
stake!’

[image]

The crowd was hushed as the two contestants took their positions for the
dance-off in the Gritshire Egg-dancing Championship.

A complicated pattern of eggs was laid out on the floor around them, the
blindfolds were produced again, and the 1st Gritshire Bombardiers’
military band struck up the opening bars of that great dancing tune ‘The
Irish Washerwoman’.

_And off they danced._

All the people in the judges’ tent were crowded around the entrance. The
gold and silver Egg Cup was all alone on a table. And, held very
carefully, a knife was cutting a slit in the back of the tent. Slugsy
Nales, wearing a proper crook’s outfit (black and white striped jumper,
mask over the eyes and a flat hat – you don’t see many of them about
now), reached in and carefully dropped the cup into a bag marked ‘Swag’.

Meanwhile, Jem Stronginthearm was not doing very well. The dance was
getting faster, and he knew he had already cracked several eggs. What he
couldn’t understand was why Fred Band’s eggs only rolled away when he
trod on them – he could hear them just knocking into each other but not
breaking.

‘There’s no doubt about it,’ one of the judges was saying. ‘The
Blackbury man is pulling ahead.’

Amos Band, Mayor of Blackbury, grinned broadly. Alice Band – who was on
Jem’s side and was watching from the seat of his horse and cart – chewed
her handkerchief nervously.

[image]

Since the cart was fairly high it was Alice who first saw Slugsy and
Mugsy tiptoeing away behind the crowd to their old car, whilst carrying
a large bag with a shape in it not entirely unlike a stolen Egg-dancing
Cup. _‘FELONS!’_ she cried. _‘APPREHEND THEM!’_

Jem stopped dancing in a crash of eggs. He tore off his blindfold, and
with one bound leaped off the platform and landed in his cart, and next
moment he and Alice were rumbling across the field after the car.

The music ended in a crash of broken notes. It took a few seconds for
everyone else to realize what was going on. Then the chase began!

The crooks’ car sped away through Blackbury, which was practically
deserted. Close behind came the cart with Jem and Alice Band. Behind
them, in this order, came:

-   the 1st Gritshire Bombardiers’ Band in a jeep, still playing
-   several policemen on bicycles
-   the Blackbury Royal Mayoral Rolls-Royce, driven furiously by Amos
    Band
-   twenty assorted other cars and carts
-   and a crowd of dogs.

The crooks skidded round a corner and zoomed off down Slade Street. But
Jem’s cart was close behind and he was standing up and judging the
distance between them. Balancing his weight carefully, he took a jump
over the horse and landed on the back of the car.

Mugsy Nales turned round with a look of absolute terror and in a crowded
four seconds the car demolished two lampposts, a letter box, a litter
bin and a bus stop. The sack containing the cup was thrown high in the
air.

[image]

Alice Band caught it as it came down.

Jem scrambled out of the wreckage with a crook over each shoulder just
as the rest of the chase arrived.

‘Well, well, well,’ said Amos Band. ‘Thank you very much for getting the
cup back. It’ll look nice on Fred’s mantelpiece – under Rule 198, you
know, Jem is disqualified for leaving the dance before it ended.’

Before anyone could say anything, Fred Band stepped forward. ‘That would
be true except that I was dancing on artificial eggs. Dad gave them to
me.’

‘Fred!’ gasped Amos.

‘Sorry, Dad,’ said Fred shamefacedly. ‘I just couldn’t do it!’

So everyone went back to the field, where Jem was presented with the Egg
Cup – to keep, because he’d won it three times. And when Jem announced
that he and Alice were going to get married, there wasn’t much Amos
could say about it, really, except to arrange with the Bishop for them
to use Blackbury Cathedral.

The evening ended with fireworks and dancing while a big orange moon
rose over the town.fn3

[image]

fn1In the Dark Ages – oh, as long ago as the 1970s – shops in Britain
used to shut half a day a week. And all day Sunday too.

fn2And if you’d met the old Granddad in question, you’d know why.

fn3We don’t see that kind of moon much these days, but Gritshire has
always been behind the times.


EDWO THE BORING KNIGHT

[image]

Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons – kings generally
do. And the youngest one, instead of being good and kind and brave, was
worse than you could hope to meet in a month of Mondays. His two older
brothers were quite nice in a rather ordinary way but he was a real
terror.

His name was Edwo.

One day the king said to his prime minister, ‘I think it’s time the lads
were sent out to seek their fortune.’ This was the custom in the land.
(The idea was to find some rich princesses.)

‘Jolly good idea,’ said the prime minister. ‘I suggest you send Edwo to
the moon or the bottom of the sea!’

The king scratched his head. ‘That’s not very nice,’ he said. ‘What’s
wrong with him? He’s a quiet lad and doesn’t mix with catapults and
such.’

‘He’s such a know-all!’ exclaimed the prime minister.

And that was the trouble. Throughout the kingdom, which was not very big
and mostly consisted of forest and goats, people used to lock their
doors when they saw Edwo coming.

If they weren’t quick enough he’d soon start off in his boring voice
about such interesting facts as the orbit of Neptune or the calorific
content of carrots. He was very brainy and might have been quite
pleasant, but no one stayed listening long enough to find out.

And so, next day, the king called his sons together and sent them out to
seek their fortunes.

Edwo, being the youngest, left last. His two brothers had taken the best
horses, so he had to make do with a broken-down old donkey. He travelled
east, through the forest, and soon he started to chat to the donkey.

At last the beast stopped, looked round at him and said, ‘That’s the
most boring thing I ever heard. You’re the most boring and uninteresting
person I ever heard.’

‘Well, I like that!’ said Edwo. ‘You’re only a donkey.’

‘Ah yes, but I can talk, and that’s interesting,’ said the donkey. ‘All
I can say is, any rich princess you meet will fall asleep out of
boredom.’

‘I can’t help it,’ said Edwo. ‘I’ve just got a boring voice. I’m not mad
keen on rich princesses anyway.’

At that moment the bushes parted and two big green eyes stared at them.
‘It’s a dragon!’ said the donkey.

The dragon slithered out of the bushes and blinked at them, breathing a
small cloud of smoke. It looked hungry.

[image]

‘Hmm,’ said Edwo. ‘Is it the Great Green Dragon or one of the blue-hued
variety? One can tell by the constrictions of the peripatetic
tooth-holders that it is about a hundred years of age, but . . .’ He
went on and on in his boring voice – and the dragon went to sleep.

The donkey prodded it with his nose. ‘It’s bored stiff!’ he said. ‘How
amazing!’

They hurried on before it woke up again.

Further west the forest became more open, with lots of little streams
and hidden meadows. The donkey, whose name was Pigsqueak, passed the
time by singing comic songs, in what wasn’t a bad singing voice for a
donkey.fn1

At sunset they came to a crumbling stone tower right on the edge of the
forest. There was a brass plaque on the broken door which read:

[image]

‘Oh,’ said Edwo, ‘that kind of wizard. He doesn’t say anything about bed
and breakfast.’ He raised the heavy iron knocker, and after a while the
door was opened by a small bear. It was wearing an apron.

‘The wizard’s in conference,’ it growled.

‘Actually, we were wondering if we could stay here tonight,’ quavered
Edwo.

‘That’s different,’ said the bear. ‘I have to be very careful, you know;
so many people are after him for money. Come in; my name is Toodle.’ He
showed them inside and added, ‘It’s a bit of luck you arriving, because
Mr Golightly is in a spot of bother . . .’

Edwo could hear muffled shouts coming from the next room. What sort of
horrible trouble could a wizard get into? he wondered. He pushed open
the door . . .

At first he saw nothing in the wizard’s room except a small bottle
standing on a table. Then he saw Mr F. R. Golightly – inside it, and
only ten centimetres tall. The wizard was very angry, and squeaked
loudly while jumping up and down.

‘One of his spells went wrong, and he was trapped,’ explained Toodle.
‘The bottle is made of Pinhop’s Unbreakable Glass, and it doesn’t.’

‘How strange,’ said Edwo.

[image]

‘Never mind,’ said Pigsqueak the donkey. ‘Edwo here is very clever. Say
a few words, lad.’

So Edwo tried his most boring voice and talked for two minutes about
newts. Toodle went to sleep standing up and the bottle crackedfn2 and F.
R. Golightly staggered out.

He soon grew back to his normal size and shook Edwo by the hand. ‘I’m so
happy I’ll give you two and a half wishes!’ he beamed.

‘Only two and a half?’ said Pigsqueak. ‘I look after Edwo’s business
interests, you know, and it should be three wishes.’

‘It’s the cost of living,’ said the wizard sadly. ‘I can’t afford more
than two and a half. But I’ll throw in bed and breakfast tonight, and –
well – a three-and-a-half-league boot?’

He explained that a three-and-a-half-league boot was one half of a pair
of seven-league boots (he’d lost the other one). You had to hop.

Early next morning they set off again, and the wizard called after them,
‘If you’re seeking your fortune, head for Globoland.’

‘I know where that is,’ said Pigsqueak.

‘You know a lot for a donkey,’ said Edwo admiringly.

‘Yes, well, I was turned into a donkey by a witch.’

‘What were you before then?’

‘Actually, I was a frog,’ admitted Pigsqueak. ‘Before that I was a toad,
and before that I was a tree, and before that I was a handsome prince. I
always seem to be falling foul of witches.’

A couple of days later they came, tired and hungry, to the border of
Globoland. Edwo and Pigsqueak wandered there all the next day without
meeting anyone.

‘I’m hungry,’ sighed Edwo. ‘I wish I had something to eat.’

Of course, the wizard had given him two and a half wishes. A magical
egg-and-cress sandwich instantly appeared out of nowhere.

‘That,’ said Pigsqueak, ‘was a waste of a wish.’

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ said Edwo with his mouth full. ‘It’s not a bad
sandwich.’

[image]

Just then they passed a large tree with a notice pinned onto it. It
read:

[image]

‘What’s bona fide?’ asked Edwo.

‘It means genuine,’ said Pigsqueak.

‘Right-ho, then – but I wish I knew where the princess is now.’

Letters of fire appeared in the air reading:

You could try the tallest tower in the baron’s palace, just west of
Snowcap Mountain.

Edwo dismounted and pulled on the three-and-a-half-league boot that the
wizard had given him.

‘You follow me later,’ he said to Pigsqueak, and gave a hop. Of course,
the magic boot took him soaring away above the trees, and two hops later
he was outside the baron’s palace.

[image]

There was a wide open plain there, and it was crowded. What had happened
was that several hundred assorted princes, out seeking their fortunes as
they usually had to in those days, had read the notices and come along.
They had pitched tents and lit fires. Some of them were doing their
washing in a stream. Some were having a sing-song. There was a terrific
din. Most of the princes seemed to be about seven foot tall and much
handsomer than Edwo.

Up came a prince holding a notebook. He asked Edwo his name and wrote it
down importantly.

‘You’re seventy-sixth on the list,’ he explained.

Just then a stretcher party hurried out of the baron’s palace, carrying
a very dazed prince. A big man with a megaphone appeared on the
battlements and shouted, ‘Next!’

‘The baron’s fought thirty-four people so far this morning,’ said the
prince. ‘He’ll be ready for you about lunch time.’

‘Oh dear,’ said Edwo, as he watched another prince gallop over the
drawbridge on a white charger.

The prince shrugged. ‘Even half a kingdom is hard to come by these
days,’ he explained.

Right up until lunch time, wicked Baron Semiquaver took on – one by one
– the princes who had come to rescue the princess. Pretty soon the field
outside the castle was littered with princes bandaging one another’s
wounds and complaining.

After lunch Edwo went hopping into the castle in his
three-and-a-half-league boot, holding a battered sword borrowed from one
of the other princes.

The drawbridge creaked up behind him. Oo-er, he thought. He was in a
very gloomy courtyard.

A door opened and evil Baron Semiquaver strode out, wearing black armour
and eating a chicken leg in a sinister fashion. He held a club in one
big hand, but the effect was rather spoiled because he still had his
napkin round his neck.

[image]

_‘FE FI FO FUM,’_ he said. ‘Come on then. I haven’t got all day. What
rotten weedy princes they breed these days!’

Edwo took a hop towards him, and of course the magic boot brought him
right up to the baron. He swung the sword at the armour – it just broke,
and the baron laughed most objectionably.

Edwo backed away, and turned and ran up some stairs. He scrambled
through a maze of dusty rooms, hearing the baron lumbering along behind
him. Strange suits of armour stood against the wall, and there were lots
of dusty pictures of dignified ancestors. Soon he reached a big barred
door, where the princess was looking out between the bars.

‘If you’re the Princess Keja, I’ve come to rescue you,’ he gasped.
‘Excuse me a mo, I’ve got a bit of a job on just at the minute.’ Then he
remembered he still had half a wish left. As the baron thundered up
waving the club he wondered frantically how to make half a wish. Should
he wish for success in battle? A glorious sword? Suddenly the most
boring idea in the world came to him. He swallowed hard, and said, ‘I
wish that the floor was covered in marbles.’

Since it was really only a half-wish, the floor was only half covered.
Even so, there were enough marbles for the baron to go skidding and
slipping along the corridor until he hit a wall with a bang that shook
dust from the ceiling. Beaten by marbles!

Edwo dashed up and took a large bunch of keys from the baron’s belt.
After a few false tries he found one which opened the princess’s cell.

[image]

‘Hadn’t we better do something with him?’ she said, pointing to the
baron. He was beginning to wake up.

‘What’s behind that window?’ said Edwo, pointing.

‘The moat, I think,’ said Princess Keja.

It was rather an effort, but a few minutes later they dropped the baron
into the moat (which was mainly mud).

Later that day the king arrived and, after trying unsuccessfully to
wriggle out of it, presented Edwo with half his kingdom as he had
promised. The baron was sent into exile, and the first thing Edwo did
was throw a large party in his palace for all the princes the baron had
fought.

In the middle of the party – by which time the princess and most of the
princes had fallen asleep after listening to Edwo – Pigsqueak the donkey
turned up. He had gone back first, though, to have a word with the
wizard Golightly and persuaded him to turn him back into a handsome
prince. (Except that he was not, frankly, very handsome – he had looked
much better as a donkey, Edwo thought.)

[image]

Anyway, Edwo made him a knight and gave him a large estate. Even
Golightly himself had been invited, and he was so pleased he gave
everyone who was still awake one-fifth of a wish each.

Then Edwo and Keja got married, because that was part of the contract.
Princess Keja turned out to be almost as boring as Edwo: she could talk
the hind legs off a donkey when she got going.fn3 They didn’t live
completely happily ever after – there was the time Edwo walked mud all
over the palace carpets, and the time the roof leaked – but they were at
least as happy as they wanted to be.

And why not, after all?

fn1His favourite, however, began: Old McWotnot had a Farm, Ee-yore,
Ee-yore, Eee.

fn2Hence proving that Unbreakable isn’t the same as Unboreable.

fn3So lucky for Pigsqueak that he was now a knight as he was rather fond
of his legs.


THE 59A BUS GOES BACK IN TIME

[image]

The 59A bus, an old-fashioned bus belonging to the East Slate and
Blackbury Traction Company, pulled out of the station and trundled off
to the Post Office stop. Driver Erica Grind was at the wheel, whistling
cheerfully, because it was early spring and she had just won fifty
pounds in the Lottery.

Inside, Conductorfn1 Albert Bream was teaching trainee busman Ravi Singh
how to whistle, while Inspector George Norris was standing on the
platform by the rear door, watching the scenery go by. Occasionally he
ran up and down the stairs at the back to look at the scenery from the
_top_ deck too.

No passenger had got on by the time the bus crossed the notorious Even
Moor.

Now, those of you who know anything about Gritshire must remember that
Even Moor is where all the mystery comes from; it is always misty there
and strange lights are seen at night. Because of that, Gritshire has
never been an ordinary county. Magic things happen, much to the
annoyance of the County Council, because you can’t put magic on the
council tax.

Anyway, the 59A bus bowled along the moor road, which was foggy even
though the sun was shining everywhere else. Then Driver Grind noticed
that the road had disappeared. She hadn’t driven off it – it had just
gone!

[image]

Not only that, the whole bus was trembling, and blue sparks were
flashing off the handrails. They came to an abrupt halt. She hurried
round to the rear of the bus. It’s gone all white in the mist, she
thought, just like in the detective stories.

‘What’s happened?’ asked Ravi Singh, standing on the platform and
leaning out to look.

The fog began to blow away.

‘Well, whatever this is it isn’t East Slate Post Office,’ said Conductor
Bream, ‘and I’ll tell you that for nothing.’

Even Moor had changed. The road was there a few metres away, but it was
much larger, and cobbled. The hills seemed bigger and the road ran
straight as an arrow over them.

‘You’ve just gone off the road, that’s all,’ said Inspector Norris, but
even he didn’t quite believe himself.

‘Hey, somebody’s coming,’ hissed Ravi.

Someone – or some _army_ – was indeed marching along the road. The sun
glinted off golden helmets and white shields and one soldier was singing
a marching song.

The leader of the soldiers had almost marched into the bus before he saw
it. ‘WHAT’S THIS, BY JUPITER!’ he said.

Now Ravi recognized a Roman when he saw one. Somehow they had driven out
of the twentieth century and into the first century BC. He stepped
forward, trying to remember his Latin.

_‘ALL HAIL – ER – MIGHTY CAESAR,’_ he began. The Roman officer was
obviously impressed. ‘We – er – have been sent by Rome in this new – er
– mechanical elephant, to see – er – how the Imperial Legions are
getting on here in Britannicus. This is – um – Brutus Breamus, and
General Claudia Grind, and Spartacus Norris. I’m Cassius Singhus.’ He
pushed his turban back a little, hoping the soldiers would believe it
was a new Roman fashion.

_‘That was quick thinking, lad,’_ whispered Erica Grind.

‘General Antonius Casca,’ said the Roman. ‘It’s good to meet another
Roman amongst all these barbarians. Mechanical elephant, you say. Hmm.’

Soon the 59A – or rather, Mechanical Elephant LIXA – was bowling down
the Roman road, filled with centurions all as pleased as puppies with
their first bus ride. They couldn’t pay in coppers, of course, so
Conductor Bream’s bag was full of gold coins.

[image]

‘Next stop, Easticus Slatinium,’ he said, tinging the bell. This is a
fine to-do, he thought. I wonder how we’re going to get out of this.

Driver Erica Grind stopped the bus in the centre of the town, and the
soldiers got off. The town had changed a lot. There were chariots and
packhorses in the streets, instead of cars, and soon the bus was
surrounded by gawping crowds.

A very important-looking man was coming out of one of the buildings and
talking to the soldiers.

‘I don’t like this,’ said Driver Grind to herself. Then the bus began to
shake again, and just as the soldiers charged at it the 59A disappeared!

This time the journey took longer and the bus seemed to float in a world
of mist and coloured lights. Inspector Norris looked at his presentation
gold watch; the hands were whizzing round so fast they could hardly be
seen.

[image]

Trainee busman Ravi sat on the platform and watched the lights. Where
would they land next?

CRASH!

Something had run into them, and was cursing in a loud voice.

The bus rolled to a stop in the long grass and Driver Grind looked in
her mirror. In the road behind them a knight in black armour was
sprawling in the dust, while men-at-arms looked at the bus in
astonishment and a very shaken horse galloped away. There was a girl
with the men, and when she saw the bus she broke away and leaped onto
the platform.

_‘SAVE ME FROM BARON BONEBUSTER!’_ she cried, and threw her arms around
Ravi Singh’s neck. He grabbed the bell rope and the bus roared off.

[image]

‘I am the Lady Kathleen,’ said the girl. ‘Are you from the king? I
thought you’d never come.’

‘Er – yes, we’re from the king,’ said Ravi cautiously. ‘Um – which
king?’

‘Arthur, of course.’

They all looked at each other.

Meanwhile the knights were galloping after the bus, and arrows rattled
off the rear destination board – Inspector Norris got one through his
hat. He’d always fancied himself as a knight in shining armour, but now
he wasn’t so sure. Lady Kathleen sat quite unconcerned.

‘Merlin sent us,’ said Ravi, who thought an explanation was necessary.
‘He created this moving castle by magic.’

‘Don’t make me laugh,’ said Lady Kathleen. ‘This is a number 59A from
East Slate.’ Then she told them how she used to be a conductress on a 35
Relief bus and one day when they were crossing Even Moor there had been
a funny noise, and the bus had ended up in King Arthur’s summer castle
at East Slate. That had been a year ago.

‘What happened to your bus then?’ asked Conductor Bream.

‘I don’t know. I got off, and suddenly it was gone.’

‘What happens when the bus runs out of diesel?’

‘It stops wherever it is.’

‘Oh dear,’ said Ravi. ‘We’ve only got a couple of gallons left!’

WHUP! HISS! An arrow had punctured the back tyre of the bus.

‘And the nearest garage is a thousand years away!’ moaned Driver Grind.

The black knights galloped up and surrounded the bus. Soon the crew were
tied up to the handrails and Baron Bonebuster’s men were towing the
machine. Lady Kathleen was strapped onto a horse, and the baron led them
in triumph back to his castle. He was surprised at the bus, but not
frightened, because in those days magic happened all the time.

‘Some of Merlin’s work, I’ll be bound,’ he said to himself.

He led them to a black stone castle high on a cliff, and the four bus
crew shivered as the heavy portcullis was lowered behind them. They were
led into the great hall of the castle.

‘Mrs Grind,’ whispered Ravi. ‘If the bus starts time-travelling again
and we’re not on it, we’ll be stuck here! But it won’t go, will it, with
a puncture? If we escape, can you change the wheel?’

‘Baron Bonebuster is King Arthur’s sworn enemy,’ whispered Lady
Kathleen. ‘If we don’t get out of here, we’re worse than dead.’

‘ENOUGH OF THAT, YOU FIVE!’ roared the baron, sitting on his throne.
‘Now, you tell me why Merlin sent you out in this cast-iron dragon
thing.’

‘It’s a bus,’ said Ravi. ‘It’s used for carrying people from place to
place.’ He watched the baron closely.

‘Like soldiers, you mean?’

‘Yes, that’s it. Just let me go free and I’ll show you,’ said Ravi.

He was cut loose and led down to the courtyard, where the bus stood.
Knights were standing around it, looking puzzled, and Ravi climbed into
the driver’s seat. He drove it round and round the courtyard, bumping
along on the flat tyre while Baron Bonebuster had the time of his life
ringing the bell.

[image]

Then Ravi slammed all the brakes on, just like Driver Grind used to.
CLANG! DONG! He grinned as all the knights fell over one another. Then
he dashed up to the hall, set the others free and they raced back to the
bus. The baron’s men were all dazed and shaken, and it didn’t take long
to push them off the platform. Already – despite the flat tyre – the bus
was beginning to vibrate.

The mists swirled around it again . . .

When they cleared, the bus was standing on a small grassy hill
overlooking a lake. There was a smell of smoke, and on the horizon a
line of volcanoes grumbled to themselves. Forests of giant ferns waved
in the breeze.

‘Well, I don’t know about you lot, but I’m going to walk down to the
lake,’ said Ravi, and he jumped off. The rest followed, except for Erica
Grind, who stayed behind to mend the tyre.

The fern forest reminded Inspector Norris of a picture he had seen when
he was at school but he couldn’t place it. Big shining dragonflies
skimmed over the lake.

‘I wonder where this is,’ he said.

‘I wonder _when_ this is,’ said Ravi.

Oh dear, oh dear, thought Conductor Bream, who was watching a dinosaur
heave itself out of the lake.

The dinosaur splashed its way to the shore and peered down at the four
time-travellers.

‘It looks like one of the herbivorous variety,’ said Ravi. ‘It only eats
water plants.’

‘Are you sure of that?’ asked Bream nervously.

‘No,’ said Ravi. ‘Shall we run away?’

They backed away into the fern forests again, and the dinosaur watched
them go with a bored expression.

[image]

‘So we’re that far back,’ muttered Ravi. ‘Well, I hope we don’t meet a
Tyrannosaurus Rex – that’s _all_ teeth. I think that one was a
diplodocus, and they’re harmless enough. But I once had a picture book
about prehistoric monsters and I think most of them are dangerous.’

‘Is there anything else we need worry about?’ asked Kathleen.

‘Bottomless swamps, poisonous insects, volcanoes, hot springs,
earthquakes and thunderstorms,’ said Ravi. ‘Shall I say any more?’

‘Definitely not,’ said Conductor Bream.

They reached the bus, where Driver Grind was mending the back tyre. ‘The
hole is rather large,’ she said. ‘I don’t think I can repair it. And
since it was a pretty bumpy ride from King Arthur’s time, I don’t think
the bus will stand another journey.’

‘Do you mean we’re marooned!’ said everyone.

‘Yes.’

‘Well, we might as well have something to eat,’ said Kathleen, looking
up at the rack where four lunchboxes were stowed.

So they sat on the platform while Ravi told them all he knew about
prehistoric times.

‘Are there any people?’ asked Erica, after a while.

‘Not for millions of years,’ said Ravi.

‘Oh. Only I was watching that smoke over there. It doesn’t look like a
volcano.’

They all looked. Several miles away a thin column of smoke was rising
above the ferns. Other people? It might be!

[image]

_‘GRAB SOME WEAPONS!’_ said Ravi. _‘AND FOLLOW ME!’_

Armed with spanners and bits of railing from the bus, the five of them
ran down the hill and into the forest. It was slow going, since the
ground between was choked with the ancestors of weeds and the
grandfathers of all stinging nettles.

‘They can’t be cavemen,’ puffed Ravi. ‘Perhaps they are more
time-travellers!’

‘I’ll just nip up this fern and have a look,’ said Inspector Norris. The
rest stood waiting for him while the minutes ticked by.

_‘INSPECTOR?’_ said Ravi. There was no answer, but something rustled
high above them. Something was creeping away.

‘Mr Bream,’ said Ravi. ‘You and the others go on ahead.’ He shinned up
into the fern before they could protest. It was very quiet in the ferns,
but out of the corner of his eye he saw a brown shape shuffling away
from branch to branch. Grasping his spanner, he followed it. What had
happened to the inspector?

Large blue and green dragonflies zoomed around as Ravi tried to keep the
brown shape in view. Then something furry dropped onto his shoulders and
hit him on the head.

When Ravi came to he found he was tied up with creepers. Inspector
Norris sat next to him, on a wide branch high above the ground.

Opposite them sat a large gorilla-man with Inspector Norris’s cap on. It
had a knobbly club in one hand.

‘Thank goodness you’ve woken up,’ whispered the inspector. ‘I thought
these brutes were going to eat us! What’s happened to the others?’

‘They’ve got away, I hope. Which is what we’ve got to do.’ Ravi looked
at the ape man; there were others too – a whole tribe of them, in the
surrounding trees. He tugged at the creepers. They didn’t budge.

[image]

Then the leaves by his ear parted and an unfamiliar voice hissed, ‘Don’t
look surprised and do as I tell you.’ There was a soft _snick!_ as the
creepers were cut.

‘Right,’ said the voice, ‘now jump.’

Ravi and Inspector Norris threw themselves off the branch and scrambled
down the fern. Someone dropped down behind them, and shouted out for
them to follow him.

‘Crikey, we thought no one would ever turn up,’ said the stranger as
they ran. ‘I’m Arnold Primley, late of the East Slate Sanitation
Department. One moment we were going across Even Moor – the next we were
in the middle of the Wars of the Roses!’

‘We had Roman soldiers and King Arthur’s knights,’ puffed Ravi. ‘I
suppose it was your smoke we saw?’

The binman told them that his waste collection lorry had landed in the
forest two months before, and then it had run out of petrol.

They came to the lorry, which by now was overgrown, in a forest
clearing. Two more council binmen and the rest of the bus crew were
there with Kathleen. Ravi had to think fast.

‘Take a wheel off the lorry – _QUICK!’_ he said. The ape men were almost
upon them when they made a dash for the bus, rolling one of the wheels
along with them.

They were struggling through the mud by the lake when the dinosaur
shuffled out of the trees. It took no notice of them, but when it saw
the ape men it roared angrily.

[image]

It was the work of a moment to bolt the new wheel onto the bus, pile in
and start the engine. The battle between the dinosaur and the ape men
was just getting interesting when the bus disappeared.

Driver Erica Grind drove like mad. The time mist didn’t come this time,
and instead they were able to watch the land change below them. The
forest was whisked away like a puff of wind, a great sheet of ice came
and went three times, hills rose and fell, then the stream that had fed
the lake became a river along which houses appeared. And all the time
the sun went round and round the sky like a rocket, days and nights
flickering like an old film.

Soon the outline of East Slate appeared, and there was only a few
hundred years to go.

Actually, Driver Grind (who by now was getting expert at this sort of
thing) stopped the bus at a quarter to four in the afternoon they had
started off from and drove into East Slate only twenty-five minutes
late, which was not bad.

‘You’re twenty-five minutes late,’ said the transport controller, coming
out of his office. ‘What happened?’

‘Well,’ said Ravi, and then thought how ridiculous the truth would
sound. ‘We had a puncture.’

[image]

fn1When this story was written, a British bus had a conductor to take
your money and – if you were lucky – help you get off at the right stop.
Or the wrong one, if you were rude to him or her.


THE ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN

[image]

There was once a young man called Captain the Honourable Sir Herbert
Stephen Ernest Boring-Tristram-Boring, who was known to his friends as
Bill and was very rich indeed. He was also very bored with living in
London.

One day a man knocked at his door, pushed past Bill’s butler and said,
‘Are you Captain the Honourable Sir, and so on?’

‘That’s me!’ said Bill.

‘Well, I’m Alfred Tence, the famous explorer,’ said the visitor,
brushing a heap of fifty-pound notes off a chair and sitting down.

‘Not the man who walked up the Amazon?’

‘I am that man,’ said Tence modestly.

‘Not the man who punted from Brighton to Bombay in the bath?’

‘I am that man,’ said Tence, swelling with pride.

‘The man who sailed across the Pacific on a raft made from mahogany and
shoelaces, and discovered the lost islands of Odium?’

‘No, I wasn’t _that_ man, actually,’ said Tence, deflating suddenly.
‘That was another man. Anyway, look at this.’ He whipped out his wallet
and showed Bill a blurred photograph of a white blob in a snowstorm.
‘Know what that is?’ he asked. ‘That’s an Abominable Snowman! If I had
twenty thousand pounds I could go and capture it,’ he added, looking
sharply at Bill.

Bill signalled to the butler. ‘Give this gentleman twenty thousand
pounds from the jar in the hall,’ he said.

_‘EXCELLENT!’_ cried Tence. ‘You must come, of course. We start
tomorrow, at dawn.’

‘Where to? Mount Everest?’

‘Nonsense! That’s like Disney World these days – the Snowmen are only
found on Ben Drumlin. That’s a real mountain for you. It’s in Chilistan.
I must rush, I’ve got things to do.’

Bill watched him go. ‘What a strange man, Twist,’ he said to his butler.
‘But a genius when it comes to exploring, of course. I wonder where he
got that photo?’

‘I couldn’t say, sir. Shall I pack?’

‘Yes, Twist. I think something warm is called for – hot-water bottles,
woolly vests and so forth. Chuck a lot of money into a suitcase too.’

[image]

They had locked up the house and were waiting on the step when Tence
turned up next morning, wearing a blue anorak and a hat with a bobble on
it. He was followed by a small Chilistanian man – his guide and
interpreter – pulling a suitcase along behind him. There was a label on
the suitcase with his name on it, but his name was so long that the
label wrapped round and round the suitcase like a long scarf.fn1 There
were also a lot of newspapermen, asking questions all at once and taking
photographs while they ran.

Tence waved them aside and shouted at Bill: _‘JUST GET A TAXI, MY BOY!’_

Bill stepped into the road and waved his umbrella.

[image]

‘Where to, guv?’ said the taxi man, as the vehicle pulled up.

‘Chilistan, please.’

The taxi man looked puzzled. ‘Is that anywhere near Shepherd’s Bush?’ he
asked.

‘It’s about six thousand miles away. Here’s five thousand pounds to
start with,’ said Bill.

The taxi man paled when he saw all that money. ‘Right-ho, then,’ he
said.

‘You can’t go by taxi all the way to Chilistan!’ cried Tence. ‘There’s
sea in the way!’

Bill leaned forward and tapped the taxi driver on the shoulder. ‘I say,
old chap,’ he said, ‘have you got a passport?’

‘Yes, guv. I got it when we went to the Costa Lotta for our holidays
last year,’ said the taxi driver.

Bill told him to fetch it, so they drove round to the taxi driver’s
house, which was No. 8 Tramway Place, London NW3. He went inside, and
reappeared not long afterwards followed by a small fat woman in a brown
coat and a velvet hat stuck full of hatpins. She carried two suitcases.

‘It’s me missus, guv!’ said the taxi driver sadly. ‘She says she’s not
going to have me gallivanting about abroad without her to keep an eye on
me.’

‘Sensible woman!’ said Bill. ‘What is your name, madam?’

‘Agnes Glupp,’ she said, and curtseyed, because she knew a gentleman
when she saw one.

‘Twist, just shove the lady’s luggage on the roof. Get in, madam. Are
you a good cook? Splendid! I can’t boil an egg myself.’

_‘THIS IS ALL WRONG!’_ cried Tence, almost in tears. ‘This isn’t the
proper way to go exploring! You can’t just take someone’s wife along!
Madam, there are Abominable Snowmen, and man-eating plants, and
dangerous mountains and things like that where we’re going!’

Mrs Glupp just smiled absent-mindedly.

Mr Glupp drove down to Dover, and before long they were bowling through
France.

‘Head south,’ said Bill. ‘Down to the Costa Lotta – it’s sunny there.’

They drove for ages through cabbage fields. When they reached the Costa
Lotta, it was all blue sea, blue sky and rich people in swimsuits.

[image]

‘Oo-er, I remember this,’ said Mrs Glupp.

Bill bought a small villa for them to stay at and then they all went
down to the beach, where Mr and Mrs Glupp paddled with their shoes tied
together round their necks – Mr Glupp even took his coat off. Tence, of
course, was still wearing his fleecy-lined explorer’s clothes, which
made people stare.

Twist the butler bought himself a copy of _The Times_, his favourite
newspaper, and settled down to read it, while Tence’s Chilistanian guide
said he wanted to stay with the taxi, where he had made himself a home
amongst the suitcases.

[image]

‘I say, sir,’ said Twist suddenly. ‘It says here that a party of
Arbrovian gentlemen are climbing Ben Drumlin to look for the Abominable
Snowman. I thought _we_ were.’

Tence almost exploded. _‘THEY’LL GET THERE BEFORE US! ALL MY WORK IS IN
RUINS!’_

‘Let me see that paper!’ said Bill. ‘Hmm . . . It says here that those
Arbrovians have just set out for Chilistan. I reckon we could get there
before them. Stop crying, Tence. Twist, find me a telephone.’

A moment later he was back, and ordered everyone to pile into the taxi.

‘Drive to Nasti airport, runway three,’ he said to Mr Glupp.

Fifteen minutes later they were driving up a ramp and through the giant
doors of a cargo plane. The propellers were already spinning.

‘How did you arrange this?’ gasped Tence.

‘I bought it,’ said Bill. ‘That’s the best of being a multi-millionaire
– you don’t have to hang about.’

‘Oo-er, I’ve never been up in the air before,’ said Mrs Glupp. She sat
down and put her hat-pinned hat down on the table. Except that it wasn’t
a table. It was the control panel, and she accidentally moved a switch.

‘We appear to be moving, sir,’ said Twist the butler. ‘And sir, there is
a uniformed gentleman running along behind us shouting, “OI,” sir. I
venture to suggest that he is the pilot, sir.’

The plane trundled along the runway, getting up speed. The wall at the
edge of the airfield was getting very near.

‘Has anyone got any suggestions?’ said Tence.

Everyone stood around looking embarrassed. Then Tence’s guide, the small
Chilistanian, leaned forward and cautiously pushed a lever.

[image]

The plane left the ground.

He sat down and bashed some switches.

‘How did he learn to fly an aeroplane?’ asked Bill.

‘Search me,’ said Tence. ‘When I first met him he was driving camels. He
is clearly a man of many talents.’

The plane looped the loop twice, dived under some telephone wires,
climbed straight upwards and settled down flying more or less properly
in the direction of Chilistan. The radio started to crackle frantic
messages from the control tower, but their new pilot ignored them.

Soon they were over the sea, while Mrs Glupp and Twist prepared lunch in
the galley.

It took several days to get to Chilistan, because they had to land
several times to refuel – usually at little desert airstrips, where fuel
was brought to the plane on camels. They also got lost for a while
around Turkey.

‘I’ve just remembered something,’ said Tence, as the Himalayan mountains
loomed up. ‘Chilistan hasn’t got an airport.’

‘That’s funny,’ said Bill. ‘We seem to be landing.’

Chilistan is a very small country, mostly tropical jungle, stony desert
and mountains. The capital city, Chilblaine, lies on the bank of the red
river McPherson, named after the man who claimed to have discovered the
country, and it was towards this that the plane was descending.

Fishermen on the bank were amazed to see it drop out of the clouds, skim
up the river, bounce onto the bank and come to rest in a thicket of
baza-trees.

The doors opened and a small black taxi shot out at great speed. Then
the plane exploded.

‘Not a bad landing at all, that,’ said Tence to his guide. ‘I reckon
we’re ahead of the Arbrovians now.’

Mr Glupp braked as a small man in a blue suit dashed up to the taxi.
Tence leaped out and shook hands with him, and there started a long
conversation in Chilistanian, which sounded to Bill like a wet finger
being dragged across a window.

‘It’s my old friend Godli, the prime minister,’ Tence explained to the
others. ‘He says he’ll give us all the help we need.’

‘That’s pretty decent, considering we’ve just set fire to a splendid
thicket of baza-trees,’ said Bill.

‘Yes, but he doesn’t like Arbrovians, because he had an Arbrovian camera
that went wrong, as far as I can understand it,’ said Tence.

‘Where is Ben Drumlin?’ asked Mrs Glupp.

Tence pointed.

[image]

The mountain rose out of the jungle and carried on, higher and higher
until it disappeared into the clouds.

‘Good heavens,’ she said, ‘and is that snow on top?’

‘Some do say it’s sherbet,’ said Tence sarcastically. ‘I don’t think
we’ll have to go more than a third of the way up, though,’ he added.
‘The Abominable Snowmen are supposed to live in caves not too far above
the jungle.’

The rest of the day was spent buying warm clothes and hiring porters,
and the tropical night had fallen suddenly, like a brick, when they went
to bed at Chilblaine’s best hotel, La Grande Magnifique Ritz Splendide
Carlton. Twist, the butler, had to sleep in the bath.

Early next morning they piled into the taxi again, with Twist driving a
lorry full of porters and provisions. A small crowd gathered to see them
off, and a brass band played the Chilistan national anthem, ‘GOD SAVE US
ALL’.

Then they started off through the forests around Ben Drumlin, the taxi
nosing along tiny tracks between huge trees full of brightly coloured
birds. Monkeys swung through the trees, and shrieked, and millions of
insects hummed and clicked.

Up and up the foothills of Ben Drumlin went the little convoy, until the
lush forests gave way to pine trees and finally to rocks and stunted
bushes.

The road disappeared. There was nothing for it but to walk. Mr Glupp
locked the door of his taxi and hid the key in his hat.

‘How much further before we find the Abominable Snowmen?’ asked Bill,
lacing up his climbing boots.

Tence struggled to get his knapsack on. ‘Another two or three thousand
feet,’ he said. ‘That’s where I saw them. By Jove, doesn’t the air smell
good up here!’

‘Smells like air to me,’ said Mr Glupp.

_‘ONWARDS!’_ cried Tence.

They trudged on up the slopes of Ben Drumlin, singing songs. At last
they came to a little mountain stream, that ran tinkling over the
stones. Bill bent down to fill his water bottle and heard a whirring
noise. There was a tiny water wheel in the stream, spinning at great
speed.

‘And there’s something attached to it,’ said Tence. It was a small piece
of parchment. On it were two lines written in Chilistanian, and Tence
translated them:

[image]

‘It’s a joke,’ said Bill. ‘A very old one too.’

‘Extremely so, sir,’ said Twist the butler.

‘Hmm,’ said Tence, tapping the paper. ‘You know what this is, don’t you?
It’s a Joke Wheel. There must be a Joke Monastery up here – and Joke
Monks.’

He explained: ‘You see, they think the world was created as a joke, so
everyone should give thanks by having a good laugh. That’s why they tie
jokes to water wheels. Every time the wheel goes round a joke goes up to
heaven.’

‘What singular persons,’ said Bill. ‘You mean they spend all their time
telling jokes?’

[image]

‘Yes. They even get up in the middle of the night to invent some more.’

Someone tapped him on the shoulder. It was a small round man in a blue
robe, with a bald head and a big grin. Slowly he took a custard pie from
one of his voluminous sleeves.

Tence ducked just in time. It hit Twist.

[image]

It was a curious scene, halfway up the twenty-seventh largest mountain
in the world. The monk stood there, laughing, while everyone else looked
embarrassed, and Twist stood with custard dripping into his collar. Then
there was a green flash, a popping noise, and the monk was gone.

Twist blew his nose.

‘Well!’ said Bill. ‘What a strange man.’

‘That was one of them,’ said Tence. ‘I forgot to add that they can do
magic as well.’

For the rest of that day they wandered on up Ben Drumlin. They saw no
more of the Joke Monks, as they hurried on past large stones and bushes,
although, as the stars were coming out, they saw, high on a spur of
rock, a large building.

As they passed it they could hear a sing-song voice telling a joke in
Chilistanian, and a burst of laughter as the monks saw the funny side.

‘An odd lot,’ said Bill, after they’d pitched camp and were sitting
around the fire. ‘It can’t be much fun sitting up here all the time
inventing jokes.’

‘They enjoy it,’ said Tence, lighting his pipe. ‘Do you know, they
reckon that there are 7,777,777,777,777 jokes in the world, and when
they’ve all been told, the world will come to an end, like switching off
a light. There’ll be no more need for it, see.’

There was silence while everyone sat around thinking, or just watching
the last of the sunset. The moon rose, painting Ben Drumlin’s snowy cap
bright silver. More stars came out.

‘Like a light, you say?’ asked Bill, after a while.

‘Yes. Or a burst balloon.’

There was another thoughtful pause, and they all listened to the monks’
laughter floating down from the monastery.

‘I wonder how many there are left?’

‘Millions,’ said Tence reassuringly.

‘EEEEEEEEEEE!’ screamed Mrs Glupp, hurtling out of her tent. ‘There’s a
hairy monster in my sleeping bag.’

[image]

_‘A SNOWMAN!’_ screamed Tence. _‘DON’T PANIC!’_

Everyone did, trying to hide behind everyone else as the sleeping bag
came bounding out of the tent, hopped high into the air and burst.

The thing inside landed on Twist’s head. It sat there, blinking.

‘That doesn’t look Abominable to me,’ said Mrs Glupp. ‘It looks rather
sweet.’

[image]

It was about the size of a football, and the same shape, with a white
coat and a small bushy tail. Two button eyes peered out of the fur. Then
it started to cry.

Mrs Glupp lifted it down off Twist’s head and said something like, ‘Izzo
fwitened by der nasty man, den? Dere, dere.’ Everyone wondered what she
was on about, but the small Snowman seemed to understand.

‘It must be a baby one,’ said Tence.

It coughed and went to sleep. Mrs Glupp made a bed for it out of Tence’s
rucksack, much to his annoyance, then, wondering how the baby Snowman
had come to be in their camp, the explorers crawled into their tents for
the night.

Bill dreamed that a Joke Monk was sitting in a bath of custard and
telling the 7,777,777,777,777th joke which would bring about the end of
the world.

The monk carried on telling it, regardless of the attempts of Tence to
stop him by throwing sleeping bags at him.

BANG!

Bill woke up. Everything had gone dark. Something was treading on his
stomach. The world has ended, he thought.

But no. The tent had just collapsed. Bill squirmed about underneath it
and raised the flap. A scene of utter confusion met his eyes. Tence was
running around waving a gun. Most of the tents had collapsed and
everyone was shouting.

It turned out that something large and furry had rushed into the camp
and had run off with Twist, the butler. It was also now snowing.

‘It must have been a full-grown Snowman,’ said Tence. ‘Let’s get after
it! Look at those footprints!’

[image]

Bill looked. There in the snow were prints nearly a metre long, each
with three toes.

‘Oo-er,’ he said. ‘Oh well, I suppose we’d better go.’

The others relit the fire, and sat round it in a circle with their backs
to it, on guard, as Tence and Bill, bundled up in thick clothes and
carrying a gun apiece, set out up Ben Drumlin.

The footprints scrambled round rocks, leaped over crevasses, sidled
along narrow ledges and disappeared, round about lunch time, into a
cave.

Tence bent down and picked up Twist’s bowler hat. ‘He’s in there
somewhere,’ he said sadly.

‘After you, then,’ said Bill, who was no fool.

They sidled into the cave. Tence took a torch out of his pack, but all
they saw by its light were icicles and damp walls.

They tiptoed on, and there was no sound but their breathing.

Suddenly Tence tapped Bill on the shoulder. At least, that’s what Bill
thought, until he realized that Tence was in front of him. What he
thought then can be represented by a little sum. He thought:

[image]

Therefore the person who just tapped me on the shoulder is a—

[image] he screamed, and spun round. It was an Abominable Snowman, a
large ball of fur nearly two metres high with the biggest feet Bill had
ever seen. And there were other Snowmen behind it.

The leading Snowman stepped forward and said something in a language
made up of squeaks and grunts.

‘Pardon?’ said Bill.

Furry hands gripped them firmly and pushed them along into a cave, lit
by candles.

Twist was sitting against one wall, drinking soup out of a bowl.

‘Good morning, sir,’ he said. ‘This is a bit of a liberty, isn’t it?
They’ve taken me prisoner.’

Tence and Bill stared around the cave. It was full of Abominable
Snowmen.

The leading Snowman stepped forward with a stick in its paw, and started
to draw in the dust at Bill’s feet. It carefully drew a series of little
pictures. The first showed a small Snowman running out of the cave. The
second was a rough drawing of the explorers’ camp.

Then there was a drawing of Twist and the small Snowman. The Snowman
pointed at the picture and started waving his arms about.

[image]

‘I may be wrong,’ said Tence, ‘but I think he’s trying to say that
they’re holding Twist hostage until the baby Snowman is brought
back . . .’

‘Yes, but we didn’t kidnap him,’ said Bill. ‘He wandered into our camp.’

The Snowman started to draw again. He made it clear that unless Bill
went alone to fetch the little Snowman, Tence and Twist would be pushed
down a cliff when the sun went down.

‘Oh,’ said Tence. ‘Well, that’s clear enough. Hurry back!’

[image]

The Snowmen led Bill out of the cave and watched him hurry down the
mountain. He skidded over glaciers, leaped over gaping crevasses, slid
down great drifts of frozen snow, tumbled into icy caves and, finally,
puffing and panting, and with blue and pink stars bursting inside his
head, he staggered into the camp.

Mrs Glupp was trying to feed the Snowman on a sort of porridge made out
of crushed biscuits.

Gasping for breath, Bill grabbed the little furry creature and rushed
back up the slopes of Ben Drumlin. It made frightened squeaking noises,
but clung to Bill’s knapsack as he climbed sheer cliffs holding on with
nothing but two fingernails and a toe. Finally he reached the cave, just
as the sun began to set.

_‘Hold everything!’_ he panted. _‘Here he is!’_

There was a great commotion and the baby was hurried away by some
Snowwomen. It was the chieftain’s son, explained Tence.

The chieftain trotted forward and shook Tence’s hand. He pointed at the
camera.

‘Pictures!’ said Tence. ‘Of course.’

During the next half-hour he took photographs of Abominable Snowmen
standing in formal groups, Abominable Snowmen with their arms around
Bill’s shoulder, Abominable Snowmen wearing Twist’s bowler hat,
Abominable Snowmen standing on their heads, Abominable Snowmen jumping
up and down and Abominable Snowmen looking serious.fn2

They didn’t actually look very Abominable . . . But Tence seemed happy
enough.

‘Just wait till I publish these,’ he said. ‘They’ll make me President of
the Royal Zoological Society for this!’

Then they all shook hands and set off back to their camp. Twist was
thinking relieved thoughts, and Tence was thinking excited thoughts, and
Bill was thinking, I wonder how long it will be before the Joke Monks
tell the last joke?

They can’t have done yet, anyway.

[image]

fn1And just like a long scarf, there was that traily bit at the end that
you _always_ seemed to tread on.

fn2In one photo, an Abominable Snowman is making devil’s horns behind
Tence’s head with his big paws. This always seems to happen when photos
are taken of groups of people.


THE BLACKBURY MONSTER

[image]

‘Now what we’ve got to decide,’ said the Mayor of Blackbury importantly,
‘is how we are going to Put Blackbury on the Map.’ He took a sip from
the glass of water on his desk and looked around at the councillors.

It was another meeting of the Borough Council. Sunlight streamed through
the windows of the old Victorian council hall, and outside the hands of
the Town Hall clock pointed to ten minutes to three. They had been stuck
in that position for ninety years.

‘Come on, now,’ said the mayor. ‘Do you realize there are people who’ve
never heard of Blackbury? Not of our new heated baths or forward-looking
waste-disposal scheme? Our town is so full of history it – er – it –
well, it’s full of history. But most people don’t even know where it
is.’

The councillors stopped staring out of the windows and doodling on their
blotters. At last Alderman Nigel Lamebucket said: ‘Well, now. Tunbridge
has got its Wells, Bath has got its Buns, Windsor’s got its Castle,
Brighton’s got its Pier, but what have we got?’

Everyone shook their heads. Even the main roads didn’t go near
Blackbury. Sometimes a party of vicars would come to see the odd Gothic
pews in the cathedral, but apart from that, there was nothing in the
town which really attracted tourists.

No one famous had ever lived or died there. Henry VIII once said, ‘Where
is Blackbury?’ and William Shakespeare might have written his plays
there if he hadn’t taken a wrong turning and gone back to
Stratford-upon-Avon instead, but for hundreds of years Blackbury had
never really been in the news.

‘And it’s not right,’ said the mayor. ‘It’s not fair. Any suggestions?’

‘How about an arts festival?’ said someone.

‘It’s been done,’ said the mayor.

‘A carnival of flowers? A big concert? A horse show?’

‘Not interesting enough,’ said the mayor. ‘But I’ve got an idea.
Supposing we had a monster, like Loch Ness? That would make the people
come! And you know,’ he said, ‘there’s every possibility there’s a
monster in the Sluggard. Well, I mean, we don’t know for sure that
there’s _not_, do we?’

The Sluggard was a rather large pond on the recreation ground in the
town centre, full of weeds and mud. People in the park were rather
surprised next day to see three mysterious humps bob up out of the
middle of the pond for a little while before sinking again.

[image]

The mayor summoned a special council meeting, and the councillors stood
up and cheered him. ‘I got the park keeper to do it with three old
tyres,’ he confessed. ‘Now, let’s see whether anyone says anything about
it.’

Next day someone found big webbed footprints near the Sluggard – made,
said the mayor, with a pair of his son’s underwater flippers.

[image]

‘Here we are,’ said the mayor, opening his copy of the _Gritshire
Comet_, ‘between the Women’s Institutes and a picture of me at the
primary school prize-giving. “AMAZING SIGHTS ON THE SLUGGARD: PROBE
MONSTER, COUNCIL TOLD”. Hmm, not bad, not bad.’ He was sitting in his
parlour, with his feet on the mantelpiece, and his mayoral shirtsleeves
rolled up.

Mr Patel, the town clerk, sat on the edge of the sofa with his bowler
hat on his knees. ‘I’m not sure I like this, Mayor,’ he said weakly.
‘It’s dishonest. It’s defrauding the public. You know the monster is
only three old rubber tyres and a pair of frogman’s flippers.’

The mayor looked out of the window. He could see the Sluggard, the weedy
pond on the recreation ground. There were at least nine people standing
around it.

‘Yes, it is dishonest,’ he admitted. ‘But it’s given people something to
talk about. And, more important, people are coming to Blackbury.’

And that was true. Ever since the park keeper had first swum round the
pond towing the old tyres behind him, people had been arriving in
Blackbury. The Temperance Hotel and the town’s four pubs were crowded.
Mrs Amrit Ghosh, down at the old tea rooms, had invented a dish called
‘Blackbury Surprise et la Monster Stew’. The mayor’s plan to make
Blackbury a tourist centre was working.

Later that day a polite lady from the _Daily Read_ called with a
photographer, and two professors from Gritshire University went and
poked around the edges of the pond with a shrimping net.

[image]

Next morning Blackbury was mentioned in three national newspapers, and
for the first time in its history the town had a traffic problem.

The council had never really believed that the motor car was anything
but a passing fancy, but soon the High Street was jammed solid with cars
and coaches. As for the recreation ground, all the flowers and plants
had been trampled down by the crowds.

The mayor ordered the local printers to print lots of monster postcards
and posters, and then he did what no mayor had done for ninety years –
he sent a man up a ladder to mend the Town Hall clock – and for the
first time in nearly a century Blackbury stopped living at ten minutes
to three.

BONG! BONG! BONG!

Three o’clock, and everyone stopped, shocked.

The clock struck four, and the streets were full of honking cars.

At five o’clock an angry crowd gathered outside the Town Hall demanding
to see the mayor.

At six o’clock somebody threw a banger.

At seven o’clock a plane broke the sound barrier right over the town,
and the mayor learned that flights from Gritshire airport had been
re-routed over Blackbury.

At eight o’clock a crowd of local people demanded that the monster be
shot.

And at nine o’clock the park keeper caught a cold.

‘Things are getting a bit difficult,’ said the mayor. ‘I never thought
the monster would cause all this!’ Someone knocked on his door. He
opened it cautiously.

The park keeper poked his head round the door and then, sure enough, the
rest of his body followed it. He was wearing blue and white striped
bathing drawers that covered him from neck to knee, frogman’s flippers,
his official hat, a large amount of duckweed, a white moustache covered
in mud, and a clothes line tied around his waist with three inflated
inner-tubes fastened at intervals along it.

‘I’m surprised you fooled anyone for a moment,’ said the mayor sternly.
‘You look as much like a monster as my Aunt Mabel, and she didn’t look
much like a monster.’

‘I’m giving in my notice, if it’s all right by you, sir,’ said the
keeper, and sneezed. ‘Monstering isn’t my cup of tea, sir; it’s not what
I was born and bred to do. Flowers and lawns, yes, but monstering, no.’
And he SQUELCHED OFF, sneezing.

[image]

Oh dear, oh dear, thought the mayor. He was very good at growing
sunflowers too. And all the roads are blocked by traffic, and the town’s
all noisy and smoky and full of litter, and it’s ALL MY FAULT!

For, of course, it was the mayor who had thought of getting the park
keeper to pretend to be a monster in the Sluggard. But what now could be
done? The damage had been done. Blackbury had become a very popular
town.

The mayor put on his coat and hurried out to the recreation ground. It
was unrecognizable. Around the Sluggard, the old weedy pond, large tiers
of seats had been built. There was also a funfair. All the flowerbeds
had been trampled underfoot. A small child rushed past the mayor and
left a patch of sticky candyfloss on his coat.

‘ALL MY FAULT,’ said the mayor sadly.

Just then a cry went up from the crowd of visitors around the Sluggard.

[image]

I thought the park keeper had gone away, thought the mayor.

He pushed his way to the front of the crowd and there, in the middle of
the pond, were three loops, looking just like the humps of a monster. He
rushed to the edge of the pond. ‘COME ON OUT,’ he cried. ‘IT’S NO GOOD
GOING ON WITH IT.’

A large muddy head raised itself out of the water and stared at the
mayor through its saucer-shaped eyes. It did have a moustache, like the
park keeper, but it was long and green. The monster was covered in
pearly scales. It pulled itself out of the water on two large webbed
feet and started to HISS like a kettle.

The seats were overturned and everyone ran for their lives! Except the
mayor. He stood rooted to the spot, terrified.

[image]

The monster yawned, and then two large leathery wings that had lain
across its back opened and began to flap in a leisurely way. It flew
over the funfair and bit the top off the helter-skelter before turning
and flying out to sea.

Blackbury emptied in a few hours.

The mayor rushed off and caught the park keeper and begged him to stay,
and then called a special meeting of the council.

‘It must have been in our pond for millions of years,’ he said, ‘but I
pity any other councils if it lands in their town. I think Blackbury is
best left alone.’

And he sent a man up the clock tower to stop the clock again.

And Blackbury, without the monster, went back to its sleepy way when it
was always ten minutes to three in the afternoon.


FATHER CHRISTMAS GOES TO WORK AT THE ZOO

[image]

Father Christmas lay fast asleep on the sofa with a newspaper over his
face, and occasionally he snored a little. Mrs Christmas was sitting on
the other side of the roaring fire, darning his socks and talking.

‘. . . And I’m getting fed up! You only work one evening a year these
days, and even if you do get paid overtime there’s the reindeer to feed.
It’s about time you got a new job, my lad.’

‘Eh? What?’ said Father Christmas, sitting up.

‘A new job,’ said Mrs Christmas, starting another sock. ‘Something
that’ll bring in a little extra cash and keep you out from under my feet
all day. You might even enjoy it.’

‘Well, I don’t know about that,’ said Father Christmas, stroking his
beard. ‘A man in my position, you know, has certain
responsibilities . . .’

Then he thought: She’s got a point. I always wanted to be an engine
driver when I was a little lad. I wonder what else I _could_ do?

So next morning he dusted off his old grey suit (he usually wore a red
one with white fur here and there) and Mrs Christmas made sandwiches for
him, and then off he went to look for a job.

[image]

‘Are you really Father Christmas?’ said the man at the Job Centre in
amazement. ‘Well, well! I remember you bought me a train set when I was
nine.fn1

‘Ah, yes, I recall it well,’ said Father Christmas, sitting down. The
job man started to fill in a form.

‘You say you can fly, but you haven’t got a pilot’s licence. You go into
people’s houses by climbing down chimneys, but frankly that sounds a bit
burglarous. You give things away. Hmm. Oh dear, I don’t know. Very
difficult. I suppose you don’t have much experience in looking after
animals?’

Father Christmas, who had been looking very glum, brightened up.
‘Certainly,’ he said. ‘Reindeers and polar bears and so forth.’

‘Ah,’ said the job man. ‘Then there’s just the job for you at the zoo.’

‘What’s a zoo?’

‘They keep animals there, to help to understand them and save animals in
danger of dying out. I imagine it’s great fun: just go and say I sent
you and they’ll probably even give you a uniform!’

[image]

Next day Father Christmas went to start work at Blackbury Zoo.

About two hours later the man at the job agency got a phone call which
went on for a very long time (just as if the person on the other end was
very, very angry).

Just as he put the telephone down Father Christmas shuffled in
sheepishly, still wearing his zoo uniform.

‘Well,’ said the job man severely, ‘it’s a fine mess you’ve made of
_that_.’

‘I KNOW,’ said Father Christmas in a small voice.

‘You let the monkeys out—’

‘I know.’

[image]

‘You gave everyone free elephant rides.’

‘I felt so sorry for them, you see. And the elephants enjoyed it . . .’

‘And you taught the hippos to fly. Very dangerous things, flying
hippos.’fn2

‘They didn’t have any reindeers, you see,’ said Father Christmas
miserably.

[image]

‘I don’t know, I’m sure. Can’t you think of any other job you could do?’
said the job man.

‘I’d like to be an astronaut or a cowboy,’ said Father Christmas.

‘Um,’ said the job man. ‘Not much call for those. How about selling ice
cream? There’s a job here for an ice-cream man . . .’

Two hours later Father Christmas gingerly drove out of the Blackbury
ice-cream factory in a bright yellow and pink van with ‘MR BRRRR’
written on the side. He stopped at a likely-looking spot and soon lots
of children were queuing up for ice cream.

‘A small ice-cream cornet, please,’ said the first one.

Father Christmas filled it and looked at it in dismay. ‘That’s not very
much ice cream,’ he said, so he scooped two more big dollops onto the
cone, and added a wafer, two chocolate thingummyjigs and half a dozen
cherries. ‘There,’ he said, beaming. ‘You can have this for twenty
pence.’

The little boy looked at it in amazement – and soon there was a big
crowd around the van. Father Christmas was having the time of his life,
building huge great creamy cones covered with all sorts of twirls,
swirls, cherriesfn3 and wafers. And selling them for next to nothing or
even less.

This is just the job for me, he thought happily.

[image]

‘Well,’ said the job man, ‘this is another fine mess you’ve got me
into.’

_‘I’M SORRY,’_ said Father Christmas mournfully.

‘According to the manager of the ice-cream company, you got rid of one
hundred pounds’ worth of ice cream for seven pounds. They’re very, very
angry,’ said the job man sternly, looking at his notes. ‘Isn’t there
anything you can do without making a mess of it?’

Father Christmas, who was really very sorry and quite sad, blew his nose
loudly. ‘It seemed such a shame to take the kiddies’ money,’ he
explained.

‘Look, the only other job we’ve got that would suit you is one as a
gardener,’ said the job man more kindly. ‘A healthy, outdoor life in
Blackbury Parks and Gardens Department. That’d suit you, I expect, and I
don’t think there’s any trouble you could possibly get into.’

So next day Father Christmas started work in one of the municipal
greenhouses, and for a while it looked as though he was doing very well.
Being a sort of old-fashioned wizard, you see, he was very good at
getting things to grow, and he quite enjoyed pottering about pruning and
planting.

‘You’re doing very well, Mr Christmas,’ said the head gardener a few
days later. ‘In fact, I think you can plant out the big flower bed down
by the Town Hall tomorrow. The ornamental one, you know.’

Father Christmas knew it. Every month or so they used to change the
flowers so the colours spelled out names, or made the borough coat of
arms, or something interesting like that.

‘We’ll leave the choice of design up to you,’ said the head gardener.
‘Something tasteful in primroses, perhaps?’

Father Christmas had a bit of a think, and later he set off with his
gardening tools and a big wheelbarrow. He put a canvas screen round the
flower bed and set to work. It was getting on for tea time when he
stopped.

A few minutes later the head gardener came along to see how he had got
on. When she saw the flower bed she stopped and her mouth dropped open
in amazement.

‘Don’t you like it?’ said Father Christmas nervously.

‘You’ve spelled out

[image] in flowers!’ blurted out the head gardener. ‘But Christmas is
eleven months away! We can’t have this sort of thing, you know.’

[image]

[image]

‘I thought it might cheer people up,’ said Father Christmas. ‘I suppose
I’m sacked?’

‘I’m afraid the mayor will insist on it after he sees that,’ said the
gardener.

So Father Christmas trooped off to see the job man, who looked up from
his files and said, ‘What, you again?’

‘There was a bit of a disagreement over a flower bed, you see.’

‘I don’t really see, but anyway, all the jobs that are going now are for
steam-roller drivers and bakers, and I dread to think of you doing
either of them.’

He gave Father Christmas a form to fill in in case any jobs cropped up,
and then the old man went home. Mrs Christmas was washing his red suit
ready for December.

‘I don’t seem to be any good at anything,’ said Father Christmas, taking
his boots off.

‘I just don’t know how we’re going to manage until next Christmas,’ said
Mrs Christmas.

Just then there was a knock at the door. It was the job man, very
breathless, holding the form that Father Christmas had filled in.

‘Why didn’t you tell me you were six hundred years old?’ he said.

‘Is it important then?’

‘Of course – you ought to be getting the State Pension! Come to think of
it, you ought to get a bit for the five hundred and thirty-five years
you missed too. That’d be thousands and thousands of pounds!’

‘A State Pension?’ wondered Father Christmas. _‘FANCY THAT! COME IN AND
HAVE A CUP OF TEA!’_

And so they did.

[image]

fn1Actually, that year, Father Christmas bought _every_ nine-year-old a
train set.

fn2Last seen heading over the English Channel in the direction of
Africa. The hippos had got fed up with being studied and saved and
fancied saving themselves.

fn3At last! A use for all those glacé cherries.

About the Author

Sir Terry Pratchett (yes, he’s a real-life knight!) is one of the
world’s funniest and most popular writers. He started writing the
stories in this collection when he was just seventeen, and his first
full-length novel, _The Carpet People_, was published in 1971. Terry
Pratchett has written over fifty brilliant books for children and
adults, and is perhaps best-known for his Discworld® series – all about
a world that happens to be carried on the back of a giant turtle
floating through space. He is the winner of multiple prizes, including
the Carnegie Medal for his young adult book _The Amazing Maurice and his
Educated Rodents_. His books have been translated into thirty-eight
languages, and have sold more than eighty million copies worldwide (but
who’s counting?).

For more information about Sir Terry and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

[image]

Also by Terry Pratchett, for children:

_The Carpet People_

The Bromeliad Trilogy:

_Truckers_

_Diggers_

_Wings_

The Johnny Maxwell Trilogy:

_Only You Can Save Mankind_

_Johnny and the Dead_

_Johnny and the Bomb_

For young adults and above:

_The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents_
(A Discworld® novel)

The Tiffany Aching Sequence (Discworld® novels):

_The Wee Free Men_

_A Hat Full of Sky_

_Wintersmith_

_I Shall Wear Midnight_

_Nation_

_Dodger_

_Dodger’s Guide to London_

A full list of Terry Pratchett’s books can be found on
www.TERRYPRATCHETT.co.uk

[image]

[image]

DRAGONS AT CRUMBLING CASTLE: AND OTHER STORIES
AN RHCP DIGITAL EBOOK 978 1 448 19577 0

Published in Great Britain by RHCP Digital,
an imprint of Random House Children’s Publishers UK
A Penguin Random House Company

[image]

This ebook edition published 2014

Text copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, 2014
Illustrations by Mark Beech © RHCP, 2014
Cover design by Mark Beech © RHCP, 2014

First Published in Great Britain

All stories contained in this collection were originally published in
the ‘Children’s Circle’ section of the _Bucks Free Press_ in the
following publication years. All stories were previously untitled, and
so these titles have been attributed for the purposes of this
collection.
‘Dragons at Crumbling Castle’ (1966); ‘The Great Speck’ (1969); ‘Hunt
the Snorry’ (1966); ‘Tales of the Carpet People’ (1965); ‘Hercules the
Tortoise’ (1968); ‘Dok the Caveman’ (1966); ‘The Big Race’ (1968);
‘Another Tale of the Carpet People’ (1967); ‘The Great Egg-Dancing
Championship’ (1972); ‘Edwo the Boring Knight’ (1973); ‘The 59A Bus Goes
Back in Time’ (1966-7); ‘The Abominable Snowman’ (1969); ‘The Blackbury
Monster’ (1968); ‘Father Christmas Goes to Work at the Zoo’ (1973)

RHCP DIGITAL 9780857534378 2014

The right of Terry Pratchett and Mark Beech to be identified as the
author and illustrator of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

RANDOM HOUSE CHILDREN’S PUBLISHERS UK
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA

www.RANDOMHOUSECHILDRENS.co.uk
www.TOTALLYRANDOMBOOKS.co.uk
www.RANDOMHOUSE.co.uk

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group Limited can be
found at:
www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm

THE RANDOM HOUSE GROUP Limited Reg. No. 954009

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.
