[cover]

Contents

Cover

About the Book

Title Page

Dedication

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Author’s Acknowledgements

About the Author

Also by Terry Pratchett

Copyright

About the Book

Dodger is a tosher – a sewer scavenger
living in the squalor of Dickensian London.

Everyone who is nobody knows him.
Anyone who is anybody doesn’t.

He used to know his future; it involved a lot of
brick-lined tunnels and plenty of filth.
But when he rescues a young girl from a beating,
things start to get _really messy_.

NOW EVERYONE WHO IS ANYONE
WANTS TO GET THEIR HANDS ON DODGER.

[images]

To Henry Mayhew for writing his book,

and to Lyn for absolutely

everything else

[images]

CHAPTER 1

IN WHICH WE MEET OUR HERO, AND THE HERO MEETS AN ORPHAN OF THE STORM AND
COMES FACE TO FACE WITH MISTER CHARLIE, A GENTLEMAN KNOWN AS A BIT OF A
SCRIBBLER

THE RAIN POURED down on London so hard that it seemed that it was
dancing spray, every raindrop contending with its fellow for supremacy
in the air and waiting to splash down. It was a deluge. The drains and
sewers were overflowing, throwing up – regurgitating, as it were – the
debris of muck, slime and filth, the dead dogs, the dead rats, cats and
worse; bringing back up to the world of men all those things that they
thought they had left behind them; jostling and gurgling and hurrying
towards the overflowing and always hospitable river Thames; bursting its
banks, bubbling and churning like some nameless soup boiling in a
dreadful cauldron; the river itself gasping like a dying fish. But those
in the know always said about the London rain that, try as it might, it
would never, ever clean that noisome city, because all it did was show
you another layer of dirt. And on this dirty night there were
appropriately dirty deeds that not even the rain could wash away.

A fancy two-horse coach wallowed its way along the street, some piece of
metal stuck near an axle causing it to be heralded by a scream. And
indeed there _was_ a scream, a human scream this time, as the coach door
was flung open and a figure tumbled out into the gushing gutter, which
tonight was doing the job of a fountain. Two other figures sprang from
the coach, cursing in language that was as colourful as the night was
dark and even dirtier. In the downpour, fitfully lit by the lightning,
the first figure tried to escape but tripped, fell and was leaped upon,
with a cry that was hardly to be heard in all the racket, but which was
almost supernaturally counterpointed by the grinding of iron, as a drain
cover nearby was pushed open to reveal a struggling and skinny young man
who moved with the speed of a snake.

‘You let that girl alone!’ he shouted.

There was a curse in the dark and one of the assailants fell backwards
with his legs kicked from under him. The youth was no heavyweight but
somehow he was everywhere, throwing blows – blows which were augmented
by a pair of brass knuckles, always a helpmeet for the outnumbered.
Outnumbered one to two as it were, the assailants took to their heels
while the youth followed, raining blows. But it was London and it was
raining and it was dark, and they were dodging into alleys and side
streets, frantically trying to catch up with their coach, so that he
lost them, and the apparition from the depths of the sewers turned round
and headed back to the stricken girl at greyhound speed.

He knelt down, and to his surprise she grabbed him by the collar and
whispered in what he considered to be foreigner English, ‘They want to
take me back, please help me . . .’ The lad sprang to his feet, his eyes
all suspicion.

On this stormy night of stormy nights, it was opportune then that two
men who themselves knew something about the dirt of London were walking,
or rather, wading, along this street, hurrying home with hats pulled
down – which was a nice try, but simply didn’t work, because in this
torrent it seemed that the bouncing water was coming as much from below
as it was from above. Lightning struck again, and one of them said, ‘Is
that someone lying in the gutter there?’ The lightning presumably heard,
because it sliced down again and revealed a shape, a mound – a person,
as far as these men could see.

‘Good heavens, Charlie, it’s a girl! Soaked to the skin and thrown into
the gutter, I imagine,’ said one of them. ‘Come on . . .’

‘Hey, you, what are you a-doing, mister?!’

By the light of a pub window which could barely show you the darkness,
the aforesaid Charlie and his friend saw the face of a boy who looked
like a young lad no more than seventeen years old but who seemed to have
the voice of a man. A man, moreover, who was prepared to take on both of
them, to the death. Anger steamed off him in the rain and he wielded a
long piece of metal. He carried on, ‘I know your sort, oh yes I do!
Coming down here chasing the skirt, making a mockery of decent girls.
Blimey! Desperate, weren’t you, to be out on a night such as this!’

The man who wasn’t called Charlie straightened up. ‘Now see here, you. I
object most strongly to your wretched allegation. We are respectable
gentlemen who, I might add, work quite hard to better the fortunes of
such poor wretched girls and, indeed, by the look of it, those such as
yourself!’

The scream of rage from the boy was sufficiently loud that the doors of
the nearby pub swung open, causing smoky orange light to illuminate the
ever-present rain. ‘So that’s what you call it, is it, you smarmy old
gits!’

The boy swung his home-made weapon but the man called Charlie caught it
and dropped it behind him, then grabbed the boy and held him by the
scruff of his neck. ‘Mister Mayhew and myself are decent citizens, young
man, and as such we surely feel it is our duty to take this young lady
somewhere away from harm.’ Over his shoulder he said, ‘Your place is
closest, Henry. Do you think your wife would object to receiving a needy
soul for one night? I wouldn’t like to see a dog out on a night such as
this.’

Henry, now clutching the young woman, nodded. ‘Do you mean _two_ dogs,
by any chance?’

The struggling boy took immediate offence at this, and with a snake-like
movement was out of the grip of Charlie, and once again spoiling for a
fight. ‘I ain’t no dog, you nobby sticks, nor ain’t she! We have our
pride, you know. I make my own way, I does, all kosher, straight up!’

The man called Charlie lifted the boy up by the scruff of his neck so
that they were face to face. ‘My, I admire your attitude, young man, but
not your common sense!’ he said quietly. ‘And mark you, this young lady
is in a bad way. Surely you can see that. My friend’s house is not too
far away from here, and since you have set yourself up as her champion
and protector, why then, I invite you to follow us there and witness
that she will have the very best of treatment that we can afford, do you
hear me? What is your name, mister? And before you tell it to me, I
invite you to believe that you are not the only person who cares about a
young lady in dire trouble on this dreadful night. So, my boy, what is
your name?’

The boy must have picked up a tone in Charlie’s voice, because he said,
‘I’m Dodger – that’s what they call me, on account I’m never there, if
you see what I mean? Everybody in all the boroughs knows Dodger.’

‘Well, then,’ said Charlie. ‘Now we have met you and joined that august
company, we must see if we can come to an understanding during this
little odyssey, man to man.’ He straightened up and went on, ‘Let us
move, Henry, to your house and as soon as possible, because I fear this
unfortunate girl needs all the help we can give her. And you, my lad, do
you _know_ this young lady?’

He let go of the boy, who took a few steps backwards. ‘No, guv’nor,
never seen her before in my life, God’s truth, and I know everybody on
the street. Just another runaway – happens all the time, so it does; it
don’t bear thinking about.’

‘Am I to believe, Mister Dodger, that you, not knowing this unfortunate
woman, nevertheless sprang to her defence like a true Galahad?’

Dodger suddenly looked very wary. ‘I might be, I might not. What’s it to
you, anyway? And who the hell is this Galahad cove?’

Charlie and Henry made a cradle with their arms to carry the woman. As
they set off, Charlie said over his shoulder, ‘You have no idea what I
just said, do you, Mister Dodger? But Galahad was a famous hero . . .
Never mind – you just follow us, like the knight in soaking armour that
you are, and you will see fair play for this damsel, get a good meal
and, let me see . . .’ Coins jingled in the darkness. ‘Yes, two
shillings, and if you do come you will perhaps improve your chances of
Heaven, which, if I am any judge, is not a place that often concerns
you. Understand? Do we have an accord? Very well.’

Twenty minutes later, Dodger was sitting close to the fire in the
kitchen of a house – not a grand house as such, but nevertheless much
grander than most buildings he went into legally; there were much
grander buildings that he had been into illegally, but he never spent
very much time in them, often leaving with a considerable amount of
haste. Honestly, the number of dogs people had these days was a damn
scandal, so it was, and they would set them on a body without warning,
so he had always been speedy. But here, oh yes, here there was meat and
potatoes, carrots too, but not, alas, any beer. In the kitchen he had
been given a glass of warm milk which was nearly fresh. Mrs Quickly the
cook was watching him like a hawk and had already locked away the
cutlery, but apart from that it seemed to be a pretty decent crib,
although there had been a certain amount of what you might call _words_
from the missus of Mister Henry to her husband on the subject of
bringing home waifs and strays at this time of night. It seemed to
Dodger, who paid a great deal of forensic attention to all he could see
and hear, that this was by no means the first time that she had cause
for complaint; she sounded like someone trying hard to conceal that they
were really fed up, and trying to put a brave face on it. But
nevertheless, Dodger had certainly had his meal (and that was the
important thing), the wife and a maid had bustled off with the girl, and
now . . . someone was coming down the stairs to the kitchen.

It was Charlie, and Charlie bothered Dodger. Henry seemed like one of
them do-gooders who felt guilty about having money and food when other
people did not; Dodger knew the type. He, personally, was not bothered
about having money when other people didn’t, but when you lived a life
like his, Dodger found that being generous when in funds, and being a
cheerful giver, was a definite insurance. You needed friends – friends
were the kind of people who would say: ‘Dodger? Never heard of ’im,
never clapped eyes on ’im, guv’nor! You must be thinking of some other
cove’ – because you had to live as best you could in the city, and you
had to be sharp and wary and on your toes every moment of the day if you
wanted to stay alive.

He stayed alive because he was the Dodger, smart and fast. He knew
everybody and everybody knew him. He had never, ever, been before the
beak, he could outrun the fastest Bow Street runner and, now that they
had all been found out and replaced, he could outrun every peeler as
well. They couldn’t arrest you unless they put a hand on you, and nobody
ever managed to touch Dodger.

No, Henry was no problem, but Charlie – now, oh yes, Charlie – he looked
the type who would look at a body and see right inside you. Charlie,
Dodger considered, might well be a dangerous cove, a gentleman who knew
the ins and outs of the world and could see through flannel and soft
words to what you were thinking, which was dangerous indeed. Here he was
now, the man himself, coming downstairs escorted by the jingling of
coins.

Charlie nodded at the cook, who was cleaning up, and sat down on the
bench by Dodger, who had to slide up a bit to make room.

‘Well now, Dodger, wasn’t it?’ he said. ‘I am sure you will be very
happy to know that the young lady you helped us with is safe and
sleeping in a warm bed after some stitches and some physic from the
doctor. Alas, I wish I could say the same for her unborn child, which
did not survive this dreadful escapade.’

Child! The word hit Dodger like a blackjack, and unlike a blackjack it
kept on going. A child – and for the rest of the conversation the word
was there, hanging at the edge of his sight and not letting him go.
Aloud he said, ‘I didn’t know.’

‘Indeed, I’m sure you didn’t,’ said Charlie. ‘In the dark it was just
one more dreadful crime, which without doubt was only one among many
this night; you know that, Dodger, and so do I. But this one had the
temerity to take place in front of me, and so I feel I would like to do
a little police work, without, as it were, involving the police, who I
suspect in this case would not have very much success.’

Charlie’s face was unreadable, even to Dodger, who was very, very good
at reading faces. Solemnly, the man went on, ‘I wonder if those
gentlemen you met who were harassing her knew about the child; perhaps
we shall never find out, or perhaps we shall.’ And there it was; that
little word ‘shall’ was a knife, straining to cut away until it hit
enlightenment. Charlie’s face stayed totally blank. ‘I wonder if any
other gentleman was aware of the fact, and therefore, sir, here for you
are your two shillings – plus one more, if you were to answer a few
questions for me in the hope of getting to the bottom of this strange
occurrence.’

Dodger looked at the coins. ‘What sort of questions would they be,
then?’ Dodger lived in a world where _nobody_ asked questions apart
from: ‘How much?’ and ‘What’s in it for me?’ And he knew, actually
_knew_, that Charlie knew this too.

Charlie continued. ‘Can you read and write, Mister Dodger?’

Dodger put his head on one side. ‘Is this a question that gets me a
shilling?’

‘No, it does not,’ Charlie snapped. ‘But I will spring one farthing for
that little morsel and nothing more; here is the farthing, where is the
answer?’

Dodger grabbed the tiny coin. ‘Can read “beer”, “gin” and “ale”. No
sense in filling your head with stuff you don’t need, that’s what I
always say.’ Was that the tiny ghost of a smile on the man’s face? he
wondered.

‘You are clearly an academic, Mister Dodger. Perhaps I should tell you
that the young lady had, well, she had not been well used.’

He wasn’t smiling any more, and Dodger, suddenly panicking, shouted,
‘Not by me! I never done nothing to hurt her, God’s truth! I might not
be an angel but I ain’t a bad man!’

Charlie’s hand grabbed Dodger as he tried to get up. ‘_You never done
nothing?_ You, Mister Dodger, _never done nothing_? If you _never done
nothing_ then you must have done _something_, and there you are, guilty
right out of your own mouth. I’m quite certain that you yourself have
never been to school, Mister Dodger; you seem far too smart. Though if
you ever did, and came out with a phrase like “I never done nothing”,
you would probably be thrashed by your teacher. But now listen to me,
Dodger; I fully accept that you did nothing to harm the lady, and I have
one very good reason for saying so. You might not be aware of it, but on
her finger there is one of the biggest and most ornate gold rings I have
ever seen – the sort of ring that means something – and if you were
intending to do her any harm you would have stolen it in a wink, just
like you stole my pocketbook a short while ago.’

Dodger looked at those eyes. Oh, this was a bad cove to be on the wrong
side of and no two ways about it. ‘Me, sir? No, sir,’ he said. ‘Found it
lying around, sir. Honestly intended to give it back to you, sir.’

‘I can assure you that I believe in full every word you have just
uttered, Mister Dodger. Although I must confess my admiration that in
the darkness you were not only able to see the form of a pocketbook, but
also so readily decided that it belonged to me; really I’m quite
amazed,’ said Charlie. ‘Settle down; I just wanted you to know how
serious we are. When you said, “I never done nothing”, all you were
doing was painting the whole of your statement with negativity, crudely
but with emphasis, you understand? Myself and Mister Mayhew are
cognisant of the generally unacceptable state of affairs throughout most
of this city, and by the way, that means we know about such things and
endeavour in our various ways to bring matters to the notice of the
public, or at least to those members of the public who care to take
notice. Since you appear to care about the young lady, perhaps you could
ask around or at least listen for any news about her; where she came
from, her background, _anything_ about her. She was badly beaten, and I
don’t mean a domestic up-and-downer, a slap, maybe. I mean leather and
fists. _Fists!_ Over and over again, according to the bruises, and that,
my young friend, wasn’t the end of it!

‘Now there are some people, not you of course, who would say we should
go to the authorities, and this is because they have no grasp at all of
the realities of London for the lower classes; no grasp at all of the
rookeries and the detritus of decay and squalor that is their lot. Yes?’

This was because Dodger had raised a finger, and as soon as he saw that
he had got Charlie’s full attention the boy said, ‘OK, certainly it can
be a bit grubby down some streets. A few dead dogs, dead old lady maybe,
but well, that’s the way of the world, right? Like it says in the Good
Book, you got to eat a peck of dirt before you die, right?’

‘Possibly not all in one meal,’ said Charlie. ‘But since you raise the
subject, Mister Dodger, for your two shillings, and one more shilling,
quote me one further line from the Bible, if you please?’

This seemed something of an exercise for Dodger. He glared at the man
and managed, ‘Well, mister, you have to goeth – yes, that’s what it
says, and I don’t see no shilling yet!’

Charlie laughed. ‘“You have to goeth”? I’ll wager that you have never
attended church or chapel in your life, young man! You can’t read, you
can’t write; good heavens, can you give me the name of one single
apostle? By the look on your face, I deduce that you cannot, alas. But,
nevertheless, you came to the aid of our young lady upstairs when so
many other people would have looked the other way, and so you will have
_five_ sixpences if you undertake this little task for me and Mister
Mayhew. So ask around, search out the story, my friend. You may find me
by daylight at the _Morning Chronicle_. Do not look for me anywhere
else. Here is my card if you should need it. Mister Dickens, that’s me.’
He passed Dodger a pasteboard oblong. ‘Yes, you have a question?’

Dodger looked more uncertain now, but he managed to say, ‘Could I see
the lady, sir? ’Cos I never really clapped eyes on her – I just saw
people running away, and I thought you fine gentlemen was with them. I
ought to know what she looks like if I’m going to ask questions around
and about, and let me tell you, sir, asking questions around and about
can be a dangerous way to make a living in this city.’

Charlie frowned. ‘At the moment she looks black and blue, Dodger.’ He
thought for a moment and went on, ‘But there is some merit in what you
say; the household has been turned upside down by this, as you must
understand. Mrs Mayhew is getting the children back to sleep and the
girl is in the maids’ room for now. If you are to go in there, make sure
your boots are clean, and if those little fingers of yours . . . You
know the ones I mean, the kind I am aware of that are adept at finding
other people’s property in them, and “Oh, dear me, and stone the crows”,
you had no idea how it got there . . .’ He trailed off. ‘Do not, I
repeat _not_, try that in the house of Mister Henry Mayhew.’

‘I’m not a thief,’ Dodger protested.

‘What you mean, Mister Dodger, is that you’re not _only_ a thief. I will
accept, for now, your story about how my pocketbook ended up in your
hands . . . for now, mind you. I note that the slim crowbar you have
about your person is designed for opening the lids of drain covers, from
which I deduce that you are a tosher; a grubber in the sewers – an
interesting profession, but not one for a man hoping for a long life.
And so I wonder how you still survive, Dodger, and one day I intend to
find out. Don’t come the innocent with me, please. I know the backside
of this city only too well!’

Although he gasped at this and protested that he was being spoken to as
if he was a common criminal, Dodger was quite impressed: he’d never
before heard a flash geezer use the term ‘stone the crows’ and it
confirmed his view that Mister Dickens was a tricky cove, the sort who
might bring a lot of nastiness down on a hardworking lad. It paid to be
careful of flash geezers like him – else they might find someone to do
something with your teeth, with pliers, like what happened with Wally
the knacker man, who got done up rotten over a matter of a shilling. So
Dodger minded his manners as he was led up and through the dark house
and into a small bedroom, made even smaller by the fact that the doctor
was still there and by now was washing his hands in a very small bowl.
The man gave Dodger a cursory glance which had quite a lot of curse in
it and then looked up at Charlie, who got the kind of smile that you get
when people know you have money. Just as Charlie had surmised, Dodger
hadn’t had a day’s proper schooling. Instead, his life had mostly been
spent learning things, which is surprisingly rather different, and he
could read a face much better than a newspaper.¹

The doctor said to Charlie, ‘Very bad business, sir, very nasty. I’ve
done the best I can; they’re pretty decent stitches if I say so myself.
She is, in fact, a rather robust young woman underneath it all and, as
it turned out, has needed to be. What she needs now is care and
attention and, best of all, time – the greatest of physicians.’

‘And, of course, the grace of God, who is the one that charges the
least,’ said Charlie, pressing some coins into the man’s hand. As the
doctor left, Charlie said, ‘Naturally, Doctor, we will see that she gets
good food and drink at least. Thank you for attending, and good night to
you.’

The doctor gave Dodger another black look and hurried back down the
stairs. Yes, you had to know how to read somebody’s phizog when you
lived on the cobbles, no doubt about it. Dodger had read the face of
Charlie twice now, and so he knew that Charlie had little liking for the
doctor, any more than the doctor did for Dodger, and, from his tone,
Charlie would be more inclined to put his trust in good food and water
than in God – a personage that Dodger had only vaguely heard of and knew
very little about, except perhaps that He had a lot to do with rich
people. This, generally speaking, left out everybody Dodger knew (except
for Solomon, who had negotiated a great deal with God somehow, and
occasionally gave God advice).

With the man’s ample bulk out of the way, Dodger got a better look at
the girl. He guessed her age at only about sixteen or seventeen,
although she looked older, as people always did when they had been
beaten up. She was breathing slowly, and he could see some of her hair,
which was absolutely golden. On an impulse he said, ‘No offence meant,
Mister Charlie, but would you mind if I watched over the lady, you know,
until dawn? Not touching or nothing, and I’ve never seen her before, I
swear it – but I don’t know why, I think I ought to.’

The housekeeper came in, casting a look of pure hatred at Dodger and, he
was happy to see, one that was not much better towards Charlie. She had
the makings of a moustache, from below which came a grumble. ‘I don’t
wanna speak out of turn, sir. I don’t mind keeping an eye on another
“author of the storm”, as it were, but I can’t be responsible for the
doings of this young guttersnipe, saving your honour’s presence. I hope
no one will blame me if he murders you all in your beds tonight. No
offence meant, you understand?’

Dodger was used to this sort of thing; people like this silly woman
thought that every kid who lived on the streets was very likely a thief
and a pickpocket who would steal the laces out of your boots in a
fraction of a second and then sell them back to you. He sighed inwardly.
Of course, he thought, that was true of _most_ of them – nearly all of
them really – but that was no reason to make blanket statements. Dodger
wasn’t a thief; not at all. He was . . . well, he was good at finding
things. After all, sometimes things fell off carts and carriages, didn’t
they? He had never stuck his hand into somebody else’s pocket. Well,
apart from one or two occasions when it was so blatantly open that
something was _bound_ to fall out, in which case Dodger would nimbly
grab it before it hit the ground. That wasn’t stealing: that was keeping
the place tidy, and after all, it only happened . . . what? Once or
twice a week? It was a kind of tidiness, after all, but nevertheless
some short-sighted people might hang you just because of a
misunderstanding. But they never had a chance of misunderstanding
Dodger, oh dear no, because he was quick, and slick, and certainly
brighter than the stupid old woman who got her words wrong (after all,
what was an ‘author of the storm’? That was barmy! Somebody who wrote
down storms for a living?). Nice work if you could get it, although
strictly speaking Dodger always avoided anything that might be
considered as being work. Of course, there was the toshing; oh, how he
loved that. Toshing wasn’t work: toshing was living, toshing was coming
alive. If he wasn’t being so bloody stupid he would be down in the
sewers now, waiting for the storm to stop and a new world of opportunity
to open. He treasured those times on the tosh, but right now Charlie had
his hand firmly on Dodger’s shoulder.

‘Hear that, my friend; this lady has you bang to rights, and if you
emulate Genghis Khan in this household and I hear of it, then I will set
some people I know onto your tail. Understand? And I will wield a weapon
that Genghis himself never dreamed of and aim it straight at you, my
friend. Now I must leave the stricken young lady in the care of
yourself, and the care of you to Mrs Sharples, upon whose word your life
depends.’ Charlie smiled and went on, ‘“Author of the storm”, indeed; I
must make a note of that.’ To the surprise of Dodger, and presumably to
the surprise of Mrs Sharples, Charlie took out a very small notebook and
a very short pencil and quickly wrote something down.

The housekeeper’s eyes gleamed with a cheerful malignance as she
regarded Dodger. ‘You can trust me, sir, indeed you can. If this young
clamp gets up to any tricks, I shall have him out of here and in front
of the magistrates in very short order, indeed I will.’ Then she
screamed and pointed. ‘He has stolen something of hers already, sir;
see!’

Dodger froze, his hand halfway to the floor. There was a very anxious
moment.

‘Ah, Mrs Sharples, you indeed have the eyes of – how can I say . . .
Argos Panoptes,’ Charlie said smoothly. ‘I happened to notice what the
young man was picking up and it has been by the bed for some time – the
girl had been clutching them in her hand. No doubt Mister Dodger was
concerned that it should not be overlooked. So, Dodger, hand it over, if
you please?’

Wishing earnestly for a piss, Dodger handed over his find. It was a very
cheap pack of cards, but there had been no time to look at it with
Charlie’s eyes on him.

Charlie got on Dodger’s nerves, but now the man said, ‘A children’s card
game, Mrs Sharples; rather damp and rather juvenile, I would consider,
for a young lady of her age. “Happy Families” – I have heard of it.’ He
turned the pack over and over in his fingers and said at last, ‘This is
a mystery, my dear Mrs Sharples, and I shall put it back into the hands
of someone who will move heaven and earth to take that mystery by its
tail and drag it into the light of day; to wit, Mister Dodger here.’
With that, he handed the cards back to the astonished Dodger, saying
cheerfully, ‘Do not cross me, Dodger, for I know every inch of you, I
will take my oath on it. Now, I really must go. Business awaits!’

And Dodger was certain that Charlie winked at him as he went out of the
door.

The night passed fairly quickly because so much of it had already slid
away into yesterday. Dodger sat on the floor, listening to the slow
breathing of the girl and the snoring of Mrs Sharples, who managed to
sleep with one eye open and fixed on Dodger like a compass needle that
steadily points north. Why had he done this? Why was he freezing on this
floor when he could have been snug and curled up by Solomon’s stove (a
marvellous contraption, which could also be a furnace if there was a lot
of gold to melt)?

But the girl was beautiful under her injuries, and he watched her as he
turned the damp pack of stupid grubby cards over and over in his hands,
staring at the girl whose face was a mass of bruises. The swines had
really done her up good and proper, using her like a punchbag. He had
given them some handy smacks with his crowbar, but that was not enough –
by God, it was not enough! He would find them, he surely would, and see
the bastards in lavender . . .

Dodger woke up on the floor in a semi-gloom illuminated by just one
flickering candle, totally disorientated until he recognized his
surroundings, which included Mrs Sharples in her chair, still snoring
like a man trying to saw a pig in half. But more importantly there was
the sound of a very small and trembling voice, saying, ‘May I have some
water, if you please?’

This caused in Dodger a near panic, but there was a jug of water on the
basin and he filled a glass. The girl took it from him very carefully,
and motioned for a refill. Dodger glanced at Mrs Sharples, refilled the
glass, handed it to her and whispered, ‘Please tell me your name.’

The girl croaked, rather than spoke, but it was a ladylike croak, such
as might be made by a frog princess, and she said, ‘I must not tell
anybody my name, but you are most kind, sir.’

Dodger was aflame. ‘Why were those coves beating you up, miss? Can you
tell me _their_ names?’

Once again there was the sorry voice. ‘I should not.’

‘Then may I hold your hand, miss, on this chilly night?’ It was, he
thought, a Christian thing to do – or so he had heard. Slightly to his
amazement, the girl did indeed reach out and take his hand. He clasped
it and very carefully looked at the ring on her finger, and thought: a
lot of gold here, and a crest; oh my word, a boy can get into trouble
with a crest. A crest with eagles on it and foreign lingo. A ring that
meant something, Charlie had said; a ring that somebody most certainly
wouldn’t want to lose. And somehow those eagles looked rather vicious.

She noticed his interest. ‘He said he loved me . . . my husband. Then he
let them beat me. But my mother always said that if anyone got to
England, they would be free. Do not let them take me back, sir – I do
not want to go.’

He leaned over and whispered, ‘Miss, I ain’t no sir, I’m Dodger.’

Sleepily, the girl said in what Dodger figured was a German accent,
‘Dodger? One who dodges, which is to say, moves about a lot? Thank you,
Dodger. You are kind, and I am tired.’

Dodger just managed to catch the glass as she slumped back into the
pillows.

1 Contrary to what he had said to Charlie, Dodger could read, having had
some tuition from Solomon the watchmaker, his landlord, and the _Jewish
Chronicle_ – but it was never in anyone’s interest to tell anybody
anything that they didn’t need to know.

[images]

CHAPTER 2

IN WHICH DODGER MEETS A DYING MAN AND A DYING MAN MEETS HIS LADY; AND
DODGER BECOMES KING OF THE TOSHERS

AS THE BELLS tolled five o’clock, Mrs Sharples woke up, making a noise
that could best be expressed as _Blort!_ Her eyes filled with venom when
they alighted on Dodger and subsequently scoured the room for
indications of malfeasance.

‘All right, you young castle, you have had your nice warm sleep in a
Christian bedroom, as promised – and, as I suspect, for the first time.
Now just you get out of here, and mind! I shall be watching you like a
fork until you’re out of the back door, you mark my words.’

Nasty and ungrateful oh those words were, and she was as good as them,
marching him down the grubby back stairs and into the kitchen, where she
flung open the door with such force that it bounced on its hinges and
slammed itself shut again, much to the amusement of the cook, who had
been watching the pantomime.

As the door hung there reproachfully, Dodger said, ‘You heard Mister
Charlie, missus, he is a very important man, and he gave me a mission,
and I have a mission so I reckon, and a missionary gets a bite of
breakfast before he is slung out into the cold. And I don’t think Mister
Charlie would be too happy if I told him about the lack of hospitality
you’ve shown to me, Mrs Sharp Balls.’

He had mangled her name offensively without a thought, and was rather
pleased, even though she appeared not to have noticed. The cook,
however, had, and the laugh she laughed had a sneer in it. Dodger had
never read a book, but if he had ever done so he would have read the
cook just like it – and it was amazing how much you could glean from a
look, or a snort, or even a fart if it was dropped into the conversation
at just the right place. There was language, and there was the language
of inflections, glances, tiny movements in the face – little bits of
habit that the owner was not aware of. People who thought that their
face was entirely blank did not realize how they were broadcasting their
innermost thoughts to anyone with the gumption to pick up the signs, and
the sign right now, floating in the air as if held by an angel, said
that the cook did not like the housekeeper, and the dislike was
sufficient enough that she would make fun of her even though Dodger was
standing there.

So he carefully made himself look a little more tired and a little more
frightened and a little more pleading than usual. Instantly the cook
motioned him towards her, saying in a low voice, but not so low that the
housekeeper couldn’t hear it, ‘OK, lad, I’ve got some porridge on the
boil – you can have some of that, and a piece of mutton that’s only
slightly on the nose, and I dare say you’ve eaten worse. Will that do
you?’

Dodger burst into tears; they were good tears, full of soul and fat –
there was a certain amount of body to them – and then he fell on his
knees, clasped his hands together and said, with deep sincerity, ‘God
bless you, missus, God bless you!’

This shameless pantomime earned him a very large bowl of porridge with a
very acceptable amount of sugar in it. The mutton wasn’t yet at the
stage when it was about to start walking around all by itself, and so he
took it thankfully; it would at least make the basis of a decent stew.
It was wrapped in newspaper and he shoved it in his pocket very quickly
for fear that it might evaporate. As for the porridge, he pushed the
spoon around until there was not one drop left, to the obvious approval
of the cook, a lady, it might be said, who wobbled everywhere one could
wobble when she moved, including the chin.

He had written her down as an ally, at least against the housekeeper,
who was still glaring at him balefully, but then she grabbed him sharply
by the hand and shouted, much louder than necessary, ‘Just you come down
here into the scullery and we’ll see how much you have stolen, my lad,
shall we?’

Dodger tried to pull out of her grip, but she was, as aforesaid, a
well-built woman – as cooks tend to be – and as she was dragging him she
leaned towards him and hissed, ‘Don’t struggle. What are you, a bloody
fool? Keep mum and do as I say!’ She opened a door and dragged him down
some stone steps, into a place that smelled of pickles. After slamming
the door behind them, she relaxed a little and said, ‘That old baggage
of a housekeeper will swear blind that you must have picked up a lot of
trinkets when you were here last night, and you may be sure that the
picker-up of said trifles will be that lady herself. Therefore it would
be very likely that any friendships you have made here will vanish like
the morning dew. The family are decent sorts, always a soft touch for a
hard luck story from a broken-down artisan or fallen woman who would
like to get up again, and I’ve seen them come and go. Quite a lot of
them are genuine, let me tell you; I know.’

As politely as possible, Dodger tried to remove her hands from his
person. She seemed to be patting him down rather more than was warranted
and with a certain enthusiasm and a gleam in her eye.

She saw his expression and said, ‘I ain’t always been this old fat
baggage; I fell once and bounced back up again. That’s the way to think
about it, lad. Anyone can rise if they have enough yeast. I was not
always like this; oh my word, you would be amazed and probably quite
amused – and I might say in one or two cases embarrassed.’

‘Yes, missus,’ said Dodger. ‘And would you please stop patting.’

She laughed, causing an oscillation of chins, and then, rather more
solemnly, said, ‘The kitchen maid told me that the talk is that you
helped save some sweet girl from ruffians last night and I know, I just
_know_ you will get blamed for something unless I show you the lay of
the land. So, little fellow, you just give Aunty Quickly here anything
you is thinking of running away with, and I will see it gets put back
where it belongs. I like this family and I won’t have them robbed, even
by a lively lad such as yourself. So if you own up now all sins will be
forgiven and you will walk out of here without a stain on your
character, although I wish I could say the same about the stains on the
rest of you.’ Her nose wrinkled as she took in the state of his
trousers.

Smirking, Dodger handed her one silver spoon, saying, ‘One spoon, and
only because I was still holding it when you dragged me down here!’ Then
he pulled out the pack of cards. ‘And this, missus, was handed to me by
Mister Dickens.’

Nevertheless, but with a grin, the cook patted him down again right
there and then, finding his knife, his brass knuckles and his short
crowbar; she pointedly ignored them, but also made him take his shoes
off for inspection, whereupon she winced at the smell, with a hand
theatrically over her nose, and made it clear that she wanted him to put
them on again as quickly as possible. She said cheerfully, ‘Not got
nothing up your jacksie, yes? Wouldn’t be the first to have tried. No, I
ain’t going to look; you’ve got more meat on your ribs than most of your
type, which means you are rather innocent, or very clever; I trust that
it is the latter, and would be most surprised if it is the former. Now
what we’ll do next is that I’ll drag you upstairs, shouting at you like
the scum you are, so that the old baggage can hear. What I shall shout
is that I’ve searched you thoroughly at risk to my own health and am
throwing you out absolutely empty-handed. After that I will kick you out
the door on the toe of my boot for the look of the thing, and then I’ll
get on with my work, which will be all the more enjoyable when I think
of the nasty old boot seething like a cauldron of bees.’ She gave Dodger
a long look as if sizing him up and said, ‘You’re on the tosh, ain’t
you?’

‘Oh yes, missus.’

‘A lot of work for not much money, so I hear.’

Never tell anybody everything. So he said, ‘Oh well, I don’t know,
missus, I just makes a living.’

‘Now, come on, let’s do the pantomime for them as is surely listening,
and off you go, but remember – come and see Quickly if you ever feel the
need for a friend. I mean what I say: if I can ever help you, you just
have to whistle. And if I knock on your door in hard times, don’t leave
it shut.’

Outside, the sun was hardly visible in the smoke, mist and fog, but that
was the clear light of day for somebody like Dodger. A bit of sunshine
was OK, he would agree, because it helped your clothes dry, but Dodger
liked the shadows and, if possible, the sewers, and right now something
in him wanted the solace of darkness.

So he crowbarred the lid of the nearest drain cover and dropped onto
what wasn’t all that bad a surface down below. The storm last night had
been kind enough to make the sewers just that bit more bearable. There
would be other toshers down there, of course, but Dodger had a nose for
gold and silver.

Solomon said his dog Onan had a nose for jewellery. Indeed, Dodger was
happy to give him the honour, because you had to feel sorry for the poor
creature, who was really quite embarrassing at times, but for some
reason the dog’s pointy little face did actually light up whenever he
smelled rubies. Sometimes Dodger would take him down into the gloom with
him, and if Onan’s amazing nose found wealth down there in the darkness
then when they got back home Solomon would give him extra chicken
gizzards.

Dodger wished he had the dog with him today – for Onan had ears so good
that he could hear a sudden shower miles upstream, and would bark
accordingly – but he had started in the wrong area without the time to
go and fetch him, so he had to make do the best he could, which after
all was pretty good at that. If you were smart on your feet, like
Dodger, you’d have grabbed your loot and been up in the fresh air long
before the first surge of storm water came down the sewers.

But it was as if last night’s storm had emptied the sky. It was as calm
as a millpond down in the tunnels today: small puddles here and there,
with a little trickle down the centre of the sewer. After the storm, it
mostly smelled like, well, wet dead things, rotten potatoes and bad air
– and these days, unfortunately, shite. This always infuriated Dodger.
From what Solomon told him, some coves called the Romans had built the
sewers to keep the rain water flowing down to the Thames instead of
pouring into people’s houses. But these days toffs here and there were
getting pipes run from their cesspits into the sewers and Dodger thought
this was really unfair. It was bad enough with all the rats down here,
without having to make certain you didn’t step in a richard.¹

A fair amount of light filtered down from the gutters through the drain
covers, which themselves had holes in to keep the water running away,
but really, being a tosher meant that you felt around – with fingers,
and toes sometimes – for all those little _heavy_ things that would get
caught up on the crumbling brickwork as the water went past. But you had
to search with your mind and your instinct as well, and that was the
soul and centre of being a tosher – old Grandad had taught him that,
telling him that it could get so much a part of you that you could smell
the gold even among the richards.

Dodger didn’t know much about the Romans, but the sewers they had built
were old and in a general state of falling to bits. Oh, gangs came down
here to patch things up occasionally, but it was always a case of a bit
of work here and a bit of work there, seldom anything very substantial.
The work gangs – who were handed an official job occasionally, shoring
up and repairing bits of the ever-crumbling sewers – would chase you off
if they found you, though they were not as young as Dodger so he could
easily leave them behind. Besides, they were working men with working
hours, and a tosher might work all night on a good night, feeling in
those little places where a brick had fallen out of the wall, or the
floor was not level. Best of all were the places where the water would
swirl around in a little whirlpool causing pennies, sixpences,
farthings, half farthings and – if you were very, very blessed –
sometimes even sovereigns, half sovereigns and crowns to collect; maybe
even brooches, silver hat pins, eyeglasses, watches and golden rings.
They would all swirl around in this dark carousel, a great spinning ball
of sticky mud which, if you were a lucky tosher and believed in the Lady
of the Toshers, then you – yes, you – might be the lucky tosher who one
day found a ball of mud like a big plum pudding. This was that wonderful
thing known to the toshers as the _tosheroon_, which when you smashed it
open would deliver unto you the fortune of a lifetime.

Dodger had found all of those things separately at some time or other,
and occasionally one or two together in a little nest in a crack, which
he would make a note of in his head and, of course, go back to again.
But while he could often come back with some goods that would make
Solomon smile, he had never come across that great pie of dirt and
jewels and money that was the key to a better life.

But, he thought, what better life was there than a life on the tosh, at
least if you were a Dodger? The world, which meant London, was built for
him, just for him; it worked in his favour as if the Lady had meant it.
Gold jewels and currency were heavy and got trapped easily, while dead
cats, rats and richards tended to float, which was a good thing because
you never like to tread in a dickie – thank goodness they floated. But,
Dodger mused, as he almost absentmindedly but very methodically felt his
way along the sewer, taking care to cover his favourite traps while at
the same time keeping an eye out for any new ones, whatever would a
tosher do if he got hold of such a thing as a real tosheroon? He knew
them, the tosher lads, and when they had a good day, what did they do
with their loot? What did they do with all the hard-earned money they
had splashed through the muck for? They drank it, and the bigger the
amount the more they drank. Maybe if they were sensible ones they’d put
a bit aside for a bed for the night and a meal; in the morning they
would be poor again.

There was a _clink_ under his fingers! That was the sound of two
sixpences together in the spot he called ‘Old Faithful’ – a good start.

Dodger knew that he had the edge on the other toshers; that was why he
had broken every tosher rule and gone into a sewer during the storm, and
it would have worked too if it hadn’t been for that fight and what had
followed. Because if you had your eye to business, you could see places
in the sewers where a tosher could hang on in a bubble of air while all
around him the world raged. He’d found a good one, and while it was
damned chilly, he would have been the first one down in this vicinity to
reap the harvest of the night. Right now, he had to hurry because other
toshers would be coming up the sewers towards him, and suddenly there
was a glint in the gloom as the sun caught something. It went away
instantly, but he had marked it in his mind and so he worked his way
carefully to where his head told him the glint had been, and found a
pile of muck on a little sandbank where the outflow of a smaller sewer
flowed into this one; it was still dribbling.

There it was – a dead rat, and in its jaws what looked like a gold tooth
but turned out to be, as it happened, a half sovereign gripped tightly
in the teeth of Mister Rat. You never, if you could help it, touched a
rat, which was why Dodger carried a little crowbar with him down there.
Using it together with his knife, he levered the nasty little jaws open
and flicked the half sovereign out. Balancing the coin on the blade of
his knife, he held it up to the trickle coming down the wall, giving it
something of what you might call a wash.

May every day be as good as this! Who would be a working man on such a
day? A skilled chimney sweep would have to work for a week to get the
money he had picked up today. Oh, to be a tosher on a day like this!

Then he heard the groan . . .

Dodger edged his way round the rat and into the smaller sewer, which was
half choked with debris – much of it pieces of wood, some of them sharp
as knives – and all the other detritus that had last night been
dislodged. But to Dodger’s astonished gaze it appeared that most of the
debris was a man, and that man did not look well; there was nothing very
much where one eye should have been, but the other one was opening now
and it looked Dodger in the face. It stank, the face Dodger looked into,
and he shuddered, because he knew it.

He said, ‘That’s you, Grandad, isn’t it?’

The oldest tosher in London looked as if he had been tortured, and
Dodger almost threw up when he saw the rest of him. He must have been
working by himself, just like Dodger, and got caught up when the flood
came down, and there would have been everything in it, anything that
someone had thrown away or lost or wanted to hide and dispose of. A lot
of it had apparently smashed into Grandad, who was nevertheless trying
to sit upright, covered in bruises, bleeding and coloured with all sorts
of nastiness, such as only a flooded sewer could provide.

Grandad spat mud – at least, Dodger hoped it was only mud – and said
weakly, ‘Oh, it’s you, Dodger. Good to see you in such fine fettle, in a
manner of speaking; you’re a good lad, I always said so, smarter than I
ever was, see. So what I want you to do now, right now, is to get a pint
of the worst brandy you can find, and bring it back down here and pour
it down this thing what used to be my throat, right?’

Dodger tried to pull some of the stuff away from the old man, who
groaned and mumbled, ‘Trust me on this one. I am banged about like
nobody’s business, fool that I am, and at my age too! Should have known
better, silly old fool. I reckon I have eaten more than my peck today
and so it’s time to die. Be a lovely lad and get me the liquor right
now, there’s a good boy; there’s a sixpence and a crown and five pennies
in my right hand, and they’re still there ’cos I can feel it, and that
is all for you, my lad, you lucky boy.’

‘Here,’ said Dodger, ‘I’m not taking anything from you, Grandad!’

The old tosher shook his head, such as was left of it, and said,
‘Firstly I ain’t your grandad really, you boys only give me the name
just ’cos I’m older than what you lot are, and by the Lady you _will_
take my stuff when I’m gone, ’cos you are a tosher and a tosher will
take what he finds! Now I knows where I am and I knows there is a bottle
shop just round the corner, up there downstream. Brandy, I said, the
worst they’ve got, and then remember me fondly. Now piss off right now,
or be followed by the curse of a dying tosher!’

Dodger came out of the next drain cover at a run, found the rather
greasy bottle shop, bought _two_ bottles of a brandy that smelled as if
it could cut a man’s leg off and was back climbing down the drain almost
before the echoes of his leaving Grandad died away.

Grandad was still there, and was dribbling something cruel, but there
was something like a smile when he saw Dodger, who handed him the first
open bottle, which he threw down his throat in one long glug. Some of it
spilled out of his mouth as he beckoned for the other, saying, ‘This
will suit me right enough, oh yes indeed, just the way a tosher should
go.’ Then his voice dropped to a whisper, and with his one relatively
good hand he grabbed at Dodger and said, ‘I _saw_ her, lad; the Lady,
standing large as life just where you are now, all crimson and gold and
shining like the sun on a sovereign. Then she blew me a kiss and
beckoned to me and scarpered, only in a ladylike way, of course.’

Dodger didn’t know what to say, but managed to say it anyway. ‘You’ve
taught me a lot, Grandad. You taught me about the Lady of the Rats. So
look, get the taste of the sewer out of your mouth, and then I reckon I
can pull you out of here to somewhere better. Let’s give it a try,
_please_?’

‘Not a chance, lad. I reckon if you were to pick me up right now I’d
fall to bits, but if you don’t mind you will find the time to stay with
me for a little while.’ In the darkness there was another liquid noise
as Grandad took a further draught of the fiery brandy and went on, ‘You
was a bloody good learner, I will say that for you; I mean, most of the
lads I see doing it just don’t have the nose for toshing, but it done me
good all these years to see how you was treating toshing like one of
them professors going through all them books. I seen you just look at a
whole pile of shite and your eyes would twinkle like you _knew_ that
there was definitely something worthwhile under there. That’s what we
do, lad – we find value in what them above throw away, what they don’t
care about. And that means people too. I seen you toshing, lad, and knew
you had toshing in your blood, just like me.’ He coughed, and bits of
his broken body moved in a rather ghastly dance. ‘I know what they call
me, Dodger – king of the toshers. The way I see it, that’s you now and
you have my blessing on it.’ What was left of his mouth smiled. ‘Never
did know who your dad was, did you, lad?’

‘No, Grandad,’ said Dodger. ‘Never knew and probably neither did my ma;
don’t know who _she_ was neither.’ Water dripped off the ceiling as
Dodger stared at nothing much and said, ‘But you were always Grandad to
me, I certainly know that, and if you hadn’t given me the knowing of the
toshing I would never have found out about all of them places down here
in a month of Sundays, like the Maelstrom and the Queen’s Bedroom and
the Golden Maze and Sovereign Street and Button Back Spin and Breathe
Easy. Oh yes, that place saved my bacon a dozen times when I was still
learning! Thank you for that, Grandad. Grandad . . .? Grandad!’

Then Dodger was aware of something in the air, or perhaps the subtle
sound of something that had been there and then gently ceased to be so.
But there was still something there; and as Dodger leaned over he felt
something carried on the last breath and was simply hovering as Grandad
said, from wherever he was now, ‘I can see the Lady, lad, I can see the
Lady . . .’

Grandad was smiling at him, and went on smiling until the light in his
eyes faded, when Dodger then leaned down and respectfully opened the
man’s hand to take the legacy that was duly his. He counted out two
coins, which he solemnly placed on the dead man’s eyes because, well, it
was something you had to do because it had always been done. Then he
looked into the gloom and said, ‘Lady, I am sending to you Grandad, a
decent old cove who taught me all I know about the tosh. Try not to
upset him ’cos he swears something cruel.’

He came out of the sewer as if Hell and all its demons were following
behind him. Suspecting that it might well be so, he ran the short
distance to Seven Dials and the comparative civilization that was in the
little tenement attic where Solomon Cohen lived and worked and did
business in a small room above a flight of stairs, which being high up
gave him a view of things that he probably did not want to see.

1 Cockney rhyming slang, short for Richard the Third, which rather
happily rhymes with another interesting word.

[images]

CHAPTER 3

DODGER GETS A SUIT THAT IS TOUGH ON THE UNMENTIONABLES, AND SOLOMON GETS
HOT UNDER THE COLLAR

IT WAS RAINING again as Dodger got to the attic, a dreadful sombre
drizzle. He fretted outside while the old man went through his
convoluted process of unlocking the door, then spun Solomon round when
he hurtled through. Solomon was old enough and wise enough to let Dodger
lie in a smelly heap on the old straw mattress at the back of the attic
until he was ready to be alive again, and not just a bundle of grief.
Then Solomon, like his namesake being very wise, boiled up some soup,
the smell of which filled the room until Onan, who had been sleeping
peacefully beside his master, woke up and whined, a sound like some
terrible cork being twisted out of a dreadful bottle.

Dodger uncoiled himself from the blanket, gratefully took the soup that
Solomon handed wordlessly to him, and then the old man went back to his
workbench with its pedal-powered lathe, and soon there was a homely,
busy little noise that would have made Dodger think of grasshoppers in a
field, if he had ever seen a grasshopper or, for that matter, a field.
Whatever you thought it was though, it was comforting, and as the soup
did its work of recovery and the grasshoppers danced, Dodger told the
old man, well, everything – about the girl, about Charlie, about Mrs
Quickly and about Grandad – and Solomon said not one word until Dodger
was empty of words of his own, and then he murmured, ‘You had a busy
day, bubele, and a great shame about your friend, Grandad mmm, may his
soul rest comfortably.’

Dodger wailed, ‘But I left him there to be eaten by rats! He told me
to!’

Sometimes Solomon talked as if he had just woken up and remembered
something; a curious little mmm sound that came out, something close to
the chirping of a little bird, heralding what he had to say next. Dodger
never really understood what the automatic mmm stood for. It was a
friendly noise and it seemed to him that Solomon was winding up for the
next thought; you got used to it after a while and missed it when it
wasn’t there.

Now Solomon said, ‘Mmm, was that any better or worse than being eaten by
worms? It is the fate of all mankind, alas. You were with him when he
died mmm, his friend? So that is a good thing. I have met the gentleman
in the past, and I suppose he must be mmm oh, thirty-three? A very good
age for a tosher, and from what you say he saw his Lady. Sad to reflect
that I myself am mmm fifty-four, though thankfully in good health. You
were lucky to meet me, Dodger, just as I indeed was lucky to meet you.
You know about keeping clean and about putting money by. We boil water
before we drink it, and I’m pleased to say I have mmm made you aware of
the possibility of cleaning your teeth, which is why mmm, my dear, you
still have some. Grandad died as he had lived and so you will remember
him fondly but not mourn unduly. Toshers die young; what else can you
expect if you spend half your life messing about in mess? You never see
a Jewish tosher – you can’t be a kosher tosher! Remember fondly your
friend Grandad, and learn what lessons you can from his life and death.’
And the grasshoppers continued to dance, sizzling as they did so.

Dodger could now hear a fight down in the street somewhere. Well, there
was always a fight; fights sprouted up like a fungus, usually because a
lot of people all pushed together in these wretched, dirty slums ended
up not just at the end of their tether but right off it completely. He
had heard people say that the drink was behind it all, but well, you
_had_ to drink beer. Yes, too much of it made you drunk, but on the
other hand water out of the pump might quite likely make you dead,
unless you boiled it first and had the money for coal or wood. That had
to wait its turn, after the food and the beer (usually the other way
around).

He thought, I believe that Grandad had the death he wanted. But surely
no one should want a death like that? I can’t say it would do for me.
There was suddenly another thought: if that isn’t what I want, then what
is it I should strive for? It was a surprising little thought, one of
those that hangs around out of general view until it pops up like a
wart. He placed it behind his ear, as it were, for future deliberation.

Solomon was talking again. ‘Mmm, as for your Mister Charlie, I’ve heard
of him down at the synagogue. He is a sharp cove, he is, sharp as a
razor, sharp as a snake, so they tell me. They say he can take one look
at you and he’s got a perfect study of you, from the way you talk down
to the way you pick your nose. He is in with the police too, as tight as
a tick with them, so now old Solomon is thinking, why did a man like him
give a job of police work to mmm a snotty-nosed tosher like you? And it
is snotty – I know you know how to use a wipe mmm, I taught you how;
just sucking it down and spitting it out on the pavement is distasteful.
Are you listening? If you don’t want to end up like poor old Grandad
then you’d better end up like somebody else, and a good start mmm would
be to _look_ like someone else, especially mmm if you are to do this
work for that Mister Charlie. So while I am making the dinner, I want
_you_ to go to see my friend Jacob, down at the shonky shop. Tell him I
sent you, and that he is to dress you from head to toe with decent
schmutter for one shilling, including boots, and mind you mention that
last word. Maybe you could think of it as spending part of your legacy,
mmm from the late Mister Grandad? And while you’re about it, take Onan
with you – he could do with the exercise, poor old thing.’

Dodger had started to argue before he realized that this would be
stupid. Solomon was right; if you lived on the streets that’s where you
died, or perhaps, as in the case of old Grandad, underneath them. And it
seemed the right thing somehow to spend part of his gift from Grandad –
and the bounty from the sewers – on smartening himself up a bit, and it
_would_ help to look better if he was to try this new line of work . . .
he liked the idea of more specie from Mister Charlie. Besides, if you
were going to help a lady in distress, it paid to look smart while you
were doing so.

He set off, trailed by Onan, who was overjoyed at going out in daylight,
and you just had to hope that he didn’t get carried away. For all dogs
smell – this being a chief, nay essential component of being a dog when
being able to smell and be smelled is of great importance – but it had
to be said that Onan not only smelled like every other dog; he
introduced a generous portion of Onan smell into the mix as well.

They headed for the shonky shop to see Jacob and, if Dodger remembered
correctly, Jacob’s rather strange wife whose wig, however you looked at
it, never quite seemed to be right. Jacob ran a pawnshop as well as the
shonky shop, and Dodger knew that Solomon suspected that Jacob also
bought things without troubling himself where they came from, although
he never said why he suspected that.

The pawnshop was where you took your tools if you were out of work, and
where you bought them back again when you were back in the job, because
it’s easier to eat bread than eat hammers. If you were really skint you
popped your unnecessary clothes too; well, at least some of them. If you
never turned up to buy them back they would go into the shonky shop,
where Jacob and his sons worked all day sewing and mending and cutting
and seaming and generally turning old clothes into, if not _new_
clothes, at least into something _respectable_. Dodger found Jacob and
his sons quite friendly.

Jacob greeted Dodger with an expensive grin, which is one where the
seller hopes that the buyer is going to buy something. He said, ‘Why,
it’s my young friend who once saved the life of my oldest friend,
Solomon, and . . . put that dog outside!’

Onan was tied up in the little yard behind the shop with a bone to worry
at – and good luck to him in that endeavour, Dodger thought, since any
bone that got given to a dog in old London town had already had all the
goodness boiled out of it for soup. This didn’t seem to trouble Onan all
that much, and so he snuffled and crunched in happy optimism, and Dodger
was ushered back inside, made to stand in the very small space available
in the middle of the shop and treated like a lord going to one of the
nobby shops you found in Savile Row and Hanover Square, although quite
probably in those places the clothes you put on hadn’t already been worn
by four or five people before you.

Jacob and his sons bustled around him like bees, squinting at him
critically, holding up only slightly yellow ‘white’ shirts in front of
him and then whisking them away before the next tailor was magically
there, holding up a pair of highly suspect pants. Clothes spun past,
never to reappear, but never mind because here came some more! It was:
‘Try these – oh dear no’; or, ‘How about this? Certain to fit – oh no,
never mind, plenty more for a hero!’

But he hadn’t been a hero, not really. Dodger remembered that day three
years ago when he had been having a really bad afternoon on the tosh,
and it had started to rain, and he had heard that somebody else had
picked up a sovereign just ahead of him so he was feeling angry and
irritable and wanted to take all that out on somebody. But when he was
back on the foggy streets, there had been two geezers kicking the crap
out of somebody on the pavement. Quite possibly, in those days, when his
temper was more liable to explode into a spot of boots and fists, if
some little wheel in his head had turned the wrong way, he might have
helped _them_, just to get it out of his system. But as it happened the
wheel turned the other way, towards the thought that two geezers kicking
an old cove who was lying on the ground groaning were pox-ridden
mucksnipes. So he had waded in and laid it on with a trowel, just like
last night, didn’t he indeed, panting and kicking until they cried uncle
and he was too tired to chase them.

It had been a madness born of frustration and hunger, although Solomon
said it was the hand of God, which Dodger thought was pretty unlikely
since you didn’t see God in those streets very often. Then he had helped
the old man home, even if he was an _ikey mo_, and Solomon had brewed up
some of his soup, thanking Dodger fulsomely the whole time. Since the
old boy lived by himself and had a bit of space to spare in his tenement
attic, it all worked out; Dodger ran the occasional errand for Solomon,
scrounged wood for his fire and, when possible, pinched coal off the
Thames barges. In exchange, Solomon gave Dodger his meals, or at least
cooked whatever it was Dodger had _acquired_, coming up with dishes much
better than Dodger had ever seen in his life.

He also got much better prices for the stuff Dodger came back with from
the toshing; the drawback of this was that the old Jew would always,
_always_ ask him if what he was buying was stolen. Well, stuff from the
sewers was definitely OK – everybody knew that. It was money down the
drain, lost to humanity, on its way to the sea and out of human ken.
Toshers, of course, didn’t count as humanity – everybody knew that too.
But in those days Dodger was not above a bit of thievery, getting stuff
you could say was extremely dodgy and totally not, as Solomon would say,
‘kosher’.

Every time the old man asked him if this stuff was just from the
toshing, Dodger said yes, but he could tell by the look in Solomon’s
eyes when the old man thought that he was not telling the truth. The
worst of it was that Solomon’s eyes invariably got it right. He would
take the stuff anyway, but things would be a little bit chilly in the
attic room for a while.

So now Dodger generally nicked only stuff that could be burned, drunk or
eaten, such as the stuff on market stalls and other low-hanging fruit.
Things had warmed up after that, and besides, Solomon read the
newspapers down at the synagogue, and occasionally there would be sad
little pieces in the Lost and Found column from somebody who had lost
their wedding ring or some other piece of jewellery. And it was
jewellery that was more to be valued, well, because it _was_ the wedding
ring, wasn’t it, and not just a certain amount of gold. There were often
the magic words ‘Reward to finder’, and with a certain amount of careful
negotiation, Solomon pointed out, you could get rather more for it than
you would get from a fence. Besides, you would never take it to a kosher
jeweller, because they would set the police on you even though you’d
merely ‘found’ it, not stolen it. Sometimes honesty was its own reward,
said Solomon, but Dodger thought it helped if some money came with it.

Money apart, Dodger found he felt happier on those days when he had
indeed been able to bring somebody back in touch with some treasured
necklace or ring, or any other trinket which they held dear; it made him
walk on air for a while, which was indeed a cut above what he was
normally treading on in the sewers.

One day, after a kiss from a lady who had recently been a blushing bride
and whose wedding ring had unfortunately come off her finger whilst she
was getting into the carriage to go to her new home, he had said to
Solomon, because some of the other toshers had been teasing him a lot,
‘Are you trying to save my soul?’ And Solomon, with a little grin that
was never far from his face, said, ‘Mmm, well, I am exploring the
possibility that you may have one.’

That little change in his habits, which helped glue together the
relationship with Solomon, meant that he didn’t – unlike some of the
other toshers – have to shiver in doorways of a night, or hunker down
under a piece of tarpaulin, or pay for the dreadful stinking ha’penny
rope down at the flophouse. All Solomon wanted from him was a bit of
company in the evenings, and occasionally the old man tactfully required
Dodger’s companionship when he was going to see one of his customers and
therefore carrying mechanisms, jewellery and other dangerously expensive
things. In the vicinity, news of Dodger’s mercurial personality had got
about, and so he and Solomon could travel entirely unmolested.

As a job, Dodger thought Solomon’s was pretty good. The old boy made
small things – usually things to replace things, precious and treasured
things that had gone missing. Last week Dodger had seen him repair a
very expensive musical box, which was full of gears and wires. The whole
thing had been damaged when some workmen had dropped it when the owners
were moving house, and he had watched the old man handle every single
piece as if it was something special – cleaning, shaping, and gently
bending, slowly, as if there was all the time in the world. Some
ornamental ivory inlays had been broken on the rosewood cabinet and
Solomon replaced them with little bits of ivory from his small store,
polishing it up so neatly he said that the lady he had done it for had
given him half a crown over and above his normal charge.

OK, sometimes some of Dodger’s chums called him _shabbos goy_, but he
noticed that he ate better than any of them, and cheaper too, since
among the market stalls Solomon could haggle even a Cockney until the
man gave in – and Heaven help any stallholder who sold Solomon short
weight, bad bread or rotting apples, let alone a boiled orange and all
the other tricks of the trade, including the wax banana. When you took
into account the good and healthful eating, the arrangement was not to
be sneezed at, and Dodger never liked to catch a cold.

When Jacob and his sons had got through with the dance of the flying
pants, shirts, socks, vests and shoes, they stood back and beamed at one
another in the knowledge of a job well done, and then Jacob said, ‘Well
now, I do not know. Upon my word, what magicians we are, ain’t we? What
we have created here, my sons, is a gentleman, fit for any society if
they don’t mind a slight smell of camphor. But it’s that or moths,
everybody knows, even Her Majesty herself, and right now I reckon, my
dears, that if she walked in this door she would say, “Good afternoon,
young sir, don’t I know you?”’

‘It’s a bit tight in the crotch,’ said Dodger.

‘Then don’t think naughty thoughts until it stretches,’ said Jacob.
‘I’ll tell you what I’ll do. Seeing as it’s you I will throw in this
excellent hat, just your size if you padded it out a bit so it ain’t
covering your ears, and I reckon the style will soon be all the rage
again.’ Jacob stood back, mightily pleased with the transformation he
had achieved. He put his head on one side and said, ‘You know, young
man, what you need now is a very good haircut and then you will have to
poke the ladies off with a stick!’

‘Solomon helps me cut it when it gets too hot and I want things to cool
off a bit,’ said Dodger, upon which Jacob gave the kind of explosive
snort that only an offended Jewish tradesman could make, even more
expressive than a Frenchman on a very bad day. Generally speaking, if it
had to be written down, it would begin with something like ‘phooieu’ and
end with a certain amount of spittle in the general vicinity.

Jacob wailed, ‘That’s not a haircut, my boy. You look like you’ve been
sheared! As though you’ve just got out of the clink! If Queen Victoria
saw you _then_, she’d probably call out the runners. Take my advice,
next time go to a proper barber! Take the advice of your old friend
Jacob.’

And so, in company with the dog Onan, who was still optimistically
carrying his bone in his jaws, Dodger walked back into the world. Of
course, shonky was shonky, however you looked at it; it might just do,
but it wasn’t the full shilling. What around here was? Nevertheless,
Dodger felt all the better for the new clobber, even with the associated
crotch problem and a certain prickling under the arms, and it was
certainly better than anything else he owned and hopefully worthy of the
girl from the storm.

He walked back to the alley and climbed up the rickety stairs to the
attic, where Solomon greeted him with, ‘Who are you, young man?’

On the table, spread out, were the contents of the Happy Families game.
‘Mmm . . . very interesting,’ said Solomon. ‘This is a remarkable and
mmm somewhat deadly device you have presented to me. It is mmm
deceptively simple, but dark clouds soon gather.’

‘What?’ said Dodger, looking at the brightly coloured cards laid out on
the table. ‘It looks like something for kids – though nothing like the
Happy Family man and his wagon, which is strange. It’s just a kids’
game, ain’t it?’

‘Alas, yes it is,’ said Solomon. ‘I shall expand on my little theory.
Every player is dealt a hand from the pack of cards, and the object
appears to be to put together one complete family, _the happy family_,
simply by asking one of your opponents if they have a particular card.
It would seem a cheerful game for children but, in fact, if they only
did but know it, the parents are setting the child on the way to be a
poker player or, worse, a politician.’

‘What?’

‘Allow me to elucidate,’ said Solomon, and after a glance at Dodger’s
blank face, ‘I mean, _explain_, young man. It appears to go like this.
In order to mmm get your happy family, you have to choose one family,
and so you might, as it were, choose to collect all of the mmm Baker
family. You might think that all you need do is simply wait until it is
your turn again, and boldly ask somebody to give you the next card you
were looking for. It might be Miss Bun the baker’s daughter. Why?
Because mmm when the cards were dealt out at the start of the game you
had already got Mister Bun the baker, and so his daughter would be a
step in the right direction. But beware! Your opponents might mmm, if
you keep simply asking for a Bun, in their turn start asking _you_ for a
member of the Bun family; they may not be collecting the Buns
themselves, but possibly they intend to get together a whole set of the
mmm Dose family, the head of which is Mister Dose the doctor. They are
asking you for a Bun when they need a Dose, because they had noticed
your interest in Buns, and despite their longing for a Dose would rather
use their turn mmm to put you off track whilst at the same time
depriving you of a precious Bun!’

‘Well, I would just lie and say I hadn’t got it,’ said Dodger.

‘Ah ha! As the game lumbers to its conclusion your ownership of the
disputed Bun will come to light, mmm yes indeed! And it will be a very
sad day for you. You have to tell the truth, because if you don’t tell
the truth, you will never win the game. Thus this terrible battle wages,
as you decide to forsake Buns now and see if your salvation might lie
mmm in collecting the family of Mister Bung the brewer, despite the fact
that your family is teetotal. You hope to put at least one of your
enemies under a false impression of your real intentions, while all the
time you must suspect that every single one of them, no matter how
innocent mmm they appear to be, are trying by every strategy they can
think of to foil your plans! And so the dreadful inquisition continues!
Son learns to deceive father, sister learns to distrust father, and
mother is trying to lose in order to keep the peace, and it is dawning
on her that her children’s facial expressions of fake desire or optimism
to put others off the track might mmm trick an opponent into thinking in
the wrong direction.’

‘Well,’ said Dodger, ‘that’s like haggling in the marketplace. Everybody
does it.’

‘And so the game comes to a conclusion, undoubtedly with tears before
the end, not to mention shouting and the slamming of doors. In what way
then does this make a family happy? Exactly what has been achieved?’
Solomon stopped talking, his face very pink and upset.

Dodger had to think for a moment before he said, ‘It’s only playing
cards, you know; it’s not as if it’s important. I mean, it’s not real.’

This didn’t satisfy Solomon, who said, ‘I have never played it, but
nevertheless a child playing with their parent would have to learn how
to deceive them. And you say this is all a game?’

Dodger thought again. A game. Not a game of chance like the Crown and
Anchor man, where you might even walk away with a pocket full of
winnings. But a game to play as a family? Who had _time_ for family
games? Only babies, or children of the toffs. ‘It’s still just a game,’
he protested, and received one of Solomon’s stares, which if you were
not careful would go right through your face and out the back of your
head.

Solomon said, ‘What’s the difference when you are seven years old?’ The
old man had gone red, and he waved the finger of God at Dodger. ‘Young
man, the games we play are lessons we learn. The assumptions we make,
things we ignore and things we change make us what we become.’

It was biblical stuff, right enough. But when Dodger thought about it,
what _was_ the difference? The whole of life was a game. But if it was a
game, then were you the player or were you the pawn? It seeped into his
mind that maybe Dodger could be more than just Dodger, if he cared to
put some effort into it. It was a call to arms; it said: _Get off your
arse!_

The one thing you could say about this dirty old city, Dodger thought as
he headed out of the attic, strutting along in his new suit with Onan at
his heels, was that no matter how careful you were, _some_body would see
_any_thing. The streets were so crowded that you were rubbing shoulders
with people until you had no shoulders left; and the place to do a bit
of rubbing now would be the Baron of Beef, or the Goat and Sixpence, or
any of the less salubrious drinking establishments around the docks
where you could get drunk for sixpence, dead drunk for a shilling, and
possibly just dead for being so stupid as to step inside in the first
place.

In those kind of places you found the toshers and the mudlarks hanging
out with the girls, and that was really hanging out because half of them
would had worn the arse out of their trousers by now. Those places were
where you spent your time and your money, so that you could forget about
the rats and the mud that stuck to everything, and the smells. Although
after a while you got used to them, corpses that had been in the river
for a while tended to have a fragrance of their very own, and you never
forgot that smell of corruption, because it clung, heavy and solid, and
you never wanted to smell it again, even though you knew you would.

Oddly enough, the smell of death was a smell with a strange life of its
own, and it would find its way in anywhere and it was damn hard to get
rid of – rather, in some respects, like the smell of Onan, who was
faithfully walking just behind him, his passage indicated by people in
the throng looking around to see wherever the dreadful smell was coming
from and hoping it wasn’t from them.

But now the sun was shining, and some of the lads and lasses were
drinking outside the Gunner’s Daughter, sitting on the old barrels,
bundles of rope, hopeless piles of rotting wood and all the other debris
of the riverside. Sometimes it seemed to Dodger that the city and the
river were simply all the same creature except for the fact that some
parts were a lot more soggy than others.

Right now, in this tangled, smelly but usually cheerful disarray, he
recognized Bent Henry, Lucy Diver, One-Armed-Dave, Preacher,
Mary-Go-Round, Messy Bessie and Mangle, who despite whatever else was on
their minds all said what people everywhere said in those circumstances
when one of their number turned up wearing clothes that might be
considered to be a cut above their station. Things like: ‘Oh dear, what
is this pretty gentleman then?’ and ‘Oh my, have you bought the street?
Cor, don’t you smell nice!’ And, of course: ‘Can you lend us a shilling?
I’ll pay you on St Never’s Day!’ And so on, and the only way that you
can survive in these circumstances is to grin sheepishly and put up with
it, knowing that at any moment you could stop the merriment; and stop it
he did.

‘Grandad’s dead.’ He dropped it on them out of the sky.

‘Never!’ said Bent Henry. ‘I was toshing with him only the day before
yesterday, just before the storm!’

‘And I saw him today,’ said Dodger sharply. ‘I saw him die, right there
in front of me! He was thirty-three! Don’t nobody say he ain’t dead,
’cos he is, right? Down below Shoreditch around about the Maelstrom!’

Mary-Go-Round started to cry; she was a decent sort, with an air all the
time of being from somewhere else and having only just arrived here. She
sold violets to ladies during the season, and sold anything else she
could get the rest of the time. She wasn’t all that bad at being a
pickpocket, on account of looking very much like an angel what had been
hit on the head with something, so she wasn’t suspected, but however you
saw her, she had more teeth than brains, and she didn’t have many teeth.
As for the others, they just appeared a bit more miserable than they had
before; they didn’t look him in the eye, just stared down at the ground
as if they wished that they weren’t there.

Dodger said, ‘He gave me his haul, such as it was.’ Feeling awkwardly as
if this was not enough, he then added, ‘That’s why I came here, to buy
you all a pie and porter to drink his health.’ This news appeared to
raise the spirits of all concerned more than somewhat, especially when
Dodger reached into his pocket and disembogued himself of sixpence which
magically became tankards all round of a liquid so thick that it was
food.

While these were being emptied with variations on the theme of ‘glug’,
Dodger noticed that Mary-Go-Round was still snivelling, and being a kind
sort of cove, he said softly, ‘If it’s any help, Mary, he was smiling
when he went; he said he’d seen the Lady.’

This information apparently didn’t satisfy, and in between sobs Mary
said, ‘Double Henry stopped off just now for some grub and some brandy,
seeing as how he’d just had to pull another girl out of the river.’

Dodger sighed. Double Henry was a waterman, constantly paddling his way
up and down the Thames looking for anyone who wanted transport. The rest
of Mary’s news was unfortunately quite familiar. The gang of people who
were more or less his own age that Dodger met most often were a tough
bunch, and so they survived; but the city and its river were harsh
indeed on the ones who didn’t make the grade.

‘He reckoned she’d jumped off the bridge in Putney,’ said Mary.
‘Probably up the duff.’

Crestfallen, Dodger sighed again. They usually were with child, he
thought: the girls from faraway places with strange-sounding names like
Berkhamsted and Uxbridge, who had come to London hoping it would be
better than a life among the hay seeds. But the moment they arrived, the
city in all its various ways ate them and spat them out, almost always
into the Thames.

That was no way to go, since you could only call what was in the river
‘water’ because it was too runny to be called dirt. When the corpses
came to the surface, the poor old watermen and lightermen had to gaff
them and row them down to the coroner of one of the boroughs. There was
a bounty for turning over these sad remnants to the coroner’s office,
and Double Henry had told him once that sometimes it was worthwhile to
take a corpse quite a long way to get to the borough that was paying the
most, though it was generally the coroner at Four Farthings. The coroner
would post notice of the dead person and sometimes, Dodger had heard,
the notice got into the newspapers. Maybe the girls’ bodies would end up
in Crossbones Graveyard, or a paupers’ burying ground somewhere else,
and sometimes, of course, as everybody knew, they could end up in the
teaching hospitals and under the scalpels of the medical students.

Mary was still snivelling, and in a conversation made up largely of
blobs of snot said, ‘It’s so sad. They _all_ have long blonde hair. All
the country girls have long blonde hair and, well, they are also, you
know, innocent.’

Messy Bessie intervened with, ‘I was innocent once. But it didn’t do me
any good. Then I found out what I was doing wrong.’ She added, ‘But I
was born on the streets here, knew what to expect. Them poor little
innocents never stand a chance when the first kind gentleman plies them
with liquor.’

Mary-Go-Round sniffed again and said, ‘Gent tried to ply me with liquor
once, but he ran out of money and I took most of what he had left when
he fell asleep. Finest watch and chain I ever pinched. Still,’ she
continued, ‘them poor girls wasn’t born round here like the likes of us,
so they don’t know nothing.’

Her words reminded Dodger of Charlie. Then his thoughts turned to Sol
and what _he_ had voiced earlier. He said, as much to the open air as
anything else, ‘I should give up on the toshing . . .’ His voice trailed
off. Now he was talking to himself more than to anyone else. What
_could_ I do? he thought. After all, everybody has to work, everybody
needs to eat, everybody has to live.

Oh, that smile on the face of Grandad; what had he seen in that last
smile? He had seen the Lady. Toshers always knew somebody who had seen
the Lady; nobody had ever seen her themselves, but nevertheless any
tosher could tell you what she looked like. She was quite tall, had a
dress that was all shiny, like silk; she had beautiful blue eyes and
there was always a sort of fine mist around her, and if you looked down
at her feet you would see the rats all sitting on her shoes. They said
that if you ever saw her feet, they would be rat claws. But Dodger knew
that he would never dare to look, because supposing they were; or even
worse, supposing they weren’t!

All those rats, watching you and then watching her. Just maybe – he
never knew – it would take only one word from her, and if you had been a
bad tosher she might set the rats on you. And if you were a very good
tosher, she would smile on you and give you a great big kiss (some said
a great deal more than just a kiss). And from that day on you would
always be lucky on the tosh.

He wondered again about those poor wretched girls who’d jumped. Many of
them, of course, were with child, and then, because the barometer of
Dodger’s nature almost always gravitated to ‘set fair’, he let go that
chain of thought. Generally speaking he had always tried to keep a
distance between himself and grief; and besides, he had pressing
business to attend to.

But not so pressing as to prevent him from raising his mug and shouting,
‘Here’s to Grandad, wherever the hell he is now.’ This was echoed by all
concerned – quite possibly, knowing them, in the hope of another round
of drinks. But they were disappointed because Dodger continued, ‘Will
you lot listen to me? On the night of the big storm, somebody was trying
to kill a girl – one of them young innocents you was just talking about,
I reckon – only she ran away, and I sort of found her, and now she is
being looked after.’ He hesitated, faced with a wall of silence, and
then carried on again, losing hope, ‘She had golden hair . . . and they
beat her up, and I want to find out why. I want to kick seven types of
shite out of the people who did it, and I want you to help me.’

At this point Dodger was treated to a wonderful bit of street theatre,
which with barely a word being spoken, went in three acts, the first
being: ‘I don’t know nuffin’,’ and the next, ‘I never saw nuffin’,’ and
finally that old favourite, ‘I never done nuffin’,’ followed at no extra
cost by an encore, which was that tried and tested old chestnut, ‘I
wasn’t there.’

Dodger had expected something like this, even from his occasional chums.
It wasn’t personal, because nobody likes questions, especially when
perhaps one day questions would be asked about you. But this was
important to him, and so he snapped his fingers, which was the cue for
Onan to growl – a sound which you could have expected might come not
from a medium-sized dog like Onan but from something dreadful arising
from the depths of the sea, something with an appetite. It had a nasty
rumble to it, and it simply did not stop. Now Dodger said, in a voice
that was as flat as the rumble was bumpy, ‘Listen to me, will you? This
is Dodger – me, right, your _friend_ Dodger. She was a girl with golden
hair and a face that was black and blue!’

Dodger saw something like panic in their eyes, as if they thought that
he had gone mad. But then Messy Bessie’s big round features seemed to
shift as she struggled with the concept of something unusual, such as a
thought.

She never had many of them; to see them at all you probably would need a
microscope, such as the one he saw once on one of the travelling shows.
There were always travelling shows, and they were ever popular; and in
this one they had this apparatus you could stare into. You looked down
into a glass of water, and when your eye got accustomed you started to
see all the tiny little wriggly things in the water, bobbing up and
down, spinning and dancing little jigs and having such fun that the man
who ran the travelling show said it showed how good the Thames water was
if so many tiny little creatures could survive in it.

To Dodger, Bessie’s mind seemed to be like that – mostly empty, but
every now and again something wriggling. He said, encouragingly, ‘Go on,
Bessie.’

She glanced at the others, who tried not to look at her. He understood,
in a way. It didn’t do to be known as somebody who told you the things
they saw, in case those things included something they did not want to
get about, and there were, around and about, people much worse than
mudlarks and toshers – people who were handy with a shiv or a cut-throat
razor and had not a glimmer of mercy in their eyes.

But now, in the eyes of Messy Bessie, there was an unusual
determination. She didn’t have golden hair – not much in the way of hair
at all, in fact; and such as it was, the strands that remained were
greasy and tended to roll themselves into strange little kiss curls. She
fiddled with a ‘curl’, then looked defiantly at the others and said, ‘I
was doing a bit of mumping in the Mall, day before the storm, and a
nobby coach went past with its door open, you see, and this girl jumped
out and had it away down the street as if she was on fire, right? And
two coves dropped off the thing, right, and legged it after her, spit
arse, pushing people out of the way like they was not important.’ Messy
Bessie stopped, shrugged, indicating that that was that. Her associates
were idly looking around, but specifically not focusing on her, as if to
make it quite clear that they had nothing to do with this strange and
dangerously talkative woman.

But Dodger said, ‘What sort of coach?’

He kept his focus on Bessie, because he just knew that if he didn’t she
would suddenly get very forgetful, and what he got, after some churning
of recollection on Bessie’s part, was: ‘Pricey, nobby, two horses.’
Messy Bessie shut her mouth firmly, an indication that she didn’t intend
to open it again unless there was the prospect of another drink. It was
quite easy for Dodger to read her mind; after all, there was such a lot
of space in there. He jingled the remaining coins in his pocket – the
international language – and another light went on in Bessie’s big round
sad face. ‘Funny thing about that coach; when it went off there was a,
like, squeal from one of the wheels, nearly as bad as a pig being
killed. I heard it all down the road.’

Dodger thanked her, sliding over a few coppers, and nodded at the rest
of them, who looked as if a murder had just taken place there and then.

Then, suddenly, Messy Bessie, the coins in her hand, said, ‘Just
remembered something else. She was yelling, but I don’t know what, on
account of it being in some kind of lingo. The coachman too – he weren’t
no Englisher neither.’ She gave Dodger a sharp and meaningful look, and
he handed over an extra couple of farthings, wondering as he did so if
he could reclaim some of this necessary expenditure from Mister Charlie.
He would have to keep a tally though, because Charlie was definitely not
the kind of man you could run rings around.

As he walked away, Dodger wondered whether he should go and see the man;
after all, he had important information now, didn’t he? Information that
had cost him money to acquire – a considerable amount of money, and
possibly worth a bit more too if he put a shine on it. Although he knew
it really wouldn’t be sensible to get ambitious about the amounts paid
to start with . . .

He fumbled in his pocket, a receptacle that contained anything that
Dodger could punch into it. There it was: the oblong piece of card. He
carefully put all the letters together, and the numbers too; for after
all, everybody knew where Fleet Street was. It was where all the
newspapers were made, but to Dodger it was a halfway decent toshing area
with one or two useful other tunnels nearby. The Fleet river itself was
part of the sewer and it was amazing what ended up in there . . . He
recalled with pleasure that once when he was exploring there he had
found a bracelet with two sapphires in it, and on the same day also a
whole sovereign, which made it a lucky place, given that a decent haul
from a day’s toshing could often be as low as a handful of farthings.

So he set off, Onan still trotting obediently behind him. He walked on,
lost in thought. Of course, Messy Bessie wasn’t the sort to come up with
something so helpful as a crest such as might have been seen on a
nobleman’s coach, and it dawned on Dodger that in any case, if the coach
was doing such dirty deeds as taking young ladies to places they
shouldn’t be going to, someone might not want to put their crest on it.
But a squeaky wheel would go on speaking until somebody did something
about it. He didn’t have much time and that was all he had to go on, in
a city with hundreds of coaches and other miscellaneous conveyances.

It is, he thought, probably going to be a little bit difficult, but if I
have anything to do with it, the squeaky wheel will get the grease, the
grease being Dodger. And possibly, he entertained in the privacy of his
own head, the men involved might form a close acquaintance with the
comfort of Dodger’s fist . . .

[images]

CHAPTER 4

DODGER DISCOVERS A NEW USE FOR A FLEET STREET SPIKE, AND GAINS A
POCKETFUL OF SUGAR

FLEET STREET WAS always busy, day and night, because of all the
newspapers, and today the Fleet was not so much running as oozing along
the open drain in the centre of the street. Dodger had heard stories
about the Fleet sewers, especially the one about the pig that escaped
from a butcher’s shop one time and got down there and then into
everywhere else, and since there is so much to eat in a sewer if you are
a pig, it became enormously fat and nasty. Perhaps it would have been
fun then to go and find it; on the other hand perhaps it wouldn’t have
been – those things had tusks! But right now, the only monsters in Fleet
Street, he had been told, were the printing presses whose thumping made
the pavement shake, and which demanded to be fed every day with a diet
of politics, ’orrible murders and death.

Of course, there are other events, but everybody liked an ’orrible
murder, didn’t they? And everywhere along the street men were pushing
trolleys and piles of paper, or running fast holding tight to smaller
bits of paper in a terrible urgency to explain to the world what had
happened, why it had happened, what should have happened and sometimes
why it hadn’t happened at all, when in fact it did happen after all –
and, of course, to tell everyone about all the people who had been
’orribly murdered. It looked a bustling place to be, and now he had to
find the _Chronicle_ in all of this, hampered by the fact that he wasn’t
very good at reading, especially big words like that.

In the end, a printer in a square hat pointed the way, while giving him
a look that said, ‘Don’t you dare steal anything here.’ A bit of a
slander to Dodger’s way of thinking, since toshing wasn’t stealing –
surely everybody knew that? Well, they did if they were a tosher.

He tied Onan to a rail, confident that nobody would steal him because of
the peculiar smell, and walked up the steps to the _Morning Chronicle_,
where he was understandably stopped by one of those men whose job it is
to stop the kind of people who need stopping. He looked as though he
enjoyed his job, and he had a hat to prove it, and the face under the
hat said, ‘Nothing here for the likes of you, boy, you have no business
here and you can go and do your thieving somewhere else, you and your
dreadful suit. Hah, looks like you’ve got it off a dead man!’

Dodger carefully did not change his expression, but stood up straight
and said, ‘My business is with Mister Dickens! He gave me a mission!’
While the man stared at him, he pulled out of his pocket Charlie’s
visiting card, and said, ‘And he gave me his card, and told me to meet
him here; can you get that into your head, mister?’

The doorman looked daggers at him, but the name Dickens apparently had
an effect here for some reason, because another man with a busy look
came and stared at Dodger, stared again at the card, looked back at
Dodger for one last stare, and said, ‘You might as well come in then,
don’t steal anything.’

Dodger said, ‘Thank you, sir, I will try my very best not to.’

He was ushered into a crowded little room filled with desks and clerks,
all looking busy with that same sense of frightful importance he had
seen out in the street. The clerk at the nearest desk – who looked like
the cove in charge of all the rest – watched him like a frog watches a
snake, his hand very close to a bell.

Dodger sat down on a bench by the door and waited. Already the fog was
rising – it always was by this time of day – and it was creeping in now
through the open door. It was like an airborne river Thames, coiling and
shimmering as if someone had emptied a bucket of snakes over the street.
Mostly it was yellow; often it was black, especially if the brick yards
were working. The nearest clerk got up, gave Dodger another scowl and
very pointedly closed the door. Dodger gave him a happy smile, which
obviously annoyed him; this was, after all, the point.

But there was nothing very much here to ‘find’, anyway. Just paper, just
lots of paper and cabinets and mugs and the smell of tobacco and books
with pieces of paper stuck inside them, where somebody wanted to keep
his place. But what Dodger noticed were the spikes on every clerk’s
desk. What was that all about? Each one was sticking right up in the
air; there was a piece of wood at the bottom, but why put a spike twelve
inches long sticking up where it could do somebody a terrible mischief?

Pointing at the nearest, he said to one of the clerks, in the tones of a
simple lad who was only asking a question in the innocent pursuit of
knowledge, ‘’Scuse me, mister, what’s this all about, then?’

The young man sneered at him. ‘Don’t you know anything? It just keeps
the desk more tidy, that’s all. In newspapers, the spike is where you
put something that you have finished with or don’t need any more.’

Dodger gave this information his attention and said, ‘Why don’t you just
throw the stuff away, instead of cluttering up the place?’

The clerk gave him a withering look. ‘Are you stupid? Supposing it turns
out later that it was important? Then all we’d have to do is find it on
the spike.’

The other clerks looked up briefly while this was going on, and then
they got back to doing whatever it was they did, but not before glaring
at Dodger to make certain he knew that he was not very important here
and that they were. He noticed, though, that their clothes weren’t much
better than his shonky stuff, although there was no point in saying so.

And so Dodger resigned himself to waiting. Right up until the moment a
man with a mask over half of his face barged past the doorman – who had
apparently just gone for a piss in the alley as he was stumbling back,
fumbling with the buttons on his trousers – and pushed into the room.
The villain pointed a large knife at the head clerk and said, ‘Give me
your money or I’ll gut yer like a clam. And nobody move!’

It was a large knife – a bread knife, with a serrated edge, perfectly OK
in a house where someone wanted to carve up a loaf and probably, Dodger
thought, not too bad either for carving up a person. But in the
horrified silence he realized that the most frightened person in the
room was the man with the knife, who was glaring at the clerks and
taking no notice at all of Dodger.

Dodger thought: He is not sure what to do, but he is sure that he might
have to stab one of these noodles who are staring at him and wetting
their pants – and he pretty well knows that if he does that he will end
up in Newgate prison, swinging from the gallows. These thoughts arrived
in Dodger’s head like a railway train, and were followed in the guard’s
van, as it were, with the recollection that he knew that voice and its
accompanying smell of bad gin. And he knew that the man wasn’t a bad
sort, not really, and he knew what had turned him to this kind of deed.

He did the only thing possible. In one movement he grabbed the spike
from the desk and let the pointy bit just prick the man’s sweaty neck.
Keeping his voice low and cheerful, he whispered to the wretched
would-be thief, so quietly that the clerks wouldn’t hear, ‘Drop the
knife right now and run for it; either that or you will be breathing
through three nostrils. Look, it’s me, Dodger – you know Dodger.’ Then
out loud he said, ‘We will have none of this around here, you bastard!’

He almost breathed the man’s relief, and certainly breathed an awful lot
of gin fumes as he dragged him out of the place and into the fog. The
clerks began to yell blue murder while Dodger shouted out loudly, ‘I’ll
hold him, don’t you worry about that!’ He carried on walking the man out
at speed, past the red-faced doorman and into the nearest alleyway,
where he dragged the would-be thief – who, it could be said, was
somewhat handicapped by his wooden leg which had a little metal piece on
the end of it – along a few yards and pushed him into a dark corner.

The alley smelled like alleys everywhere: largely of desperation and
impatience – and now also of Onan, who had vented his spleen and other
things in protest, adding to the aromas of the alley a medal-winning
stench. Blessedly, the fog made a kind of blanket over them. It stank,
of course, but so did the man whose trousers were so lively that quite
probably they could have gone for a walk all by themselves.

Dodger heard with relief the sound of the knife being dropped to the
ground. He kicked it into the shadows, then heaved the man by his collar
and hustled him to the other end of the alley, crossed the street and
pulled him into a corner.

‘Stumpy Higgins!’ he said. ‘Blow me down if you aren’t the dumbest thief
I’ve ever met. You know, next time you come up before the beak you will
end up with the screws swinging on your ankles, you bloody idiot!’ He
sniffed, and groaned. ‘Cor blimey, Stumpy, what a mess you are, ain’t
you? Do you ever take a wash? Or ever stand out in the rain or even
change those trousers?’ He looked into two eyes full of cataracts and
sighed. ‘When did you last eat?’

Then Stumpy muttered something about not wanting to be a beggar, and
Dodger nearly gave up on him, but the vision of Grandad was still in his
mind.

‘Look, here’s sixpence,’ he said. ‘That should get you a decent bite and
a space in the flophouse, if you don’t drink it all up. OK, you poor old
bugger, now off you go – no one else is chasing you, so just keep on
moving and get out of the neighbourhood. I’ve never seen you before in
my life, I don’t know who you are, and by the look of you, Stumpy,
neither do you, you poor old devil.’ Dodger sighed. ‘Look, if you’re
going to hold up something, the time to get grogged up is after the
business, not before, right?’

And that was it. Dodger went back to the _Chronicle_ offices and there
was a copper there already when he arrived, and the clerks were giving
the man the particulars of the aforesaid Stumpy, which at the moment did
not include the wooden leg. By the sound of their babbling, Stumpy was a
lot more fearsome than Dodger knew him to be, and apparently his bread
knife had become a real honest-to-God sword too. The policeman was
trying to take down details, being hampered by the chattering of the
clerks and the fact that he wrote things down very slowly, all the while
keeping an eye on Dodger, because although the policeman might not have
been that good at spelling he was very good at recognizing the likes of
Dodger.

Dodger knew what was coming, and here it came as the policeman poked a
thumb in his direction and said, ‘This gentleman was an accomplice,
yes?’

The clerks looked at Dodger, and somewhat reluctantly their chief said,
‘Well, no, in fact to tell the truth he threatened the miscreant with a
spike and chased him away.’

Dodger was beginning to really dislike the policeman, because the man
said brightly, ‘Oh, so this man here had a weapon as well?’

The chief clerk said, ‘Well, no, I mean it’s a spike, we have one on
every desk.’

There was a creak on the stair by the door and a voice said, ‘This young
man is working for me, Constable, and may I say that Mister Dodger has
my full confidence. It would appear that he is a hero of epic
proportions, having saved the _Chronicle_ from the depredations of such
a terrible creature as the one that I’ve just heard spoken about –
possibly he should have a medal of some kind; I will speak to the
editor. In the meantime, gentlemen, Mister Dodger has confidential
information for me, and I would like to take him over to the coffee
house to hear what he has to say. So if you will, in fact, excuse the
both of us, we will depart.’

With that, Charlie nodded to the policeman and walked down the steps, an
amazed Dodger following him. Onan padded behind, ever-optimistic that
Dodger might be taking a route through the foggy streets that could
involve a bone. Life for Onan often didn’t produce the rewards he
wanted; and as Dodger tied him to a lamppost it became clear that this
was going to be one of those times. Again. Dodger resolved to get him a
decent bone at the earliest opportunity.

He hadn’t tasted coffee before, but Solomon said it was nothing but mud,
and in any case he couldn’t afford it. The coffee house was full of the
stuff, full of people and full of chatter and, above all, full of noise.

Charlie pushed Dodger onto a chair, sat down beside him and said,
‘Nobody is going to hear what you say here, because in here everybody is
always talking at once, and the ones who aren’t actually talking are
thinking about what they are going to say next and waiting for their
turn. Is there any point in my asking you for the truth about that
delicious little episode, or should we perhaps just let a veil of
mystery fall over it? Have you ever heard of a cove called Napoleon, by
any chance? Do take more sugar, and when you have finished the bowl they
will bring another one; these new sugar lumps are all the go, aren’t
they?’

Dodger stopped feverishly pushing sugar into his pockets and said,
‘Napoleon, yeah, Froggy general, that’s why we’ve got old sweats begging
on the streets, sometimes with a knife, yes?’

‘Well,’ said Charlie, ‘he was famous among other things for saying that
what he looked for in his generals was luck; and you, Mister Dodger, are
all lucky, very lucky, because something about that little escapade
smells to me as bad as an extremely old cheese. I think I know you,
Dodger, so I will indeed recommend to my editor that some little honour,
possibly including a half sovereign or two, might be in order – although
I will try and persuade him not to put your name in the newspapers,
because I suspect that doing so could mean you having some little
trouble finding friends in the future, since helping the police would
not look good on your curriculum vitae in those shadows you frequent.
You are lucky, Dodger, and the more you help me, the luckier you will
become.’ His fingers strayed to his pocket and the unmistakable jingle
of coins could be heard. ‘What have you found out?’

Dodger told him about the coach and the girl, with Charlie listening
carefully to everything he said.

When he had finished, Charlie said, ‘So she saw no crest on the coach?
What kind of foreign accent? French? German?’

Much to Charlie’s surprise, Dodger said firmly, ‘Mister Charlie, I know
about what’s on coaches and I know to recognize most lingos, but you see
that in this I’m just like you – I’m dealing with an informant who isn’t
bright enough to know everything or notice much.’

Charlie looked at Dodger in the way that somebody would look at some sad
accident and said, ‘You, Dodger, are what is known as a _tabula rasa_ –
Latin for a clean slate; you are smart, indeed, but you have so very
little to be smart about! It grieves me, it really does, although I do
see that you have had the sense to get some new clothes, the best a
shonky shop could provide.’ He smiled when he saw Dodger’s expression
and went on, ‘What? You don’t think the likes of me would know what a
shonky shop is? Believe me, my friend, there are very few depths in this
city that I haven’t plumbed as a matter of business. But on a lighter
note, I expect you will like to hear that the young lady you rescued is
recovering. I believe that no one has yet reported her missing – though
there are indications that she is not some street waif, so her
disappearance _should_ have been reported. You understand? Although as
yet she cannot speak very well – she seems incapable of explaining what
may have happened to her – she does appear to understand English. As a
matter of fact, I believe she is a foreigner – a very _special_
foreigner, although I cannot tell you why I think this may be the case.
And I suspect there is some excitement about this in high places. The
crest on her ring is providing an interesting line of enquiry, and my
friend Sir Robert Peel is being rather circumspect, leading me to
believe that there is a game afoot. As you know, I write for newspapers,
but not everything a newspaperman knows gets into print.’

A game, Dodger thought. He had to get into this game and win it. But
what kind of game would lead to a girl being beaten like that? _That_
kind of game he would have to stop. In the noise and smoke of the coffee
house, under his breath, he said a prayer to the Lady, feeling somewhat
embarrassed as he did so: ‘I ain’t never met you, missus, but you knew
Grandad and I hope he’s with you now. Well, I’m Dodger, and Grandad has
made me king of the toshers, and a little bit of help from yourself
would certainly not go amiss. Thanking you in anticipation, yours,
Dodger.’

Although the din in the coffee house was so great now that he could
barely hear himself think, let alone hear any reply or anything else
Charlie had to add, Dodger managed to say, ‘Well, if nobody has reported
somebody missing, it may just be that they either don’t know they are
missing, or hope to find the missing person before somebody else does,
if you catch my meaning?’

‘Mister Dodger, you are a find! Between ourselves, I rather like the
police, although I suppose that you do not; but what I really like about
them is the concept they have, well, some of them, at least, that the
law should apply to everybody, not just the poor people. I know the
rookeries do not like the police; generally speaking, you will find in
high places people who dislike them even more.’ He paused. ‘And you tell
me your informant told you she was escaping from a carriage and pair,
and a swell one at that. Find me that carriage, my friend, and who has
lent their carriage to that vicious day’s work, and the world might be a
better place, especially for you.’

There was a jingling again and Charlie put two half crowns on the small
table, and smiled when they disappeared into Dodger’s pocket in one
movement.

He said, ‘Incidentally, my colleague and friend Mister Mayhew and his
wife would very much like to meet you again, and may I suggest sometime
tomorrow? They are given to believe that you are an angel, albeit one
with a dirty face, with a sweet nature and possibly useful career ahead
of him; whereas I, as you know, regard you as a blaggard and scallywag
of the first water, full of guile and mischief, the kind of smart lad
who would do anything to reach his goals. But this is a new world, we
need new people. Who are you really, Dodger, and what is your story? If
you don’t mind?’ He looked at Dodger quizzically.

Dodger did mind, but the world seemed to be moving fast, and so he said,
‘If I tell you, mister, you won’t tell anyone else, promise? Can I trust
you?’

‘On my honour, as a journalist,’ said Charlie. Then, after a pause, he
added, ‘Strictly speaking, Dodger, the answer should be no. I am a
writer and a journalist, which is a very difficult covenant. However, I
have high hopes and great expectations of you and would do nothing to
get in the way of your progress. Excuse me . . .’ Abruptly, Charlie took
a pencil and a very small writing pad out of a pocket and scribbled a
few words on it before looking up again with a slightly embarrassed
smile. ‘I’m sorry about that, but I do like to write a line or two
before the words escape me . . . Now, please do continue.’

Uneasily, Dodger said, ‘Well, I was brought up in an orphanage. You
know; I was a foundling, never knew my mother. I wasn’t a very big kid
neither, and there was a lot of bullies around there when I grew up. So
I used to dodge about a bit, keep out of the way, as it were, because
some of the bigger boys laughed about my real name; and if I complained,
they beat me to the ground when the superintendent wasn’t looking. But
that stopped after a while when I got bigger, and then they picked on me
again, didn’t they just! And there I was, and I thought, I ain’t ’aving
this no more, and when I got up, I grabbed hold of a chair and I set
about me.’ He paused, treasuring that moment when all sins had been
punished; even the superintendent hadn’t been able to get a hold on him.
‘So I finished that day out on the streets, when life really began.’

Charlie listened intently to the carefully abridged version of this and
said, ‘Very interesting, Dodger, but you haven’t told me your name.’
Shrugging, because there seemed no hope for it, Dodger told Charlie his
name, expecting laughter and getting no more than, ‘Oh, I see. Yes, of
course, that would explain quite a lot. Naturally, my lips will remain
sealed on this issue. Although could I venture to ask you about your
life subsequently?’

‘Is this going to be written down in your little notebook, mister?’

‘Not as such, my young friend, but I am always interested in people.’

_Never tell nobody nothing they don’t need to know_. That was what
Dodger believed. But he had never before in his life found an outsider
that could so easily wriggle his way inside, and therefore in this
world, which seemed to be changing direction all the time, he decided
not to be coy.

‘Well,’ he said, ‘I got ’prenticed to a chimney sweep, being a skinny
youth, see, and after a while I ran away, but not before coming out of
the chimney into a bedroom, a swell bedroom, and coming out with a
diamond ring what I nicked off the dressing table. And I tell you, sir,
best move I ever made that was, ’cos the chimneys ain’t no place for a
growing lad, sir. The soot, it gets in everywhere, sir, _everywhere_.
Into every cut and scrape, sir, and it’s perilous stuff; does very nasty
things to your unmentionables, and I know because I’ve seen the lads who
stayed on and they were in a very bad way, but thanks to the Lady I got
right out of it.’ He shrugged, and went on, ‘That’s how life was. As for
the diamond ring, when I fenced it, the fence saw that I was a likely
lad and pointed me in the way of being a snakesman, sir, which is—’¹

‘I know what a snakesman is, Mister Dodger. But how did you get from
there to toshing, may I ask?’

Dodger took a deep breath, breathing in the ashes of the past. ‘I had a
little difficulty concerning a stolen goose and got chased by the
runners, just because I had feathers all over me, and so I hid out in
the sewers, see? They didn’t even follow, on account of being too fat
and too drunk, in my opinion. Then I found out about toshing and, well,
that’s it, sir, all of it, more or less.’

He watched Charlie’s face for an expression more than a noncommittal
stare, and then Charlie appeared to wake up and said, ‘And what would
you do if you had had a different name, Dodger? A name such as Master
Geoffrey Smith, for example, or Master Jonathan Baxter?’

‘Dunno, sir. Probably been a normal person, sir.’

At this, Charlie smiled and said, ‘I rather believe that you are an
unusual one, my friend.’

Was that a real smile on Charlie’s face? You couldn’t be sure with
Charlie, and so that was unresolved as they left the coffee house and
went their separate ways, Charlie to go wherever he went and Dodger to
make his way back, delighting Onan by buying him a juicy bone from a
butcher just before the man closed for the night. Onan carefully carried
it home in his mouth, dribbling as he did so.

Not a bad day, Dodger thought as he walked up the stairs to the attic
room. Finishing with more money too, not to mention a pocketful of sugar
lumps.

1 A small man or boy who could wriggle into narrow, open windows or
fanlights – especially fanlights, which were often ajar – to get into a
building, then let in his associates to join him in stealing everything
that could be stolen.

[images]

CHAPTER 5

THE HERO OF THE HOUR MEETS HIS DAMSEL IN DISTRESS AGAIN, BUT WINS A KISS
FROM A VERY ENTHUSIASTIC LADY

SOLOMON WAS STILL at work at his little lathe when Dodger came up the
stairs. It was always strange to watch Sol working; it was as if he had
disappeared. Oh yes, he was there, but mostly his brain was lodged in
his fingertips, paying no attention to anything other than what he was
very carefully doing until it seemed all part of some kind of natural
process, as gentle as grass growing. Dodger envied him that
peacefulness, but it wouldn’t suit him, he was sure.

Sol’s choice of clobber wouldn’t suit him either, oh no. When he went to
the synagogue the old boy wore baggy pantaloons and a ragged gabardine
coat, summer and winter; and when safely back in his lair in the attic,
even longer pantaloons from who knew where, with a vest which – give him
his due – was generally always as white as could be achieved. On his
feet he chose to wear some very carefully embroidered slippers acquired
in foreign parts where Solomon had some time or another apparently lived
and, possibly, from which he had escaped with his life. Then, of course,
there was his apron, with a very big pocket in the front so that any
small fiddly and expensive items that rolled off the workbench would be
caught in it.

There was an appetizing smell coming from the cauldron on the stove –
Mrs Quickly’s mutton being put to good use – that automatically made
Dodger lick his lips. Dodger never knew how Solomon managed it; the old
man could make a delicious dinner out of half a brick and a lump of
wood. When he’d asked him one day, Solomon had replied, ‘Mmm, I suppose
it was all that wandering in the wilderness; it makes you do the best
you can with what you’ve got.’

Dodger lay awake on his mattress for most of the night, and lying awake
was very easy to do; often there were fights back down in the yards when
the blokes came home, and then the screaming babies and terrible rows –
the whole cacophony that was the lullaby of Seven Dials. Happy families,
he thought. Are there any? And over and above the streets there were the
bells, clanging out all over the city.

Dodger stared at the ceiling, thinking about the coach. Messy Bessie
probably wasn’t going to be any more help, and so it seemed to Dodger
that the only way to find out more was to continue to ask questions, in
the hope of coming to the attention of the aforesaid people who didn’t
like questions being asked, and especially didn’t like questions being
answered. He bet they would know a thing or two.

Where to start, where to start? A squeaky wheel, and a nobby coach. Did
it have a crest on it? Maybe one with eagles? Perhaps the girl would
remember more if he saw her again . . .?

Well, he thought, Mister Mayhew wants to see me and so does his wife,
and perhaps a smart young man could smarten himself up and try to put
some kind of shine on his boots and wash his face before going to see
them, in the hope that a good lad might at least come out of the meeting
with something more than a cup of tea, perhaps something to eat. And who
knows; possibly, if he was very good and very respectful, he would be
allowed to see the girl with the wonderful golden hair again.

Because you cannot switch cunning off when you want to, Dodger’s own
cunning treacherously prompted him: maybe they will give you some money
as well, for being a good boy. Because he thought he knew the kind of
people that Mister and Mrs Mayhew were; amazingly, every now and again
you came across nobby folks who actually cared about the street people
and were slightly guilty about them. If you were poor, and perhaps took
the trouble to scrub up as best you could, and had no shame at all and
could also spin a hard luck story as well as Dodger could – though,
frankly, he didn’t really _need_ to make one up, since his life, as he
had very nearly truthfully described to Charlie, had included big
dollops of hard luck anyway – why, then they would practically kiss you,
because it made them feel better.

Lying there in the darkness and thinking about the girl, Dodger felt
somewhat ashamed to be thinking only of what he could make out of it,
for surely saving the girl was in itself a kind of reward, but he was
only a little bit ashamed, because you had to live, didn’t you?

Uncomfortable, he turned over and thought about Charlie, who seemed to
think that Dodger was some kind of a pirate king, and when you thought
about it, Charlie was playing a little game of his own. Every lad wants
to be thought of as a wide boy, a geezer, right? Dodger thought. ’Cos it
makes you feel big. For Charlie, words were a kind of complicated game
and it might not be a game Dodger knew well, but it was still a game –
and he, Dodger, was pretty good at the game of surviving.

Staring up at nothing, he thought about Grandad, dying with a smile on
his face in the sewers and in all that the sewers contained. It would be
a long time before he ever went into the Maelstrom again. Rats were
small, but there were a lot of them, and more and more when the news got
around. He would leave a week or two at least before he would return to
the place where the old man had died. Died, he reminded himself, where
he wanted to be.

Then there was Stumpy, who’d had two legs until a cannonball hit him
when he was fighting somewhere in Spain.

And here he was, and suddenly now Charlie’s words were clinging to him,
changing his world – a world where one moment you are happily on the
tosh, then quick as a wink coppers might call you a hero and you are
wandering around in nobby houses. Not the person you had been when you
woke up. It was like some great big spring was tugging at him – and
maybe, perhaps sooner rather than later, a boy has to decide what kind
of man he is going to be. Is he going to be a player, or a playing
piece . . .?

In the gloom, Dodger smiled and went to sleep, dreaming of golden hair.

In the morning, as clean as he could be, he headed to the house of
Mister Mayhew. By daylight, the man’s house looked pretty good; not a
palace, but the place of somebody who had enough money to be called a
gentleman. The whole street looked like that, smart, ordered and clean.
There was even a policeman patrolling it, and much to Dodger’s surprise
the policeman gave him a little salute as they passed. It wasn’t
anything much, just a flick of the fingers, but up until now a policeman
in a place like this would have told him to go somewhere else sharpish.
Emboldened, Dodger remembered the way that Charlie talked, and saluted
the constable back, saying, ‘Good morning, Officer, what a fine day it
is to be sure.’

Nothing happened! The copper strolled slowly past him and that was that.
Blimey! In a hopeful mood, Dodger found the house. He had learned at an
early age how to hang about the back doors of houses on the swell
streets, and also – and this was important – to get known as a spritely
lad. He had realized that if you were an urchin, then it might help to
treat it as a vocation and get really good at it; if you wanted to be a
successful urchin you needed to study how to urch. It was as simple as
that. And if you are going to urch, then you had to be something like an
actor. You had to know how to be chatty to everybody – the butlers and
the cooks; the housemaids; even the coachmen – and in short become the
cheerful chappie, always a card, known to everybody. It was an act and
he was the star. It wasn’t a path to fame and fortune, but it certainly
wasn’t the road to Tyburn Tree and the long drop. No, safety lay in
having one talent that you can call your own, and his lay in being
Dodger, Dodger to the hilt. So now he walked round to the back door,
hoping he might perhaps run into Mrs Quickly the cook again and come
away once more with a pie or another piece of mutton.

The door was opened by a maid, who said, ‘Yes, sir?’

Dodger straightened himself up and said, ‘I’m here to see Mister Mayhew.
I believe he is expecting me, my name is Dodger.’

No sooner had he said this than there was a clang from somewhere beyond,
and the maid panicked a little, as maids do (especially when they met
Dodger’s cheerful grin), but she visibly relaxed as she was replaced by
Dodger’s old friend Mrs Quickly, who looked him up and down critically
and said, ‘My word, ain’t you the toff and no mistake! Pray excuse me if
I do not curtsey, on account of me being all but up to my armpits in
giblets.’

A moment later the cook came back to the door again, this time
unencumbered by the bits of the insides of animals. She shooed away the
maid, saying, ‘Me and Mister Dodger is going to have a little chat, so
go and see to the pig knuckles, girl.’ Then she gave Dodger a hug
involving a certain amount of giblet, wiped him down and said, ‘You are
a hero of the hour, my little pumpkin, yes indeed, they were talking
about it at breakfast! It seems that you, you little scallywag,
single-handedly stopped that _Morning Chronicle_ being overrun by
robbers last night!’ She gave Dodger a saucy smile, and said, ‘Well, I
thought to myself, if that is the selfsame young man I met the other
day, then the only way he would stop anything being stolen would be to
put his hands behind his back. But now it appears that you fought a
battle with some robbers and chased them to kingdom come, so they say.
Just fancy that! Next thing you know they will be asking you to be the
Lord Mayor. If that is so I would like you to take me as your Lady
Mayoress – don’t worry, I’ve been married lots of times and know how it
is done.’ She laughed again at his expression and, more soberly, said,
‘Well done, lad. We’ll get the girl to take you upstairs to the family,
and you be sure to come down here again when you go, because I might
have a little bundle of food for you.’

Dodger followed the maid up a flight of stone stairs to a door, to the
magic green baize door between the people who clean the floors and those
people who walk on the floors – the upstairs and the downstairs of the
world. Actually, what he found was a kind of pandemonium, with a husband
and wife as unwilling referees in a dispute between two boys over who
had broken whose toy soldier.

Mister Mayhew grabbed him and nodded to his wife, who could only smile
frantically at Dodger from the middle of this tiny war as he was hurried
into her husband’s study. Henry Mayhew pushed him onto a uncomfortable
chair and sat down opposite him, saying immediately, ‘It is a pleasure
to make your acquaintance again, young man, especially in the light of
your intervention yesterday evening, of which Charlie has informed me.’
He paused. ‘You are a most interesting young man. May I ask a . . . few
personal questions?’ His hand reached for a notebook and pencil as he
spoke.

Dodger was not used to this sort of thing: people who wanted to ask him
personal questions such as, ‘Where were you on the night of the
sixteenth?’ normally damn well asked them without permission, and also
expected them to be answered with equal speed. He managed to say, ‘I
don’t mind, sir. That is, if they ain’t too personal.’ He stared around
the room while the man laughed, and he thought: How can one man own this
much paper? Books and piles of paper were on every flat surface,
including the floor – everywhere on the floor, but _neatly_ on the
floor.

Now Mister Mayhew said, ‘I imagine, sir, that you were not actually
christened? I find the idea unlikely. Mister Dodger is a name you . . .
came by?’

Dodger settled for a variant on honesty. After all, he’d been through
all of this with Charlie, and so what he delivered was a slightly
abbreviated version of ‘the Dodger story’, because you never told anyone
everything. ‘No, sir, was a foundling, sir, got called Dodger in the
orphanage because I move fast, sir.’

Mister Mayhew opened the notebook, which Dodger looked at with
suspicion. The pencil was poised over the paper, ready to pounce, so he
said, ‘No offence meant, it makes me come over all wobbly if things gets
writ down, and I stops talking.’ He was already scouting the room for
other exits.

However, much to his surprise, Mister Mayhew said, ‘Young man, I do
apologize for not asking your permission. Of course I will not make
further notes without asking you. You see, I write things down for my
job, or perhaps I should say my vocation. It is a matter of research – a
project on which I have been engaged for some time now. I and my
colleagues hope to make the government see how terrible conditions are
in this city; it is, indeed, the richest and most powerful city in the
world, and yet the conditions here for many may not be far removed from
those in Calcutta.’ He noted that there was no change in Dodger’s
expression and said, ‘Is it possible, young man, that you do not know
where Calcutta is?’

Dodger stared for a moment at the pencil. Oh well, there was no hope for
it. ‘That’s right, sir,’ he said. ‘Do not have a clue, sorry, sir.’

‘Mister Dodger, the fault is not yours. Indeed,’ Mister Mayhew
continued, as if talking to himself, ‘ignorance, poor health and lack of
suitable nutrition and potable water see to it that the situation gets
ever worse. So I simply ask people for a few details about their life,
and indeed their earnings, for the government cannot fail to respond to
a careful accumulation of evidence! Curiously, the upper classes, while
generally very gracious in the amount of money that they give to
churches, foundations and other great works, tend not to look too hard
below them, apart from occasionally making soup for the deserving.’

The thought of food once again got Dodger’s stomach rumbling. It must
have grumbled enough for Mister Mayhew to hear, because the man was
suddenly flustered and said, ‘Oh my dear sir, you will be very hungry,
of course; I anticipated this, so I will ring the bell and get the maid
to bring you some bacon and an egg or two. We are not rich, but
thankfully we are not poor. It must be said that everybody has a
different calculus on this matter, however, because I have met people
who I would have thought were amongst the most extreme of the poor, who
nevertheless protest that they are jogging along nicely, whilst on the
other hand I have known men who live in very large houses on really good
incomes to consider themselves one step away from debtors’ prison!’ He
smiled at Dodger as he rang the bell, and said, ‘How about you, Mister
Dodger, who I believe is a tosher as well as dabbling in other lines of
ad hoc business when the opportunity arises? Do you consider yourself
rich, or poor?’

Dodger knew a trick question when he saw one. Mister Mayhew, he
considered, was probably not as darkly sharp about the world as Charlie
was but it wouldn’t pay to underestimate him; and therefore he took
refuge in the last resort, which was honesty. He said, ‘I reckon me and
Sol aren’t really the poor, sir. You know, we’re doing a bit of this and
a bit of that and we do pretty well, I think, compared to many, yes.’

This seemed to pass muster, and Mister Mayhew looked pleased. He glanced
at his notebook and said, ‘Sol being the gentleman of the Jewish
persuasion with whom Charlie tells me you share lodgings?’

‘Oh, I don’t think he needed any persuading, sir. I think he was born
Jewish. At least, that’s what he says.’

Dodger wondered why Mister Mayhew laughed, and he wondered too how it
was that Charlie knew enough to tell the man where he lived when Dodger
himself couldn’t seem to remember telling him. But that didn’t really
matter, because he could hear the sound of the servant just outside the
door, and the rattling of a tray. A rattling like that meant that it was
heavy – always a good thing. And, as it turned out, it was. Mister
Mayhew said that he had already had breakfast, so Dodger tucked in to
bacon and eggs at considerable speed.

‘Charlie has high hopes of you, as you know,’ said Mister Mayhew, ‘and I
must confess my admiration of the fact that you have put yourself out
for our young lady, especially as, I understand, you had never met
before. I will take you to see her shortly. She seems to understand
English, although I fear that her mind has been disturbed by the nature
of her ordeal and she seems unable to give an account of the dark events
which appear to have befallen her.’

Most unusually for Dodger, he looked at the food in front of him without
instantly finishing it up, and instead said, ‘She was very scared. She’s
been married to a cove who treated her rotten and that’s a fact.
And . . .’ Dodger was about to say more, but hesitated. He thought:
She’s hurt, yes; she’s frightened, yes; but I don’t reckon she’s lost
her mind. I reckon she’s biding her time until she finds out who her
friends are. And if I was her, badly beaten though she be, I reckon that
I would find it in myself to appear a little worse off than I was; it’s
the rule of the streets. Keep some things to yourself.

Dodger felt the man still watching him, and sure enough, Mister Mayhew
said, ‘So if you don’t mind . . . where were you born, Mister Dodger?’

He had to wait until Dodger had finished the plateful of food and licked
the knife on both sides. Then Dodger said, ‘Bow, sir, though don’t know
for sure.’

‘Would you mind telling me about your upbringing . . . how you came to
be a tosher?’

Dodger shrugged. ‘Was a mudlark for a while first, ’cos, well, that’s
the kind of stuff you like as a kid – it sort of comes natural, if you
know what I mean, mucking about in the river mud picking up bits of coal
and suchlike. Not bad in the summer, bloody awful in the winter, but if
you are smart you can find a place to sleep and earn yourself a meal. I
done a bit of time as a chimney sweep’s lad, like I told Charlie, but
then one day I began toshing, and never looked back, sir. Took to it
like a pig to a muck heap, which is pretty much the same. Never found a
tosheroon yet, but I hope to do so before I die.’

He laughed and decided to give the very serious-looking man something to
think about, and so he added, ‘Of course I found practically everything
else, sir – everything what folk throw away, or lose, or don’t care
about. It’s amazing what you can find down there, especially under the
teaching hospitals, oh my word yes! I can walk from one side of London
to another underground, come up anywhere I like, and I’ll tell you, sir,
you won’t believe me sometimes, sir, beautiful so it is! It’s like
walking through old houses sometimes, the slopes of the stairs and stuff
growing on the walls – the Grotto, Windy Corner, the Queen’s Bedroom,
the Chamber of Whispers and all the other places we toshers know like
the backs of our hands, sir, once we’ve washed them, of course. When the
evening light strikes and comes off the river, it looks like a paradise,
sir. I can’t expect you to believe it, but so it does.’

Dodger paused and considered what he had just said, common sense meaning
that he wouldn’t tell a man with a poised pencil about stealing things
and being a snakesman and a thief; that sort of revelation was fine for
someone like Charlie, but for the likes of Mister Mayhew it seemed more
sensible to put a shine on things.

‘One time I even found an old bedstead down there. And it’s amazing how
the light finds a way in,’ he finished, and smiled at Mister Mayhew, who
was looking at him with an expression halfway between shock and
puzzlement, with perhaps a tiny bit of admiration.

Now the man said, ‘One last thing, Mister Dodger. Would you mind telling
me how much you glean from your labours as a tosher?’

Dodger had pretty much expected something like this. He instinctively
halved the amount of his earnings, saying, ‘Well, there’s good days and
there’s bad days, sir, but I reckon I might earn as much as a chimney
sweep, with every now and again a little windfall.’

‘And are you happy in your occupation?’

‘Oh yes, sir. I go where I please, I ain’t answerable to anybody, and
every day is a sort of adventure, sir, if you get my meaning.’ And in
order to boost his bona fides as an upstanding young gentleman he added,
‘Of course, sometimes I find something down there that someone has lost,
and it does my heart good to give it back to them.’ Well, it was
technically true, he thought to himself, even if a few shillings did
come into the picture.

After a while the man cleared his throat and said, ‘Mister Dodger, thank
you for that insight. I see that you have finished your breakfast to the
extent that the plate positively shines, and now perhaps it is time to
let you meet our guest again. Have you ever had such a thing as a bath?
I must say that, considering your calling, you look reasonably clean.’

Dodger smirked at this. ‘That’s because of Solomon, sir, the cove what I
live with. He is a devil for dirt, sir, on account of being one of the
chosen people. And yes, there is a bath in the back room, sir – one of
those little ones you stand in, kind of like washing yourself down with
a rag, sir, and soap too, my oath, yes. I heard someone say cleanliness
is next to godliness, but I reckon Sol reckons that cleanliness gives
godliness a run for its money.’

Mister Mayhew was staring at Dodger like a man who has found a sixpence
in a handful of farthings. Now he said, ‘You amaze me, Mister Dodger;
you appear to be a brand plucking himself from the burning. Please do
follow me.’

A minute later Dodger was ushered into the rather dark maids’ room
upstairs. The golden-haired girl was sitting upright on one of the beds,
like somebody who has just got up; and the room was suddenly bright from
the girl’s smile, at least in the depths of Dodger, whose heart,
somewhat corroded, was beating fast.

Mister Mayhew said, ‘Here is the young lady, whom I’m glad to say is
making progress.’ He gestured to the other person in the room. ‘This, of
course, is my wife Jane, whom I believe you met earlier but have not
been introduced to as yet. My dear, this is Mister Dodger, the saviour
of damsels in distress, as I believe you know.’

Dodger wasn’t sometimes certain that he understood what Mister Mayhew
was saying, but he thought it would be sensible to point out, just in
case there would be trouble later, ‘There was only one damsel in
distress, sir – if the damsel means a lady, of course. But just one,
sir.’

Mrs Mayhew – who had been sitting beside the girl, a soup bowl and spoon
in her hand – stood up and held out her hand. ‘One damsel in distress,
indeed, Mister Dodger. How foolish of my husband to believe that there
might be more than one.’ She smiled, and so did her husband, and Dodger
wondered if he had missed some kind of joke, but Mrs Mayhew hadn’t
finished yet.

Dodger knew about families, and husbands and wives; often, wives helped
their menfolk who sold stuff on the streets like baked potatoes and
sandwiches – although baked potatoes were always a treat – and whole
families worked at the game. Dodger, who had the eye for this sort of
thing, watched the families and watched their faces and watched how they
spoke to one another, and sometimes it seemed to him that although the
man was the master, which was of course only right and proper, if you
watched and listened you would see that their marriage was like a barge
on the river, with the wife being the wind that told the captain which
way the barge would sail. Mrs Mayhew, if not being the wind, certainly
knew when to apply the right puff.

The couple smiled at one another, and Mrs Mayhew said sadly, ‘I’m afraid
that the dreadful beating this young lady had – and I suspect had not
endured for the first time – has in some way tangled her wits, so
unfortunately I cannot introduce you properly. “Simplicity” will suffice
for a name, a good Christian name, until we know more. And the name
belonged to an old friend of mine, and so I am fond of it. She is quite
young and one must hope that she will heal rapidly. At the moment,
however, I keep the curtains mostly closed to keep out as much as
possible of the noise of carriages in the streets – they appear to make
Simplicity fearful. However, I’m glad to see that her physical faculties
seem to be coming back slowly and the bruises are fading. Unfortunately
I am led to believe that her life in recent times has not been . . .
pleasant, although there are signs that at one time it may have been
rather more . . . agreeable. After all, surely somebody must have cared
for her to give her that wonderful ring she wears.’

Dodger didn’t need to know the precise code that passed between Mister
Mayhew and his wife, but he could see that much of it consisted of
meaningful looks from one to the other, and one of the messages was:
Better not to talk about a valuable ring in front of this lad.

He said, ‘She gets worried when she hears carriages, does she? What
about other street noises, like horses or honey wagons¹ – they tend to
rumble a lot?’

Mrs Mayhew said, ‘You are a very astute young man.’

Dodger blushed, and said, ‘I’m sorry, missus, but my best trousers are
in the wash.’

Without any change of expression, Mrs Mayhew said, ‘No, Mister Dodger, I
meant that you are very quick to understand things, and you are a man of
the world, or should I say London, which is practically the same thing.
I know that Mister Dickens is optimistic that you may be able to help us
solve this little mystery.’ She exchanged another glance with her
husband and said, ‘I assume you know that there was another most
unpleasant aspect to this whole Satanic business.’ She hesitated, as if
trying to move unpleasant thoughts in her mind, then said, ‘I believe
you are aware that the young lady was . . . she was . . . she
lost . . .’ Mrs Mayhew rushed out in embarrassed confusion, leaving the
room suddenly silent.

Dodger glanced at Simplicity, and then said to Mister Mayhew, ‘Sir, if
you do not object, I would very much like to talk to Simplicity alone.
Possibly I can also help her eat her soup. I have a feeling she might be
capable of talking a little to me again.’

‘Well, it would be unseemly to leave a young lady alone in a bedroom in
your company.’

‘Yes, sir, and it’s unseemly to beat a lady half to death and try to
drown her, but that wasn’t me, sir. So I think, sir, in the privacy of
this house, you might allow the rule to be a little more . . . human?’

There was the sound of Mrs Mayhew hovering on the landing and Henry
Mayhew, suddenly bewildered, stirred and said, ‘I will leave the door
open, sir. If Miss Simplicity agrees.’

His words were instantly followed from the bed with the unmistakable
tones of Simplicity, saying, ‘Please, sir, I would very much like to
have a Christian word with my saviour.’

True to his word, Mister Mayhew did leave the door slightly ajar and so,
awkwardly for once, Dodger sat down on the chair that Henry Mayhew’s
wife had vacated and smiled nervously at Simplicity, who returned it
with considerable interest. Then he picked up the soup spoon and handed
it to her, saying, ‘What is it that you would like to happen next?’

Her smile broadening, Simplicity very gently took the spoon, put it to
her mouth and drank the soup. Speaking quietly, she said, ‘I would like
to say that I want to go home, but I have no home now. And I have to
know who I can trust. Can I trust you, Dodger? I think I might be able
to trust a man who has fought valiantly for a woman he doesn’t even
know.’

Dodger tried to look as though this was all in a day’s work. ‘You know,
I’m quite sure you can trust Mister and Mrs Mayhew,’ he said.

But much to his surprise, she said, ‘No, I’m not sure. Mister Mayhew
would prefer that you and I were not talking, Dodger. He seems to think
that you would take some kind of advantage of me and I believe the word
for that is’ – she hesitated for a moment – ‘is incongruous! You saved
me, you fought for me, and now you are going to do me harm? They are
good people, no doubt, but good people, for example, might think that
they should deliver me to the agents of my husband because I am his
wife. People can be very exact about that sort of thing. And no doubt a
man would turn up with something very official and signed with a very
impressive seal, and they would obey the law. A law which would see me
taken away from the country where my mother was born and back to a
husband who is embarrassed by me and does not dare defy his father.’

Her voice grew stronger and stronger as she spoke but, Dodger suddenly
realized, she was also sounding more and more like a street girl –
someone who knew how to play a game. The slight Germanic accent had gone
and the vowels of England were in her tone, and she was doing what every
smart person did, which was to never tell anybody anything that they
didn’t need to know.

But he could not place her accent. He knew about other languages, but as
a decent Londoner he vaguely disapproved of them, knowing full well that
anyone who wasn’t English was obviously an enemy sooner or later. You
couldn’t hang around the docks without picking up, if not the languages,
at least the sounds the languages made, and so if you listened carefully
a Dutchman spoke differently from a German, and you could always tell a
Swede, of course, and the Finns yawned at you when they were speaking to
you. He was pin-sharp on telling one language from another, but had
never bothered to learn any of them – though by the time he was twelve
he knew the words that meant ‘Where are the naughty ladies to be found?’
in a variety of languages, including Chinese and several African ones.
Every wharf rat knew those; and the naughty ladies might give you a
farthing for setting a gentleman’s footsteps in the right direction. As
he grew older he realized that some people would say that was, in fact,
the _wrong_ direction; there were two ways of looking at the world, but
only one when you are starving.

There were sounds of stirring on the landing and he immediately stood
up, spry as a guardsman and practically saluted a very surprised Mister
Mayhew and his wife.

‘Well, sir, madam, I’ve had a nice little chat with the girl. As you
say, she seems frightened by the sound of coaches. Perhaps if I could
take her out for some air, she could see that the coaches which pass
your house are just ordinary coaches . . .? And so, if you don’t mind,
could I take her out for a walk?’

This caused such a silence that he realized this was probably not a
sensible idea. As he thought this, he suddenly also thought, I’m talking
to this gent like I’m his equal! It’s amazing how a shonky suit and a
plate of bacon and eggs can make a man feel set up! But I’m still the
lad who got up this morning as a tosher, and they’re still the gent and
his missus who got up in this big house, so I need to be careful, else
they’ll suddenly decide I’m a tosher again and chuck me out. He added to
himself, though, in a voice that seemed quite daring, ‘I don’t have no
master, nobody can give me orders, I ain’t wanted by the peelers and I
ain’t never done nothing to be ashamed of. I ain’t got as much as them,
oh my, not by a long chalk, but I am no worse than they are.’

Mrs Mayhew hesitated, and then said, very carefully, ‘Well, I am quite
certain that sooner or later Simplicity must get out in the fresh air,
so perhaps that could be arranged, Mister Dodger. But I am sure you will
understand that it could only take place in the presence of a chaperone.
You must see that leaving her just with a young man – however valiant he
may be – is something that would be very much frowned upon in polite
circles. We must be adamant in this respect, although, of course, I
believe that your intentions are entirely innocent.’

Mister Mayhew looked as embarrassed as his wife, and Dodger, still
trusting his luck, in his most ingratiating voice, said, ‘Well, dear Mrs
Mayhew, I can promise you that there will not be any hanky-panky,
because I do not know what panky is and I’ve never had a hanky. Only a
wipe.’

For a moment her steely glare melted again and Mrs Mayhew said, ‘You are
a very forward young man, Mister Dodger.’

‘I certainly hope so, Mrs Mayhew; indeed sometimes I think I am being
pulled forward through no fault of my own. However, Mrs Mayhew, I am
sure you will agree with me that being forward is better by far than
being backward. And I believe I care for Miss Simplicity. I was thinking
too that we all want to find the coves who beat her up, so if I walked
about with her in the town she might see or hear something that could
give me a clue. I know that the carriage she escaped from made a noise
that I, for one, haven’t heard on a carriage wheel. So what I say is:
Find the carriage, find a clue.’

Mister Mayhew looked at his wife and said, ‘You are commendably
eloquent, Mister Dodger, but we – that is, my wife and myself – feel
there could be other aspects to this situation.’

Dodger straightened up. ‘Yes, sir, I fear there may be, and I rather
think so does Charlie. I don’t know what an eloquent is, but I do know
London, sir, every dirty inch and where it’s safe to go and where it’s
not safe to go. Everybody knows Dodger, sir, and Dodger knows everybody.
So Dodger will find out what you want me to find out.’

‘Yes, Mister Dodger,’ Mrs Mayhew said. ‘I’m quite certain that is true,
but my husband and I feel that we stand _in loco parentis_ to this young
lady, who appears to have no one else to care for her, and so the social
niceties must be observed.’

Dodger, who didn’t know what a _loco parentis_ was, shrugged and said,
‘Right you are, missus, but I will be passing this way again tomorrow
just after lunch.’ He added, raising his voice a little, ‘In case anyone
should change their mind.’

Mister Mayhew caught up with him just as he reached the kitchen and
said, ‘My wife is a little highly strung right now, if you know what I
mean.’

All that Dodger could find to say was, ‘No, I don’t,’ and like two
gentlemen they left it at that, and he shook hands with Mister Mayhew
and hurried through the kitchen door, his head still reeling with the
way they seemed to let him speak out. Wait till he told Sol!

The cook did not look surprised when he came into the kitchen. She said,
‘Well, my lad, ain’t you the rising star, hob nobbing with your elders
and betters! Good for you! I reckon what I see in front of me now is not
just another tosher but a smart young man for whom the world is an
opportunity.’ She handed him a greasy package, saying, ‘Money is tight
here these days – things are a bit worrying all round, and of course you
won’t know it but we got rid of the second maid. If things get any
worse, I reckon Mrs Sharples will be next, no loss, and then I suspect
that it will be me, although I can’t see my lady working down here. But
I done you a package of leftovers – some cold potatoes and carrots, and
a nice piece of pork.’

Dodger took the package, and said, ‘Thank you very much. I’m very
grateful to you.’

This caused Mrs Quickly to throw her arms open in an attempt to cuddle
him. ‘Spoken like a true gentleman. I couldn’t possibly expect a little
kiss . . .?’ she asked hopefully.

And so Dodger kissed the cook – a rather pneumatic lady who kissed at
some length – and when he was allowed to break free, she said, ‘When you
rise up high, remember them as live lowly.’

1 Around about the time of Dodger, most sewerage in London went into
septic tanks, or cesspits. The tanks were emptied out and the contents
taken away by honey wagons.

[images]

CHAPTER 6

IN WHICH SIXPENCE BUYS A LOT OF SOUP, AND A FOREIGNER’S GOLD BUYS A
SPY . . .

THE EMBARRASSMENT OF this followed Dodger all the way back home, as did
a certain aroma of giblets. Somehow he wasn’t quite as certain of who he
was now – a kid from the sewers, or somebody who chats with the gentry –
although he knew enough to understand that Mister and Mrs Mayhew were
not exactly all that much like gentry, even with their house and
servants. It was certainly better than anything Dodger had lived in, but
the place was just a bit shabby here and there. Not really dirty, but
just enough to indicate that money was perhaps tight in this household,
like Mrs Quickly said, so every penny had to be counted.

Mrs Mayhew had been worried too, and Dodger rather felt that the worry
was somehow built in, and not just about Simplicity. He shrugged it off.
Maybe that’s how it goes, he thought. The more you’ve got, the more
worried you become, just in case you lose it. If money gets a bit short,
then you might be worrying about losing your nice house and all those
pretty little ornaments.

Dodger hadn’t ever worried too much about anything beyond the important
things – a decent meal and a warm place to sleep. You didn’t need a
house full of little ornaments (and Dodger was a great one for noticing
little ornaments, especially the kind that could be picked up very
easily and shoved into a pocket at speed and sold again almost as fast).
But what was the point of them? To show that you could afford them? How
much better did that make you feel? How much happier were you really?

The Mayhew household had been doing its duty in a stiff kind of way, but
it didn’t appear to be very happy – there had been a kind of tension
there which he couldn’t quite fathom, unhappiness riding on the very air
– and in a strange way that made Dodger feel a little unhappy himself,
and he wondered why. Unhappiness was a state of mind generally alien to
him. Who had the _time_ to be unhappy, after all? He was often pissed
off, fed up, even angry, but these were just clouds in the sky; sooner
or later they passed. They never lasted long. But as he walked aimlessly
away from the Mayhews’ it seemed that he was dragging other people’s
worries with him.

He felt that the only cure for something like this would be to go down
into the sewers, because if you had to be down in the dumps you might as
well have a feel around and see if you could find sixpence. He would
have to go and get changed – the shonky outfit was the finest and
smartest he had ever worn, and it would never do to go to work in, would
it?

But . . . Simplicity. He couldn’t stop thinking about her. Wondering who
she might be, and who might know what had happened to her and why. And
who had _hurt_ her, of course. He really, really _needed_ to know that
now. And in this crowded town there would always be somebody to overhear
anything that a body said.

The police wouldn’t know _anything_, of course – that was because no one
in their right mind ever talked to the peelers. One or two of them were
OK, but it didn’t pay to trust them. However, people talked to Dodger,
good old Dodger, especially when he loaned them a sixpence, to be repaid
on St Never’s Day.

And so, on his winding way back to the attic to change, a route not just
roundabout but swings and slides as well, he found time to lounge around
chatting to the dregs of the earth; and to the Cockneys, who sold apples
and who liked nothing better than to gang up on the peelers for a real
old-fashioned, no-holds-barred war in which any weapon was fair game. He
spoke to the street traders, trading on the smallest of margins; and he
chatted to the ladies who hung about doing nothing very much, but always
happy to meet a gentleman with money who would be generous to a girl,
especially after his drink had been spiked – after which he could have
the luxury of a long voyage down the Thames to places far, far away
where he would possibly meet interesting people, some of whom might even
endeavour to eat him, by all accounts. If a gentleman was very unlucky –
or upset someone like Mrs Holland on Bankside – he would do the journey
down the Thames without a boat . . .

Then there were the men offering games of Crown and Anchor, which at
least had the benefit of being winnable if you were sober enough and the
dice rolled your way – unlike the other game you might be offered by a
cheery man who owned nothing more than one flat wooden board on which
were three thimbles and one pea. On that little battlefield you would
indeed bet some money on the whereabouts of the said pea, relying on
your keen eyesight to keep track of it as the thimbles turned and spun
under the hands of the cheerful chattering man. You would never, _ever_
guess right, because where the pea really was was known only to the
cheerful man and God – and probably not even God was certain. If you had
drunk enough, you would try again and again, betting more and more, ’cos
sooner or later, even if you simply guessed, it was _surely_ bound to be
under the one you guessed. But sadly, it never would be, ever.

Finally, of course, there was the Punch and Judy man, running his puppet
show, which was even more of a hoot these days now there was a policeman
for Mister Punch to beat with his stick. The kids laughed, and the
adults would laugh, and everyone would laugh as the laughing Mister
Punch screamed, ‘_That’s the way to do it!_’ in that squeaky voice of
his, like some terrible bird of prey . . . or the wheels of a coach.

You knew when you grew up that Punch was the man who throws the baby out
of the window and beats his wife . . . Of course, such things did
happen: certainly the beating of the wife, and as to what might happen
to the baby, that might not be the subject for children – not a happy
family.

Now Dodger, into whose mind was creeping a dreadful shining darkness in
which lay a wonderful girl with golden hair, had to restrain his fists
from knocking out that damned shrieking puppet as he passed the stall.
He felt himself shiver for a moment and brought himself back down to
earth. He _knew_ all this, had known it for _ever_. But Simplicity . . .
well, Simplicity was someone he could maybe do something about. And that
something wasn’t just for Simplicity; it was for himself too, in some
funny way he couldn’t quite work out yet.

Better though, if he wanted to see things that didn’t make him feel sick
or angry, he would find the men whose dogs could do tricks, or the men
who lifted heavy weights, or the boxers – bare knuckles, of course.

But today, today Dodger was asking questions. And he had done his best.
He had spoken to two ladies waiting for a gent. He had chatted to the
Crown and Anchor man, who knew him by name, and even the man who lifted
weights, who had grunted with pleasure. On one occasion he even reminded
somebody of the sixpence he had loaned to him because of his poor old
mummy and subtly said, ‘Oh no, don’t bother, I’m sure you will find a
way to repay me someday.’ In short, Dodger moved over the face of the
world – or at least that part encompassed over the stews of London –
spreading Dodger like a cat spreads piss and leaving little questions in
the air. So that if ever somebody heard a coach that screamed, they
might just have a word with Dodger; and even better, he thought, if
someone who _owned_ a coach that screamed, maybe screamed like a gutted
pig, he might want to sort it out with the man who was asking all those
questions. It was like throwing breadcrumbs into a stream to see if
something would rise; the drawback of this method, he knew, might be
that what would rise would be a shark.

Then he remembered the Happy Family man. He hesitated after this
thought, and wondered where and when he had last seen the Happy Family
man and his wagon; probably on one of the bridges, where there was
always such a lot of passing trade. It was quite magical, the happy
family – that little cart with its odd menagerie of animals all living
so peacefully together. He would have to take Simplicity to see it as
soon as possible – she would surely enjoy it. Then he realized he was
crying, seeing again inside his head a beautiful face that looked as if
it had been pushed down some stairs. Somebody had done that to her, and
as he wiped his nose with a rag, he vowed that one day he would indeed
take her Mister Punch and back him up to a wall somewhere and most
surely make him mind his manners.

But now he was startled by somebody tugging at his trouser leg, and he
looked down irritably at a couple of kids, maybe five years old, or six
perhaps, looking up at him with their hands out. It wasn’t the kind of
tableau he needed to see right now, but both of them had one hand held
out while the other one was firmly grasped by their friend. He
remembered doing that sort of thing once upon a time, but only to people
he had thought of as wealthy – although when you are hungry and five
years old, everybody has more money than you. In his smart clobber, of
course, he didn’t look like a tosher no more. He told himself, you still
are a tosher, but not just a tosher, and right now you are going to be a
gentleman to the tune of sixpence.

So he led the kids to the stall run by Marie Jo, who dispensed
nourishing soup to all and sundry who could put down a few farthings –
perhaps even less if she was in a generous mood.

Marie Jo was one of the good ones, and there weren’t enough of them.
Among the tales that people told about her was that she had once been a
famous actress over in Froggy parts, and indeed there was always, even
in these days, something fey about her, something mercurial. According
to rumours, she was once married to a soldier who got shot in some war
or other, but fortunately not before he had whispered to her the
whereabouts of all the loot he had picked up in his many campaigns.

She, being a decent sort, despite the fact of being married to a Froggy
all them years, had set up this stall, which was one you could trust:
trust for no rats in the soup, trust for no things worse than rats,
trust her not to sell soup that had bits of cats and dogs in it. Marie
Jo’s soup was full of lentils and other odds and ends; slightly scruffy
perhaps, but taken all together it did you good and kept you warm. All
right, there may occasionally have been a bit of horse, that being the
Froggy way, but it just meant you had a slightly more nourishing soup.
It had been said that even some of the grand eating places these days
would give Marie Jo leftovers, knowing that they would be going on her
stall. Apparently, people said, her French wiles twisted the nobby chefs
around her little finger, but ‘Well done, her,’ everyone said, because
it all went in the great big pot that she stirred all night, pausing
only to dip the ladle in for the next customer; and what you paid was
what she reckoned you ought to pay, and because people didn’t like to
see her shake the ladle at them for being greedy, nobody haggled.

And so, when Dodger turned up with the two kids in tow, she looked him
up and down and said, ‘Well now, aren’t we in the money, Dodger, and who
did you steal that from?’ But she was laughing, perhaps because both of
them could surely remember the time – years ago before her hair was so
white – when Dodger himself was very small and had hung around near her
stand with one hand out, looking very sad and very hopeful, just like
the pair he was delivering.

He said, ‘Nothing for me, Marie Jo, but feed these two up today and
tomorrow to the length of sixpence please?’

The expression on her face was strange. Like the soup she sold it was
full of everything, but mostly it was full of surprise. But this was the
street, and she said, ‘Let me see your sixpence, young Dodger.’ He
plonked it on the stall, where she looked at it, looked at him, looked
at the kids who were very nearly drooling with anticipation, then looked
back at Dodger, who was red with embarrassment, and she said quietly,
‘Why, oh why, well now, here’s the thing and no mistake, what am I to
do?’ Then her face broke out into wrinkly smiles as she said, ‘For you,
Dodger, I will feed the little buggers today and tomorrow, maybe the
next day too, but oh my word what has happened? Glory be! The world has
gone upside down while I wasn’t looking! Don’t tell me that you have
been going to church – I’m sure the confessional would not be big enough
to hold everything you’ve got to say! And lo, what is this? My little
Dodger has grown up to be an angel.’

Marie Jo pronounced his name ‘Dodgeurr’, which sent little silver
messages passing up and down his spine every time he heard it. Marie Jo
knew everybody, and all about everybody, and now she looked at Dodger
with a dangerous smile, but you always had to play her game, so he
smiled back and said, ‘Now don’t you go saying those things about me,
Marie Jo! I don’t want nobody to whiten my name! But well, I was a kid
once, you know what I mean? Mind, if you keep tally of what you feed
them, I’ll see to it you get the cash later, trust me.’

Marie Jo blew him a little kiss with the smell of peppermint in it,
lowered her voice, leaned forward and said, ‘I’m hearing all kinds of
things concerning you, my lad. Careful how you tread! One of them was
the little fracas you had with Stumpy yesterday. He’s boasting about it,
you know.’ She lowered her voice still further. ‘Then there was a
gentleman. And I know a gentleman when I see one. He was asking about
someone called Dodger, and I don’t think it was because he wanted to
give you a present. He was an expensive kind of gentleman.’

‘He wasn’t called Dickens, was he?’ said Dodger.

‘No, I know _him_ – Mister Charlie, the reporter man, knows the peelers.
One of you insufferable English, though. If I had to guess, my friend,
this gentleman was more like a lawyer.’ Then, as if nothing had
happened, she turned to the next customer without a further glance.

Dodger wandered on, meeting somebody he knew on every street corner,
with a bit of banter here and a bit of conversation there, and every now
and then asking a little question – not very important really, just as a
sort of afterthought, concerning a girl with golden hair escaping from a
carriage into the storm.

Not that _he_ was interested, of course; it was just something he had
heard, in a round about way, as it were – not for any special reason, of
course. It was just good old Dodger, and everybody knew Dodger, wanting
to know about the coach and the girl with the golden hair. He would have
to be careful how he walked, but so what? He always was. And right now
he was at the bottom of the rickety staircase that led up to the
tenement attic.

Home, where Solomon was, as usual, at work. He always was; he was never
_hard_ at work – he was always soft at work, almost always on tiny
things that needed tiny tools and considerable amounts of patience, and
a gentle hand as well as, sometimes, a large magnifying glass. Onan was
curled up under his chair, as only Onan could curl.

The old man took his time relocking the door, then said, ‘Mmm, a busy
day again, my friend, I hope it has proved fruitful?’ Dodger showed him
the largesse from the kitchens of the Mayhews, and Solomon said, ‘Mmm,
very nice, really very nice and a fine piece of pork, I see; possibly a
casserole later, I think. Well done.’

Some years ago, after he had brought home a piece of pork that had
remarkably tumbled out of a kitchen window and right into the innocent
hands of Dodger, who had merely been passing by, Dodger had said to
Solomon, ‘I thought you Jews were not allowed to eat pork, right?’

If Onan was the king of curling up, Solomon was a prince of the shrug.
‘Strictly speaking,’ he had answered, ‘that may be so mmm, but another
set of rules applies. Firstly, this is a gift from God and one should
never refuse a gift given freely, and secondly, this pork appears to be
quite good, better than usual, and I am an old man and I am mmm very
hungry. Sometimes I think that the rules made centuries ago for the
purpose of getting my excitable and bickering forebears across the
desert cannot easily be said to apply in this town with its rains, smogs
and fogs. Besides, I am an elderly man and I am quite hungry, and I have
mentioned this twice, because I think it is very relevant. I think in
the circumstances that God will understand, or He is not the God I know.
That is one of the mmm good things about being Jewish. After my wife was
killed in that pogrom in Russia I came to England with only my tools,
and when I saw the white cliffs of Dover, alone without my wife, I said,
“God, today I don’t believe in you any more.”’

‘What did God say?’ Dodger had asked.

Solomon had sighed theatrically, as if he had been put upon by the
question, and then smiled and said, ‘Mmm, God said to me, “I understand,
Solomon, let me know when you change your mind,” and I was really
pleased with that, because I’d had my say and the world was better, and
now I sit in a place that is rather dirty, but I am free. And I am free
to eat pork, if God so wills it that pork comes my way.’

Now Solomon turned back to his work. ‘I am making sprockets, my boy, for
this watch. It is engrossing work requiring considerable coordination of
hand and eye, but also in its way the work is very soothing, and that is
why I look forward to making a sprocket or two. It means I’m helping
time know what it is, just as time knows what I will become.’

There was silence after that, apart from the reassuring noises of
Solomon’s tools, and that was just as well because Dodger didn’t know
what to say, but he wondered whether all that was because Solomon was
Jewish or because Solomon was quite old, or both, and so he said, ‘I
want to do a bit of thinking, if that’s all right with you? I’ll get
changed, obviously.’

This was because Dodger was certain he did his best thinking on the
tosh. It had rained a bit last night, but not too much, and now he
wanted some time with nobody else in it.

Solomon waved him away. ‘Take your time, boy. And take Onan too, if you
would be so kind . . .’

A little while later, a little way away, the lid rose on a grating and
Dodger dropped comfortably into his world. It wasn’t too bad, because of
the rain, and because it was still daylight there were echoes, oh yes,
the echoes. It was amazing what the drains picked up, and voices could
echo along for quite a way. Every sound left its dying ghost, bouncing
who knew how far?

Then, of course, there were the noises from the street; sometimes you
could follow a conversation if it was near a drain, people talking away
totally oblivious to the tosher hiding below. Once, he had heard a lady
get out of a carriage, stumble and drop her purse, which opened. Some of
the money, as the luck of the tosher would have it, rolled into the
nearest drain. Young Dodger had heard her cries, and the curses to the
footman who she said hadn’t been holding the door properly, and he
followed the sound already down in the sewer to where, falling like
manna from heaven, one half sovereign, two half crowns, a sixpence, four
pennies and a farthing dropped almost into his hands.

At the time he had been quite indignant about the farthing; what was a
grand lady with a coachman doing with one farthing in her purse?!
Farthings were for poor people, and so were half farthings!

You didn’t often get days as good as that, but it was night time when
the sewers became strangely alive. Toshers liked nights with a bit of
moonlight. If they went down there then, they sometimes carried a dark
lantern – one of the ones with the little door so you could shut off the
light if you didn’t want to be seen. But those came expensive and were
cumbersome, and the tosher sometimes had to move fast.

It wasn’t only good honest toshers down there in the dark, though, oh no
and dearie! There were rats too, of course – it was their natural home,
and they didn’t particularly want to meet you and you didn’t want to
meet them – but after the rats came the rat-catchers, trapping rats for
the dog fights.

And then you got down to the really dreadful things . . .

There were still plenty of places in the city where the sewers were open
and above ground, and where some of them were pretending to be rivers;
this meant that anything that could float or anything that could roll
could be dropped or trapped in them in the dead of night. A sensible
tosher stayed away from those areas, but there were other people who
used the privacy of the sewers for purposes of their own – they were the
kind of people who normally wouldn’t go out of their way to do a
horrible thing to a tosher, but on the other hand they were the kind of
people who might just do so if the mood took them, just for a laugh.

They liked a laugh . . .

Dodger’s thoughts shot back to what Marie Jo had told him. Someone who
looked like a lawyer was asking after somebody called Dodger. And Marie
Jo was a very shrewd lady; otherwise she wouldn’t have survived.

These thoughts spread out in his brain like the incoming tide (always a
nuisance to toshers near the Thames). And an answer sprang back at him.

This was his territory; he knew every sewer in the length and breadth of
the city, every little hidey hole that could barely be seen lest you
knew where to look, the places that were half blocked off and nobody
knew they were there. Honestly, he could navigate by the smells
themselves and he knew exactly where he was right now. If someone is
looking for me, he thought, if I’m going to have to fight someone, I
must see to it that it’s on my patch. I’m Dodger; I can dodge down here.

Right now, the air in the tunnel was more or less sweet – well, in
comparison to the things that weren’t sweet at all, with the possible
exception of Onan who had, of course, brought his own particular odours
with him. Dodger gave the two-tone whistle that every tosher knew, and
listened for a reply; there was none, and so, at least for now, he had
this area all to himself, as he so often did.

Almost without thinking he picked up a tie pin and a farthing within a
couple of yards; luck was with him, and he wondered if it was because he
had just done a good deed. As he thought this, Onan began to snuffle and
whine and worry at something in a broken-down pile of old bricks. Dodger
suddenly heard a _clink_ as Onan’s nose knocked something loose. Now the
dog had something golden in his jaws – a gold ring with a big stone in
it! Worth at least a sovereign!

Good old Onan! And thanks to the Lady. But things happened, or didn’t
happen, and that’s all there was to it, Dodger knew. You could drive
yourself mad thinking otherwise.

In the gloom, listening to the sounds of the world above, hunting
through the tunnels, Dodger was in his element and Dodger was happy.

Elsewhere, others were not . . .

There were many candles in this room, but none of them illuminated the
face of the man seated by the tapestry. This considerably disconcerted
the man known to his special clients as Sharp Bob – most certainly not
the name he used when dealing with more ordinary legal affairs. He
always liked to see whoever it was who was employing him; on the other
hand, he also liked gold sovereigns, and they didn’t worry him at all –
he was always pleased to see them. He could see two of them now; a lamp
in the darkness before him showed them shining on a low table. He hadn’t
picked them up yet, because he thought, If I pick them up before that
incredibly toffish voice tells me to, for a certainty I might just have
my knuckles rapped, or worse.

He didn’t like this place. He hadn’t liked having to spend some time in
that rattling coach with a blindfold over his eyes and a man with a
foreign accent sitting opposite him who had threatened to do him a
mischief if he tried to take it off. He didn’t like working for men with
foreign accents, when it came down to it. Not to be trusted. Not like
doing business with a good, honest, God-fearing Englishman – Sharp Bob
knew how to deal with _them_. He didn’t like the way the journey here
had been all around the houses either, doubling back and constantly
changing direction like a thief on the run. Nor did he like the fact
that after this interview he would have to go through the whole business
again.

This place was plush – that was certain; it even smelled plush.
Occasionally people walked past behind him and that made him angry too,
because he dared not turn his head. Creepy stuff. He had been here for
ten minutes, waiting for whoever it was who had just walked silently
over to a chair on the other side of the flames – a fact he knew only
because the padded leather chair had complained with that little farting
noise that only the very best padded leather chairs gave off when sat
upon. Sharp Bob knew a good chair when he heard it, for he had been in
the houses of the mighty before, though not on business such as this.

Now there was a stirring, and the someone behind the flames who was
anxious not to be seen was about to talk. At this point Sharp Bob
realized that the really anxious one was himself, and he had a terrible
premonition that he would sooner or later have to pass water.

He nearly did when the hidden voice said: ‘Also, Mister Sharp Robert, I
believe you told us that your men would have no difficulty in dealing
with one simple girl. And yet, my friend, it would appear that she has
twice escaped you and you were only able to catch her once. This does
not, I am sure you will not blame me for pointing out, appear to be a
very good record, wouldn’t you say?’

There was something in the voice which disturbed Sharp Bob. It was
English, but not quite English; as if a foreigner had learned English
absolutely perfectly, but hadn’t been able to include all the little
usages that a native-born speaker would have picked up. In fact, as
English, it was too good. Too perfect. Lacking the slurs and
imperfections that the native users sprinkled on their conversations. He
sat in his puddle of darkness – and fortunately nothing else at the
moment – and said, ‘Well, sir, we expected a girl, but that lady had a
punch on her that knocked out one of my boys. And one of them’s been in
the ring, sir! She was fast and clever, sir, fighting like anything, and
you did say that you wanted her back and on the boat in one piece.
Unfortunately my boys, quite frankly, sir, also wanted to get home in
one piece. They say there never was a girl like that who kicked and spat
and punched like a good ’un, and I’ve got one lad now who walks funny
and is sporting a black eye, and another who had two of his fingers torn
off. I mean, the first time she took us by surprise, but that time she
just ran and they got her back in and tied down in your coach. Of
course, after that we were too late for the boat, which is why we were
bringing her back to you.’

Sharp Bob was feeling on very shaky ground at the moment because, after
all, it had hardly been his fault.

‘Just as I told your colleague earlier, sir,’ he went on, ‘everything
would have been all right on the second try, but she kicked the door out
and jumped off in the middle of that terrible thunderstorm. Your
coachman couldn’t stop the horses, sir, not in that rain. Very unusual
circumstances. Difficult to predict.’

In the silence there was the sound of a page turning and a voice said,
‘And apparently, Mister Sharp Robert, a person called’ – the pages
rustled – ‘Dodger actually wounded your two men, very nearly drowning
one in a gutter. It seems to me that we should perhaps have employed him
instead.’

The man who liked to think of himself as Sharp Bob but wasn’t feeling
all that sharp right now said, ‘I can still be of some help, sir,
bearing in mind that you already owe me quite a lot for having tracked
her down in the first place. I believe you have had my bill for that for
some time . . .?’

The speaker ignored the latter part of this statement, saying instead,
‘I would like to assume that you have some news pertaining to this
little difficulty. I understand there was something further about this
troublemaker? Do be so kind as to enlighten me, will you?’

Sharp Bob said, ‘He has been asking around, sir, and being very what you
might call methodical about it, sir.’

Sharp Bob was satisfied with ‘methodical’ as a description, but not
pleased when the voice said, unnecessarily sharply in his opinion, ‘Good
heavens, man, surely you can use your own initiative, can you not?’

Sharp Bob knew what an initiative was, but right now he was certain he
hadn’t got one. Hopefully he said, ‘The body asking the questions ain’t
just any nobody, if you get my drift; he’s got _contacts_ on the street,
which makes things a little more difficult.’

The voice sounded angry, and that did not sit well with Sharp Bob’s
bladder. Things got no better when, out of the dark, the voice came back
with, ‘Is he working for a policeman . . . what you call, I believe, a
peeler?’

A peeler! What a word to use to a troubled gentleman of fortune. The
bloody, bloody peelers. You couldn’t bribe them, you couldn’t make
friends with them – not like the old Bow Street runners – and mostly the
new boys were war veterans. If you had been in some of the wars lately
and come back with all your bits still attached to your body, then that
meant you were either a hard man or very, very lucky. Bloody Mister Peel
had sent them scurrying about like busybodies and no mistake, and they
wouldn’t take no for an answer, and mostly they wouldn’t take any answer
at all from anyone unless it was: ‘It’s a fair cop, I’ll come quietly,
sir.’ You cried uncle, you cried aunt, you cried your eyes out the
moment you fell foul of the peelers, and the bleeders wouldn’t even help
you put them back, and they drank like fish and roared like the Devil,
and weren’t friends with anybody – and that, amazingly, included the
nobs. It _certainly_ included those on the fringes of the legal
business, like himself, who had relied on the old Bow Street boys who
were, well . . . understanding, especially when money jingled.

What could you do with men like the peelers, who respected nobody except
Sir Robert Peel himself? The very thought of them was just another
problem for Sharp Bob’s bladder to cope with. A certain amount of fear
trickled down his leg as he said carefully, ‘No, sir, not for the
peelers, sir. He’s a bloke, sir, although he is really more of a geezer,
sir, if you catch my meaning?’

This led to a frosty silence, which was followed by, ‘I do not intend to
catch anything of yours, Mister Bob. What is a geezer?’ The word was
said as if the speaker was pulling a dead mouse out of their soup, or
more accurately, half a dead mouse.

Sharp Bob, who in these circumstances now realized that only half his
name was accurate, was struggling now. Didn’t everybody know what a
geezer was? Of course they did! Well, every Londoner did, anyway. A
geezer was . . . well, a geezer! It was like asking: What is a pint of
beer? Or, What is the sun? A geezer was a geezer; although it did occur
to Bob that he would have to do some work on the definition before he
answered the dangerous voice in the darkness.

He cleared his throat again and said, ‘A geezer, now, well, a geezer is
somebody that everybody knows, and he knows everybody, and maybe he
knows something about everyone he knows that maybe you wished he didn’t
know. Um, and well, he’s sharp, crafty, um, not exactly a thief but
somehow things find their way into his hands. Doesn’t mind a bit of
mischief, and wears the street like an overcoat. Dodger now . . . well,
Dodger’s a tosher as well, which means he knows what’s going on down in
the sewers too – a tosher, sir, being somebody who goes down there
looking for coins and suchlike which may have been lost down the drain.’
This mention of drains seemed to make Sharp Bob somewhat more uneasy as
he continued to move uncomfortably and added, ‘What I’m meaning to say,
sir, is that he is a central kind of cove, you might say – makes the
place a bit more interesting, if you know what I mean? And he’s been
seen mixing with some nobby types recently.’

Sweating hard and still squirming on his seat, Sharp Bob awaited
judgement. Above the frantic beating of his heart he thought he could
hear faint whispering beyond the wall of fire. So there was more than
one person in the room with him! He squirmed even more – this was not
going well.

Eventually, the voice said, ‘We do not have any interest in interesting
people; they can be dangerous. However, if this Dodger is asking
questions about the girl then he might either find her, or know where
she is now, and so therefore I require you to make certain that he is
watched at all times, do you understand? And, of course, it goes without
saying that there should be no way that he can know that he is being
spied on. Do I make myself clear, Mister Robert? Because I generally do.
This is a very delicate matter, and we will be _extremely_ disappointed
should matters not be brought to a happy ending. I don’t intend to
expand here, but I’m sure you will understand what an ultimate failure
ultimately entails. We want that girl, Mister Bob. We want her back.

‘Incidentally, Mister Bob, one of my associates will now take you gently
by the arm and lead you to a place where you can, as it were, find some
relief. You may take the sovereigns as a token of good faith and we rely
on you to deserve them.’

A foreigner’s gold, Sharp Bob thought, was as good as anyone else’s, but
you could get into trouble with foreigners, and he would be glad when
all this was over.

After taking up the sovereigns and being allowed the blessed relief of
the jakes, Sharp Bob was bundled back into the wretched coach, which by
the feel of it trundled him all around London again before he was rather
rudely pushed out close to his office, his mind busy with what he knew
about the lad called Dodger.

One of the invisible gentlemen who had been sitting in the dark leaned
down and, switching to his native tongue, said to the interlocutor, ‘Are
you _quite_ sure about this man, sir? After all, we _could_ get the
Outlander? I have made enquiries and he is free at the moment.’

‘No. The Outlander is sometimes very messy, dangerous; it might
become . . . political, if it was known that we had called him in. We
would prefer to avoid causing an . . . incident. No, the Outlander is
the last resort. I have heard about what he did to the family of the
Greek ambassador – it was entirely uncalled for. I won’t dream of
sending for the likes of him until every other avenue has been
fruitless. If this troublemaker persists in his trouble-making, or
brings others into the affair . . . well, then, we may need to
reconsider. For now, however, let us continue to use this Mister Robert
Sharp. It surely can’t be all that difficult, can it, for him to find a
girl for us? To follow a grubby little guttersnipe? We can always get
rid of him later if he becomes an . . . embarrassment.’

[images]

CHAPTER 7

DODGER GETS A CLOSE SHAVE AND BECOMES A HERO (AGAIN!); CHARLIE GETS A
STORY – AND A PAIR OF RUINED TROUSERS

DODGER GOT BACK home and cleaned his face and hands while Solomon dished
up the pork casserole; Solomon never said much about his time wandering
around other countries, but he had certainly learned cookery on the
journey, using spices and herbs that Dodger had never heard of.

Dodger had once asked Solomon why he had chosen to come to England, and
Solomon had said, ‘Mmm, well, my dear, it seems to me that in the pinch
most governments settle for shooting their people, but in England they
have to ask permission first. Also, people don’t much mind what you’re
doing as long as you’re not making too much noise. Mmm, I like that in
this country.’ He had paused. ‘Once, when I was running away, as usual,
I recall I met a rather hairy young man who told me that one day all
that sort of thing would be swept away. We were hiding from Cossacks at
the time. Occasionally, I mmm wonder what happened to young Karl . . .’

After the meal, which was delicious, Solomon and Dodger took Onan for
his walk while the sun chased the horizon. It was an education to see
Solomon locking up. The steps to the attic were narrow and rickety, just
like the rest of this place and more or less like everywhere else, but
it was when you got inside the attic you noticed the differences – the
steel reinforcement around the door, the lock that looked simple but was
very complicated indeed, having been made by Solomon himself. It would
have taken a small army to break in, and Dodger himself even had to give
a special knock before Solomon would open his door. He had asked Solomon
why he went to all this trouble, and the old man had said ‘A lesson
learned, my friend,’ and left it at that.

Now the streets looked a little like a fairyland under the honey glow of
the evening sun, although, it must be said, only a little. But the sun
seemed to heal the city of the argy-bargy and insults of the day,
although there were still a few stalls, their owners lighting up flares
as the light dwindled. All was calm and placid – but you knew that this
was merely the shift change, because the night people followed the day
people as, well, night follows day, although day, generally speaking,
doesn’t pick night’s pockets.

The two of them had a beer from a bottle shop, sharing some of it with
Onan while Dodger told Sol about Onan’s find in the sewers, and how he
was planning to return to the Mayhews’ house to take Simplicity for a
walk if possible the following day. Tired out, they finally headed back
to the attic.

On the way Dodger noticed something quite brilliant shining through the
filthy air and said, ‘What’s that, Sol? Is it an angel?’

It was said more in fun than anything else, but Solomon said, ‘Mmm, my
experience of angels is somewhat limited, my boy, although I do believe
they exist mmm; however, that particular angel, if I am not mistaken, is
the planet Jupiter.’

Dodger squinted at it. ‘What’s that, then?’ Sol was always telling him
stuff, but this was definitely something new.

‘You don’t know? Jupiter is a gigantic world, much bigger than the
Earth.’

Dodger stared. ‘Do you mean that Jupiter is a world with people living
on it?’

‘Mmm, I believe astronomical science is uncertain on that point mmm, but
I assume there must be, because otherwise what would be the purpose of
it? And if I may expand mmm, I will tell you that it is only one of a
number of planets, which is to say worlds, moving around the sun.’

‘What? I thought the sun went round us. I mean, you can see it doing it,
it stands to reason.’

Dodger was puzzled, and the careful voice of Solomon said, ‘Mmm, there
is no doubt about it; the fact has definitely been established. It might
also amuse you to know that the planet Jupiter has four moons, which
travel around it just like our moon travels around the Earth.’

‘What do you mean? I thought you just said we go round the sun. So where
does the moon go, then? Not round the sun too?’

‘Indeed, the moon circles the Earth and together they circle the sun,
and indeed, mmm I can assure you about the moons of Jupiter, because I
witnessed them through a telescope when I was in Holland.’

Dodger thought his head would explode. What a thing to find out. You get
up, you walk around, you think you know everything there is to know, and
suddenly it turns out that up in the sky everything is spinning around
like a top. He felt almost indignant that he hadn’t been let into the
secret before, and as they continued their walk, he listened hard as
Solomon imparted as much astronomy as he could remember, a process which
ended when Dodger said, ‘Can we get to any of these worlds?’

‘Mmm, very unlikely, they are a long way off.’

Dodger hesitated at this and said, ‘As far away as Bristol, maybe?’ He
had heard of Bristol, apparently a big port but not as big as London.

Solomon sighed and said, ‘Alas, Dodger, it is much, much further away
than Bristol; it is even much further away than Van Diemen’s Land, which
I believe is the furthest you can go from here, it being on the other
side of the world.’

It seemed to Dodger that everything he was told by Solomon stuck him
like a silver pin, which didn’t hurt but filled him up with a sort of
fuzz. He was beginning to see a world that stretched far beyond the
tunnels beneath the streets – a world which was filled with things he
didn’t know. Things he hadn’t even known he didn’t know until now.
Things he realized with a jolt that he _wanted_ to know about. He
wondered too if maybe Simplicity might be even more interested in a man
who knew this kind of thing – and he realized how much he was looking
forward to seeing her again.

As they climbed the stairs, Solomon said, ‘If you were better at your
letters, Dodger, I might interest you with the works of Sir Isaac
Newton. Now let us get in, I am beginning to feel the damp. Mmm, you
asked me about angels earlier, which are mmm messengers, so I suspect
that means anything that brings you information may be considered to be
an angel, my dear Dodger.’

‘I thought they were supposed to be messages from God?’

Solomon sighed as he began the business of unlocking his door. ‘Mmm,
well now,’ he said, ‘if one day you gave up messing about in . . . well,
mess, I might talk to you about the works of Spinoza, a philosopher who
might broaden your mind – because, as far as I can see, there’s plenty
of room – and pass on the nature of atheism, which most certainly
questions the belief in God. As for me, some days I believe in God, and
some days I do not.’

Then Dodger said, ‘Is that allowed?’

Solomon pushed the door open and then fussily began locking it up again
behind them. ‘Dodger, you fail to understand the unique arrangements
between Jewish people and God.’ He looked over at Onan, and added, ‘We
are not always in agreement. You ask about angels. I speak of people.
But who, for instance, are humans to sanction love to themselves alone?
Where there is love there must mmm surely be a soul; yet curiously the
Lord appears to believe that only humans have souls. I have explained to
Him at length why He should mmm reconsider His stance on the matter,
especially since, quite some time ago and before I met you, I was once
confronted by an agitated gentleman possessed of a belief that all Jews
should die, and also of a very large metal bar – a circumstance, may I
add, that I was not mmm unfamiliar with in any case. Onan, who wasn’t
much more than a puppy at that time, valiantly bit him in the
unmentionables, thereby distracting him so that I could lay him low with
a little trick that I had mmm learned in Paris. Who can say that action
wasn’t done out of love, especially since in doing his very best to keep
me from harm, Onan received for his selflessness the heavy blows that
possibly made him the dog he is today. Mmm, and now I am rather tired,
and I intend to put out the light.’

In the gloom Dodger rolled out his mattress; Onan watched him eagerly,
in the hope that this might be one of those nights when it was chilly
enough for Dodger to want a rather smelly dog sharing the thin mattress
with him. His gaze held that unconditional love that only a dog can have
– a dog with a soul, surely. But Onan was irredeemably a dog, which made
his metaphysics considerably less complicated than those of humans,
although sometimes he had a slight crisis in that he did have two gods
to worship: the old one who smelled of soap, and the young one who
smelled deliciously of just about everything else – at least when he got
back from toshing, when to the senses of Onan Dodger was like a rainbow
stuffed with kaleidoscopes. Now the hopeful dog riveted Dodger in the
somewhat distressing sincerity of his love, and Dodger gave in; he
always did.

The little room was silent and dark, apart from the slight snoring of
Solomon, the grey light that managed to filter through the dirty window,
and the smell of Onan, which in some peculiar way could almost be heard.

Outside in the street, one man watched, though he wished there were two
men, because one man by himself could so easily be one dead man in the
morning, if indeed the dead can find themselves dead, which was one of
those philosophical conundrums that Solomon liked.

Up in the attic Dodger slept, and in his dreams he listened to the
planets rolling overhead, interspersed occasionally with visions of the
girl with golden hair.

He got up even earlier than Solomon the next morning; usually, if he had
no plans for the day, he would lounge under the blanket until Onan
licked his face, and you never wanted that to happen more than once.

Solomon said nothing, but Dodger noticed his little smile as he made the
soup that would do duty for breakfast today. It was true that with
Solomon’s magic and his contacts in Covent Garden, he could make mere
gruel into a very elegant soup which Dodger believed could hardly be
bettered anywhere, even by Marie Jo. And right now, Dodger put down his
spoon.

‘That was very nice, thank you, Sol, but now I have to go.’

‘Mmm, not without shining your boots you are not. You are almost a
gentleman now, at least in very poor lighting circumstances, and you are
on a mission of mmm great importance, and so you must look your best,
especially this afternoon when you go and see Miss Simplicity again. It
can be difficult enough as it is to be a member of the chosen people in
this city without being accused of sending a lad like you out without
appropriate schmutter; people will be going back to throwing stones at
the building again! Mind you don’t get that suit dirty – I want to see
you back here later with not one mark on it. Now, your boots, boy.’
Solomon opened one of his strongboxes and handed Dodger a small metal
container saying, ‘This is the proper boot polish, the real thing, even
smells nice mmm, not like that dratted pig fat you use! You will expend
some elbow grease shining your shonky boots until you can see your
somewhat shonky face in them, which leads me on to the next thing that
you are going to have to do, because you will see that your face needs
almost as much work as your boots, since you didn’t mmm wash properly
last night.’

Before Dodger could object Solomon continued, ‘And then you will realize
that what you tend to think of as your hair is in fact something worse
than mmm a Mongolian’s breeches, which are noisome things indeed, for
the hair and bits of yak; indeed, I believe yak milk is what they use on
their hair for special occasions. And so, since I don’t want to have to
flee to yet another country mmm, after you have got yourself spruced up
and looking like a Christian – because, my dear boy, the chances of you
ever looking Jewish are thankfully small – I suggest you go and find
yourself a proper barber for a haircut and a professional shave, not mmm
from an old man whose hands get shaky when he’s tired.’

Dodger could shave himself in a lacklustre kind of way – even if,
truthfully speaking, there wasn’t really all that much to shave yet –
but he had never had a proper official haircut in his life. He would
generally just do it himself, slicing off handfuls of hair with his
knife, using Solomon as a kind of clever looking glass since the old boy
just stood in front of him and told him whereabouts to slice next. This
left something to be desired, possibly everything, and then he would
have to have a go with the nit comb, which was uncomfortable to say the
least, but it stopped the itching. It was great to see the little
buggers dropping out onto the floor too, where he could jump up and down
on them, knowing that for the next few days, at least, he was not going
to be a nitwit.

He plunged his hand into his scalp now, a technique which Solomon called
the German comb, and he had to admit that Sol was right – there was
considerable room for improvement up there above his eyebrows. So he
said, ‘I know where there’s a barbershop. I saw it the other day when I
was in Fleet Street.’

He had enough time, he thought, as he applied the aforesaid elbow grease
to his boots, along with the newfound boot polish. Solomon, standing
over him to make certain he did it properly, said that he had bought the
polish in Poland. There seemed to be no end to the countries that
Solomon had visited and left at speed; it wouldn’t do to force him to go
to another.

Dodger now remembered how Solomon had once taken a pepperbox pistol from
one of his strongboxes. ‘What do you want that for?’ he had asked. And
Solomon had said, ‘Once bitten, twice shy. But not that shy . . .’

When the boots were cleaned to the old man’s satisfaction – and he was
not easily satisfied – Dodger sprinted in the general direction of Fleet
Street. The streets were warming up, but he felt clean, even if there
was a certain question mark over the shonky suit: it was making him itch
like mad! It looked wonderful, and he wanted to be all nonchalant and
wide as he walked up the street, but this was rather spoiled by the fact
that every spare minute he was scratching somewhere about his person. It
was an itch that wanted to move about, a playful itch, and it wanted to
play hide and seek, at one point being in his boots and then turning up
behind his ears, and just as quickly finding its way into his crotch,
where on the whole it was rather difficult to do anything about in
public. However, he decided that going faster might help and so he
arrived, slightly breathless, at the barbershop he had noticed
yesterday, and for the first time glanced at the little nameplate, which
he eventually deciphered as: _Mr Sweeney Todd, Barber-Surgeon_.

He stepped inside the place, which appeared to be empty until he spotted
a pale and rather nervous-looking man who was sitting in the barber’s
chair and drinking a beverage of what turned out to be coffee. The
barber sighed as he saw Dodger, dusted down his apron and said with
brittle cheerfulness, ‘Good morning, sir! An excellent morning! What can
I do for you today?’ At least, he _tried_ to make this greeting
cheerful, but you could see he didn’t have it in him. Never had Dodger
seen such a woebegone face, apart from the time when Onan disgraced
himself more than usual by eating Solomon’s dinner while the old man’s
back was turned.

Mister Todd was definitely not a naturally cheerful personality; the
gloom was apparently laminated to him and he was obviously more built by
nature to be someone like an undertaker’s mute, whose job it was to
follow the coffin of the deceased, looking respectably mournful but not
saying a word because that would cost tuppence extra. It wouldn’t have
been so bad if Mister Todd hadn’t tried to ignore it by pretending to be
cheerful; it was like putting rouge on a skull. Dodger was fascinated.
Perhaps all barbers are like this, he thought to himself. After all, I’m
only asking for a shave and a haircut.

With some misgivings, he sat down in the chair and Sweeney swirled a
white sheet over him in a way which would have been called theatrical
if, indeed, Sweeney had really known how to do it first time. At this
point, Dodger became aware of a dull, persistent smell coming from
somewhere. It had the flavour of decay and it mingled with the smells of
soap and jars of various lotions. He thought, Well, this isn’t a
butcher’s shop, so I just bet his landlord has gone and knocked a way
from the privy to the sewers – I really wish they didn’t do that sort of
thing.

A lot of the sheet ended up round Dodger’s neck, to be whisked aside by
the luckless Sweeney with lots of apologies and assurances that it
wouldn’t happen again. It did. Twice. Next time it fell around Dodger in
a way that both of them could live with, and the sweating Sweeney turned
his attention to the job in hand. At some time, somebody must have told
Mister Todd that a barber, in addition to tonsorial prowess, should have
memorized practically a library of jokes, anecdotes and miscellaneous
rib-ticklers, occasionally including – should the gentleman in the chair
be of the right age or nature – ones that might include some daring
remarks about young ladies. However, the person that had given him this
advice had simply not calculated on Sweeney’s terrible lack of anything
that could be called bonhomie, cheerfulness, ribaldry or even a simple
sense of humour.

Nevertheless, Dodger noticed he did try. Oh my, how he tried, stropping
his razor while messing up punch lines and, horror of horrors, laughing
at the joke which he himself had so clumsily executed. But at last the
razor was sharp enough for Sweeney and then there was the matter of the
shaving foam, which the man attended to just as soon as he had laid the
razor down so that its gleaming edge faced north, all the better to
maintain its sharpness.

Dodger, helpless in the chair, watched in something like awe, his mind
springing to and fro from the spectacle of the barber’s preparations to
a pleasing image of the admiration he hoped would appear on Simplicity’s
face once she saw him scrubbed up so well, oh my, a proper young gent.
Now he could see that the man’s hands had scars on every finger,
although this slight problem barely showed up because Sweeney was
briskly whisking up the shaving foam with all the manic enthusiasm of a
circus clown. The stuff was falling out all over the place, and here and
there, because it had been so suffused with air as to make it
practically dirigible; it was floating away on the breeze as if it
wanted to get out of there as much as Dodger did right now – especially
since he was aware of that smell, that heavy and unpleasant smell,
gradually permeating the shop.

‘Are you feeling all right, Mister Todd?’ he said. And, ‘Your hands are
shaking a little bit, Mister Todd.’

The barber’s face looked like steel, if steel could sweat, and he was
swaying back and forth with his eyes like two holes in the snow, looking
far away but at something else, somewhere else. Dodger began stealthily
to extricate himself from the cloth, whilst keeping a sharp eye on the
man. And, oh dear, and now Mister Todd started to mumble, the words
blurred as they tried to get out one after the other, some of them so
urgent to get away from the swaying man that they overtook themselves.

Then Sweeney was between Dodger and the door to the street, waving the
gleaming razor like a bride just after her wedding, straining to see who
is going to catch the bouquet . . .

Dodger, hoping that his heartbeat could not be heard, said calmly, ‘Tell
me what you see, Mister Todd; it sounds terrible. Can I help you?’

_Bang bang_ went his heart, but Dodger ignored it. Unfortunately, so did
Sweeney Todd, whose mutterings began to take on something vaguely if
erratically understandable. Moving gently, so very gently, Dodger slowly
eased himself out of the chair and to his feet and he thought, Opium,
maybe? He sniffed, wished he hadn’t – no alcohol on the man’s breath
either. He said in as kind a voice as he could muster, ‘What is it you
are looking at, Mister Todd?’

‘They . . . they keep coming back. Yes, yes, coming back, trying to take
me away with them . . . I remember them . . . Do you know what a
cannonball can do, sir? Sometimes they bounce, very funny, ha, and then
they are running along the ground, and then some lad . . . yes, some lad
fresh from the farm in Dorset or Ireland, with his head full of lies
about combat, and in his pocket a badly drawn picture of his girlfriend,
who might have let him tickle her fancy because he was the brave warrior
off to fight Boney . . . This young warrior sees that dreadful
cannonball rolling along on the turf like it’s a game of skittles, and
so like a bloody idiot he calls out to his mates, such as have survived,
and he decides to give it a big kick, not knowing how much force there
is still left in the ball. Which is quite enough to take off his leg,
and not just his leg. Barber-surgeon, that’s me, the surgeon bit on the
battlefield being somewhat akin to butchery, but slightly better
paid . . . And I see them now . . . the broken men, the handiwork of God
twisted into terrible shapes, terrible . . . and here they come . . .
here they come, just as they always come, our glorious heroes, some
seeing for those with no eyes, some carrying those with no legs, some
screaming for them with no voice . . .’

All the time the razor danced and weaved, hypnotically, back and forth,
while Dodger slid slowly towards the sweating man.

‘Not enough bandages, not enough medicines, not enough . . . life . . .’
Sweeney Todd mumbled. ‘I _tried_. I never pointed the weapon at another
man, I just tried to help, when the best help you can give is the gentle
knife, and yet still they come . . . they come here now, all the
time . . . looking for me . . . And they say they aren’t dead, but I
know they are. Dead, but still walking. Oh! The pity of it, the
pity . . .’

Now Dodger’s hand, which had been following the twisting flight of the
erratic blade, gently gripped the hand that held it, and it seemed to
Dodger that he could see those soldiers himself, so hypnotic was the
sway of the razor, and he could feel himself being dragged towards some
terrible outcome until the inner Dodger, the bit that wanted to survive,
woke up, saluted, took control over Dodger’s arm and neatly and
carefully lifted the razor out of Sweeney Todd’s hand.

The swaying man didn’t even notice it go. Still staring into a place
where Dodger did not want to see, he simply let it go and slumped down
over the chair, foam settling around him softly.

Only then did Dodger realize that they weren’t alone, because while he
had been half in the dream world of Sweeney Todd, there in the doorway –
and being remarkably quiet for their kind – were two peelers, sweating
and staring at him and poor Mister Todd. One of the peelers said, ‘Holy
Mary, mother of God!’ and both men jumped back as Dodger folded up the
razor and shoved it into his pocket out of harm’s way. Then he turned
back, smiled cheerfully at the peelers, and said, ‘Can I help you
gentlemen?’

After that, the world went mad, or at least more mad than it had been
before. Dodger was surrounded by people, and the little shop was lousy
with peelers, brushing past him to the back of the shop, and then he
could hear the rattle of a lock, the thud of a boot and, in the
distance, some terrible swearing. A gust of corruption of graveyard
proportions swept through the shop to cries from the crowd, leaving
Dodger suddenly feeling rather queasy and, for some reason, a bit
annoyed that he hadn’t had his haircut.

There was the sound of police whistles outside and more peelers flooded
into the shop, two of them then grasping the recumbent and possibly
insensible Mister Sweeney Todd, who had tears running down his face. He
was rushed out again, leaving Dodger on a chair in the epicentre of a
hubbub that was loud enough to be considered a hubbub with at least an
extra hub, not to mention bub. Faces watched him from every direction,
and there was a gasp every time he moved, and in his rather troubled
state he dimly heard the voice of one of the peelers who had just
emerged from the cellar saying, ‘He just stood there. I mean, he just
stood there, eyeball to eyeball with the man, not blinking at all, just
waiting for a moment to grab the wretched weapon! We didn’t dare say a
word, ’cos we saw the malefactor was in some kind of dream, a dream in
the mind of a man flourishing a dreadful weapon! What can I say? I beg
you, ladies and gentlemen, do not go down into the cellar. Oh no, ’cos
if you do, you might see something that you really would not like to
see. Stop them, Fred! Calling it dreadful carnage would not do justice
to the crimes. You must trust me on this – I was a soldier once. I was
at Talavera and that was bad enough. When I went down there I threw up,
so I did, all over the place. I mean, well, the stink! No wonder the
neighbours had been complaining! Yes, sir, you sir, can I help you?’

Blearily, Dodger saw Charles Dickens arrive on the heels of the peelers.
Charlie said, ‘My name is Dickens, and I know young Dodger here to be a
most excellent and trustworthy individual; he is also the hero who saved
the staff of the _Morning Chronicle_ just the other evening, and I’m
sure you have all heard of that.’

Dodger began feeling rather better now, especially as there was
tremendous applause, and he brightened up still further when he heard
somebody in the crowd shout, ‘I propose we make up a subscription for
this young man of such exceptional valour! I pledge five crowns!’

He tried to get to his feet at this point, but Charlie Dickens, who was
bending over him, pushed him gently back down into the chair, bent down
until his lips were very close to Dodger’s ear and whispered, ‘It would
be in order to groan a little in response to your terrible encounter, my
friend. Trust me as a journalist; you are a hero of the hour, again, and
it would be a pity if an unguarded comment at this juncture spoiled
things.’ He leaned an inch closer and whispered, ‘Listen to them
shouting out how much they will pledge to the hero, and so I will
carefully get you to your feet and take you to the magnificent offices
of the _Chronicle_, where I will pen an article the like of which has
never been written before, since possibly the time of Caesar.’

Charlie smiled. Rather like a fox, Dodger thought, in the spinning,
roaring, suddenly baffling world. Then he inched closer, and said,
‘Incidentally, my intrepid friend, it would interest you to know that I
have been told just now that Mister Sweeney Todd used his razor to slit
the throats of six gentlemen who came to him earlier this week for a
haircut and a close shave. But for your almost magical response you
would have been the seventh of them. And these were my best trousers!’
These words were shouted, or more accurately screamed, because Dodger
had thrown up his breakfast all over Charlie.

Sometime after, Dodger was seated at the long table in the editor’s
office of the _Chronicle_, wishing he could be on his way to see
Simplicity. Opposite him was Charlie, who was somewhat less angry now
since, being a man of means, he had acquired another pair of trousers
and sent the other ones to be cleaned. The inner wall of the office was
one of those half-height affairs so that people passing by in the
newsroom could see what was happening, and now, how they _did_ pass by.
And linger too, with every writer, journalist and printer finding an
excuse to see the young man who, according to the magical telegraph of
the streets, had wrestled to the ground the terrible Demon Barber of
Fleet Street.

Dodger was getting rather annoyed about this. ‘I hardly touched ’im! I
just pushed ’im gently down and took the wretched razor off ’im, that’s
all! Honest! It was as if he had been taking opium or something, ’cos he
was seeing dead soldiers – dead men coming towards him, I swear it, and
he was talking to them, like he was ashamed that he couldn’t save them.
God’s truth, Mister Charlie, I swear I was seeing them too, come the
finish! Men blown all to pieces! And worse, like men half blown to
pieces and screaming! He wasn’t a demon, mister, although I reckon he
may have seen Hell, and I ain’t a hero, sir, I really ain’t. He wasn’t
bad, he was mad, and sad, and lost in his ’ead. That’s all of it, sir,
the up and the down of it, sir. An’ that’s the truth you should write
down. I mean, I ain’t no hero, ’cos I don’t think he was a villain, sir,
if you get my drift.’

Then there was silence, somehow filled by Charlie’s gaze, in this
polished little room. A clock ticked and, without looking, Dodger could
feel the employees still taking every opportunity to look at him, the
unassuming and reluctant hero of the hour. Charlie was staring at him,
occasionally playing with his pen, and at last the man said, with a
sigh, ‘Dear Mister Dodger, the truth, rather than being a simple thing,
is constructed, you need to know, rather like Heaven itself. We
journalists, as mere wielders of the pen, have to distil out of it such
truths that mankind, not being god-like, can understand. In that sense,
all men are writers, journalists scribbling within their skulls the
narrative of what they see and hear, notwithstanding that a man sitting
opposite them might very well brew an entirely different view as to the
nature of the occurrence. That is the salvation and the demon of
journalism, the knowledge that there is almost always a different
perspective from which to see the conundrum.’

Charlie played with his pen some more, looking uncomfortable, and went
on, ‘After all, my young Dodger, what exactly are you? A stalwart young
man, plucky and brave and apparently without fear? Or possibly, I
suggest, a street urchin with a surfeit of animal cunning and the luck
of Beelzebub himself. I put it to you, my friend, that you are both of
these, and every shade in between. And Mister Todd? Is he truly a demon
– those six men in the cellar would say so! If they could but speak, of
course. Or is he the victim, as you would like to think of him? What is
the truth? you might ask, if I was giving you a chance to speak, which
at the moment I am not. My answer to you would be that the truth is a
fog, in which one man sees the heavenly host and the other one sees a
flying elephant.’

Dodger began to protest. He hadn’t seen no heavenly host; no elephant
neither – he didn’t actually know what one of those was – though he’d
put a shilling on the fact that Solomon had probably seen both on his
travels.

But Charlie was still talking. ‘The peelers saw a young man face down a
killer with a dreadful weapon, and for now that is the truth that we
should print and celebrate. However, I shall add a little tincture of –
shall we say – a slightly different nature, reporting that the hero of
the hour nevertheless took pity on the wretched man, understanding that
he had lost his wits due to the terrible things he had witnessed in the
recent wars. I will write that you spoke very eloquently to me about how
Mister Todd himself was a casualty of those wars, just as were the men
in his cellar. I will make your views known to the authorities. War is a
terrible thing, and many return with wounds invisible to the eye.’

‘That’s pretty sharp of you, Mister Charlie, changing the world with a
little scribble on the paper.’

Charlie sighed. ‘It may not. He will either hang or they will send him
to Bedlam. If he’s unlucky – for I doubt he would have the money
necessary to ensure a comfortable stay there – it will be Bedlam.
Incidentally, I would be very grateful if you could attend at the
premises of _Punch_ tomorrow so that our artist, Mister Tenniel, can
draw your likeness for the paper.’

Dodger tried to take all this in, and said finally, ‘Who are you going
to punch?’

‘I am not going to punch anybody; _Punch_ is a new periodical magazine
of politics, literature and humour which, if you don’t know, means
something that makes you laugh, and possibly think. One of the founders
was Mister Mayhew, our mutual friend.’ Charlie’s jaw dropped suddenly,
and he scribbled down a few words on the paper in front of him. ‘Now off
you go, enjoy yourself and please come back here as soon as you can
tomorrow.’

‘Well, if you will excuse me, sir, I have another appointment anyway,’
said Dodger.

‘_You_ have an _appointment_, Mister Dodger? My word, it seems to me
that you are becoming a man for all seasons.’

As Dodger hurried off, he wondered exactly what Charlie had meant. He
was damned if he was going to ask him, but he would find out what it
meant as soon as possible. Just in case.

[images]

CHAPTER 8

A YOUNG MAN TAKES HIS YOUNG LADY FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL WALK; AND MRS
SHARPLES COMES TO HEEL

DODGER MADE HASTE towards the house of the Mayhews while in his mind he
saw the cheerful face and hooked nose of Mister Punch, beating his wife,
beating the policeman and throwing the baby away, which made all the
children laugh. Why was that funny? he thought. Was that funny _at all_?
He’d lived for seventeen years on the streets, and so he knew that,
funny or not, it was real. Not all the time, of course, but often when
people had been brought down so low that they could think of nothing
better to do than punch: punch the wife, punch the child and then,
sooner or later, endeavour to punch the hangman, although that was the
punch that never landed and, oh how the children laughed at Mister
Punch! But Simplicity wasn’t laughing . . .

Running faster than he had before, Dodger arrived, if you put any
reliance on all the bells of London, at just about the time when people
would have finished their lunch. Feeling very bold, he walked up to the
front door – he was, after all, a young gentleman with an _appointment_
– and rang the bell, stepping backwards when the door was opened by Mrs
Sharples, who gave him a look of pure hatred, and since she then slammed
the door, couldn’t have got a receipt from him.

Dodger stared at the emphatically closed door for several seconds and
thought, I don’t have to believe what just happened. He pulled himself
upright, brushed the dust off his coat and grabbed the bell pull for the
second time, till at last the door was opened once again by the same
woman. Dodger was ready, and even before she had finished opening her
mouth he said, ‘This morning I defeated the Demon Barber of Fleet
Street, and if you don’t let me in we will see what Mister Charles
Dickens has to say about it in his newspaper!’ As the woman ran down the
hall he shouted after her, ‘In big letters!’

He stood waiting by the open door, and very shortly after this he saw
Mrs Mayhew walking towards him with a smile of a woman who wasn’t sure
that she should be smiling. She came a little closer, lowered her voice
and said, in the tones of one almost certain that she was going to be
told the most enormous lie, ‘Is it _really_ true, young man, that you
were the one who this morning defeated the most dreadful of villains in
Fleet Street? The cook told me about it; and apparently, according to
the butcher’s boy, the news is already the talk of London. Was that
_really_ you?’

Dodger thought of Charlie’s fog. Thought of wanting to see Simplicity
again, and did his best to look suitably bashful and heroic all at the
same time. But he did manage to say, ‘Well, Mrs Mayhew, it was all a
sort of fog.’

It seemed to work, for Mrs Mayhew was speaking again. ‘Somehow, Mister
Dodger, you will not be surprised that Simplicity herself, subsequent to
your recent call, has made it quite clear to us that she would like to
go out in the sunshine for a constitutional walk with you, such as you
suggested previously. Since it is such a fine day, and she herself seems
well on the way to being restored, I cannot find it in me to deny her
this wish. You will of course, as we said before, have to be in the
charge of a chaperone.’

Dodger let a little silence reign and then forced it to abdicate. He
attempted to make the little noise that Solomon produced when he was
trying to make conversation more pleasant and intimate, and said, ‘Mmm,
I am most grateful, madam, and whilst I’m on the subject, if you don’t
mind, I would like someplace where I can sit quietly while Simplicity is
getting ready. I have a few aches and pains that I need to deal with.’

Mrs Mayhew was suddenly all motherly. ‘Oh, you poor dear boy!’ she said.
‘How you must be suffering. Are you very badly wounded? Shall I get
somebody to bring the doctor? Do you need to lie down?’

Dodger hastened to stop her turning this into something dreadful and
said, still slightly breathless, ‘Please, no, just a nice quiet room
where I can sort myself out for a minute or two, if you don’t mind. That
will do me fine.’

Shooing him before her like a hen with one chick, Mrs Mayhew guided him
down the corridor and opened a door into a room which had white and
black tiles everywhere and a wonderful privy, not to mention a
washbasin. Complete with jug.

Once he was left alone and unseen, Dodger did indeed use the water to do
something at least to his hair, which fortunately had not felt the
ministrations of Mister Todd, and generally slicked himself down and
made use of the privy. He thought, Well, I’ve made myself a hero to Mrs
Mayhew, but it’s all about Simplicity, isn’t it? And Simplicity herself,
it appeared, had totally understood what he had said the previous day
and indeed was very keen on the walk.

Dodger had never heard the term ‘the end justifies the means’, but when
you had been brought up like him its principle was nailed to your
backbone. So after a discreet interval during which he essayed an
occasional groan, Dodger turned himself into a hero and strode out of
the privy ready to meet his young lady.

Mrs Sharples was waiting in the hallway, and this time she looked at him
nervously, which you certainly should do when you’re looking at a man
who is in the news, and what news! Since it had been such a good day,
Dodger was generous enough to give her a little smile, and got a little
simper in exchange, which suggested that hostilities, if not entirely
forgotten, were at least temporarily suspended. After all, he was the
wounded hero now, and that had to count for something, even to someone
like Mrs Sharples.

However, he noticed when she took a small book off the hall table that
it was one of those that some people used for jotting things down, the
ones with a tiny little pencil attached to them by a piece of string.
That meant she thought she might have _occasion_ to write things down,
and Dodger – who had always kept a significant distance between himself
and the alphabet – started to wish that he had perhaps spent more time
getting to grips with the irritating business of reading as opposed to
picking at the letters slowly, one at a time. Too late, too late, and
now there was a certain amount of movement upstairs and Mrs Mayhew came
down, holding Simplicity by the hand and descending very carefully,
making sure that every foot had found the right place before the next
foot joined it. This took some time, about a year by Dodger’s reckoning,
until they were both standing in the hall.

Mrs Mayhew gave him what you might call an inadequate smile, but Dodger
looked just at Simplicity, and realized that Mrs Mayhew had been very
careful to provide her with a bonnet and a shawl which covered quite a
lot of her face, and therefore most of the bruises, which were already
losing some of their colour. And just as Dodger looked at her,
Simplicity beamed at him, and it was indeed a beam, because the bonnet
made a sort of shield around her, so that the centre of her face seemed
highlighted.

He held out his hand and said, ‘Hello, Simplicity, I’m so glad you’ve
decided to come for this little walk with me.’

Simplicity held out her hand, grasped his very lightly and said . . .
nothing that Dodger could hear; and her head turned very slightly so he
could see the bruising to the throat, and that burden that he was
carrying almost without noticing now whispered to him, ‘_You will make
them pay!_’ In that moment, he thought he saw in Simplicity’s eye a
glint like a falling star shining as it fell to earth; he had only ever
seen one, a long time ago and a long way away on Hampstead Heath, and he
had never seen another one since, because you don’t get many shooting
stars when you are a tosher. But she hadn’t let go of his hand, which
was extremely pleasant but not practical, unless he wanted to walk
backwards.

In the end, Dodger carefully let go and trotted around her to grasp her
other hand, all in one movement, with no harm done, leading the way
gently to the gate, tiptoeing through the very small front garden, where
a few roses attempted to make a difference. You saw this more and more
these days, he thought; people with enough money at last to live in a
decent area set about trying to make their tiny little bit of land look
like a very small version of Buckingham Palace.

He didn’t often walk slowly in London; after all, he was Dodger, dodging
here and there, and never there long enough to get caught. But now
Simplicity was holding his arm and he was aware that she needed his
support, which slowed him down, and that somehow also slowed his
thinking so that the bits came together neatly, instead of in a hurry.
He turned and looked at Mrs Sharples, walking behind them. It was early
afternoon and around here it was pleasant to walk, and in this bright
light he felt curiously happy and at home with the girl on his arm. She
kept in step, and every time he glanced at her she smiled at him and
there was a peace that you didn’t get in the rookeries until one in the
morning when the dead had stopped screaming and the living were too
drunk to care. Suddenly it didn’t seem to matter whether Simplicity
recognized anything important or not; it was enough that they were out
for this walk together.

Yet there was a part of Dodger that would always be a dodger, and it
guided his eyes and ears around, listening to every footstep, looking at
every face and watching every shadow, calculating, figuring, estimating,
judging. Now he turned his attention to old Soft Molly, whom he could
see approaching.

For a long time Soft Molly had been a puzzle to Dodger, because he had
never been able to make out where the flowers came from that she sold in
the streets – little nosegays, all very delicate and fine. One day the
old lady, who had a face that was a playground for wrinkles, told him
where she got them from, and after that he had never thought about the
cemeteries in the same way. She had made his flesh creep, but he
reckoned perhaps that when you were so very old that you were older than
some of the people buried beneath your feet, and therefore deserving of
some respect yourself, he could see why it would make sense to you to
‘borrow’ some of the blooms scattered on the headstones of the recently
deceased. It was hard to see where the harm was, and if you thought
about it, the flowers stolen from the dear departed who, it must be
said, could hardly be able to smell them now, were nevertheless keeping
the old dear alive.

It was a sad thought, and a horrible picture, that Molly would spend
time in the graveyard at night methodically collecting floral wreaths to
be carefully unravelled in the heart of darkness and lovingly made into
little posies for the living. In the scales of the world, how much did
it matter that the dead had been robbed of the flowers they could never
have seen when, for one night at least, poor old Soft Molly, who had as
far as he could tell just one tooth, was still living. Besides, he
thought, some of those wreaths looked like a florist shop all by
themselves so would barely miss a few blossoms, and that thought made
him feel a bit better.

That was why he gently pulled Simplicity with him as the old girl
crouched on the pavement, looking pitiful and not having to try. He
pressed sixpence, yes, a _whole_ sixpence, on a little bundle of
fragrant blooms. And if the dead turned over in their graves, they were
generous enough to do it quietly, and besides, the exercise would do
them good.

When he handed them to Simplicity, all he could find to say was, ‘Here
is a present for you,’ and she said, she actually said, ‘Oh, roses!’ He
was certain of it. He saw her lips move, he saw the lips become a rose
as they pronounced the words and then close, and even Simplicity seemed
surprised to have heard the words, while deep in his heart, once again,
Dodger wanted very much to hurt somebody.

Then she said, ‘Please, Dodger, I heard them talking. I am very grateful
to Mrs and Mister Mayhew but . . . it is as I feared. I heard them say
that they will be very pleased when I am sent back, to the safety of my
husband.’ The look on her face as she said it was pure terror.

Dodger turned to look at the housekeeper, who was some way behind them,
still clutching her notebook, and whispered, ‘I believe that despite
everything you are not quite as ill as you appear, yes?’ There was a
silent ‘Yes’. To which he more or less silently said, ‘Don’t let them
know. Trust me, I’ll see to it that you go somewhere else.’

Simplicity’s face shone as she said quietly, so that only he could hear,
‘Oh, Dodger, I am so happy to meet you again. I burst into tears every
night when I remember that storm and how you drove away those terrible
men who were’ – and here she hesitated a little – ‘so unkind, shall we
say.’

The softness of that speech pierced Dodger’s heart, orbited right round
him and came back and did it again. Was she truly beginning to believe
him when he said he wanted to help her? Believe that he wasn’t playing
some kind of game?

‘I know I should not hate,’ she continued, ‘but for them, yes! Because
of them I must not use my proper name, and I dare not tell anyone it –
not even you, not yet. For now, I _must_ remain Simplicity, although I
do not believe that I am very simple.’

But although the sun was still shining and the honey was still in the
air, Dodger had an inkling that somebody other than Mrs Sharples was
watching them; someone was _following_. He knew this simply because on
the streets you learned to notice these things almost out of the back of
your head – someone with a hand out, or maybe a peeler. You didn’t get
to become a geezer if you didn’t have eyes in your arse, and it helped
if you had them on the top of your head too. Surely now, someone was
following them; and it had to be someone with a mission: a mission of
their own.

He cursed himself for not thinking about this, but really you can’t be
thinking of everything when you are a hero. He thought, Well, that was
quick work – he’d only been asking questions on the street yesterday.
Someone was in a great hurry. But right now he did nothing about it and
strolled along at a steady pace, a simple young man taking his young
lady for a little constitutional walk, without a care in the world,
while inside his head the wheels turned and the troops were called up,
plans were made and angles sought.

Whoever it was was keeping their distance, and whatever happened Dodger
was certain that he ought to make sure nobody knew where Simplicity was
living. Whoever they were they weren’t at the moment confident enough to
attack him right here, especially not with Mrs Sharples in tow; that
disapproving look of hers would have been worth a battalion to the Duke
of Wellington.

And so all three of them walked on happily, just like normal people,
until he heard the voice of the old baggage saying, ‘I think this is
quite far enough, young man, and so I insist that we rephrase our steps.
Simplicity’s condition is still very delicate, and you will do no
service to let the cold find its way to her.’

Her voice did not seem as unpleasant as he had heard it before, and so
he guessed that the only hope was to take her into his confidence. He
reached out and, much to her surprise, pulled the woman towards them,
and whispered, ‘Ladies, I believe there is a gentleman following us who
means somebody harm. It may be Simplicity or it may be, well, me. For
the love of God, and your job, I implore you now, without saying a word,
to turn at the next corner and wait while I send the cove about his
business.’

To his amazement Mrs Sharples whispered back, ‘I have misjudged you,
young man. And if the bastard puts up a fight, pray kick him in the
unmentionables, good and proper. Do him up bad!’ Then her face returned
to its usual expression of low-grade dislike for all and sundry.

Simplicity snorted and said, ‘Dodger, if you can, put him in the
gutter.’

Dodger saw Mrs Sharples’ look of surprise, but Simplicity was standing
up straight and right now looked as though she was ready for a fight.

Puzzled, but somehow reassured for the moment, Dodger watched as the
women barely missed a step as they walked on, and then, when the time
was right, he turned the corner sharply into an alleyway and let the
ladies pass him. He waited, his back to the wall so that when the man
stepped round carefully, Dodger had him by the throat and had brought
his foot straight upwards to a place that would jangle, being rewarded
with a groan. Then he pulled the man upright again and dragged him so
close that he could smell the sweat. And there was slightly more light
so he could now see him as well as smell him.

‘Oh my word, Dirty Benjamin, as I live and wish I couldn’t breathe. Down
for a little stroll among the toffs, ain’t you? What’s your game today?
’Cos you have been following me a step for a step over the last seven
corners I have travelled, and on one of them I crossed over my own
steps. Funny, ain’t it, that you should have the same roundabout journey
in mind, you nasty, nasty little man. A spy! Jesus, you stink like a
five-day dog, you wheeze like a pig in difficulty, and if you don’t say
something soon, so help me God, I will give you a pasting, see if I
don’t.’

At that moment it occurred to him that the man was unable to say
anything because Dodger’s other hand was on his throat. And, indeed,
Benjamin looked as if he was about to explode. Dodger loosened his grip
a little, and pushed the luckless Benjamin further into the alley.

The alley was narrow, and no one else was around, so Dodger said, ‘You
know me, don’t you, Benjamin, even in my smart new clobber? Good old
Dodger, who will never do you a bad turn if he could do you a good one.
I thought you were my friend, I really did. But friends don’t spy on
friends, do they?’

Dirty Benjamin stood frozen in front of Dodger, and after a bit of
effort managed to get out, ‘They is saying as you killed that barber –
you know, the one with all them dead bodies in his cellar, yeah?’

Dodger hesitated. Life was so much simpler in the sewers, but he had
learned something lately, which was that the truth was indeed a fog,
just like Charlie said, and people shaped it the way they wanted it to
go. He had never killed anybody, ever, but that didn’t matter, because
the fog of truth didn’t want to know that poor Mister Todd had been a
decent man who saw so many terrible things in the service of the Duke of
Wellington that his mind had become as twisted as the corpses of the men
they placed in front of him. The poor devil was indeed more a candidate
for Bedlam rather than the gallows, though any man with any sense but no
money – oh, not those of the poor who did go to Bedlam – would choose
the hangman any day. But the mist of truth didn’t like awkward details,
and so there had to be a villain, and there had to be a hero.

Although it was a wretched nuisance, right now at least it could make
itself useful, and so he looked at Dirty Benjamin sternly and said,
‘Something like that, but not all that. Now, if you are my friend you
will tell me why you were following me, because if you don’t I will make
cold meat of you.’

It was a rotten thing to do to Benjamin, who he knew of old as a
snow-dropper, who mostly stole ladies’ underthings off clothes lines –
being a man of no ambition whatsoever apart from being alive tomorrow –
and ran errands for anyone who had some money and was bigger than him.
He was the kind of person who would make a body want to wash their hands
after meeting him; the man was a worm. Yes, all he did was wriggle. He
was one of the lost souls, one of the people who were behind the door
when God went past; they just grazed on the world, hardly disturbing it
a bit, and were always scared of something.

Right now, Dirty Benjamin looked very scared, and Dodger relented,
saying, ‘Well, maybe it won’t be cold meat, because I know you, Ben, and
I’m sure you’re going to tell me who sent you to follow me, am I right?
If you do that, I won’t hurt you.’

Both Dodger and his captive turned as the shadows changed to reveal Mrs
Sharples peering round the corner with Simplicity next to her. The
housekeeper said, ‘I am sorry to interrupt your little concussion,
gentlemen, but I think it is time for us to go home, if it’s all the
same with you?’

Dodger turned back to the hapless villain in front of him. ‘Benjamin,’
he said sternly, ‘I have no beef with you. This is your last chance.
Tell me who you are working for and why, and I will never let on it’s
you.’

Dirty Benjamin was crying, and not just crying by the smell of it. He
slid to the ground in a pitiful heap.

And Dodger leaned over and whispered, ‘I have in my hand the razor of
Sweeney Todd the barber, and at the moment I haven’t opened the blade.
But it calls to me; it calls to me to use it . . . So now, Benjamin, I
strongly suggest you tell me who you are working for. _Do you
understand?_’

The words came out so fast that they tumbled among themselves. But
Dodger made out: ‘It was Harry the Slap from Hackney Marshes, but the
word is there’s important coves wanting to know where you are, and if
you’ve got some girl with you. That’s all I know, honest to God. There’s
some kind of reward out.’

Dodger said, ‘Who set up the reward?’

‘Don’t know. Harry the Slap never told me nuffin’, just to tell ’im.
Promised me a cut of the profit, so he did.’

Dodger stared at the face. No, he wasn’t lying. Benjamin was easy meat,
and so he said, ‘Well, Benjamin, as a friend, I rely on you not to tell
Harry the Slap that you have seen me.’ There was a frantic nodding of
the head from the wretched little man on the ground. ‘And, of course,
there is just one other thing I must do. I did say that I would not harm
you but _this_’ – and he swung his boot – ‘is from Mrs Sharples. Sorry,
but she asked me to.’

He was rewarded with a deep groan from Benjamin and, amazingly, a huge
and horrible grin from Mrs Sharples, who said, ‘Well done, young man, do
it again!’

Dodger thought, This is the time to be the man who saved the world from
Mister Sweeney Todd. So he said quietly, ‘Simplicity, and you too, Mrs
Sharples, listen. I have reason to fear that there are people who are
searching for Simplicity to do her harm, and therefore I am going to
remove her from the kind embrace of the Mayhew household. Although I
don’t doubt that they are kind to her, it makes me shiver, it does, to
think of you opening the door to them very nasty coves.’

‘But she is in their care, Mister Dodger,’ Mrs Sharples insisted.

Dodger opened his mouth, but the noise he heard was Simplicity speaking.
Not loudly, but not a whisper either, and she said, ‘I am a married
woman whose husband turns out to be a weak and stupid boy, Mrs Sharples,
and I believe that Dodger is right in this instance. So I suggest we
make our way back to the house as soon as possible.’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Dodger. ‘I am sure you would be in agreement, Mrs
Sharples?’

Mrs Sharples looked down at Dirty Benjamin and said, ‘What are you going
to do about him?’

Dodger said to Benjamin lying on the ground, ‘Listen, my friend, I know
who you are, and I know where you live, don’t I just! Still collecting
corsets, are you? Trust me that what you are going to do as soon as you
are fit to stand is start walking up the road there, and you will go on
walking as fast as you can in that direction as long as possible and you
will not, repeat _not_, turn round to look behind you until it’s
absolutely dark, understand? Because you know me and I am Dodger. The
_new_ Dodger. I’m the Dodger what done up Mr Sweeney Todd. The Dodger
what has his razor now! And if you do the wrong thing by me, I’ll come
up through the floor one night with it and make certain you never wake
up.’

There was a groan from Benjamin, who said, ‘I ain’t never clapped eyes
on you, mister, and by God I wish I ha’n’t. You’ll have no trouble from
me.’

They began to walk back to the house by a roundabout route, and it
wasn’t until he saw the kid selling newspapers and screaming, ‘’Orrible
murder! Read all about it! Valiant hero to the rescue!’ that Dodger
fully realized how life would be getting even more complicated.

At last the little gate to the Mayhew household was back in front of
them, and he quickly cased the area for spies and found none. Then he
opened the gate for Simplicity, who said, ‘Thank you very, very much, my
dear Dodger,’ and she blew him a kiss, which made no sound at all,
except that in his head the belfries of London all clanged at once in
one great peal.

The interview with the Mayhews, husband and wife, went rather more
smoothly than Dodger had dared hope, especially since he carefully told
them how someone was clearly looking for Simplicity – the kind of
person, he said, that he would not like to come knocking at their door.

‘And so,’ he concluded, ‘if you would be so kind, help Miss Simplicity
with such packing as she has, help us find a growler and I will take her
forthwith to Charlie, where we will be safe enough to discuss the next
move. And please, Mrs Mayhew, Mister Mayhew, we will not need a
chaperone.’

‘I feel I must object,’ said Mrs Mayhew. ‘It is hardly seemly . . .’

Dodger opened his mouth to answer, but Simplicity stepped forward, gave
Mrs Mayhew a kiss and said, ‘Jane, I’m a married woman and I can stand
up and say that my husband wants me as a slave or otherwise dead. I will
go with Dodger. The choice or blame is mine, and I would not like to
think that any harm came to this household because of me.’

They stared at her as one might stare at a dog that has just sung a
song, and then suddenly common sense blossomed and Mister Mayhew said,
‘Dear Mrs Sharples, can you please get a cab while you, dear, help our
guest – her baggage is rather spartan – and be ready for the coach to
come.’

Now it seemed to Dodger that the coach could not come too soon. And
indeed when one did rattle up, without any bidding Mister Mayhew pressed
a half crown into Dodger’s hand.

‘Well done, sir, very well done!’

When the cab was rattling its way to Fleet Street, Simplicity said, ‘My
dear Dodger, why did you rescue me in the rain?’

This bowled him over, but he managed to say, ‘Because I don’t like
people who bash up other people who ain’t got anybody to bash back on
their behalf. I had too much of that when I was a kid, and besides, you
were a girl.’

The tone of her voice changed as she said, ‘In fact, a woman, Dodger.
Did you know that I lost my baby?’

This flustered Dodger, who managed, ‘Yes, miss, I mean missus. Very
sorry not to have been there earlier.’

‘Dodger, you came out of the drain like a god. Who could have come up
any faster?’ And this time the kiss didn’t need to be blown. She
delivered it directly, as it were.

Charlie was not at the _Chronicle_, but inside his office there was a
boy, one of the numerous boys employed by the paper to run around with
other bits of paper, looking very important as they did so. This one,
though, stared at Dodger as if he was the Angel Gabriel and whispered
hoarsely, ‘Is it true that you throttled the monster with his own
necktie? Oh, can you write down your name on this bit of paper for me,
please? I am making a scrapbook.’

Dodger stared at the boy’s slightly grubby face which, like his clothes,
made it perfectly clear that this was a building with a lot of ink on
the premises. He was at a loss and therefore took refuge in the truth,
saying, ‘Look, kid, he was just a very sick old man, right? He thought
he was killing dead men who were coming back to haunt him, and I never
laid a finger on him, right? I just took the razor off him and the
peelers took him away and that is that, do you hear?’

The lad backed away a little, and then said, ‘You are only saying that
because you are modest, sir, I am sure. And Mister Dickens says that if
you was to turn up here again today, looking for him, you could find him
in the Houses of Parliament, on account of the fact that he is doing a
bit of court reporting today. Mister Dodger, he said he’d tell the man
on the door to let you in if you ask for him, and if there is any
trouble to say you’ve come from the _Chronicle_, and will you sign this
piece of paper for me anyway?’ The boy almost pushed a pencil up
Dodger’s nostril, so Dodger relented, and the boy got a squiggle and
Dodger got the boy’s pencil.

The boy said, ‘I don’t quite know exactly where Mister Charlie will be
right now, but you could always ask the peelers.’ He smiled. ‘You can be
sure that there will be a lot of them about.’

Ask a peeler! Dodger? But surely that was the old Dodger saying that, he
thought. After all, because of two admittedly total misunderstandings he
was a hero, at least to some kid with blobs of ink in his hair, and
therefore a hero should be able to stand up and talk to a peeler man to
man, shouldn’t he? Because a hero would look the peelers directly in the
eye and, besides, Simplicity had kissed him, and for another one of the
same he would kick a peeler in the arse. All he had to do was keep on
the square, life would get better, and it might be better still if he
could enlist the help of Mister Dickens.

He looked at Simplicity and said, ‘Sorry, but it looks like we’ve got
another journey to make.’

Then there was nothing for it but to pick up another growler amongst the
plenty outside and head for Parliament Square.

[images]

CHAPTER 9

DODGER TAKES A CUT-THROAT RAZOR TO PARLIAMENT, AND MEETS A MAN WHO WANTS
TO BE ON THE RIGHT SIDE

THE MEN WHO guarded what was left of the Houses of Parliament, in
uniform or otherwise, were not very happy about letting them in,
possibly because they could be French spies, or even Russian ones.
Dodger wasn’t either, but instead of telling them to go to blazes, which
he would have done once upon a time before he had Simplicity hanging on
his arm, he simply stood there, making himself look as tall as he could,
and said, ‘I am Mister Dodger and I am here to see Mister Charlie
Dickens.’

This caused a certain amount of chuckling, but he stood straight and
stared at them and then somebody said, ‘Dodger? Isn’t he the man who
wrestled the Demon Barber to the ground this morning, right down there
in Fleet Street?’ The first man who had spoken came closer and said,
‘Yes, the peelers were frightened to go in there, so people say! I heard
that people have already subscribed nearly ten guineas for him!’

Now there was another crowd, and the only thing Dodger could do was to
keep saying, ‘I am here to see Mister Dickens on a very important
matter.’ Then he told himself that all he would have to do would be to
hang on, stand up, shake the hands that were proffered, nod and smile
and wait until somebody came back with Charlie.

That worked, and a man – a very smart, very dapper man – suddenly
appeared and said, with withering scorn, ‘If this is the Hero – _twice_
the Hero of Fleet Street according to the newspapers – then what kind of
service are we giving him when he comes to see us, yes, what do you
_think_?’

There was a kind of little hum on that last ‘think’, and people started
clapping and a couple of them said things like, ‘Well said, Mister
Disraeli, well done; where are our manners, after all?’ And finally one
of them said, ‘Well, I don’t know about you, gentlemen, but it seems to
me that a hero like that is just the kind of person to have that
dreadful cut-throat razor about his person even now!’ A statement which
made Dodger’s heart whine as his mind flashed through images of the
repercussions of being caught with it, until the very man who had said
that burst out laughing, and added, ‘The very thought, indeed.’

‘The very thought,’ Dodger murmured in response, matching the man’s
laugh with one of his own.

And that was how Dodger and Simplicity got into Parliament, indeed with
the cut-throat razor – and with a lie, which was fine, considering
that’s how so many people got into Parliament. Dodger still wasn’t quite
sure why he had taken Mr Todd’s razor in all the confusion, but he had a
feeling that the best place for it to be right now was close to him.
Anyway, before he could do anything about it, Mister Dickens was called
for and arrived shortly afterwards, taking good care to shake Dodger
very theatrically by the hand and then looking at Simplicity and saying,
‘You are surely not the young lady I last saw fair beaten up three
nights ago?’ Then he said that he had urgent business with the young
cavalier, whatever that meant.

They were escorted along carpeted halls and poured into a small room
with a table in it. While Dickens was sorting out chairs and getting
Simplicity settled, Dodger kept his eye on Mister Disraeli. He reminded
Dodger somewhat of a much younger Solomon, and he also looked like a cat
who had found a saucer of milk and had enjoyed every last bit. He was,
yes, that was it: he was a dodger – not a dodger like Dodger, but
another kind of dodger, and it took one to know one. He looked sharp as
a knife, but probably the knife was his tongue; he was that kind of
bloke – a smart person, but a definite geezer.

He looked at Disraeli and caught his eye, and Mister Disraeli winked – a
tribute from one dodger to another dodger, perhaps. Dodger let himself
smile, but didn’t wink back, because a young man could get into trouble
winking at gentlemen, and up until then this place – all these statues,
all these soundless carpets, all these pictures on the walls of elderly
men with white hair and an expression of acute constipation – had been
preying on his nerves, pushing him away, telling him he was small,
insignificant, a worm. That wink had broken the spell and told him that
this place was just another rookery: bigger, warmer, certainly richer,
definitely better fed to judge by the stomachs and the redness of the
noses, but after that wink just another street where people jostled for
advantage and power and a better life for themselves if not for
everybody else.

Dodger couldn’t stop grinning as he clutched this thought to himself,
like a magic ring that gave you power and no one knew you had it. Then
after this high came the low; this rookery was full of words, the place
was full of books, and right now he could find no words at all.

At this moment there was a hand on his shoulder and Charlie said, ‘We,
my friend, well, we have business to attend to. You can speak freely to
me in front of my good friend Mister Disraeli, an up-and-coming
politician of whom we have great hopes and who is aware of the certain
current problem that we have. How are you, by the way? Would you like
some refreshments?’ As Dodger struggled for words, Simplicity nodded her
head politely and Charlie walked over to the door and pressed a bell
pull. Almost immediately a man came in, had a whispered conversation
with Charlie and went out again.

Charlie sat down in a big comfy chair, and so did Disraeli. Disraeli
fascinated Dodger; there was no two ways about it. Dodger didn’t know
the word ‘insinuated’, but he knew the thought, and Mister Disraeli
insinuated himself, in some way never leaving anywhere until he was
entirely somewhere else, whereupon he instantly became everywhere. This,
of course, would make him dangerous, thought Dodger, and then he
remembered what it was he had stuffed up his shirt.

With the servant off fetching drinks, Charlie said, ‘For heaven’s sake,
sit down, young man, the chairs don’t bite! I am extremely glad to see
that our young lady is progressing slowly but surely, which is very good
news.’

Disraeli said, ‘Excuse me, but who exactly is the young lady? Is
she . . .? Would someone please introduce me?’

He rose to his feet and Charlie stood up and piloted Disraeli towards
Simplicity, saying, ‘Miss . . . Simplicity, may I introduce Mister
Benjamin Disraeli.’

Dodger watched this from the edge of his seat with a certain
incredulity. You never did things like that in Seven Dials. Then Charlie
said, ‘Ben, Miss Simplicity is the lady who has been discussed.’

And, very sweetly, Simplicity said, ‘What has been discussed about me,
pray?’

Dodger almost leaped back to his feet, ready to defend Simplicity if
necessary, but quite sharply Charlie said, ‘Sit back down, Dodger. Best
if you let me handle this, if you don’t mind, but feel free to break
in.’ He looked across to Simplicity and said, ‘May I say that you can do
the same.’ He cleared his throat and said, ‘The facts of the matter, as
understood here in England, are that you lived out of the country with
your mother – an English teacher, we believe, working abroad. Following
her sad demise, sometime in the recent past you went through a form of
marriage with a prince from one of the Germanys.’ Charlie looked at the
girl as if fearing an explosion, but she just nodded so he continued,
‘We also understand that a short time later, you, miss, fled the country
and landed up here in England – where we understand your mother was
born.’

Glaring at him, Simplicity said, ‘Yes. And I left, gentlemen, because my
husband became, as soon as we were married, a snivelling wretch of a
man. He even tried to put the blame for our so-called marriage onto me,
a trick, as you gentlemen must know, which is as old as Eden.’

Dodger looked at Disraeli, who had turned his eyes up to Heaven. Even
Charlie himself seemed somewhat awkward, saying nothing more about
_that_, but continuing, ‘Subsequently, we have learned by means which I
shall not disclose here that two farm workers who were witness to the
marriage have been found dead, and the priest who conducted the ceremony
apparently lost his footing one day while inspecting the roof of his
church and plunged to his death.’

Her face pale, Simplicity said, ‘That would be Father Jacob, a decent
man, and I would say not a man who easily falls off roofs. The witnesses
were Heinrich and Gerta. I was told about them by the maid who brought
my meals. You seem, sir, to be lost for words, but I suspect that what
you are going to try to tell me now in your long-winded British way is
that my husband wants his wife back. Apart from the priest, Heinrich and
Gerta were the only people who had knowledge of our wedding and I know
they are gone. Now this’ – she slipped off her ring and held it up – ‘is
the only evidence of the marriage. I believe, sir, that what you are
trying to tell me is that my husband – that is to say, his father –
wants to see this ring back, come what may.’

Glances passed between Disraeli and Charlie, and Disraeli said, ‘Yes,
madam, so we understand.’

‘But you see, sir, there is more evidence of the marriage. That, sir, is
myself. But I will not go back there because I know full well that I
could simply vanish. And that is if I even survived the journey – a
journey by boat, gentlemen. Because, you see, if I am now the only
evidence left, how difficult would it be for me to disappear along with
the other evidence?’

She slipped the ring back on her finger and glared at them. ‘Two very
nice people here in England, gentlemen,’ she continued, ‘not knowing my
real name, called me “Simplicity”, but I am rather more complicated. I
know that my father-in-law got very angry when he found that his son and
heir had married, he said for love, a girl who was not even fit to be a
lady-in-waiting, let alone a princess. Well, sirs, that’s what the fairy
tales tell us, and I had thought I was _in_ a fairy tale when I first
met my husband. But in truth, I have learned that princes and princesses
in the politics of Europe have a certain value when it comes to matters
of state. People feel somehow that because “our” princess has married
“your” prince, then two countries that were likely to wage war on each
other now might not do so. And my vain and stupid husband – and my
stupid self for believing him – ruined a perfectly good opportunity for
bargaining flesh for a treaty.’

Dodger was staring at Simplicity with his mouth open. A _princess_!? You
had to be a knight or something even to rescue one, didn’t you? Charlie
and Disraeli shuffled uncomfortably in their seats. And at this moment
there was a discreet knock on the door and a man appeared with cups of
coffee and plates of small cakes.

‘I believe, sir,’ Simplicity continued when they were alone once more,
‘that I am what is called “a displaced person”, and that there are those
who wish me harm in this country. They have twice tried to abduct me
since my arrival in England and it is only thanks to Dodger and, I
believe, to you, Mister Dickens, that I am here today and not on some
boat back to my husband. My mother, who – yes – was English, said that
in England everybody is free. I would be very happy to stay here, sir,
though even here I fear for my safety now I appear to be a person of
some value. But if I should go back, I dread what might befall me. I am
at a loss, gentlemen – safe nowhere. Not even in England, where no man,
I am told, can be a slave. I trust, gentlemen, that this applies to
ladies as well.’

Charlie walked over and leaned on a mantelpiece and said, ‘What do you
think about this, Ben?’

Mister Disraeli looked like a man after someone had thrown a very large
rock at his head and seemed, if only for a little while, at a loss for
words. Finally he managed, ‘Well, madam, I am very sorry to hear of your
situation but we, that is to say the British government, have been
assured that if you go back you won’t be harmed.’

At this point Dodger rose out of his chair at speed and said, ‘Would you
trust them? Besides, not being harmed is one thing, being locked up
where no one can see you is something else. I mean, you coves know about
words. There’s a lot of bad things lurking around “won’t be harmed”.’

‘But how,’ said Disraeli, ‘could we be expected to guarantee Miss
Simplicity’s safety while she remains on our shores? We all understand
how neither the government of which we speak nor our own can be seen to
be . . . interfering in this matter. But this does not mean that either
party might not consider employing others to, let us say, act on their
behalf. Now if Miss Simplicity should suffer harm whilst in our country,
it might not bode well for . . . affairs between the two governments.’
He swallowed, as though fearing he had said too much.

Dodger turned to Charlie. ‘That, sir, is why I – I mean, we – have taken
the liberty of removing Simplicity from the house of Mister and Mrs
Mayhew, kind though they have been to her, simply so that no harm
befalls _them_. Whoever the people looking for Simplicity are, I don’t
think they’re very nice. And you can trust me, sir, not to give up on
this. If I can find those villains what treated her so cruel and make
them pay, she won’t _have_ to go back, will she? I can protect her.’

Mister Disraeli squirmed a little in his chair and looked knowingly over
at Charlie before replying, ‘Well, you see, my dear sir, it is all
rather complicated. Right now the government of which we speak is
demanding the return of this lady, who is, after all, married and
therefore the rightful property of her husband. There are indeed people,
even here, who think it quite sensible to send her back for the sake of
peace between nations.’ He saw Dodger open his mouth to protest. ‘Mister
Dodger, be aware that we have had enough of wars lately – I believe you
know this rather well after your run-in with our Mister Todd – and all
too many of them started over trivial things. I am sure you can see why
this matter is so difficult.’

Difficult? Dodger thought, his temper rising. They were treating
Simplicity like she wasn’t a person, just some kind of bargaining
counter in a game of politics. Even the Crown and Anchor man would give
you better odds of winning! Suddenly his face was in front of Disraeli,
who had been forced back into his chair. ‘There is nothing complicated,
sir, not one thing,’ he cried. ‘A lady what has been beaten up by her
old man and doesn’t want any more of it ain’t going back to where she is
going to get more of the same. My word, that happens in the rookeries
all the time and nobody waggles a finger exceptin’ the old man who
suddenly has to wash his own unmentionables.’

Before Disraeli could speak, there was a welcome comment from Charlie,
who said, ‘Ben, surely it is possible for you to delay a decision on
this for a little time, give us all the opportunity to consider the best
next move. But there is a matter that clearly does need to be resolved
right now. Dodger here lives in Seven Dials with an elderly landlord and
an . . . interesting dog. It is no place for a lady, and there is no
doubt that we have a young lady here. One in fear for her life. If she’s
unlucky enough, she could even be killed in the light of day, because
our Mister Dodger, swift as he is, cannot always be everywhere. So we
have to make a decision right now, you understand? That is to say right
now, Ben, as to where this lady – a _princess_, Ben – will lay her head
in the certainty that she will have one when she wakes up. You and I
know the one person we could call on in these circumstances.’

Disraeli looked up as if someone had handed him a bucket of water when
his foot was on fire. ‘You are, of course, talking about Angela?’

‘But of course.’ Charlie turned to Dodger, now standing by Simplicity
like a guardsman ready to strike at any moment, and went on, ‘We have a
useful friend who I am sure will be delighted to offer shelter, faithful
guards and lodging to Miss Simplicity. I, for my part, am absolutely
sure that she will rise to the occasion, because I believe that she is a
woman who never, ever has to care what politicians think, or kings for
that matter. We could get there in a growler in less than an hour, if
the traffic isn’t too bad. You too must accompany us. I will come with
the pair of you and explain matters.’

‘How do I know I can trust you, Charlie,’ said Dodger, ‘even if we can
trust this mysterious lady?’

‘Well,’ said Charlie, ‘on a number of matters you probably can’t. I was
telling you the truth of it. And the truth, you know, is a fog – but do
you believe, truly _believe_, that I am not trustworthy in _this_? Where
else are you going to take the lady? Down into the sewers?’

Before another word could be uttered, the ringing voice of Simplicity
said, ‘I must trust _you_, Dodger. Maybe it’s time for a little bit of
trust on your behalf.’

There were always growlers waiting around the Parliament buildings, and
they were soon heading west, as far as Dodger could make out.

They travelled in silence until Simplicity said, ‘Mister Dickens, I do
not much like your friend Mister Disraeli; he is like somebody who sees
that there are two sides to every question. He kind of floats, if you
get me; it’s like everything was, well, like some cloth you could shake
and pick up again. And my mother said such people were innocent but
dangerous.’ After a pause she added, ‘I do apologize, but I think what I
said was true.’

Charlie sighed. ‘People must have invented politics as a means for
preventing wars and in that respect politicians are useful, most of the
time. It is very hard to see what else we have. But Ben’s hands are
tied. There are things he simply cannot do in his position, things that
he would not wish to be known to be involved in. It may surprise both of
you to know that agents of foreign powers roam around in this country
all the time, just as we ourselves send people to spy on those other
countries. Both sides know this happens, and again, generally and
unbelievably, a fragile peace is maintained. However,’ he added, ‘when
the kings and queens find themselves in checkmate, a pawn might win the
day.’

This was all news to Dodger, who said, ‘So we are always spying on our
enemies?’

In the darkness of the coach there was a chuckle. ‘Generally, Dodger,
no, because we know what our enemies are thinking; it’s _friends_ you
have to be careful of. It can be like a seesaw. One day our enemies
might be like our friends, and another day our friends may turn out to
be an enemy. Oh, everybody knows about the agents. The _agents_ know
about the agents. I must confess, though, I am at a loss to see what
even diplomacy can do in this case. Undoubtedly Simplicity could be
allowed to live here, but I cannot believe that this would be the end of
the matter, since the other government, on behalf of her father-in-law,
seems to be very adamant. Perhaps we could smuggle her onto a boat to
the Americas or possibly Australia, although this is me now thinking as
a novelist.’

Dodger burst out, ‘The Americas? I’ve heard about them! Full of savages.
You can’t possibly send her there! She won’t have any friends! And I
don’t know very much about Australia, but Sol told me it’s the other
side of the world, so the way I see it that means that they must walk
around upside down. And even if we did put her on a boat, there will be
people who know that happened: you know that, Charlie; there’s people
who watch everything that happens on the docks – I used to be one of
’em.’

‘I’m quite certain she could go in disguise,’ said Charlie. ‘Or,’ he
added, ‘it might just be sensible to lie low until said father-in-law
finally has an apoplectic fit. As I understand it, from what Disraeli
has gleaned, the rather unpleasant son might be more easy to deal with.’

In the corner where Simplicity was sitting, a voice said, quietly and
firmly, ‘Excuse me, gentlemen. All I want to do is stay here in England
where my mother was born. There are no other sides to this question and
talking about it won’t create one. I have no intention of going anywhere
else.’

Dodger listened very carefully to this. Simplicity had been beaten up
very badly, and she had been an invalid, and ever since then Dodger had
thought of her in those terms, but now a distant memory struck him. He
said, ‘Charlie, I remember someone telling me once that when the Romans
were over here building the sewers, there was some girl who chased them
around the place with chariots with wheels that cut their legs off;
you’re a reading type of cove – can you bring to mind what her name
was?’

‘Boadicea,’ said Charlie, ‘and I think you have made a point. Miss
Simplicity is a young woman who knows her own mind and she should be
allowed to stand firm against those who oppose her.’

Then the coach slowed, and stopped outside what seemed to Dodger to be a
very large and well-lit house. A butler opened the door when Charlie
knocked. There was a whispered conversation, then Dodger and Simplicity
were ushered into a small neat room by the door, while Charlie went away
at some speed with the butler, whom he had addressed as Geoffrey.

Within less than a minute, Charlie was back, accompanied by a lady whom
he introduced as Miss Angela Burdett-Coutts. She looked quite young,
Dodger thought, but she dressed quite old, and what he could see was
sharp. It was rather like Charlie. You saw at once with this lady that
you would need to be either direct or silent: she had the look of
somebody who inevitably won arguments.

The woman held out her hand. ‘My dear, you must be Simplicity, and I am
very pleased to meet you.’ She turned to Dodger. ‘Ah yes, the Hero of
Fleet Street. Charlie has told me about your exploits at the
_Chronicle_, and everyone is talking of your bravery this morning, and
you must believe me, I do have a notion as to what is going on – people
can be so talkative. Clearly the thing to do right now is to get this
young lady’ – she corrected herself – ‘young _woman_ a meal and a chance
to sleep in a warm and, above all, secure bedroom.’ She added, ‘Nobody
comes into this house without my leave, and any intruder who came in
with malice aforethought would wish they had never been born, or
perhaps, if they were able to think more selectively, that _I_ had never
been born. Simplicity is entirely welcome or, I should say . . . I am
welcoming the daughter of an old friend from the country, who is staying
here in safety while she learns to navigate her way in this wicked city.
I am sure that you, Mister Dodger, have all your work cut out as it is.
Heroes are always such busy people, I have found, although I would be
very grateful if you would attend me here at a dinner party tomorrow.’

Dodger listened to this, open-mouthed, until Charlie pushed past him and
said, ‘Dear Angela, would it be in order to allow this young man, busy
though he is, to come tomorrow with his friend and mentor, Solomon
Cohen? An excellent and renowned maker of jewellery and watches.’

‘Capital. I would be most happy to meet him. I believe I have heard of
him. As for you, Charlie, you know you are invited anyway, and I would
like to have a quiet word with you after Mister Dodger has left.’

The word ‘left’ had an air of finality, but Dodger found that he had
raised his hand, and since it was up there, he said, ‘Excuse me, miss,
would you allow me to see where Miss Simplicity is going to sleep?’

‘Why, pray?’

‘Well, miss, I reckon I can get through most windows in this city, and
if I can, then so can someone more nasty than me, if you see what I
mean.’

He was expecting a reproof, but what he got was a broad smile from
Angela. ‘You acknowledge no master, do you, Mister Dodger?’

‘I don’t know what you mean, miss, but I want to know that Simplicity is
safe, you see.’

‘Well done, Mister Dodger. I will get Geoffrey to show you the room and
the bars on the window. I too do not like intruders, and even now I’m
wondering whether I shouldn’t employ you or some of your contemporaries
to find a hitherto undiscovered way in. We might talk about this on the
morrow. But now I must speak at length to Charlie.’

[images]

CHAPTER 10

DODGER USES HIS HEAD

DODGER RAN TOWARDS home feeling in some way buoyed up by the meeting,
especially since Charlie had whispered to him as he left that Angela had
more money than anyone who wasn’t a king or queen. A nobby party sounded
like a difficult crib to crack, though. He sped at a steady pace until
he reached the first drain cover: an entrance to his world. A moment
later, despite his smart attire, there was a distinct absence of Dodger
and the sound of a drain cover falling back into place.

He got his bearings by feel, by echoes and, of course, by smell – every
single sewer in the city had a smell that was all its own; he could
taste them like a connoisseur of fine wines, and so he plotted the way
home, changing direction only once when his two-note tosher whistle was
answered by another already working that particular tunnel. It was still
light, which helped when you passed the occasional grid or grating, and
the walking was easy – not so much as a trickle today – and he almost
absentmindedly explored as he passed a secret niche. He found sixpence,
a sign that somebody or something was watching over him.

Overhead in the complicated world was the noise of hooves, the echo of
footsteps and occasionally a carriage or a coach, and out of nowhere a
sound that made him freeze: there was an eerie metallic squeal of metal
in extreme distress, as if something was wrong, or maybe something had
got stuck in a wheel, causing it to drag noisily over the stones with a
sound that seared the soul and, once heard, could never be forgotten.

The coach! If he could see where it went, he might find the men who had
battered Simplicity. He clenched his fists in anticipation – wait until
they were on the receiving end of a set of brass knuckles . . .

The coach was running along the street above him, and he cursed the fact
that the next drain cover in that direction was some way away, luckily
in a usually moderately clean sewer which he told himself would save
wear and tear on the shonky suit. He ran along the sewer, not stopping
at all, not even for a shilling, and didn’t halt until he saw the
gratings of the drain cover above him. He got out his crowbar, but just
as he was about to fling the cover away there was a sound of heavy
hoofbeats and the jingle of harness. Something huge covered that little
circle of light that had been salvation with a great and glorious smell
of dung, as a brewer’s cart pulled up on top of the drain and settled
down like an old man finding a privy at last after a long wait. The
likeness was assisted by the fact that the great steaming shire horses
that had been pulling the cart decided, as one, very hygienically to
empty their bladders. They were large animals and it had been a long
afternoon, and so the shower was not over in the space of a moment, but
rather an elegant duet to the goddess of relief. Regrettably, since the
only way was down, there was simply no time for Dodger to dodge out of
the way, not now.

In the distance, gradually merging with all the rattle and clamour of
the streets, the screaming wheel could barely now be heard. In any case,
the beefy men who worked for the brewers were unloading the heavy casks
down wooden ramps, and the rumble of the great barrels drowned out every
other sound that was left.

Dodger knew the routine of these men; once they had shifted all the
empty barrels from the pub and replaced them with full ones, they would
as sure as sunset drink a pint of beer. They would be joined in this
cheerful enterprise by the landlord himself, the ostensible reason for
this being that they would all agree on the quality of the nectar
concerned, although in truth the likely reason was that, after heaving
great loads around for any length of time, well, a man deserves a beer,
doesn’t he? It was a ritual that was probably as old as beer itself.
Occasionally, the brewery men and the landlords would have another beer,
so great was their determination to make sure that the beer was in the
best possible condition. In fact, Dodger could smell it, even above the
scent of the horses, and even with a certain essence of horse to contend
with, it still made him thirsty.

He had always loved the smell you got in the sewers by the breweries. A
geezer called Blinky, who was a rat-catcher by profession, had once told
him that the rats in the sewers underneath the breweries were always the
biggest and fattest anywhere, adding that the rat-catching fancy would
pay extra for brewery rats because they had a lot of fight in them.

Whatever he did now, though, Dodger knew he wasn’t going to catch up
with that damned coach. The men above him were being very assiduous in
deciding on the quality of the beer, and while he could, of course, run
along to the next grating, his quarry by then would have got lost in the
street noise of London, as sure as Heaven. All he could do was seethe at
an opportunity lost.

He trudged on anyway, mostly because the large shire horses also did
other things than piss – that’s why some of the street urchins used to
follow them with a bucket. You often heard them shouting their wares
among the nobbier houses, where people had gardens, with the refrain
‘One penny a bucket, missus, well stamped down!’

The only thing to do now was hurry along to the next drain cover and get
out there. And so, after a day of dodging, he traipsed through the maze
of streets, tired, hungry and well aware that there was indeed _not one
mark_ on the shonky suit; it was now, in fact, _made up_ of marks. Jacob
and his sons were pretty good at cleaning things up, but they would have
their work cut out on this. No hope for it, though; he would have to
take his lumps.

Gloomily he walked on, paying attention all the time for heads that
dropped out of sight as soon as they knew that they had been made, or
people who very swiftly disappeared into alleyways. This was what a
geezer did; a geezer knew that most of the hurrying, scurrying crowd
would be simply minding their own business, although with the option of
minding somebody else’s business as well if the opportunity arose. What
Dodger was looking out for was the interrogating eye, the eye of
purpose, the watchful eye, the eye that read the street.

And right now the street seemed clear, in so far as any street could,
and at least Simplicity was safe for tonight, he consoled himself.
Although not safe if she went out. It was dreadful the things that could
happen on the street, in full view.

Not so long ago, he remembered he had dressed up as a little flower
girl; he was young enough to pull it off with his auburn hair sticking
out fetchingly from a scarf, and it wasn’t even his hair because he had
borrowed it from Mary-Go-Round, who had pretty good blonde hair. Mary’s
hair grew like a mushroom and looked like it too. But she made good
money every few months or so by selling it to the wig-makers.

The reason he had been doing this favour was that the flower girls, some
of whom were as young as four years old, had been having a certain
amount of . . . harassment from a particular kind of gentleman. The
girls, who mostly sold violets and daffodils in season, were a decent
bunch, and Dodger quite liked them and cared for them. Of course, they
had to make a living as they grew older, just like everyone else, and it
might be said that in certain circumstances a little bit of hanky-panky
might just be acceptable to the older ones, provided that they were in
control of the hanky, not to mention the panky. However, they were
furiously protective of their younger sisters, at which point Dodger had
been persuaded to don his first dress.

And so when the sharp-suited gentlemen who liked to go down among the
poor flower girls to see if there were any new blossoms they could pluck
came to ply them with strong liquor until they could have their wicked
way with them, they would actually be subtly directed to the shrinking
and simpering violet who was, in fact, Dodger.

Actually, he had to admit that he had been incredibly good at it,
because to be a geezer was to be an actor and so Dodger was better at
being a shrinking violet than any of the other flower girls who had, how
could you put it, better qualifications. He had already sold quite a lot
of his violets because his voice hadn’t broken then and he could make
himself a real little virgin when he wanted to. After a few hours of
this, the girls tipped him off to the whereabouts of a particularly
nasty dandy who always hung around the smaller girls, and who was
heading towards him with his nice coat and his cane, jingling the money
in his pockets. And the street applauded when a suddenly rather athletic
little flower girl grabbed the smarmy bastard, punched him, dragged him
into an alley and made certain that he would not be able to jingle
anything in his pockets for some time to come.

That had been one of Dodger’s very good days because, well, firstly he
had done a good deed for the flower girls, earning from one or two of
them the likelihood of an occasional kiss and cuddle, as between
friends. Secondly, since he had left a gentleman groaning in the alley
without even his unmentionables, he had harvested one gold watch, one
guinea, a couple of sovereigns, some small change, an ebony walking cane
set with silver trimmings, and one pair of the said unmentionables.¹ And
the bonus in the whole affair was that the man was never, ever likely to
get in touch with the peelers. Also, he had forgotten this: there had
been the gold tooth which the man had spat at him after the best punch
that Dodger had ever laid on anybody. He had actually caught it in the
air, much to the applause of the flower girls, making him feel for a
while the cock of the heap. He had taken the older flower girls for an
oyster supper and it had been the best day a young man could ever have.
It was always worth doing a good deed, though that had been before he
had rescued Solomon, who wouldn’t have approved of some aspects of the
enterprise.

Since Dodger was now practically on his home patch, blackened by smoke
though it was, he let his guard down and a hand landed on his shoulder
with a grip that was surprising, given that its owner mostly used his
strength to push a pen.

‘Well, Mister Dodger! You will be amazed how much I had to spend on the
growler to get here so quickly. And, may I say, your sewers have made
short work of your suit. Any chance of there being a coffee house around
here, do you think?’

Dodger thought not, but did volunteer that one of the nearby meat pie
houses might have some of it on the go, adding, ‘Not certain what it
will taste like. A bit like, probably very much like, the meat pies,
really; I mean, you have to be really hungry, if you see what I mean.’

In the end, he led Charlie to a pub where they could talk without being
overheard, and where it was least likely somebody would try to pick
Charlie’s pocket. When Dodger went in, he was Dodger in spades. No, come
to think about it, not just in spades, but also in clubs, hearts and
diamonds as well – a diamond geezer, the friend of everyone in the
rookeries. He glad-handed Quince, the landlord, and a few of the other
hangers-on of dubious repute with enough fire to send the word to those
who had the eyes to see that this mark belonged to Dodger, and nobody
else.

On the whole, Charlie was putting a good face on it, but nevertheless,
here he was in the rookeries, where even the peelers trod carefully and
never, ever went singly. Here was Charlie, as out of place as Dodger had
felt himself at first in Parliament. Two different worlds.

London wasn’t all that big when you thought about it: a square mile of
mazes, surrounded by even more streets and people and . . .
opportunities . . . and outside that a load of suburbs who thought they
were London, but they weren’t at all, not really, at least not to
Dodger. Oh, sometimes he went outside the square mile – oh, as far as
two miles away! – and he took great care to cloak himself with the full
cocksureness of geezerdom. Then he could be all friendly with all those
people it paid to be friendly with, and geezer would call unto geezer;
the geezers of the Outer Wastes, as Dodger called those streets, weren’t
exactly friends but you respected their patch in the hope and sureness
that they would respect yours. You reached an understanding with looks,
assumptions and the occasional exchange of gestures which hardly needed
words. But it was all a show, a game . . . and when he was not Dodger,
he sometimes wondered who he really was. Dodger, he thought, was a lot
stronger than he was.

Now and then, a customer in the pub glanced at Charlie and then looked
at Dodger, and instantly thought they understood and looked away. _No
problem, ’nuff said, guv’nor, right you are_.

When it was clear that warfare would not break out, and two pints of
porter, for once in clean glasses, what with there being a gentleman
here, were put in front of them, Charlie said, ‘Young man, I made great
haste to my office after finishing our business with Angela, and what
did I find but that my friend Mister Dodger the hero is a very rich
man.’ He leaned closer and said, ‘In fact, I have in my pocket,
carefully wrapped so that they should not jingle, specie to the tune of
fifty sovereigns and what you might now call small change, with the
promise of more to come.’

At last Dodger got control of his own mouth, which for a few seconds had
totally been beyond him. He managed to whisper, ‘But I ain’t no hero,
Charlie.’

Charlie put a finger to his lips and said, ‘Do be careful about
protesting; you know who and what you are, and I suppose so do I,
although I suspect I am kinder to you than you are to yourself. But
right now the good people of London have contributed this money to
someone they consider to be a hero. Who are we to deprive them of their
hero, especially since it might be that a hero can get things done?’

Dodger glanced around the bar. Nobody was listening and he hissed, ‘And
poor old Todd is a villain, right?’

‘Well, now,’ said Charlie. ‘A hero, a man might think, is a man who
might protest that the so-called villain is nothing more than a sad, mad
man in torment because of what war has done to him, and indeed suggest
that Bedlam would be more sensible than the gallows. Who would deny a
hero, especially if said hero sprang some of his newfound wealth seeing
to it that the poor man had a reasonable time there.’

Dodger thought of Mister Todd in Bedlam, where the poor devil would
presumably be locked in somewhere with his demons and with no comforts
unless he could afford to pay for them. The thought made Dodger’s flesh
crawl, because surely that would be much worse than the gallows in
Newgate, especially since they were getting the art of putting the knot
in the rope in such a way that the neck was broken instantly, which
saved a lot of hanging around for all concerned and meant that people no
longer had to rely on their friends swinging on their heels as they
danced the hemp fandango. Reportedly, a good pickpocket could get his
lunch just by strolling behind people who were intent on making the most
of the entertainment. Dodger had himself tried this out once and hadn’t
done too badly, but he had been surprised to find himself feeling a
little ashamed at using such an occasion for profit and so he had
re-distributed the money he had expertly filched to a couple of beggars.

‘No one’s going to listen to me,’ he said now.

‘You undersell yourself, my friend. And you undersell the power of the
press. Now close your mouth before something flies into it, and
remember, tomorrow morning you must come to see me at the offices of
_Punch_ magazine so that Mister Tenniel can make a very droll likeness
of you, for our readers would like to see the hero of the day.’

He slapped Dodger on the back – an action he immediately regretted as
his hand encountered an especially fruity patch of Dodger’s suit.

‘The coach,’ said Dodger. ‘I heard it again. Nearly caught it too. I’ll
find them coves, Charlie. Simplicity will be safe from _them_.’

‘Well, she’s certainly safe right now at Angela’s.’ Charlie smiled. ‘And
I believe I can keep Ben quiet for a day or so whilst I make further
enquiries. We make a team, Mister Dodger, a team! The game is on, so let
us hope we are on the winning side.’

With that, he left the pub, heading fast for the next wide road that
might contain a cab and leaving Dodger standing there with his mouth
open and a pocket full of glorious, shiny specie. After a few seconds,
the goddesses of reality and self-preservation ganged up on him, and a
man holding a fortune raced through Seven Dials and hammered on
Solomon’s door.

He gave the special knock, heard the joyful bark of Onan followed by the
shuffling of Solomon’s slippers, followed by the rattle of bolts. Dodger
knew that at the Tower of London – a place he never wanted to see the
inside of – there was a great ceremony of the Yeoman warders, known by
some as the Beefeaters, when the place was locked up at nights. But
however complicated their ceremony was, it probably wasn’t as careful
and meticulous as Solomon opening or closing his door. This was, in
fact, now at last open.

‘Oh, Dodger, a little late. Never mind, stew is all the better for a
really good simmer . . . Oh dear, what _have_ you done to Jacob’s very
nearly new suit!’

Carefully taking off the jacket, Dodger hung it at the insistence of
Solomon on a coat hanger to await further attention before turning round
slowly, opening the purse that Charlie had given to him and letting its
contents tinkle onto the old man’s work table.

He then stood back and said, ‘I think Jacob would now agree with me that
the suit is not really important at the moment. In any case,’ he
continued, smiling, ‘everybody knows that a little bit of piss does no
harm to a garment whatsoever, so I think some of this specie would make
everything as right as rain, what do you say?’ And while the old man’s
mouth was still open Dodger went on, ‘I hope you’ve got some room in
your strongboxes!’

Then he thought, as Solomon stood there in amazement and said nothing,
maybe it would be a very good idea to get his riches somewhere else, as
soon as ever possible.

Sometime later, two empty bowls of stew sat on the table alongside a
fortune made up of carefully stacked coins, which were ranged in order
of denomination from one or two half farthings right up to the guineas
and sovereigns. Solomon and Dodger stared at the piles as if expecting
them to perform a trick or, possibly more likely, to evaporate and go
back to where they came from.

As for Onan, he looked anxiously from one to the other, wondering if he
had done something wrong, which to be frank was generally likely to be
the case, although on this occasion he was blameless so far.

Solomon listened very carefully to Dodger’s account of what had happened
in the barbershop and all that had followed, right up to the dinner
invitation from Miss Angela and the reward Charlie had given him in the
pub, sometimes raising a finger to ask a particular question but
otherwise not making a sound until finally he said, ‘Mmm, it is not your
fault if people call you a hero, but it is to your credit that you
recognize that if he was a monster then it was other monstrous things
which made him so. The iron forged on the anvil cannot be blamed for the
hammer, and I believe God will quite understand you took every
opportunity to explain the situation to all those who listened. Mmm,
don’t I just know that onto the world that is people paint the world
that they would _like_. Therefore they like to see dragons slain, and
where there are gaps, public imagination will fill the void. No blame
attaches. In the case of the money, one might feel that this is in some
way a society trying to feel better. A healing action, which almost as a
side-effect makes you a very well-off young man who in my opinion
definitely should put most of this money in the bank. You tell me of a
lady by the name of Miss Angela Burdett-Coutts; she is indeed extremely
rich, having received a very large legacy from her grandfather, and you
would be very wise to deal with her family. The people at Mister Coutts’
bank are your men, I think, and therefore I suggest that you put the
money with them, where it will be safe and earn interest. A very good
nest egg indeed!’

‘Interest? What’s money interested in?’

‘_More_ money,’ said Solomon. ‘Take it from me.’

‘Well, I don’t want people to be very interested in me!’ said Dodger.

The mmm from Solomon was an unusually fruity one, and he said, ‘Not so
much interested in you, but very interested in your money. Mmm, you see,
it is like this. Supposing one of these newfangled railway gentlemen,
let us call him Mister Stephenson, has a design for a wonderful new
engine. Being a man interested in mostly bolts and atmospheric
pressures, he might not be very well versed in the world of commerce.
Mmm, now Mister Coutts and his gentlemen will find for him entrepreneurs
– that is _you_, Dodger, in this case – who might lend him the necessary
cash in order to get his good idea to a state of solid reality. Mister
Coutts can take the measure of a man as to his trustworthiness and, in
short, see to it that your money works for the aforesaid engineer, and
also at the same time for you. Of course, they will take advice to
ascertain that this gentleman with the shining eyes and grease down his
breeches with a definite reek of coal dust about his person is a sound
investment, but Mister Coutts and his family are very wealthy people who
most certainly didn’t get that way by guessing wrongly. It’s called
finance. Trust me; I’m Jewish, we know about these things.’

Solomon was beaming happily, but Dodger said uneasily, ‘This sounds a
bit like gambling to me. You can lose money gambling.’

Under the table Onan whined, because nobody was paying him any
attention.

‘Indeed you can, but mmm you see, there is gambling, and on the other
hand there is _gambling_. Take poker, for example. Poker is about
watching people, and you, young man, are incredibly good at that. You
read people’s faces. I don’t know how you do it so well – it’s a gift.
So it is in finance; you have to be careful with the people you deal
with, and so are Mister Coutts and Co.’

‘You make them sound as if they are on the dodge, like me!’ said Dodger.

Solomon smiled. ‘Mmm, that is a most interesting philosophy, Dodger, but
not one that I might suggest too appropriate to mention to the men at
Coutts bank. Remember, it’s very hard to stay in business with a bad
name, and they certainly stay in business.’ He wrinkled his nose as the
odours of the drying jacket managed even to overwhelm Onan’s
contribution to the air in the attic.

‘I’m sorry about the shonky suit,’ Dodger managed, but Solomon waved
this away with a sound like _phooey!_

‘Don’t worry about Jacob,’ he said. ‘Jacob would never be angry with a
man who has a lot of money to spend. Anyway, horse urine is, as we know,
very good for cleaning clothes – a fact not everyone appreciates, though
everybody knows it has a smell like good cider, and is very fruity. Now
I suggest an early night, once you have finished the washing-up, because
tomorrow we will be dining with very important people and I will feel
ashamed if people were to say, “Look at that overgrown street urchin,
you can see that he has no manners at all.” They will say he might know
how to use a knife and fork, but he certainly does not know how to use
mmm a fish slice; and they will say to themselves, “I suspect that he
slurps when he drinks his soup” – which you, Dodger, if I may say so, do
a lot. If people like Mister Disraeli are going to be there, then you
must be a gentleman and mmm, it would appear that I have less than one
day to turn you into one. Money alone doesn’t do the trick.’

Dodger winced at this, but Solomon plunged on loudly with Old Testament
firmness and waggled the finger of rectitude as if at any moment he
would throw down the Ten Commandments. Given that the timbers of the
property were already creaking and groaning with the weight of multiple
families in that one building, this would mean that the building would
surely collapse.

Sticking out his beard like an advance guard, Solomon mumbled on, ‘This
is a matter of pride, Dodger, which I have and you must acquire. First
thing in the morning we will go and visit Mister Coutts, and then see if
it is possible to find in London a man who would do the very best
haircut and shave for the customer without killing him with a razor. I
know just the one.’

Before Dodger could say a word the finger was raised again, seas parted,
thunder rolled and the sky darkened, making birds fly frantically for
safety. Or at least, that is what happened in the privacy of the attic,
and indeed in the mind of Dodger.

Solomon said fiercely, ‘Do not argue with me. This isn’t the sewers.
When it comes to finance, and banking, and smartening yourself up, I am
a master. With the scars to prove it. I must tell you that just for once
in your life I am insisting! This is not the time to argue with your old
friend. After all, I wouldn’t tell you how to work the sewers.’

His finger stopped stabbing and joined its family on the hand, and the
tide turned back, the dark sky became the peaceful if somewhat dirty
glow of evening and the terrible finger of thunder and lightning faded
out of Dodger’s imagination as Solomon became rather smaller and said,
‘Now, please take Onan down to do his business and we can shut up shop
for the night.’

There was still some light in the sky when Dodger got the dog
downstairs. As is the protocol of these things, he let Onan off his
leash then looked around as if he had no idea what the dog was actually
doing. There were a few lights to be seen, though not too many, candles
being the price they were. Just the galaxies of London, the occasional
star, or a candle in a window, wasting a part of its tallow on the
ungrateful streets. When you saw a candle in a window at this time of
night, it meant that some poor wretch had died, or some other poor
wretch had been born. Lights were for when the midwife had to be called
in, and lights were for a death. If, of course, it was the more heated
kind of death – the kind that might make the peelers take an interest –
that would be a job for the coroner and would bring forth a second
candle.

With that in mind, Dodger called Onan to stop worrying whatever he was
worrying and a tiny bell rang in his mind as he realized that in the
darkness someone had crept so silently towards him that they now had a
knife at his throat.

A voice said very quietly, ‘There is something of considerable
importance that you know the whereabouts of, Mister Dodger, and I’m
hearing that some people are scared of you on account of everybody
knowing, so they say, that you must be quite the lad to have put down
Sweeney Todd. But me? I say no, that can’t be true, can it, considering
that all a cove needs to do is wait right here and threaten you when you
comes out to take the air of a night, waiting for your stinking mutt to
make the cobbles even more treacherous for law-abiding folks, such as
what I am. Don’t blame yourself, Mister Dodger; routines have been the
undoing of many poor buggers, and I heard tell you was clever. Well,
there’s none here but you, me and the mutt, and he won’t last long when
you’ve told me what I want and I’m done with you. You’ll be just one
very short scream in the rookeries, eh. And my employer, Mister Sharp
Bob, will be all the happier. That is, Mister Dodger, if you can tell me
of the whereabouts of that girl with golden hair; and if you don’t I’ll
gut yer anyway.’

Not one muscle had moved anywhere on the body of Dodger, if you didn’t
count the sphincter. But as the name _Sharp Bob_ rocketed through his
brain, he said, ‘I don’t know you. Thought I knew everyone in all the
boroughs. Would you mind telling me who you are, mister? After all, it’s
not as though I’ll be able to pass on the information, right?’

The blade just occasionally touched the nape of Dodger’s neck. Onan
would almost certainly attack if Dodger gave him the signal, but a knife
at your neck is a great encouragement to careful thinking. The neck,
Dodger knew, was tough and strong and quite capable of holding the
weight of a very large man, as was demonstrated regularly at the Tyburn
gallows, and sometimes difficult to puncture if you didn’t get the place
right. But what it was vulnerable to was, of course, the slice.

The unseen man had stopped talking; if it hadn’t been for the sensation
of his breath close to Dodger’s ear, he almost wouldn’t have known
somebody was there. All this went through the brain of Dodger at speed.
The man was enjoying the fact that Dodger was helpless and totally in
his power; you got that sort sometimes, and the man would never become a
geezer. If a real geezer wanted you dead he’d have done it straight
away.

Now the man apparently decided that it was time for more tormenting of
his victim. ‘I like to see a man take his time,’ he said, ‘so by now I
reckon you’ve worked out you can’t break my grip and I could do very
nasty things to your neck before your doggie got to me. Of course, there
would be a wee little set-to between him and me, but dogs is not too
difficult if you have the knowing of it and take care what clothing you
wear. Oh, I didn’t spend years in the ring without knowing how to take
care of myself in any fight you could mention! And I knows you can’t get
to your knuckles right now, nor that little bar you like to carry – not
like the last time we met.’ The man chortled. ‘I’m going to enjoy this
after the way you came at us in that storm. You might have ’eard tell
that someone has taken measures since then so as my associate of that
night is now no longer in the land of the living – and you’re going to
be joining ’im pretty sharpish, I reckon. Now if I don’t want to be
amongst that happy crowd, I needs that information. Now.’

Dodger gasped. So this was one of the men who had been beating
Simplicity! And _Sharp Bob_ was behind it! _He had heard tell of the man
– a legal cove, of sorts, widely respected by the unrespectable. Was he
the geezer who had been talking to Marie Jo?_

Anger rose in him, a terrible anger that coalesced into one glittering
shining certainty as the man’s blade gently stroked across his neck. It
whispered, ‘This man is not going to walk out of here.’

Nobody was nearby. There was the occasional scream, shout or mysterious
sigh – the music of the night in the tenements – but for now Dodger and
the unseen man were alone. Dodger said, ‘It sounds like I am in the
hands of a professional, then?’

The voice behind him said, ‘Oh yes, I guess you could say that.’

‘Good,’ said Dodger, and threw his head back so hard that he heard the
reassuring noise of something breaking, and then spun round and kicked.
It didn’t matter very much what he kicked, or indeed on what he stamped,
but he found a multitude of choices, and in his rage he kicked and
stamped on practically everything. When it came to it, the only sensible
thing to do was stay alive, and the chances of staying alive with a man
threatening you with a knife were reasonably small. Better him with a
bloody nose and a great big bruise than you being nothing but a memory.
And goodness, the bloke had been drinking before coming out – never a
good idea if you wanted to be really quick. But this was one of the men
who had been _beating Simplicity_, and no kicking now could be thorough
enough for that.

The knife had been dropped, and he picked it up, looked down at the man
who was lying in the gutter and said, ‘Good news is that in a couple of
months you will hardly remember this; the bad news is, that after about
two weeks you will need to get somebody to break that nose proper for
you again so’s you look like your old ’andsome self.’

The man snuffled, and by the sight of him in the gloom, the way his face
looked now was quite probably better than it had been before: it was all
scars. People thought that a ragged face was a sign of a professional
boxer, but it wasn’t – it was a sign of an amateur boxer. Good boxers
liked to be pretty; it put the contenders off their guard.

Dodger kicked the recumbent man in the fork, as hard as he could, and
while the man groaned, he riffled his pockets to the total account of
fifteen shillings and sixpence ha’penny. Then he kicked him again for
good measure. He also pulled off the man’s shoes and said, ‘Yes, mister,
I am the geezer that knocked you down in the storm. The geezer who stood
up to Mister Sweeney Todd, and do you know what? I have his razor. Oh
my, how it does talk to me. You tell Sharp Bob to come and ask me
questions himself, right! I ain’t a murderer, but I am on good terms
with such as is, and I’ll see you in lavender if I ever see you around
here, or hear of you taking your fists to a lady again. You will float
down the river without a boat, and that’s the truth.’

Above and around them there was the sound of windows being cautiously
opened – cautiously because whatever it was that had just gone down in
the street it might be something that you really didn’t want to see,
especially if it was possible that the peelers might quiz you about it.
In the rookeries, you needed to develop a blindness that could be
switched on and off.

Dodger cupped his hands and shouted cheerfully, ‘Nothing to worry about,
folks, it’s me, Dodger, and a bloke from out of town who amazingly
enough fell over my foot.’ The ‘out of town’ bit was necessary, to show
to all those listening that the local patch, such as it was – and mostly
it was mud and the remnants of Onan’s most recent meals – was being
defended, and it did not hurt, did it, to let everyone know that it was
being defended by Dodger, good ol’ Dodger.

In the grey light there was a sleepy applause from everybody except
Mister Slade, who was a bargee by profession and not known for the
gentleness of his speech, him being a man who also had to get up very
early in the mornings. He had clearly had a bad day and shouted down,
‘OK, now piss off and go back to bed.’

Dodger decided not to take the invitation to piss off and go back to
bed; instead, he half dragged, half carried the man off his patch, as
the protocol of the streets demanded, then spent another ten minutes
dragging him a further distance away from the tenement, just in case a
peeler wanted to investigate. He propped the figure up against the wall
and whispered, ‘You are a very lucky man. And if I ever see your face
around here again you will have what we in the business call a very
close shave. Understand? I will assume that was a yes.’ Then Dodger
whistled to Onan, though not until after the dog had urinated on the
man’s leg: something that in fact Dodger hadn’t intended, but that he
thought in the circumstances was a perfect ending to that particular
scenario.

And then . . . there was just Dodger, and it seemed to him that the
events of the evening needed one last touch, one last little detail that
a geezer could look back on and be proud about – a detail that would
give his reputation even more shine too. After a few moments’ thought,
jingling the purloined coins in his hand, he walked back to his own
streets, over to a small doorway and knocked several times.

After a while, a very cautious old lady in a nightshirt peered out,
saying with the deepest suspicion, ‘Who’s that? I ain’t got any money in
the house, you know.’ Then it was, ‘Oh, it’s you, young Dodger. Cor
blimey, I only recognized you ’cos of your teeth. Never known anyone
with such white teeth.’

Dodger, to the old woman’s surprise, said, ‘Yes, it is me, Mrs Beecham,
and I know you haven’t got any money in the house, but you have now.’ He
dropped the booty into her astonished hands.

It felt good, and the toothless old woman perceptibly beamed in the
darkness and said, ‘God bless you, sir, I will say a prayer for you at
church in the morning.’

This somewhat surprised Dodger; no one had offered him a prayer before,
as far as he could recall. The idea that he might have one was, on this
chilly night, a welcome warmth. Cuddling that to his bosom, he led Onan
up the long stairs to bed.

1 Rather soiled but nevertheless very well made, and which he had
subsequently worn quite a lot afterwards – that was, after some serious
washing.

[images]

CHAPTER 11

DODGER SMARTENS UP, AND SOLOMON COMES CLEAN

SOLOMON HAD BEEN waiting up for him. He hadn’t been in the neighbourhood
audience, because no room in the attic faced the street. His windows
instead looked out on one side of some warehouses, which Solomon had
considered a much better view than the kind of things you have to see in
the street itself. Only a very few words were exchanged in the darkness
before Dodger flopped down onto his mattress and the last candle was
snuffed.

As he snuggled down under his blanket in the knowledge of a day well
filled, Dodger watched his own thoughts swim past his eyes. No wonder
the world spun – there were so many changes. How long ago was it that he
had heard a scream and jumped out of a foaming sewer . . . how many days
was it? He counted – three days. _Three days!_ It was as if the world
was moving too fast, laughing at Dodger to keep up with it. Well, he
would chase the world and take what came and deal with it. Tomorrow he
would be attending a wonderful dinner at a place where there was
certainly going to be Simplicity, and it appeared to him as tiredness
built up that the important thing in all this was how you seemed and he
was learning how to seem. Seem to be a hero, seem to be a clever young
man, seem to be trustworthy. That seemed to fool everybody, and the most
disconcerting thing about this was it was doing the same to him, forcing
him on like some hidden engine. And with that strange deduction still in
his head, he fell asleep.

The following morning, the man whose job it was to open the doors of
Coutts Bank to the customers found himself looking at an elderly Jewish
gentleman in a ragged gabardine coat, whose eyes gleamed with mercantile
zeal. This apparition pushed past him, followed by a young man in an
ill-fitting suit and a nasty-smelling dog. Among some of the other
clients, there was some murmuring about poor people coming in there,
until it turned out – after every coin above the rank of sixpence was
duly bagged and signed for – that these were poor people with a lot of
money.

A receipt and a shiny new bank book were received, the little party
swept away as fast as they had come in, and the Red Sea closed again,
the planets wobbled back to their rightful orbits, first-born children
once again played happily and all was right with the world. Except that
part of it now contained one of Mister Coutts’ senior partners, who was
realizing that somehow he had agreed to a rate of interest that they
seldom offered, but he had considered cheap at the price if it got
Solomon out of the building before he threw out the moneylenders. The
suggestion was, of course, ridiculous and unfounded in every respect,
but Solomon nevertheless was always a winner when it came to bargaining
and it tended to leave everybody somewhat dazed.

As soon as they got outside the bank, Dodger reminded Solomon, somewhat
reluctantly, that he was due in the offices of _Punch_ magazine, so that
some artist or other could draw a picture of him for the front cover.

Mister Tenniel turned out to be a young man only a little bit older than
Dodger and whose brown hair seemed closer to red. With Dodger in a seat
in front of him, the two of them chatted away while the artist drew.
Being drawn by Mister Tenniel wasn’t all that difficult, and a lot less
difficult, Solomon said, than being drawn and quartered, at least. That
was apparently a Solomon joke; one he didn’t explain to Dodger.

Perhaps, Dodger thought, he should have said that the process was not
difficult but occasionally worrying, because Mister Tenniel would
scribble and scribble and then suddenly dart a glance towards Dodger,
which pinned him like a butterfly, and then just as soon disappear as
Mister Tenniel got back to the scribbling again. Only the top of his
head could be seen as the artist bent over his work, while Solomon sat
drinking coffee and reading a complimentary issue of _Punch_.

To Dodger’s amazement, being drawn didn’t take very much time, and
finally Tenniel made a sudden few last-minute adjustments to the
portrait on his easel and turned it towards Dodger with a grin. ‘I’m
pretty pleased with this, Mister . . . may I call you Dodger? I think I
have your essence down pat, but of course the paper is always somewhat
cluttered, and I will be expected to add a few other details to give the
public some vision of what transpired in Mister Sweeney Todd’s shop. I
need to draw Mister Todd too, you know – the public demands both hero
and villain.’

Dodger swallowed. ‘But Mister Todd wasn’t really a villain, sir—’ he
tried.

Tenniel cut him off with a wave of his brush. ‘I hear that Talavera was
a most dreadful battle. They say that Wellington simply threw men
forward into the mouths of the cannons in abandon, and to great loss of
life. One can only hope that the deaths were worth the sacrifice, if
that could be possible.’ He shook Dodger by the hand and went on,
‘Mister Dickens told me the truth about what happened on that day in
Fleet Street, and it is wonderful, is it not, how the public perception
of what is true these days seems always biased towards the macabre? It
would seem that the common man likes nothing so much as an ’orrible
murder.’ He paused and added, ‘Is there something the matter, Mister
Dodger?’

As often as Tenniel had closely scrutinized Dodger, so had Dodger in his
turn scrutinized him. He had seen not what was there, but at one point
seen something very subtly out of kilter. It took a while for him to see
it properly and to find the words.

Embarrassed at being caught staring, he decided to make a clean breast
of it and said, ‘I believe you have something wrong with your left eye,
don’t you, Mister Tenniel? I hope it ain’t too much of a drawback in
your profession?’

The artist’s face froze and then thawed into a lopsided smile. ‘The scar
is so small, I believe that you are the first man I have met to notice
it. In fact, it was a trivial childhood accident.’

Dodger, watching the smiling face, thought: Not, I think, so trivial.

‘Charlie was right in what he said about you the other day!’

‘Oh? Mmm, and what _did_ Charlie say about my friend Dodger the other
day, if you please, sir?’ Solomon rumbled, standing up and packing the
magazine into the depths of his coat. ‘I would very much like to know.’
He smiled, of course, but the wording was emphatic.

This was most certainly picked up by Tenniel, who blushed and said,
‘Since I have put my foot in it, sir, I can do no more than tell the
truth – will you please not tell Mister Dickens that I mentioned it?
What he said, in fact, was: “Mister Dodger is so sharp that one day his
name will be known on every continent, possibly as a benefactor of
mankind, but also quite possibly as the most charming scoundrel ever to
be hanged!”’

Mister Tenniel took a step backwards in amazement when Solomon,
laughing, said, ‘Well, at least Mister Dickens is a wonderful judge of
character, and directness in a man such as himself is admirable. But
should you meet him before I do, please tell him that Solomon Cohen is
endeavouring to see that the first option will prevail! Thank you very
much for your time, sir, but please excuse us now, because I must go
with the young ruffian to a place where he will get cleaner than he’s
ever been in his life, because this evening we are due to go to a very
important dinner engagement in the West End. Good day to you, sir, and
thank you, but now we really must take our leave.

‘No time to dawdle, Dodger,’ said Solomon as the door closed behind
them. ‘You know how keen I am on bathing? Well, we are today going to
have a Turkish bath, with all the trimmings.’

This was news to Dodger, but Solomon’s wisdom and efforts at basic
hygiene had kept him alive so far, so it was almost inconceivable for
Dodger to thwart his friend on this occasion; he dared not argue for
fear that Solomon’s righteous zeal would cause him to drag Dodger there
by the ear. Acquiescence was better than becoming a laughing stock in
all the rookeries and stews. And so, putting a brave face on it, he
followed the old man out into what was really a drizzle with smoke in
its eye, where they unhooked Onan from the lamppost where he had been
tethered in the certain knowledge that nobody would ever want to steal
him.

Dodger felt better when he cogitated on the word ‘Turkish’. Somebody,
probably Ginny-Come-Lately – a nice girl with a laugh that made you very
nearly blush; they had been quite close once upon a time – had told him
about Turkey. She had filled his mind with exciting images of dancing
girls and light-brown ladies in very thin vests. Apparently, they would
give you a massage and then oil you with what she called ‘ungulates’,
which sounded very exotic, although to tell you the truth,
Ginny-Come-Lately could make anything sound exotic. When he had
mentioned this to Solomon – Dodger had been much younger then, and still
a bit naïve – the old man had said, ‘Surely not. I have not travelled
widely in the countries of the Levant, but whatever else they do to
their goats, I am quite sure they don’t rub them all over their own
bodies. The goat has never been distinguished by the fragrance of its
aroma. I suspect you mean “unguents”, which are perfumes distilled from
fragrant oils. Why’d you want to know?’

The younger Dodger had said, ‘Oh, no reason really, I just heard
somebody say the word.’ Right now, though, whatever way you put it, the
word Turkish conjured up visions of eastern promise, and so he became
quite optimistic as he strolled through the streets all the way to the
Turkish baths in Commercial Road.

There were, of course, bathhouses all over the place, often used even by
those who were really poor, when – as one old lady had put it to Dodger
– ‘sometimes you need to knock the lumps off ’. Often, the baths were
ordered just like the rest of the world, in that the more you paid the
more likely it was that you got the hottest and cleanest water which
was, at least before the soap went in, transparent. Dodger was aware
that in some of those places the water that the nobs had bathed in ended
up in the baths habituated by what you might call the middle classes,
travelling afterwards to the great bath for the lower classes, where at
least it arrived soapy, which if you took the cheerful view meant a
saving. Even though you might never sit down at a table with mayors and
knights and barons, at least you could share their bath, which made you
proud to be a Londoner.

The rain was falling faster now, rain that was undeniably London rain,
already grubby before it hit the ground, putting back on the streets
what had been taken away by the chimneys. It tasted like licking a dirty
penny.

The door to the bathhouse was up some steps, although there was nothing
much else to recommend it; it certainly didn’t look like a haven for
nubile Nubians of any kind. Once inside, however, they were greeted by a
lady, which sent Dodger’s spirits up a bit, although the fact that she
turned out to be quite old and had something of a moustache lowered them
once again. There was a muted conversation between her and Solomon. The
old boy would haggle over the price of a penny bun but had apparently
now met his match in the old woman, whose expression suggested that the
price was that well-known one, ‘take it or leave it’, and as far as she
was concerned she would be very happy if he left it, as far away as
possible.

Solomon was not often thwarted in his determination to haggle the
cheapest price for everything, and Dodger heard him mutter the word
‘Jezebel’ under his breath, just before paying for what turned out to be
the keys to a couple of lockers. Of course, Dodger had been to the
ordinary public baths many times before; but this one, he hoped, might
be more adventurous. He was rather open to the prospect of being oiled.

So, clothed only in large towels, their feet slapping on marble, Solomon
and Dodger stepped out into a huge room which looked rather like Hell
would look if it had been designed by somebody who thought people
deserved another chance. It was full of the strange echoes you get when
steam, stone and humanity are all in one place. To Dodger’s dismay,
there were no signs of the eagerly anticipated ladies in thin vests, but
shadowy figures – male figures – were visible everywhere in the steaming
gloom. At this point, Solomon put a hand on Dodger’s shoulder and
whispered, ‘Be careful of the Percys, a word to the wise.’

This word to the wise left Dodger no wiser until the penny dropped, and
he said, as they were stepping down into the nearest bath, ‘This isn’t
the first bath I’ve been in, you know, but I think it’s the prettiest.
The Percys never bothered me before.’

‘God seems to have really taken against them,’ said Solomon as the hot
water rose up their legs. ‘For myself, I can’t see why, because it seems
to me that, in a small way at least, they are doing this small planet
something of a service by not helping to fill it with unnecessary
people.’

There wasn’t just one bath in the baths; there were sweat baths, cold
baths, hot baths and, right now, clambering down into the bath with the
two of them was a gentleman wrapped in towels and with biceps bigger
than most people’s thighs, who said in a voice like a grinding mill,
‘Would either of you gentlemen require a massage? Very good, very
thorough, you will feel the benefit and afterwards you will be as right
as ninepence, yes?’

Dodger looked at Solomon, who nodded and said, ‘You should try it, by
all means. They tend to be rather brisk in here, but afterwards you will
feel the glow.’ He nodded to the man and said, ‘I will take a massage
myself alongside my young friend, and we can talk and relax.’

Afterwards, Dodger considered that the massage had not been relaxing,
unless it was that you felt so much better when it stopped, but while
the two masseurs twisted and pummelled with no other interest in their
victims/clients, he unloaded his thoughts to Solomon, occasionally
punctuated with an ‘ouch’.

‘I’m glad that Simplicity is safe where she is,’ he said, ‘but she will
be in danger every time she goes for a walk, and as far as I can see
there ain’t nobody in the government who wouldn’t do nothing to help her
(ugh!).’

‘Mmm,’ said Solomon. ‘That is because mmm the government thinks mostly
about all the people – they are not very good at individuals – and
undoubtedly there would be those in the country who consider that
handing her back against her will might save any bad blood between two
countries. And indeed, although I fear to say it, it would be a
Christian act, since after all she is a wife in the eyes of God –
although, Dodger, God sometimes appears to be looking the other way and
I have often told Him so. The wishes of the husband are mmm invariably
considered more important than those of the wife.’

‘That man last night was working for a cove called Sharp Bob, who is
(ouch!) interested in Simplicity and me,’ Dodger said between blows.
‘Wants to know where she is, so there must be money in it for him. Do
you know him? I heard tell he’s a legal kind of gentleman.’

‘Sharp Bob,’ Solomon mused. ‘Mmm, I believe I have heard of him. And
yes, he’s a lawyer – for criminals, you might say. I don’t mean getting
them off in front of the beak. He does do that, certainly, but he is
more a sort of mmm go-between, you might say. Someone will approach him
and say, as it might, “There’s a gent in our town who I might like to
see inconvenienced.” Nobody would say anything about killing or chopping
off an ear because it would be done simply by looks, and a touching of
the nose and little signals like that – just so that Sharp Bob himself
can say that he knew nothing about the matter or why somebody’s dining
room had blood all over it.’ Solomon sighed. ‘You say his men are those
who attacked Miss Simplicity?’

‘Yes, and now I need to find him,’ Dodger said. ‘Soon as we’ve got this
business tonight out of the way. I oughta have got the whereabouts of
this Sharp Bob off that cove last night, but I was (ouch!) kicking him
in the crotch at the time and forgot to do anything about it. I think I
had perhaps punched him heavily on the conk as well, flattened it over
his face, so all he could say was grunts.’

‘Let that be a lesson to you,’ said Solomon. ‘Violence is not always the
way to resolve things.’

‘Solomon, you have a six-barrelled pistol back at home!’ said Dodger.

‘Mmm, I said, not always.’

‘Well, if you know where he might be, let me know ’cos tomorrow I’m
after him anyway,’ Dodger said. ‘Maybe he reckons someone would be happy
to hear that Simplicity was dead. Not because they hate her, but just
because she is (ugh!) in the way.’

There was a very long mmm from Solomon, which at first Dodger thought
was because of an extra-special twist from the masseur, then Solomon
said quietly, ‘Well then, Dodger, you have answered your own little
conundrum. Let them hear that Simplicity is mmm dead. No one hunts a
dead man. Mmm, just a point that crossed my mind, of course. No reason
to take it seriously.’

Dodger looked at Sol’s expression and his eyes were shining. ‘What do
you mean!?’

‘I mean, Dodger, that you are a very resourceful young man, and I have
given you something to think about. I suggest you think about it. Think
about people seeing what they want to see.’

A fist came down on Dodger with a thump, but he barely noticed it as his
brain started to clamour and then began to spin. He looked back at
Solomon and just nodded with a glint in his eye.

Solomon loomed up then like a whale and patted his arm, saying, ‘Time to
go, young man. There is such a thing as being _too_ clean.’

No sooner had they got dried off and back in their cubicles than Solomon
said, ‘We should sit here for a little while for a drink; it doesn’t do
to go out immediately after a bracing massage, you could catch a fever.
After that, my boy, I intend to introduce you to Savile Row, where all
the top men go for their clothing. We haven’t got much time, but last
night I sent a boy over to my friend Izzy, who will see you right. His
place is no shonky shop, and I am certain that he will give a good deal
to an old friend who incidentally carried him to safety when the
Cossacks shot him.’ He added, ‘He had better. Running, I carried him for
more than a mile before we lost them in the snow and none of the three
of us had boots on, having been woken up at night. After that we went
our separate ways, but I will always remember young Karl – I believe I
have mentioned him to you before? – saying to me that all men are equal
but they are downtrodden, though sometimes they do their own treading.
Now I come think of it, he said a lot of other things too. Worst haircut
I have ever seen on a young man, and wild eyes too – reminded me of a
hungry wolf.’

Dodger wasn’t listening. ‘Savile Row is in the West End!’ he said, like
a man talking about the ends of the earth. He went on, ‘Do I really need
toffs’ clothing? Mister Disraeli and his friends, well, they know what I
am, don’t they?’

‘Mmm, oh, and what are you mmm exactly, my friend? Their subordinate?
Their employee? Or, I would suggest, their equal? That’s what young Karl
would certainly have said, and probably still does. Unless he’s no
longer alive.’ Dodger gave Solomon a strange look and Solomon hastened
to clarify: ‘Mmm, as I recall, if you go around telling people that they
are downtrodden, you tend to make two separate enemies: the people who
are doing the downtreading and have no intention of stopping, and the
people who are downtrodden, but nevertheless – people being who they are
– don’t want to know. They can get quite nasty about it.’

Intrigued, Dodger said, ‘Am I downtrodden?’

‘You? Not so you would notice, my boy, and neither do you tread on
anybody else, which is a happy situation to be in, but if I was you I
shouldn’t think too much more about politics, it can only make you ill.
As a matter of fact I certainly believe that some, if not all, of the
people that you will meet tonight will be considerably richer than you,
but from what I have heard of the lady in whose house we will be dining,
I have reason to assume that they will not think this means they are
that much better than you. Money makes people rich; it is a fallacy to
think it makes them better, or even that it makes them worse. People are
what they do, and what they leave behind.’ Solomon drained his coffee
cup and said, ‘Since it’s a long way, and my feet hurt, we will take a
growler, and behave like the gentlemen we are.’

‘But that’s a lot of money!’

‘So? I should walk all that way in this rain? What are you, Dodger? You
are a king of infinite space – provided that said space is underground.
You are a man who picks up money for a living, and because you have a
wonderful eye for it I think it makes something of an everlasting child
of you. Life is fun with no responsibilities, but now you are taking on
responsibilities. You have money, Dodger, as that shiny new bank book
proves. And you hope to have a young lady, mmm yes? This is good for a
man because responsibilities are the anvil on which a man is forged.’

Just as soon as they were outside the baths Solomon had to rescue an
elderly lady who had simply patted Onan. He helped her brush herself
down, then, when both her dress and Sol’s handkerchief were cleaner, he
hailed a growler, which stopped without the driver having meant to, his
horse’s hooves leaving sparks on the cobbles.

Once they were safe on the cushions inside, with the London rain and all
its stickiness falling outside the windows, Solomon sat back and said,
‘I have never really understood why these gentlemen seem so hostile to
their clientele. You would have thought that driving a growler was a job
for somebody who liked people, wouldn’t you?’

It was pouring down now and the sky was the colour of a bruised plum. It
was not a good day to be a tosher, but the night might be, when with any
luck Dodger could be back after dinner where he belonged,
underground . . . With Solomon’s recent lecture in mind, he amended it
in his thoughts to ‘the place where he sometimes chose to be’.

He felt he would need to be there because he was once again feeling not
entirely sure about himself. He was still Dodger, of course, but what
kind of Dodger? Because he was most definitely not the Dodger that he
had been a week ago. And he thought, If people change like this, how can
you be sure about what you get and what you lose? I mean, these days,
well, getting into a growler . . . easily done, I’m the kind of lad who
goes around in growlers, not the lad with the arse hanging out of his
trousers who used to run up behind them and try to hold on. Now I
actually pay; would I still recognize the boy?

It looked as if the weather was shaping up to be a storm akin to the one
on the night when he had met Simplicity for the first time. In front of
them, the coachman himself was out in all elements and weathers, which
may have had something to do with the growling, and surely only the
horse could be doing the navigating in this downpour. There was nothing
in the world but rain, it seemed, and now, surely against all the rules
of nature, some of it was even falling upwards, since there was no room
anywhere else.

At this point Dodger heard, only very slightly, the sound he had for
days been subconsciously listening for – it was the squeal of metal in
pain. And it was ahead of them. He dived towards the little sliding
plate that enabled the inmates of a growler to speak to the coachman, if
ever he wanted to listen to them, and water splashed on his face as he
yelled, ‘If you overtake the coach in front of us – that one with the
squeaky wheel – I will give you a crown!’

There was no answer – and how could you hear one in these crowded
streets of vapour and flying water? – but nevertheless the speed of the
growler suddenly changed, just as a puzzled Solomon said, ‘I am not at
all sure we have a spare crown on us!’

Dodger wasn’t listening; a growler had a lot of places where somebody
with quick wits could grasp and pull their way to the roof of the thing,
in this case much to the extreme annoyance of the driver, who swore like
the devil and shouted out above the noise of the storm that he would be
mogadored if a poxy upstart was going to climb all over his vehicle.
Above the noise of the storm and the cursing, Dodger leaned down and
said, ‘You must have heard of the man who brought down Sweeney Todd the
Demon Barber? Well, cully, that was me, yes, Dodger. Now, you want to
talk about it or shall I get angry?’ Dodger worked his way down so that
he could hang on while talking to the man, and said, ‘The person who
owns the coach ahead of us is wanted for attempted murder, assault and
battery. Probably also kidnapping a young lady and responsible for the
death of a baby!’

With water pouring off him in every direction, the captain of the
growler growled, ‘The hell you say!’

‘The hell I do indeed, sir!’ said Dodger. ‘And if I find that person
before the peelers do, it will be the worse for him, and incidentally of
course there will be a reward in all of this for you.’

The coachman, trying to keep the horse under control with lightning
flashing around them, gave Dodger a sideways look in which was mingled
anger, intrigue and uncertain disbelief. ‘Oh, so he’s got more to fear
from you than the peelers, does he? They have damn big sticks, as I very
well know!’ He opened a mouth in which there appeared to be just one
solitary tooth, adding, ‘We certainly know when they want to get their
point across, those bastards.’ He spat, increasing the storm by the
equivalent of about three raindrops, and gave Dodger a pitying look,
then growled with another toothless grin, ‘Well, how will you be worse
than the peelers, my little lad, do tell me?’

‘Me? Because the peelers have rules. I don’t firkytoodle around! And
unlike the peelers, when it comes to bashing, I don’t have to stop!’

The growler, though, _had_ come to a stop. A dead stop, and its driver
cursed under his breath. ‘Piccadilly Circus, guv, all fouled up ’cos of
the rain. To tell you the truth, I can’t tell which of these buggers is
the one you’re after, chief, ’cos people are cutting in like Christmas
dinner. I don’t know why they’re always messing about with the roads,
but I reckon it’s the four-horsers that are causing this lot – they
shouldn’t be allowed in the city! People are walking around in the road
too like they own it, ain’t they got no sense?’

It was true; there were people dodging between stationary vehicles, and
Piccadilly Circus was a pattern of umbrellas spinning through the
growing host of rain-soaked vehicles, none of which could move until the
others did. Now the horses were beginning to panic, and yet other
coaches, cabs and one or two brewer’s drays were piling in. Then
somewhere in the damp, jostling, frantic cauldron of frightened horses
and bewildered pedestrians, someone must’ve stuck part of his umbrella
up a horse’s nose, causing what previous centuries would have called a
hey-ho-rumbelow, but what the growler captain called it could not be put
on paper because it would have immediately caught fire.

After that, there was nothing else for it. As the growler coachman said,
‘If they want to get everybody out of there, they need to drag out one
or two coaches and dismantle the whole damn mess.’ With that, the sun
came out, bright and shining in the clear blue sky, which made it even
worse, because every human or horse who wasn’t already steaming began to
steam.

Even Dodger could see they had lost their quarry with very little chance
of finding it now. No point. Solomon was looking at him from the
vehicle’s window, holding up his huge pocket watch and pointedly showing
him what the time was. Dodger groaned inwardly. If he gave in, then
maybe, just maybe, when this seething fiasco was eventually unravelled –
and hopefully before any more fights started – he might be in the right
place to hear the dreadful screeching wheel scream again. If he couldn’t
find out what he wanted from Mister Sharp Bob, of course. But right now
it was Solomon who looked as if he was likely to be the one doing the
screaming.

Dodger looked back at the coachman, shrugged, and said, ‘How much,
mister?’

To Dodger’s surprise, the man gave him a sly grin, waved his hands in
the air to demonstrate that the progress of horse-drawn transport in
this vicinity was a bucket of sheep droppings, and then said, ‘You
really the geezer who brought down Sweeney Todd? You look like a liar to
me, but then so does everybody else. Ho-hum, never mind, just give me
your signature on this little page I have here, making a suitable
mention of the fact that it was indeed you what done it, and we’ll call
it quits, how about that? ’Cos I think it’d be worth some money one
day.’

Well, thought Dodger, this was Charlie’s fog again; if the truth wasn’t
what you wanted it to be, you turned it into a different version of the
truth. But the man was waiting patiently, with a pencil and a notebook.
Taking them up and sweating, Dodger very carefully scribed, one letter
at a time: _It woz me wot took dahn Sweeni Tod. Dodjer and that iz
troo_.

As soon as he had handed it to the coachman, he was dragged to the kerb
by Solomon, who was frantically trying to open an umbrella – a black and
treacherous thing that reminded Dodger of a long-dead, but nevertheless
large, bird of prey and could take your eye out, if you let it. Dodger
pointed out that right now, at least, it wasn’t necessary – except, of
course, for protection from the horses all around them, which were doing
what horses regularly do and doing it slightly more because they were in
a state of panic.

They headed on foot to Savile Row. The side streets were more busy with
pedestrians than usual because of the tangle that they had thankfully
left behind them. They arrived, wet and warm – which can sometimes, as
in this case, be worse than wet and cold because it includes sticky and
horsy – at the shining, polished door of Davies & Son, at 38 Savile Row,
leaving Onan at a lamppost and on this occasion with a bone brought
along for the purpose, in the company of which he was oblivious to the
world.

Once inside, Dodger tried not to be awed at the world of schmutter.
After all, he knew there were swells that had much finer clothes than he
ever wore, but seeing such a lot of it in one place would have been
overwhelming if he let it be so. As it was, he tried to look like
somebody who barely glances at this sort of thing because he sees it
every day – although aware that the cleaned-up but still quite
_fragrant_ shonky suit might be a clue that this was not entirely the
case. But after all, a tailor is a tailor and all the rest of it is just
shine.

Eventually, they were handed into the care of Izzy, small and skinny but
nevertheless possessed of some inner nervous energy that would in other
circumstances have turned a mill. He appeared like an arrow between
Dodger and Solomon and the front-of-house man who opened the door for
them, talking all the time so fast that the best you could do was
understand that Izzy would take care of everything, had anything, and
everything was in hand and if everybody left it to Izzy, everything
would not just be all right but also extremely acceptable in every
possible way, and at a price that would amaze and yet satisfy all
parties – if, and this was important, Izzy was allowed to get on with
the job, thank you all so very much. He fussed Solomon and Dodger into
one of the fitting rooms, never at any time ceasing to worry, fret and
apologize to nobody in particular about nothing very much.

A long cloth tape measure was whisked around his shoulders and Dodger
was pushed gently but firmly to the centre of the room, where Izzy
looked at him with the expression of a butcher faced with a particularly
difficult steer, walking around him, measuring by the
pounce-and-run-away method. And in all this time the only words he said
to Dodger were variations on the theme of ‘If you would just turn this
way, sir?’; and sir this, and sir that, until Dodger was seriously in
need of refreshment. It didn’t help matters either when the spinning,
dashing Izzy, apparently now with no alternative left to him, finally
stopped with his mouth in the vicinity of Dodger’s left ear, and in the
tones of a man enquiring after the whereabouts of the Holy Grail,
whispered, ‘How does one dress, sir?’

This request was something of a problem for Dodger, who had never really
given a thought to the aspect of putting his clothes on; after all, it
was just something you did. But the little tailor was standing by him as
if he expected to learn the location of hidden treasure, and therefore
he made an effort, and said, ‘Well, normally I’d put on yesterday’s
unmentionables if they ain’t too bad, and then I pulls on my
stockings . . . No! I tell a lie; most days I put on my vest and then I
put on my socks.’ It was at this point that Solomon crossed the room at
the normal speed of a god intending that the ungodly should be smitten,
only to whisper something in Dodger’s ear, causing the latter to say,
with some indignation, ‘How the hell should I know? I never bothered to
look! Things find their own way, don’t they? What kind of question is
that to ask a man, anyway?’

Solomon laughed out loud, and then went into a huddle with an
ever-vibrating Izzy, who seemed never to be actually still. Solomon and
Izzy were chattering to one another in a language that went all over
Europe and the Middle East until at last, laughing, Solomon said, ‘The
luck of the Dodger is holding; Izzy says he can do us a wonderful deal!
It appears that another tailor was told to work on a frock coat and a
very elegant navy-blue shirt, but regrettably one of Izzy’s associates
made a laughable mistake during the measuring, which meant that they
would no longer fit the fine gentleman they were intended for, and so my
friend Izzy,’ he continued, staring fixedly at Izzy, ‘has a little
proposition for you, my friend.’

Izzy looked hesitantly at Solomon, and like a man throwing a bone to a
lion about to eat him, turned to Dodger and said hurriedly, ‘I could do
you an excellent deal, young sir, on both those garments; they are
happily only a stitch away from your requirements at a very spirited
discount of . . . fifty per cent?’

Oh, that little tell-tale question in the statement which told the world
that Izzy was just slightly uncertain, and even more worryingly for
Izzy, he was uncertain in the face of Solomon’s deadpan face.

The bargaining had only just begun, and rather wisely, Izzy, with an eye
on Solomon, dived to, ‘I beg your pardon – seventy-five, sorry, no,
_eighty_ per cent. I will throw in two pairs of very elegant
unmentionables as well?’

Solomon smiled, and Izzy looked like a man who had not only been
pardoned on the very steps of the gallows, but had also been given a
purse full of sovereigns to atone for the misunderstanding. And twenty
minutes later a grateful Izzy sent Solomon and the Hero of Fleet Street
on their way, with Dodger clutching his new schmutter, Solomon carrying
the bag containing the unmentionables, and Izzy now in possession of
some of the hero’s reward. There was also, courtesy of the management,
Solomon’s umbrella, which had been dried and brushed; and there was a
growler waiting for them in the street.

Well, not exactly; it was coming along the street right up until Solomon
stood in front of it waving his finger of God in the air, and the horse
began to slow even before the coachman had time to pull on the reins,
because horses know trouble when they see it. Dodger was quite careful
to put Onan and his bone in the cab before the man had a chance to
object; Onan tended to leave a certain Onan-ness wherever he went.

Once inside, Solomon made himself comfortable and said to the man, ‘Lock
and Co. of St James’s please, my man.’ He turned to a startled Dodger
and said, ‘They will almost definitely have a hat there for you, my lad.
Everyone who is anyone, or at least thought by everyone to be anyone,
gets their hats there.’

‘I’ve got a hat from Jacob!’

‘That shonky thing? It looks like somebody used it as a concertina and
handed it to a clown. You need a hat for a gentleman.’

‘But I am not a gentleman,’ Dodger railed.

‘You will be much closer to being one with an elegant hat for special
occasions.’

And Dodger had to admit that the shonky hat, no doubt about it, was
shonky. Generally, hats were not your friend when you were a tosher;
they got knocked off your head far too easily. He often wore a thick
leather cap, just good enough to save you from cracking your skull if
you stood up too quickly in a small sewer, and easy to keep clean.

Everybody wore a hat of some kind, but the hats in the shop they stepped
into now were extraordinary, and some were extremely high. And so, of
course, Dodger pointed to the biggest one, which looked like a stovepipe
and called to him with a siren voice which only he could hear. ‘I rather
think that one will do me a treat.’

When he looked at his reflection in the mirror, he thought, oh yes, a
really sharp look, sharp as a razor. He would be no end of a swell,
where recently he had been no end of a smell – because no matter how
hard you scrubbed, the curse of the tosher would always leave its own
cheerful mark on you.

Oh yes, this would do him! How amazed Simplicity would be when she saw
him in such a splendid hat! However, it didn’t do for Solomon, who
considered the price of £1 and 18 shillings to be grossly extravagant.
Dodger was firm. True, it was a lot of money for something that he
really didn’t need, but it was the principle of the thing. He didn’t
know exactly what the principle was, but it was a principle and it had a
thing, and that was that. Besides, he pointed out that only the other
day Solomon had said while he was working on one of his little machines
that ‘this thing needs oiling’ and, he continued relentlessly, only the
day before _that_ the old man had said that his little lathe had
‘wanted’ oil.

‘Therefore,’ said Dodger, ‘surely _want_ is the same as _need_, yes?’

Solomon counted out the coins very slowly and in silence, and then said,
‘Are you certain you weren’t born Jewish?’

‘No,’ said Dodger. ‘I’ve looked. I’m not, but thanks for the
compliment.’

The last call before they went home was to a barber – a perfectly
reasonable and careful barber who didn’t include extras like having your
throat cut. However, the poor fellow was unmanned when Solomon said,
just as the barber was shaving Dodger, ‘It might impress you, sir, if I
told you that the gentleman you are now shaving was the hero who put
paid to the activities of the nefarious Mister Sweeney Todd.’

This intervention caused the man to panic – only a fraction, but
nevertheless not a thing to do when you have just put a very sharp
cut-throat razor to a man’s throat, and it nearly caused another
hey-ho-rumbelow in the vicinity of Dodger’s neck. The nick was not big,
but the amount of blood was out of all proportion to the size, and so
there was a great performance with towels, and alum for the cut. It
would certainly leave a scar, which was something of a bonus as far as
Dodger was concerned; the Hero of Fleet Street ought to sport something
on his face to show for it.

Then, once his face was tidy and, of course, Solomon had negotiated in a
friendly but firm way six months of free haircuts, they caught another
growler home and there was just about enough time to get washed, dressed
and generally smartened up.

It was while Dodger was sponging himself down, including the crevices
because, after all, this was a special occasion, he found part of
himself thinking: What would I have to do to let someone die and then
come alive again? Apart from being God, that is.

Then, for some reason, the dodger at the back of his head remembered the
Crown and Anchor men with their dice, and the man with the pea that you
never, ever found. Then tumbling on top of that there was the voice of
Charlie, saying that the truth is a fog and in it people see what they
want to see, and it seemed to him that around these little pictures a
plot was plotting. He trod carefully so as not to disturb it, but wheels
in his head were clearly turning and he had to wait until something went
_click_.

The new clothes still fitted him exactly as promised and Dodger wished
that he had something more than a tiny piece of broken mirror in which
to see himself in his finery. Then he pushed aside the curtain to ask
Solomon’s opinion and was confronted by Solomon arrayed in all his
glory.

A man who usually wandered around in embroidered slippers or old boots,
and wore a ragged black gabardine, had suddenly become an old-fashioned
but very smart gentleman with a fine black woollen barathea jacket,
dark-blue pantaloon trousers and long, dark-blue woollen stockings with
ancient but well-kept court shoes sporting silver buckles that shone.
But what amazed Dodger most of all was the large dark-blue-and-gold
medallion around Solomon’s neck. He knew what the symbols were on the
medallion, but Dodger had never associated them with the old man: they
were the seal and the eye in the pyramid of the Freemasons. Finally,
since Solomon had washed his beard and primped it, the whole effect
appeared to have an amazing power.

And Dodger said so, which caused Solomon to smile and say, ‘Mmm, one
day, my boy, I will tell you the name of the august personage who was
gracious enough to give this to me. And may I say, Dodger, as always you
scrub up very well; one might almost take you for a real gentleman.’

It only remained to very cautiously give Onan his dinner and equally
cautiously take him for a little walk outside to do what he needed to.
They left him in dog Heaven with another bone; and then there was
nothing for it but to find another growler, just as the evening fog was
rising, and head back west to number one Stratton Street, Mayfair.

[images]

CHAPTER 12

IN WHICH DODGER MIXES WITH THE GENTRY, DISRAELI ACCEPTS A CHALLENGE AND
DODGER PROVES TO BE A QUICK LEARNER

DODGER STARED OUT of the cab as they rattled westwards with the words
‘I’m going to see Simplicity again’ etching themselves on his heart, or
so it felt, and suddenly he thought of Simplicity being dead. Dead, and
therefore no trouble to anybody – no reason for wars, no reason for
people to prowl the streets with malice aforethought.

There had to be a way! Right now, she was a girl that no one wanted;
that was to say, no one other than him. As the fog delivered the stink
of the Thames to his nostrils, a click in his brain signalled a
successful conclusion, and all that remained was the fine details. There
were a few things he couldn’t quite see, but with the Lady on his side,
he thought they would drop into his hand.

‘A remarkable woman, is Miss Burdett-Coutts,’ Solomon was saying. ‘She
is an heiress, and also a major philanthropist, which is somebody who
gives their money away to the poor and needy – which I must make clear
to you, young man, doesn’t mean you, you being neither poor nor needy,
just occasionally knee-deep in sewage.’

Solomon seemed very taken with his little joke, and it would have been
like kicking Onan to do anything other than applaud, and so Dodger
pulled his mind away from Simplicity and said, ‘That was a good one! Why
on earth does she want to give so much money away?’

They were passing through Leicester Square and Solomon said, ‘Because
she feels that she should. She pays for the ragged schools, which give
some children at least an elementary education and funds mmm
scholarships and bursaries, which I must tell you means giving brighter
pupils the chance to go to university for an even better education.
That’s all they know about her down at the synagogue, apart from the
fact that she keeps bees, and you need to be a very mmm sensible person
to keep bees – someone who thinks about things, plans ahead and thinks
about the future. A very thorough lady, in fact, who I assume does not
wish to die rich. Which I’ve always considered to be mmm an admirable
ambition. A very singular lady and a power in her own right.’

He paused. ‘I wonder who else there is likely to be at this little
soirée since she knows so many important people. In a sense, I rather
suspect you might see tonight some more of the mmm powerhouse of
politics. Of course, the lords and elected members debate the issues of
the day in Parliament itself, but I strongly suspect that here in London
the actual outcomes have a lot to do with the things that people say to
other people over a drink. The process of ratifying what they have
decided amongst themselves may be a variant of mmm what is known as
_proportional representation_, but on the whole it all seems to work, if
somewhat mmm erratically.’

He warmed to his subject. ‘What I really like about the English is that
they don’t have theories. No Englishman would ever have said, “I think,
therefore I am.” Although possibly he might have said, “I think,
therefore I am, I think.” The world can have too much order, alas. Ah,
here we are at last. Mind your manners and remember what I told you
about how to eat with so much cutlery¹ – which, I have to reiterate, I
would rather you did not attempt to steal. I know you to be a
well-intentioned young man, but occasionally you get a little mmm
absent-minded around small light objects; please refrain from the habit
of a lifetime, just for tonight, please?’

‘I’m not a thief!’ said Dodger. ‘I can’t help it if things are left
lying around.’ Then he nudged Solomon’s arm and said, ‘Just kidding. I
will be on my best behaviour and a credit to my wonderful unmentionables
– I’ve never had a garment that fitted so well in the groin. If I’d
known what it feels like to be among the gentry I would have applied for
a ticket a long time ago!’

The driver stopped just short of their destination; private coaches and
growlers were politely jostling to disgorge their passengers without
their drivers having to swear at one another more than usual. They got
out and walked up the steps of the very pleasant building Dodger had
hardly noticed the night before. Solomon raised his hand to knock on the
door and magically the door opened before he had touched it, to reveal
Geoffrey the butler.

The important thing to do, Dodger thought, was to keep close to Solomon,
who seemed to be entirely in his element. The guests were still coming
in, and most of them knew one another, and they certainly knew where the
drinks were, and therefore Dodger and Solomon were ignored right up
until Charlie and Mister Disraeli returned together from wherever it was
they had huddled to exchange current information.

Disraeli made a beeline for Solomon and said, ‘How nice it is to see you
here!’ They shook hands, but Dodger read from their faces that here were
two people who distrusted each other quite a lot. Then Disraeli, with a
glint in his eye, turned to Dodger and said, ‘Oh, wonderful, the young
tosher transmuted into a gentleman! Excellent!’

This slightly annoyed Dodger, though he couldn’t exactly figure out why,
but he said, ‘Yes, sir, indeed, tonight I am a gentleman and tomorrow I
might turn out to be a tosher again!’ As the words dropped into Dodger’s
ears, his brain clicked again, telling him: This is the opportunity,
don’t mess it up! And so, grinning, he added, ‘I can be a gentleman, and
I can be a tosher; can _you_ be a tosher, Mister Disraeli?’

For a moment, and probably entirely unnoticed by anyone else in the
throng apart from the four of them, there was a moment when the world
froze, and then thawed instantly the moment Mister Disraeli had decided
what to do, which was to smile like the morning sun with a knife in its
teeth. He said, ‘My dear boy, do you think I would make a tosher? Hardly
a profession I had reason to contemplate, I must say!’

He had to pause because Charlie had slapped him on the back, saying,
‘It’s just scrambling in the mud to find the hidden treasure, my friend,
and I might suggest it is remarkably like politics! If I was you I would
take the opportunity to learn something very valuable about the world. I
always do!’

Disraeli glanced at Dodger and said, ‘Well, now I come to think of it,
quite possibly a reconnaissance of the underbelly of the city would be
sensible at this time.’

‘And indeed,’ said Charlie, grinning like a man who has dropped a
sixpence and picked up a crown, ‘it would show, do you not think, that
you are being very careful of public opinion in the matter of drainage
in this city, which is in fact antiquated and noisome, to say the least.
A canny politician would, I am sure, like to show his concern for this
scandalous state of affairs. Our friends in _Punch_ magazine would
certainly portray you as a forward-looking politician, careful of the
city as a whole.’

For a moment Disraeli looked rather solemn, playing with his little
goatee beard as if lost in thought, then he said, ‘Yes indeed, Charlie,
I think you may have a point.’

It seemed to Dodger that the two men were each hatching plans of their
own; he could smell the smell of a man who scents an opportunity and was
deciding how to bend it to his own advantage, just like he was. He
thought, Good old Charlie knows that whether Mister Disraeli comes out
of the sewer covered in richards or covered in diamonds, Charlie will
have covered a very good story.

Disraeli lit up like a very enthusiastic candle and his smile broadened
as he turned and said, ‘Very well, Mister Dodger, let no one say that I
am averse to a challenge. I will indeed, if you are prepared to be my
Virgil, take a subterranean ramble with you in the public interest. Let
me see – the day after tomorrow perhaps? After all, a politician should
do more than just talk!’

He looked around approvingly, and Dodger said, ‘I’d like you to
understand, sir, I ain’t a virgin, you just ask Ginny-Come-Lately! But I
would be quite happy to give you a little tour, sir. Not near the
hospitals, of course. The breweries are pretty good; down there, even
the rats smell good.’

At that point Miss Burdett-Coutts passed, circulating among her growing
crowd of guests, and Charlie said, ‘Here’s a go, Angela. Ben and young
Dodger here are hatching up a scheme to go down into our wretched sewers
shortly, on a voyage of exploration for the public good. Don’t you think
that is a fine thing?’

‘Are they? I certainly hope they tidy themselves up before they come
back here again!’ Angela smiled at Dodger, held out her hand and said,
‘So nice to see you again, Mister Dodger. I see you have raised your
game considerably when it comes to your clothing. Excellent!’

Dodger took the lady’s outstretched hand and kissed it, to her surprise
and his own, but to the great edification and amusement of both Charlie
and Disraeli; Solomon certainly hadn’t told him to do this but, well, he
was Dodger, and Miss Burdett-Coutts was smiling as if a favourite dog
had done a good trick, but at the same time would quite like the dog to
know that it was only allowed one bite. The unspoken code was that once
was fine and twice would be taking liberties, and she was sure that
Dodger would not need telling twice.

She looked at Solomon and said, ‘Ah, the most learned Mister Cohen, I
presume? I have heard so much about you. I believe the Papal Nuncio told
me a wonderful story about your perspicacity.’ She turned back to Dodger
and said, ‘Mister Dodger, I believe you might be interested to meet Miss
Simplicity Parish, a cousin of mine from the country.’

Almost immediately, Simplicity stepped out from behind Miss Coutts, and
for Dodger every single person in the room once again disappeared,
leaving only Simplicity. After a moment, Simplicity, clearly realizing
that if she didn’t say anything, Dodger was likely to be there with his
mouth open for the rest of the evening, held out her hand and said, ‘My
word, so you are the famous Mister Dodger. I am very happy to meet you.’

Angela, glancing at Dodger, said, ‘When dinner is announced, I would be
happy for you to take Miss Simplicity through to the dining area. You
may sit beside me so that the proprieties are maintained.’ Having neatly
put Simplicity and Dodger together, Miss Coutts then cased the room,
Dodger thought, like a burglar anxious to find every piece of
silverware, scanning all the newcomers milling around. ‘Do you see that
gentleman over there, by the fireplace?’ she said with a small gesture
of her head. ‘That is Sir George Cayley, who certainly has demonstrated
to us exactly why birds are able to fly and I believe is determined to
see that humans do the same, although I suspect that William Henderson
might beat him to it – I have been hearing much about his prototype
steam-powered aerial carriage. If things look promising, I might
consider funding further progress. It would be such a boon for mankind.
Just imagine if you could fly to France in one day!’

That would be like the railways, Dodger thought. If you had money, you
find someone who is, you are sure, going to change the world, and get
more money back if it works. After all, money doesn’t do much when it’s
just standing still. It’s when it’s moving around that it really works.
He felt quite pleased with himself for coming up with this observation.

One of the guests had cracked a joke on the other side of the room and
there was general laughter, and then in a low voice Angela said to
Dodger and Simplicity, ‘Do you see that rather taciturn gentleman over
there who looks as if he lost a guinea and found a farthing? That’s
Charles Babbage, and he has made a machine that can add up, and that’s
very interesting and I am very fond of interesting people. Although in
his case, he is not really very keen on other people at all, apart from
having excellent taste when it comes to his lady friends. And I see that
Mister Cohen is already in conversation with Mister Babbage and his
friend, Ada Lovelace, who is a most elegant lady and a credit to her
father. I am sure they will have a lot to talk about. If ever there is a
man who introduces himself, it is Mister Cohen.’ Suddenly she said
happily, ‘Ah, there’s Sir Robert Peel. I’m so glad he could come. I was
told that he had been held up on a bit of business at Scotland Yard.’
She swept away into the chattering throng.

Sir Robert Peel? The boss of the crushers! Being a tosher wasn’t exactly
illegal – Grandad had told Dodger a coin was a coin, and if you picked
it out of the mud, well, who knew whose coin it had been? Mind you,
there was the little matter of _getting_ into the sewers, that probably
being a matter of trespass. Nobody bothered all that much though, except
for the work gangs, who thought that loose coinage was their legal perk.
The public at large didn’t care a fig; toshers could scrabble in the
dark and come up with a copper or two, or they could scrabble in the
dark and die, at no extra charge.

But peelers, well, sometimes they had their own interpretation of the
spirit of the law, and some of them saw it as their duty to make life a
little more tricky for those people on the edge of society, which was
why they were having so many fights with the Cockney lads, which
amounted to a small war.

Toshers were small fry, but in the rookeries, well, peelers were the
_enemy_. Dodger didn’t know the word ‘visceral’, he just understood the
situation: you would do yourself no good mixing with the peelers, and
now here he was in the same room as their boss and, as sure as sixpence,
Angela was going to introduce Dodger to him. He told himself that he had
done nothing wrong – well, maybe a few things hardly worth mentioning
and mostly a long time ago – but if you came from the rookeries the
peelers didn’t listen for long.

On the other hand, of course, he thought, it was quite possible that
Angela might object to people being arrested in her house.

He didn’t panic, because people on the tosh who panicked would sooner or
later knock themselves out and lose their bearings. But Simplicity was
watching him with a slightly worried smile, and by sheer main force he
calmed himself down as if nothing had happened, because in fact nothing
_had_ happened, and by degrees he was feeling better. All he had to do
was not get excited and keep as far away as possible from Sir Robert.

To his surprise, Simplicity stroked his hand and said, ‘Are you all
right, Dodger? I know you have had such a busy time, all because of me,
and I am so very grateful.’

Charlie and Disraeli had drifted off on another current in this room,
where it appeared that nobody stood in one place for very long before
seeing somebody else that they also wanted to talk to. So gossip and
people oscillated through the air, with at the moment himself and
Simplicity in a little bubble.

He managed to say, ‘Oh, don’t worry about me, miss. How is life here?’

‘Angela is very kind,’ said Simplicity. ‘Really very kind, and . . . how
can I put this . . .? Very understanding.’

Dodger said, ‘I asked you this once before, and now things is different
but there’s no change in the question. What would you like to happen
next? Do you want to stay here?’

Her face went solemn. ‘Yes, Angela is very kind. But I know I am here
because I am a problem, and I do not wish to be a problem. Sooner or
later, problems get solved. I wonder how that might happen.’

Dodger looked around, but no one was paying them any attention so he
plucked up his courage and said, ‘Supposing as you could go somewhere
where you could be anybody you wanted to be? Not no problem to nobody.
Because, you see, I think I might have a plan. It’s quite a good plan,
but I only got one part this evening so I’m still working on it. It
might be risky and it could mean a bit of play-acting, but if I trust in
the Lady, I think it will work – she has never let me down this far.’
Then he had to explain to her who the Lady was.

At last, Simplicity said, ‘I see. I mean, I think I see. But, dear
Dodger, would I be right in believing that the success of this plan will
end up with you and me together somewhere safe?’

Dodger cleared his throat. ‘Yes, that is the plan.’

She stared at him. There was always something delightfully solemn in the
way Simplicity spoke, and she said softly, ‘I think that would be an
excellent plan, Dodger, don’t you?’

Dodger said, ‘You agree?’

‘Oh yes, indeed, you are kind, very kind. I don’t know about loving; we
shall see. I have had what I believed was love, but it was an untrue
thing, what I think is called a forgery, a bad coin, and not what I
thought it was.’ She hesitated. ‘What I thought of as a shining sixpence
proved to be a farthing, as you would say. But I have found that
kindness lasts a lot longer than love, because my mother always said
that kindness was love in disguise. And, Dodger, where you are, the
world seems to fizz. You make everything seem possible.’

At a moment like this, for a boy like Dodger who would trip over his own
mental feet, he said, ‘Of course we don’t have to stay together if you
don’t want to.’

Simplicity smiled. ‘Dodger, this may be hard for you to understand, but
sometimes you should just stop talking.’

And as Dodger blushed, dinner was announced.

Miss Burdett-Coutts led the party into dinner, accompanied by a tall man
with a severe flinty look on his face and, Dodger noticed in horror,
dressed in exactly the same clothes as Dodger – a fact that made him
unaccountably nervous. What was it that Izzy had said before giving him
and Solomon such a good deal? _Dodger, I’ve got a really good deal on
this wonderful new suit with wonderful and cherished unmentionables
because some apprentice tailor got the sizes wrong first time_.

Yes, his frock coat was exactly like Dodger’s, and the man had opened
the coat to reveal the splendid blue silk shirt that was the spit and
image, apart from a trifling matter of size, to the one which Dodger was
wearing; and now, oh dear, because he had been looking at the man, the
man was now looking at him with the same sharp expression, causing hairs
to rise on Dodger in places where he had never known he had hairs. But
they had paid for the clothes, hadn’t they, fair and square? He knew
that Solomon had most definitely got a receipt, Solomon being the kind
of person who was almost as anxious about getting the receipt as he was
about getting the relevant merchandise itself.

In this moment of slight panic Dodger recognized, coming towards them,
Henry Mayhew and his wife, and indeed Simplicity was running towards
Jane Mayhew to give her a hug.

While that was going on, Henry held out his hands to Dodger and said
cheerfully, ‘The man of the moment. Mister Dodger, I have made a study
of the multiple classes of people in London, and it does seem to me that
you are climbing the ladder faster, if I may say so, than a chimpanzee.’
He smiled nervously and said, ‘No offence, of course.’ And indeed no
offence was taken as Dodger had no idea what a chimpanzee was and made a
mental note to ask Solomon later.

So Dodger took Simplicity somewhat nervously on his arm and followed the
Mayhews into the dining room. And succeeded in parking her exactly where
Angela had intended, according to the smile of approval.

Then Angela turned to him and said, ‘Well now, Dodger, I wonder if you
have met my very good friend Sir Robert Peel? I suspect you may have
some things in common.’ Her eyes twinkled as she introduced the two men,
as if she was actually introducing the two sets of matching trousers.

Sir Robert Peel smiled, although because of Dodger’s nerves, it seemed
to him more like a grimace, and said, ‘Oh yes, the Hero of Fleet Street.
I would very much like to have a quiet word with you.’

Dodger looked into those eyes and they had ‘copper’ all over them. He
thought: Is that always how it’s going to be? Always being the man who
took down Sweeney Todd? Well, it was useful, no doubt about it, but
somehow it was awkward as well, like wearing another man’s trousers,
which in a sense was what he was doing right now. And the man was still
watching him carefully, as if sizing him up.

People were now sitting down. Dodger was urged towards the chair next to
Angela, with Simplicity already seated on his other side and Solomon
beside her. Sir Robert – or ‘Dear Rob’, as Angela called him – sat on
Angela’s other side.

In a lowered voice, Angela said to him, ‘Does it hurt? You wince when
somebody calls you the Hero of Fleet Street. Do you not notice that?
Charlie tells me that you are quite clear that people should know that
the facts of the matter are not as they seem, and I suggest that you
feel that every commendation for you is a damnation for Mister Todd, and
I must say that this is to your credit. One feels there was another kind
of heroism, of the kind which is often ignored. I will bear this in mind
because I do have some influence. Sometimes a word in the right place
can do a lot of good.’ She smiled then, and said, ‘Do you like it,
scrabbling in the sewers for money? Tell the truth now!’

‘I don’t need to tell a lie,’ said Dodger. ‘It’s freedom, miss, that’s
the truth, and pretty safe if you keep your wits about you and use your
head. I reckon I earns more than a chimney sweep any day of the week,
and soot, well it’s terrible stuff, miss, not good for you at all. Bad
for you inside and out, my oath! But when I come back from the tosh,
well, good old lye soap does the trick. Not what you would call fancy,
but you do feel clean.’

The conversation had to stop there as waiters came past, and after the
noise of the plates and the – oh so much – cutlery, Miss Burdett-Coutts
said, ‘You appear to be everywhere and into everything, according to my
informants, rather like the famous, or if you prefer, the _in_famous
highwayman Dick Turpin. Have you heard of him, young man? What do you
think about his extraordinary ride to York on his mare Black Bess? I
believe they are doing plays about him now and the public just love him,
because he was a scallywag.’

Looking apprehensively at the meal put in front of him, Dodger said, ‘I
have heard about the gent, madam, and I like the way he put a shine on
the world. But I think he was clever, and far too clever to ride all the
way to York. Too risky, and while I have to say I ain’t – I beg your
pardon, I _am not_ – a horseman, I reckon that he would have knackered
the horse within an hour if he’d done it as fast as they said. No, I
reckon he rushed up to some of his mates what he knew to be not all that
matey and shouted out something like, “Pray for me, my lads, for I am
going to try to get to York this very night!” And o’ course, you see,
you can be certain that when you have a price on your head like he did,
his mates would have instantly peached on him to the runners within ten
minutes, by which time, I’d bet you a crown, our friend Dick would be in
the West End with his moustache a different colour, walking around with
two sporting ladies arm-in-arm. That’s what’s _clever_; just legging it
don’t do the trick, though I know they got him in the end. If I was him,
I’d’ve dressed up as a priest and just laid low somewhere until
everybody had forgotten about me. Sorry for the lecture, miss, but you
did ask.’

Angela laughed. ‘Your reputation goes before you, Mister Dodger, as a
young man of great courage and indeed understanding. Now it would seem
you are a man of strategy and a breath of fresh air!’ She put her hand
on his arm and said, ‘Are you a church-going man at all, Mister Dodger?’

‘No, miss. Take it from me, miss, Solomon does the believing for both of
us, depend upon it! I reckon he tells the Almighty what to do. But don’t
worry, I heard that Jesus walked on water, so he might know a little bit
about toshing, but I ain’t seen him down there. I mean no offence; mind
you, in the dark you don’t see everybody.’

He noticed Angela’s smile become a little strained before coming back to
normal, whereupon she said, ‘Well, Mister Dodger, it would appear that
an unbeliever might put some believers to shame.’ He assumed from this
that once again he had got away with it, even though he wasn’t quite
sure what the ‘it’ was.

Now, at last, Dodger was able to pay attention to the food in front of
him: a rather good bowl of vegetable soup, even better than the stuff
that Solomon made, and he said so as soon as he finished it, noticing as
he did so that no one else had dived into the soup with the same
alacrity.

‘It’s called julienne,’ said Angela. ‘I really don’t know why that is
so. I envy you your appetite!’

Cheered up by this, Dodger said, ‘Can I have some more?’ Out of the
corner of his eye he saw Charlie wearing the familiar expression of a
man enjoying the fun.

Angela followed his gaze and said, ‘Charlie writes books, you know? I
often wonder where he gets all his ideas from. As for the soup I’m sure
there is plenty more, but there is a very nice turbot to follow, after
which there will be roast saddle of mutton and that will be followed by
roast quails. If, young man, you haven’t exploded by then, there will
follow a compote of cherries – very sweet. I see you haven’t touched
your wine; it is quite a decent sauvignon blanc, and I think you would
like it.’ As Dodger reached for the glass, she turned to answer a
question from Sir Robert Peel on her other side.

Dodger did like the wine, and because he was Dodger he thought, Well,
this is pretty good stuff so I will drink it very slowly. After all, he
very seldom drank wine, although Solomon used to buy some stuff at
Passover which was so sweet it made your teeth ache. Dodger generally
liked beer or stout, especially stout in the winter; they were simple
drinks for simple people, and Dodger did not wish to become a
complicated person, which he certainly would become if he drank more
than one glass of this wine.

Solomon had told him beforehand that there could be a different wine
with every course with meals like this; he had to wonder how on earth
people would get back home. So, while Angela spoke to Sir Robert Peel
and Simplicity delicately finished her own bowl of soup, he treasured
the little glass, taking a small sip at a time. Oh, he had been rascally
drunk occasionally, but while it had looked a good idea at the time it
never looked quite the same later on when you woke up, and it was very
hard to go on the tosh without your mind being clear. Of course, not
throwing up a lot helped too, and more than anything he didn’t want to
disgrace himself in any way in front of all these nobby people, and
while Simplicity was watching. And she was watching.

So was the turbot, which came past on a silver tray before being
distributed among the guests. It was big and fat, but you had never seen
such a sorry expression on the face of a fish before, although perhaps
it might have been cheered up by the fact that along with the rather
piquant sauce it tasted very nice. Dodger was more at his ease now; the
dinner was going well, people were chattering to one another, and it was
all rather jolly. It was still jolly when the roast saddle of mutton
turned up, slightly yellow and rather greasy, and to a lad as energetic
as Dodger, pure pleasure, although he couldn’t remember the last time he
had eaten so much. In the attic, the meals prepared by Solomon
were . . . wholesome, and enough. Meat came in small amounts, more a
seasoning than the whole meal, and generally the basis of a thick soup
or nourishing gruel. He was aware now of a general tightness of the
stomach; but good mutton was the food of the gods, and therefore it
would be totally unrighteous not to do it justice.

Things were going well; he had listened to Solomon on the subject of
which knife and fork you should use for each course,² he had tucked his
napkin in his neck, and he could definitely do this sort of thing every
night. But he knew that he had been ignoring – how could he? –
Simplicity, who was, he saw, very politely listening to one of Solomon’s
stories now, with every semblance of interest, which was right and
proper because Solomon could surprise you every time.

Just as he turned to look at her, she turned to look at him, and said,
‘It’s rather droll, Dodger, that you appear to be dressed like a
slightly smaller version of Sir Robert.’ Here she lowered her voice to a
whisper. ‘Much more handsome, and you don’t scowl as much. But I must
say you look like two peas in a pod.’

Dodger said, ‘He’s a lot older and bigger than me.’

A remark which caused Simplicity to smile and say, ‘Sometimes I think
English people don’t always think about what they say; if you look
inside any pod of peas, you will see that they are all sizes. The pea
pod shapes them differently.’

He stared at her with his mouth open. Because firstly, he realized he
often shelled peas for Solomon and had never really bothered what shape
any of them were, and secondly, here was Simplicity telling him
something new. Not for the first time, he thought, Yes, Simplicity is
not simple.

She laughed softly. ‘You don’t know anything about me, Dodger.’

‘Well, I expect that someone will let me find out some more at some
time, please?’

‘I have very fat legs!’ she announced.

The chances of getting very fat at all in the rookeries were small, but
Dodger had never heard of any girl saying that her legs were too thin,
and so he said, in the silence that followed her remark, ‘I don’t want
to be indelicate, miss, but that is a matter of opinion – your opinion
obviously, but alas I have as yet been unable to form one for myself.’

It wasn’t quite an uproar, he thought, more like a halfway up roar, but
Dodger heard variations on the theme of ‘I’d say!’ And quite a few
examples of that hard-to-describe noise that people make when they are
pretending to be shocked, but really are just rather amused and possibly
also relieved. It was probably Charlie who said, ‘Excellent, worthy of
the famous Beau Brummel himself!’

Solomon’s face was absolutely blank, as if he hadn’t heard, and Angela,
God bless her, was chuckling. This was very useful, Dodger thought,
because she was the hostess, and an incredibly rich woman, and quite
clearly to everybody there she was perfectly happy about what was going
on, thus defying anyone who thought otherwise. After all, who would want
to disagree with one of the richest women in the world?

Around them there grew then a sort of comfortable buzz as people
finished their drinks and in some cases started them again anew, and at
this point Dodger realized that he certainly needed the jakes, and he
had no idea where they would be, except of course they would be
downstairs. In a world of unmentionables – real, erratic and sometimes
invisible – he was not going to ask a lady where he could go to take a
piss.

Then he found himself looking into the eyes of Sir Robert Peel, who was
grinning round Angela like a cat who has seen a mouse, and the boss of
the peelers said, ‘Ah, Mister Dodger, I rather suspect from the way in
which you are searching about that you are looking for a place of some
easement; allow me to escort you, because I myself am noticing the same
urgency.’

Dodger was in no position to refuse. Sir Robert exchanged a nod with
Angela and piloted Dodger out of the room and down some steps, ushering
him eventually into something like a paradise made of mahogany and
gleaming brass and copper.

It sparkled; it was a palace. The jakes in the rookeries were crowded,
dark and stank; you would be better off going outside, and many did –
which meant that walking along an alleyway at night was a very big
adventure. Solomon, always fastidious about this sort of thing, had his
own portable bucket with a little well-scrubbed wooden lid for those
moments when a man just wanted a nice sit-down. One of Dodger’s chores
was to take the bucket to the nearest cesspit, but these were
overflowing most of the time; anyway, every night the honey wagons came
round, which did a little something to improve matters when the workers
shovelled up the stuff and away it went, along with the horse muck too.
But however often the honey wagons came along, and however hard the
dunykin divers scoured the septic tanks, you were never very far from
yesterday’s dinner. But this place, well, this was amazing, and although
he knew what the hole in the shiny mahogany was for, it seemed like
sacrilege to use it. And what was this? Sheets of paper, all cut out
ready for use, just like Solomon did with the _Jewish Chronicle_, and
there were mirrors too, and little soaps in a large bowl, soft and
smelling nice on the hands. Dodger couldn’t help pocketing some –
despite the company – because there were so many of them.

He took a few moments to be stupefied, despite the pressure on his
bladder and a certain nervousness about being cooped up in the same room
as the boss of the peelers who, he noticed, was now sitting quite
happily in a very expensive chair and lighting a cigar.

Sir Robert Peel smiled at him and said, ‘Please don’t stand on ceremony,
Mister Dodger; I am in no hurry and, of course, as you must have
realized, I am also between you and the doorway.’

This information, just as he was addressing himself to the ornate and
gleaming pan in front of him, dropped Dodger into a state where the
business in hand was turning out to be impossible. He glanced over his
shoulder. Sir Robert wasn’t even looking at him, but was simply enjoying
his cigar, like a man with all the time in the world. But since nothing
actually _bad_ was happening now, Dodger got a grip on his . . . fears
and had to admire the perfect workings of this wondrous new contraption.
When he had finished, the voice of Sir Robert, still in his chair, said
laconically, ‘Now you pull the porcelain knob on the chain to your
left.’

Dodger had been wondering what that was for. It was surely waiting to be
pulled, wasn’t it? But why? To let people know that you had finished?
Did it ring a bell so that people didn’t come in and disturb you? Oh
well, he gave the nice little ceramic knob on the end of the chain a
casual but hopeful pull, then backed away from the bowl, just in case
this really was the wrong thing to have done and despite everything he
was going to get into trouble . . . except the water gurgled around the
pan, leaving the place spotless. Now that was a thing worth having!

He swung round and said, ‘Yes, sir, I know what to do. And I know you
are having a little game, sir. I am wondering what you want from me.’

Sir Robert looked at the tip of his cigar as if he had not seen it
before, and said very casually, ‘I would very much like to know how you
did that murder in the sewers this afternoon.’

Inside Dodger, the turbot and all his little friends rushed to escape
the sinking Dodger, and for a moment he thought he would make a terrible
mess on that shiny floor until he reminded himself, _I never murdered
anyone, didn’t want to, didn’t have time_. So he said, ‘What murder
would this be?’ quelling the turbot and telling it to mind its manners.
‘I never murdered nobody, never!’

The head of all the policemen in London said cheerfully, ‘Well now, it’s
funny you should say that, because I believe you, but sad to say we have
a dead body in the morgue and two men who say you put the poor fellow in
there. And the funny thing is, and you might laugh at this, I do not
believe _them_. There is a corpse, certainly, reported to us by a
gentleman known around and about as Manky Smith – probably known to you
as well?’

‘Manky Smith? He’s a boozer, walks around all the time with wet pants.
He would peach anybody for a pint of porter. I bet the other one was
Crouching Angus, an old sweat with one and a half legs.’

The man had said that he didn’t think that Dodger had murdered anybody
and that was a good thing, wasn’t it? A very good thing, but
nevertheless the chief peeler had that look about him you learned to
recognize after you had had a few run-ins with authority. It said that
authority wanted you to know that authority always had the upper hand,
and that you had just better mind your manners for the moment, because
you were the enemy of authority unless authority told you that you
weren’t.

Mister Peel was watching him with a slight smile on his face – you must
never ignore the smile on the face of a peeler – and Dodger thought,
This one is the king of the peelers, the big Peel himself, so even a
dodger knows when not to dodge. He said, watching that smile, ‘You say
that you don’t think I murdered anybody, but there are two people saying
I done it, right? Who’s the body what was murdered? And why ain’t you
taking their word against mine?’

Very calmly, Sir Robert said, ‘Frankly, my men know them and say that
they wouldn’t take the testimony of those two if the Archangel Gabriel
was standing beside them and had given them a reference.’ He smiled the
smile of a policeman, which was only slightly better than the smile of a
tiger, and said, ‘And I’m not taking _your_ word as anything, Mister
Dodger, but I _am_ inclined to take the word of Solomon Cohen, who is
very well thought of in the Jewish community. While I engaged him in
conversation earlier this evening – and quite clearly he knew nothing of
this accusation, nor did I say anything of it to him – he was kind
enough to mention that you have spent almost the whole day in his
company, a fact which can be verified by a number of reputable
merchants, including my own tailors, which I can see with my own eyes.
But I ask myself, if this murder took place only a few hours ago, why
did this allegation reach me instantly, do you think?’

Before Dodger could say anything, Sir Robert continued. ‘I think that
you have made enemies because, as Ben tells me, you appear to be
compounding your heroic deeds by keeping a certain young woman safe
while she is in our country. I salute you for that, but this situation
cannot go on for ever. There are indications that . . . others involved
in this affair are growing increasingly impatient.’

He drew on his cigar and lazily blew out a cloud of blue smoke; it
drifted and curled around Dodger’s head like an aromatic fog.

‘There has clearly been a murder,’ the head of the peelers stated, ‘and
indeed I must make certain that somebody is brought to justice – despite
the fact that the corpse concerned was a gentleman who was known as a
man who got things done, for a fee, with no questions asked and
certainly no questions answered. He was a lawyer until the other lawyers
found him out, and then he became what we call an accommodator, and a
particularly good one because he knew all the lawyers’ tricks. He was
very good at introducing people who needed crimes committed to people
who wanted to be paid for committing crimes and, of course, he would
skim something off the top for his expenses without ever getting his
hands dirty. Now he turns up quite professionally dead, meaning neat and
clean and not involving any third party. A very neat job. And a very
silent corpse. They might as well have done the washing up and fed the
cat before they left. His name was Sharp Bob.’

Sharp Bob was dead! So someone had got to him, Dodger thought. But now
he had other questions. What had this Sharp Bob known? Had he been
working on his own, just to make some specie . . .? Or under the orders
of someone else? For that government Mister Disraeli had spoken of?

‘All the policemen know about you, Mister Dodger,’ Sir Robert was
saying, ‘and the old Bow Street boys did as well: always suspected,
never impeached, never had to stand in front of the beak. One old lad I
knew said some people believed you were protected by the Lady of the
Sewers, and I believe that you may now need all the protection you can
get. _We_ are not the Bow Street runners, Mister Dodger; we are clever
men – your friend Charlie Dickens is in fact quite fascinated by our
procedures.’ Sir Robert sighed, and went on, ‘Indeed, I sometimes
suspect he would love to be a peeler if I let him; he’d make a good
copper if he didn’t scribble, scribble, scribble all the time, I am
sure. We know what goes on, Mister Dodger, but sometimes we don’t see
the need to tell people everything that we know.’

He paused to take another puff on his cigar, before continuing, ‘I do
know, however, that one or two people with associations to the aforesaid
Sharp Bob are said to have recently run up against a gentleman known to
all and sundry as Dodger, and ended up the worst for it. One . . .
employee, shall we say, appears to have had an unfortunate and terminal
accident only yesterday morning – the kind involving his being run over
by a coach and four in a busy street not too far from your own
neighbourhood. Run over _twice_, it would appear . . . with no witnesses
whatsoever.’

Dodger’s mind was racing. Someone else had got to the other cove who had
beaten Simplicity, then – someone who _hadn’t_ held back from killing.
Now it began to seem that everyone connected with this affair was ending
up dead . . .

‘We are rather wondering,’ Sir Robert mused, ‘if there might be another
player here now; people are getting restive and want to see this whole
matter cleared up. Of course, a keen policeman would still automatically
think that said Mister Dodger, being somewhat annoyed by the lackeys of
Sharp Bob, might see that some harm came to him or his associates.
However, as all London knows, you were otherwise engaged yesterday
morning at Mister Todd’s establishment. You appear to be a lucky man,
Dodger. A man who is normally invisible has become surprisingly visible
at just the right moments.’ He paused. ‘Although my informants do tell
me there is a further known associate of both of these two late
gentlemen who was seen sporting a broken nose this morning, whilst also
walking in a rather peculiar fashion . . . this may need further
investigation. Are you with me? I see that you are remaining quiet; very
sensible of you.’

The boss of the peelers stood up, knocking the ash off the end of his
cigar into a small silver ashtray. ‘Mister Dodger, I am the head of the
police force, which makes me a policeman, but I am also a politician. I
am sure that someone as smart as you is aware that politicians – who in
theory wield a great deal of power – can sometimes get somewhat tangled
up when it comes to using it, knowing that their every move is going to
be watched and questioned. Agents watch every port – good heavens, you
yourself must know that; there isn’t a mudlark or an urchin on every
quay who wouldn’t keep an eye open for anyone for a cost. But there are
indeed some of us who, whilst publicly toeing the government line, feel
that an innocent person who has sought sanctuary in Britain should not
be sent back to where she does not want to go. Good Lord, man, we are
British! We should not bow to the demands of anyone. There must surely
be a way to resolve this situation without risking a war.’

Dodger’s mouth fell open. A war? Over Simplicity?

‘Mister Dodger,’ the head of the peelers continued, ‘you and Miss
Simplicity appear to be a reason why people are being killed. And why
more people might be, unless we can resolve this, and very soon, since
you must by now also realize that this affair has ramifications beyond
Miss Simplicity and yourself. Now I know that you are very keen to see
that the young lady in question comes to no harm, and as your friend
Charlie has said, when the kings and queens and knights and rooks find
it difficult to move, the pawn may win the game. Like Charlie, I
therefore believe that somebody not so readily associated with the
government could indeed be the very man to help us find a solution.’ His
voice dropped as he said, more softly, ‘You are the freest free agent
that I can possibly imagine, and frankly, Mister Dodger, and I will deny
this if ever you repeat it publicly and you may be sure that my word
will be taken against yours, one of the reasons I’m talking to you now
is to tell you that whatever you may be planning, you must not break the
law. Since I have just now stepped out of this room and any voice you
may be hearing cannot possibly be mine, I must, however, point out to
you that there are times when the law may be somewhat . . . flexible.’

He moved closer to the door and said, ‘And now, without another word, we
will both stroll back to the others as if we had just been discussing
the very latest in modern sanitation, and I will find you again when I
need to. We will’ – he paused – ‘be watching you with interest.’ The
head of the peelers looked at Dodger’s panicked expression and smiled
again. ‘Don’t worry unduly; in the meantime, we have a homicide – that
just means a dead body really. Who knows? He might have been meeting a
client in rather insalubrious surroundings and banged his head on
something and some people got the wrong idea. And, Mister Dodger, this
conversation and everything to do with it has never existed. Do you
understand?’

At last Dodger found his tongue and he simply said, ‘Understand what,
sir?’

‘You are a quick learner, Mister Dodger. Incidentally, you appear to
have no other name than Dodger, Mister Dodger. I know you were brought
up in an orphanage, but surely they gave you a name?’

More than a name, Dodger thought, and I bet you already know it, Mister
Peel. Then he said, ‘Yes, they did. They called me Pip Stick! Are you
happy now? Because I’m not! How about that for a name? Think of all the
fun people can have with that and a small boy; and they did, Mister
Peel, they certainly did. It’s writ down in the workhouse, all official
like. Mister Pip Stick, just my luck. Hard luck. Mind you,’ he added,
‘now I come to think of it, Mister Pip Stick had to know how to fight.
And to dodge. And to kick and bite. And run. Oh, and how he could run,
and climb and twist.’ He hesitated and added, ‘Not that I’m sayin’ that
it was a good name to have, oh dear me, no.’

The dinner was almost over when Dodger got back to his seat, and a few
minutes later Angela tapped a wineglass with a spoon, very gently, and
announced, ‘My friends, custom and practice these days is that ladies
withdraw to the withdrawing room while all the gentlemen stay behind,
and as you know I find this rather irksome because I’d quite like to
talk to some gentlemen, and I’m sure some gentlemen might like to talk
to some ladies. After all, these are modern times and we are all people
of the world; I daresay none of us in this eminent company require a
chaperone. I shall go to the drawing room and await all comers!’

To Dodger’s surprise one of the richest women in the world then grasped
his arm. ‘Now, Mister Dodger,’ she said, ‘I would like to talk to you
about _reading_. Solomon tells me that you seldom make any attempt at
reading and can barely cipher something approximating your name. This is
not good enough, young man! A person of your calibre has no business
being illiterate. Normally I would suggest that you should get enrolled
in one of my ragged schools, but I fancy you would consider yourself too
old for that, so instead, and so that I may begin to instil in you a
love of words and the way they can be used, you will promise me that
tomorrow night you will come with me and young Simplicity to the theatre
to see the new production of William Shakespeare’s _Julius Caesar_.’

She straightened up and added, ‘Mister Cohen may accompany us too if he
would be so kind. You must raise your play, Mister Dodger, because no
man should waste his life tramping through sewers when he could be
sailing through literature and the theatre. Raise your play, Mister
Dodger, raise your play! You already have the gingerbread, time to get
the gilt!’ She paused and looked at Dodger’s expression. ‘You are
looking at me with your mouth open,’ she added. ‘Is there anything that
I have just said that you might not have understood?’

Dodger hesitated, but not for long. ‘Yes, miss. I am rather busy but I
would like to go and see the play, and I have seen gingerbread with gilt
on it in some baker’s shop, but for the life of me I don’t know what
that has to do with anything.’

‘One day, Dodger, you should ask Solomon what a metaphor is.’

‘There’s another thing I want to ask please, miss,’ said Dodger. ‘That
is, how can you be sure that nothing bad could happen to Miss Simplicity
in the theatre; they are big places with lots of people in them.’

Angela smiled. ‘Sometimes the best place to hide something is exactly
where no one would think to look. But if they do, then surely, Mister
Dodger, we will be one step closer to reaching a happy conclusion to
this affair? Simplicity will be in no danger – I have the ways and means
to see that all of us will be able to enjoy the evening unmolested, you
can be sure of that. My footmen have – you might say – hidden talents.
But we may gain more than an evening’s entertainment from the
excursion.’

She very carefully steered him then into yet another very well-appointed
room in which comfy chairs were in abundance and so, on the whole, was
everything else. Up in the attic Solomon had nothing that was not
practical. The old man had his work table and a very narrow bed, and
behind his curtain Dodger had a bedroll and a number of blankets, and if
it was a cold winter sometimes Onan as well; the smell could get bad,
but Onan was polite enough not to acknowledge it. But this room was full
of . . . well, things! Things that as far as Dodger could see were there
just to be seen, or perhaps things that were designed to have other
things put on top of them, or inside them. It also had enormous displays
of flowers in great big vases, and the place looked like Covent Garden.
He wondered why people needed all these things, when he himself could
carry everything he owned in quite a small bag, not counting the
bedroll. It seemed to be something that happened when you were rich,
like in the Mayhews’ house but with more knobs on.

But he pushed that aside in his mind to make way for his plan. It was a
good plan, a shiny one, and it had come together finally because Mister
Disraeli had tried to make fun of him. All evening long he had been
piecing it together, trying to figure out which parts were likely to be
straightforward – such as the breeches – and which parts there were
where you would just have to trust to your luck; and the Lady, of
course.

Tomorrow was going to be a very busy day.

He was looking around for Solomon when somebody else tapped him on the
shoulder and said very politely, ‘I’m very sorry to intervene, but I
hear that you habitually frequent the sewerage system.’

The unwanted enquirer was a young man some ten years older than himself
with the beginnings of a very curly moustache in the current fashion,
and the way the question was asked made Dodger suspect that the man
might be something of an enthusiast when it came to drains. He was a
gentleman who wanted to talk about drains and he – that is to say,
Dodger – had to be polite, and so there was nothing for it but to smile
nicely and say, ‘I’m no expert, sir, but since you ask, I am a tosher
and I reckon I’ve been down every drain anybody can get down in the
Square Mile, and then some. And you, sir, are . . .?’ He smiled so as
not to give offence.

‘Oh dear, how remiss of me. Bazalgette, Joseph Bazalgette; here is my
card, sir. May I say that if you are thinking of a journey into the
sewers I would be most pleased if I could come with you. Indeed, I would
be honoured!’

Dodger turned the card over and over in his fingers, gave in and said,
‘I was planning an . . . expedition with Mister Disraeli and Mister
Dickens. The day after tomorrow, I believe. Perhaps one more . . .?’
After all, he thought, it could fit in very well with his plans,
especially if one of the aforesaid gentlemen should change their minds,
or find themselves ‘otherwise engaged’, as he believed it was described.

Mister Bazalgette was beaming with delight. Yes, he was an enthusiast
for sure. A man who liked numbers and wheels and machinery, and quite
possibly sewers. Mister Bazalgette, Dodger thought, might just be a gift
from the Lady. ‘You must surely know,’ Bazalgette burbled, as if reading
his mind, ‘although perhaps you don’t, that the first people to
undertake the work of building these sewers were the Romans. Indeed they
believed in a goddess of the sewers, whom I believe is commonly known as
“the Lady” and gave her a name – Cloacina. You may be interested to
learn that not so long ago a gentleman here in England called Matthews
wrote a poem to her, following the example of the Romans, imploring her
to help him with – how can I put it? – a way to make smoother his bodily
functions, which the poem suggests were something of a morning trial to
him.’

From what Dodger had heard, the Romans were sharp coves and had built
other things besides sewers, like roads. But now, without any warning,
it turned out that they had also worshipped the Lady. Those Romans,
according to Solomon, were tough and rough and merciless if you went up
against them . . . and they had believed in the Lady. Well now, Dodger
had prayed to the Lady to be sure, but he was never, well, definite when
he did – sort of only half believing. Now it turned out that all those
big warriors were once upon a time in this city kneeling down to her to
make their richards a bit more squishy. There could be no better
endorsement. Now more than ever, Dodger – admittedly via a roundabout
route – was a believer.

Mister Bazalgette was coughing. ‘Are you all right, Mister Dodger?’ he
queried. ‘You looked a bit far away for a while.’

Dodger hustled back to reality, smiled at the man and said, ‘Everything
is fine, sir.’

Then a hand dropped on his shoulder, and gleefully Charlie said, ‘Excuse
me, Mister Bazalgette, I thought I must remind our friend about that
trip into the sewers. Benjamin too, because those of us who are his
friends would love to see what the dapper chappie will make of the
subterranean experience, especially if he slips over in it, and of
course I sincerely hope that does not happen. I wonder what shoes he
will wear?’ Charlie was smiling, in Dodger’s opinion with a certain
touch of cheerful malice – not the nasty sort as such, but maybe the
sort you use to tell one of your chums that he is getting too big for
his boots. Dodger wouldn’t mind betting that Charlie’s mind was
suggesting that the sewer excursion could just possibly be very
entertaining as well as instructive.

As people milled around him saying their goodbyes to one another, Dodger
said to Charlie, ‘I expect you gentlemen are all very busy, so for this
trip let us meet at The Lion in Seven Dials. It won’t be a difficult
walk from there to where we start and you could keep the growler there.
The day after tomorrow, wasn’t it? Maybe seven o’clock? The sunlight
will be low and you will be amazed how far it reaches into the sewers,
like it was trying to fill them up.’ Then he added, ‘No offence to you,
gentlemen, but if I take you down there and something nasty happens to
any of you, I will be very upset and so will you. So I’ll do a little
walk around there early in the day to make sure there ain’t going to be
any problems because you never know. So, if it ain’t on, I’ll make shift
to let you know so that it’s postponed.’

Charlie grinned with glee. ‘Now that’s a sensible precaution, Dodger.
What a shame Henry is unable to join us! But I for one cannot wait to
join this little odyssey. How about you, Mister Bazalgette?’

The engineer’s eyes sparkled. He said, ‘I will bring along my
theodolite, my most waterproof boots, my most expendable trousers and,
knowing something about sewers, good stout leather breeches will be your
friend. Thank you so much for this, young man. I very much look forward
to seeing you the day after tomorrow. And if possible to meeting your
Lady.’

As Mister Bazalgette headed off to find his coach, Charlie turned to
Dodger and asked, his face a mask, ‘What lady might that be?’

Dodger hurriedly explained. ‘I was talking about _the Lady_, our Lady of
the Sewers, sir, and if you reach for your notebook now I think I would
just about pull your fingers off, sir, ’cos this is stuff that should
not be known, sir.’

Charlie said, ‘Are you telling me, Dodger, that you truly believe that
there is some kind of a goddess in the sewers?’

‘No, sir, not a goddess, not for the likes of us,’ Dodger continued.
‘Gods and goddesses are for the likes of people who go to church, sir.
They laugh at people like us, but _she_ doesn’t. There is no salvation,
sir, not with her, because there is nothing to be saved from, sir. But,
like I say, if you get on well with her then one day she might show you
something of great worth. Everybody has got to believe in something;
that’s all it takes. That’s why, because of this, I decided to rescue
Simplicity, you see. I mean, how could I have heard all the screaming
above the noise of the storm? But I heard it right enough. And so I have
to think that I have been guided on a journey and I don’t know where all
the steps are, and I know the people who are my betters would like to
see Simplicity shut away in some bleak house somewhere, so as she would
cause no trouble. I won’t stand for it, sir, whoever they are. _I said I
didn’t want you to write things down!_’

This came out fast and Charlie’s pencil fell away from his notebook and,
flustered, he said, ‘My apologies, Mister Dodger. My attempt at jotting
a thought down had nothing to do with Miss Simplicity, I can assure
you.’

Dodger jumped as Angela appeared at their side and said, ‘Changing
times, Mister Dodger. A young queen on the throne and a new world of
possibilities. Your world, should you choose to make it so.’ She leaned
closer and whispered, ‘I know that Sir Robert has spoken to you, and I
know why. There are wheels within wheels. Make certain now that you’re
not crushed between them. I admire men of resource who are prepared to
make some difference in the world, and on occasion, as you know, I like
to help them up. And, Mister Dodger, like you I cannot abide bullies. I
do not like men who trample on others.’ She paused and handed him a slip
of paper. ‘Something my dear friend Sir Robert just said to me makes me
feel that you could find this place very interesting.’

Dodger glanced at the piece of paper, feeling embarrassed. ‘Excuse me,
miss,’ he said. ‘Is this the way to one of your ragged schools?’

He saw her eyebrows narrow until she looked quite fierce. ‘Not exactly,
Mister Dodger; it is where I think you might like to teach someone a
lesson. But do please feel free to call on me at need.’

And now Solomon loomed like a revelation, a pink one and slightly fatter
than Dodger remembered. ‘Have you said all your goodbyes and thank yous?
Say goodbye to Miss Simplicity, and then you and myself must be going,
Onan will be pining.’

Dodger turned round, and there was Simplicity, who simply said, ‘How
very nice to see you again, my hero, and I look forward to going to the
theatre with you tomorrow, I really do.’

As he and Solomon were leaving, Simplicity, standing next to her new
hostess in the doorway, blew him a kiss and Dodger was suddenly floating
on air.

1 Frankly, most of the time, Dodger ate using his fingers unless Sol
told him off.

2 Solomon had said, ‘Don’t bother about the fish slice; nobody bothers
with the fish slice, it is there as an ornament, just to show people
that you have a fish slice.’

[images]

CHAPTER 13

THE CLOCK IS TICKING AS A MYSTERIOUS OLD LADY CROSSES THE RIVER

SOLOMON WAS SILENT until the growler was well on its way, and then he
said, ‘Rather a forward young lady, I feel, and so there must be
something in the saying that “like attracts like”, and mmm, you, Dodger,
were Dodger, which I believe is a skill unto itself. But you must be
careful; you are in the centre of things now, if you did but know it.
Although there are agents of other powers in this country, I suspect
they would think twice before doing any harm to Mister Disraeli or
Mister Dickens, but I think the life of a tosher is one they would snuff
out without a second thought.’

Dodger knew Solomon was right. After all, tangled up in this there was
politics, and where there is politics there is money and power, which
probably can be considered more important than a tosher and a girl
alone.

‘Tomorrow,’ Solomon was saying, ‘remember, you must be smart and in your
best clothes again when you go to the theatre. Incidentally, what is
that piece of paper rolling up in your hand? Unusual for you to try to
read . . .?’

Dodger gave up the unequal struggle and said, ‘Tell me what this means,
Sol, ’cos I think this one is important. I think these people are the
people what mean Simplicity harm.’

The speed with which Solomon drank information off a page always seemed
wondrous to Dodger, and the old man said, ‘It’s the address of an
embassy.’

‘What’s an embassy?’ said Dodger.

It took a minute or two for Sol to explain the concept of an embassy to
Dodger, but by the end of the explanation Dodger’s eyes were ablaze and
he said, ‘Well, you know me and writing. Can you just tell me where it
is?’

‘I wonder if I dare,’ said Solomon, ‘but I know you will not be
satisfied until you find out. Please promise me, at least, that you
won’t kill anybody. Well, unless they try to kill you first.’ He added,
‘A remarkable woman, Angela, isn’t she?’ He glanced out of the window
and continued, ‘As a matter of fact I think I might be able to persuade
the growler to go past the address.’

Five minutes later, Dodger was staring at the building like a pickpocket
fixes his gaze on a lord’s trouser pockets. He said, ‘I’ll come back
home with you right now to see you get in all right, but then don’t wait
up.’

He itched with impatience all the way to Seven Dials as they rumbled
through the darkened streets, and as they arrived home he apparently
took no notice of the single man lurking in the shadows and the man paid
them no apparent attention as they climbed up the stairs, a grumbling
Solomon complaining about being so late for bed. Dodger spent some time
feeding Onan and taking him for his usual nocturnal walk. When that was
over, the dog followed him upstairs, and very shortly after that the
watcher down in the street below saw the solitary candle go out.

On the other side of the building, Dodger – now dressed in his working
clothes – climbed down the rope he utilized whenever he wanted to get
back to ground level without being noticed. Then he slid round to where
the watching man was still watching, silently tied his bootlaces
together in the darkness and then kicked the man’s feet from under him,
saying, ‘Hello, my name’s Dodger, what’s yours?’

The man was at first startled, then extremely angry, saying, ‘I am a
policeman, you know!’

‘I don’t see no uniform, mister policeman,’ said Dodger. ‘I’ll tell you
what, ’cos you have a nice face I’ll let you go, OK? And tell Mister
Robert Peel that Dodger does things his way, all right?’

But he was, he thought, if not exactly in trouble with Scotland Yard,
nevertheless certainly in a stew of sorts, and it was bubbling, wasn’t
it just! Once the peelers from Scotland Yard got a hold of you they
tended to hang on, and if the news got about that he had spoken to the
peelers – especially the big Peel himself! – then the street people
would think he was getting into bad company, and might be likely to
peach on them.

Even worse, he was being _spied_ on. Plain-clothed policemen! There
ought to be a law against it; everybody said so – it was, well, it was
unfair. After all, if you saw a peeler walking around, well, maybe you
would think once or twice about dipping into someone’s pocket or dipping
into something that didn’t really belong to anyone really, when you came
to think about it, or just possibly knocking off something from a barrow
when the owner wasn’t looking. After all, seeing policemen around kept
you honest, didn’t it? If they were going to lurk around like ordinary
people they were basically asking you to commit crimes, weren’t they? It
was entirely unfair in Dodger’s opinion.

It had been a long night already indeed, but there were things that had
to be done quickly, or else he would burst. So he ran through the dark
streets until he came to the abode of Ginny-Come-Lately.

She answered the door on the third knock, and in something of a bad
temper until she said, ‘Oh, it’s you, Dodger, how nice. Er, can’t invite
you in quite yet, you know how it is, don’t ya?’

Dodger, who certainly did know how it was because it was always what it
was, said, ‘Nice to see you, Ginny. You know that little package of
tools I once asked you to keep for me when I promised Solomon I wasn’t
going thieving any more? Still got it?’

She smiled at him for a moment, then ducked back in and came out with a
small package wrapped in oilcloth. She gave Dodger a peck on the cheek
and said, ‘I’m hearing a lot about you these days, Dodger. I hope she’s
worth it!’

But at that point Dodger was already out of the door and running at
speed; he had always liked running, which was just as well, since a
thief who couldn’t run fast was soon dead, but now he ran like he had
never run before. He was running through the streets in what seemed like
a frenzy of acceleration, and occasionally an alert peeler, noting that
someone was running, would shout or blow his whistle and then feel
rather stupid since Dodger was a rapidly dwindling bit of darkness in a
city full of the stuff. He didn’t simply run; he _sped_, legs pounding
much faster than his heartbeat. Disturbed pigeons flew away. A man who
tried to waylay him as he ran down a useful alleyway was punched and
then trodden on, and Dodger kept going, not looking behind him because,
well, by now _everything_ was behind him as he channelled rage into his
legs and simply followed them . . . and then, suddenly, there it was
again. That building.

Dodger slowed down and disappeared into darkness and spent some time in
getting his breath back; after all, now he was here, he would have to
take his time. By the light of his dark lantern, he unrolled the green
baize parcel wrapped in the oilcloth, and the light glistened on all his
little friends – the half-diamond pick, the ball pick, and the torsion
bar – but of course there were the others; there was always some lock or
other which was slightly different, and he had spent many a happy hour
with the rakes and picks, bending and filing them into exactly the right
shapes. It seemed to him that they were saluting him, ready for combat.

Shortly afterwards, darkness moved within darkness and this particular
darkness found, on the more insalubrious side of the building, a metal
cover to a cellar. When he had given it just a little bit of oil and a
little tinkering, Dodger was in at the enemy’s throat. He grinned, but
there was no fun in the grin; it was more like a knife.

The building was mostly in shadows and Dodger just loved shadows. He was
pleased to see that there were carpets – not really a sensible choice if
you were running an embassy and might like to know if there were some
unwelcome people walking about, because marble floors were much to be
recommended, as Dodger well knew; sometimes if you stepped on them in
the night time they could ring like a bell. Whenever he’d found them, he
had always got down and very carefully slid himself over them, so that
no sound could be heard.

Now he listened at doors, he stood behind curtains, and he made sure not
to go too near the kitchens, as you never knew when a servant might be
up. And all the time he stole. He stole in the same methodical way that
Solomon made beautiful small objects, and he smiled when he thought
that, because now Dodger was making small beautiful things disappear. He
stole jewellery, when he found it, and he opened every lock and riffled
through the contents of every drawer, in every boudoir. On two occasions
he robbed rooms in which he could just make out people sleeping. He
didn’t care; it was as if nothing could stop him, or maybe it was as if
the Lady had made him invisible. He worked fast and methodically and
everything was wrapped up in its own little velvet bag, within the main
bundle, so that nothing would ever go ‘_clink_’ just at the wrong moment
because if there was a clink then the clink was where you spent your
days until they hanged you. It was a little joke among thieves.

At one point, in the middle of the building, in a large desk which took
one hell of a long time to yield its secrets to his busy fingers and
their little friends, he found ledgers and a series of little books.
They had a complicated look about them, and manuscripts and scrolls with
red wax on them, which always looked expensive. He recognized the crest
on some of the documents, he surely did.

As he stood in this busy, important room, he thought, I wish I could do
something, so that they would know. And then knew what he would do. I’ll
let them know who it had been, he told himself, because, well, I could
have brought the place down in flames. After all, all those oil lamps
around? All those curtains? All those stairs and all those people
sleeping up there? He was so angry but, in the warm darkness of the
room, what he was not – whatever else he had been – was a murderer. I
shall make them pay in my own way, he decided, and at that moment all of
them were saved from a fiery death, if they only had known it, and were
only living because Dodger, silent in this sleeping world, allowed them
to.

Put like that, it made him feel a little better. Padding away silently,
he thought, I’ve always said I wasn’t a hero, and I ain’t, but if I’ve
ever been a hero, then as sure as Sunday I’m a hero now, because I’ve
stopped an embassy full of people being burned alive.

And so at last, not long before the first crack of dawn, he was down and
outside and into the mews by the side of the embassy. He knew there
would be ostlers and grooms hanging about here any minute soon but
nevertheless, moving even more stealthily, he found the coach house, and
yes, there was a coach there with a foreign crest painted on the side.
Dodger carefully knelt down beside it and felt around near the wheels.
Close to one wheel it seemed that a length of metal had been thrown up
on one occasion and got stuck, scraping on the rim of the wheel. Dodger
tried to pull it free, but without any success until a very useful
little crowbar caused it to spring out, and Dodger caught it in the air
whereupon he straightened up, went to the coat of arms on the coach and
scratched, as deeply as he could inscribe them, the words: _MR PUNCH_.

Then, with his face dark and his purpose iron-clad, he walked from loose
box to loose box, driving the occupants into an adjacent mews and
carefully shutting the gate behind them, because everybody knew that
horses were so stupid that if there was a fire they would rush into
their stables because that’s where they thought they would be safe, a
habit that showed you why horses didn’t rule the world. They wandered
about aimlessly while Dodger struck up a light and dropped it into a
large bale of hay and then walked in earnest down the nearest alleyway
with the virtuous feeling of having done something right, by virtue of
not doing something wrong. He jogged his way towards the river, where
the crackling of wood and the shouting of humans grew louder in the
distance behind him.

Of course, Solomon shook him awake not long after the usual time, with
the certain allowance for the fact that Solomon himself had slept in
somewhat, after that wonderful meal. Solomon had also decided to let
Dodger sleep on, and meanwhile had taken a look at the contents of
Dodger’s useful bag, because he wouldn’t have been Solomon if he wasn’t
inquisitive. So that when Dodger did in fact find himself shaken awake,
and he came round the curtain, he saw a beaming Solomon sitting at the
table with the jewellery in one neat pile on a velvet cloth and some of
the books and ledgers beside it.

‘Mmm, Dodger, I do not know for certain what you think you were doing
last night, but I think I can perceive, because as you know Solomon does
himself have a certain wisdom of his own, that you thought you had a
score to settle with somebody. Though you know that I do not mmm
tolerate thievery of any kind, I’ve had a word with God and he agrees
with me that in the circumstances you might have wanted to set fire to
the place.’

Dodger looked embarrassed for a moment and then said, ‘Actually, Sol, I
did torch the stables, because the bloody coach was in there.’

Solomon’s brow wrinkled in distress. ‘Mmm, I trust you let out all the
horses.’

‘Of course,’ said Dodger.

‘And, mmm, after all,’ the old man continued, brightening, ‘what is
jewellery? Just shiny rocks. And you have an excellent eye. Quite
excellent. But I dare say that some of these ciphers and code books
might be of considerable interest to the government; there are things
here in several languages which would do a great deal of damage in some
quarters, and cause a great deal of rejoicing in others.’

All Dodger could find to say at that moment was, ‘You . . . don’t mind?’
And, ‘You could read them all?’

The old man gave him his most supercilious look. ‘Mmm, I can read in
most languages of Europe, with perhaps the exception of Welsh, which I
find a tad difficult. One of these documents is a copy of a message
about the Tsar of all the Russias, who mmm apparently has done something
quite naughty with the wife of the French ambassador – oh dearie me,
such goings on; I wonder what would happen if more people knew about it.
Dodger, if you don’t mind, I think it would be a very good idea if
somebody like Sir Robert was privy to this startling information, which
is only one of the many things which Her Majesty’s government would be
very interested to know about. I will see to it that he gets them in a
mmm covert way.’

He paused. ‘Of course, I see no reason to mention anything to him about
the jewellery. Incidentally, it’s worth a king’s ransom, even for the
rubies alone. Or perhaps a gift from a prince and his father, mmm? As
you know, I am not a fence, but I think I know one or two associates who
might take the stuff off our hands, and I am sure I will be able to
negotiate an acceptable price. Indeed I shall, because they go to the
synagogue as I do, and sooner or later every man has to bargain with the
Devil, and in those circumstances God is inclined to help him achieve a
good price. You won’t, of course, get the full value, but I believe that
after I have negotiated, you will have a second fortune. As a dowry for
your young lady, perhaps?’

He plucked one of the documents from the pile. ‘And, mmm all I will ask
from you, my friend, is that I am allowed to take this document
concerning the Tsar, and quite possibly make some use of it one day,
when the occasion ever presents itself, especially if my young friend
Karl is still alive . . . Mmm, and incidentally, in another one of these
packages is a scurrilous piece of information about a member of our own
royal family. I suppose I should throw it into the fire . . .’ He
hesitated for a moment. ‘But perhaps I will just keep it in a place of
safety mmm, so that it never comes to the attention of unfriendly eyes.’
He grinned again. ‘And, of course, gentlemen like ourselves would have
nothing to do with such things, but nevertheless there are times when a
little leverage is worth having.’

With that, the old man carefully stowed away both the jewellery and the
precious information somewhere inside his voluminous jacket, and turned
to his workbench while Dodger sat and stared at nothing. He thought, If
you put Solomon in a room full of lawyers, how many would come out, and
in what condition would they be as they crawled along the floor?

He took this opportunity. ‘Solomon,’ he asked, ‘could you do a little
job of work for me, please? Could you melt out some gold from this haul
and make a gold ring? With a decent ruby maybe? And possibly a
sprinkling of diamonds to set them off?’

Solomon looked up. ‘Mmm, I would be delighted to do that for you,
Dodger, and at my very best price.’ He laughed at Dodger’s expression
and said, ‘Honestly, my friend, what must you think of me? You must
understand that was just my little joke, and I do not make many of
them.’ He added, ‘Mmm, by any chance would you like an engraved
inscription?’ His expression looked sly as he went on, ‘Perhaps
something relating to a young lady? We can agree the exact wording
later, yes?’

Dodger blushed and said, ‘Are you a mind reader too?’

‘Mmm, of course! And so are you, the only difference being that I have
had far more chances to read them than you have, and some of the minds
that I have fathomed were very tangled and convoluted minds indeed.’

Dodger stood back and said, ‘I have never asked you this before, but you
know so much and you can do so much. Why then do you spend most of your
time fiddling with bits of old jewellery and watches and so on down here
in the rookeries when there are many other things you could be doing?’

And Solomon said, ‘That in itself is a convoluted question, but surely
you know most of the answer, mmm? I enjoy my chosen trade and receive
good remuneration. That is to say, for your benefit, _money_ for doing
something that gives me great pleasure.’ He sighed and went on, ‘But I
suppose the main reason is that I can no longer run as fast as I once
could, and death is, well, so final.’

This last piece of information caused Dodger to sit up straight. But it
was a call to arms, the starting of a clock, which meant Dodger wasn’t
so free as he had been because now time itself was his master, so he got
dressed in a hurry.

He had to be careful about this; there were quite a number of people
whom he could trust, but there were, as it were, several stages of
trust, ranging from those he could trust with a sixpence to those he
would trust with his life. There weren’t all that many of the latter,
and it was probably a good idea not to trespass on their goodwill,
because: a) goodwill, if trespassed on too often, might have a tendency
to lose some of its bloom; and b) because it didn’t do for anyone to
know too much about Dodger’s business.

Now he made his way once again to the stall of Marie Jo, who probably
wouldn’t be too busy at this time of day, since most of her customers
would be out there on the streets, begging, stealing, or – when all else
failed – earning enough for their dinner. But she was there, as reliable
as the peals of the Bow bells – and Dodger made sure _he_ was reliable
too, and paid her the promised few sixpences more for the children’s
soup – and then there were not many around to hear them so he lowered
his voice and told her what he wanted.

When she laughed and said something in French that he didn’t understand,
he said, ‘I can’t tell you why I need to, Marie Jo.’

She looked at his face and laughed again, giving him the expression that
a certain type of woman has when they are dealing with a saucy young
gentleman such as Dodger, and he recognized this as he had spent a lot
of time analysing this in the University of Dodger; it was accusing and
forgiving wrapped up together in a complicated parcel, and her eyes
twinkled and he knew that she would do anything for him. But knowing
that, he also knew that he shouldn’t ask for too much.

Looking him up and down, she said, ‘_Cherchez la femme?_’ Dodger knew
this one, and very carefully looked embarrassed. She laughed, that laugh
which somehow came from her childhood, and she insisted that he run the
stall and chop up some onions and some carrots while she ran this little
errand for him. How embarrassing! In the full light of day, passers-by
could see Dodger – yes, _Dodger_ – working on a stall; he was glad that
there weren’t too many people about.

Fortunately, Marie Jo soon came back with a small package which he
carefully stowed away, and in good faith he spent half an hour cleaning
and chopping vegetables and welcomed it, because the attention to detail
meant the inner Dodger could think about what he was going to do next,
which was to take a walk among the shonky shops and pawnbrokers. He knew
what he needed, but was careful not to get it all from one single shop,
although he was particularly fortunate in one old shop smelling of not
quite properly laundered clothing to find just what he wanted, and the
proprietor smelled of gin and appeared not to know Dodger at all.

But the clock was still ticking and he was short of time.

By mid-afternoon, though, after a trip to the Gunner’s Daughter and a
couple of pints of porter with a few mates, and one in particular – good
ol’ Dodger, never forgot his friends now he was in the money after his
exploits with the Demon Barber – he was ready, though Solomon chuckled
rather too much for his liking.

Dodger had heard that God watches everything, although he thought that
around the rookeries, He tended to close his eyes. If God wasn’t
available today, and since people didn’t look too much, just in case
they saw anything, possibly only a watcher on the moon would have seen
an elderly lady – an extremely pitiful one, even by the standards of the
rookeries – shin down a length of rope, land like an athlete and then,
very slowly, hobble away.

Dodger wasn’t particularly bothered about this bit; there were only a
few places you could stand to see the rope in any case, but being an old
lady meant that you couldn’t travel fast. Regrettably, little old ladies
– rather unwashed ones, at that – didn’t often have enough money to hire
a growler, but since he would be damned before he hobbled all the way to
the river, the old lady did manage, by the frantic waving of her walking
stick, to hail a cab. Unusually, given the pitiful condition of the old
girl, who seemed to be a jolly playground for warts, thanks to the
theatrical help of Marie Jo, the growler captain, thinking about his old
mum, carefully helped the old girl up and didn’t short-change her.

Indeed, she was a very pitiful old lady; she smelled six days away from
a good wash. And warts? Never before had he seen such terrible warts.
She wore a wig, but that wasn’t unusual knowing the sensitivities of old
ladies, and goodness, he thought, it was a terribly bad wig even so,
about the worst a shonky shop could offer.

He watched her walk away, and it looked as if her feet were in a
terrible way, and this was true because Dodger had put a piece of wood
in his boot which hurt like the blazes. By the time he reached the
nearest wharf, his feet were killing him. Once upon a time, Marie Jo had
told him that with his skills, he should be on the stage, as she had
been, but since he knew that actors didn’t get paid very much he had
always reckoned that the only reason to be on a stage would be to rob
it.

A waterman, coincidentally one whom Dodger had chatted to earlier in the
day – Double Henry, a regular at the Gunner’s Daughter – gave a lift to
the dear old lady with the warts and _terrible_ bad teeth, and kindly
helped her out quite near the morgue at Four Farthings, London’s
smallest borough. Possibly somebody on the moon watching the old lady
from that point on would have watched her progress all the way to the
coroner’s office. It was pitiful, absolutely pitiful. So pitiful, in
fact, that an officer in the morgue, generally not well disposed to
living people and with something of a temper, actually gave her a cup of
tea before directing her to the coroner’s office, some distance away.

The coroner was a kind man, as generally the coroners were, which was
quite remarkable given that so often they saw and knew things that
decent people should neither see nor know, and this one listened to the
old lady, who was in floods of tears about her niece, who had gone
missing. It was a familiar tale, a tale just like one Dodger had heard
from Messy Bessie: the sweet girl had come up from somewhere in Kent,
seeking to improve herself and get a better job in London. A dreadful
engine, if she did but know it, that took the hopeful, the innocent and
ultimately the living, and turned them into . . . something else.

The coroner, hardened though he was to this sort of thing, was
overwhelmed by the tears and the lamentations on the lines of, ‘I told
her, I said we could manage, we could run along all right.’ And, ‘I told
her not to talk to any gentlemen on the street, sir, I certainly did,
sir, but you know how it is with young girls, sir, ever the prey of a
dashing gentleman with money to spend. Oh dear me, if only she had
listened. I shall always blame myself.’ And, ‘I mean, the country ain’t
like the city, that’s for God’s certainty. I mean, generally, if a lad
and a lass got to grips and she started to swell around the waist, then
her mum would have a word with her, wouldn’t she? And then her mum would
talk to her dad and her dad would talk to the boy’s dad in the tavern
and everyone would sigh and say, “Oh well, but at least it shows that
they can have kids.”’ According to the old lady, the young couple would
very quickly then go and see the vicar, and all in all there would be no
harm done.

The coroner, not only a man of this world but in some sense of the next
one too, was not certain it was always as easy as that, but he took care
not to say so. Eventually, the old woman explained about the girl
running out of the house and how she had gone as best she could from
bridge to bridge in search of the runaway. The coroner nodded gloomily
at that point, because this was the same old tragic story. He knew that
there were always Christian people who patrolled the London bridges at
twilight, looking out for these unfortunate ‘soiled doves’. Generally,
they were given a pamphlet and urged not to do it; sometimes this even
worked, but then it was going to be the workhouse, and most likely after
the birth the poor girl would never even see the child for more than the
time it took to be delivered.

You had to develop the hide of a rhinoceros to deal with this sort of
thing on a daily basis and, alas, he found himself not very good at it,
but he listened to the old woman’s description of her niece with a glum
countenance. In between sobs were the words, ‘A blue dress, sir, not
very new, but very nice underthings, sir, very good with the needle, so
she was . . . Just an iron ring made out of a horseshoe nail like the
blacksmiths make, ’cos it’s a ring, you see. Ain’t got no jewels, but a
ring is a ring, ain’t it, sir. Maybe this is important, sir; she had
yellow hair, lovely yellow hair. Never cut it, not like the other girls
who would cut it every year or so and sell it when the wigmakers’ man
came round. She wouldn’t have none of that, sir, she was a very good
girl . . .’

After hearing all this, the coroner brightened a little, and so did
Dodger on seeing his expression. It had been worth the time spent to
locate Double Henry and the two pints of porter had got every single
detail out of him.

The coroner said, ‘It would be invidious of me to use the word “luck” in
this context, madam, but fortuitously it may just be the case that your
niece is even now lying in our mortuary and has been there for a few
days. She was drawn to my attention when I visited there yesterday
morning, and indeed the officer on duty and myself were much taken by
the wonderful colour of her hair. Alas, all along the lower Thames this
sad tableau is re-enacted far too often. In the case of this lovely
young lady, I must say that I was beginning to despair that anyone would
claim her as their own.’

At this point the old lady broke down, whimpering, ‘Oh dear, whatever am
I going to tell her mother! I mean, I said I’d look after her, but young
girls these days . . .’

‘Yes, I fully understand,’ said the coroner hurriedly, and continued,
‘Do let me give you another cup of tea, my good woman, and I will take
you to see the corpse in question.’

There was another wail at this, and another flow of tears, and they were
real tears, because by now Dodger was so wrapped up in the drama that he
might have had a fainting fit but he, or strictly speaking at this point
_she_, carefully drank the proffered tea, taking great care not to knock
off a wart. Shortly afterwards, the coroner, having taken so much pity
on her dreadful state, led her by the arm to the mortuary. One glance
from the old lady at the girl on the slab, who had been cleaned up a
little to the point where she looked as if she was sleeping, was enough.
There was no more acting now, or perhaps the acting was so good, so
perfectly in the role that there should have been a gallery of
theatre-goers cheering to the rafters.

The old lady turned a face lined with hairs, snot and tears to the
kindly coroner and said, ‘I ain’t rich, sir, really I ain’t. Seeing my
Arthur neatly away on Lavender Hill left me fairly skint, sir, so I
reckon it will take me some time to get the wherewithal for seeing her
decent, sir. Do you reckon they will have her at Crossbones?’¹

‘That I cannot say, madam, but I hardly think that your dear niece so
fresh from the country was anything like a’ – and here the coroner
cleared his throat, embarrassed, and went on – ‘a Winchester goose.’
Most unusually, he took out his handkerchief to wipe away a tear and
continued, ‘Madam, I cannot but be very moved by your plight and your
determination to do the very best for the soul of this unfortunate young
lady. I will guarantee you that – we have no shortage of ice, after all
– your young niece can remain here, not for ever, but certainly for a
week or two, which I reckon should be enough for me to contact those
others that may be able to help you in your plight.’

He took a step backwards as the old woman tried to throw her rather
smelly arms around him, saying, ‘God bless you, sir, you truly are a
gentleman, sir. I will turn over every stone, sir, so I will, right
away, sir, thank you so much for all your kindness. Got a few friends I
could talk to. Might help me write a letter to her mum, on the postage,
and I’ll move Heaven and earth not to put you to any trouble, sir. Can’t
be said that we will let one of our own go into a pauper’s grave, sir.’
At which point tears actually were pouring down the coroner’s face. And
Dodger meant it. The man had been a decent cove; that was something to
keep in mind.

The coroner deputized his officer to assist the old lady back to the
wharf, and before saying goodbye pressed into her hand enough money for
the waterman, and so the unknown watcher on the moon watched the poor
old lady work her way through the naughty city until, as she walked down
an alley, she suddenly appeared to drop into the sewers, where the old
woman died but was instantly – possibly to do with the Lady –
reincarnated as Dodger, and a shaken Dodger at that.

He was used to playing roles; to be Dodger was to be a man of all
seasons and seasonings, everybody’s friend, nobody’s enemy, and all this
was fine, but sometimes that all went away and it was just Dodger, alone
in the dark. He realized that he was shaking, and down in the hospitable
sewers he heard the sounds of London floating through the grating. He
carefully packed up the trappings of the old lady into a bundle,
endeavouring to memorize the placement of every single wart. Then he set
off.

He was still as upset about the drowned girl as the old lady had been.
It was a shame, and he would have to see to it that when all this was
over the poor unknown girl did indeed get a decent burial, rather than a
pauper’s grave or worse. He absent-mindedly toshed his way across the
city, more or less instinctively becoming sixpence farthing richer in
the process.

Well, he’d got the coroner sorted out, but corpses need careful
attention and there was nothing for it – he would have to go and see Mrs
Holland. That meant going to Southwark, and even a geezer like Dodger
had to be careful there. But if ever a geezer was careful, it was
Dodger.

Mrs Holland. She had no other name; well, she was a gang all by herself,
and if that wasn’t enough there was her husband Aberdeen Knocker, known
to his friends as Bang, who had in all probability never seen the city
of Aberdeen, which was somewhere up north, like maybe in Wales. The
soubriquet had settled on him as such things did on the streets of
London, indeed as the name Dodger had landed on Dodger, but Bang’s skin
was as black as your hat and a very black hat at that, and he had been
married, theoretically at least, to Mrs Holland these past sixteen
years. Their son, known to everybody for some reason as Half Bang, was
as smart as a dungeon full of lawyers and really being of use in the
family business, which was basically property and people.

But Mrs Holland was a great organizer with a very fertile imagination.
Probably every sailor who had docked in the port of London had gone to
Mrs Holland’s League, as they called it, usually to meet the young
ladies who adorned the upper floors of the building while Mrs Holland
took charge of everything in her office downstairs. Of course, Mrs
Holland being Mrs Holland, sometimes it was rumoured those sailors, once
they were rascally drunk, were shanghaied and sent on a lovely cruise
whose destination might be round Cape Horn, or possibly Davy Jones’
locker. But when not giving sailors nice long holidays, Mrs Holland
arranged things.

Around the docks Mrs Holland was Queen, and nobody questioned the fact
when Bang was by her side. It would be difficult to pinpoint her actual
occupation these days, though Dodger was well aware that once upon a
time she had been both a nurse and a midwife, and apparently had made a
living by causing things to turn up or more often to disappear. If you
were the kind of person who would come seeking more definite information
about her activities, you were the kind of person who was likely soon to
be inspecting the Thames bridges from underneath.

Dodger got along with the family, of course – especially Bang, who had
once fascinated a young Dodger by showing him the scars where his
shackles had chafed him most cruelly, and the place where he had been
branded by the slavers like an animal. Despite his history, he was a
gentle and very amiable person, although right now, answering Dodger’s
knock, he was holding back the growling slathering dog of Satanic
proportions that was the family’s front-line security. They also had a
blunderbuss the size of a French horn and famed to be packed with black
powder and rock salt and, on occasion for very special customers,
miscellaneous nails as well for the hard of understanding.

There was Mrs Holland herself, all chins and smiles, and that meant a
lot of smiles above the blunderbuss. Mrs Holland had bright blue eyes
which, Dodger had often noticed, twinkled with sincerity every time she
told you an outright lie. As she put down the blunderbuss, she said
cheerfully, ‘Dodger! As I live and breathe! Welcome! Welcome!’

Very shortly afterwards, in her little private room, with the dog, name
of Jasper, lying there peacefully in front of her but nevertheless ready
to leap and snarl on command, she listened to Dodger’s story. She looked
thoughtful for a moment, then said, ‘Ah well, it’s amazing how lively a
corpse can be after it is dead. Stiff one day, and playful as anything
the next. What you are suggesting ain’t no journey for the unprepared,
but I have the knowing, oh yes indeed. I ain’t no stranger to corpses,
as you are aware. So just you listen to your favourite aunty, right?
Well, first of all, what you are going to need is . . .’

Dodger learned things quickly, and after a few minutes said, ‘I’m in
your debt, Mrs Holland.’

She smiled at him and said, ‘You know, I always thought you were one of
my smart boys, Dodger. As for being in my debt, well, who knows? One day
you will have an opportunity to pay me back. And it’s all right – I know
you are not a killer, so you wouldn’t be my chosen in that respect, but
in other matters. Well, as they say, one hand washes the other.’

Dodger glanced down at her podgy hands; it looked as if neither of them
had been washed in a week, but he understood the meaning and accepted
it. Favours were currency down here, just like they were on the street.
He also knew she always had a twinkle in her eye for Dodger, although it
didn’t do to rely on a twinkle.

Just as he was leaving, she suddenly went all solemn and said, ‘I reckon
you’ve been stirring things up, my little lad. And there’s some people
that I don’t like the stink of the moment I hears about them, and one of
them is a cove by the name of the Outlander – ever heard of him?’

Dodger shook his head and Mrs Holland began to look uneasy. She glanced
at her husband and then back at Dodger and said, ‘I don’t know if I’ve
ever met him, don’t know what he looks like, but by all accounts he is
your dyed-in-the-wool, stone-hard killing cove. I think it might be his
first time in England, but I’m getting word that he’s been asking
questions about “somebody called Dodger” and some girl. Don’t know much
about him. Some say he’s a Dutchman, sometimes they say he’s a Switzer,
but always they say he is a killer, who comes out of the dark and goes
back into the dark and gets his money and disappears. No one knows what
he looks like, no one knows him as a friend, and the only thing that
anyone knows is that he likes the ladies. They say that he will always
have a girl on his arm, never the same one twice.’ Her brow wrinkled.
‘Don’t know as why I ain’t seen him here yet, given that liking. Maybe
we will. But no one can tell you what he actually looks like. I mean
that: sometimes they say that they’ve met him and he’s tall and thin,
and other times that he’s a fairly short cove. From what I understand, I
reckon he must be a master of disguise, and if he wants to talk to you
he sends one of his ladies with a message.’

Mrs Holland stared down at the small and smoky fire in the grate and
looked unusually troubled. ‘I cannot say he is in my league, the
Outlander; he’s more like a nasty dream. Mostly, of course, he stays in
Europe where they deserve people like him. I don’t like the idea that
he’s turning up here. I quite like you, Dodger, you know that. But if
the Outlander gets on your tail, you’re going to have to order up a
whole new bag of smarts.’

Dodger checked his face was as cheerful as he could make it. ‘And no
one’s ever really seen him, yes?’

‘No,’ said Mrs Holland. ‘Like I said, lots of people have seen him, but
they never seem to see the same man.’

Her concern was palpable; Dodger could feel it pouring off her, and this
was a woman who would have no great compunction about sending a drunken
sailor to, quite probably, a watery grave. Now it seemed that there were
some things that even she got nervous about, and she said, ‘It might
surprise you, my boy, that a nasty old creature like me has got some
standards, and so if I was you, I’d keep my eyes open even if I was
asleep. Now give me a great big kiss, ’cos it may be the last one I’ll
ever have off of you!’

Dodger did so, much to the amusement of Bang, and he was careful not to
wipe his face until he was well away. Then he went back home via the
sewers, as much as that was possible.

So somebody that you couldn’t really describe was out there after him
and/or Simplicity . . .

Well, they would have to wait in line.

1 The Crossbones cemetery in the borough of Southwark was known as the
single women’s churchyard, after the single women in question plied
their single women’s trade under licence from the Bishop of Winchester,
who owned that part of the riverside, which was why they were humorously
named ‘Winchester geese’. Delicacy, of course, prevents the author from
describing what exactly they were trading. Although it does suggest that
the Church of the time had an understanding and, one might say, very
forward-thinking approach to the matter.

[images]

CHAPTER 14

A LIGHTERMAN GETS A SURPRISE, AN OLD LADY VANISHES, AND DODGER KNOWS
NOTHING, HEARS NOTHING AND – UNSURPRISINGLY – WAS NOT EVEN THERE

THERE WAS SO much that needed doing, he thought as he hurried home. He
had to get ready to go to the theatre later on, but first of all and
most importantly, what he had to do was pray. Pray to the Lady.

Dodger had been in churches occasionally, but on the whole the street
people kept clear of them unless the promise of food was in the offing;
after all, a cove could put up with quite a lot of ‘Come to Jesus’ for
the sake of a full stomach, so now he was down in his beloved sewers
wondering how to go about a prayer.

He’d never seen the Lady, although Grandad had always talked about her
as if she was a friend – and he had seen her before he died, and if you
can’t trust the word of a dying man then who can you trust? Oh, he’d
always half-heartedly asked her for help almost automatically, but he’d
never really prayed from the guts upwards, and standing here with the
sounds of London overhead and apparently a real assassin looking for
him, he needed a prayer.

He began in the time-honoured way by clearing his throat and was about
to spit when he hesitated, because at a time like this you didn’t want
to offend _anybody_. Kneeling down was not something you generally did
in the sewers, so he straightened up instead and said, ‘I’m sorry, I
don’t know what to say, Lady, and that’s the truth. I mean, it’s not
like I’m a murderer, is it? And I promise you that if Simplicity is
spared, that poor girl up in the mortuary in Four Farthings will get a
place in Lavender Hill; I will see to it, and flowers too.’ He hesitated
and continued, ‘And she will get given a name, so that at least I can
remember her, and that’s it, Lady, because the world is rather bad and
extremely difficult and all you can do is the best you can. And I’m just
Dodger.’

There was the tiniest of noises. Dodger glanced down and saw a very
small rat run over his boot. Was that a sign? He really wanted a sign.
There _ought_ to be signs, and if there was a sign there should be a
sign on it to show that it was a sign so that you _definitely_ knew it
was a sign. To be frank, a rat running over your boots in the sewer did
not, when you thought about it, seem that much like a sign. Was it a
sign, or was it just a rat? Oh well, what was the difference? The Lady
always had rats around her, and he had half hoped to see a beautiful
face magically appear on the dripping bricks of the sewer.

The traffic rattled overhead and the usual punctuated silence remained
distinctly empty, and so Dodger added, ‘Grandad, who you most surely
have heard of, told me that you always had a pair of shoes on – I mean,
not boots but real shoes, so if you would be so good as to smooth my
way, I will give you the best pair of shoes that money can buy. Thanking
you in expectation, Dodger.’

That afternoon, Solomon pretended to be amazed at how much care Dodger
was taking to get ready for the theatre.

Dodger scrubbed out every crevice and corner several times while
thinking about the Outlander. He’d never heard of him, but then you
don’t get to hear about everybody and it was certainly unlikely that
anybody would try anything at the theatre, wasn’t it? But later, in his
little private world behind the curtain, as Solomon went through his own
ablutions with a considerable amount of splashing and grunting, he
carefully took Sweeney Todd’s razor from its hiding place and stared at
it.

It was a razor, _just_ a razor. But it was also a fear and a legend. He
could slip it into his pocket quite easily. Izzy had done some
magnificent work; in fact, the jacket had an inner pocket which just did
the job perfectly, and Dodger wondered whether, since this jacket had
originally been intended for Sir Robert Peel, Sir Robert Peel had
required there to be an inner pocket for those items that a gentleman
walking the street might need to get hold of in a hurry – brass
knuckles, perhaps.

He sighed and put the razor back in its hiding place. He was uncertain
if he wanted to sit next to Simplicity with that so close, and as soon
as he had that thought, he felt a little shocked and told himself,
Mister Todd killed, but he wasn’t a killer. Maybe if he’d never had to
go to that blessed war, he wouldn’t have gone right off his head. But
however he looked at it, today at least was not the day for Sweeney
Todd’s razor to be on the streets.

Angela had told Solomon to expect a coach that would take them all to
the theatre. Dodger found himself looking out for it at least an hour
before it was due to reach them, and was gratified that when it did
arrive, there were two brawny footmen with it, well spruced up. Their
well-set jaws and knowing eyes indicated that they were more than happy
to take on anyone in the rookeries who got closer to the coach than they
wanted them to.

Solomon got in first. When Dodger stepped in behind him, he was totally
crestfallen not to see Simplicity inside, but one of the coachmen poked
his head in the coach, gave Dodger an uncharacteristic smile and said,
‘The ladies are still getting ready for the performance, sir, and so we
were told to pick you up first. I’m also to tell you that there are
refreshments that you may wish to savour during the journey.’ Then, and
in a far less nobby voice the footman said, ‘The man that battled
Sweeney Todd. Oh my, I can’t wait to tell my old mum!’

While Solomon critically inspected the little well-stocked bar inside
the carriage with, as it turned out, great approval, Dodger was thinking
hard. Never mind about the Outlander, he thought, but there was
something at the back of his mind that was playing over and over again
the words that Mrs Holland had told him. Something wasn’t right: what
she had told him sounded like, well, a story, rather like Sweeney Todd’s
razor, and Dodger knew the truth about Sweeney Todd’s razor, didn’t he?
Admittedly, he thought ruefully, he had made up parts of that story so
now he was some kind of brave warrior to a lot of people while in his
heart he knew himself only as a smart young man.

Swift as a knife, the thought came back. How much of that is the same
for this Outlander? Him with all his ladies? Does that sound quite real?
he thought. He answered himself: No; even Mrs Holland is pretty well
terrified of him, and maybe the Outlander had spun a little spell that
made him bigger and more dangerous than he was. Ah yes, that made Dodger
feel better. It was like showmanship; it was always showmanship that got
you through, and he had a show of his own to prepare.

He reminded himself that he would have to have a very important
conversation with Miss Coutts, dear Miss Coutts. He knew that she was a
most unusual woman with more money than practically anybody and no
husband, and he smiled at himself and he thought, Hmm, a woman with
loads of money who isn’t interested in a husband. After all, if you’ve
got the money – your own money – a husband is sort of in the way.
Solomon had told him that she had once proposed marriage to the Duke of
Wellington. Wellington, known to have been a good tactician, had
carefully and respectfully declined. Dodger thought, There’s a man that
knew there was one battle he would never be able to win!

Solomon put a stopper in a brandy decanter with a happy sigh and Dodger
said, ‘Solomon, there’s something I must tell you.’

It was less than fifteen minutes before the coach got to its
destination, and Dodger spent a lot of that time looking nervously at
Solomon, who seemed lost in thought right up until the old man said,
‘Mmm, well, Dodger, I must say that you are very thorough. You are
looking at a man, old and creaky as he is now, who once got out of a
jail by garrotting a gaoler with his bootlaces. It is something I regret
now, while at the same time reminding myself that because of that act I
am now here to tell you about the escapade – and frankly the bastard
deserved it because I saw what he had done to others. My people are not
known as fighters, but should it be necessary we try to be very good at
it. As for your plan, it is bold, daring, and in the circumstances you
describe, quite possibly something that will work. Although, my dear
friend, do reflect that you will have to get this past Angela, who sees
herself at the moment as the protector of our Simplicity.’

The coach was slowing down now, and Dodger said, ‘I know what you mean,
but the only person who can order Simplicity to do anything, according
to the rules, is her husband, and you must understand that what he says
is not going to happen, because he is a pox of a prince. A right royal
richard.’

Another flunky opened the door even before Solomon’s hand had touched
it, and Solomon and Dodger were shown into a sitting room that contained
Angela but, alas, not Simplicity. Angela must have noticed Dodger’s
expression because she said cheerfully, ‘Simplicity is taking her time,
Mister Dodger, because she is going out to a theatre with you.’ She
patted the sofa next to her. ‘Do take a seat.’

So the three of them sat there, in that rather strange silence of people
who are waiting without very much to say to one another, until a door
was opened and a maid came in, fussing alongside Simplicity, who smiled
when she saw Dodger and turned the whole world into gold.

Miss Coutts said, ‘How nice to see you looking so beautiful, my dear,
but I think we are going to be late for _Julius Caesar_ if we do not
hurry. I know we have a box at the theatre, but I always think it looks
so discourteous to be late.’

Dodger was allowed to sit next to Simplicity in the coach; she wasn’t
saying very much at the moment, but was apparently somewhat excited at
the prospect of the theatre, while Dodger thought things like: A theatre
box – that means quite a lot of people in the theatre can see you, oh
dear.

But shortly after they arrived at the theatre, in sufficient time not to
be too embarrassing, the footmen – or a pair just like them – took their
places behind the four of them. It must have been the original two,
Dodger thought, because as he turned to look at them he thought he
recognized the one who couldn’t wait to tell his mum about Dodger. For
just one moment, as he recognized said Dodger, the footman proudly let
him glimpse a shining display of brass knuckles, which magically
disappeared again into his dressy outfit. Well, that was something.

Dodger had been in theatres before, unofficially, but it took him some
time to get the hang of what was going on. Solomon had earlier tried to
give him some inkling of what _Julius Caesar_ was all about, and it
seemed to Dodger to be about something like a gang fight, except that
everybody talked too much. But the words flew over his head and he tried
to flap after them, and after a while the play began to enter him. Once
you’d got used to the way they were speaking, and all the bed sheets and
so on, this was about nasty people, and the moment he thought that and
wondered on whose side he should bet, he remembered that these Roman
coves had built the sewers and called the Lady ‘Cloacina’.

Although Julius Caesar and the other coves were not actually building
any sewers on the stage, Dodger wondered if he should call the Lady by
the name they had given her; it might be worth a try. So as the speeches
rolled over him, he shut his eyes and trusted his luck to the Roman
goddess of the latrines and opened his eyes again as a voice declaimed,
‘There is a tide in the affairs of men. Which, taken at the flood, leads
on to fortune.’ Eyes wide open, he stared at the players. Well now, if
you were going to have a sign, something like this was certainly better
than a little rat on your boot!

Miss Coutts, his hostess, was sitting beside him for propriety’s sake,
leaving Simplicity chaperoned by Solomon, who being an elderly gentleman
could in theory be guaranteed not to think about hanky or panky. Now
Miss Coutts nudged him very discreetly and said, ‘Are you all right? I
thought you were sleeping, and you nearly jumped out of your seat.’

‘What?’ said Dodger. ‘Oh yes, I just know that it’s going to work, no
doubt about it.’

He cursed himself for being stupid then, because Angela whispered, ‘What
is going to work, pray?’

Dodger mumbled, ‘Everything.’ And suddenly he paid more attention to the
stage, wondering why it took so many Romans to kill one man, especially
since he didn’t seem to be a particularly bad cove.

It was what Solomon called ‘a repast’. Which was apparently something
much more exciting than a meal. There were glorious potted meats and
cold cuts and pickles and chutneys to make your eyes water and Solomon’s
eyes gleam. As they finished eating, Dodger said quietly to Angela,
‘Where are your servants now?’

‘Why, in the servants’ hall. I only have to ring if I require them.’

‘Can they hear us?’

‘Absolutely not, and may I remind you, young man, that you already know
that they have my full trust. I would not employ them otherwise.’

Dodger stood up. ‘Then I must tell all of you what I hope will happen
tomorrow, if you agree.’

The thing about secrets is that they are usually best kept by just one
person. That was the special thing about secrets. Some people seemed to
think that the best way to keep a secret was to tell as many people as
possible; what could possibly go wrong for a secret when there were so
many people defending it? But sooner or later he did need to tell it,
and the time was now. He also needed an ally, and it needed to be
Angela. It seemed to him that a woman who had more money than God, and
was still happy and alive, must be a very clever woman indeed. So he
told them, quietly and carefully, covering every detail, including what
Mrs Holland had told him about the Outlander, and when he stopped there
was absolute silence.

Then Angela, not quite looking at Dodger or Simplicity, said, ‘Well,
Mister Dodger, much as I admire you, my first inclination was to utterly
forbid you to attempt this curious and dangerous scheme. But even as I
summoned up the breath to do so, I realized, having seen the looks that
passed between the two of you and reminding myself that Simplicity is
not a child but a married woman, that the best I can do is to thank you
for allowing me into the secret. And frankly, even if I have to pick up
the pieces, in truth this matter is one between the two of you.’ She
turned to Solomon and said, ‘Will you tell us your thoughts, Mister
Cohen?’

After a few seconds there was, ‘Mmm, Dodger has told me of the
Outlander, and it is unlikely that he would find Dodger before Dodger’s
plan comes to fruition. As a plan it seems to me it does have certain
beguiling aspects, because if it works it is unlikely anyone would wish
to delve into the matter subsequently. And, of course, my spirits rise
when I consider that this plan will take place on a battlefield
absolutely familiar to my young friend who, as I am aware, knows every
inch of the terrain. In the circumstances mmm, I don’t think Wellington
himself could do better with an army.’

Dodger’s eyes had remained on Simplicity through all of this. Once he
saw her frown and his spirits had plummeted, rising again when she
grinned – not a smile but a grin, quite a saucy one like somebody
contemplating a weak adversary.

Angela said, ‘Well, my dear, you are your own woman and will have my
support against any man who suggests otherwise. Pray tell me what you
think of this hare-brained scheme, eh?’

Quietly Simplicity walked over to Dodger and took him by the hand,
sending a quiver down his spine so fast that it bounced up again. She
said, ‘I trust Dodger, Miss Angela. After all, look at the things he has
done for me already.’

With this ringing in the air, Dodger said, ‘Er, thank you. But now
you’ve got to give up your wedding ring.’

Instantly her hand touched the ring, and the silence in the room
thundered great peals of absence of sound while Dodger waited for the
explosion. Then Simplicity smiled and said, quite softly, ‘It’s a pretty
ring, isn’t it? I loved it when he gave it to me. And I thought I was
married in the eyes of God. But what do I now know about being married?
The poor priest who conducted the ceremony is dead, and so are two good
friends, so I think that God was never in this marriage. He was never
there when I was beaten, or when I was dragged into that coach, and then
there was Dodger. Angela, I trust my Dodger, completely.’ With that, she
looked into his eyes, then dropped the ring into his hand and gave it to
him with a kiss, and of the two he considered the kiss to be truly
twenty-four-carat.

Angela looked at Solomon, who said, ‘Mmm, I think there is no doubt
about it, Angela. What we have here is a rather unusual _Romeo and
Juliet_.’

‘So you say,’ said Angela, ‘but as a practical woman, I think we will
also need a dash of _Twelfth Night_. Mister Dodger, you and I must talk
about particulars before you leave.’

Angela’s coach carried Dodger and Solomon back to Seven Dials, and they
barely exchanged a word until after they had got back from Onan’s
late-night run, and even then, still lost in their own thoughts, they
spoke little in the gloom. Finally Solomon said, ‘Well, Dodger, I have
faith in you, Miss Burdett-Coutts may have some faith in you, but Miss
Simplicity has a faith in you which I venture to suggest is greater than
that of Abraham.’

In the darkness, Dodger said, ‘Do you mean your friend Abraham, the
slightly suspect jeweller?’

And the darkness came back with, ‘No, Dodger: the Abraham who was
prepared to sacrifice his son to the Lord.’

‘Well,’ Dodger said, after a moment, ‘we are not going to have any of
that sort of thing!’

After that he tried to sleep, seeing as he tossed and turned the face of
Simplicity repeating again and again the words that she had said during
that last discussion: ‘_I trust my Dodger, completely!_’

The echoes of it bounced among his bones.

In the morning, he counted what he took to be three plain-clothed
policemen, trying to be surreptitious and as ever not doing it properly.
He pretended that he didn’t see them, but Sir Robert Peel obviously
meant what he had said; two nights in a row there had been someone
outside his crib, and now they were here in the daytime too! They were,
in a policemany sort of way, trying out new ideas, such as having no man
visible near the tenement but putting a couple just round the corner,
where he might run into them. Was Sir Robert getting nervous?

Long before daylight, Dodger had already been a very busy boy while the
fogs, steams and smoky darkness gave him lots of cover, and now, as the
world woke up some little way away, a poor old woman could be seen
hobbling past the policemen – if there was anyone about who cared to
look at poor old women, who were in reality something of a glut on the
market, owing to the fact that they tended to outlive their husbands and
generally speaking had nobody who cared about them very much. Dodger
thought it was sad; it always was, and sometimes you saw the old girls
scraping a living by scrabbling around in the dust heaps and sieving
household dust for anything remotely usable.¹ Of course, it was
out-doors work but you hardly ever saw one of them in anything like a
decent coat. And they were scary; they really were. Terrible bright eyes
some of them had as they held out a claw for a farthing; toothless old
ladies with that fallen-in look to the face that made you think of
witches, and you found them everywhere – anywhere a body could get out
of the rain.

But on this occasion, moving through the lanes and alleys, there was a
now rather more spry old woman towing a handcart – a vehicle of high
status on the streets – and she was fussing over it as elderly ladies
did. If there was indeed a watcher on the moon, looking down on London,
they would have noticed her zigzagging her way to the embankment,
whereupon she hazarded a penny on a boat that took her and her little
cart across the Thames, although on this occasion she paid no more than
a farthing – not the official sum for the trip, the watcher would have
noticed, but the lighterman himself had never seen an old girl in such a
sad old dither. Having an old mother himself, he felt a little generous
today and even agreed to wait to take her back across the river, only to
find that when she came back from her errand, on her cart was strapped a
corpse in a winding sheet. This, to tell the truth, was a problem, but
then one of his mates stopped on the landing to disembark a fare and,
waving vaguely towards the old girl, who was still in such a terrible
state, the lighterman got his mate to help him on with the cadaver.
Fortunately, it was still bendy.

Dodger – because the old lady was indeed Dodger – felt rather happy
about all this. And also slightly ashamed since, after all, the coroner
of Four Farthings himself _and_ his officer had come out to help the old
lady with the cart and had assured her that the remains of her niece had
been treated with veneration at all times. It warmed the cockles of your
heart, so it did.

Then, of course, there was the return journey, this way against the
tide, and the lighterman could see that he was not, as it were, going to
become a rich man in this situation, so he said gruffly, ‘OK, dear, in
for a lion, in for a lamb, a farthing each and let’s call it quits.’

The journey across the water wasn’t that long, although it was a bit
choppy, and after the man helped the fussy old lady to get the little
cart over the cobbles he was amazed beyond belief when the old girl
handed him a shiny three sixpences, calling him the last gentleman in
London. For a long time afterwards he remembered the incident fondly.

Once back on the right side of the Thames, a watcher would have seen the
old lady pulling her cart in a haphazard way along a dark and foggy
alley where there was a shadow and a great smell of gin, and a very
drunken, very dirty and very nasty-looking man who said, ‘Got anything
for me in your bag there, Granny?’

This little tableau was witnessed through the gloom by a bootblack who
was sitting down on the kerb to eat his breakfast. Just as he began to
think that he should do something about the ambush further on, something
very strange eventuated in which the old lady seemed to vanish in a
whirl and the man was on the ground while she was kicking him merrily in
the fork, crying out, ‘If ever I see you around here again, sonny, I’ll
have your giblets on my griddle, just you see if I don’t!’ Then, after
adjusting her dress somewhat, the old lady once again became, well, an
old lady in the eyes of the bootblack, who had watched with his
half-eaten jacket potato neglected in his hand. Then the old dear waved
at him cheerily and said, ‘Young man, who’s doing potatoes around here
today?’

This led to Dodger continuing his journey with quite a lot of jacket
potatoes in his bag, which he distributed to any old ladies he saw
sitting pitifully on the kerb; it was a kind of penance, he thought. And
God, who must surely have looked kindly on this act of charity, seemed
to have arranged it that a lavender girl had set up right in the next
street, which meant that Dodger was spared the chore of going out to
find one, not a difficult task since in the stink of London everybody
liked to buy some lavender now and again. In this case the lucky girl
sold all of the stock to the old lady with grateful thanks and went to
the pub, while the old lady, smelling far more fragrant, trundled on her
way.

Moving a dead body is never easy in any case, but in the murkier part of
Seven Dials Dodger treasured an alley with a drain in it that was just
the job; and of course, once he was in the sewers he was in his element.
He could go about his business unrecognized by the people walking about
above, and the chances of meeting another tosher were small. Anyway, as
the king of the toshers, he could do as he pleased. In sewers, if you
knew where to look for them, there were places that would make a
good-sized room – places the toshers had given wonderful names to, like
Top and Turn Again.

Splashing his way into one of the tunnels, Dodger set about the nastier
piece of the enterprise. This particular stretch had so far never been
given a name; it got one now: Rest in Peace. Death was always around in
the darker places of London, and it was an unusual day when you didn’t
see a funeral procession, so this engendered a kind of pragmatism:
people lived, people died and other people had to deal with it. At this
point, because he very much wanted to live, Dodger pulled off his
disguise to reveal his normal clothes hidden beneath the rags, and
pulled on a pair of large, well-greased, leather gloves, just as Mrs
Holland had advised, and he was grateful for the advice, and grateful
too that he had spent so much on the lavender, because however you
looked at it, the dull, heavy, cloying smell of death was something that
you didn’t put up with for any longer than you had to.

So with traffic a few feet overhead, he pulled, pushed and levered very
thoroughly until he had got things looking just right. All was well
right up until when, as he was just positioning the remains of the young
lady in her nook, she sighed as her head moved. Dodger thought, If
something like _that_ is going to happen it’s a good job you _are_
standing in a sewer. It was nothing; he knew the dead could be quite
noisy at times, as Mrs Holland had said. What with gases and so on,
corpses might be said to speak long after they were dead. He opened his
carefully prepared little bag of camphor and cayenne pepper, which ought
to keep the rats away, for long enough at least.

As he stood back to look at his handiwork, he was glad, very glad, that
he wouldn’t have to do it ever again. Then there was nothing more to do,
apart from packing up his gloves, but he also took great care to leave
the sewer at some distance away from the scene of the crime – if such it
could be called, he added to himself. Finding a pump, he washed his
hands in London water, which he knew was always slightly suspicious
unless you boiled it, but good old lye soap was a reliable if caustic
companion. Then he strolled back to Seven Dials with the air of a young
man just enjoying the sunshine which, in fact, was rather strange today,
as if something was going on in the upper air.

He didn’t think very much about this, however, for as soon as he got
home two peelers were waiting for him, and one of them said, ‘Sir Robert
would like a word with you, my little lad.’ He sniffed at the leftover
lavender that Dodger had chosen to take home because it was always
welcome around Onan. ‘Flowers for your girl, hey?’

Dodger ignored him, but he had been expecting something like this, since
once the peelers had got interested in you, they kept on being
interested in you, apparently thinking that sooner or later you would
break down and confess to everything. It was a sort of game, and the
worst of it was when they tried to seem to be friends. And so, like the
upstanding citizen he was, he accompanied the two men to Scotland Yard,
but making sure that he went with the swagger of a geezer and everyone
in the rookeries could see that this wasn’t something he was in
agreement with – for Dodger had a reputation to keep down; it was bad
enough to be an official hero, but he would be damned if he was going to
be seen to go willingly into anywhere where peelers lurked. It wouldn’t
be the first, third or tenth time the peelers thought they had got
Dodger and would have to think again.

Sir Robert Peel was waiting for him. Even now Dodger didn’t trust him –
he looked like a swell, but had a street gleam in his eye. The head of
the peelers regarded him over his desk and said, ‘Have you ever heard of
the Outlander, my friend?’

‘No,’ lied Dodger, on the basis that you always lied to a policeman if
at all possible.

Sir Robert gave him a blank look and said that the police forces of
Europe would very much like to see the Outlander behind bars or, for
preference, swinging from the gallows. ‘The Outlander is an assassin. He
is a sharp man, Mister Dodger, and so are his knives. We presume from as
much information as we can glean that he is very much interested in the
whereabouts of Miss Simplicity. And, by association, you. We both know
the facts of the matter, and I must assume that someone somewhere is
getting extremely impatient, as evinced by the murder of Sharp Bob and
his employee. We appear to be running out of time, Mister Dodger. You
must understand that the British government would be doing nothing wrong
in the eyes of many people if a runaway wife was sent back to her legal
husband.’ He sniffed. ‘Distasteful as that would seem to many of us who
are cognizant of the circumstances of this whole sordid matter. The
clock is ticking, my friend. People in power do not like to be
continually thwarted, and can I at this stage also draw to your
attention the fact that I am one of them.’

There was a tapping noise and Dodger glanced down at Sir Robert Peel’s
left hand, the fingers of which were drumming on a pile of documents
which seemed rather familiar.

Sir Robert looked at his face and said, ‘I know, because it is my job to
know these things, that a certain embassy was broken into two nights
ago, with a great deal of documentation and miscellaneous jewellery
stolen. Subsequently it appears that the miscreant, who we are under
some pressure to bring to justice, then saw fit to set fire to a coach
house.’

Dodger’s face was all innocent interest as Sir Robert continued, ‘Of
course, my men had to go to check upon the details of this theft and
this wilful vandalism and it seemed that even before the fire one wheel
of this coach was damaged, but the perpetrator appeared to have
scratched across the crest of this coach the name “Mr Punch”. I must
assume that of course you know nothing about any of this?’

‘Well, sir,’ said Dodger brightly, ‘as you know, we were at a jolly
dinner party that night. I went home with Solomon, who I am sure will
testify should you require it.’ And he thought, I wonder if Solomon
would lie for me to a policeman? Swiftly the thought came back: Solomon
must have lied to policemen all over Europe, and with God on his side,
and would be very unlikely in the presence of a peeler to know if the
sky was blue.

Sir Robert smiled, but the smile had no warmth in it and the drumming of
his fingers became a little more insistent. ‘Mister Dodger, I am
absolutely certain that Mister Cohen would say exactly that. And since
we are on the subject, would you know anything about a Jewish gentleman
who called in at our front desk this morning with a little package of
documents for me? The sergeant in charge said he placed them on the desk
and scuttled off at some speed and most certainly without leaving his
name.’ There was the unfunny smile again, and Sir Robert went on, ‘Of
course, generally speaking, all elderly Jewish gentlemen in their black
clothing look very similar to everyone except their nearest and
dearest.’

At this point Dodger piped up and said, ‘Indeed, I never really thought
of it.’ He was enjoying this and so, in some twisted way, was at least
part of Sir Robert.

‘So you know nothing,’ said Sir Robert. ‘You know nothing, you heard
nothing and you weren’t there, of course.’ He added, ‘These are very
interesting documents, very interesting. Especially in the light of the
current discussions taking place. Which is why the embassy want them
back. Of course, I don’t know where they are. Surely Solomon must have
pointed out to you the worth of what you brought home?’

‘What, sir, sorry, sir. Solomon ain’t mentioned to me anything about any
documents and I ain’t seen them,’ said Dodger, thinking, What’s he think
I am? A little baby?

‘Ye-e-s,’ said Sir Robert. ‘Mister Dodger, have you heard the phrase,
_You are so sharp that you might cut yourself_?’

‘Yes, sir, very careful with knives, sir, you can be sure of that.’

‘I’m so glad to hear it. You may go now.’ And as Dodger had his hand on
the door knob, Sir Robert said, ‘Don’t do it again, young man.’

Dodger said, ‘Can’t, sir, haven’t done it once.’ He didn’t shake his
head, except in the privacy of his brain. Yes, they always wait until
you think you are out of trouble and then they fly one on you. Honestly,
I could teach them a few tricks.

He left Scotland Yard, calling out cheerfully as he did so, ‘Told yuz!
You’ll never find anything on me, my lads.’ But he thought, So there are
clocks ticking. A government’s clock. The Outlander’s clock. And mine.
It will be best for Simplicity if mine chimes first.

As for the Outlander? Here he paused. A man whose only description was
that he never seemed to be the same man twice? How could you ever find a
man like that? But he comforted himself as he thought, We are so close
now, and he’s got to learn all about me and find out where I am. That’s
going to be very difficult for him. This didn’t entirely satisfy him,
because the thought that came after was that the Outlander was a
professional killer, apparently of important people, so exactly how hard
would it be for him to wipe a snotty-nosed tosher off of the world?

He considered this and then said aloud, ‘I’m Dodger! It will be very
hard indeed!’

1 Sights like this were commonplace. Henry Mayhew’s research is full of
details of this level of poverty, nowadays unimaginable in cities such
as London.

[images]

CHAPTER 15

IN THE HANDS OF THE LADY

AS SEVEN O’CLOCK neared, Dodger went over all his precautions and
preparations and came up out of the sewer a little way away, in order to
be seen cheerfully walking to The Lion public house.

He was not surprised to find Mister Bazalgette sitting on a bench
outside, wearing what might be called serviceable clothes for someone
who is going to perambulate underneath the streets of London. The young
man looked like a kid waiting for the Punch and Judy show to begin, and
had festooned himself with various instruments and a large notebook, and
had also very thoughtfully come with his own lantern, although Dodger
had made certain to borrow three of these already. It meant calling in a
few little favours, but that was surely what favours were for.

The young engineer was primly nursing a pint of ginger beer, and right
there and then he struck up a conversation with Dodger about the nature
of the sewers, with reference to the amount of water that Dodger had
seen in them, the prevalence of rats, the dangers of being underground
and other things of interest to a gentleman as enthusiastic as
Bazalgette.

‘Looking forward to seeing your Lady, Mister Dodger?’ he asked.

Dodger thought, Yes, both of them, but smiled and said, ‘I ain’t never
seen her, ne’er even once. But sometimes, you know when you are by
yourself, you get a feeling that someone’s just walked past, and there
is a change in the air, and then you look down and all the rats are
running very fast, all in the same direction; and then sometimes, as it
might be, you look at a bit of rotted old sewer wall and something tells
you that it might _just_ be worth fumbling around in the crumbling
bricks. So you take a look, and glory be, there’s a gold ring with two
diamonds on it. That’s what happened to me one time.’ He added, ‘Some
toshers say they’ve seen her, but that’s supposed to be when they are
dying, and I ain’t intending to do that right now. Mind you, sir, I’ll
be happy to see her right now if she points me to a tosheroon.’

There followed a conversation on the legendary tosheroons and how they
were formed. Fortunately, at this time a growler pulled up and disgorged
Charlie and Mister Disraeli, who was bright and shining and somewhat
nervous, as sensible citizens tended to be in the general vicinity of
Seven Dials. Charlie sat him down on the bench and headed into the pub,
coming back shortly afterwards with a man carrying a couple of pints of
beer on a tray, and Mister Bazalgette rubbed his hands and said, ‘Well
now, gentlemen, when do we start?’

‘Very soon, sir,’ Dodger replied. ‘But there’s been a slight change of
plan. Miss Burdett-Coutts wants one of her young footmen to come down
with us because she wants to encourage him to better himself.’ He added
brightly, ‘Maybe he might become an engineer like yourself, sir.’

Dodger stopped, because a very smart coach with two beefy coachmen had
spun into the pub’s yard, and its doors opened to disgorge the aforesaid
young footman, somewhat plumper in certain regions than the average
footman, and remarkably – yes, thought Dodger – the signs of shaving
around his jaw. Simplicity, and just possibly Angela, was really taking
this charade seriously. The rest of them were taking it on the chin.

It wasn’t at all a bad disguise and quite a lot of young serving men
were on the plump side, what with all the leftovers, but to anyone who
had seen her in a dress she was Simplicity, absolutely Simplicity, and
if you were Dodger, looking more beautiful – even if unshaven – than
ever before. But she had been wrong; her legs were not fat! No, in
Dodger’s mind, they were perfectly shaped, and he had to fight to take
his mind off her legs and back onto the task ahead of him.

He wasn’t sure what Joseph Bazalgette was thinking, but quite possibly
he was thinking about sewers and couldn’t have seen that much of
Simplicity at the party in any case. And since Angela was right there,
Charlie and Disraeli were seeing – my word, yes! – what they were
supposed to see. It was, thought Dodger, a kind of political fog.

Miss Coutts leaned out of the coach window and said, ‘I will return for
my young footman in an hour and a half, gentlemen. I trust you will take
care of him because I have no wish to answer for him to his grieving
mother. Roger is a good boy, rather shy and does not talk much.’ She
added meaningfully, ‘If he is sensible.’

The coach window closed again, and Miss Angela was gone. It was left to
Charlie to say, ‘Well, gentlemen, maybe we should start? We are in your
hands now, Mister Dodger.’

All things planned in the rookeries had to be carefully thought through,
Dodger knew. That was why, just before they left, he threw a handful of
ha’pennies and farthings down where they were standing, so that the
urchins around the place had more interesting things to do than follow
them, so engrossed were they as they struggled against one another for
this sudden storm of wealth.

Dodger kept the pace brisk with a number of unnecessary twists and turns
and doubling back until he got to the sewer entrance of his choice, and
proceeded to help the party down one at a time with the young footman
first.

When they were all assembled, staring around at the rotting bricks and
the curious unnamed growths that hung from the walls, he put a finger to
his mouth to indicate silence, walked a few steps and gave out a
two-tone whistle, which floated along the pipes. He waited; there was no
answering call. He wasn’t expecting any other toshers today, but if
there had been any, they would have answered; generally speaking, it was
common sense to know if other people were working down there as well.

‘And now, gentlemen,’ he said jauntily. ‘Welcome to this, my world. As
you can see, in this light sometimes it even seems a little bit golden.
It’s amazing how the sun gets through. What do you think of it, Mister
Disraeli?’

Disraeli, who Dodger was slightly unhappy to see had come in proper
useful boots for the occasion, wrinkled his nose and said, ‘Well, I
cannot recommend the smell, but it is not quite as bad as I expected.’
This was quite probably true, Dodger knew, because for quite some time
in the last few hours he had done his level best to prepare the most
salubrious bit of sewer there had ever been. After all, Simplicity was
going to be walking in it.

‘It used to be nicer, in the old days,’ he said cheerfully. ‘Not so good
now people are banging holes through from their houses, but just step
careful, and please, if I ask any of you to do anything, please do it
with alacrity and without question.’ He was pleased with ‘alacrity’;
every so often Solomon hit him with a word he didn’t understand and
Dodger had a good memory. He let them walk for a little while and then,
like a tour guide, glanced down and said in the gluey tones of a Crown
and Anchor man, ‘Now here’s an interesting place that’s occasionally
kind to toshers.’ He stepped back and said, ‘Mister Disraeli, will you
now try your luck as a tosher? I noticed you have clapped your eyes on
what might be generously called a “sand bar” on the floor over there by
that rivulet, and may I say, well done, sir, and so I will give you this
stick and suggest you have a go.’

The group moved forwards as Disraeli, with the fixed grin of someone who
wants to seem a good sport and dare not seem to be a bad one, took the
stick from Dodger and approached the pile of miscellaneous debris with
caution. He hunkered down and stirred about fastidiously until Dodger
produced a pair of small gloves and handed them to the man, saying, ‘Try
these, sir – very useful in certain circumstances if you can afford
them.’ He thought Disraeli almost giggled at this point – the man did
have some gumption after all – but the politician put on the gloves,
rolled up his sleeves and trailed one hand in the pile, being rewarded
with a clinking sound.

‘Hello,’ said Dodger. ‘Do we have some beginner’s luck here? That’s the
sound of specie, right enough. Let’s see what you’ve got.’

They crowded round and Disraeli, almost in a daze, held up a half crown,
as shiny and as untarnished as the day it had been coined.

‘My word, sir, you have the luck of a tosher and no mistake. I see I had
better not let you down here again, hey? If I was you I would have
another go, sir; where you find one coin, you tend to find another one.
After all, it takes two to make a clink. It’s all to do with how the
water’s running, you see; you never quite know for certain where the
specie might turn up today.’ Again they craned as Disraeli, this time
with every evidence of enthusiasm, rummaged in the heap of litter, and
there was another clink and he held up a gold and diamond ring. ‘Oh my
word, sir.’ Dodger reached for the ring and Disraeli pulled his hand
away until he realized that was bad manners, so he allowed Dodger to
handle the ring and was told, ‘Well, sir, it’s gold, that’s true. It
ain’t diamonds though, just paste. Shocking, isn’t it, but there you go,
sir, first time out and you’ve already earned a working man’s daily
wage.’ Dodger straightened up and said, ‘I think we ought to be getting
on because of the light, but maybe our young man here would like to try
next time? Would you, Master Roger? You could make a day’s wages like
Mister Disraeli here!’

Dodger was rewarded with a wide smile, and Disraeli, smiling just as
much, said, ‘This is rather like a lucky dip, isn’t it?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Dodger, ‘but there aren’t many rats around at the
moment, and it’s not particularly wet. I mean, you are seeing it at its
best.’

Bazalgette and Disraeli began talking about the construction of the
sewers, with the former tapping the brickwork occasionally and the
latter trying not to be drawn into expressing an opinion, such as paying
for something better. Charlie followed behind, noting and observing, his
sharp eyes worryingly everywhere.

Now as they strolled carefully, sometimes bending where the roof seemed
to sag, Dodger pointed to a couple of broken bricks and said, ‘There’s a
place that might trap a coin or two. It’s like a little dam, see? The
water goes past, heavy stuff gets trapped. This one is yours, Master
Roger. I have another pair of gloves.’ He handed them to the footman
with a wink.

He was entirely elated when she knelt down in the muddy gloom and stared
at the brickwork, then pushed and pulled for a while and came up holding
something. She gasped, and so did Disraeli, who said, ‘Another golden
ring? You must live like a lord, Mister Dodger. Well done, Miss
Simplicity.’

Suddenly the sewers were silent except for the occasional drip. At last
Charlie cleared his throat and said, ‘Ben, I cannot for the life of me
understand why you confused this young man, handsome though he is, with
the young lady in question. Quite possibly the vapours here must, I
suspect, alongside your evident joy in your new-found profession, have
just for a little while gone to your head.’

Disraeli had the grace to say, ‘Yes, yes indeed. How silly of me.’
Joseph Bazalgette simply smiled nervously, like a man who knows someone
has cracked a joke that he hasn’t understood, and returned to his
detailed inspection of the sewer wall.

It was Charlie who worried Dodger, Charlie who held back and watched and
had leaned forward and perhaps had noticed Simplicity’s gasp as she saw
the inscription on the ring, and almost certainly must have noticed that
she turned wide-eyed to look directly into Dodger’s face. He wasn’t
quite certain about Charlie; he always had the feeling that here was a
man who could see through Dodger and out the other side.

Quickly, he said, ‘I’ll tell you what, friends, let me go ahead. Tosh
all you want to and I will point out some matters of interest to Mister
Bazalgette. Of course, anything you find is yours for the keeping. And
if I was you, Master Roger, I’d put that ring in your pocket for safety
right now.’

He knew what would happen next. It happened to every new tosher; once
you’d found your first coin the toshing fury was at your throat. Here
was money for the taking, and already Simplicity and Disraeli were
fascinated by holes in the brickwork, interesting holes, small mounds of
rubbish and anything that seemed to sparkle.

Mister Bazalgette, on the other hand, was grumbling and measuring at the
same time. ‘These bricks are useless,’ he said from a nearby corner.
‘They are rotten, they should be taken out and put back and faced with
ceramic tiles – that can be the only way forward; it would keep the
water out.’

‘Alas, we don’t have the money,’ said Disraeli, staring intently at what
turned out to be one half of a dead rat.

‘Then if you don’t have the money, you have the stink,’ said Bazalgette.
‘I’ve seen the river at low tide and it is as if the whole world has
taken a purgative. It surely cannot be healthy, sir.’

They walked on while the light allowed, and the total yield to the two
‘would-be toshers’ was a further one shilling and a farthing which, to
give him his due, Disraeli handed over to Simplicity with a bow. And
Charlie watched, with his hands in his pockets and a curious and
calculating smile, occasionally taking out his damned notebook and
scribbling, occasionally cheering a find, sometimes staring around at
the debris and the smaller outlets.

Now the light was beginning to go. Not a problem; there were lamps
galore – Dodger had made certain of one each, even though he could
generally get around without one. But the lamps only lit small pools in
the darkness, and as the light changed the sewers began to take on their
own life. Not sinister, exactly, but little noises became more acute;
the rats which were otherwise minding their own business fled out of the
way, the dripping of water from the ceiling seemed louder, shadows
seemed to move, and it was then that the thought might creep up on a
person that if you tripped over some of these crumbling bricks, or took
the wrong turning at those places where sewers met and merged, you were
suddenly a long way away from what you knew as civilization.

Dodger thought, Well, Simplicity shouldn’t have any problem; he had been
very careful about the special route, with the occasional brick lighter
than the others and debris and other rubbish masking every wrong turn.
He noticed her watching him intently now and it was no time to lose his
nerve. A few more minutes would do, he thought. Once you lose the sun,
then that’s when you really become a tosher.

Then Charlie said, ‘There’s a likely-looking place over there, Dodger.
You can just about make out something like an entrance.’

Dodger bustled back to him quickly and said, ‘Do not go any further down
there, sir. It is very dangerous; the floors are washed out. All very,
very nasty, and all jammed up too, lots of places like it in the sewers
– they just don’t get cleaned out enough. Now since we really haven’t
got much light left, could we all agree that Mister Disraeli, although a
gentleman, is also a tosher. Hurrah!’

Simplicity, that is to say Master Roger, burst out laughing, as did
Bazalgette, and Charlie clapped, and as the clapping came to an end
there was another sound – a scraping sound, the unmistakable sound of a
crowbar somewhere ahead of them opening a drain cover, and Charlie said,
‘What was that, Dodger?’

Dodger shrugged it off and said, ‘Could be anything, sir. A trick of the
sewers, you might say. The sun has gone down, things expand and
contract, like they say, and you get all kinds of little noises then.
It’s been quite a hot day really; sometimes you could think there was
someone else down here with you, and if we simply turn round it’s an
easy stroll back to where we came in. It’s not as though we’ve gone all
that far, to tell you the truth.’

Mister Bazalgette, waving his lamp, said, ‘I would really like more
time, if you don’t mind.’ In the end, Dodger pacified him with the
promise to take him further afield on the following day, possibly in the
company of Mister Henry Mayhew, who had been unable to join this little
excursion.

After saying that, he once again delivered the two-tone whistle of a
tosher. It was not returned and this worried him, for any tosher would
have whistled back . . . Even the rat-catchers knew enough to shout out
when a tosher whistled – that saved embarrassment all around. Well, he
thought, it was quite a good plan, it really was, but I can’t do it if
there is somebody else stamping around down here. Inwardly he groaned.
Well, maybe tomorrow he could come up with another plan.

He had not, he thought, heard any more noises since that scraping, apart
from those made by the company, and that meant that somebody was trying
to keep quiet. So right now it was important to get Simplicity out of
here. It could be a very young tosher who hadn’t yet learned the ropes.
Or it might be something else . . . but it wasn’t worth taking the
chance. Nothing must happen to Simplicity.

Keeping his tone cheerful, he ushered his little flock back along the
way they had come, silently cursing every step. It was not as easy as
may have been thought, even by the lamplight, which didn’t penetrate all
that far.

‘Gentlemen, if you don’t mind there are a few things I’d like to look at
down here,’ he said as they approached the sewer exit. ‘When you are
above ground I hope that you can take care of . . . Roger until the
coach turns up. Sometimes you get undesirables down here, well, more
undesirable than what’s down here already. I’ll just have a little
glance around and then come back. I’m sure it’s nothing, but with Mister
Disraeli here as well, I feel a little caution is sensible.’

Simplicity was watching him intently, Mister Bazalgette was looking
somewhat dismayed, and Charlie was just strolling carefully back the way
they had come. Mister Disraeli, quite surprisingly, took Simplicity’s
hand. ‘Come along . . . Miss . . . young man. Frankly, I could do with a
breath of fresh air.’

As they climbed up and out, Dodger took care to say again, ‘Probably
nothing at all, nothing at all, but I had best check.’ Then he dropped
back into the sewer and was free, free of other people. Someone else had
got into his sewer and if it were any of the work gangs there would have
been a shout along the lines of ‘Bugger off, you toshers!’ – not exactly
a cheerful greeting, but at least something human. No, someone _was_
there. It couldn’t be the Outlander, could it? That would be too glib.
But the Lady knew there were still a number of people after Dodger, and
everyone knew where Dodger could usually be found. Oh well, at least he
was on his own ground, sticky and stinking though it was.

In the dark now, he heard the rattle of a coach overhead, and the sounds
of voices, one of which was unmistakably that of Simplicity. He breathed
a deep sigh of relief. Well, whatever happened now couldn’t happen to
her. Of course, he told himself again, it almost certainly wasn’t the
Outlander, who was surely just a bogeyman, after all . . . though try as
he might, his thoughts dived from being optimistically cheerful to: _I’m
a bloody fool_. If the Outlander has been so successful in his trade,
then he must surely know just about everything concerning Dodger and
Simplicity.

That was just the start of the terrible scenarios jostling for space in
front of his eyes. Pictures flashed across his mind at speed, nasty
pictures. Well, would someone like the Outlander go down into the
sewers? Perhaps someone had paid him enough money. And then what further
scenarios could near-panic throw up? Everybody knew Dodger had gone into
the sewer with his group. Who did the Outlander know? How fast did news
travel? And how clever must someone like the Outlander have been still
to be alive when by now he must have so many enemies in so many
countries. Just how stupid had Dodger, good old Dodger, been to have
thought that the threat was something he could just brush off? But
perhaps it was someone else?

Well, Simplicity was safe, for now. Then the sensible thing for Dodger
to do was to be up and out of the sewer as soon as possible before the
stranger caught him up, but with his heart pounding most unusually
against his ribs, he considered his limited options. He _could_ get out
of the sewer by another drain further along, but if he took the time to
get there, anything could happen, and if he tried to leave by the
nearest one, whoever it was – and suddenly he felt certain that it _was_
the Outlander and he was trapped down here with him – could come out
right behind him.

Then the last of the sunlight faded. He thought, This is my world. I
know every brick. I know every place where if you put a foot wrong, you
are up to your waist in stinking mess. He thought, Here I am. Maybe he
could use this to his advantage. Make a _new_ plan, a plan with a
different way of getting to the same end. And Julius Caesar appeared in
his mind, admittedly sitting on a jakes (an image which would stay with
him for a long time) – and Dodger thought, He was a warrior, wasn’t he?
A cove who was difficult to kill too. He whispered, ‘There!’ and said
aloud in the gloom, ‘Come along. Here I am, mister; maybe you want to be
shown the sights.’

Looking down, he realized that someone was most definitely on his way,
because the rats were running straight towards him, trying to keep ahead
of whoever or whatever was coming up the sewer. Dodger, by now, was up
against the sewer wall, mostly in a little alcove where several ancient
bricks had fallen out (and where, he recalled fondly, he had once picked
up two farthings and one of the old-fashioned groats that you didn’t see
around these days).

The running rats clambered over and around him as if he wasn’t there,
and he thought, They see me nearly every day. He had never hunted them,
slammed his boot on them or even tried to shoo them away. He left them
alone and so they left _him_ alone. Besides, he didn’t know how he would
stand with the Lady if he was nasty to her little subjects. Grandad had
been very firm about this, saying ‘Tread on a rat and you’re treading on
the Lady’s robe.’ Dodger whispered to the silence and said, ‘Lady, it’s
Dodger again. About that luck I mentioned? If you can see your way
clear, thanking you in expectation, Dodger.’

And up there in the darkness, there was the scream of a stricken rat.
They were capable of dying quite noisily, and there was another squeal,
and even more rats were pouring past him, surrounding him.

There, suddenly, barely visible in the grimy light, was the intruder,
crawling with commendable stealth along the sewer, actually passing
Dodger in his stinking hideaway, since Dodger was clearly invisible,
being the same colour and certainly the same stink as the sewer itself.
The rats were running over the intruder too, but he was hitting out at
them with something – Dodger couldn’t quite see what – and the rats were
screeching, and most certainly the Lady would be listening.

Now, in his hand Dodger had – yes! – Sweeney Todd’s razor; he had
brought it with him not so much as a weapon but as a talisman: a gift
from fate that had changed his life, just as it had changed that of
Sweeney Todd. On a day like this, how could he have left it behind?

In the darkness, Dodger’s dark-accustomed eye saw the gleaming stiletto
dagger in the man’s hand. It was an assassin’s weapon, if ever he had
seen one. No decent murderer would use something like that. The thought
came to him fast and all at once: he had nothing at all to fear down
here. It was his world, and he could feel the Lady helping him, he was
sure of it. No, the person who ought to be afraid was the man stealthily
crawling along the drain just where Dodger could see him . . . and
Dodger jumped on him, pinning him down immediately, and assassin or not
it is hard to use your dagger when you are splayed in the muck of a
sewer with Dodger sitting on your back.

He was a wiry boy, but he held the man more or less fixed to the ground
as if he had been nailed to it, and pummelled every bit of the man that
could be pummelled. Even as the man struggled, Dodger pressed cold steel
to his throat and whispered, ‘If you know anything about me, then you
know that pressed to your neck is Sweeney Todd’s razor – wonderful
smooth, so it is, and who knows what it could cut off?’ He allowed the
prone man to at least lift his mouth and nose out of the muck for a
moment, and added, ‘Upon my word, I was expecting rather more of an
assassin than this. Come on, speak up!’ Dodger grabbed the stiletto and
flung it into the darkness.

The man below him spat out mud and a piece of what might once have been
part of a rat and tried to say something that Dodger couldn’t
understand, so Dodger said, ‘Come on, what was that again?’

A voice – a female voice – said, ‘Good evening, Mister Dodger; if you
look carefully, you will see that I am holding a pistol, quite a
powerful one. You will not make a single move until my friend here stops
throwing up so unpleasantly, whereupon I expect he will wish to do unto
others that which hath just been done to him. In the meantime, you will
stand where you are and I will pull the trigger if you move so much as
an inch. Later I will kill your young lady friend . . . By the way, I
can’t say I like that gentleman very much, not the best assistant I’ve
ever had. Oh dear, oh dear, why is it that everybody assumes that the
Outlander is a man?’ The owner of the voice stepped nearer and Dodger
could now see both her and her pistol.

There was no doubt about it. The Outlander was attractive, even in this
gloom, and Dodger could not pinpoint the accent. Not Chinese, certainly
not European, though very fluent in English. He had Sol’s pistol
strapped in his boot; that had been for use later, for the plan which
was now of course in tatters, and so he said, ‘Excuse me, miss, but why
do you want to kill Simplicity?’

‘Because I will then be paid quite a considerable sum of money, young
man. Surely you know that? Incidentally, I have no particular quarrel
with yourself, although Hans – once he can stand up straight – almost
certainly would quite like to have a brief, very brief, conversation
with you. We just have to wait for the poor man to recover.’

The girl – and the Outlander looked like a girl not much bigger than
Simplicity and, he had to admit, slightly thinner – gave him a charming
smile. ‘It won’t be long now, Mister Dodger. And what is it that you are
staring at, apart of course from myself?’

Dodger, almost swallowing his tongue, said, ‘Well, miss, not staring,
miss, just praying to the Lady.’ And indeed he was praying, but also
watching the shadows shift. They lingered even here.

‘Ah yes, I have heard tell of her . . . the Madonna of the sewers, the
goddess Cloacina, the lady of the rats, and I see so many of her
congregation here with us this evening,’ the Outlander continued.

The shadows behind her quite subtly changed again. And hope, which had
disappeared for some time, suddenly returned. Although Dodger made
certain to keep it out of his face.

‘You are a fervent believer to turn to the darkness in supplication, but
I am afraid it will take more than rats to save you now, however hard
you stare into the darkness . . .’

‘Now!’ screamed Dodger, and the quite hefty lump of wood in Simplicity’s
hands was already in flight, hitting the Outlander on the back of the
head and knocking her straight to the ground. Dodger jumped and slid and
snatched up the pistol, banging his head on the side of the sewer in his
haste as the rats ran and squeaked in panic.

He gave Hans another swift boot to ensure he stayed on the ground a
little longer and Simplicity, with great presence of mind, sat on the
woman. Dodger thought, Thank goodness for all that heavy German sausage,
then he shouted, ‘Why did you come back here? It’s _dangerous_!’

Simplicity gave Dodger a bewildered look and said, ‘You know, I looked
at the ring that I found, and on it I saw it said in tiny writing: _To
S, with love from Dodger_. So of course I had to come back, but I kept
quiet, because you said we should keep quiet in the sewers. I told them
I was going to wait until I saw you come out of the sewer, and I thought
something was wrong. Well, you told me that the Outlander always had a
good-looking lady with him, and I thought, well, a good-looking lady who
went around with somebody like that assassin would be a very powerful
woman. I wondered if you realized that; it would appear, my dearest
Dodger, that I was right.’

In the echoes of that little speech, for just one bleary moment, Dodger
thought he heard the voice of Grandad, with its cheerful, toothless
sound, saying, ‘Told yuz! You is the best tosher I known. You got your
tosheroon now. That young lady there – she’s your tosheroon, lad!’

There was nothing for it. Treading heavily on the Outlander, he grabbed
Simplicity, gave her a hug and a kiss, one which regrettably couldn’t go
the optimum distance because now, surely, there was so much to do.

Simplicity had hit the Outlander quite hard; there was certainly a
pulse, but also a bit of blood here and there, and the assassin
definitely wasn’t going to get up for a while. The man, however, was,
but not with much enthusiasm, since a mouth full of mixed sewer water
can slow down anybody. He was groaning, swaying and dribbling –
dribbling green slime.

Dodger grabbed him and said, ‘Can you understand English?’ He couldn’t
understand the answer, but Simplicity stepped forward, and after a brief
interrogation said, ‘He’s from one of the Germanys, from Hamburg, and he
sounds very scared.’

‘Good, tell him that if he is a good boy and does what we ask he might
see his home country again. Don’t tell him that what he’s likely to see
there could be the gallows, ’cos I wouldn’t want him to worry. Right
now, of course, I need to be a friend to this poor man led astray by a
wicked woman. So he will, I reckon, be very very helpful . . . Oh, and
tell him to take his trousers off, quickly!’ They were foreign and
pretty good, but as the man sat there, naked, Dodger tore the German
trousers to shreds and used them to bind the recumbent Outlander and her
employee.

Simplicity was wreathed in smiles, but a cloud passed over her face and
she said, ‘What should we do now, Dodger?’ and he replied, ‘It’s like
the plan. You know the place I told you about. We call it the Cauldron,
’cos that is what it is like when there is a real storm, but at least it
means it’s a lot cleaner than most of the places down here. You remember
all the lighter bricks? There’s food up there, and a bottle of water
too. And people will come running down when they hear the gunshot.’ He
gave her Solomon’s pistol and said, ‘Do you know how to fire one of
these things if necessary?’

‘Well, I have seen men shooting, with my . . . husband, and I think I
can.’

‘Right!’ said Dodger. ‘You just point the bit at the end at anyone you
don’t like, and that generally works. If all goes well, I think I should
be able to come and find you around about midnight. Don’t you worry now;
the worst thing in these sewers right now is me, and I’m on your side.
You will hear voices, but just lie low and keep very quiet, and you will
know it’s me that’s coming to find you when you hear me whistle; just
like we planned . . .’

She kissed him and said, ‘Do you know, Dodger, your first plan would
have worked too.’ Very pointedly she put on her finger the ring she had
‘found’ on the tosh, then she left, following the slightly lighter
bricks in the darkness.

Dodger worked fast now. He scurried at speed back down through the
sewers to the place he most emphatically had stopped Charlie going into,
and with care pulled out from hiding – and from the sheaves of lavender
– all that remained of the unfortunate girl, yellow-haired and wearing
exactly the same breeches and cap as Simplicity was wearing. He slid the
wonderful ring on her cold finger – the gold ring with the eagles on the
crest.

Now there was the worst bit. He drew out the Outlander’s pistol, took a
few breaths, shot the corpse in the heart twice, because the Outlander
as a matter of course would use two shots to make sure, and – horribly,
and almost without looking – once in the side of the face where the rats
had begun to . . . well, do what rats usually do to a nice, fresh
corpse. He whispered, ‘I’m sorry.’ Then he took from another hidey hole
amongst the junk in the sewer a bucket of pigs’ blood. He tipped it out,
trying all the time to not exactly be there, trying to become a
disembodied spirit watching somebody else doing all these things,
because as often as he told himself that he had done nothing really bad,
there would always be a little part of him that would argue.

And then he walked back along the tunnel, sat and sobbed and listened to
the noise of splashing feet coming at speed down the sewer, led,
interestingly, by Charlie, followed by a couple of policemen. They found
Dodger curled up in tears, tears that right now came of their own
accord.

‘Yes,’ said Dodger, crying. ‘She’s dead, she’s really dead . . . But I
did my best, I really did.’

A hand landed on Dodger’s neck and Charlie said, ‘Dead?’

Looking at his boots, Dodger said, ‘Yes, Charlie, she was shot. There
was nothing I could do. It was . . . the Outlander, a right proper
assassin.’ He looked up, tears glistening in the lamplight. ‘What chance
would the likes of me have against someone like that?’

Charlie looked angrily at Dodger and said, ‘Are you telling me the
truth, Dodger?’

Now Dodger looked up with his head held high. ‘It all happened so
quickly that it’s all a bit of a fog. But yes, I’d say that’s the truth
of it all right.’

Charlie’s face was suddenly much closer to Dodger’s. ‘A fog, you say?’

‘Yes indeed, the kind of fog in which people see what they want to see.’
Was that just a hint of a grin in Charlie’s eye? Dodger had to hope so.

But the man said, ‘Surely there is a corpse?’

Dodger nodded sadly. ‘Yes, sir, I can take you to it right now; indeed I
think I should.’

Charlie lowered his voice and said, ‘This corpse . . .?’

Dodger sighed and said, ‘A poor girl’s corpse . . . and I have the
culprits and will bring them to justice with your help, Charlie, but
Simplicity, I am afraid you will never see alive again.’

He said these words very carefully, eyes glued to Charlie, who said, ‘I
cannot say I am pleased by what I hear, Mister Dodger, but here is a
constable and we will follow your lead.’ He turned to Disraeli, who
almost stepped back, and said, ‘Come along, Ben, as a pillar of
Parliament, you should witness this.’ There was an edge of command in
that suggestion and a few minutes later, they had reached, indeed, the
sad corpse of ‘Simplicity’, lying in a pool of sewerage and blood.

‘Good lord,’ said Mister Disraeli, doing his best to appear shocked. ‘It
would appear that Angela’s footman is really . . . Miss Simplicity.’

‘If you don’t mind me saying so, sir, what was a girl doing down here
dressed as a man?’ the constable said, because he _was_ a policeman,
even though right at this minute he looked like a constable who found
himself in a position that needed a sergeant at least.

Charlie turned to him. ‘Miss Simplicity was a girl who knew her own
mind, I believe. But I beg of you all, please, for the sake of Miss
Coutts, let it never be known that the girl was dressed like this when
she died.’

‘I should think not,’ Mister Disraeli pronounced. ‘The death of a young
girl is appalling, but a young girl in breeches . . . whatever next?’
There was a hint of politician in this little speech; a whiff of
wondering, What would the public think if they knew I was here, down
here, mixed up in all this?

‘Perfect for a working girl,’ Dodger said. ‘You don’t know the half of
it. I’ve seen girls working on the coal barges, and strapping big girls
they were too. Nobody told them they shouldn’t, ’cos I remember seeing
one that had a fist on her that many a man could wish for.’

Charlie turned back to the corpse. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘we are all agreed
that this lady, who is wearing breeches, is Miss Simplicity. But her
death – what do you think, Constable?’

The policeman looked at Charlie, and then at Dodger, and said, ‘Well,
sir, that’s a bullet wound and one more at least with no doubt about it.
But who done it? That’s what I’d like to know.’

‘Ah well,’ said Dodger, ‘for the answer to that, I must beg you
gentlemen to follow me over here. If you would be so good as to keep
your lanterns bright, you will see trussed up a lady who I think you
will find is the Outlander.’

Even Charlie looked surprised at this, saying, ‘Surely not!’

‘She told me she was,’ said Dodger, ‘and lying down there is “exhibit
B”, her accomplice. Speaks German, that’s all I know, but I rather feel
he will be very anxious to tell you everything, since I must tell you
that to the best of my knowledge he had no part in the death of
Simplicity, and as far as I am aware hasn’t committed any other crime in
London. Apart from trying to murder me.’ Then he held up the pistol and
said, ‘This was the weapon, gentlemen, and there wasn’t much I could do
to stop her shooting Miss S . . . Miss . . .’

Dodger began to cry, and Charlie patted him on the shoulder and said,
‘Well, you couldn’t have stopped a pistol, and that’s the truth of it.
But well done for catching the miscreants.’ He sniffed and went on, as
an aside, out of the hearing of the constable, ‘You know, clearly you’ve
told us the truth, but I have seen a corpse or two in my time – oh,
haven’t I just – and this one appears to me to be possibly . . . not
very fresh . . .?’

Dodger blinked and said, ‘Yes, sir, I think it’s the miasmic effusions,
sir. After all, the sewers are full of death and decay, and that finds
its way in, sir, believe me it does, most egregiously, so it does.’

‘Miasmic effusions,’ Charlie repeated, louder this time. ‘Hear that,
Ben? What can we say? I think that all of us know that Mister Dodger
would never have hurt Simplicity, and we all understand that he was very
caring of her. So I hope that you will join me in sympathy for this
young man, who despite the loss of his lady love has managed to bring a
dreadful killer to justice.’ Then he added, ‘What do you think,
Constable?’

The policeman looked rather stern and said, ‘Well, sir, so it seems,
sir, but the coroner will have to be informed. Has the corpse any next
of kin that you know of?’

‘Alas, no,’ said Charlie. ‘In fact, officer, I am aware that nobody
really knows who she is, or where she came from. She was somewhat
unfortunate – an orphan of the storm, you might say. A girl whom Miss
Coutts had taken under her wing out of the sheer goodness of her heart.
What do you think, Ben?’

Mister Disraeli appeared horrified by the entire business and looked
nervous, saying, ‘A dreadful matter indeed, Mister Dickens. All we can
do is let the law take its course.’

Charlie nodded in a statesmanlike way and said, ‘Well, Mister Dodger, I
think that all you need to do is give the constable here your
particulars, and of course I can vouch for you as a pillar of the
community. As you may know, Constable, Dodger here is the man who set
about the infamous Sweeney Todd, and may I add my own dismay at how our
innocent little excursion came to such an unhappy end.’

He sighed. ‘One can only speculate as to why this poor, unfortunate girl
was the target of this madwoman. But I have taken note, Constable, that
the dead girl is wearing a fine gold ring, very ornate and with a ducal
seal on it too. This may or may not be of interest, but I must ask you
to take it as evidence which may be very germane to the investigation.
But then,’ he added, glancing again at Disraeli, who still looked
appalled, ‘in the circumstances, Constable, I am sure you and your
superiors, when of course they have satisfied themselves about the sad
facts of this matter, will see to it that the whole business does not
lead to unnecessary speculation because, of course, surely the facts
speak for themselves.’

He looked around for agreement. ‘And now,’ he concluded, ‘I think we
should leave, although I think that some of us’ – and now he glanced
meaningfully at Dodger – ‘should wait here until the coroner’s officer
comes along. May I say, Constable, you should approach him in all
haste.’

To Dodger’s amazement the policeman saluted, actually saluted, and said,
‘Yes indeed, Mister Dickens.’

‘Very good,’ said Charlie. He then added, ‘But you do have here these
killers, and if I was you I should right now make an immediate report
and have the wagon here as soon as possible. I will wait with Mister
Dodger and the pistol, if you don’t mind, until you and your colleagues
return.’ He turned to Mister Bazalgette. ‘Joseph, how do you feel?’

The surveyor looked a bit unnerved but said, ‘Honestly, Charlie, I have
seen worse things.’

‘Then would you be so kind as to see that Ben gets home safely? I think
he is rather shaken by all this; I am sure that it wasn’t the happy
little jaunt we were all expecting.’

Two more policemen arrived almost immediately, and then others soon
followed suit, and by now a crowd was forming around the entrance to the
sewer, and more policemen were called in to hold the crowd back. Every
policeman at some time went down into the sewers just so they would have
something to tell their grandchildren. And the newspapers were already
churning . . . another ‘ ’_orrible murder!_’ would be front-page news
tomorrow, oh yes.

It was indeed a very strange evening for Dodger; he was interrogated
several times by different policemen, who were themselves watched like a
hawk by Charlie. It was embarrassing when some of the policemen came up
to Dodger to shake his hand, not because the Outlander had now been
captured – after all, who could believe that a _girl_ could be a
dangerous assassin, after all? – but because of Mister Todd, and how
Dodger now appeared to be a hero in more ways than one, even though a
young girl had died. And all the time the fog spilled over everything,
finding its way in everywhere, silently changing the realities of the
world.

They took away the Outlander and her accomplice. Then the coroner’s
officer came and the coroner as well, and there were coaches and carts,
and everywhere there was Charlie, and eventually the last remains of the
poor dead girl were put into a coffin for the eventual destination at
Lavender Hill.

The coroner, said Charlie afterwards, had taken the view that since the
girl had no friends or relatives to speak of, except a young man who
clearly loved her very much and a lady who had kindly given her shelter
and tried to stop her following other young girls down the wrong path,
then surely this was an open and shut case if ever there was one. Even
if there were a few little mysteries.

The killer was now under lock and key, despite the fact that the
wretched woman now denied shooting anybody, an assertion belied by her
confederate who, it must be said, was talking his heart out in the hope
of salvation.

Dispatches were sent to Downing Street, along with the ring for
examination, once the crest on it was noted, this being political. And
indeed the word ‘political’ seemed to hover like the fog over the case
as a warning to all men of good will, with the meaning that if your
masters are satisfied, so you had better be as well.

Now it was nearly midnight, and there was only Charlie and Dodger.
Dodger knew why he himself was there, but since Charlie had already
filed his copy to the _Morning Chronicle_, he had no idea why the other
man was still there.

Then, in the gloom of midnight, Charlie said, ‘Dodger, I think there is
a game called Find the Lady, but I am not asking to play it. I simply
wish to know that there is a lady to be found, in good health, as it
might be, by a young man who can see through the fog. Incidentally, both
as a journalist and as a man who writes things about things and indeed
people that do not exist, I rather wonder, Mister Dodger, what you would
have done if the Outlander had not turned up?’

‘You were watching me all the time,’ said Dodger. ‘I noticed. Did I give
very much away?’

‘Amazingly little. Am I to assume that the young lady we all saw so
emphatically dead did not die by your hand, if you will excuse me for
being so blunt?’

And Dodger knew that the game was up but not necessarily over, and said,
‘Charlie, she was one of those girls that drowns herself in the river
and no one cares very much. She will get a decent burial in a decent
graveyard, which is more than she would have got in other circumstances.
And that’s the truth of it. My plan was simplicity itself, sir.
Simplicity would have excused herself, being a very “shy lad”. Alas, she
would have wandered into the sewers where I would rush to find her. In
the dark there would be a great noise of a scuffle and a scream as I
fought valiantly, I’ll have you know, as I came to blows with an unknown
man who must have heard of our little excursion and may even now be
still at large. Whereupon I would rush to meet yourself and the others
and implore you all to help the dying Simplicity, and not least chase
the dreadful assassin through the sewers. It would be a terrifying but
fruitless pursuit.’

‘And where would the living Simplicity be, pray?’ said Charlie.

‘Hidden, sir. Hidden in a place where no one but another tosher would
ever find her – a place we call the Cauldron on account of the way the
waters wash it clean – with a waterproof packet of cheese sandwiches and
a bottle of boiled water with a dash of brandy to keep the cold out.’

‘Then, Mister Dodger, you would have made fools of us all.’

‘No, sir! You would have been quite heroic! Because I would never tell
and nor would Simplicity, and then one day everyone would know the name
of Charlie Dickens.’

It seemed to Dodger that Charlie was trying to look stern, but in fact
Charlie was rather impressed, saying, ‘Where did you get a pistol?’

‘Solomon has a Nock pepper-box pistol. Dangerous brute. I think I
thought about everything, sir, except for you, that is.’

‘Oh,’ said Charlie. ‘Those bricks over there look so beguilingly
higgledy-piggledy. I wondered why they were there. Also, I am wondering
now why you are hanging around here? Would it help if I say that I won’t
pass on my suspicions to any third party because, frankly, I don’t think
I would be believed!’ He smiled at Dodger’s discomfiture and said,
‘Dodger, you have excelled yourself, by which I mean to say you have
done exceptionally well, and I salute you. Of course, I am not a member
of the government, thank goodness. Now I suggest that you go and find
Miss Simplicity, who I imagine must by now be feeling a little chilly.’

Caught unusually unawares, Dodger burst out, ‘Actually, it can be quite
warm down here at night time – tends to hold the heat, you see.’

Charlie laughed out loud and said, ‘I must be off and, I suspect, so
should you.’

‘Thank you, sir,’ said Dodger, ‘and thank you very much for teaching me
about the fog.’

‘Oh yes,’ said Charlie. ‘The fog. Intangible though it is, it is a very
powerful thing, is it not, Mister Dodger? I shall follow your career
with great interest and, if not, with trepidation.’

When he was absolutely certain that there was no one else around, Dodger
made his way through the sewers until he came to the little hidey hole
where Simplicity was waiting, and he whistled softly. No one noticed
them leave, no one saw where they went, and the veil of night spread
over London on the living and the dead alike.

[images]

CHAPTER 16

A LETTER COMES FROM YORK, AND THE SKILLS OF THE DODGERMAN WIN APPROVAL
IN THE HIGHEST QUARTERS

FOG, OH YES, fog, the fog of London town, and it seemed to Dodger, once
Charlie and Sir Robert Peel got to talking, that the fog was shaped to a
purpose, or so it seemed. There were a number of meetings in offices
around Whitehall, where Dodger was asked questions about his little
excursion into the embassy and the paperwork he had brought back, and
they listened carefully, nodding occasionally as he explained that he
had taken it simply to get back at whoever it was that was making life
so difficult for Simplicity and himself.

He didn’t mention the jewellery, now carefully concealed in Solomon’s
strongboxes – those pieces, that is, that weren’t already stealing their
way into the welcome fingers of Solomon’s jeweller friends. He did not
want to get into trouble, and it appeared, amazingly enough, that it was
beginning to seem that he was not going to get into trouble for
_anything_.

At one point, a friendly-looking cove with silver hair and a
grandfatherly kind of face beamed at him and said, ‘Mister Dodger, it is
apparent that you got into the well-guarded embassy of a foreign power,
and roamed at will among its floors and the inner sanctums without ever
being challenged. How on earth were you able to do this? Could you
please elucidate if you would be so good? And may I ask if you would be
amenable to repeating this singular feat another time, at some other
place, should we ask you to do so?’

It took a little while, and a certain amount of translation with the
help of Charlie, to give an explanation about the working practices of
the snakesman. It culminated in Dodger’s handing back Charlie his watch,
which he had taken from him just for fun, and then he said, ‘Do you want
me to be a spy, is that it?’

This comment caused a certain frisson around the men in the room, and
they all looked at the silver-haired man, who said, smiling, ‘Young man,
Her Majesty’s government does not spy, it merely _takes an interest_,
and since both Sir Robert and Mister Disraeli have told us that while
you are a scallywag you are the right kind of scallywag, of which we may
wish we had a few more, Her Majesty’s government might have an interest
in occasionally employing you, although having employed you they would
emphatically deny ever having done so.’

‘Oh, I understand that, sir,’ said Dodger cheerfully. ‘It’s a kind of
fog, isn’t it? I know about fogs. You can trust me on that, sir.’

The white-haired gentleman looked affronted at first, and then smiled.
‘It seems to me, Mister Dodger, that no one can teach you anything about
fog.’

Dodger gave him a cheeky salute and said, ‘I’ve lived in the fog all my
life, sir.’

‘Well, you do not need to give me an answer now, and I suggest you talk
it over with your friend Mister Dickens, who I’m bound to say is
something of a scallywag himself, being a newspaper gentleman, but who I
suspect has your best interests at heart. May I say, Mister Dodger, that
there are some slightly worrying details about what happened in the
sewer the other day which might in other circumstances have led to more
investigation, were it not for the fact that you most certainly did
bring to justice the notorious Outlander, a circumstance that will cause
great relief among our European friends, while at the same time showing
them what happens to assassins who dare to come to England. I believe
some rewards might be coming your way.’

The white-haired man stood up, and the action broke the tension in the
room; Dodger saw smiles all round him as the man, his face now looking a
little sorrowful, added, ‘I’m sure we were all upset to hear of the
death of the young lady known as Simplicity, Mister Dodger, and may I
say you have my condolences.’

Dodger looked at the old man, who probably wasn’t all that old but
instead had been made old by the white hair. He was totally certain the
face in front of him knew everything or, at the very least, as much of
anything that anybody could, and most certainly knew everything about
the uses of a fog. Dodger thought he’d be the kind of cove, for example,
who might pick up the detail that a body, having apparently just been
shot, seemed very like somebody who had been dead for almost a week, and
never mind about noxious effusions.

‘Thank you, sir,’ he said carefully. ‘It has not been a very pleasant
time lately, and I was thinking of taking a little trip out of London so
that I don’t see anything that reminds me of my girl.’

And he cried real tears, which was quite easy to do, and it shocked him
inside, and he wondered if there was anything in the boy called Dodger
that was totally himself, pure and simple, not just a whole packet of
Dodgers. Indeed, he hoped in his soul that Simplicity would embrace the
decent Dodger and put him on something approaching the straight and
narrow, provided it was not all that straight and not all that narrow.
Ultimately, it was all about the fog.

He blew his nose on the nice white handkerchief that he had
absentmindedly removed from the pocket of one of the other gentlemen
around the table and said, ‘I was thinking of going up to York, sir, for
a week or two.’

This revelation caused a little excitement in the room, but after a few
minutes’ discussion it was agreed that Dodger, who after all had
committed no crime and, indeed, quite possibly the reverse, should of
course be allowed to go to York if he wanted to.

The meeting broke up, and Charlie put a hand on Dodger’s arm as they
were leaving and escorted him at some speed to a nearby coffee house,
where he said, ‘It would appear that all sins are forgiven, my friend,
but of course it’s such a shame that Miss Simplicity, despite all your
best efforts, is now deceased; how is she, by the way?’

Dodger had been expecting something like this, and so, giving Charlie a
vacant look, he said, ‘Simplicity is dead, Charlie, as well you know.’

‘Oh yes,’ said Charlie, grinning. ‘How foolish of me to have forgotten.’
His grinning face went as blank as a board, then he held out his hand,
saying, ‘I am sure that we will meet again, my friend. It has, I must
say, been a privilege of sorts to meet you. I am as unhappy as you are
perhaps about the death of poor Simplicity, the girl that nobody really
cared about, except for you. And, of course, dear Angela, who seems
suspiciously unmoved? I expect, nay assume, that you will before very
long find another girl quite like her. Indeed, I might even bet on it.’

Dodger tried to keep any expression away from his face and then gave up
because no expression at all is an expression in itself. He looked into
Charlie’s eyes and then said, slowly and deliberately, ‘Well, I don’t
know nothing about that, sir.’ And he winked.

Charlie laughed, and the two of them shook hands, then went their
separate ways.

The day after this conversation, a coach left London bound for Bristol,
with the usual cross-section of passengers to endure the raggedy road.
However, in this case the coachman reckoned that one of the passengers
was the most unpleasant he had had that year, and it was all the worse
because it was an old lady with a voice as crackly and demanding as a
cauldron full of witches; nothing would please her – the seats, the
ride, the weather and, as far as he knew, the phase of the moon. When
the passengers were allowed off for a mercifully quick meal at one of
the coaching inns along the way, she found fault with every dish put
before her, including the salt, which she declared was not salty enough.
The old baggage, besides smelling too much of lavender, also bullied
incessantly a rather pleasant-looking young lady who was her
granddaughter. She, at least, lit up the atmosphere in the coach a
little, but mostly the coachman remembered Grandma, and he was very glad
to see the back of the old besom as she almost fell off the coach when
they got to Bristol. Of course, she had complained about that too.

A cheerful-looking young man then went to a pharmacist at Christmas
Steps, near the centre of Bristol, where he discussed certain things to
do with pigments and similar, in a very useful discourse that included
words like henna and indigo. Shortly afterwards, quite a pretty young
lady with beautiful red hair and a dark-haired young gentleman hired a
coach and a driver to take them out of the city and all the way to the
gaunt grey Mendip Hills, whereupon they told the driver that they wished
to continue the journey along the turnpike past the pub at Star, where
they had lunch consisting of excellent cheese and the type of cider that
was so strong it might have been fortified by lion’s piss, and all the
better for it apparently, because even the young lady had a second half
pint of the scorching stuff.

After their lunch they dismissed the coachman, telling him to meet them
at the same place in precisely one week’s time. The man happily agreed,
because he had already been paid quite a considerable sum by the young
man, who had handed him a beautiful amount of money, whispering that he
would be grateful if nobody was told about this little excursion since
they would both be in trouble if her father found out. The coachman was
not unfamiliar with journeys of this sort, and therefore saluted and
tapped the side of his nose with a greasy little grin that said, ‘Me? I
know nothing, I am totally blinded by the shine of money, and God bless
you, sir.’

The following day a man in the local pub, a carrier by trade, was
induced by means of a jingling purse to take the young couple on a short
cut to the small town of Axbridge, on the other side of the Mendips. The
couple came down the southern slopes and took lodgings near the water
mill. It was an unusual arrangement, however, since the young man made
it clear that the young lady was to sleep in the best bedroom, such as
it was, and he himself would sleep on a straw palliasse outside the
door, covered with a horse blanket. This caused a little bit of talk
locally with the ladies of the village, who took the view that the
runaways (which everyone agreed was what the nice young couple were)
were being very careful about things as decent Christians should be.

Christian or otherwise, that was in fact the case. The communication had
passed between Simplicity and Dodger almost by telepathy; this had to be
a time to relax, heal and, well, enjoy the world. And the world itself
seemed to enjoy them, because they were quite free with their money, and
although the girl was rather modest, as a maiden ought to be, she took
every opportunity to chat to people. She seemed very keen to speak like
they did in the Somerset accent, which might have been called bucolic
because it was slow. It was indeed slow, because it dealt with things
that _were_ slow – like cheese and milk and the seasons, and smuggling
and the brewing of fiery liquors in places where the excise men dared
not go – and in those places, while the speech was slow, thought and
action could be very fast indeed.

And Dodger learned fast, because on the streets a quick uptake was the
only one to have and you never got a second chance. At first his head
ached with a language that seemed made up of corn and cows. But the
learning was helped along by the drink the locals called scrumpy, and
after a while he was talking like them as well. His head filled up with
words like ‘Mendip’, ‘priddy’ and ‘bist’, and conglomerations of a
language whose rhythms were not the stacatto of the town but practically
had something that you could call a melody. There are more types of
disguise, he thought, than just putting on a different kind of shirt or
changing your hair.

One morning, as they walked by the river, he said to Simplicity, ‘I
never asked you before. But why did you have the game of Happy
Families?’

The Somerset accent wobbled a little as she said, ‘My mother gave it to
me and, you see, I always wanted to have one thing – something that was
mine, when nothing else was. I used to look at it and think how one day
things would be better, and now I think they are, after the wretched
time I had.’

She beamed at him, and the little speech, combined with the smile,
warmed the cockles of Dodger’s heart, and carried on going further down.

It was about this time that in London – a place where people spoke so
fast that you never saw where your money had gone – a lady called Angela
stepped out of a coach in Seven Dials, the coach then being immediately
guarded by two strapping footmen, and climbed up a set of stairs and
knocked gently on the door to an attic.

It was opened by Solomon, who said, ‘Mmm, ah, Miss Angela, thank you so
much for coming. May I tempt you to some green tea? I am afraid you have
to take us as we are, but I have cleaned up as best I can, and don’t
mind Onan; the smell does disappear after a while, I can assure you.’

Angela laughed at that and said, ‘Do you have any news?’

‘Indeed, mmm,’ said Solomon. ‘I have had a letter – surprisingly well
written – from Dodger, from York, where he went to grieve, because there
he won’t see anything that reminds him of poor dear Simplicity.’

Angela picked up the spotlessly cleaned tea cup and said, ‘York, well,
yes indeed, how very fitting. Has anyone else enquired of you of
Dodger’s whereabouts, pray?’

Solomon filled her cup meticulously, saying, ‘I got these in Japan, you
know? I am amazed that they have survived as long as I have.’ He glanced
up, and with a face as straight as a plumb line, said, ‘Sir Robert was
kind enough to send two of his constables to visit me two days ago, and
they did ask about Mister Dodger’s whereabouts, and so of course mmm, I
had to tell them all that I knew, which is of course my duty as a good
citizen.’ His smile broadened and he said, ‘I always think one should
lie to policemen; it is so very good for the soul and, indeed, good for
the policemen.’

Angela grinned and said, ‘You may or may not be surprised, Mister Cohen,
that I too have had a communication from a nameless person, giving me
details of a place in London and – isn’t this quite exciting? – a time
as well. This is rather fun, isn’t it?’

‘Yes, indeed,’ said Solomon, ‘although I must say my life has been
altogether too full of this kind of fun, so I now prefer working here in
my old carpet slippers, where fun does not usually interrupt my
concentration. Oh dear, where are my manners? I do have some wonderful
rice cakes here, my dear. Bought them from Mister Chang, and very
excellent they are too. Do please help yourself.’

Angela accepted the proffered cake and said, ‘Should you meet the young
Mister Dodger again, please do tell him that I have reason to believe
that the authorities would indeed like to speak to him, not because he
has done anything wrong, but because he has the capacity, they think, to
do some things very right, and for the good of the country. The offer is
open.’ She hesitated for a moment and added, ‘When I mention the word
authorities, I mean the highest authority.’

Most unusually, Solomon looked surprised, and said, ‘When you say
“highest”, you mean . . .?’

‘Not the Almighty,’ said Angela, ‘at least not as far as I know, but
definitely the next best thing – a lady who could make some parts of
Mister Dodger’s life somewhat easier. I rather think that this is an
invitation that would not be repeated if ignored.’

‘Mmm, really? Well, in that case I’d better get my morning dress suit
from Jacob and have it cleaned, shall I?’

Quite apart from the cider, the fresh air, the cheese and the stars, the
young couple making friends with everybody in the town of Axbridge also
got a taste for wall fruit, which the girl had told them was called by
the French _escargot_, while in Somerset they were snails and be damned
if they tried to be anything else.

All in all, the pair were a source of amiable mystery to the townsfolk,
and everyone seemed to have their own anecdote about the couple, and
speculated about them; the lady who did the church flowers said she had
seen them in the lane by the river with some kids, teaching them a game
called Happy Families. And a farmer declared that he had seen them
sitting on a gate with the girl teaching the lad to read, or so it
seemed, correcting his pronunciation and everything, for all the world
like a school teacher. But, the farmer maintained, the lad seemed to
enjoy the whole business and one of the farmer’s mates then mentioned to
the regulars in the pub that he had seen the lad every night lying on
the warm grass and watching the stars. He said, ‘It were as if the poor
devil had never seen them before.’

On the last day, as they said their goodbyes, one of their new friends,
who had a pony and trap, took them back up the road to the pub at Star.
He took a minor detour on the way to show them the field wherein there
was a stone which, it was said, possibly by people who drank all that
cider, came alive on some nights and danced around the field.

At that point, just after they had finished watching the stone, in case
it was inclined to attempt a little jig for the tourists, Dodger said to
his girlfriend in the pure, rustic tones of Somersetshire, ‘Oi reckon we
oughta be moving along now, moi goyirl.’

She, smiling like the sun, said, ‘Where bi’st to, my lover?’

Dodger smiled and said, ‘Lunnon.’

And she said, ‘Where folk be so queer, not like ussun.’

Then she kissed him and he kissed her, and in tones more like those of
Lunnon than Somerset, he said, ‘My love, do you thinks it possible, that
a stone could dance?’

She said, ‘Well, Dodger, if anyone could make a stone dance, it would
have to be you.’

After that, two locals from Somerset, who nevertheless had enough money
to travel by coach, arrived in London from Bristol. Entirely
disregarded, they disappeared into the throng, and paid for
accommodation for a single lady in a respectable boarding house while
the young man set off to Seven Dials.

The following morning, Dodger took Onan out for a run, and then
disappeared down into the sewers. Anyone watching might have noticed
that he was rather solemn and carrying a bag, although it is
questionable whether rats can tell how solemn a human being is, or
indeed know the meaning of the term solemn. The rats might have been
surprised later to find, tucked away in the debris of the sewers,
carefully placed high above the normal levels of the water, a pair of
shiny new shoes.

What Dodger did subsequently nobody saw, but he was most certainly on
London Bridge at noon. There he was, staring at the boats going past
when a girl with long hair said in a voice that made his bones tingle,
‘’Scuse me, mister, can thee show me the way to Seven Dials, where my
aunty lives?’

Dodger, if anyone was watching – and they certainly were – brightened up
and said, ‘Are you new here? Capital! Allow me to show you around, it
would be my pleasure.’

At that moment a coach pulled up, to the consternation of the drivers of
some vehicles behind it. But the coachmen paid them no attention as a
woman stepped out, smiled at Dodger, looked intensely at the Somerset
maiden, and said after an almost forensic examination, ‘Well now, how
surprising, my friend, one might be mistaken in thinking that this young
lady was Simplicity herself, but alas, as we both know, the poor girl is
most dreadfully deceased. But clearly you, Mister Dodger, are a
resilient gentleman, I am aware of that. Since the three of us have
strangely met on this bridge, perhaps you would allow me to take you and
your new friend to Lavender Hill cemetery, where I was intending to go
today, because the stonemason will by now have finished poor
Simplicity’s gravestone.’ She turned to the girl and said, ‘What is your
name, young lady?’

The girl smiled and said, ‘Serendipity, missus.’ And Angela had to put
her hand over her mouth to conceal laughter.

And so they went, all three, to Lavender Hill, where flowers were laid
and not surprisingly tears were shed, and then Dodger and the young lady
called Serendipity were dropped off again at one of the other bridges
where he had been told the Happy Family man had positioned his rather
strange cart.

It was, in short, one quite large cage in which was a dog, a cat, a
small baboon, a mouse, a couple of birds and a snake, all living
together in harmony, like real Christians, as the old man put it.

Serendipity said, ‘Why on earth doesn’t the cat eat the mouse, Dodger?’

‘Well,’ he said, ‘I think the old man is not one to tell you his
secrets, but some people say if they are brought up together with some
kindness, they become just that, a happy family. Although I have been
told that should a mouse who has not yet been introduced to the snake
come in through the bars, it would become the snake’s dinner very
quickly.’

She held his hand then, and they walked along across the bridges and saw
all the entertainments thereon: the men who lifted heavy weights, and
the Crown and Anchor men, and the man who sold ham sandwiches, and the
man who could stand on his hands upside down. Finally, as the golden
light of evening made London look more like a pagan temple, all bronze
and shiny, and turned the Thames into a second Ganges, they went home,
totally ignoring the Punch and Judy man.

The following morning began with pandemonium outside. When Dodger crept
down the stairs and peered out at the street, he saw two men wearing
plumed helmets, and a smaller man looking at the same time both
self-important and also slightly terrified about where he was. Dodger
managed to get the window open and shouted down, ‘What do you want,
mister?’ He didn’t like the look of the smaller man, who was obviously
the boss – because whenever you see a big man alongside a small man, the
little man is generally the boss. The little man now demanded, ‘A
gentleman by the name of . . . Mister Dodger?’

Dodger gulped and shouted down, ‘Never heard of him.’

The man looked up and said, ‘Well, sir, I am sad to hear that. But if
you do in fact meet the said Mister Dodger, perhaps you would tell him
that Her Majesty Queen Victoria has summoned him to Buckingham Palace
tomorrow afternoon!’

From behind Dodger, Solomon said blearily, ‘Mmm, Dodger, you cannot
ignore a summons from Her Majesty.’

And so Dodger was short of anywhere to dodge to, and he stepped gingerly
into the street. People were already gathering, much to the chagrin of
the two men with the plumed helmets, because the rumour had run around
that Dodger was being taken to the gallows at last and one or two people
were talking about fighting back; and naturally, when you have one
rumour, it buds little extra rumours. Just for the fun of it.

Now Dodger stood there, blinking, and said, ‘OK, mister, now tell me the
truth.’

The small, rather harassed man, trying to maintain a dignified image in
a world that had no dignity at all, handed Dodger a document. ‘Make
yourself available at the gates of Buckingham Palace at four thirty
tomorrow,’ he said, ‘and you will be welcomed in. You may bring members
of your family, to the number of three. I shall of course relay to Her
Majesty that you have humbly accepted.’

It was a strange, mysterious day after that, even when people lost
interest and went about their business, or in some cases as much of
anyone else’s business that they could steal. Dodger started it by going
for a walk, forsaking the sewers but simply criss-crossing London with
Onan, who was overjoyed at this lengthy outing, trotting happily beside
him. Eventually Dodger’s legs, who knew him better than he did, took him
through Covent Garden and into Fleet Street.

Charlie wasn’t there, but when Dodger asked to meet the editor and said
who he was, he was instantly ushered upstairs, where he was told that
another seven guineas was accrued to his account. Dodger said that he
would like the remaining money in that wretched subscription to please
be diverted to make life comfortable for Mister Todd who, he understood,
was now incarcerated in Bedlam hospital, a place not suitable for those
of a delicate disposition.

Mister Doyle agreed, and moreover promised to see to it that the money
would actually get to where it should go. That made Dodger feel better.
Then he continued his walking, pausing only to buy a bone from the
butcher’s shop for Onan’s lunch. Then he went to a bottle shop and
procured a bottle of good brandy and carried it with him down to the
river, where he hailed a waterman to take him down to the wharf at Four
Farthings.

The coroner was not there, but his officer promised to see to it that
this gift, ostensibly from the son of an old lady that he had helped,
would get to its intended owner; alas, there were times when you had to
hope that people were as good as their word. There really wasn’t much in
Four Farthings that wasn’t soon going to be swept up by the bigger
boroughs, but Dodger did take a look in the church of St Never, a
little-known saint who was in charge of things that didn’t happen, which
was why so many young ladies prayed there. He dropped a shilling in the
offertory box, but heard the coin hit wood, where he suspected it was
likely to be lonely for quite some time.

He found the time to make a detour to the house of Mister and Mrs
Mayhew, shaking hands and thanking them for their condolences, and for
all the help they had given to the poor late Simplicity, who, said
Dodger, if she was alive now, would be very grateful. He was absolutely
certain of that, he told them, as certain as if he had heard it from her
very own mouth. Then, when he was shown along to the main entrance, he
waved the suggestion away and headed down past the green baize door,
where he had a cheerful smile even for Mrs Sharples and a pneumatic kiss
from Mrs Quickly.

As he wandered back across the river he wondered why he was doing all
this, and quite rightly so did Onan, who was having the time of his
life, never having had such a long walk in one go. It struck him that
there was one person who could tell him. That led to the hiring of
another waterman to take him upstream for a while, and then a reasonable
walk took him to Miss Serendipity’s boarding house and a growler took
the two of them to Angela’s home. The door was opened very respectfully
by the butler, who said, ‘Good afternoon, Mister Dodger, I will see if
Miss Angela is in.’

In fact, it was less than a minute before Angela appeared. Then,
brightening, Dodger told them his news over coffee, and asked
Serendipity to accompany him.

Serendipity took the news in a very feminine way, which was to panic
that she wouldn’t have anything to wear to the palace, at which point
Angela chimed in happily, saying, ‘My dear, you hardly have to worry
about that. Perhaps we could have a little visit to my dressmaker; it’s
very short notice, but I am sure something can be done.’ She turned to
Dodger and said, ‘Talking of dresses reminds me of rings, and so I
should like you, Mister Dodger, to tell me exactly what your intentions
are? I understand the two of you are engaged; when do you believe that
you will be wed? Personally I have never seen the point of long
engagements, but there may be . . . difficulties?’

Dodger had thought long and hard about Serendipity and marriage.
Officially, as Simplicity, she was still a married lady, but as she
herself had said, God could hardly have been at that wedding or He would
not have allowed it to turn from love to something so awful. When he’d
asked Solomon, the old man had stroked his chin and mmm’d a few times,
and then said that surely any Almighty worth believing in would agree.
And if not, Solomon would explain it to Him for them. Dodger had chimed
in then and said, ‘I don’t know if God was in the sewer, but the Lady
definitely was.’

After all, he thought, other than the prince, who would surely keep
silent, the only witnesses to the wretched marriage now had been
Simplicity and the ring. The ring was gone and Simplicity was dead. So
where was the evidence that Simplicity had ever been there at all? It
was in a way another kind of fog, and in that fog, he thought, people
might make their way to some sunlit uplands.

Now he said firmly, ‘Simplicity was married. But Simplicity is dead. Now
I have Serendipity – somebody new, and I’ll help her. But I’m someone
new too, and before we marry I’ve got to get a job, and a good one – I
shall have to save the toshing for a hobby. But I don’t even know how to
get proper work.’

He paused there, because Angela’s smile spoke volumes, which at the
moment he could not interpret. ‘Well now,’ she said, ‘if I can believe
tittle-tattle, I rather suspect, young Dodger, that shortly in your life
you will see again a cheerful but friendly old man with silver hair who
might like to give you a holiday in foreign parts. Congratulations to
you, young man, and to you too, Miss Serendipity.’

The following day the coach arrived exactly on time and with Serendipity
on board. When they set off again Solomon, who seemed to know everything
about these matters, said, ‘This is, of course, a private audience. But
just remember, Her Majesty is in charge. Do not speak until you are
spoken to. Never, ever interrupt and – and I stress this, Dodger – don’t
get familiar. Do you understand?’

Some of this information was imparted as they were walking through the
palace, which was to a part of Dodger the most target-rich environment
he had ever encountered. Even Angela’s place was put to shame. Room
followed room and it was an overpowering panorama for someone who had
been a snakesman, but he told himself it would never work. No one would
have a sack big enough to take away those great big pictures or those
great big chairs.

Then suddenly there was another room, and the Queen and Prince Albert
were there, and indeed, Dodger noticed, there were flunkies everywhere;
standing still in the way a good thief does, because people are quick to
notice movement.

Dodger had never heard the word ‘surreal’ but would have used it when
Solomon, dressed in all his glory, bowed so low before the Queen that
his hair nearly touched the floor. There was a little click and a sudden
stillness in the room and Solomon was frantically waving a finger at
Dodger, who knew the drill and so stepped forward, smiled nervously at
the Queen, wrapped his arms around Solomon, stuck a knee in his back,
then brought him upright. To his own dismay, he heard himself say
cheerily, ‘Sorry about this, Your Majesty, he gets the twinging screws
when he tries that, but no harm done, I’ve knocked him into shape
again.’

A splendid-looking girl, he thought – very nobby, of course; that went
without saying. Her face was a blank and Prince Albert was looking at
Dodger like a man finding a cod fish in his pyjamas. So Dodger took a
step back, let Solomon find his feet and tried to look invisible, and at
that point the Queen lit up and said brightly, ‘Mister Cohen, it is a
great pleasure to meet you at last; I’ve heard so many stories about
you. You are not in pain in any way, are you?’ she added in a less royal
tone of voice.

Solomon gulped and said, ‘Nothing damaged except my self-esteem, Your
Majesty, and may I say that some of the tales they tell about me are not
true.’

Prince Albert said, ‘The King of Sweden tells a very good one.’

Solomon blushed under his beard – Dodger could just make that out – and
said, ‘If it was the one about the racehorse in the lodge, Your Royal
Highness, alas it was true.’

‘Nevertheless,’ said the Prince, ‘I feel quite privileged to meet you,
sir.’ He held out his hand to Solomon, and Dodger watched the handshake
very carefully, and recognized the Masonic hand of freedom.

The Queen, her eyes on her husband, said, ‘Well, my dear, there is a
nice surprise for you.’ Although it was quite a pleasant sentence, it
had a little clip on the end, to remind everybody that _that_
conversation at least was at an end. She turned to Dodger and said,
‘You, then, must be Mister Dodger? You do very well around desperate
criminals, I believe. Everyone is still talking about Sweeney Todd. That
must have been such a terrible day for you.’

Dodger recognized that it might not be a good idea to deny this fact,
even though the day had been more astonishing than terrible. And so he
took refuge in: ‘Well, Your Majesty, there he was and there I was, and
there the razor was, and that was it really. To be honest, I felt sorry
for the poor man.’

‘So I have heard,’ said the Queen. ‘It is a disquieting thought, but it
is to your credit, at least. I believe that the young lady beside you is
your fiancée, is that not so? Do come here, Miss Serendipity.’

Serendipity stepped forward, and suddenly Dodger found himself somehow
outside the room looking down on it, watching how expressions changed
and changed again, and then he was back in himself and everything was
cheerful and someone had just brought in some tea and there was a
definite feeling that things were satisfactory.

Who would dare lie to a queen? he thought. How much did she know? For
that matter, how much did Prince Albert know? He was from one of the
Germanys, wasn’t he? But that would start him thinking about politics
again, and so he chased the thought out of his mind and as time floated
back, Serendipity curtsied – rather better than Solomon had bowed – and
the room began to be more cheerful.

‘When do you think your wedding will be, my dear?’

Serendipity blushed and said, ‘Dodger says he will have to get a new job
first, Your Majesty, so we don’t know yet.’

‘Indeed,’ said the Queen. ‘What is it you do, Mister Dodger, when you
are not thwarting criminals?’

Dodger didn’t answer that, not being entirely sure what thwarting meant,
but Solomon was in there fast with, ‘He assists with the proper running
of the drainage, Your Majesty.’

Prince Albert rolled his eyes and said, ‘Oh, drains, we have them here
and they never seem to work properly.’

Dodger opened his mouth, but the Queen, anxious to get drains out of the
way, said, ‘Well, sir, I wish you well in whatever post you eventually
take. And now . . .’ she added, glancing at a flunky, ‘we think that
bravery such as yours should be recognized, and so I would like you to
step forward here and get down on one knee. See the cushion here, and it
would probably be a good idea if you took off your hat.’ A flunky
stepped forward holding a sword, and quite a shiny one at that. The
Queen took it, and then said, ‘What is your full name to be, Mister
Dodger? I have been advised that you would like to see the last of Pip
Stick.’

Dodger stared at her, and then Serendipity said, ‘If it’s any help, Your
Majesty, I’ve always thought that Jack is a very nice name.’

Jack Dodger, thought Dodger. It sounded slightly nobby, but he didn’t
know why. The Queen looked at him expectantly and said, ‘If I was you,
sir, I would take the advice of your lady.’ She glanced at Prince Albert
and added, ‘As all sensible husbands do.’

All Dodger could do now was say, ‘Uh, yes please,’ and then there was a
breath of air over his scalp and the sword was back in the arms of a
flunky again and Sir Jack Dodger stood up.

‘It makes you look taller,’ said Serendipity.

‘Indeed it does,’ said Queen Victoria. ‘Incidentally,’ she went on, ‘I
am told, Sir Jack, that you have a very intelligent dog as a pet?’

Dodger grinned. ‘Oh yes, Your Majesty, that would be Onan; he’s a very
good friend, but of course we couldn’t bring him along here.’

‘Quite so,’ said the Queen and she cleared her throat. ‘You mean Onan,
as in the Bible?’ Out of the corner of his eye Dodger could see Solomon
stepping backwards, but nevertheless he said, ‘Oh yes, miss.’

‘Why did you call him that?’

Well, Dodger thought, after all she did ask. So he told her,¹ and the
young Queen glanced at her husband, whose face was a picture, and then
burst out laughing and said, ‘Well now, we _are_ amused.’

Like some sort of clockwork, the tea then disappeared as quickly as it
had turned up, and there was a certain signal that this audience was at
an end. Greatly relieved, Dodger took Serendipity by the arm and led her
away, and was slightly surprised as they left the room when the
white-haired man he had met before walked boldly up to him and said,
‘Sir Jack, allow me to be the first to congratulate you. May I trespass
upon your time for a moment? Have you perchance had time to consider my
proposal?’

‘He wants you to be a spy,’ murmured Solomon behind him.

The white-haired man made a ‘tsk, tsk’ noise and said, ‘Oh dear no,
Mister Cohen. A spy, sir? Perish the thought. Her Majesty’s government,
I can assure you, has no dealings with spies, oh my word, no. But
nevertheless we like the kind of people who help us . . . take an
interest.’

Dodger took Serendipity to one side and said, ‘What should I do?’

‘Well, he does want you to be a spy,’ Serendipity replied. ‘You can tell
that by the look on his face when he says that he doesn’t. For someone
like you, Dodger, it seems to me to be the perfect occupation, although
I suspect it will mean learning one or two foreign languages. But I have
no doubt that you will find learning them quite easy. I myself know
French and German, as well as a little Latin and Greek. Not too
difficult if you put your mind to it.’

Not to be outdone, Dodger said, ‘Well, I know some Greek. [Images]
[Images]?’²

Serendipity smiled at him and said, ‘My word, Dodger, you do lead a very
interesting life, don’t you?’

‘My love,’ he replied, ‘I think it’s only just beginning.’

And that was why two months later, Jack Dodger was running through the
boulevards of Paris with the gendarmerie lagging far behind him. He was
carrying a pocket stuffed with coins and bonds, a tiara that had once
belonged to Marie Antoinette and would look very good on his wife
Serendipity, and last but not least, the plans for an entirely new type
of gun. Whistles were blowing all over the place, but Dodger was never
where anyone thought he would be. He had been most interested to find
out that the Froggies had drains too, pretty good ones which you
wouldn’t have expected from Froggies, and so he jigged and dodged and
ran on to the safe house he had sorted out last night, and he was having
the time of his life.

1 If you want to know more about Onan – a well-known biblical character
– I am sure that many of my readers know their Bible from one end to the
other. And if not, Google, or any priest – possibly a slightly
embarrassed one – will help you.

2 Please direct me to where the naughty ladies are.

 

[images]

[images]

AUTHOR’S ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS, EMBARRASSMENTS AND EXCUSES WITH, AT NO EXTRA
COST, SOME BITS OF VOCABULARY AND USAGE

_DODGER_ IS SET broadly in the first quarter of Queen Victoria’s reign;
in those days disenfranchised people were flooding into London and the
other big cities, and life in London for the poor – and most of the
people were the poor – was harsh in the extreme. Traditionally, nobody
very much bothered about those in poverty at all, but as a decade
advanced, there were those among the better off who thought that their
plight should be known to everybody. One of those, of course, was
Charles Dickens, but not so well known was his friend Henry Mayhew. What
Dickens did surreptitiously, showing the reality of things via the
medium of the novel, Henry Mayhew and his confederates did simply by
facts, lots and lots of facts, piling statistics on statistics; and
Mayhew himself walked around the streets chatting to little orphan girls
selling flowers, street vendors, old ladies, workers of all sorts,
including prostitutes, and exposed, by degrees, the grubby underbelly of
the richest and most powerful city in the world.

The massive work known as _London Labour and the London Poor_ ought to
be in every library, if only to show you that if you think things are
bad now, they were oh so much more worse not all that long ago.

Readers may have heard of the movie _Gangs of New York_; well, London
was worse and getting even more so every time fresh hopefuls arrived to
try their luck in the big city. Mayhew’s work has been shortened,
rearranged and occasionally printed in smaller volumes. The original,
however, is not heavy going. And if you like fantasy, in a very strange
way fantasy is there with realistic dirt and grime all over it.

And so, it is to Henry Mayhew that I dedicate this book.

Dodger is a made-up character, as are many of the people he meets,
although they are from types working, living and dying in London at that
time.

Disraeli was certainly real, and so was Charles Dickens, and so was Sir
Robert Peel, who founded the police force in London and became Prime
Minister (twice). His ‘peelers’ did indeed replace the old Bow Street
runners who were, more or less, thief-takers and not known for excessive
bravery. The peelers were a very different kettle of fish, being drawn
from men with military experience.

Readers will recognize other personages from history along the way, I
expect. Most fantastic of all was Miss Angela Burdett-Coutts, heiress of
her grandfather’s fortune when she was still quite young and at that
time the richest woman in the world, apart perhaps from a queen here or
there. She was an amazing woman who did indeed once propose marriage to
the Duke of Wellington. But more importantly, for me at least, she spent
most of her time giving her money away.

But she wasn’t a soft touch. Miss Coutts believed in helping those who
helped themselves, and so she set up the ‘ragged schools’, which helped
kids and even older people to get something of an education, wherever
they were and however poor they were. She helped people start up small
businesses, gave money to churches, but only if they were in some way
assisting the poor in practical ways, and all in all was a phenomenon.
She plays a major role in this narrative, and since I couldn’t ask her
questions, I had to make some informed guesses about the way she would
react in certain circumstances. I assumed that a woman as rich as her
without a husband would certainly know her own mind and generally not be
frightened of anything very much.

The Romans did build the sewers in London; they were haphazardly
repaired as the generations passed. The sewers were mostly intended for
rain water, rather than human waste, cesspits and septic tanks
effectively doing that job, and it was when these overflowed, simply
because of too many human beings, that you were in the land of cholera
and other dreadful diseases.

There were indeed toshers, whose lives were anything but glamorous, but
the same applied to the mudlarks and the young chimney sweeps who had
nasty diseases of their very own. Dodger, then, was very lucky to find a
landlord who was in receipt of four thousand years’ worth of food safety
information. But even then, I have to admit, as Mark Twain did many
years ago, that I may have put a little touch of shine on things.

I didn’t need to put a shine on Joseph Bazalgette, who appears in this
book as a young but keen man. He was the leading light among the
surveyors and engineers who changed the face, and most importantly the
smell, of London sometime after the story of Dodger has been told. The
new London sewers and sewer works were one of the technological miracles
of the new Iron Age and so, with some maintenance here and there, they
remain.

‘Boney’, of course, was the nickname of Napoleon Bonaparte, and if you
don’t know who he was, I am quite certain, alas, that your keyboard will
sooner or later let you know.

A note about coinage. Explaining the British pre-decimal coinage to
generations that haven’t had to deal with it is difficult, even for me,
and I grew up learning it. I could talk at length about such things as
thrupence ha’penny, and tanners and crowns and half crowns and the way
it drove American tourists, in particular, totally nuts. So all that I
can say is that there were coins made of bronze, of all sizes, and these
were the cheaper coins; and then there were the coins made of silver
which, as you might expect, occupied the middle ground finance-wise, and
then there were the gold coins which were, well, gold and in Dodger’s
day were truly golden, not like the coins you get today, mumble, mumble,
complain. But in truth, the old currency had a certain reality to it
that the modern ‘p’, God help us, does not; it just doesn’t have the
same life.

Then there was the wonderful ‘thrupenny bit’, so heavy in a little kid’s
pocket . . . No, I’d better stop here, because if this goes on, sooner
or later I’ll be talking about groats and half farthings and someone
might have to shoot me.

The wonderful thing about slang is, if you like that kind of thing, that
it is interesting to note that once upon a time the word ‘crib’ meant,
among many other things, a building, or place where you lived, and quite
recently for some reason has come back again in the English-speaking
countries.

Victorian slang, and there was such a lot of it, can be a minefield.
Looking at the world from Dodger’s point of view means that you can’t
say ‘posh’, because that word had not yet been created. But nobby does
the trick. It would be possible to fill up this book with appropriate
slang, but sooner or later, well, it’s not there to be a textbook of
slang and so I’ve left in some of the ones I liked. Unfortunately, I
cannot find a place for my favourite piece of slang which is ‘tuppence
more and up goes the donkey’ because, alas, it’s just a little bit too
modern.

And very short though _Dodger_ is, I’ve been helped time and again by
friends with particular expertise, and my thanks go out to Jacqueline
Simpson, Bernard Pearson, Colin Smythe and Pat Harkin, who stopped me
putting a foot wrong. Where one is wrong is probably my own dammed foot.

I have to confess ahead of the game that certain tweaks were needed to
get people in the right place at the right time – students of history
will know that Tenniel didn’t illustrate his first _Punch_ cover until
1850 and Sir Robert Peel was Home Secretary before Victoria came to the
throne, for instance – but they are not particularly big tweaks, and
besides, _Dodger_ is a fantasy based on a reality. It was the devil’s
own job to find out where the headquarters of the _Morning Chronicle_
was. It seems that they changed offices periodically, so I’ve stuck
them, for the purposes of _Dodger_, in Fleet Street – where they ought
to have been anyway. This is a historical fantasy, and certainly not a
historical novel. Simply for the fun of it, and also too, if possible,
to get people interested in that era so wonderfully catalogued by Henry
Mayhew and his fellows.

Because although I may have tweaked the positions of people and possibly
how they might have reacted in certain situations, the grime, squalor
and hopelessness of an underclass which nevertheless survived, often by
a means of self-help, I have not changed at all. It was also, however, a
time without such things as education for all, health and safety, and
most of the other rules and impediments that we take for granted today.
And there was always room for the sharp and clever Dodgers, male and
female.

_Terry Pratchett, 2012_

About the Author

TERRY PRATCHETT is the acclaimed creator of the global bestselling
Discworld® series, the first of which, _The Colour of Magic_, was
published in 1983. His novels have been widely adapted for stage and
screen, and he is the winner of multiple prizes, including the Carnegie
Medal, as well as being awarded a knighthood for services to literature.
Worldwide sales of his books now stand at 70 million, and they have been
translated into thirty-seven languages.

For more information about Terry Pratchett and his books, please visit
www.terrypratchett.co.uk

Also by Terry Pratchett

THE DISCWORLD® SERIES

1. THE COLOUR OF MAGIC

2. THE LIGHT FANTASTIC

3. EQUAL RITES

4. MORT

5. SOURCERY

6. WYRD SISTERS

7. PYRAMIDS

8. GUARDS! GUARDS!

9. ERIC

(illustrated by Josh Kirby)

10. MOVING PICTURES

11. REAPER MAN

12. WITCHES ABROAD

13. SMALL GODS

14. LORDS AND LADIES

15. MEN AT ARMS

16. SOUL MUSIC

17. INTERESTING TIMES

18. MASKERADE

19. FEET OF CLAY

20. HOGFATHER

21. JINGO

22. THE LAST CONTINENT

23. CARPE JUGULUM

24. THE FIFTH ELEPHANT

25. THE TRUTH

26. THIEF OF TIME

27. THE LAST HERO

(illustrated by Paul Kidby)

28. THE AMAZING MAURICE AND

HIS EDUCATED RODENTS

(for young adults)

29. NIGHT WATCH

30. THE WEE FREE MEN

(for young adults)

31. MONSTROUS REGIMENT

32. A HAT FULL OF SKY

(for young adults)

33. GOING POSTAL

34. THUD

35. WINTERSMITH

(for young adults)

36. MAKING MONEY

37. UNSEEN ACADEMICALS

38. I SHALL WEAR MIDNIGHT

(for young adults)

39. SNUFF

OTHER BOOKS ABOUT DISCWORLD

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD

(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD II: THE GLOBE

(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE SCIENCE OF DISCWORLD III:

DARWIN’S WATCH

(with Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen)

THE NEW DISCWORLD COMPANION

(with Stephen Briggs)

NANNY OGG’S COOKBOOK

(with Stephen Briggs, Tina Hannan and Paul Kidby)

THE PRATCHETT PORTFOLIO

(with Paul Kidby)

THE DISCWORLD ALMANAK

(with Bernard Pearson)

THE UNSEEN UNIVERSITY CUT-OUT BOOK

(with Alan Batley and Bernard Pearson)

WHERE’S MY COW?

(illustrated by Melvyn Grant)

THE ART OF DISCWORLD

(with Paul Kidby)

THE WIT AND WISDOM OF DISCWORLD

(compiled by Stephen Briggs)

THE FOLKLORE OF DISCWORLD

(with Jacqueline Simpson)

THE WORLD OF POO

DISCWORLD MAPS

THE STREETS OF ANKH-MORPORK

(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

THE DISCWORLD MAPP

(with Stephen Briggs, painted by Stephen Player)

A TOURIST GUIDE TO LANCRE –

A DISCWORLD MAPP

(with Stephen Briggs, illustrated by Paul Kidby)

DEATH’S DOMAIN

(with Paul Kidby)

A complete list of Terry Pratchett ebooks and audio books as well as
other books based on the Discworld series – illustrated screenplays,
graphic novels, comics and plays – can be found on
WWW.TERRYPRATCHETT.CO.UK

NON-DISCWORLD BOOKS

THE DARK SIDE OF THE SUN

STRATA

THE UNADULTERATED CAT (illustrated by Gray Jolliffe)

GOOD OMENS (with Neil Gaiman)

THE LONG EARTH (with Stephen Baxter)

NON-DISCWORLD NOVELS FOR YOUNG ADULTS

THE CARPET PEOPLE

TRUCKERS

DIGGERS

WINGS

ONLY YOU CAN SAVE MANKIND*

JOHNNY AND THE DEAD

JOHNNY AND THE BOMB

NATION

DODGER

*www.ifnotyouthenwho.com

DODGER
AN RHCP DIGITAL EBOOK 978 1 409 02441 5

Published in Great Britain by RHCP Digital,
an imprint of Random House Children’s Publishers UK
A Random House Group Company

This ebook edition published 2012

Copyright © Terry and Lyn Pratchett, 2012
Illustrations copyright © Paul Kidby, 2012

First Published in Great Britain by Doubleday, 2012

The right of Terry Pratchett to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

RANDOM HOUSE CHILDREN’S PUBLISHERS UK
61–63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA

www.randomhousechildrens.co.uk
www.totallyrandombooks.co.uk
www.randomhouse.co.uk

Addresses for companies within The Random House Group Limited can be
found at: www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm

THE RANDOM HOUSE GROUP Limited Reg. No. 954009

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.
